
ENVIRONMENTAL
JUSTICE

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann
Strickland
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Obesity, Judith S. Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
 activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic  issues facing
the world today.

ENVIRONMENTAL
JUSTICE
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
David E. Newton
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2009 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Newton, David E.
Environmental justice : a reference handbook / David E. Newton. —
2nd ed.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-223-4 (hard copy : alk. paper) —
ISBN 978-1-59884-224-1 (ebook)
1. Distributive justice.
2. Environmental justice—Social aspects.
3. Civil rights.
I. Title. 
JC578.N485
2009
363.7—dc22
2008044400
13 12 11 10 09  1 2 3 4 5
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America.

Once again,
for Delores and Reg
with as much love as ever!

Contents
List of Tables, xv
Preface, xvii
1
Background and History, 1
Warren County, North Carolina: September 15, 1982, 1
Environmental Inequities, Environmental Racism, and
Environmental Justice, 2
Examples of Environmental Inequities, 6
West Dallas, Texas, 6
Churchrock, New Mexico, 7
“Cancer Alley,” 9
Pesticide Exposure, 11
Consumption of Toxic Fish from the Detroit River, 13
Proposed Select Steel Corporation Plant (Flint, Michigan),
14
Sweet Valley and Cobb Town, Alabama, 15
West Harlem Environmental Action and Diesel Buses, 16
Southern Nuclear Operating Company, 17
Environmental Justice: Environmentalism and 
Civil Rights, 18
The Modern Environmental Movement, 20
The Civil Rights Movement, 22
Environmental Justice Comes of Age, 23
The Commission on Racial Justice of the United Church of
Christ, 23
The Michigan Conference, 25
Governmental Recognition in the 1990s, 26
First National People of Color Environmental Leadership
Summit, 26
ix

Environmental Justice as a Social Movement, 27
Growth and Challenges, 29
References, 33
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Do Environmental Inequities Actually Exist?, 38
Progress and Environmental Degradation, 42
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs, 43
Concerns about Environmental Issues among 
People of Color, 44
Access to Tools of Protest, 46
Job Blackmail, 47
The Effects of Environmental Regulations, 50
Environmental Inequities: By Chance or By Choice?, 53
The Legal Question of “Intent” in Environmental 
Inequities, 57
Responding to Environmental Inequities, 59
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement
in the United States, 60
Environmental Inequities Exist, 60
Federal, State, Regional, and Local Governmental Agencies
Have a Responsibility to Find, Study, and Deal with
Cases of Environmental Inequities, 61
The Federal Government Has Not Been a Strong Advocate
for Environmental Justice, 65
Complaints Filed with the EPA Have Not Been an Effective
Means of Dealing with Environmental Inequities, 68
Environmental Justice Advocates Have Largely Failed to
Obtain Redress from Inequities through the Judicial
System, 69
The U.S. Congress Has Failed to Take Action on Basic
Environmental Justice Legislation, 71
Environmental Justice Activists Have Learned to 
Use a Combination of Tools for Achieving Their 
Goals, 73
References, 76
3
Worldwide Perspective, 81
Environmental Inequities Worldwide, 81
Mineral Extraction in Papua New Guinea, 82
x
Contents

Environmental Discrimination against the Roma in 
Central Europe, 83
Ecotourism and the Maasai, 85
The Bakun Hydroelectric Project in Sarawak, 86
Thor Chemicals and Mercury “Recycling,” 87
The Voyage of the Khian Sea, 89
A Background for the Transboundary Dumping of
Hazardous Wastes, 91
The Basel Convention, 93
Other Treaties and Bans, 96
Environmental Justice and Climate Change, 97
Environmental Justice and Sustainable Development, 103
References, 108
4
Chronology, 113
5
Biographical Sketches, 137
Dana Ann Alston, 137
Bunyan Bryant, 139
Robert Bullard, 140
Dollie Burwell, 141
César Chávez, 142
Torri Estrada, 143
Margie Eugene-Richard, 144
Jay Feldman, 145
Deeohn Ferris, 146
LaDonna Harris, 148
Hazel Johnson, 149
Pamela Tau Lee, 150
Graciela Martinez, 151
Norris McDonald, 152
Paul Mohai, 153
Richard Moore, 155
Na’taki Osborne, 155
Swati Prakash, 157
Patricia E. Salkin, 158
Peggy Shepard, 159
Gail Small, 160
Damu Smith, 161
Beverly Wright, 163
Contents
xi

6
Data and Documents, 165
Documents, 166
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 166
Fair Housing Act of 1968, 167
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 168
Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation
with Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding
Communities (1983), 171
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States (1987), 172
Principles of Environmental Justice (1991), 173
Environmental Equity: Reducing Risks for All
Communities (1992), 175
Executive Order 12898 (President Clinton)—Federal
Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority
Populations and Low-Income Populations (1994), 178
Not in My Backyard: Executive Order 12898 and Title VI as
Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice (2003), 181
2003–2008 EPA Strategic Plan: Direction for the Future
(2003), 182
Toolkit for Assessing Potential Allegations of
Environmental Injustice (2004), 185
Evaluation Report: EPA Needs to Consistently Implement
the Intent of the Executive Order on Environmental
Justice (2004), 188
Redefining Rights in America: The Civil Rights Record 
of the George W. Bush Administration, 2001–2004 
(2004), 190
Environmental Justice: EPA Should Devote More Attention
to Environmental Justice When Developing Clean Air
Rules (2005), 197
Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty (2007), 198
S. 2549: Environmental Justice Renewal Act (2008), 202
Data, 209
7
Directory of Organizations, 213
Governmental Organizations, 214
Nongovernmental Organizations, 217
National and International, 217
State, Regional, and Local, 235
xii
Contents

8
Resources, 245
Books, 245
Articles, 261
Reports, 280
Internet Sources, 282
Glossary, 289
Index, 295
About the Author, 308
Contents
xiii

List of Tables
6.1
1980 Census Population, Income, and Poverty Data for
Census Areas Where Landfills Are Located, 172
6.2
Racial and Socioeconomic Characteristics of People Living
Near Hazardous Waste Facilities, 209
6.3
Racial and Socioeconomic Disparities between 
Host Neighborhoods and Non-Host Areas for the Nation’s
413 Commercial Hazardous Waste Facilities (1990 and 2000
Census), 210
6.4
People of Color Percentages for Host Neighborhoods and
Non-Host Areas by EPA Region, 211
6.5
Socioeconomic Disparities between Host Neighborhoods
and Non-Host Areas by EPA Region, 212
xv

Preface
E
nvironmentalism and the civil rights movement have been
two of the most important social movements in the United
States over the past half century. At first glance, these two
great movements would appear to have little or nothing in
common. And, in fact, some observers have argued that steps
taken to improve the nation’s environmental quality may actu-
ally have had a deleterious effect on the social and economic
status of African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Amer-
icans, and Native Americans. Studies have shown, for exam-
ple, that laws passed to reduce environmental impacts overall
have, in some cases, had an unfair impact on minority or poor
 communities.
Only within the last three decades has it become apparent
that environmentalism and civil rights do have a great deal in
common. That realization has come about primarily as the result
of redefining the “environmental issues” to which Americans
should turn their attention. More and more individuals and
groups are pointing to the special environmental problems fac-
ing minority and low-income communities: hazardous waste
sites, polluting industries, occupational hazards, and exposure to
lead and other toxic metals, for example. The emphasis seems to
be shifting from an almost exclusive concern with issues such as
wilderness preservation and protection of endangered species to
maintenance of livable environments for people of color and
low-income communities.
Out of this view of environmental issues has grown a new
movement—the environmental justice movement—that at-
tempts to analyze patterns of disproportionate exposure to envi-
ronmental hazards experienced by minority and low-income
communities, to understand how such patterns have developed,
xvii

and to develop programs by which disproportionate exposures
can be remedied and prevented.
The environmental justice movement has undergone a sig-
nificant evolution in the last three decades. At first, the concerns
expressed by its leaders were largely ignored or regarded with
little concern. Low-income and minority communities them-
selves seldom had the knowledge or the skills to deal with the
special environmental inequities with which they were con-
fronted. Over time, however, that situation changed. Strong lead-
ers from the African American, Asian American, Native
American, Hispanic American, and other communities began to
develop theory and practices on which to base a strong and effec-
tive environmental justice movement. In some ways, a turning
point for the movement was reached in 1994, when President Bill
Clinton issued an executive order requiring all federal agencies to
make environmental justice an integral part of their missions.
Progress in dealing with environmental inequities has not,
however, been smooth or constant. It has fallen prey to the influ-
ence of varying social, economic, and political forces that have
(and often have not) supported the growth of efforts to achieve
environmental justice. During the administration of President
George W. Bush, for example, much of the momentum created by
President Clinton’s executive order was lost, as Bush officials
stepped back from vigorous enforcement of environmental poli-
cies and regulations and, indeed, attempted to redefine the mean-
ing of environmental justice itself.
This book examines the nature, growth, and vicissitudes of
the environmental justice movement. Chapter 1 provides a gen-
eral introduction to the history of the movement, explaining the
forces that led to its birth, the philosophy that underlies much of
its work today, and the tools through which it attempts to
achieve its goals. The chapter also contains a number of exam-
ples of cases in which environmental inequities have affected in-
dividual communities.
The irony of the modern environmental justice movement is
that it carries such great hope for low-income people and minor-
ity communities in the relief of the environmental hazards to
which they are often exposed. But concrete success in dealing
with many of the issues has often seemed too slow and much too
inadequate. Chapter 2 reviews some of the problems and contro-
versies that may have contributed to this situation. It also dis-
xviii
Preface

cusses some possible solutions to the problems that hinder the
development of the movement.
One might easily think of environmental justice as a
uniquely American movement grounded in environmental prob-
lems found exclusively in the United States. And, in some ways,
that view is accurate. Many of the problems faced by low-income
and minority communities (and by Americans as a whole) result
from the prodigious industrial complex operating in this country,
with its consequent effluents and wastes constantly being re-
leased into the environment. But people in other parts of the
world face similar problems of inequitable exposure to haz-
ardous materials based on income and race. For example, indus-
tries in developed nations have long viewed less-developed
nations as legitimate dumping grounds for the wastes they pro-
duce at home. Chapter 3 considers some issues related to envi-
ronmental inequities in parts of the world other than the United
States.
Chapters 4 through 8 provide a variety of resources to help
the reader continue further study of environmental justice. Chap-
ter 4 contains a chronology of the movement, a movement that,
although still young, has made some important strides. Chapter 5
consists of biographical sketches of some important figures in the
movement. Chapter 6 contains documents relating to the growth
and work of the environmental justice movement, including rele-
vant laws, recommendations for action, and proposed legislation.
Chapter 7 provides a list of organizations active in the field.
The list is representative only; one characteristic of the environ-
mental justice movement is its emphasis on action by local and
regional groups, which precludes the ability to provide an ex-
haustive list. Chapter 8 contains a selected bibliography of books,
articles, reports, and Internet sources relating to the environmen-
tal justice movement. A glossary of terms commonly used in
dealing with environmental justice issues is included, and an in-
dex is also provided.
Preface
xix

1
Background and History
Warren County, North Carolina:
September 15, 1982
The protest tactics seemed clear enough. Most residents of War-
ren County knew how civil rights battles of the 1960s had been
fought: with civil disobedience and nonviolent protest. The issue
in 1982 was somewhat different, involving the construction of a
waste disposal dump for toxic chemicals, but poor African
Americans in Warren County knew their history well enough.
The road to follow was not one of violent confrontation but of
nonviolent demonstration and protest.
The issue had arisen four years earlier when the Ward Trans-
former Company of Raleigh had illegally and surreptitiously dis-
posed of 31,000 gallons of toxic polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) along 240 miles of roadways in 14 North Carolina coun-
ties. When the state of North Carolina uncovered the action, it
was faced with the problem of digging up and relocating 40,000
cubic yards of contaminated soil. The state decided to bury those
wastes in rural Shocco Township in Warren County.
The state’s decision came under criticism almost immedi-
ately. Geological studies showed that soil under the proposed
landfill was not impervious to leaching from the landfill, as re-
quired by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regula-
tions, and the water table in the area was only about 7 feet below
the landfill bottom, 43 feet shallower than required by the EPA.
Since the majority of Warren County residents obtain their water
from wells, these geological conditions raised serious questions
1

about the state’s decision. On June 4, 1979, however, the EPA
gave North Carolina a waiver on both of these requirements and
issued a permit for the landfill.
Residents of Warren County had had little experience in
fighting political battles. As a group, they were poor (the county
ranked 97th among North Carolina’s 100 counties in per capita
income) and African American (75 percent in Shocco Township
and 64 percent in Warren County) and lacked the resources,
knowledge, and skills to fight a state political and bureaucratic
system. Still, they used the skills they had. They made public ap-
peals, called for help from national leaders of civil rights and en-
vironmental groups, and, in the end, prostrated their bodies in
front of trucks carrying PCB-contaminated soil to their commu-
nity. In all, 523 protestors were arrested.
In one sense, the Warren County protest failed. Over a six-
week period, the 20-acre landfill was filled with 7,223 truckloads
of wastes. The wastes remained in place for nearly 20 years, all
the while leaching contaminants into the underlying soil. In a
larger sense, however, the protest was more successful than any-
one could have imagined. For the first time in history, poor
African Americans banded together—with the support of civil
rights and environmental groups on a national level—to fight an
environmental problem affecting a poor minority community.
Environmental Inequities, Environmental
Racism, and Environmental Justice
Most great social movements in history can be marked by a
“defining moment,” a single event so powerful and moving that
later generations can look back and say, “It all started at . . . .”
Rosa Parks’s refusal to give up her seat on a Montgomery, Al-
abama, bus to a white man and move to the back of the bus is
one such example of a defining moment in the civil rights move-
ment. Historians may well look back at the protest by Warren
County citizens and say, “That protest was the defining moment
of the environmental justice movement.”
Of course, such views of history are usually overly simpli-
fied and often incorrect. A nascent civil rights movement had
been active long before Parks’s heroic decision to confront racist
laws in Montgomery. And the seeds of a movement that would
2
Background and History

confront environmental inequities had been planted years before
the Warren County protest brought the movement to public
 attention.
The issue facing residents of Warren County, North Car-
olina, in 1982 was and is not unique in the United States. The is-
sue has been described as environmental inequity or environmental
racism, terms that refer to the generally accepted evidence that
environmental hazards are not distributed equally among vari-
ous groups of people, either in the United States or throughout
the world. Instead, communities of color and, to a lesser extent,
poor people in general are exposed to hazardous and toxic
wastes, dangerous working conditions, polluted air and water,
and other environmental insults to a greater degree than are non-
colored communities and people of higher economic status. Al-
though the reasons for this pattern are disputed, its existence has
been confirmed by multiple research studies. The term communi-
ties of color, as described by those active in the environmental jus-
tice movement, refers to people who are nonwhite: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, and Native
Americans, for example.
The terms used to talk about this phenomenon are impor-
tant because they focus on and emphasize quite different aspects
of the issue. Environmental inequity refers to a geographic reality,
a pattern in which hazardous waste sites, polluting industries,
nuclear waste dumps, and other environmental threats are more
likely to be located within or adjacent to communities of color or
poor communities. The existence of environmental inequities in
the United States, within individual states, or in other localities
can be determined—at least in principle—by research studies.
Researchers count the number of environmentally hazardous fa-
cilities and determine whether inequities are likely to occur in
such communities. Such studies have been conducted, and the
evidence implies that environmental inequities do exist in the
United States. For example, researchers at the Southeast Com-
munity Research Center in Atlanta reported in 2007 on the use of
agricultural pesticides in and near communities of color in the
rural U.S. South. They found that such communities were ex-
posed to greatly disproportionate numbers of pesticide use
events compared to comparable communities of white residents
(Griffith, Tajik, and Wing 2007). A number of similar studies,
along with some that dispute the existence of environmental in-
equities, are discussed later in this chapter.
Environmental Inequities, Racism, and Justice
3

Environmental racism is a term that introduces a second con-
cept into the discussion of environmental inequities. Environ-
mental racism goes beyond acknowledging that such inequities
exist and suggests a reason for their existence: racism. The
phrase environmental racism was first used in 1982 by Benjamin
Chavis, then executive director of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), in connection
with the protest at Warren County. He later explained precisely
what he meant by the term during testimony before the U.S.
House of Representatives Subcommittee on Civil and Constitu-
tional Rights on March 3, 1993: “Environmental racism is de-
fined as racial discrimination in environmental policy making
and the unequal enforcement of environmental laws and regula-
tions. It is the deliberate targeting of people of color communi-
ties for toxic waste facilities and the official sanctioning of a
 life-threatening presence of poisons and pollutants in people of
color communities. It is also manifested in the history of exclud-
ing people of color from the leadership of the environmental
movement” (U.S. Congress 1993, 6).
A second term, environmental discrimination, is also used in
referring to the unequal distribution of environmental insults but
may suggest that such inequalities affect communities other than
those of color, such as those of low income. An important feature
of both environmental racism and environmental discrimination
is that they suggest that environmental inequities occur not be-
cause of chance, random events in history but as the concrete
and specific consequences of official public and corporate poli-
cies, whether conscious and deliberate or not.
Proving the existence of environmental racism or environ-
mental discrimination is a quite different matter from proving
the existence of environmental inequities. Even if one grants that
such inequities exist, it does not necessarily follow that they are
the result of some specific intent on the part of an individual or a
corporation. The debate as to whether environmental inequities
occur as the result of concrete policies and practices designed to
bring them about or as the incidental consequences of other busi-
ness practices will be reviewed later in this book.
The term environmental justice alludes to yet another aspect
of this issue. It refers to policies and practices by which existing
environmental inequities can be corrected and prevented in the
future. It focuses on research programs that attempt to detect
the existence of environmental racism and environmental
4
Background and History

 discrimination; that uncover the underlying reasons that hold
such practices in place; and that promote the enforcement of ex-
isting laws and regulations, the adoption of new rules and regu-
lations, and the changes in philosophies and attitudes needed to
eliminate environmental racism and environmental inequities
from society. The achievement of environmental justice among
communities is also called environmental equity, the situation in
which environmental risks and benefits among all groups of
people are approximately comparable.
Dr. Robert D. Bullard, one of the most prolific and articulate
writers on the subject of environmental justice, has identified
three broad categories into which the field of environmental jus-
tice can be subdivided. These are procedural equity, geographic
equity, and social equity. Procedural equity refers to questions of
fairness, “the extent to which governing rules and regulations,
evaluation criteria, and enforcement are applied in a nondiscrim-
inatory manner.” Geographic equity refers to the location of en-
vironmental hazards with regard to communities of color and
poor communities. Social equity concerns the way in which so-
cial factors, such as race, ethnicity, class, and political power,
have an impact on and are reflected in environmental decision
making (Bullard 2000, 116).
The environmental inequities that exist in the United States
include a variety of hazardous conditions. During the 1970s,
much attention was focused on air and water pollution. Data
from that period clearly show that the impact and costs of these
environmental problems—although often not explicitly stated
in reports—were not shared equally by all Americans. Two
decades later, in the early stages of the environmental justice
movement, research focused on municipal landfills, hazardous
waste dumps, and emissions from chemical plants. As the
movement has matured, however, it has become clear that
many other forms of environmental inequities exist: in the sit-
ing of nuclear waste sites; in the nature and extent of occupa-
tional hazards to which workers are exposed; in the health
hazards to which people are exposed in their daily diets; in
planning for and construction of highways and public transit
systems; in the siting of parks and other recreational facilities;
in the production, testing, and disposal of conventional
weapons systems; in the international distribution of haz-
ardous and toxic wastes; and in the manufacture and sale of
hazardous products.
Environmental Inequities, Racism, and Justice
5

Examples of Environmental Inequities
The term racism may cause one to focus on the inequalities that
African Americans have historically experienced in the United
States. It is clear, however, that other groups within American so-
ciety—including Native Americans, Asian Americans, Pacific Is-
landers, and Hispanic Americans—have also been subjected to
similar kinds of discrimination. The examples on the following
pages are a few of the hundreds that could demonstrate the envi-
ronmental insults to which minority and low-income groups
within American society have been exposed. The cases illustrate
the disproportionate exposure of minorities to environmental
hazards; however, they do not in and of themselves necessarily
prove the existence of environmental racism.
West Dallas, Texas
In the late 1980s, West Dallas was a predominantly poor African
American section of Dallas, Texas, with a population of 13,161, of
whom 85 percent were African American. In recent decades, the
area has grown considerably (2000 population: 24,132) and be-
come primarily Hispanic American. But it remains one of the
poorest regions of Dallas. When the area was annexed by Dallas
in 1954, a number of private homes were torn down as part of a
“slum clearance” program to make way for large public housing
projects. As a result of this program, the Dallas Housing Author-
ity became the largest single landlord in West Dallas.
Immediately adjacent to the housing authority’s 3,500-unit
West Dallas housing projects is the 63-acre West Dallas RSR lead
smelter, originally the Murph Metals secondary lead smelter. At its
peak operation in the 1970s, the smelter released more than 269
tons of lead into the air annually. A significant fraction of the lead
was blown across the homes and recreational areas of West Dallas.
In theory, such emissions came under the control of a strong
lead emissions ordinance passed by the Dallas city council in
1968. According to Robert D. Bullard, however, “city officials
systematically refused to enforce [the city’s] lead emission stan-
dards” (Bullard 2000, 47). In support of this observation, studies
found blood lead levels in West Dallas children to be 36 percent
higher than those in children in control areas, a result attributed
to the children’s exposure to smelter emissions.
6
Background and History

The period between the mid-1960s and the early 1980s was
marked by the continuing release of lead particulates from the
smelter, multiple studies showing elevated blood lead levels in
West Dallas children. Ongoing efforts by citizens of West Dallas
to gain relief from their exposure to polluted air met with persis-
tent stonewalling by local and national officials in the enforce-
ment of existing regulations.
The issue was resolved in 1983, when the state of Texas and
the city of Dallas sued RSR for violations of city, state, and federal
lead emission standards. The case was settled out of court when
RSR agreed to clean up soil in the West Dallas area that had been
contaminated by lead emission from its smelter, to conduct a
blood lead screening program for children and pregnant women
in West Dallas, and to install antipollution equipment on its West
Dallas plant. The final point of the agreement became moot four
months later when the smelter was closed permanently.
The final word in this story may have been written in 1985,
when RSR also agreed to a settlement in a civil case brought on
behalf of 370 children in West Dallas. The company agreed to a
program of payments that eventually reached nearly $45 million
paid to those harmed by its smelter’s emissions. Although the
cash settlement was large, it can never, as Bullard has pointed
out, “repay the harm caused by lead poisoning of several genera-
tions of West Dallas children.” On the other hand, it does send a
message, he says, “that poor black communities are no longer
willing to accept other people’s pollution” (Bullard 2000, 51).
Churchrock, New Mexico
Churchrock Chapter is a governmental unit within the Navajo
Nation, the largest Native American tribe in the United States.
The chapter is located east of Gallup, New Mexico, in an area
characterized by extremely dry conditions with an average an-
nual rainfall of about seven inches. The major source of water in
the region is the Rio Puerco, a stream that runs only intermit-
tently, when fed by snow runoff or rainstorms.
Churchrock is the site of the longest continuous period of
uranium mining in the Navajo Nation. That period began in
1954 with the discovery of uranium deposits along the north
edge of the Rio Puerco Valley and continued until 1986. Mining
rights were leased to uranium mining companies by the Navajo
tribal government, but without the consent or participation of
Examples of Environmental Inequities  7

individual Navajo families living in the area. During most of the
30-year period during which mining continued, residents 
of the Churchrock Chapter had relatively little information
about the environmental effects caused by uranium mining and
milling in their area.
One of the most important of those effects was the removal
of water from the Morrison Formation aquifer near the head of
the Rio Puerco. Mining companies pumped water out of the
aquifer at the rate of 5,000 gallons per minute to support the con-
struction and operation of underground mines for the removal of
uranium. That water was then returned to the Rio Puerco, con-
verting the river into a continuously flowing stream.
This practice had two important effects on the Churchrock
environment. First, it resulted in a significant loss of under-
ground water from which many people drew water by means of
wells. Second, it resulted in the release of water contaminated
with radioactive wastes into the Rio Puerco, the region’s major
water source.
For years, the two companies mining uranium in the
Churchrock region—the Kerr-McGee Nuclear Corporation and
United Nuclear Corporation—argued that the Federal Water Pol-
lution Control Act did not apply to their operations since the Rio
Puerco was located on Native American lands and was not,
therefore, a part of the United States. It was not until 1980 that
the courts confirmed that the two companies were subject to the
same Clean Water Act jurisdiction as were companies operating
in other parts of the United States.
In 1983, the staff of the Southwest Research and Information
Center in Albuquerque examined Kerr-McGee and United Nu-
clear records to determine the extent to which the two companies
were in compliance with federal Clean Water Act regulations.
They found that Kerr-McGee was out of compliance 7 of the 35
months studied, and United Nuclear was out of compliance 13 of
38 months in one location and 25 of 37 months in a second loca-
tion. “Out of compliance” meant that mines were releasing wa-
ters that contained a higher concentration than permitted of
dissolved uranium and/or radium-226, carried an excess of sus-
pended solids, had a pH (a measure of the water’s acidity or al-
kalinity) that was higher or lower than permitted, or failed to
meet other water quality standards.
As unsatisfactory as these records were, they were dwarfed
by a serious accident: the failure of a United Nuclear uranium
8
Background and History

mill tailings dam on July 16, 1979. More than 94 million gallons
of contaminated liquids with a pH of 1 (roughly comparable to
that of battery acid) were released into the Rio Puerco. The spill
posed a serious health threat not only to Native Americans living
in the area, but also to the livestock upon which many Native
Americans depended for their livelihood. In 1985, United Nu-
clear settled a lawsuit brought as a result of this accident by
agreeing to pay $550,000 to 240 plaintiffs, an award of about
$2,000 per plaintiff.
Still, it was not the 1979 spill that has been the most serious
problem for residents of the Churchrock area. William Paul
Robinson, research director of the Southwest Research and Infor-
mation Center, has written that the spill “does not appear to have
had as devastating an effect on the Rio Puerco as the decades of
mine dewatering (the removal of water that seeps into a mine as
it is dug), which preceded the spill. Studies of human and live-
stock health effects after the spill indicated that the same pollu-
tants found in high concentrations in mine and tailings water
had shown up in abnormally high levels in the muscles and or-
gans of cattle, sheep, and goats that grazed along the Rio Puerco
downstream of the mines and mills” (Robinson 1992, 160).
As is often the case in environmental justice cases, actions
against uranium mining in the Churchrock area may have been
more successful than one might have imagined. Residents have
formed the Puerco Valley Navajo Clean Water Association to
learn more about the dangers of polluted waters and to search for
new and safer water supplies for their community. As Robinson
has pointed out, the Association’s 10th anniversary celebration on
July 16, 1989, “focused on the need for water in the communities,
not the horror of the spill itself” (Robinson 1992, 161).
“Cancer Alley”
In some instances, a pattern of environmental inequity may ex-
tend over broad regions, affecting many communities at once.
Such is the case with an 85-mile stretch of land along the Missis-
sippi River between Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana.
Louisiana has long publicized itself as a “sportsman’s paradise”
and depended on agriculture and fishing as its main sources of
income. At the end of World War II, however, the state’s political
economy began to change. Attracted by the potential for easy
transportation and waste disposal as well as the availability of
Examples of Environmental Inequities  9

cheap labor, chemical and petroleum companies moved into the
region between the state capital and its largest city. Over the
decades, these companies dramatically changed the character of
the region.
Today, more than 125 companies producing fertilizers, gaso-
line, paints, plastics, and other chemical products line the banks
of the Mississippi. Approximately one-quarter of the nation’s
petrochemicals are produced in the region. In addition, the
plants release huge amounts of toxic wastes into the air, water,
and surrounding countryside. By one estimate, more than 2 bil-
lion pounds of toxic chemicals were emitted in the two-year
period between 1987 and 1989 (Louisiana Advisory Committee
1993). For this reason, the region has been given the name “Can-
cer Alley” by residents of the area. The Washington Post has re-
ferred to the region as a “massive human experiment” and “a
national sacrifice zone” (Maraniss and Weisskopf 1989, A1).
The development of the new industrial complex along Can-
cer Alley, while undoubtedly beneficial to the state economy, has
caused severe dislocations among communities along the river.
In a 1993 study of Cancer Alley, the Louisiana Advisory Commit-
tee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights selected eight com-
munities to study in detail: Revilletown, Sunrise, Morrisonville,
Alsen, Wallace, Forest Grove, Center Springs, and Willow
Springs. The committee found that the interaction between cor-
porations and communities differed from town to town, and the
ultimate resolution of disputes between the two entities also dif-
fered from case to case.
In some instances, residents were able to prevent a new
plant from moving into an area. In such cases, the community
was able to survive, although it was not necessarily spared a sig-
nificant increase in exposure to air- and water-borne pollutants
released by nearby plants. In other cases, towns acceded to offers
from companies to sell their homes and land to make room for
new plants. Two of the communities studied, Revilletown and
Sunrise, were dismantled completely as a result of buyout pro-
grams, and a third, Morrisonville, was relocated to make room
for a plant.
Despite the accommodations made by individual communi-
ties, the committee came to the conclusion that the 85-mile
stretch of Cancer Alley had, indeed, earned its name. It reported
to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights that “black communities
in the corridor between Baton Rouge and New Orleans are dis-
10
Background and History

proportionately impacted by the present State and local govern-
ment systems for permitting and expansion of hazardous waste
and chemical facilities. These communities are most often lo-
cated in rural and unincorporated areas, and residents are of low
socioeconomic status with limited political influence facilities”
(Louisiana Advisory Committee 1993, 63). The committee further
concluded that a major reason for the existence of Cancer Alley
was that “state and local governments have failed to establish
regulations or safeguards to ensure such communities are rea-
sonably protected from a high concentration of hazardous waste
and industrial facilities and risks associated with living in and
around such facilities” (Louisiana Advisory Committee 1993, 63).
Pesticide Exposure
For more than half a century, U.S. farmers have relied heavily on
the use of synthetic chemicals to protect their crops from destruc-
tion by insects, rodents, microorganisms, and other predators.
Names such as DDT, aldrin, malathion, parathion, chlordane,
heptachlor, toxaphene, and Sevin are now familiar to many
Americans whether they are engaged in agriculture or not. These
chemicals have been popular with farmers because they kill
pests effectively at relatively modest costs.
As the use of synthetic chemicals spread through agricul-
ture, however, some important disadvantages became evident.
Among other problems, some of the most popular pesticides
proved to be toxic not only to pests but also to harmless or bene-
ficial animals and to humans themselves. One of the most influ-
ential books on the problems posed by pesticides was Rachel
Carson’s Silent Spring, published in 1962. In her book, Carson
wrote about a spring in which no bird songs could be heard (the
“silent spring”) because they had been killed by pesticides.
Responding to growing public concerns about the risks
posed by pesticides, the EPA began regulating agricultural chem-
icals much more closely in the early 1970s. In 1972, for example,
it banned the widely popular pesticide dichlorodiphenyl-
trichloroethane (DDT). In the same year, the U.S. Congress
passed amendments to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), imposing much stronger regulations
on the use of many pesticides. With actions such as these, many
Americans began to feel that the most serious environmental
Examples of Environmental Inequities  11

problems posed by synthetic pesticides were being brought un-
der control.
However, pesticides continued to pose dangers to farm-
workers. Many of the regulations passed to protect consumers
from pesticides made no mention of the dangers posed to men
and women working in the fields. Among the products banned
by the EPA were a number of chlorinated hydrocarbon pesti-
cides, such as aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, heptachlor, and chlor-
dane. This class of pesticides tends to be persistent, meaning
that they remain on fruits and vegetables long enough that they
may be present when consumed by the general public. Farmers
switched instead to pesticides known as organophosphates
(malathion, parathion, and methyl parathion, for example) and
carbamates (Sevin, Zectran, and Temik, for example). These
compounds are more toxic but less persistent. They pose less
threat to consumers (because they have degraded by the time
fruits and vegetables reach the marketplace) but greater threat
to farmworkers (Miller 2003).
The problem of pesticide exposure is an important issue in
the environmental justice movement because a large proportion
of farmworkers are Hispanic Americans, especially Mexican
Americans. Many are illegal aliens who work for  less-than-
minimum wages, often under difficult and illegal working con-
ditions. They are seldom in a position to complain about
working conditions since objections are likely to be met with dis-
missal from their jobs.
It is true that laws have been passed to protect farmworkers.
In general, however, those laws have been weak, poorly en-
forced, and, therefore, largely ineffective. For example, it is ille-
gal to use pesticides on a field in such a way that workers will be
sprayed directly. But this regulation does not necessarily protect
workers on an adjacent field from being exposed to pesticides
blown onto them. Also, state officials are allowed to use other-
wise unlicensed pesticides in an emergency, such as the unex-
pected appearance of a pest. In such a case, the implication is
that it is acceptable to expose farmworkers to a chemical hazard
to save crops.
Some regulations exist governing the period of time after
spraying during which workers are not allowed to reenter fields.
Given the paucity of data on safe intervals for most pesticides,
however, such regulations may not be effective (Wasserstrom
and Wiles 1985; Moses 1989, 1993). Overall, one observer has
12
Background and History

concluded that “the reality [of existing pesticide legislation] is
that the extant legislation leaves farmworkers virtually unpro-
tected against pesticide hazards” (Perfecto 1992, 216).
Consumption of Toxic Fish from the 
Detroit River
Environmental inequities can exist in many forms. One that is
probably less apparent than the cases described previously is in
the dietary patterns of minorities who rely on fish taken from the
Detroit River. An analysis of this issue was carried out by Patrick
C. West, associate professor in the School of Natural Resources
and Environment at the University of Michigan, and his col-
leagues in 1992. The study was motivated by the fact that state
and federal guidelines currently specify the amount of toxic con-
taminants that may be released into surface waters. The regu-
lated level of contaminants is determined, in turn, by assuming
that the average person will consume a certain amount of fish
per day. For example, the state of Michigan’s Rule 1057, which
regulates the discharge of toxic chemicals into the state’s surface
water, assumes that the average level of fish consumption in
Michigan is 6.5 grams per person per day. Under those circum-
stances, an allowable amount of no more than 0.1 milligrams of a
toxic substance in the fish would avoid endangering the health
of the consumer.
The flaw in this logic, however, is that some residents of
Michigan are likely to consume more than 6.5 grams of fish each
day on a regular basis. A person who regularly eats 10 or 20
grams of fish, for example, would then be exposed to two or
three times the toxic amount assumed by the regulatory agency.
Rather than being protected by federal or state regulation, con-
sumers are instead lulled into a false sense of safety.
West and his colleagues attempted to find out the extent to
which this situation might exist in the state of Michigan and, if it
did, the extent to which certain individuals might be exposed to
unexpected environmental risks from eating fish. West’s team
made two interesting discoveries. First, they found that, among
those who fish in the Detroit River, 21.7 percent of whites in the
sample were more likely to fish for both recreational purposes
and to obtain food for meals, whereas 58 percent of nonwhites
fished for both recreational purposes and to obtain food.
Examples of Environmental Inequities  13

In addition, the West research team found that members of
all minority groups studied (African Americans, Native Ameri-
cans, and other minorities) consumed about five times the
amount of fish per day as assumed by Michigan’s Rule 1057. The
team concluded that the regulation was, therefore, inadequate to
protect those who fish primarily for food rather than for recre-
ation. They ended their report with the observation that “to rely
on a policy of fish consumption advisories creates more of a
hardship for minorities because a needed protein source is at
stake, not just a chance to catch that big one that didn’t get
away” (West et al. 1992, 111).
Proposed Select Steel Corporation Plant 
(Flint, Michigan)
The “justice” of the environmental justice movement some-
times seems so obvious that one wonders how critics can com-
plain about efforts to ameliorate cases of environmental
inequities. One answer to that question can be found in a com-
plex case involving plans by the Select Steel Corporation of
America in the late 1990s to build a new factory in Michigan’s
Genesee County. Most residents of the county were delighted to
hear of the plans as the new plant promised to bring with it at
least 200 new jobs in an economically depressed region of the
state. At least one group of citizens was not pleased with the
proposal, however. Father Phil Schmitter and Sister Joanne Chi-
averini of the St. Francis Prayer Center in Flint, Genesee
County’s largest city, raised objections with the EPA, claiming
that pollution from the new plant would cause disproportion-
ate health effects on minority people living near the construc-
tion site.
The complaint was the first of its kind to be presented to the
EPA since the agency had adopted its Interim Guidance for Investi-
gating Title VI Administrative Complaints Challenging Permits, a set
of guidelines for ruling on environmental justice cases. The EPA
soon discovered, however, that its guidelines were too vague to
permit a clear decision on some facets of the Select Steel case. 
It eventually decided, however, that there was no evidence that
the plant would produce toxic releases greater than standards set
by the state itself and by the EPA. It rejected the  Schmitter-
Chiaverini claim.
14
Background and History

Dissatisfied with this result, complainants asked the EPA to
reconsider its decision. Meanwhile, Select Steel was eager to get
a resolution to its problems. It threatened to move to Ohio if ap-
proval were not granted for the Genesee plant, and, finally, in
April 1999, it announced that it would be building the new plant
in Delta Township, near Lansing, Michigan. At this point, very
few people were satisfied with the outcome of this environmen-
tal justice complaint, some feeling that justice had not been done,
and others viewing the complaint as an overreaction by environ-
mentalists to a nonproblem. As Michigan governor John Engler
said about the case, “The EPA is imposing their bureaucratic will
over this community and punishing a company with the latest
environmental standards, all because of a baseless complaint. . . .
The net result is that the EPA is a job killer” (Alex J. Sagady & As-
sociates 1998).
Sweet Valley and Cobb Town, Alabama
Residents of the Sweet Valley and Cobb Town neighborhoods of
Anniston, Alabama, generally expected to live out their lives in
their poor but comfortable homes. Then they learned about the
toxic wastes produced by the Monsanto PCB (polychlorinated
biphenyl) plant only a few hundred feet from their houses. Mon-
santo had purchased the plant in the 1930s and taken over pro-
duction of PCBs from its previous owners. Polychlorinated
biphenyls are a class of organic compounds once widely used in
a variety of products, including coatings of electrical wiring and
electronic components, flame retardants, sealants, adhesives,
paints, coolants and insulating fluids for transformers, additives
in pesticides, and carbonless copy paper. Both Monsanto and the
African Americans who called Sweet Valley and Cobb Town
home shared the lowest land in Anniston for the same reason: it
was inexpensive. Wealthier white residents generally lived in
higher parts of the town, less exposed to toxic gases and runoff
from the plant.
By the 1970s, almost everyone had become aware of the
harmful effects of PCBs on the environment. The EPA eventually
banned their production and use in 1979 (although Monsanto
had stopped production in Anniston eight years earlier). Still, it
was not until the early 1990s that Sweet Valley and Cobb Town
residents realized the potential health threats they faced from ex-
posure to PCBs. They began to see what they thought of as an
Examples of Environmental Inequities  15

unusually large number of cases of cancer, birth defects, and
other health problems that they attributed to years of PCB expo-
sure. Organized as the Sweet Valley/Cobb Town Environmental
Justice Task Force, they filed suit and sought EPA assistance in
gaining compensation from Monsanto for their health problems.
Six years later, the case was resolved. In 2001, Monsanto
agreed to pay residents of the area $42.8 million to facilitate their
relocation. Even though valid and reliable evidence for a connec-
tion between PCBs and human health disorders was still largely
absent, the company decided that it no longer wanted to fight
what appeared to be a losing battle. Environmental justice for the
citizens of Sweet Valley and Cobb Town had been achieved, but
at what health cost still remained to be seen.
West Harlem Environmental Action and 
Diesel Buses
For low-income and minority communities, examples of environ-
mental racism are often ubiquitous, if not immediately obvious.
Over the last decade, the disproportionate effect of highway
 construction and public transit systems on such communities has
become increasingly evident and of greater concern to environ-
mental justice groups. One of the first instances in which a com-
plaint was filed about environmental inequities in transportation
occurred in 2000, when West Harlem Environmental Action 
(WE ACT) filed a complaint with the EPA. That complaint
claimed that New York City’s Metropolitan Transit Authority
(MTA) disproportionately affected citizens in its part of the city.
WE ACT pointed out that six of the city’s eight major bus depots
are located in Harlem. Diesel buses traveling throughout the city
almost all have to drive through Harlem at some point in their
trips. The pollutants released by these buses, WE ACT said, are an
important factor in the abnormally high rate of asthma among
children in the region.
WE ACT pointed out in its complaint that options were
available for reducing diesel bus emissions. For example, the
MTA’s plans to close a downtown terminal could be reversed,
distributing pollution problems to a wider part of the city. Also,
the agency could consider using buses that produce less pollu-
tion, such as natural gas or diesel-electric hybrids. In response
to the organization’s criticisms, the MTA agreed to take some
16
Background and History

steps to deal with WE ACT’s concerns, primarily the use of  less-
polluting vehicles.
In 2005, the EPA formally rejected the WE ACT complaint,
explaining that it had found no evidence of intentional environ-
mental racism in the MTA’s policies and practices. It did admit,
however, that some of the concerns expressed by the organiza-
tion in its formal filing did have justification. Meanwhile, the
MTA continued to waffle on its agreement with WEACT about
dealing with the pollution caused by its buses in Harlem. In
2004, it announced that it was no longer considering shifting to
natural gas–powered buses because diesel technology had im-
proved so much that MTA vehicles no longer posed a health
threat to residents of Harlem. Four years later, it changed its
mind again, announcing that it would begin buying  fuel-
efficient, low-polluting diesel-electric hybrid buses for use in
the city.
But the battle over buses was still not over. Reacting to the
MTA’s 2004 decision, WE ACT executive director Peggy Shepard
said that “we do understand that C.N.G. [compressed natural
gas] and hybrid diesel buses are measuring about the same level
in terms of emissions. But without an agreement in place on a va-
riety of environmental measures that we want them to imple-
ment in Harlem, I cannot say we are not opposed” (Chan 2005).
Southern Nuclear Operating Company
Proponents of environmental justice take pride in pointing to the
many cases in which their complaints have been successful and
some measure of recompense has been provided to victims of en-
vironmental inequities. A broader view of the topic reveals, how-
ever, that activists frequently lose such cases. Understanding the
reasons for these losses is important because it helps environ-
mental justice advocates deal with their problems more effec-
tively in the future. An example of such a case is the petition filed
in 2007 by five groups interested in environmental justice: the
Center for a Sustainable Coast, Savannah Riverkeeper, the South-
ern Alliance for Clean Energy, the Atlanta Women’s Action for
New Directions, and the Blue Ridge Environmental Defense
League.
These groups appeared before the Nuclear Regulatory Com-
mission’s Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel to challenge
Southern Nuclear Operating (SNO) Company’s petition for an
Examples of Environmental Inequities  17

early site permit at its Vogtle Electric Generating Plant near
 Waynes boro, Georgia. The five groups argued that the SNO envi-
ronmental report had not given adequate attention to the possi-
ble disproportionate health effects produced by the plant on
low-income and minority populations in its vicinity. They
pointed out that residents of the area already have unusually
high cancer rates (as a result of eating fish contaminated with
toxic chemicals) and that the plant’s operation may only magnify
this effect. Finally, they said that SNO had made no special pro-
visions for low-income and minority groups in case of a nuclear
accident at the plant.
In March 2007, the panel ruled on the group’s complaint.
That ruling reflected a theme common among cases in which en-
vironmental justice activists have failed to make their argu-
ments before governmental agencies. The panel said that the
groups had failed to meet two essential requirements estab-
lished for deciding environmental justice cases: (1) providing
evidence for “the alleged existence of adverse impacts or harm
on the physical or human environment” and (2) showing that
“these purported adverse impacts could disproportionately af-
fect poor or minority communities in the vicinity of the facility
at issue.” For these reasons, the panel rejected the groups’ com-
plaint (Lee 2007).
Environmental Justice:
Environmentalism and Civil Rights
The movement for environmental justice represents the conflu-
ence of two older movements in the United States—the environ-
mentalist and civil rights movements. The origins of the
environmentalist movement in this country can be traced to the
late 19th century. Before then, concern about the environment
was virtually nonexistent in the United States. Instead, the domi-
nant philosophy was that of the biblical injunction to “go forth
and conquer the Earth.” Early pioneers sweeping westward from
the original 13 colonies encountered unimagined riches of land,
minerals, timber, and wildlife. They harvested and used those re-
sources without consideration about preserving or conserving
them for some future use. Indeed, official governmental policy
encouraged this rape of the land and its resources. The Preemp-
18
Background and History

tion Act of 1841, for example, allowed a settler and his family to
buy homestead land of up to 480 acres for 50 cents an acre. In
many cases, lumber companies hired gangs of men to claim the
land and hand it over to the companies. A similar practice was
followed by cattle barons, who hired cowboys to claim home-
steading lands under the Desert Land Act of 1877 and then use
the lands for grazing their cattle (Petulla 1988).
It was only with the end of the westward migration, as pio-
neers reached the Pacific Coast, that some individuals began to
realize that the continent’s resources were not, in fact, unlimited.
This realization spurred the first environmental movement in the
United States. That movement actually consisted of two
themes—conservationist and preservationist. The term conserva-
tion refers to the practice of harvesting natural resources in a con-
trolled manner so that they will be available for future
generations. The current U.S. government policies of “multiple
use, sustained yield” reflect this philosophy. Conservationists do
not argue that nature is sacred and inviolable but that it provides
humans with many valuable resources that they must learn to
use wisely. One of the most articulate spokespersons for the early
conservationist movement was Gifford Pinchot, chief of the Divi-
sion of Forestry (later the National Forest Service) in the Depart-
ment of Agriculture (Wild 1979).
In contrast to the views of the conservationists was the phi-
losophy of preservation. Preservationists argue that there is a
beauty and value in nature that has nothing to do with the com-
mercial value for humans. Humans have the obligation to protect
vast portions of the natural world for no other reason than for its
inherent value. According to preservationists, large segments of
the world’s forests, deserts, grasslands, and other natural re-
sources should be set aside forever, for their own protection and
for their enjoyment by humans. The philosophy of preservation
owes much to the early writings of Henry David Thoreau.
Thoreau once wrote that “there is a subtle magnetism in Nature,
which, if we unconsciously yield to it, will direct us aright”
(Thoreau 1962, 265). Perhaps the most famous preservationist
was John Muir, one of the founders of the Sierra Club and the
man largely responsible for convincing President Theodore Roo-
sevelt of the need for the U.S. National Park system.
The traditional environmental movement, then, was one
that strongly emphasized the connection between humans and
nature. Hiking, backpacking, mountain climbing, bird-watching,
Environmental Justice: Environmentalism and Civil Rights
19

photography, canoeing, and many other forms of recreation were
the preferred activities of those who called themselves “environ-
mentalists” until the mid-20th century. The environmental
groups that sprung up within this movement—groups such as
the Sierra Club, the Wilderness Society, and the National Parks
and Conservation Association—strongly reflected that emphasis.
Their goal was to protect the natural environment for a variety of
human uses, whether for pure enjoyment or limited commercial
exploitation.
The Modern Environmental Movement
The 1960s saw the rise of a quite different kind of environmental
movement. This movement was inspired by a dawning recogni-
tion of the havoc humans were wreaking on the natural environ-
ment. Some people credit Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring
(1962) as the defining moment in the modern environmental
movement. Carson showed how the indiscriminate use of pesti-
cides killed insects and the birds who fed on them. She called at-
tention to the fact that many of the wonders of modern science
and technology that made life healthier, safer, and more pleasant
for humans were, at the same time, causing extensive damage to
the physical and biological environment.
Out of this dawning realization grew a host of new environ-
mental groups, groups whose focus was not primarily on the en-
joyment of nature but on issues such as air and water pollution,
hazardous waste disposal, and land use. Examples of such
groups are the Acid Rain Foundation, the Citizens Clearinghouse
for Hazardous Wastes, the Environmental Action Foundation,
and the Friends of the Earth.
Groups that make up the traditional and modern environ-
mental movements are often considered mainstream environ-
mentalists. Early activists in the environmental justice movement
have often argued, however, that they have little in common
with mainstream environmentalism. One reason for this position
is that mainstream environmentalist groups tend to be largely
white and middle or upper class. One study of the membership
of mainstream environmental groups in the 1940s, for example,
found that 96 percent of the 1,468 respondents classified them-
selves as caucasian/European. Almost half (48 percent) had a to-
tal family income of more than $10,000, and 15 percent had a
total family income of more than $25,000. In comparison, only 
20
Background and History

10 percent of American families made $13,000 or more at the time
of the survey (as cited in Smith 1974).
In addition, the evidence suggests that most mainstream en-
vironmentalist groups have traditionally had little interest in is-
sues faced by poor, minority, urban people. When members of
the Sierra Club were asked in the 1970s, for example, whether
the club should concern itself with the conservation problems of
such special groups as the urban poor and ethnic minorities,
about 40 percent said “no” and about 15 percent said “yes”
strongly (as cited in Smith 1974). When a similar poll was con-
ducted more than a decade later, a proposal to increase involve-
ment in environmental issues faced by the urban poor and
communities of color was defeated by a vote of about three to
one (Freudenberg 1984).
Under the circumstances, it is hardly surprising that at least
some observers have had harsh words for mainstream environ-
mentalism. For example, Richard Hatcher, then mayor of the city
of Gary, Indiana, observed in 1970 that “the nation’s concern with
the environment has done what George Wallace had been unable
to do: distract the nation from the human problems of black and
brown Americans” (“The Rise of Anti-Ecology?” 1970, 42).
In fact, the accomplishments of mainstream environmental-
ism have sometimes exacerbated the environmental problems of
low-income people and people of color. As an example, new reg-
ulations on the use of pesticides in agriculture—rules enacted
under the pressure of mainstream environmental groups—have
in some cases increased the risk to farmworkers. Agricultural
business people have replaced pesticides of lower toxicity and
longer persistence (thereby providing greater protection to con-
sumers) with pesticides of greater toxicity and shorter persis-
tence (thus increasing the risk to farmworkers) (Perfecto 1992).
In any case, many of those active in the environmental jus-
tice movement retain doubts about the ability of mainstream en-
vironmentalist groups to understand or respond to the issues
about which people of color are most concerned. In assessing the
current relationship between mainstream environmentalism and
the environmental justice movement, Robert Bullard has written
that “the mainstream environmental movement has proven that
it can help enhance the quality of life in this country. . . . Yet, few
of these groups have actively involved themselves in environ-
mental conflicts involving communities of color. Because of this,
it’s unlikely that we will see a mass influx of people of color into
Environmental Justice: Environmentalism and Civil Rights
21

the national environmental groups any time soon. A continuing
growth in their own grassroots organizations is more likely”
(1993, 38).
The Civil Rights Movement
For some historians, the modern civil rights movement in the
United States can be traced to December 1, 1955, when African
American seamstress Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat in
the first row of the “colored” section of a Montgomery, Alabama,
bus to a white man. The event precipitated a yearlong boycott of
Montgomery buses by African Americans in the city and culmi-
nated in a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court that segregation
on public bus systems was illegal.
The next decade was marked by the battle by African Amer-
icans and their allies to eliminate the whole fabric of segregation
that had been constructed in the South over the preceding cen-
tury. Important events included the Alabama Freedom Rides of
1961; civil rights demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama, and
the March on Washington, D.C., in 1963; and the marches on
Selma, Alabama, in 1965. Although protests were strongly influ-
enced by the philosophy of nonviolence, they were often met
with extreme violence, resulting in injuries to and the deaths of
hundreds of protestors.
The civil rights movement’s major goals were slowly accom-
plished, however, with the passage of the Voting Rights Act of
1957, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act of 1968,
and similar legislation. Courts also confirmed that segregation of
any kind in American society was unconstitutional and set forth
rigorous programs for the elimination of bias in education, hous-
ing, employment, and other fields. Although the centuries-old
evils of segregation were hardly eliminated, the nation’s highest
legislative and judicial bodies had made clear that official forms
of apartheid in the United States were illegal (Grossman 1993;
Morris 1984).
The environmental justice movement probably owes more
to one parent—the civil rights movement—than to the other—
the environmental movement. Although the issues with which
environmental justice deals are environmental issues—air and
water pollution, hazardous waste sites, and the like—the politi-
cal philosophy that underlies action is a reflection of the civil
rights philosophy. In addition, most of the groups currently act-
22
Background and History

ing on environmental justice issues began their existence as civil
rights groups and not environmental organizations. As Robert
Bullard has said, “The push for environmental equity is an exten-
sion of the civil rights movement, a movement in which direct
confrontation and the politics of protest have been real weapons”
(1994, 13).
Environmental Justice Comes of Age
Walter E. Fauntroy, then representative from the District of Colum-
bia to the U.S. House of Representatives, participated in and was
arrested for his part in the 1982 Warren County protest described
previously. Following his release from jail, Fauntroy asked the U.S.
General Accounting Office (GAO) to conduct a study on the rela-
tionship between pollution and minority communities. The report
found that three of the four largest landfills located in the South-
east were located in predominantly poor and African American
communities (U.S. General Accounting Office 1983).
The GAO study was rather modest in its scope, but it was
important for another reason. It brought to the attention of the
general public, probably for the first time, a possible association
between race and income on the one hand and exposure to envi-
ronmental hazards on the other. In addition, it highlighted the
serious lack of fundamental research on this issue.
The Commission on Racial Justice of the
United Church of Christ
In response to the gap in fundamental research, the Commission
on Racial Justice of the United Church of Christ decided to initiate
an even more extensive study of the environmental problems
faced by minority and poor communities. The commission ana-
lyzed the location of hazardous waste sites in all zip (postal)
codes and counties in the United States. The results of the study
were released in 1987 and were immediately hailed by experts in
both environmental and civil rights communities. In a 1987 edito-
rial, for example, the Atlanta Constitution observed that the study
put an end to any doubts that white America had been pursuing 
a policy of dumping its garbage in black neighborhoods. The
 commission report, it said, clearly pointed out where public
Environmental Justice Comes of Age
23

health officials and environmental inspectors needed to look for
potential problems before they became health hazards.
What was it that the Commission on Racial Justice had actu-
ally found? Among the most important points in the commission
report were the following:
• People of color are twice as likely to live in a community
with a commercial hazardous waste site than are whites.
They are three times as likely to live in a community with
more than one hazardous waste site.
• About 60 percent of African Americans live in a commu-
nity with an abandoned hazardous waste site.
• The average annual income of people living in communi-
ties with a hazardous waste site is signiﬁcantly less than
those living in communities without such a site.
• In spite of the preceding point, race, more than income, 
is a more reliable factor in predicting the presence of a
hazardous waste site.
• Three of the ﬁve largest hazardous waste sites, accounting
for about 40 percent of the nation’s total landﬁll capacity,
are located in communities that are predominantly
African American or Latino.
• Fifteen million African Americans and 8 million Hispanic
Americans live in communities with one or more haz-
ardous waste sites.
• Of the six cities with the largest number of hazardous
waste sites, African Americans make up a far greater
fraction of residents than do whites. The numbers for
those cities are as follows: Memphis (43.3 percent African
Americans; 173 sites), St. Louis (27.5 percent; 160 sites),
Houston (23.6 percent; 152 sites), Cleveland (23.7 percent;
106 sites), Chicago (37.2 percent; 103 sites), and Atlanta
(46.1 percent; 94 sites). For comparison, African Ameri-
cans make up 11.7 percent of the general U.S. population.
(Commission on Racial Justice 1987)
As dramatic as the Commission on Racial Justice report was,
it was certainly not the first serious study of the relationship
among environmental hazards, race, and income. For example,
an early study by David Harrison found that the costs of air
 pollution were more likely to be borne by low-income groups
than by middle- or high-income groups (1975).
24
Background and History

Another important study was the one completed by Robert
D. Bullard and reported in 1983. Bullard found that the pattern of
siting for municipal landfills, incinerators, waste transfer sta-
tions, and other forms of waste disposal facilities in Houston was
similar to what was later reported by the Commission on Racial
Justice. That is, all five of the city-owned landfills were located in
predominantly African American neighborhoods; six of eight
garbage incinerators were located in such neighborhoods, with
the remaining two in a predominantly Hispanic American neigh-
borhood and a predominantly white area (Bullard 1983). Over
three decades, a number of studies similar to those of Bullard’s
have been conducted in specific cities, counties, and states. (The
bibliography in Chapter 8 lists the reports from many of these
studies.)
The Michigan Conference
As the decade of the 1990s dawned, environmental justice was a
topic of considerable interest across a wide spectrum of citizens
from all walks of life. In 1990, two academicians relatively re-
cently introduced to the issues of environmental justice—Bun-
yan Bryant and Paul Mohai at the University of Michigan School
of Natural Resources (now the School of Natural Resources and
Environment)—convened a conference of scholars and activists
in Ann Arbor to present their latest research, discuss their ideas,
and consider possible solutions to the problems of environmen-
tal racism and environmental inequities. A number of papers
presented at the Michigan Conference were later reprinted in
Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards, edited by Bryant
and Mohai.
The Michigan Conference was important because of other
events it initiated. First, participants at the conference drafted a
letter to Louis W. Sullivan, secretary of the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; William K. Reilly, administrator of
the EPA; and Michael R. Deland, chair of the Council on Environ-
mental Quality. The letter asked for an opportunity to meet with
government officials to discuss a number of topics relating to en-
vironmental justice. Among these issues was the request for more
research on the nature of environmental inequities in the United
States, the development of projects targeted at providing aid to
low-income and minority populations, the appointment of spe-
cial assistants for environmental equity in government  agencies,
Environmental Justice Comes of Age
25

and the development of a policy statement on environmental eq-
uity. Representatives of the Michigan Conference met with Reilly
and other government officials on September 13, 1990, in what
appeared to be a highly productive meeting.
Governmental Recognition in the 1990s
Although the administration of President George H. W. Bush took
no concrete action to deal with the issues of environmental justice,
an important seed had been planted. That seed came to fruition
with the election of Bill Clinton as president in 1992. Clinton ap-
pointed Benjamin Chavis and Robert Bullard, both activists in the
field of environmental justice, to serve on his transition team in the
area of natural resources (which included the EPA and the Depart-
ments of the Interior, Energy, and Agriculture). Then, on February
11, 1994, President Clinton issued Executive Order 12898 establish-
ing the Office of Environmental Justice within the EPA and the Na-
tional Environmental Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC).
Clinton’s action is arguably the most important step to occur
in the environmental justice movement in its short history. The
creation of the Office of Environmental Justice and the NEJAC
provided the mechanism and the financial support needed for
those concerned about environmental justice issues to meet at
regular intervals, design programs of research, present their con-
cerns directly to the federal administration, hold public meetings
at which groups and individuals can testify, and comment on fed-
eral programs that have a relevance to environmental inequities.
The NEJAC consists of about two dozen members selected
from community-based groups, business and industry, acade-
mia, tribal governments, nongovernmental organizations, and
environmental groups. The NEJAC is organized into four sub-
committees—Waste and Facility Siting, Enforcement, Health and
Research, and Public Participation and Accountability.
First National People of Color Environmental
Leadership Summit
Another important event in the organization of a national envi-
ronmental justice movement took place in October 1991. Under
the auspices of the Commission on Racial Justice of the United
Church of Christ, the First National People of Color Environ-
26
Background and History

mental Leadership Summit was convened in Washington, D.C.
More than 500 participants from a wide variety of ethnic, racial,
cultural, and economic groups came together to talk about their
mutual concerns about the environment and environmental in-
equities. More than 50 presentations, workshops, panels, cau-
cuses, and other sessions were held during the three-day
conference. At the conference’s conclusion, the participants
adopted a 17-part statement, “Principles of Environmental Jus-
tice,” outlining their combined view on the state of environmen-
tal inequities in the United States. The principles have become a
guideline for much of the thought and work that now takes place
in environmental justice groups throughout the nation. (See
Chapter 6 for a statement of the principles.)
Environmental Justice as
a Social Movement
The environmental justice movement in the United States stands
out among other social movements. Although it has begun to
take on some of the trappings familiar to the movements from
which it sprang, namely, a centralized organization located in
large governmental and nongovernmental bodies, it still remains
to a large degree a highly decentralized movement. While acade-
micians and activists were coming together at the Michigan Con-
ference and in the development of the EPA Office of
Environmental Justice, dozens of small, local groups were being
organized to deal with the very real issues faced by individual
neighborhoods and communities. (For a superb discussion of all
facets of the environmental justice movement, see Lazarus
[1993].)
The 1990s saw the formation, for example, of groups such as
the Coalition for Environmental Consciousness in Ridgeville, Al-
abama; California Indians for Cultural and Environmental Pro-
tection in Santa Ysabel, California; the Citizens League Opposed
to Unwanted Toxins in Tifton, Georgia; Ke Kua’aina Hanauna
Hou in Kaunakakai, Hawaii; the Flint-Genesee United for Ac-
tion, Justice, and Environmental Safety in Flint, Michigan; Con-
cerned Citizens of Sunland Park in Sunland Park, New Mexico;
Fort Greene Community Action Network in Brooklyn, New
York; Eufaula Street Landfill Committee in Fayetteville, North
Environmental Justice as a Social Movement
27

Carolina; Environmental Services Office of the Cherokee Nation
in Tahlequah, Oklahoma; People Organized in Defense of Earth
and Its Resources in Austin, Texas; and the Environmental Cen-
ter for New Canadians in Toronto.
Representatives of such groups often stay in contact with
each other and draw on each other’s resources through tribal, re-
gional, cultural, or other affiliations, such as the Southwest Net-
work for Environmental and Economic Justice, the Asian Pacific
Environment Network, the Gulf Coast Tenants Organization, or
the National Congress of American Indians. Yet, in many cases,
the bulk of their actual work occurs within a neighborhood, a
small town, a tribe or reservation, or a county.
Local groups also stay in contact with each other through a
number of journals, magazines, newsletters, and other publica-
tions that have grown up over the past three decades. These in-
clude Race, Poverty, and the Environment (published by Urban
Habitat), Everyone’s Backyard (Center for Health, Environment,
and Justice), RACHEL’s Hazardous Waste News (Environmental
Research Foundation), Toxic Times (Chemical Injury Information
Network), Voces Unidas (Southwest Organizing Project), and
PAN magazine (Pesticide Action Network North America).
An interesting feature of the modern environmental justice
movement is the critical role played by women. Mothers, house-
wives, secretaries, and rural women have long been at the fore-
front of protests, community action, leafleting, public testimony,
and other actions on topics concerning environmental inequities
and environmental racism. A number of writers have observed
that many issues in the field of environmental justice strike close
to the individual home and thus arouse more interest among
housewives and mothers than would issues from mainstream
environmentalism, such as the protection of endangered species
or the development of national parks.
Celene Krauss, assistant professor of sociology and coordi-
nator of Women’s Studies at Kean College of New Jersey, for ex-
ample, has drawn on interviews with women active in the
environmental justice movement to place their participation in a
broader context of feminist political philosophy. She concludes
that women who can be described as “female blue-collar ac-
tivists” often have a political philosophy similar to those in the
field of environmental justice and a suspicion of the relevance 
of mainstream environmental organizations to the concerns of
women like themselves (Krauss 1994).
28
Background and History

Growth and Challenges
By the first decade of the 21st century, the environmental justice
movement had become a strong, diversified, active, and success-
ful crusade in the United States. Each new edition of the basic
reference text, the People of Color Environmental Groups Directory,
showed a significant increase in the number of environmental
groups in the United States, Puerto Rico, Canada, and Mexico:
from 205 such groups in 1992 to about 300 groups in 1994 to
more than 400 groups in 2000. And stories of successful battles
by local environmental groups against a variety of corporate
groups and governmental agencies continued to flood the acade-
mic and movement literature (see the chronology in Chapter 4
and resources in Chapter 8 for more detail).
By the mid-1990s, environmental justice groups had found
that they had two powerful tools for exposing and acting against
cases of environmental injustice: President Clinton’s Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Title VI
specifies that “no person in the United States shall, on the
ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from partic-
ipation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimi-
nation under any program or activity receiving Federal financial
assistance” (Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act). Since a great
many governmental and nongovernmental organizations and
agencies receive at least some part of their budget from the fed-
eral government, these organizations and agencies are subject to
the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act. Groups con-
cerned about environmental justice realized that they could file
complaints with the EPA against organizations and agencies that
they believed practiced environmental racism.
The first case on record involving this type of action took
place in 1992, when members of the St. Francis Prayer Center in
Flint, Michigan, filed a complaint with the EPA to prevent con-
struction of a new “mini-mill” plant near Flint by the aforemen-
tioned Select Steel Corporation of America. (Because the EPA
apparently mislaid the complaint, it was not acted upon until
1998; U.S. EPA 1998.) A year later, a group of environmental jus-
tice organizations also filed complaints with the EPA against the
Louisiana and Mississippi Departments of Environmental Qual-
ity, claiming that, in violation of the provisions of Title VI, they
discriminated against low-income and minority communities in
making environmental policies and decisions. Within a matter of
Growth and Challenges
29

years, the instances of using Title VI as a tool against industries
and government agencies had become a flood, with well over
100 cases being filed by the year 2000.
Environmental justice groups have not, however, met with
a great deal of success thus far in the use of Title VI as a means
of gaining redress against situations that they regard as environ-
mental racism. An article published in the November 2003 issue
of the New York Law Journal found that, of the 136 claims submit-
ted by environmental justice groups based on Title VI standards
to date, all decisions had been to deny the claim. Of the 136
cases, 75 were rejected without investigation, 26 were investi-
gated and found to have no evidence of discrimination, and 30
were still pending at the time of the article. The most common
reason for rejecting a claim, the article reported, was that the
complaint had not been filed in a timely manner. The EPA has
also been perhaps unduly deliberate in considering complaints
presented to it. In one case, it issued a decision almost 10 years
after the original complaint had been filed (Gerrard 2003, 3). A
summary of similar cases that had been presented to the EPA
since the law journal article was published can be found on the
American Bar Association’s Update Web site. More than 20 of
the cases discussed resulted in rejection of claims by the EPA;
less than 5 were favorably reviewed or accepted by the agency
or by any other state or federal court or agency (American Bar
Association 2008).
President Bill Clinton’s Executive Order 12898 on environ-
mental justice has also had somewhat less of an impact on envi-
ronmental inequities than many people had once hoped and
expected. A major problem appears to have been the low priority
placed on environmental justice issues by the administration of
President George W. Bush. Over the eight-year period of Bush’s
administration, a number of governmental and nongovernmen-
tal commissions studied the implementation of Executive Order
12898. For example, the inspector general of the EPA issued a re-
port in March 2004 noting that little progress had been made in
implementing the executive order and that, in fact, the Bush ad-
ministration had reinterpreted the meaning of environmental
justice to exclude low-income and minority populations (Office
of Inspector General 2004).
Later the same year, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights is-
sued a comprehensive review of the status of civil rights issues
during Bush’s first term. The commission concluded that
30
Background and History

despite a decade of active pursuit, Executive Order
12898 is still not part of EPA’s core mission. President
Bush did not consider implementation of the order a
primary goal. . . . [The] EPA has not developed a clear
vision or a comprehensive strategic plan, nor estab-
lished values, goals, expectations, and performance
measurements regarding the order. Further, EPA has
not provided regional or program offices with stan-
dards for what constitutes a minority or low-income
community, or defined the term “disproportionately”
as it relates to environmental justice. If EPA does not
identify parameters for environmental justice, it will
not be able to comply with Executive Order 12898. (U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights 2004, 75–76)
As of late 2008, a comparable scorecard on the Bush admin-
istration’s record during its second four-year term was not avail-
able. It can be noted, however, that the Republican Party did not
include any mention of environmental justice in its 2004 platform
(the Democratic Party platform did have a section under this
title), and little progress appears to have been made in the imple-
mentation of Title VI or Executive Order 12898 policies.
The record of the U.S. Congress in dealing with environmen-
tal justice issues has not been much better than that of the admin-
istration. Rep. John Lewis (D-GA) and Sen. Al Gore Jr.   (D-TN)
introduced an environmental justice act into Congress in 1992,
but the bill was not acted upon. A year later, Lewis and Sen.
Max Baucus (D-MT) reintroduced the same act, again without
success. Since that time, some version of the Lewis-Gore-Bau-
cus bill has been introduced into Congress in 1998, 1999, 2002,
2003, 2005, 2007, and 2008. Since 1998, a primary purpose of the
environmental justice legislation has been to codify Executive
Order 12898 to provide it with greater legal force. In no case has
an environmental justice bill come even close to passage; such
bills often do not get out of the committees to which they are
assigned.
In spite of the somewhat dismal record of the federal gov-
ernment in the area of environmental justice over the past
decade, a number of individual success stories can be told. These
stories often involve successful court cases at the local and state
level and, even more often, successful negotiations between pol-
luting industries and local grassroots environmental justice
Growth and Challenges
31

 organizations. A typical example is the ongoing battle by resi-
dents of the Baldwin Hills neighborhood of Los Angeles to pre-
vent despoliation of a large open space in their district. The open
space in question consists of about two square miles of undevel-
oped land, the largest such area in urban Los Angeles.
In 2001, the state of California announced plans to grant a li-
cense to La Jolla Energy Development, Inc., to build a new power
plant in the park as a way of responding to the state’s energy cri-
sis. With only 30 days to prepare for a hearing on the proposal,
residents of Baldwin Hills (78.5 percent African American in the
2000 census) quickly brought together a coalition of concerned
citizens and organizations to object to the plan. The coalition was
able to mass more than 1,000 people at the June 21 hearing on the
proposal. Faced with such daunting opposition, La Jolla Energy
eventually withdrew its plans to build in Baldwin Hills park.
That victory was somewhat short-lived, however, as the city
of Los Angeles announced only two years later that it planned to
build a garbage dump on the fringes of Baldwin Hills park.
Again, residents came together to oppose those plans and, again,
they won. The city decided to place the “solid waste transfer sta-
tion” in another location. Finally (if it truly turns out to be “fi-
nally”), residents of Baldwin Hills were able to convince the city
in 2007 to place a moratorium on the construction of 24 new oil
wells in the park (although wells had been in place in some parts
of the park since the 1920s). Whether the 2007 decision marks the
end of attempts to encroach on the park is still to be seen.
The modern environmental justice movement in the United
States poses something of an enigma for those concerned about
environmental and civil rights issues. On the one hand, the
movement has achieved some amazing successes in its less-than-
three-decade history. Poor people and minority communities
have won redress and compensation from giant multinational
corporations for the health risks they pose. Many states, regions,
and local governments have acknowledged the significance of
environmental justice issues and have passed laws and adopted
regulations to ameliorate the effects of environmental inequities.
But much remains to be done. The federal government, after
an impressive early initiative on behalf of environmental rights
in the 1990s, has largely ignored the issue since. The president,
Congress, and the courts at nearly all levels appear not to recog-
nize the existence of environmental inequities or their need to act
against such problems. What stumbling blocks do environmental
32
Background and History

justice activists still face, what basic questions about environ-
mental inequities remain, and what can be done to more fully
reach the goals of environmental equity that were first high-
lighted in the 1982 protest in Warren County? Chapter 2 exam-
ines these issues.
References
Alex J. Sagady & Associates. 1998. “E-M:/Engler News Release on Select
Steel Case.” [Online article or information; retrieved 5/14/08.]
http://www.great-lakes.net/lists/enviro-mich/. 
American Bar Association. Section of Environment, Energy, and Re-
sources. 2008. “The Law of Environmental Justice: Update Service.” [On-
line article or information; retrieved 4/22/08.] http://www.abanet
.org/environ/committees/envtab/ejupdates.html. 
Bullard, Robert D. 1983. “Solid Waste Sites and the Black Houston Com-
munity.” Sociological Inquiry 53 (2–3): 273–288.
Bullard, Robert D. 1993. “Anatomy of Environmental Racism and the
Environmental Justice Movement.” In Confronting Environmental Racism:
Voices from the Grassroots, edited by R. D. Bullard, chap. 1. Boston: South
End Press.
Bullard, Robert D. 1994. Unequal Protection: Environmental Justice and
Communities of Color. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.
Bullard, Robert D. 2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental
Quality, 3rd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Chan, Sewell. 2005 (March 28). “City to Buy Diesel-Electric Buses, Not
Natural Gas Ones.” New York Times. [Online article or information; re-
trieved 5/14/08.] http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/28/nyregion/
28bus.html?n=Top/Reference/Times%20Topics/Organizations/N/
New%20York%20City%20Transit. 
Commission on Racial Justice of the United Church of Christ. 1987. Toxic
Wastes and Race in the United States: A National Report on the Racial and So-
cio-Economic Characteristics of Communities Surrounding Hazardous Waste
Sites. New York: United Church of Christ.
Freudenberg, N. 1984. “Not in Our Backyards: Community Action for
Health and the Environment.” Monthly Review Press 22:34–39.
Gerrard, Michael B. 2003. “EPA Dismissal of Civil Rights Complaints.”
New York Law Journal, November 28, 3+.
Grifﬁth, Matt, Mansoureh Tajik, and Steve Wing. 2007. “Patterns of
Agricultural Pesticide Use in Relation to Socioeconomic Characteristics
References
33

of the Population in the Rural U.S. South.” International Journal of Health
Services 37:259–277.
Grossman, Mark. 1993. The ABC-CLIO Companion to the Civil Rights
Movement. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Harrison, David, Jr. 1975. Who Pays for Clean Air: The Cost and Beneﬁt Dis-
tribution of Automobile Emission Standards. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Krauss, Celene. 1994. “Women of Color on the Front Line.” In Unequal
Protection: Environmental Justice and Communities of Color, edited by
Robert D. Bullard, chap. 14. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.
Lazarus, Richard J. 1993. “Pursuing ‘Environmental Justice’: The Distri-
butional Effects of Environmental Protection.” Northwestern University
Law Review 87 (March): 101–170.
Lee, Charles. 2007. “Environmental Justice in the News for the Week End-
ing April 20, 2007.”  [Online article or information; retrieved 4/20/07.]
http://www.epa.gov/compliance/resources/newsletters/. 
Louisiana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.
1993. The Battle for Environmental Justice in Louisiana . . . Government, In-
dustry, and the People. Kansas City, MO: U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights, Central Regional Ofﬁce.
Maraniss, David, and Michael Weisskopf. 1989. “Jobs and Illness in
Petrochemical Corridor.” Washington Post, December 22, A1.
Miller, G. Tyler. 2003. Living in the Environment: An Introduction to Environ-
mental Science, 13th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Morris, Aldon D. 1984. The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement: Black
Communities Organizing for Change. New York: The Free Press.
Moses, Marion. 1989. “Pesticide Related Health Problems in Farm Work-
ers.” American Association of Occupational Health Nurses Journal
37:115–130.
Moses, Marion. 1993. “Farmworkers and Pesticides.” In Confronting En-
vironmental Racism: Voices from the Grassroots, edited by Robert D.
Bullard, chap. 10. Boston: South End Press.
Ofﬁce of Inspector General. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
2004. EPA Needs to Consistently Implement the Intent of the Executive Order
on Environmental Justice. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection
Agency.
Perfecto, Ivette. 1992. “Pesticide Exposure of Farm Workers and the In-
ternational Connection.” In Race and the Incidence of Environmental Haz-
ards: A Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai,
chap. 14. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
34
Background and History

Petulla, Joseph M. 1988. American Environmental History, 2nd ed. San
Francisco: Boyd & Fraser.
“The Rise of Anti-Ecology?” 1970. Time, August 3, p. 42.
Robinson, William Paul. 1992. “Uranium Production and Its Effects on
Navajo Communities along the Rio Puerco in Western New Mexico.” In
Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards: A Time for Discourse,
edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai, chap. 12. Boulder, CO: West-
view Press.
Smith, James Noel, ed. 1974. Environmental Quality and Social Justice in
Urban America. Washington, DC: The Conservation Foundation.
Thoreau, Henry David. 1962. “Walking.” In Excursions. New York:
Corinth Books.
Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. [Online information; retrieved
5/5/08.] http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/cor/coord/titlevistat.htm. Up-
dated November 13, 2000.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Ofﬁce of Civil Rights Evaluation.
2004. Redeﬁning Rights in America: The Civil Rights Record of the George W.
Bush Administration, 2001–2004. Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights.
U.S. Congress. 1993. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Environmental
Justice Hearings before the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights.
103rd Congress, 1st sess., March 3 and 4. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1998. “In Re: Select Steel
Corporation of America.” [Online article or information; retrieved
5/15/08] http://www.gridauh.fr/sites/fr/ﬁchier/447aec8d1257e.pdf. 
U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO). 1983. Siting of Hazardous Waste
Landﬁlls and Their Correlation with Racial and Economic Status of Surround-
ing Communities. Washington, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Wasserstrom, R. F., and R. Wiles. 1985. Field Duty: U.S. Farmworkers and
Pesticides Safety. Study 3. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute,
Center for Policy Research.
West, Patrick C., J. Mark Fly, Frances Larkin, and Robert W. Marans.
1992. “Minority Anglers and Toxic Fish Consumption: Evidence from a
Statewide Survey of Michigan.” In Race and the Incidence of Environmental
Hazards: A Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai,
chap. 8. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Wild, Peter. 1979. Pioneer Conservationists of Western America. Missoula,
MT: Mountain Press.
References
35


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
he environmental justice movement has grown rapidly, has
spread extensively throughout the world, and has achieved
some remarkable successes in the past three decades. Today,
most people who are interested in social justice, environmental
issues, and human rights are aware of the context into which en-
vironmental justice has placed these topics for people of color
and low-income communities.
Still, the movement has just begun to achieve the goals it has
set out for itself and for society as a whole. Hazardous waste
sites are still being sited in minority and low-income communi-
ties, petrochemical and other plants still deliver unacceptably
high levels of pollutants to such communities, farmworkers and
workers in hazardous industries are still exposed to health risks
that could and should be reduced, and developed nations of the
world still tend to think of developing nations as dumping
grounds for products and wastes that they, themselves, do not al-
low in their own countries.
This chapter reviews some of the major problems and con-
troversies still faced by the environmental justice movement. It
considers whether environmental injustice really does exist and,
if so, what evidence there is for it. It also asks to what extent resi-
dents of low-income and minority communities are exposed to
inequitable amounts of environmental risks, whether these risks
develop intentionally as the planned acts of government and/or
industry, and what low-income and minority communities can
do to combat these risks.
37

Do Environmental Inequities Actually Exist?
The fundamental premise of the environmental justice move-
ment is that low-income and minority communities are exposed
to a disproportionate risk from hazardous waste sites, work-
place hazards, polluting industries, and other facilities poten-
tially harmful to human health. To some extent, this premise
was initially based on anecdotal evidence provided by people
living in such communities. By the late 1970s, however, research
studies also began to provide support for the premise. Perhaps
the best known of these early studies was one conducted by
Robert D. Bullard, then an assistant professor of sociology at
Texas Southern University in Houston. Bullard’s research was
conducted to support a lawsuit filed by his wife, Bean v. South-
western Waste Management, Inc., in which plaintiffs claimed that
black citizens in Houston were being unfairly discriminated
against because of the siting of hazardous waste dumps in the
city. Bullard’s research showed that all five city-owned garbage
dumps, six of the eight city-owned garbage incinerators, and
three of the four privately owned landfills were sited in black
neighborhoods. The evidence strongly supported claims of en-
vironmental inequities in the city. Bullard’s research, completed
in 1979, was eventually published as “Solid Waste Sites and the
Black Houston Community” in the spring 1983 issue of Sociolog-
ical Inquiry.
Over the next decade, researchers collected an increasingly
extensive body of evidence to support the premise that poor and
minority communities are disproportionately affected by haz-
ardous working conditions and industrial facilities. These stud-
ies investigated problems such as the siting of radioactive waste
sites on Native American lands; the consumption of contami-
nated fish by minority communities around Puget Sound, Wash-
ington; the exposure of farmworkers to hazardous pesticides;
and the risks to minority communities of hazardous waste sites
in Massachusetts [for a summary of research studies conducted
on environmental inequities, see the U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency’s (2006) “Environmental Justice Bibliography Data-
base”]. Many of the case studies presented in Chapter 1 were
documented during this period.
Perhaps the most significant of all studies on environmental
inequities conducted in the 1980s was sponsored by the Commis-
sion on Racial Justice of the United Church of Christ, discussed
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in Chapter 1. The evidence from that study was so well docu-
mented and convincing that, by the time of its publication in
1987, many researchers had concluded that the case of environ-
mental inequities in the United States had essentially been
proved.
The United Church of Christ report was, however, by no
means the only study on the existence of environmental in-
equities. As an additional example, Paul Mohai and Bunyan
Bryant at the University of Michigan School of Natural Re-
sources, organizers of the Michigan Conference on Environmen-
tal Justice, undertook a review in 1992 of 16 major studies on the
relationship between race and income and the distribution of en-
vironmental hazards. They found significant correlations be-
tween these factors in all of the studies on which they reported
(Mohai and Bryant 1992).
The conclusions drawn by Bullard, the United Church of
Christ study group, Mohai, Bryant, and other researchers were
not, however, entirely convincing to all investigators. By the
early 1990s, a number of questions were being raised about the
methodological accuracies of many early environmental justice
studies. Some researchers had begun to ask if the apparent corre-
lations between income and race on the one hand and environ-
mental risk on the other were accurate or whether, in fact, they
represented an artifact produced by faulty methodology. These
investigators reported that the evidence from their own research
seemed to contradict the basic premise of environmental justice;
their studies seemed to suggest, that is, that low-income and mi-
nority communities are at no greater risk from hazardous expo-
sure than are middle-income and nonminority communities.
Perhaps the most famous studies that came to these conclu-
sions were those conducted by Douglas L. Anderton and his col-
leagues at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in the
early 1990s. The initial studies were funded by Chemical Waste
Management, Inc., currently the largest waste management cor-
poration in the world.
Anderton’s research team focused on the smallest popula-
tion units for which reliable national data are available. These
units are the census tracts used by the U.S. Bureau of the Census
in its decennial census. When the Anderton team compared the
demographic characteristics of 1990 census tracts containing
toxic waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs)
with similar tracts lacking such facilities, they found essentially
Do Environmental Inequities Actually Exist?
39

no differences in the racial status of residents of the two tracts.
They reported their results in a series of papers published in the
mid- and late 1990s (Anderton et al. 1994a, 1994b; Anderton,
Oakes, and Eagan 1996, 1997). In a summary of this research, An-
derton’s team drew three primary conclusions. First, the appear-
ance of environmental inequity depends on the way in which
areas of potential impact are defined. Second, if one uses census
tract areas, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, hazardous
waste sites are no more likely to be located in nonwhite neigh-
borhoods as in other tracts. Third, the most consistently signifi-
cant effect on the location of hazardous waste sites is the
proportion of workers employed in industrial activities. That ob-
servation, the researchers said, should hardly be surprising since
industrial operations tend to locate near other industrial facilities
(Anderton et al. 1994a).
Anderton and his colleagues continued their research on
environmental inequities based on race and income for a num-
ber of years. In 2000, he and colleague Pamela Davidson re-
ported on a review of hazardous waste facilities governed by
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Their
results did not show disproportionate siting of such facilities
based on income (facilities most commonly were placed in
working-class neighborhoods), although the hazardous waste
sites did tend to be located near minority communities. Over-
all, Davidson and Anderton concluded that “the siting of
RCRA facilities does not merit high priority among the poten-
tial hazards and burdens to which minorities and the disad-
vantaged are disproportionately exposed” (Davidson and
Anderton 2000, 466).
As might be expected, Anderton’s research itself became the
subject of some dispute, with other observers raising questions
about the methodology used in his studies. Indeed, the scientific
data on which claims of environmental inequities are based have
been and continue to be the subject of considerable controversy
among researchers. For example, some researchers point out the
problems of proving that clear evidence exists for the connection
between exposure to hazardous materials and cancer and other
diseases, birth defects, and death. It can be very difficult to say
that just because people live near a hazardous waste site, for ex-
ample, their health problems are caused by exposure to those
wastes.
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Questions have also been raised about the way generaliza-
tions have been made by environmental justice advocates from
specific situations in one locality to general patterns of environ-
mental inequities throughout the nation or around the world.
Situations are so different, some critics say, that each problem
area must be studied and treated on its own.
The debate over the correlation among race, income, and en-
vironmental hazards is far from over. Scholarly articles in the
first decade of the 21st century are still arguing the best ap-
proaches to use in studying these factors, and experts are still de-
bating how extensive environmental inequities in the United
States are. But other research questions remain also. To the extent
that environmental inequities exist, researchers would like to
know the answers to a number of related questions, such as how
these conditions have arisen, whether they represent conscious
intent on the part of industry and/or government, and how such
inequities can be reduced in the future.
Precisely how environmental inequities develop is a com-
plex question, one that has not yet been answered to everyone’s
complete satisfaction. Yet, some forces contributing to this state
of affairs are reasonably clear. These forces can be characterized
as follows:
• Progress and environmental degradation: Improvements
in our way of life often lead to a diminished quality of
the environment for all citizens, but often and especially
for poor communities and communities of color.
• Siting decisions: The choices that governments and in-
dustries make in locating hazardous facilities can dam-
age the environment.
• Access to tools of protest: Lack of education and experi-
ence can reduce the ability of some communities to un-
derstand and respond to environmental issues they face.
• Job blackmail: Individuals faced with a diminished envi-
ronment are often forced to choose between keeping
their jobs and accepting those conditions or battling for a
better life and, perhaps, losing their jobs.
• Effects of environmental regulations: Ironically, govern-
mental regulations designed to improve the overall envi-
ronmental quality for an area sometimes have undesirable
impacts on poor and minority communities.
Do Environmental Inequities Actually Exist?
41

Progress and Environmental Degradation
Environmental degradation comes about because societies strive
for a better way of life—nicer, more comfortable homes; better
clothes; more effective medicines; and more efficient means of
transportation, for example. The largest single difference be-
tween the “have” and “have-not” countries of the world reflects
the abilities of some nations to provide their citizens with better
material goods and a larger supply of energy—a higher standard
of living—than can other nations.
But the systems of production, distribution, and consump-
tion of material goods and energies always result in the release of
waste products into the environment. Polluted air and water,
hazardous waste dumps, and dangerous occupations are all ex-
amples of the price a society pays for improving its standard of
living. And the more the standard of living is improved, the
greater the amount of waste released into the environment.
In a perfect world, the benefits and burdens of a high stan-
dard of living would be distributed equally throughout a society.
Everyone would have equal access to new products and would
have to live with increased levels of environmental degradation.
But no perfect society exists. Instead, in every form of govern-
ment devised—socialism, communism, fascism, or democracy—
there are haves and have-nots. Some people receive a larger
share of the benefits, and others receive a larger share of the bur-
dens. One of the goals of almost any social movement is to obtain
a more fair distribution of these benefits and burdens.
How is the distribution of benefits and burdens deter-
mined in the real world? One factor is the way in which various
groups within the society are viewed. In the United States (as in
many other nations), white people tend to have the advantage
over people of color, men over women, the physically well over
the physically handicapped, heterosexuals over gay men and
lesbians, and so on. This pattern is reflected in the wage gap
among various groups in the United States. In 2006, for exam-
ple, the last year for which data are available, white women
earned about three-quarters (73.5 percent) as much as men in
the United States; black men earned 72.1 percent as much; black
women, 63.6 percent as much; Hispanic men, 57.5 percent as
much; and Hispanic women, 51.7 percent as much (Infoplease
2008).
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The unequal distribution of power and prestige is also re-
flected in the relative numbers of men and women, whites and
nonwhites, and other demographic groups in positions of power.
In the 110th Congress of the United States (2007–2009), for exam-
ple, there are 16 women (16 percent; all white) in the Senate com-
pared to 84 men (84 percent), whereas the percentage of women
in the general population is about 52 percent. At the same time,
there are 74 women (17 percent) in the House, of whom 15 (3 per-
cent) are African American, 3 (0.6 percent) are Asian Pacific
Americans, and 7 (1.6 percent) are Hispanic Americans (Amer
2008).
Under these circumstances, it is not difficult to see why
white males tend to receive the highest proportion of material
goods available in the U.S. society. And the burdens—such as in-
creased amounts of hazardous wastes, polluted air and water,
and greater occupational hazards—that develop as a result of an
improved lifestyle for the more privileged are likely to fall on
poor people of color. The environmental justice movement has
fought to make that fact abundantly and unquestionably clear.
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs
Beyond political and social philosophy, however, there are some
concrete reasons that the burdens of environmental degradation
have fallen disproportionately on communities of color and on
people of low economic status. In the first place, decisions as to
where polluting industries, hazardous waste dumps, radioactive
storage sites, and other environmentally undesirable sites are to
be located are commonly made by governmental bodies, such as
city councils, planning departments, or zoning committees. It is
not uncommon for such bodies to consist of a disproportionate
number of the local “power structure,” which usually means
white males. The tendency in many cases may be, then, for envi-
ronmentally undesirable sites to be located in “their” neighbor-
hoods rather than in “our” neighborhoods.
This tendency is reinforced by the reluctance of ordinary citi-
zens to have such sites located in their neighborhoods. One of the
most familiar phrases in land-use issues in the last few decades
has become “not in my backyard,” or NIMBY. The phrase reflects
the fact that most people recognize that undesirable factories,
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs
43

prisons, halfway houses, hazardous waste sites, and other “lo-
cally unwanted land uses” (LULUs) are now a reality in our soci-
ety. Given our way of life, they have to exist. But few people
want them near their homes. They would prefer to have them
constructed “somewhere else.” In many cases, this outlook has
led to a new attitude, the “put it in the blacks’ backyard,” or
PIBBY, syndrome.
Concerns about Environmental Issues 
among People of Color
Consonant with the NIMBY principle has been the belief, spoken
or unspoken, that African Americans and other minorities are
not concerned about environmental issues. Some people have ar-
gued that people of color have too many other concerns—jobs,
housing, and health problems, for example—to care about the
surroundings in which they live. A number of research studies
have been conducted to determine the factual accuracy of this at-
titude.
In his study of environmental problems in five largely
African American communities, Robert Bullard found that resi-
dents were very much interested in and concerned about such is-
sues. Overall, more than half of the respondents in Bullard’s
survey had taken part in some form of environmental activism,
such as writing a letter to or telephoning an official about an is-
sue, signing or circulating a petition, attending or organizing a
meeting in one’s home, marching in a demonstration, attending
a public meeting, or helping to raise funds (Bullard 2000; also see
Buttel 1987; Lowe and Pinhey 1982; Taylor 1989).
An associated finding of the Bullard study was that environ-
mental activism among African Americans tended to take place
not within traditional environmental groups but through other
organizations, such as churches, social clubs, labor unions, civil
rights groups, or parental groups. On average, 16.3 percent of
Bullard’s subjects belonged to an environmental group defined
as such, whereas memberships were 76.5 percent in churches,
27.9 percent in community involvement groups, and 23.1 percent
in parent groups (Bullard 2000).
More recent studies confirm the evidence adduced from this
earlier research. In 2003, Paul Mohai reported the results of his
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

review of data from three sources: the University of Michigan
National Opinion Research Center Detroit Studies from 1990 and
2002, the findings of Urban League studies collected over a 20-
year period, and the People of Color Environmental Groups Direc-
tory. Mohai’s analysis covered not only environmental attitudes
of African Americans but also factors such as lifestyle choices,
political actions, environmental group memberships, and the en-
vironmental voting records of African American legislators. He
found four major trends:
• In most respects, African Americans are more likely to
make lifestyle choices that are better for the environment
than do whites: They consume less meat, buy more pesti-
cide-free foods, and drive less. In a few categories, they
trail whites. For example, African Americans tend to re-
cycle less than do whites.
• No statistical difference exists between the number of
African Americans and the number of whites who join
environmental groups. The major difference between the
two groups is that the former tend to afﬁliate with local
grassroots organizations while the latter join more tradi-
tional, “mainstream” environmental groups.
• African Americans are more likely to express concerns
about environmental issues that affect them directly, such
as exposure to lead, high noise levels, and abandoned or
run-down properties. Mohai points out that these differ-
ences probably reﬂect the environment in which African
Americans live compared to white neighborhoods.
• African American legislators are signiﬁcantly more likely
to support environmental legislation than are their white
counterparts. The rate for African American legislators
ranges from about 75 to 85 percent; for white Democrats,
from about 60 to 80 percent; and for white Republicans,
from about 20 to 40 percent.
Mohai concluded that “environmental issues are not ‘luxu-
ry’ issues to African Americans. Survey results such as these
demonstrate that environmental quality issues are a priority on
many different levels” (2003, 25).
Two later studies confirmed Mohai’s conclusions. In 2005,
Matthew Whittaker of the University of Iowa, Gary M. Segura
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs
45

at the University of Washington, and Shaun Bowler at the Uni-
versity of California at Riverside reported on their study of Lati-
nos in California over a period covering just over two decades.
They found that the subject population evidenced greater inter-
est in environmental issues than did whites, but only on issues
that related directly to their own lives (Whittaker, Segura, and
Bowler 2005). A year later, Robert Emmet Jones of the University
of Tennessee and Shirley A. Rainey of Austin Peay State Univer-
sity described their study of 247 people living in a “highly pol-
luted” community of color. They found that their respondents
had a very different perception of which environmental issues
were of concern to them than did a control group of whites and
that they showed a greater level of interest and participation
than did whites (Jones and Rainey 2006).
Access to Tools of Protest
The most important single reason that LULUs end up in neigh-
borhoods with a majority of people of color or of people in lower
economic strata may be the difference in access that various
groups of people in the United States have to the political pro-
cess. One might argue that a community of color has the same
opportunity to protest the siting of a hazardous waste site or a
polluting industry as does any other community. It can take its
case before a zoning board or bring suit in a court of law to pre-
vent the siting of an undesirable facility, for example.
The reality is, however, that people of color and poor people
probably lack the experience, the training, or the financial re-
sources to engage in the same kinds of battles that affluent white
communities routinely use to keep their neighborhoods free of
environmentally offensive sites. Mohai and Bryant have summa-
rized the disadvantages under which communities of color oper-
ate when confronted with environmental hazards. In the first
place, the residents of such communities are usually unaware of
policy decisions that impact them, and they generally do not have
the resources, time, money, experience, or knowledge of the polit-
ical system to know how to react to those policies. In addition,
minority communities tend to be underrepresented on bodies
that make and administer policies determining environmental
quality (Mohai and Bryant 1992).
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Job Blackmail
The siting of LULUs in communities of color or low-income com-
munities often presents a difficult dilemma. The construction of a
factory or a hazardous waste site may mean new jobs and an ex-
panded tax base for such communities, an important economic in-
centive when unemployment may be high and municipal services
minimal. When Chemical Waste Management, Inc. (CWM), pur-
chased an existing hazardous waste landfill in Sumter County, Al-
abama, in 1978, for example, it worked hard to convince local
residents of the landfill’s economic benefit to the community. A
chart the company made public, “How Much Will We Get from
Chem Waste?” showed 21 different governmental and nongovern-
mental bodies—for example, the Sumter County General Fund;
the Sumter County Board of Education; the Sumter County Water
Authority; the Livingstone University General Fund; the towns of
Gainesville, Geiger, and Emelle; the cities of Livingstone and York;
and the Sumter County Historical and Preservation Society, the
Sumter County Library System, and the Sumter County Fine Arts
Council—receiving tax benefits from the landfill. Overall, CWM
was to become the largest single taxpayer in the county, producing
about half of all public funds collected (Bailey and Faupel 1992).
Poor communities find it difficult to reject an economically
productive facility such as this one, even if it might present seri-
ous environmental and health hazards. Individual workers face
a similar dilemma. It seems unlikely that anyone would choose
to work in a hazardous waste landfill or a factory in which nox-
ious fumes are constantly released, but a dangerous job may be
better than no job at all.
This form of job blackmail is hardly new to minority work-
ers. Throughout history, African Americans, Asian Americans,
Hispanic Americans, or other minority groups have been given
jobs that whites would not want or take. Migrant workers proba-
bly do not choose to work 12-hour days in hot, dry fields where
they are exposed to dangerous pesticides, for example, because
they enjoy the outdoor life. They take such jobs because they
may be the only ones open to them. Probably the earliest com-
prehensive discussion of job blackmail can be found in a book by
Richard Kazis and Richard L. Grossman, Fear at Work: Job Black-
mail, Labor, and the Environment, in which they first use the term
(Kazis and Grossman 1982).
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs
47

In many cases, the assignment of minorities to dangerous
and difficult jobs has been justified by pseudoscientific theories
about differences in physical or biological traits among various
ethnic groups. For many years, for example, the iron and steel in-
dustry assigned African American men to work at its coke ovens
because of the supposed ability of African Americans to with-
stand heat better than whites. Similarly, workers with dark skin
were once more frequently assigned to work with caustic chemi-
cals in some industries because job-induced skin irritations
would supposedly be less noticeable and less objectionable than
they would be with lighter-skinned workers (Davis 1977).
Job blackmail on a somewhat more comprehensive scale is
sometimes referred to as “economic blackmail,” a posture taken
by both industry and government. One form of the argument is
that low-income and minority communities should think seri-
ously about objecting to environmental problems caused by a
polluting industry. If you make too much trouble, that argument
goes, the industry will go somewhere else, and you will all be left
without jobs.
One of the widest applications of economic blackmail in the
United States historically has been the use of Native American
lands for the mining of coal, oil, natural gas, uranium, and other
valuable minerals; for the construction of energy-generating
plants; and for hazardous waste disposal sites. In such cases,
corporations have traditionally made tribes very attractive fi-
nancial offers to allow them to build facilities that probably
could not be built elsewhere or at much greater expense. The
consequence of this trade-off has been the accumulation of con-
siderable wealth for some tribes, accompanied by a significantly
diminished environment with consequent health risks to indi-
viduals and communities.
Although Native American tribes have become much more
sophisticated in dealing with the issue of economic blackmail,
temptations continue. In 2007, the Burnham Chapter of the
Navajo Nation in the Four Corners region of the Southwest
(where Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah meet) was
confronted with the proposed construction of the Desert Rock
power plant, a joint project of the tribe’s Diné Power Authority
and Sithe Global, a private, multinational company based in
Houston. Diné and Sithe Global noted that the plant would cre-
ate 200 new jobs for the community and that an additional 200
jobs would be created at the coal mine supplying the plant its
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

fuel. In addition, the new plant would produce far less pollution
than others of its kind in the area.
Although the planned construction seemed a win-win situa-
tion for everyone, environmental activists were less certain. They
pointed out, first, that a number of opportunities for alternative
energy generation facilities were available, such as those involv-
ing the use of solar power. In addition, they wondered why the
owners of the plant selected one of the most impoverished, In-
dian-occupied lands in the area on which to build rather than
choosing land occupied primarily by middle-class whites. Fi-
nally, they suggested that reducing pollution significantly does
not solve the environmental health problems already faced by
Native Americans in the area. As one observer noted, “just be-
cause you go from 10 quarts of whiskey a week to four doesn’t
mean you’re clean and sober,” and reducing pollution even by
half still results in unacceptable levels of noxious gases being re-
leased into the atmosphere (Binkly 2007).
Job blackmail and economic blackmail present, therefore, a
damned-if-you-do and damned-if-you-don’t choice for both in-
dividuals and communities. In his article “Environmental Black-
mail in Minority Communities,” Robert Bullard pointed out that
many polluting facilities such as paper mills, chemical plants,
heavy metals operations, and waste disposal and treatment facil-
ities saw minority communities as a logical choice for their facili-
ties. They assumed that such communities reasoned as Third
World communities might, believing that development of any
kind, no matter how dangerous, is better than no development at
all. Foul-smelling air and polluted water were, they reasoned, a
fair trade-off for jobs and security (Bullard 1992).
An intriguing point about the job/economic blackmail argu-
ment is that it often presents a false dichotomy, forcing individu-
als and communities to choose between two apparently
incompatible alternatives. But those alternatives are not neces-
sarily incompatible. In some cases, industries that have said they
could not survive unless their demands were met did, indeed,
survive (and often prospered), even though they were not able to
get their way with a community. One case sometimes mentioned
involves the paper industry in Maine, which claimed that the
provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments
(the so-called Clean Water Act) of 1972 would put it out of busi-
ness because it would be forced to install new pollution control
devices. In fact, there appeared to be little economic impact on
NIMBY, PIBBY, and LULUs
49

the industry once it complied with the legislation, and it was not
until a decade later that employment actually dropped—as a re-
sult of new automated production methods (Sayen 1995).
Other observers point out that meeting new environmental
regulations can even benefit an industry. By switching from older,
outmoded systems to newer, more-efficient systems, industries
can create new jobs and realize unexpected profits. When speak-
ing about pollution problems in his Cincinnati neighborhood, for
example, activist Mike Henson reflected on the fact that a local in-
dustry, Queen City Barrels, now brags on its Web site about hav-
ing the best pollution control equipment available in operation at
its facility. But, he points out, the company installed the equip-
ment only because of pressure by community activists and, even-
tually, new city regulations (Pierce 2007).
The Effects of Environmental Regulations
The picture painted thus far of the environmental inequities
faced by people of color and poor people seems bleak. Yet, the
United States has developed a much more enlightened view of
the environment in the past three decades. People in general are
probably much better informed and more concerned about the
environment, and federal, state, and local governments have be-
come much more aggressive about passing legislation and en-
forcing regulations that protect the environment. Do these
changes suggest that progress is being made in dealing with the
disproportionate exposure faced by people of color and poor
people in the United States?
It would be difficult to argue that no overall improvement
has been made as a result of such changes. Somewhat remark-
ably, however, it is also clear that many new environmental regu-
lations have actually increased the environmental hazards to
which minorities are exposed. Again, the benefits of environ-
mental regulations for some groups of people have resulted in an
increased burden for other groups of people.
First, new programs to protect the environment clearly cost
money. Those costs are borne by all taxpayers in the society,
poor as well as rich. They are borne by all taxpayers whether or
not they benefit directly from the environmental program in
question. Programs to protect national wildlife areas or na-
tional seashores are paid for by African Americans, Hispanic
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Americans, and Native Americans, as well as by whites. Every
time an environmental regulation raises the cost of an automo-
bile because of new pollution control devices, increases the cost
of housing because of new land-use regulations, or raises the
cost of food products because of new pesticide-use rules,
people of lower-income groups pay a disproportionate percent-
age of that cost.
In other words, the economic costs of new environmental
regulations are more likely to have a more significant effect on
low-income people than on high-income people. If the costs of
environmental regulations average out to $500 per person na-
tionwide, those costs will be more detrimental for someone mak-
ing $10,000 per year than for someone making $100,000 per year.
One attempt to measure the economic impact of the air pol-
lution policy in the United States was conducted by Leonard P.
Gianessi, Henry M. Peskin, and Edward Wolff. This study was
used to determine the costs and benefits that could be antici-
pated from the full implementation of the federal Clean Air Act.
The researchers found that the effects of the Clean Air Act were
regressive; that is, people of low income would pay proportion-
ally more than would those of high income. For those with an in-
come ranging between $3,000 and $8,000 per year, the net costs
of the Clean Air Act were about 0.9 to 1.0 percent of their income.
In contrast, those with incomes of more than $8,000 uniformly
experienced a net cost of about 0.5 percent of their income
 (Gianessi, Peskin, and Wolff 1979; also see Johnson 1980).
The costs of environmental regulation can also be measured
in terms of exposure to regulated pollutants. In his doctoral the-
sis at the University of California at Berkeley, Michel Gelobter
analyzed the amount of air pollution to which individuals in se-
lected urban areas were exposed in the period between 1970 and
1986. He found that all the racial and all the income groups he
studied were exposed to lower levels of ambient air pollutants
at the end of that period than they were at the beginning. How-
ever, Gelobter found differences in exposure among both in-
come and racial groups. For example, in 1970, 1975, 1980, and
1984, the average white resident of the urban areas studied was
exposed to 100, 75, 75, and 62 micrograms of total suspended
particulates per cubic meter of air, respectively, whereas the
comparable figures for nonwhites during those four years were
122, 85, 82, and 70 micrograms of total suspended particulates
per cubic meter of air, respectively. In an analysis of the “relative
The Effects of Environmental Regulations
51

benefit from air quality improvements” that included a variety
of measures, Gelobter found that whites and nonwhites rated al-
most exactly the same in 1970. Over the next 15 years, however,
the difference in relative benefits diverged until whites were ap-
proximately 5 percent “better off” according to these measures.
Gelobter later summarized the results of his research in a chap-
ter for the book Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards: A
Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai
(Gelobter 1992).
A number of studies have produced another interesting
finding: the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
U.S. government agency primarily responsible for the preven-
tion and cleanup of polluted sites, has itself been guilty of dis-
criminatory policies and practices in dealing with communities
of color and low-economic status. In a study conducted for Clean
Sites, Inc., in 1990, for example, Kate Probst found that the EPA
was less likely to include rural poor communities on its list of po-
tential Superfund sites than other communities (Probst 1990).
One of the most telling studies on this issue was con-
ducted by Lavelle and Coyle in 1992. These researchers found,
first of all, that the EPA was likely to make minority communi-
ties wait even longer than low-income communities to receive
Superfund listing. The pattern was for low-income areas to
wait 11 percent longer than high-income areas, and for minor-
ity areas to wait 20 percent longer than white areas. Lavelle
and Coyle also found that, after a minority community did re-
ceive a Superfund listing, the agency was more likely to insti-
tute a program of waste containment than to arrange for
toxicity reduction or removal, as was the case with white
 communities. Finally, for instances of pollution in minority
communities the fines assessed by the EPA averaged only 
20 percent of those assessed in white communities (Lavelle and
Coyle 1993).
Critics have argued that an indication of the EPA’s attitudes
toward racial issues can be found in the agency’s hiring policies.
One way in which the agency could demonstrate a greater sensi-
tivity to issues of environmental inequities, they suggest, would
be to make greater efforts to include members of minorities on its
staff. Yet, according to an agency report published in 1992, less
than 10 percent (33 out of 412) of the new management positions
filled during the previous year were given to members of a mi-
nority. In the following year (1992), 42 of 354 management hires
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

went to minorities. In comparison, the number of white females
hired was 142 (34 percent of new hires) and 126 (36 percent) in
1991 and 1992, respectively (U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency 1992).
In a critique of the nation’s environmental protection poli-
cies, Robert Bullard has written that these policies have “(1) insti-
tutionalized unequal enforcement; (2) traded human health for
profit; (3) placed the burden of proof on the ‘victims’ and not on
the polluting industry; (4) legitimated human exposure to harm-
ful chemicals, pesticides, and hazardous substances; (5) pro-
moted risky technologies, such as incinerators; (6) exploited the
vulnerability of economically and politically disenfranchised
communities; (7) subsidized ecological destruction; (8) created
an industry around risk assessment; (9) delayed cleanup actions;
and (10) failed to develop pollution prevention as the overarch-
ing and dominant strategy” (Bullard 2000, 115).
Environmental Inequities:
By Chance or By Choice?
Even if everything said above were entirely true, one critical
question remains—the question of intent. Do environmental in-
equities exist because corporations, governmental bodies,
and/or individuals plan for them, or do they come about simply
as the result of business and/or technical decisions based on
other factors? This question has been at the core of environmen-
tal justice issues because, from the earliest days of the movement,
the assumption has been that environmental inequities are a
manifestation of racism and, perhaps to a lesser degree, class is-
sues. Recall that Benjamin Chavis defined environmental racism
as “the deliberate targeting of people of color communities for
toxic waste facilities and the official sanctioning of a life threaten-
ing presence of poisons and pollutants in people of color com-
munities” (U.S. Congress 1993, 6).
Some people, however, while acknowledging the existence
of environmental inequities, argue that racism is a minor or
nonexistent factor. Such inequities come about not because busi-
ness, industry, and government intend to expose poor and mi-
nority communities to environmental insults; instead, these
problems arise as a by-product—and an unfortunate by-product
Environmental Inequities: By Chance or By Choice?
53

that needs to be addressed—of business decisions that have no
racial or class component.
This issue is, of course, a crucial one within the environmen-
tal justice arena. Perhaps corporations and governments rou-
tinely make decisions about the siting of LULUs based strictly on
economic factors, such as labor costs, availability of land, and ac-
cess to transportation. Racial, ethnic, or other social factors might
then have little or no impact on their decisions. In such a case,
minority communities could expect to work with corporations
and governments to find ways of siting such facilities with less
disproportionate impact on themselves. The affected communi-
ties and the agencies responsible for environmental inequities
could work together with trust and confidence in each other.
On the other hand, it might be that factors other than eco-
nomic matters enter into the siting of LULUs. One could imagine
that those responsible for making such decisions hold African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, Native
Americans, and poor people in less regard than they do middle-
and upper-class white citizens. In such a case, solving the prob-
lem of environmental inequities poses a different dilemma. Mi-
nority communities would be faced with the task of changing
attitudes among those in corporations or government whose re-
spect they currently do not have. Or they might have to use a
more confrontational approach to problem solving (such as court
cases) to deal with environmental inequities. As a matter of fact,
it is the latter position that most of those active in the environ-
mental justice movement appear to hold currently and to have
held since the earliest days of the movement.
Still, many observers continue to deny the presence of social
attitudes, such as racism, in the origin of environmental in-
equities. An example is the comment made by Kent Jeffreys, di-
rector of Environmental Studies for the Competitive Enterprise
Institute, in testimony before the Subcommittee on Civil and Con-
stitutional Rights of the U.S. House of Representatives on March
3, 1993. Jeffreys said that “racism exists. Environmental problems
exist. These facts, however, do not reveal whether or not environ-
mental racism is occurring. Regardless of whether any particular
case fits the definition of environmental racism, the fact remains
that environmental problems—from a minority perspective—are
rather trivial in comparison to the larger economic and civil lib-
erty issues: solve these and you have solved most, if not all, of the
environmental inequities” (U.S. Congress 1993, 64). 
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

This viewpoint was also reflected during hearings before the
Louisiana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights in February 1992. The hearings were held to determine the
status of environmental problems in certain parts of the state. At
the conclusion of its fact-finding sessions, the committee con-
cluded that “many black communities located along the indus-
trial corridor between Baton Rouge and New Orleans are
disproportionately impacted by the present State and local gov-
ernment system for permitting and expansion of hazardous
waste and chemical facilities” (Louisiana Advisory Committee
1993, iii). The committee did not specifically attribute the environ-
mental inequities it found to racism, but its final report contains a
number of allusions that suggest that the majority of committee
members may have held this viewpoint. At one point the report
says, for example, that “some black citizens and organizations
view with skepticism and distrust some agencies in State govern-
ment, including the Department of Environmental Quality. These
views are held because of poor access to government and an on-
going perception that State government discriminated against
them to promote and sustain the interests of industry and busi-
ness” (Louisiana Advisory Committee 1993, iv).
Perhaps the best view of the committee’s mind-set on this is-
sue comes from one member who wrote a dissenting statement to
the report. John S. Baker Jr., professor of law at the Louisiana State
University Law Center, concluded that “absent from the report is
the one finding most clearly supported by the evidence: Environ-
mental Racism has not been shown to exist in Louisiana. . . .
None of the extensive findings contains anything about, nor could
they support a finding of, ‘deliberate targeting’ or ‘official sanc-
tioning’” (Louisiana Advisory Committee 1993, 69 [emphasis in
original]). Baker argued that members of the committee knew in
advance of the hearings that discriminatory motive would not be
found and that the sessions were conducted with other purposes
in mind than the search for such a motive. Baker continued in his
dissent:
The overall handling of this project reminds me of the
situation that occasionally occurs during a criminal
case. Sometimes during voir dire when a potential juror
is asked whether he or she can presume the innocence
of the defendant and give him a fair trial, the juror will
answer quite innocently in terms that effectively say:
Environmental Inequities: By Chance or By Choice?
55

“Of course, I’ll give him a fair trial before convicting
him.” Like the prospective juror, the staff and commit-
tee members, I believe, are acting with the best of inten-
tions. Nonetheless, the report, and the process that
produced it, have blindly stepped over and around the
evidence, which so clearly establishes no racially moti-
vated discrimination on environmental decisions in
Louisiana. (Louisiana Advisory Committee 1993, 71–72)
The issue being raised in this debate might be characterized
as a chicken-and-egg debate: Which came first—the hazardous
waste facility or low-income and minority communities? In other
words, do industries tend to choose an existing minority and/or
low-income community in which to locate because they have less
regard for the health and welfare of people living there, or does
an industry build a landfill (or other LULU) and low-income and
minority people then choose to move into that area?
Some research has been done on this question, but the find-
ings are not yet conclusive. For example, Vicki Been, associate
professor of law at New York University School of Law, has rean-
alyzed the demographics of waste disposal sites previously stud-
ied by the U.S. General Accountability Office (GAO) and by
Robert Bullard in Houston. Her intent was to pay greater atten-
tion to the economic and racial status of an area before a toxic
waste landfill was constructed.
Been obtained somewhat conflicting results from her exami-
nation of the GAO and Bullard studies. In the former case, she
found that the four communities where waste disposal sites were
sited were originally both predominantly low-income and minor-
ity communities. She also found that neither the proportion of
low-income nor the proportion of minority individuals increased
after the siting. In the Houston (Bullard) case, Been found that
waste disposal sites were occupied predominantly by minority
populations, but not by low-income populations, before facilities
were installed. After the facilities were opened, however, the per-
centage of African Americans and of low-income people in-
creased. Been concludes from her research that “research
examining the socioeconomic characteristics of host neighbor-
hoods at the time they were selected, then tracing changes in
those characteristics following the siting, would go a long way to-
ward answering the question of which came first—the LULU or
its minority or poor neighbors. Until that research is complete,
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

proposed ‘solutions’ to the problem of disproportionate siting run
a substantial risk of missing the mark” (Been 1994, 124). 
One of the difficulties in conducting studies of this type is the
difference between older hazardous waste sites, many now closed,
and new or proposed sites. At one time, it was relatively easy to
build a hazardous waste site, and older sites can be found
throughout the United States. Now, obtaining permission to con-
struct a hazardous waste site is much more difficult. It follows that
the factors involved in making the decision as to where to build a
newer site might, therefore, be somewhat different now than in
the past. One study bearing on this issue was completed by James
T. Hamilton. Hamilton found that counties planning to expand
waste disposal sites apparently made no distinction among areas
on the basis of racial or economic conditions. He also found, how-
ever, that sites scheduled for closure were more likely to be located
in white areas than in minority communities (Hamilton 1993).
In his summary of the new research needed in the field of
environmental justice, Benjamin Goldman returns to the ques-
tion of causality in the siting of LULUs. He points out that the
majority of studies he reviewed make use of correlation analysis,
which shows how two variables are mathematically related to
each other, but do not demonstrate whether or how one variable
is dependent on the other. Thus, the fact that the siting of haz-
ardous facilities is mathematically related to a high density of
nonwhite and/or poor populations does not prove that one of
these factors causes or is caused by the other (Goldman 1993).
Yet, as Goldman also points out, studies like those by Been
and Hamilton deal with the very core of the environmental jus-
tice movement. He goes on to say that the basic questions for
those concerned about environmental justice are about how the
decisions made by legal, social, economic, and other cultural in-
stitutions result in disproportionate environmental impacts and
what legal remedies are available for resolving those impacts,
whether or not one can prove intent by an offending industry.
The Legal Question of “Intent” 
in Environmental Inequities
Goldman’s summary refers to another key issue in the dispute
over environmental inequities: the question of intent. Many
The Legal Question of “Intent” in Environmental Inequities
57

 involved in the environmental justice movement would like to
demonstrate that environmental harm has come about as a re-
sult of decisions and actions taken by business, industry, or
governmental bodies and then to obtain some relief from that
harm from the appropriate body. That is, an environmental jus-
tice organization might like to prove that Company X placed its
hazardous waste landfill adjacent to a predominantly African
American community because that was the easiest decision 
for the company to make. The organization might then argue
that health effects to the community resulting from the com-
pany’s decision were the company’s responsibility, and that the
company should be forced to pay a financial penalty for its
 decision.
And in some cases, this approach has worked, and compa-
nies have paid large fines or made large financial settlements to
members of communities harmed by their activities. But such in-
stances are relatively rare. One reason is that a stringent standard
of proof is often required by courts in cases of environmental
harm. This standard was established in the landmark decision in
Washington, Mayor of Washington, D.C., et al. v. Davis et al. In that
case, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a plaintiff must be able
to prove that harmful actions taken by an individual, a group, or
a corporation are intended to cause harm to the plaintiff and not
that the harm occurred as an unexpected by-product of the ac-
tion. This legal standard is a difficult one to employ since it re-
quires that a plaintiff somehow find out what was in the minds
of a businessperson or government official and then demonstrate
“intent” to the court.
The hurdles created by the intent standard have meant that
many environmental justice activists have used means other
than legal challenges to deal with environmental issues. As one
example, the Lumbee Indians of Robeson County, North Car-
olina, were involved in an extended dispute with the GSX Cor-
poration, which planned to build a hazardous waste facility on
lands sacred to the Lumbee. The tactics used by the Lumbee
were not legal challenges but a more personal campaign featur-
ing traditional Native American dance and music at public hear-
ings, leafleting at churches, and participation in all planning
sessions held on the GSX request (Austin and Schill 1994). Grass-
roots activities such as these have been common and successful
in situations where long, expensive, and complex legal chal-
lenges would have held much less promise.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Responding to Environmental Inequities
Some obvious methods for dealing with environmental in-
equities have been suggested thus far. Some communities have
found that direct political action—protests and demonstrations,
for example—have accomplished their goals. Others have
sought relief in the courts. A debate remains, however, as to the
best mechanism by which a community dealing with a LULU
can protect itself against the dangers of such a facility.
On the one hand, some people believe that environmental
justice is, to a large extent, a problem with which governments
have to deal. New and better laws and stronger enforcement of
existing laws can prevent future environmental inequities and
can help deal with instances now existing. Robert Bullard, for ex-
ample, has called for government to take five steps to ensure en-
vironmental justice: creating national legislation modeled on
civil rights acts, eliminating existing environmental hazards,
shifting the burden of proof for guilt or innocence in environ-
mental inequity cases from affected communities to polluting in-
dustries, modifying the current legal standard of intent in
dealing with cases of environmental inequities, and providing
compensation and assistance to communities most seriously af-
fected by environmental inequities (Bullard 1994).
An opposing view to the solution of environmental in-
equities calls for greater dependence on market forces in the pri-
vate sector and less on government involvement. Companies
that benefit from the use of land for the construction of LULUs
should be required to pay a fee for this privilege. That fee would
then be transferred to minority and poor communities on whom
the burdens of the LULU siting fall.
An example of this approach is legislation proposed in the
state of Wisconsin in 1981. This legislation required negotiations
between a company wishing to build a hazardous waste facility
and the municipality in which the facility would be located.
Three advantages of the Wisconsin plan, as noted by Christopher
Boerner and Thomas Lambert of the Center for the Study of
American Business at Washington University in St. Louis, are
that the statute “clearly specifies ‘the players of the game’—that
is, who negotiates with whom. Both developers and potential
host communities are required to establish negotiating commit-
tees, with the rules regarding these representatives explicitly set
Responding to Environmental Inequities
59

forth in the statute. Secondly, the legislation assures that these
‘players’ will not only negotiate, but also that the results of their
negotiations will be legally binding. . . . Finally, the Wisconsin
statute provides a ‘back-up plan’—a way to arbitrate siting deci-
sions should negotiations fail or should one party refuse to coop-
erate” (Boerner and Lambert 1995, 99).
The Current Status of the Environmental
Justice Movement in the United States
The March 2007 United Church of Christ report Toxic Wastes and
Race at Twenty includes a timeline of important events in the en-
vironmental justice movement from 1987 to 2007 (Bullard et al.
2007, chap. 2). That timeline provides a succinct review of the
progress (or lack of progress) in dealing with environmental in-
equities in the United States and a hint as to the problems and
challenges still facing the movement. A few of the generaliza-
tions that can be drawn from the timeline are described in the
following sections.
Environmental Inequities Exist
Despite all the debate that has taken place over whether environ-
mental inequities exist, what groups of people are most affected
by such inequities, whether inequities occur as the by-product of
industrial development or because of corporate intent, and other
details, the fact remains that very few experts any longer doubt
that low-income and minority communities in the United States
suffer disproportionate health risks because of their exposure to
hazardous waste dumps, nuclear processing plants and disposal
sites, unsafe occupational settings, petrochemical and chemical
industries, and other facilities that emit harmful products into
the environment. Report after report begins with some mention
and acknowledgment of this reality. The 2003 report by the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights, Not in My Backyard: Executive Order
12898 and Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice, for
example, notes that “clearly, race and class play significant roles
in environmental decision-making; moreover, communities of
color and low-income communities are disproportionately af-
fected by siting decisions and the permitting of facilities. Siting
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and permitting decisions are not, however, the sole sources of en-
vironmental concerns in these communities. Exposure to lead-
based paint, diesel emissions, noise, odor, and other pollutants
also diminishes the health of these communities.” Minority and
low-income communities are exposed to multiple pollutants
from multiple sources, the report continued; however, there has
been insufficient data collection and scientific research identify-
ing the health risks created by these multiple exposures (U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights 2003, 27).
Two years later, the U.S. Government Accountability Office
(GAO) issued a report on clean air rulemaking by the EPA. Its
letter of transmittal about the report began with the statement
that “[l]ow-income and minority populations are disproportion-
ately exposed to air pollution and other environmental risks, ac-
cording to Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) studies”
(U.S. Government Accountability Office 2005, 1).
Shortly after the GAO report appeared, the Associated Press
reported on “a little-known government research project” deal-
ing with the prevalence of environmental inequities using data
from the 2000 census. That report indicated that 79 percent of
African Americans were more likely to live in neighborhoods
where pollution could pose health risks than are whites. It con-
cluded that “residents in neighborhoods with the highest pollu-
tion scores also tend to be poorer, less educated and more often
unemployed than those elsewhere in the country.” The study
also found that similar patterns do not hold nationwide for
Asians and Hispanics, although they do occur in certain states
(12 states for Hispanics and 7 for Asians) (Pace 2005).
Federal, State, Regional, and Local
Governmental Agencies Have a Responsibility
to Find, Study, and Deal with Cases of
Environmental Inequities
The first major governmental action dealing with environmental
inequities was Executive Order 12898, signed by President Bill
Clinton on February 11, 1994. (Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 has also become an important tool in dealing with environ-
mental justice issues, although it was not adopted specifically for
that purpose.) Since the time of Clinton’s proclamation, a number
of other executive, legislative, and regulatory orders have been
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
61

adopted for dealing with problems of environmental injustices. In
2003, for example, the New York State Department of Environ-
mental Conservation adopted a new policy requiring the inclu-
sion of environmental justice considerations in the issuance of
new permits. The new policy amended the existing permitting
process by “identifying potential environmental justice areas;
providing information on environmental justice to applicants
with proposed projects in those communities; enhancing public
participation requirements for proposed projects in those com-
munities; establishing requirements for projects in potential envi-
ronmental justice areas with the potential for at least one
significant adverse environmental impact; and providing alterna-
tive dispute resolution opportunities to allow communities and
project sponsors to resolve issues of concern to the community.”
A year later, New Jersey governor James McGreevey became
one of the first state executives to take action on environmental
justice issues. On January 19, 2004, he issued an executive order
similar to Clinton’s order of 1994 that required all state depart-
ments, agencies, boards, commissions, and other bodies to “pro-
vide meaningful opportunities for involvement to all people
regardless of race, color, ethnicity, religion, income, or education
level” (“Environmental Justice Executive Order [New Jersey]”
2004). The order included a number of specific provisions, such
as requiring that notices on health and environmental issues be
made available in Spanish as well as in English, studying exist-
ing and proposed industrial and commercial facilities located
near minority and low-income communities to determine their
impact on the health of individuals in those communities, devel-
oping advisories concerning consumption of fish that may con-
tain high levels of hazardous materials, creating a strategy for
dealing with health problems faced by low-income and minority
communities as a result of exposure to particulate matter in the
air, and creating or reconstituting a number of state agencies
with responsibility for environmental justice issues.
In 2004, the section of Individual Rights and Responsibilities
of the American Bar Association and the Public Law Research In-
stitute of the University of California’s Hastings College of Law
issued a comprehensive report on the actions taken in all 50
states in the field of environmental justice. The report shows that
a host of tools has been developed by the states for dealing with
problems of environmental inequities, ranging from statutes and
executive orders to policy statements and special training
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

 programs. As one might expect, dramatic differences exist in the
extent to which states (if any) acknowledge the existence of envi-
ronmental inequities and/or take action to deal with those in-
equities, as well as in the tools they have developed to use in
environmental justice problems. The examples that follow
demonstrate the differences (all information as of 2004 and ob-
tained from Bonorris 2004).
Alaska has no laws or regulations dealing with environ-
mental inequities.
Arizona has no state laws on environmental justice, but the
state’s Department of Environmental Quality has expressed
a commitment to monitor and act on issues of environmen-
tal inequities that come to its attention. It maintains one
full-time employee to deal with such issues.
California has one of the most extensive and comprehensive
collections of laws and regulations for dealing with envi-
ronmental justice issues of any state. The ﬁrst such law was
passed in 1999 designating the Governor’s Ofﬁce of Plan-
ning and Research as the lead agency for environmental jus-
tice programs and directing the California Environmental
Protection Agency to take a number of actions to ensure
that the state is notiﬁed of and takes actions on speciﬁc in-
stances of environmental injustice that occur in the state.
During the three-year period from 2001 to 2004, the state
legislature passed eight more bills dealing speciﬁcally with
environmental justice concerns, such as diesel engine emis-
sion reduction programs, cleanup programs for small
parcels of land contaminated with hazardous wastes, mod-
els for the siting and operation of hazardous waste disposal
sites, and a program of small grants for communities deal-
ing with environmental and health problems speciﬁc to
their neighborhoods.
Florida has, like most other states, adopted laws and regula-
tions ensuring that problems of environmental inequities
are discovered and acted upon. But it has also developed a
somewhat unusual model in that most of the actions taken
to deal with environmental justice issues take place outside
of state agencies and within the state’s university system.
Much of this work is carried out through ﬁve university
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
63

 divisions: the Environmental Sciences Institute, the Center
for Environmental Equity and Justice, the College of Phar-
macy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, the Institute of Public
Health at the Florida Agricultural and Mechanical Univer-
sity, and the Interdisciplinary Center for Brownﬁeld Reha-
bilitation Assistance at the University of South Florida.
These divisions are responsible for conducting research and
working with communities on problems of environmental
injustice.
Indiana stands out among states as having been especially
proactive in dealing with its problems of environmental in-
equities. The state’s Department of Environmental Manage-
ment (IDEM) adopted a strategic plan for environmental
justice in August 2001. Key elements in that plan include
identifying geographic areas in which environmental in-
equities of signiﬁcance exist and developing procedures by
which communities can make their concerns known to state
agencies. Although the state’s approach to environmental
justice has been recognized as a “model for change” by the
National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA), some
internal problems remain. Since other state agencies respon-
sible for air and water quality and solid waste management
continue to function independently of IDEM, the latter
agency’s ability to bring about signiﬁcant change is some-
what limited (see National Academy of Public Administra-
tion 2002, 37–43; Bonorris 2004, 24).
Kentucky is an example of a state with minimal environ-
mental justice provisions. A 2002 law requires that the Ken-
tucky Regional Integrated Waste Treatment and Disposal
Facility Siting Board consider the social and economic im-
pacts on communities and the environment of any pro-
posed new or existing waste treatment or disposal site. The
state has virtually no other statutory or regulatory provi-
sions for dealing with environmental inequities.
New Jersey was another state recognized by the 2002 NAPA
study of “models of change” in environmental justice. The
NAPA report especially applauded the state’s decision to
include environmental justice considerations in its broader
plan to deal with an array of state problems, including ur-
ban sprawl, availability of open space, preservation of agri-
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cultural lands, rehabilitation of brownﬁeld sites, and rede-
velopment of older, industrialized cities. Well before Gover-
nor McGreevey’s executive order on environmental justice
(see above), Robert C. Shinn Jr., commissioner of the state’s
Department of Environmental Protection, issued a number
of orders dealing with environmental inequities. The ﬁrst,
issued in 1998, created the Environmental Equity Task Force
to develop policy and make recommendations for environ-
mental justice in the state. The second, issued in 1999, was
designed to carry out the task force’s recommendations.
And the third, issued in 2000, set out an extensive and com-
prehensive state environmental justice policy that reﬂected
the recommendations of the task force.
Virginia ﬁrst recognized the problem of environmental
 inequities in 1993 when the legislature adopted a joint reso-
lution requiring the Joint Legislative Audit Review Com-
mission (JLARC) to study the “siting, monitoring, and
cleanup of solid and hazardous waste facilities, with an em-
phasis on how waste facilities affect minority communities”
(Bonorris 2004, 55).
The Federal Government Has Not Been a
Strong Advocate for Environmental Justice
Early in the environmental justice movement, many people were
confident that they possessed two powerful tools to challenge
cases of environmental inequities: President Clinton’s Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. They be-
lieved the executive order could be used by federal officials (and,
perhaps, by example, state, regional, and local officials) to use their
regulatory powers to find and fight cases in which  low-income
and minority communities are exposed to disproportionate health
risks from hazardous waste dumps, occupational hazards, nuclear
mining operations, and other hazardous facilities. The executive
order created a new federal framework for dealing with environ-
mental justice and required all federal departments to develop
strategies for including the principles of environmental justice
within their overall philosophies and day-to-day operations.
From the outset, however, that expectation met with mixed
results. Some departments appointed task forces to study the
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
65

ways in which the executive order could be implemented within
their own agencies, appointed men and women with specific re-
sponsibilities for environmental justice activities, offered training
classes in dealing with environmental justice issues, offered
grants for research and action programs on environmental jus-
tice, and otherwise complied with both the spirit and the letter of
the executive order. Other departments moved more slowly or,
in some cases, hardly at all.
The potential for action using the executive order was re-
duced significantly with the accession of George W. Bush to the
presidency. Many observers believed that Bush was not partic-
ularly interested in environmental justice, and his appointees
to the EPA tended to reflect that position. Over the years, the
first efforts to include environmental justice concerns within
departments faded or disappeared entirely. The Interagency
Working Group established by the executive order became
moribund and, by 2008, touted a conference on environmental
justice as its main accomplishment and indication that it was
still active and moving aggressively on environmental justice
issues (Gogal, 2008).
During the first decade of the 21st century, a number of gov-
ernmental and nongovernmental organizations and agencies be-
gan to issue reports highlighting the failure of the federal
government to take environmental justice concerns seriously, of-
ten criticizing specific agencies for their tendency to ignore pre-
cise instructions in the executive order. For example, the EPA’s
own Office of Inspector General (OIG) issued a report in March
2004 reviewing the agency’s efforts to implement Executive Or-
der 12898. The OIG concluded that the “EPA has not fully imple-
mented Executive Order 12898 nor consistently integrated
environmental justice into its day-to-day operations. EPA has not
identified minority and low-income, nor identified populations
addressed in the Executive Order, and has neither defined nor
developed criteria for determining disproportionately impacted”
(Office of Inspector General 2004, i).
The OIG report goes on to suggest that, although the agency
has been actively involved in implementing Executive Order
12898 for 10 years, it has not developed a clear vision or a com-
prehensive strategic plan and has not established values, goals,
expectations, and performance measurements. The agency did
make an attempt to issue an environmental justice toolkit, en-
dorsed environmental justice training, and required that all
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

 regional and programmatic offices submit “action plans” to de-
velop some accountability for environmental justice integration.
In the absence of environmental justice definitions, criteria,
or standards from the agency, the OIG report concluded, many
regional and program offices have taken steps, individually, to
implement environmental justice policies. This has resulted in in-
consistent approaches by the regional offices. Thus, the imple-
mentation of environmental justice actions is dependent not only
on minority and income status but on the EPA region in which
the person resides. A comparison of how environmental justice
protocols used by three different regions would apply to the
same city showed a wide disparity (Office of Inspector General
2004, i–ii).
Two years later, the OIG issued a second report on the EPA’s
internal implementation of the provisions of the executive order
and found that very little had been accomplished (Office of In-
spector General 2006). Reviews from outside the EPA found sim-
ilar results. In July 2005, a report by the GAO found that the EPA
had essentially ignored Executive Order 12898 and any consider-
ation of environmental justice concerns when it issued three new
regulations on air quality.
Perhaps the most striking feature of the Bush administra-
tion’s approach to environmental justice has been its attempt to
redefine the meaning of the term in such a way as to subvert its
fundamental intent, namely, to focus on the disproportionate en-
vironmental inequities faced by minority and low-income com-
munities. It decided to define environmental justice as “the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless
of race, color, national origin, or income, with respect to develop-
ment, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws,
regulations, and policies” (U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 2008). In a June 2002 memo to employees of the EPA, the
agency’s Office of Environmental Justice offered a redefinition of
its mission. “Senior management should recognize,” the memo
said, “that the environmental justice program is not an affirma-
tive action program or a set-aside program designed specifically
to address the concerns of minority communities and/or low-in-
come communities. To the contrary, environmental justice be-
longs to all Americans and it is the responsibility of Agency
officials, as public servants, to serve all members of the public”
(as quoted in Office of Inspector General 2004, 10). In other
words, the purpose of the EPA’s environmental justice  program
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
67

was not to provide relief to those low-income and minority com-
munities who suffer disproportionate health risks from exposure
to hazardous materials but to distribute the risks and the benefits
of environmental justice (whatever the term now means) to all
Americans equally.
The OIG rejected this action by the EPA’s Office of Environ-
mental Justice. “We believe the Agency is bound by the require-
ments of Executive Order 12898,” the OIG report said, “and does
not have the authority to reinterpret the order. The Acting
Deputy Administrator needs to reaffirm that the Executive Order
12898 applies specifically to minority and low-income popula-
tions that are disproportionately impacted” (Office of Inspector
General 2004, ii). The EPA’s efforts to redefine environmental jus-
tice also produced a firestorm of objection from environmental
justice groups and from legislators. In August 2005, for example,
more than 70 Democratic members of Congress wrote the EPA
objecting to its attempts to redefine the meaning of environmen-
tal justice and its failure to carry out the objectives of Executive
Order 12898 (Featherstone 2005).
Complaints Filed with the EPA Have 
Not Been an Effective Means of Dealing 
with Environmental Inequities
During the early 1990s, activists decided that the best way to
challenge environmental inequities faced by low-income and mi-
nority communities was to file complaints with the EPA based on
the equal rights provisions contained in Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. In the decade following 1993, when the first
such complaint was filed, the EPA received 143 complaints. Of
that number, the EPA rejected 82 cases outright, primarily be-
cause they did not meet regulatory requirements or because the
complaints were made against companies or agencies that did
not receive EPA funding (a requirement for such claims). As of
November 2003 (the last date for which complete data are avail-
able), 29 complaints were still pending before the EPA. Of the 
32 cases that have been closed, 2 were settled informally, and 2
were referred to other agencies. Ten more cases became moot be-
cause the complaint was dropped, the challenged permit was
withdrawn or denied, or some other mitigating action was taken.
Of the 18 cases on which the EPA took action, it rejected the
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

 complaint in every case. In most cases, the EPA found that com-
plainants did not show a direct causation between hazardous
wastes or emissions and human health problems, did not
demonstrate that low-income or minority communities had been
disproportionately affected by exposure to hazardous wastes, or
dealt with nonessential issues (such as not providing informa-
tion in languages other than English). As one expert in the field
has concluded, “it now appears that the EPA’s complaint proce-
dure is not providing an effective source of redress . . . unless
some of the 29 cases still pending have different outcomes than
the 105 already closed” (Gerrard 2003, 6; also see Toffolon-Weiss
and Roberts 2004, 265; Pace 2005).
Environmental Justice Advocates Have
Largely Failed to Obtain Redress from
Inequities through the Judicial System
Another avenue activists can use to pursue environmental justice
complaints is through the courts. Early in the movement’s his-
tory, some authorities believed that court cases could be brought
based on the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution. That amendment says that “no state shall
. . . deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection
of the laws.” Since disproportionate exposure to hazardous ma-
terials would seem to violate this clause, a number of complaints
were filed in courts claiming discrimination. These complaints,
however, failed almost universally (for details of this history, see
Peter 2001).
Eventually, attorneys decided that environmental justice
clients were more likely to achieve success suing on the basis of
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. That is, they planned to
sue corporations or governmental agencies on the basis that their
clients’ civil rights were being violated by disproportionate ex-
posure to hazardous and toxic materials. A number of court cases
were filed under this rubric, but without much success. An ex-
ample of such cases was Sierra Club v. Gates, a suit filed in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana in early
2007. A group of environmental organizations sought to enjoin
the U.S. Department of Defense and its private agent, Veolia En-
vironmental Services, from incinerating 1.8 million gallons of the
chemical warfare agent VX, which is converted into the chemical
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
69

known as hydrolysate before disposal. Veolia planned to conduct
this operation in Port Arthur, Texas, on land adjacent to a largely
low-income, African American community.
That neighborhood already faced a number of environmen-
tal hazards from adjoining refineries and chemical facilities and
had been found to have an unusually high rate of respiratory
problems; ear, nose, and throat disorders; asthma; cancer; and
liver and kidney diseases compared to control groups in nearby
Galveston. Residents blamed their health problems on exposure
to hazardous wastes produced by the nearby plants and feared
that the planned incineration of VX would only exacerbate those
problems.
On August 3, 2007, Judge Larry J. McKinney denied the re-
quest for an injunction against the Department of Defense and
Veolia, saying that the army had made its decision to incinerate
the VX materials on scientific principles and that the environ-
mental groups stood little chance of success in pursuing their
case. The environmental groups then sought the aid of state and
federal lawmakers in an effort to prevent the incineration. Those
efforts also failed, and as of late 2008, almost all of the VX had
been destroyed in Port Arthur.
Perhaps the most promising court ruling for proponents of
environmental justice came on April 19, 2001, when U.S. District
Court judge Stephen Orofsky ruled for the plaintiffs in South
Camden Citizens in Action v. New Jersey Department of Environmen-
tal Protection (145 F. Supp. 2d 446 [2001]). Judge Orofsky decided
that the state environmental agency had failed to consider the
potential disproportionate and adverse effects posed by air emis-
sions from the proposed St. Lawrence Cement Company’s plant
in South Camden. The legal basis of Orofsky’s decision rested in
draft guidelines that the EPA had prepared for such cases and on
the assumption that individuals have the right to sue to enforce
regulations that have disparate effects on communities under
Title VI.
Environmental justice advocates were delighted with the
ruling, one of the first upholding the general philosophy under
which Title VI could be used to deal with environmental in-
equities. That delight lasted only five days, however. On April
24, The U.S. Supreme Court issued its decision in the case of
Alexander v. Sandoval, a case unrelated to environmental justice
substantively (it dealt with the issuance of a driver’s license). In
writing for the Court, Justice Antonin Scalia noted that “neither
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

as originally enacted nor as later amended does Title VI display
an intent to create a free standing private right of action to en-
force [these] regulations.” Scalia explicitly stated that neither sec-
tion 601 nor section 602 of Title VI permits individuals to sue on
the basis of disproportionate exposure to hazardous materials
(Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275 [2001]).
The Supreme Court’s decision has been devastating to the
environmental justice movement. As one legal expert has
 observed,
The effect of Justice Scalia’s decision in Sandoval is very
profound. For over fifty years, Civil Rights advocates
challenged agency decisions using § 602 [of Title VI].
There was extensive case law, which established that an
implied private right of action existed under § 602. Fur-
thermore, Justice Scalia indicated § 1983 may not be
used to enforce a violation of § 602 because § 601 does
not prohibit unintentional discrimination. The only way
advocates can challenge agency decisions is to prove in-
tentional discrimination. Requiring plaintiffs to prove
intentional discrimination to substantiate disparate im-
pact claims, without alternate legal mechanisms, will
sound the death knell for the environmental justice
movement (Zywicki 2002).
Other activists are more sanguine. However dismal the situ-
ation may look at the federal level, state courts operating under
state constitutions may be more receptive to claims for redress
because of environmental inequities. In California, for example,
recent changes in the law have made it permissible for individu-
als to sue state agencies to enforce state regulations. As one legal
expert has written, such changes may mean that “California may
soon emerge as the leader in the effective use of civil rights laws
to address environmental inequities” (Rechtschaffen 2003).
The U.S. Congress Has Failed to Take Action
on Basic Environmental Justice Legislation
The first legislation dealing with environmental justice in the
U.S. Congress was introduced by Rep. John Lewis (D-GA) in
1992. That bill was referred to the House Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment, but no action was ever taken. Lewis
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
71

reintroduced the bill in 1998, and it was referred to the Subcom-
mittee on National Parks and Public Lands. Again, no action was
taken. Similar legislation on environmental justice was intro-
duced into later sessions of Congress, with similar bills appear-
ing, in some cases, in both the House of Representatives and
Senate. In no case did a bill ever get any further than being re-
ferred to some subcommittee of the House or Senate.
After President Bill Clinton’s Executive Order 12898 of 1994,
the purpose of these bills was to codify into law the provisions of
the executive order. While members of the government bureau-
cracy are supposed to abide by the provisions of an executive or-
der, they are not constrained to do so in the same way they
would be by a law passed by Congress. Supporters of environ-
mental justice have, therefore, argued for more than 15 years that
Congress should pass a law to strengthen the requirements of
Clinton’s executive order. A reading of the most recent versions
of the environmental justice bills shows how similar they are to
the executive order itself.
Given that national legislators have clearly decided not to
act on environmental justice bills, it appears that the movement
cannot hope, for the foreseeable future, for support for its cause
from the U.S. House or Senate. As noted above, advocates have
decided, therefore, to look to state legislatures for such actions. A
number of states have moved in this direction, with laws on en-
vironmental justice now having been passed in about a dozen
states. These laws vary widely from state to state, with some es-
tablishing a complete set of environmental justice provisions
similar to those found in Executive Order 12898 and others deal-
ing with only a specific aspect of environmental justice. For ex-
ample, the state of Oregon adopted new environmental justice
legislation in 2007, which took effect on January 1, 2008, requir-
ing all 14 state agencies that deal with natural resources to de-
velop procedures that will increase the participation of citizens
affected by agency actions. The law also created an environmen-
tal justice task force charged with advising the governor and nat-
ural resources agencies on environmental justice issues, with
defining environmental justice issues in the state, with identify-
ing minority and low-income communities that may be affected
by environmental decisions made by the agencies, with meeting
with environmental justice communities, and with making rec-
ommendations to the governor regarding concerns raised by
these communities.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Other state laws are more limited. Mississippi, for example,
has an “anti-concentration” law that prohibits the siting of more
than one hazardous facility in any one county of the state. The
law contains a loophole, however, as it allows a variance from
this restriction if state needs change in such a way as to make the
construction of more than one facility advantageous. Alabama
and Georgia have similar anti-concentration laws. An example of
some of the weakest environmental justice legislation is North
Carolina’s law on the issuance of solid waste permits. The law re-
quires a permitting agency to “consider” the most recent census
data for an area in which a waste disposal site is to be located,
but it gives no guidance as to how the agency is to use that data.
Environmental Justice Activists Have 
Learned to Use a Combination of Tools for
Achieving Their Goals
Any organization striving to eliminate environmental inequities
will necessarily have to consider legal and administrative reme-
dies for such situations. But given the poor record of federal legal
and judicial bodies in responding to environmental justice
claims, activists have long realized that they also need to explore
other tools for reaching their objective. These tools include the
intensive involvement of community members; reliance on ex-
perts in science, technology, the law, sociology, political science,
and other fields; networking among social, civil rights, and envi-
ronmental justice organizations; and the use of education and
political pressure on decision makers. An example that illustrates
the way environmental justice activists can use these tools is the
Environmental Justice for Cleaning Workers Campaign (EJCWC)
of the Massachusetts Coalition for Occupational Safety and
Health (MassCOSH). MassCOSH is a nonprofit organization of
workers, unions, community groups, and health and safety ac-
tivists to organize and advocate for safe, secure jobs and healthy
communities throughout eastern and central Massachusetts.
The focus of the EJCWC is the health of more than 30,000
custodians and janitors who work in homes, commercial build-
ings, and a variety of public facilities throughout the common-
wealth of Massachusetts. These workers wash and strip floors,
clean toilets and other equipment, maintain and shine furniture,
and carry out a variety of other tasks that require the use of
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
73

 materials that may be irritating or hazardous to one’s health. Ac-
cording to some evidence, these materials may be implicated in
high rates of asthma, bladder and prostate tumors, heart attack
deaths, cancer of the lower urinary tract, chemical burns, still-
births and preterm delivery, birth defects, and Down syndrome.
The vast majority of cleaning workers in Massachusetts (as
is the case throughout the country) are people of color and/or
immigrants. These workers seldom have the education or experi-
ence that allows them to understand the hazards they face or to
take action to remove such hazards from their workplace.
MassCOSH has decided on a three-tier program to improve
the working conditions for cleaning workers in Massachusetts.
The first tier involves active participation by workers themselves
to collect the information needed to document the hazards they
face on the job. Tier two calls for organizing workers and support-
ers of EJCWC to promote safer working conditions. Tier three in-
volves public advocacy among decision makers to replace
hazardous working materials with green products that do not
pose a health risk for workers. To achieve these goals, MassCOSH
formed a partnership with other stakeholder organizations in
Massachusetts, such as the Service Employees International
Union (SEIU) Local 615 and its nonprofit subsidiary, the Voice
and Future Fund; the Boston School Custodial Union; the Boston
Urban Asthma Coalition (BUAC); the Boston Urban Asthma Ini-
tiative; and Urban Edge and Viet AID, two local community de-
velopment corporations.
By following the above agenda, MassCOSH has achieved re-
markable success in reducing the environmental hazards to
which cleaning workers are exposed. Data collected from work-
ers in 2004 have led some major public employers to change the
way their facilities are cleaned. The contractor responsible for
cleaning Logan International Airport, for example, has agreed to
replace all hazardous cleaning materials with safer alternatives
and to provide a display at the airport explaining to workers
how the new materials are to be used. SEIU Local 615 has inte-
grated health and safety materials into its training manual for
shop stewards. And the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Au-
thority (MBTA) has agreed to use green cleaning products in
place of hazardous materials.
In 2005, custodians in four of Boston’s public schools con-
ducted a pilot program to study the effect on asthma rates among
employees using green cleaning materials rather than  traditional
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cleaning supplies. As a result of that study, the Boston school sys-
tem announced in 2006 that it would begin to change its cleaning
procedures and start purchasing only green products in the fu-
ture. Also in 2005, MassCOSH responded to a request from Urban
Edge to analyze and reassess its cleaning program. Urban Edge is
a community development corporation that works for the devel-
opment of sustainable housing in the Jamaica Plains and Roxbury
neighborhoods of Boston. The two entities were able to develop a
new set of cleaning guidelines that replaced materials and
 practices hazardous to a worker’s health with green products that
are safer to use. (For a copy of these guidelines, see http://
urbanedge.org/green-housing.php?subcode=Green%20
Cleaning.) The combined efforts of MassCOSH and its collabora-
tors have demonstrated how proponents of environmental justice
can bring about significant change, even absent the force of fed-
eral or state legislation and/or the power of judicial decisions.
The battle of the Sokaogon Mole Lake Chippewa and Forest
County Potawatomi Indian tribes in Wisconsin to prevent devel-
opment of a zinc and copper mine near their land provides an-
other illustration of imaginative ways in which environmental
justice activists can achieve success in their efforts. The battle
goes back to the 1970s, when the Exxon Corporation purchased
more than 5,000 acres of land about 100 miles north of Green Bay.
Over time, ownership changed hands a number of times, with
Nicolet Mineral Company being the most recent owner.
From the moment the mine was originally proposed, mem-
bers of the two tribes expressed concerns about possible environ-
mental effects on the health of their members. They feared that
runoff from mining operations would contaminate the wild rice
beds upon which they depend for an important part of their food
supply. They also worried that wastes from the mine would
 pollute their water supplies and contaminate the air with partic-
ulates. For more than 25 years, however, the tribes were unsuc-
cessful in deterring Nicolet and its predecessors from proceeding
with plans for the mine—until October 2003. At that point, an ex-
tended period of bargaining between the two tribes and North-
ern Wisconsin Resources Group, the timber arm of Nicolet,
concluded with an agreement to sell the 5,939-acre mine site, the
mineral rights, and some associated timber rights to the two
tribes for $16.5 million. About half of the money was to come
from profits from a Potawatomi gaming casino near Milwaukee,
and the rest from a loan to be obtained by the Mole Lake tribe.
The Current Status of the Environmental Justice Movement in the U.S.
75

When the deal was announced, representatives of the tribe also
reported that they would immediately withdraw a pending ap-
plication that had been filed by the Nicolet company for a permit
to mine in the area. The tribes had finally resolved a very long
controversy over operations they believed would threaten their
health.
“Buying off” a corporation whose activities pose an environ-
mental risk is only one more approach to the resolution of envi-
ronmental justice issues. Lacking access to administrative,
legislative, and judicial venues for such cases, environmental jus-
tice activists are becoming increasingly skillful and effective in
developing and using the tools that remain available to them to
obtain relief from the problems they face.
References
Amer, Mildred L. 2008. Women in the United States Congress: 1917–2008.
Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. Updated May 7.
Anderton, Douglas L., et al. 1994a. “Hazardous Waste Facilities: ‘Envi-
ronmental Equity’ Issues in Metropolitan Areas.” Evaluation Review 18
(2): 123–140.
Anderton, Douglas L., Andy B. Anderson, John Michael Oakes, and
Michael R. Fraser. 1994b. “Environmental Equity: The Demographics of
Dumping.” Demography 31:229–248.
Anderton, Douglas L., John Michael Oakes, and Karla L. Eagan. 1996.
“Methodological Issues in the Spatiotemporal Analysis of Environmen-
tal Equity.” Social Science Quarterly 77:508–515.
Anderton, Douglas L., John Michael Oakes, and Karla L. Egan. 1997.
“Environmental Equity in Superfund: Demographics of the Discovery
and Prioritization of Abandoned Toxic Sites.” Evaluation Review 21 (1):
3–26.
Austin, Regina, and Michael Schill. 1994. “Black, Brown, Red, and Poi-
soned.” The Humanist 54 (July/August): 9–16.
Bailey, Conner, and Charles E. Faupel. 1992. “Environmentalism and
Civil Rights in Sumter County, Alabama.” In Race and the Incidence of En-
vironmental Hazards: A Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and
Paul Mohai, chap. 11. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Been, Vicki. 1994. “Locally Undesirable Land Uses in Minority Neigh-
borhoods: Disproportionate Siting or Market Dynamics?” Yale Law Re-
view 103(6): 1383–1422.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Binkly, Gail. 2007 (November 8). “‘Economic Blackmail’ Fueling Power-
Plant Push? ‘Big Coal’ Author Says Desert Rock Project Makes No Sense
in Southwest.” [Online article or information; retrieved 5/24/08] Alp-
central. http://www.alpcentral.com/article.php?article_id=1948. 
Boerner, Christopher, and Thomas Lambert. 1995. “Environmental Jus-
tice Can Be Achieved through Negotiated Compensation.” In Environ-
mental Justice, edited by J. S. Petrikin, chap. 7. San Diego: Greenhaven
Press.
Bonorris, Steven. 2004. Environmental Justice for All: A Fifty-State Survey
of Legislation, Policies, and Initiatives. San Francisco: Hastings College of
the Law, University of California.
Bullard, Robert D. 1983. “Solid Waste Sites and the Black Houston Com-
munity.” Sociological Inquiry 53 (2–3): 273–288.
Bullard, Robert D. 1992. “Environmental Blackmail in Minority Com-
munities.” In Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards: A Time for
Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai, chap. 6. Boulder,
CO: Westview Press.
Bullard, Robert D. 1994. Worst Things First? The Debate over Risk-Based
National Environmental Priorities. Washington, DC: Resources for the
 Future.
Bullard, Robert D. 2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental
Quality, 3rd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Bullard, Robert D., Paul Mohai, Robin Saha, and Beverly Wright. 2007.
Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty: A Report Prepared for the United Church of
Christ Justice & Witness Ministries. Cleveland, OH: Justice and Witness
Ministries, United Church of Christ.
Buttel, Frederick R. 1987. “New Directions in Environmental Sociology.”
Annual Review of Sociology 13:465–488.
Davidson, Pamela, and Douglas L. Anderton. 2000. “Demographics of
Dumping II: A National Environmental Equity Survey and the Distribu-
tion of Hazardous Materials Handlers.” Demography 37 (4): 461–466.
Davis, M. E. 1977. “Occupational Hazards and Black Workers.” Urban
Health 6 (August): 16–18.
“Environmental Justice Executive Order [New Jersey].” 2004. [Online ar-
ticle or information; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://www.state.nj.us/dep/
ej/ejeo.pdf.
Featherstone, Liza. 2005 (August 1). “E-Raced: EPA Says Race, Income
Shouldn’t Be Environmental Justice Factors.” Grist. [Online article or in-
formation; retrieved 6/19/08.] http://www.grist.org/news/maindish/
2005/08/01/featherstone-ej/.
References
77

Gelobter, Michel. 1992. “Toward a Model of ‘Environmental Discrimina-
tion.’” In Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards: A Time for Dis-
course, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai, chap. 5. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Gerrard, Michael B. 2003. “EPA Dismissal of Civil Rights Complaints.”
New York Law Journal, November 28, 3+.
Gianessi, Leonard P., Henry M. Peskin, and Edward Wolff. 1979. “The
Distributional Effects of Uniform Air Pollution Policy in the United
States.” Journal of Economics 93 (May): 281–301.
Gogal, Daniel. 2008. Personal communication, April 29. 
Goldman, Benjamin A. 1993. Not Just Prosperity: Achieving Sustainabil-
ity with Environmental Justice. Washington, DC: National Wildlife
 Federation.
Hamilton, James T. 1993. “Politics and Social Cost: Estimating the Im-
pact of Collective Action on Hazardous Waste Facilities.” RAND Journal
of Economics 24 (Spring): 101–125.
Infoplease. 2008 (June 19). “The Wage Gap, by Gender and Race.” [On-
line article or information; retrieved 6/19/08.] http://www.infoplease
.com/ipa/A0882775.html.
Johnson, F. Reed. 1980. “Income Distributional Effects of Air Pollution
Abatement: A General Equilibrium Approach.” Atlantic Economic Journal
8 (4): 10–21.
Jones, Robert Emmet, and Shirley A. Rainey. 2006. “Examining Linkages
between Race, Environmental Concern, Health, and Justice in a Highly
Polluted Community of Color.” Journal of Black Studies 36 (4): 473–496.
Kazis, Richard, and Richard L. Grossman. 1982. Fear at Work: Job Black-
mail, Labor, and the Environment. New York: Pilgrim Press.
Lavelle, Marianne, and Marcia Coyle. 1993. “Unequal Protection: The
Racial Divide in Environmental Law.” National Law Journal 21 (Septem-
ber): S1–S12.
Louisiana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.
1993. The Battle for Environmental Justice in Louisiana . . . Government, In-
dustry, and the People. Kansas City, MO: U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights, Central Regional Ofﬁce.
Lowe, G. D., and T. K. Pinhey. 1982. “Rural-Urban Differences in Sup-
port for Environmental Protection.” Rural Sociology 47 (1): 114–128.
Mohai, Paul. 2003. “Dispelling Old Myths: African American Concern
for the Environment.” Environment Magazine 45 (June): 10–26.
Mohai, Paul, and Bunyan Bryant. 1992. “Environmental Racism:
 Reviewing the Evidence.” In Race and the Incidence of Environmental
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

 Hazards: A Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant and Paul Mohai,
chap. 13. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
National Academy of Public Administration. 2002. Models for Change: Ef-
forts by Four States to Address Environmental Justice. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy of Public Administration. 
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 2003. “En-
vironmental Justice and DEC Permits. Summary of Commissioner Policy 
CP-29, Environmental Justice and Permitting.” [Online article or infor-
mation; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://www.dec.ny.gov/public/36929.html.
Latest Date Revised: March 19, 2003.
Ofﬁce of the Inspector General. Environmental Protection Agency. 2004.
EPA Needs to Consistently Implement the Intent of the Executive Order on En-
vironmental Justice. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency.
Ofﬁce of the Inspector General. Environmental Protection Agency. 2006.
EPA Needs to Conduct Environmental Justice Reviews of Its Programs, Poli-
cies, and Activities. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency.
Pace, David. 2005 (December 13). “AP: More Blacks Live with Pollu-
tion.” [Online article or information; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://hosted
.ap.org/specials/interactives/archive/pollution/part1.html.
Peter, Ellen M. 2001. “Implementing Environmental Justice: The New
Agenda for California State Agencies.” Golden Gate University Law Re-
view 31 (Spring): 529–591.
Pierce, Margo. 2007 (April 8). “Equal Environmental Rights: Ending the
Link between Poverty, Race and Pollution.” City Beat. [Online article or
information; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://citybeat.com/2007–04–18/cover
.shtml.
Probst, Kate. 1990. Hazardous Waste Sites and the Rural Poor: A Preliminary
Assessment. Arlington, VA: Clean Sites, Inc.
Rechtschaffen, Clifford. 2003. “Using California’s Anti-Discrimination
Law to Remedy Environmental Injustice.” Environmental Justice
 Committee Newsletter, ABA Section of Individual Rights and Respon-
sibilities. http://www.abanet.org/irr/committees/environmental/
newsletter/dec03/Civilrights.html.
Sayen, Jamie. 1995. “Obligatory Skepticism: The Environmental Move-
ment’s Internal Enemy.” Earth Island Journal 10 (Spring). [Online article
or information; retrieved May 28, 2008.] http://www.earthisland.org/
eijournal/new_articles.cfm?articleID=830&journalID=75.
Taylor, Dorceta E. 1989. “Blacks and the Environment: Toward an Expla-
nation of the Concern and Action Gap between Blacks and Whites.” En-
vironment and Behavior 21 (March): 175–205.
References
79

Toffolon-Weiss, Melissa, and J. Timmons Roberts. 2004. “Toxic Torts,
Public Interest Law, and Environmental Justice: Evidence from
Louisiana.” Law & Policy 26 (April): 259–287.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 2003. Not in My Backyard: Executive Or-
der 12898 and Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 
U.S. Congress. 1993. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Environmental
Justice. Environmental Justice Hearings before the Subcommittee on Civil and
Constitutional Rights, 103rd Congress, 1st sess., March 3 and 4. Washing-
ton, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1992. Women, Minorities
and People with Disabilities. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection
Agency.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). “Environmental Justice.”
[Online article or information; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://www.epa.gov/
compliance/environmentaljustice/. Updated February 5, 2008.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). “Environmental Justice
Bibliography Database.” [Online article or information; retrieved
5/24/08.] http://cfpub.epa.gov/ejbib/. Updated June 18, 2006.
U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO). 2005. Environmental Jus-
tice: EPA Should Devote More Attention to Environmental Justice When
 Developing Clean Air Rules. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Account-
ability Ofﬁce.
Whittaker, Matthew, Gary Segura, and Shaun Bowler. 2005.
“Racial/Ethnic Group Attitudes toward Environmental Protection in
California: Is ‘Environmentalism’ Still a White Phenomenon?” Political
Research Quarterly 58 (3): 435–447.
Zywicki, Michael. 2002. “Scalia Scalds Environmental Justice Move-
ment.” Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 4 (October 10). [Editorial.]
[Online article or information; retrieved 5/24/08.] http://www.vjel.org/
editorials/ED10033.html#ref20.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
T
he environmental justice movement in the United States is
premised on the belief that low-income and minority com-
munities are exposed to a disproportionate share of the haz-
ardous waste products (in one form or another) produced by the
nation’s industries. Study after study conducted over the past
three decades has demonstrated the validity of that premise. In
recent years, a similar pattern on an international scale has be-
come apparent. At least partly because of the globalization of
business, raw materials and waste products now flow more
freely than ever within and among countries and throughout the
world. As a result of that process, low-income communities in
developing countries around the world are increasingly exposed
to the hazards involved in the production, consumption, and dis-
posal of a seemingly limitless range of products, from pesticides
and drugs to nuclear power plants and electricity generating fa-
cilities. This chapter considers some examples of environmental
racism throughout the world, the special problems posed by
global climate change and the need for sustainable communities,
and the progress being made by environmental justice groups
worldwide.
Environmental Inequities Worldwide
As the U.S. example shows, environmental inequities can occur
in any country, whether highly developed or still in its earliest
stages of development. On an international scale, however, one
overall pattern tends to predominate: Developed nations such as
81

the United States and members of the European Union tend to
treat less-developed nations in much the same way that indus-
tries in the United States treat low-income and minority commu-
nities. That is, they place resource extraction facilities, garbage
dumps, industrial plants, and other polluting operations in areas
where residents are generally less able to object to the environ-
mental insults associated with these operations. The following
cases illustrate only a few of the ways in which this generally
north-to-south environmental injustice has occurred in the past.
Mineral Extraction in Papua New Guinea
One might easily think of the island of New Guinea as a some-
what backward region of spectacularly beautiful scenery having
but little contact with the modern world. That picture is only
partially accurate. The scenery is spectacular, containing a num-
ber of the rarest animal and plant species in the world, but mod-
ern industrialism has become an important part of Papuan
culture.
Starting in the 1950s, the Australian government (which
then governed Papua) sold mining rights on the island to multi-
national corporations with no input from local citizens or their
leaders and essentially no concerns about possible deleterious
impacts on the local environment or residents’ health and wel-
fare. When Papua New Guinea (PNG) achieved its indepen-
dence in 1975, the new government continued that practice. As a
desperately poor nation, PNG saw resource extraction as a criti-
cal way of attracting foreign investment in the young country.
As is sometimes the case, mining companies paid relatively
little attention to laws and regulations relating to environmental
protections. Indeed, the PNG government even exempted some
corporations from its own environmental laws, accepting envi-
ronmental impact statements written by the companies as being
more “suitable” than those of its own government agencies.
One of the most notorious cases of environmental injustice
in PNG involved a mine at Ok Tedi, near the mouth of the Fly
River, that belonged to the Australian corporation BHP-Billiton.
For the two decades during which it operated, the mine pro-
duced an average each day of about 80,000 tons of tailings con-
taining copper, zinc, cadmium, and lead, all toxic to plant and
animal life (Marshall 2002). Before long, the mine’s toxic wastes
had decimated plant and animal life along the Fly River. For
82
Worldwide Perspective

 residents of the region, the most serious problem was the loss of
the abundant fish population, which formed a major part of their
diet. But one study showed that, beyond the loss of fish, “[a] de-
cline in the turtle population has also been seen as the sandy
banks where eggs were laid have been replaced by particulate
copper and mud. Prawns, lobsters, and bivalves have also de-
clined, and birds that depend on riverine life (egrets, kingfishers,
Brahmin kites) have also left. The water is no longer safe for
bathing, washing clothes, swimming, or drinking” (Johnston
1994, 92). Over time, the potential liabilities for BHP continued to
grow until, in January 2002, it negotiated a deal with PNG to sell
the mine to the government. In return, the government was to in-
demnify the company against all future claims.
As a result of that agreement, BHP was able to exit PNG fac-
ing no liabilities for its actions in the country. The government
took over ownership of the mine, which it decided to keep oper-
ating for at least a decade because of its enormous potential for
income. And the people of PNG, who had already suffered se-
verely from environmental degradation, faced another 10 years
of mine operation with its consequent destruction of their lands.
Throughout this sordid affair, evidence accumulated reveal-
ing PNG governmental and BHP corporate dismissive attitudes
toward indigenous peoples of the nation. They were apparently
heard to comment that those people were not intelligent enough
to understand what was going on in their land or to make deci-
sions about how the land was to be used. As the sale of the mine
was concluded, one representative of the PNG Environmental
Law Centre said: “Based on my conversations with the local
people, it is quite clear that in my opinion the people who are
signing this agreement do not know what they are signing”
(Marshall 2002). Perhaps not, but they had another decade to live
with its consequences.
Environmental Discrimination against the
Roma in Central Europe
Discussions of environmental inequities around the world often
focus on obvious candidate countries in Africa, South America,
and parts of Asia. But environmental discrimination also occurs
in regions more commonly thought of as “developed” or “ad-
vanced.” For example, many countries in Central and Eastern
Environmental Inequities Worldwide
83

 Europe, some of which were part of the former Soviet bloc, have
made impressive economic progress since the collapse of the So-
viet Union in 1991. Still, as in the United States, it is not difficult
to find examples of environmental racism in the most highly de-
veloped nations.
One recurring example involves the Roma (or Romany), also
known as gypsies, who occupy most of Central Europe. Histori-
cally, the Roma have been subjected to widespread and aggres-
sive discrimination in almost every nation they inhabit. In recent
decades, that discrimination has shown up over and over again
in the form of environmental racism.
A common theme appears in most of these cases: A com-
pany or local government seeks a site for a new factory, munici-
pal waste dump, or other potentially hazardous entity. Because
land on which the Roma live is often the least expensive and
least desirable for residential purposes, it is often selected for the
new facility. Roma are moved out of the area or, more commonly,
allowed to remain on land immediately adjacent to the facility.
Over succeeding years, a variety of health problems develop
among the Roma who are exposed to the hazardous facility.
These problems are exacerbated because often the only jobs
available to Roma workers are at the same hazardous facility.
For example, scientists have studied in some detail a case in
Heves, Hungary, where a primary source of income for Roma
men was the recycling of lead taken from batteries in an illegal
dump near their homes. Eventually, more than 1,500 individuals
were exposed to high levels of lead, one 15-month-old girl died,
and 65 children were hospitalized (Steger 2007, 21).
The situation for Roma in Romania is no better. A recent re-
port by the Central European University Center for Environmen-
tal Policy and Law, the Health and Environment Alliance, and the
Coalition for Environmental Justice listed a number of instances in
which Roma were relocated by local, regional, and federal govern-
ments into areas where they would be exposed to disproportion-
ately high levels of toxic emissions. The town of Episcopia Bihor,
for example, relocated its Roma community to a new settlement
that was built on top of the town’s municipal rubbish dump.
 Under such circumstances, an epidemic of health problems is al-
most guaranteed. In some parts of Central  Europe—Hungary, for
 example—Roma have a life expectancy 10 to 15 years less than
comparable non-Roma populations (Steger 2007, 25–26).
84
Worldwide Perspective

Ecotourism and the Maasai
Instances of environmental injustice sometimes arise in the most
unlikely of situations. Consider the Maasai (or Masai) tribe that
once populated wide stretches of East Africa. The Maasai are
transhumance pastoralists, a term referring to a population that
moves about the countryside annually with its animals, con-
stantly looking for new grazing grounds and permitting over-
grazed areas to recover. With the arrival of British colonists in
East Africa in the early 20th century, the Maasai were restricted
to ever-smaller areas on which to live. The British saw the Maa-
sai as a “nuisance” and negotiated more and more restrictive
treaties limiting their movement to smaller and smaller regions
(Narimatsu 2008).
This pattern continued throughout the 20th century, even
after the replacement of British rulers by native governments
beginning in the 1960s. Most young African governments real-
ized early on the potential value of safari travel, ecotourism,
and other travel experiences that emphasized the enormous
natural wonders of their nations. The government of Kenya, for
example, established a goal of hosting 1 million tourists by the
year 1990.
One element in such programs was the creation of new na-
tional parks, a goal that, in turn, required governments to even
further restrict the Maasai. Ironically, then, the effort of African
governments to save endangered species such as the tiger, lion,
rhinoceros, and hippopotamus resulted in severely changing the
lifestyle of one of the continent’s indigenous peoples. In their
view, “The Maasai people have been systematically driven off
our traditional lands in the wake of economic development, irre-
sponsible tourism, large-scale farming, and other activities that
destroy wildlife habitat” (Maasai Environmental Resource Coali-
tion 2008).
For almost a century, the Maasai were essentially pawns in
the economic and environmental policies of, first, the British
colonists and, later, native African governments in Kenya, Tan-
ganyika, and other East African countries. They had little experi-
ence and few tools for dealing with the more sophisticated
European and native governments. Toward the end of the 20th
century, however, the Maasai began to better understand the op-
tions available to them in protecting their traditional culture and
Environmental Inequities Worldwide
85

began organizing to make their needs and wishes known. Maa-
sai activists have now organized into an umbrella organization
known as the Maasai Environmental Resource Coalition, consist-
ing of about a dozen local groups. These groups include the Ara-
mat Association, Arusha Women’s Group, and Ilkisongo Maasai
Cultural Organization of Tanzania; the Enkong’u Narok Cultural
Center, Kajiado Integral Rural Association for Development,
Maasai Mara Women’s Group, and Olchorro-Oirowua Wildlife
Conservation Association of Kenya; and the Maasai Cultural,
Wildlife and Ethical Tourism Society of Kenya and Tanzania. The
mission of the organization is to protect traditional land rights of
the Maasai people and to help conserve, manage, and develop
sustainable use systems for the ecosystems of East Africa.
The Bakun Hydroelectric Project in Sarawak
In the most egregious examples of environmental racism, human
populations are sometimes treated as disposable commodities to
be relocated and moved around without regard to their own cul-
ture, traditions, lifestyles, and best interests. A striking example
of that policy can be found in plans for building the Bakun hy-
droelectric facility in the Malaysian state of Sarawak on the is-
land of Borneo. The earliest studies for such a facility began in
the 1960s and were approved by the Malaysian government in
1986. Four years later, however, the government changed its
mind and put construction plans on hold.
In 1993, plans for the dam were revived, and a no-bid con-
tract was signed with Ekran Berhad, a close friend of then–prime
minister Mahathir Mohammad. Those plans called for the flood-
ing of an area of about 270 square miles (about the size of the is-
land of Singapore) at a cost of about $6 billion by the year 2003.
Construction would require the removal of about 9,000 indige-
nous people, members of the Iban, Dayak, and Bidayuh tribes.
These peoples have traditionally practiced subsistence agricul-
ture, depending on the forest for most of their food, housing,
clothing, and other needs. The area to be flooded was also home
to one of the largest collections of threatened and endangered
species of plants and animals in the world (Friends of the Earth
1996; Malaysian Timber Council 2002).
The dam project was halted a second time in 1997, this time
because of the widespread Asian financial crisis and reduced es-
timates of the amount of electricity needed in Malaysia. Studies
86
Worldwide Perspective

showed that energy consumption in the whole state of Sarawak
was about 500 megawatts and that generating facilities already
in operation were producing 700 megawatts. In addition, experts
predicted that existing facilities could be expanded to produce
about 1,000 megawatts. Other studies showed that energy use in
Sarawak was expected to decline from 9.8 percent in 2000 to 5.6
percent in 2010. Under those circumstances, it was no longer
clear that the Bakun dam was needed.
Nonetheless, plans for the dam were revived yet again in
May 2000 with a new completion date of 2010. Statistics associ-
ated with the project are impressive. The dam will be the tallest
concrete-faced rockfill dam in the world, capturing the largest
lake in Malaysia by storage volume and producing the largest
amount of electric power of any station in the country. In addi-
tion, the submarine cable that carries power from Sarawak to the
Malaysian peninsula will be the longest in the world.
The required displacement of indigenous peoples has now
been completed. Most of them have been relocated to a long-
house settlement in Bakun, a dramatically different lifestyle than
the one with which they are familiar. Jobs at the dam that were
promised them have largely not materialized, and unemploy-
ment rates are very high among the tribespeople. The deportees
are expected to pay up to $15,000 for the new housing they are
being provided, although such sums are essentially unimagin-
able to people who had previously had virtually no experience
with money. Unlike some environmental justice stories, the
Bakun dam saga appears to have no happy ending associated
with it. The Iban, Dayak, and Bidayuh have lost their traditional
homes to a giant modern industrial project.
Thor Chemicals and Mercury “Recycling”
Historians of the international environmental justice movement
sometimes point to the Thor case as one of the first events to at-
tract worldwide attention. It began in 1988, when the British com-
pany Thor Chemicals moved its mercury reprocessing operations
from Margate, in Kent, England, to the small industrial village of
Cato-Ridge in the South African province of Kwazulu-Natal.
Thor’s decision to move from England to South Africa was occa-
sioned by concerns raised by the British government’s Health and
Safety Executive about excessive levels of mercury in the air
around the Margate facility and in the urine of workers employed
Environmental Inequities Worldwide
87

at the plant. Thor was aware that environmental protections in
South Africa were less stringent than in the United Kingdom and
that continued operation of the plant was possible only if the
move was made.
The new Thor plant in Cato-Ridge soon drew the attention
of manufacturers around the world. It was one of the few facili-
ties worldwide willing and able to accept wastes containing mer-
cury for reprocessing. Two of the largest contributors to the Thor
recycling program were the American companies Borden Chemi-
cals and Plastics and American Cyanamid. In a 1999 report, the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) said that the two
companies were shipping about 190 tons of mercury-containing
wastes annually to the Cato-Ridge facility (Fondaw 2008).
Evidence of the harmful effects of the mercury reprocessing
facility began to appear shortly after the plant began operations.
Water samples taken from the Mngeweni River, into which Thor
discharged its wastes, contained 1.5 million parts per billion
(ppb) of mercury, 1,500 times greater than the current EPA rec-
ommended limit for mercury in water. The river is the main
source of drinking water for the city of Durban (current popula-
tion: 3.5 million) and the primary source of water for the region’s
agricultural and dairy industries. Even 40 miles downstream
from the plant mercury levels reached 20 times the EPA recom-
mended limits.
The South African government did not appear to be unduly
concerned about the potential health hazards posed by the Thor
plant. It ordered a four-week closure to permit the plant to clean
up its operations, then issued a new license to the facility. In
1994, the Department of Environmental Affairs sent a secret
memo to the South African cabinet praising Thor’s “sensible op-
erations” and commending its “sound work” (Cook and Koch
1992, 9).
The situation at Cato-Ridge first drew international atten-
tion in 1990, when the St. Louis Post-Dispatch conducted a study
of hazardous waste disposal policies and practices in the United
States. The paper traced the link from Borden Chemicals and
American Cyanamid to Thor and followed up with an extensive
report on conditions in and around the Thor plant. Its story soon
attracted the attention of environmental groups, particularly
Earthlife Africa and Greenpeace International, which began their
own investigations of Thor and of the South African govern-
ment’s “cozy” relationship with the company. Almost simultane-
88
Worldwide Perspective

ously, reports of the first deaths of workers at the Thor plant be-
gan to surface. According to one report, workers at the Thor
plant had mercury levels as high as 600 to 1,000 ppb in their
urine, compared to generally accepted limits of 50 ppb.
As more and more information about Thor’s operations be-
came available, a number of individuals began filing suits for
damage as a result of their employment at the Cato-Ridge facil-
ity. The company settled out of court for a total of $2.1 million for
20 such claims in 1997 and then again in 2000 for a total of
$353,000 for an additional 20 employees. In 1992, the company
announced that the plant would cease operations as of 1996. In
2000, the South African government invited experts from the
EPA to visit the Thor site and recommend procedures for clean-
ing it up (Knight 2001).
The Voyage of the Khian Sea
Arguably, the most famous example of the use of developing na-
tions for the disposal of hazardous wastes involves the voyage of
the freighter Khian Sea, which was attempting to dispose of about
14,000 tons of ash from a municipal incinerator in the city of
Philadelphia’s Roxborough neighborhood. The incinerator, like
most municipal incinerators, burned household wastes consist-
ing of everything from newspapers and garbage to cigarettes and
dead batteries. Lacking space within the city limits to dispose of
incinerator ash, Philadelphia contracted with outlying areas (pri-
marily in New Jersey) to accept its wastes. Although the materi-
als burned in the Roxborough incinerator were relatively benign
products of home and municipal use, the ashes that resulted
were not. They contained by-products such as dioxins, furans,
cadmium, and lead, considered to be toxic, teratogenic, carcino-
genic, or otherwise hazardous to human health.
In 1984, the state of New Jersey informed authorities in
Philadelphia that it would no longer accept the city’s incinerator
ash for disposal. Instead, the city contracted with the firm Paolino
and Sons, Amalgamated Shipping and Coastal Carrier, to dispose
of the ash. Paolino’s original intent was to dispose of the wastes
on a manmade island in the Bahamas—except that the Bahamian
government denied the company a permit to unload its cargo on
the island. Over the next year, the Khian Sea roamed the
Caribbean looking for a place to dispose of the ash. Between Sep-
tember 1986 and August 1987, it was turned away from Bermuda,
Environmental Inequities Worldwide
89

the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Guinea-Bissau, and the
Netherlands Antilles. Efforts were then made to convince the
Panamanian government to accept the ash for use in  road-
building in Panama, an offer that was refused (Schwartz 2000).
On December 31, 1987, the Khian Sea arrived in Haiti and ob-
tained a permit from the government to unload a portion of its
cargo, described to officials as “fertilizer.” Between January 20
and January 31, the ship offloaded 4,000 tons of the ash, only to be
interrupted by an order from the Haitian government to reload its
cargo and return to sea. The Khian Sea did return to sea, but with-
out reloading the ash it had already left on Gonaives beach.
After a brief return to Philadelphia in February 1988, the
Khian Sea set off once more to find a dumping ground for the re-
maining ash in its hold. Over the next six months, it was refused
permission to unload its cargo in Morocco, Senegal, Sri Lanka,
and Yugoslavia, where it put in for repairs in August 1988. When
it was escorted from the country by the Yugoslav navy, it had a
new name—the Felicia—and a new country of registry—Hon-
duras. Before long, its name was changed once more, this time to
the Pelecano. On September 28, 1988, it passed through the Suez
Canal, listing Singapore as its destination.
By the time the Khian Sea/Felicia/Pelecano reached Singa-
pore in November 1988, the troublesome ash cargo had disap-
peared. The captain later admitted that the ash had been
dumped into the Indian and Atlantic oceans on the way from
North America to the Pacific. In 1993, William P. Reilly and John
Patrick Dowd, officers of Coastal Carriers Inc., which operated
the Khian Sea, were convicted of perjury in the United States and
sentenced to jail. No convictions were ever obtained for the
dumping of ash in Haiti or on the open seas.
In 1997, a coalition of the Greenpeace environmental organi-
zation and Haitian environmental groups joined to form the Re-
turn to Sender project, aimed at having Philadelphia’s hazardous
ash removed from Gonaives beach. The project was eventually
able to obtain funds from the city of Philadelphia to hire Waste
Management, Inc. (WMI), to complete that task. In April 2000,
WMI began the work and eventually removed the remaining
2,500 tons of waste to a docking point in Florida’s St. Lucie
Canal. After resting at that location for two years, the ash was re-
turned to its final burying ground in Franklin County, Pennsyl-
vania, by WMI in June 2002 (Greenpeace 2008).
90
Worldwide Perspective

A Background for the Transboundary Dumping
of Hazardous Wastes
The case studies presented here may strike an observer as exam-
ples of horrible disregard for the health and lives of people in
less-developed countries (LDCs) by uncaring corporations and
upscale consumers in more-developed countries (MDCs). Al-
though that assessment may be correct in some ways, it ignores
developments in MDCs such as the United States that made
these environmental injustice examples not only possible but
perhaps inevitable.
One of the important but unexpected consequences of the
American environmental movement of the 1960s and 1970s was
that the United States began to adopt laws and regulations far
more severe than those of most other nations of the world, cer-
tainly more restrictive than those of less-developed nations. Pes-
ticides that could no longer be used in the United States because
of their toxicity were, in many cases, still legal in other nations.
Companies that could no longer sell their products to American
farmers because of their toxicity might well be able to sell them
to farmers in Indonesia, Ghana, Somalia, and other struggling
nations (Norris 1982).
Such practices could be thought of as just another form of
environmental inequity, and perhaps environmental racism, but
on a much grander scale. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, a
number of waste disposal problems made this analogy even
more obvious. In 1988, for example, the city of Philadelphia hired
a Norwegian company, Bulkhandling, Inc., to transport 15,000
tons of toxic incinerator ash to Kassa Island, part of the African
nation of Guinea. Only when plant and animal life began to die
off on the island did the government discover what had hap-
pened and ordered Bulkhandling to remove and return the ash
to Philadelphia (Mpanya 1992).
As permits and land for hazardous waste landfills on the
continental United States became more and more difficult to ob-
tain, dumping in African nations became more and more attrac-
tive. The number of such cases increased by a factor of 10 in the
three-year period between 1987 and 1989, rising from 3 cases in 3
countries in the first of these years to 40 cases in 25 nations in
1989 (Mpanya 1992).
A Background for the Transboundary Dumping of Hazardous Wastes
91

As with possible cases of environmental racism in the
United States, such practices often make good economic sense:
They provide an answer to a difficult corporate problem (waste
disposal) while bringing significant economic benefit to people
who need it (poor African nations). In fact, this argument in a
slightly different context was made by Lawrence Summers, chief
economist of the World Bank, in a memo of December 12, 1991.
The memo was obtained by and then reprinted in the British
journal The Economist in its February 8, 1992, issue. “Just between
you and me,” Summers wrote, “shouldn’t the World Bank be en-
couraging more migration of the dirty industries to the LDCs?”
(The real author of the now infamous “Summers memo” was ap-
parently one of his aides, Lant Pritchett, a longtime employee of
the World Bank and, as of 2008, professor of economics at Har-
vard University [Wade 1997, 712].)
The Summers memo presented three reasons for this rec-
ommendation. First, it argued that the cost of illness and death
resulting from pollution is essentially a measure of lost earn-
ings from these conditions. Since wages are lowest in LDCs, the
economic cost of exposure to pollution is lowest in those coun-
tries. Second, the memo suggested that the cost of pollution is
nonlinear. That is, as the amount of pollution increases, the
economic costs it produces grow geometrically. The countries
best able to absorb the initial costs of pollution problems, then,
are those that already have very little pollution, the LDCs. The
writer of the memo said specifically, “I’ve always thought that
 under-populated countries in Africa are vastly  UNDER-
polluted, their air quality is probably vastly inefficiently low
compared to Los Angeles or Mexico City” (Whirled Bank
Group 2008).
Finally, the memo writer said that people living in LDCs
probably do not view exposure to pollution in the same way as
do people in MDCs. In the latter, people live relatively long lives,
during the latter parts of which they develop a number of dis-
eases that eventually cause their deaths, such as prostate cancer.
But people who live in LDCs tend to have much shorter life
spans. They are, therefore, less likely to worry about late-life dis-
eases and more likely to appreciate the benefits of an enhanced
income early in their lives, even if it means exposure to poten-
tially toxic or hazardous materials. As an adjunct to this point,
the memo writer pointed out that complaints about pollution
 often refer to “visibility impairing particulates” that may be
92
Worldwide Perspective

 aesthetically displeasing but that “may have very little direct
health impact” (Whirled Bank Group 2008).
The Summers memo is hardly the only expression of sup-
port for the shipment of hazardous wastes from MDCs to LDCs.
For example, in a 1995 book for young adults presenting a vari-
ety of viewpoints on environmental justice, Harvey Alter, man-
ager of the Resources Policy Department of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, argued for a more liberal view of such trade. Hu-
manitarian instincts, he said, prompt us to want to cut back on
our trade in hazardous wastes, but the long-term effect of bans
on such trade would be disastrous for underdeveloped countries
because it brings very poor nations a dependable and significant
source of income, thereby improving the lives of their citizens.
The net effect of efforts to ban trade in hazardous wastes, he said,
would be to make poverty in developing nations an even more
serious problem and, at the same time, to increase the severity of
the environmental problems nations are trying to solve (Alter
1995).
Alter and the Chamber of Commerce have also promoted
this view of trade on the international stage. During early discus-
sions over the Basel Convention on the Control of Transbound-
ary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal (the
so-called “Basel Convention”; see below for more detail), Alter
and the chamber argued vigorously against a proposed ban on
all shipment of waste materials between Organisation for Eco-
nomic Development and Co-operation (OECD) states and non-
OECD nations. In fact, some observers have credited Alter and
the chamber with effectively scuttling U.S. efforts to ratify the
treaty (which it still has not done as of late 2008), thus preventing
implementation of this aspect of the convention (Clapp 2001,
75–76).
The Basel Convention
In spite of the views of Larry Summers (and/or his aides), Har-
vey Alter and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and like-minded
individuals and groups, concerns about the deleterious effects of
international trade in hazardous wastes grew throughout the
1980s. That concern culminated in the adoption in 1989 of the
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements
of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, also known simply as
the Basel Convention. The Basel Convention was signed in Basel,
A Background for the Transboundary Dumping of Hazardous Wastes
93

Switzerland, on March 22, 1989. It was an agreement among 103
nations establishing certain requirements for the shipment of
hazardous wastes between nations. In particular, it required that
a nation desiring to ship hazardous wastes to a second nation no-
tify that nation of its intent and that the receiving nation ac-
knowledge its willingness and consent to receive the shipment.
The Basel treaty arose, in a general sense, as the result of two
major changes in the disposal of hazardous wastes. The first
change was the accumulation of new environmental legislation
in many developed countries limiting or restricting the produc-
tion, use, and disposal of toxic and hazardous materials. Indus-
tries in the United States, European Union, Canada, Australia,
and other developed countries that had previously discarded
their hazardous wastes in the ground, in lakes and rivers, in the
oceans, or into the air could no longer use those methods of dis-
posal. They found it necessary to ship their wastes to other parts
of the world, to nations that had not yet developed stringent en-
vironmental legislation. In addition, the technical means for
making such transfers became much more sophisticated, so that
a U.S. industrial facility could rather easily package its wastes for
shipment to almost any part of the world.
Within this general milieu, however, was a series of specific
incidents involving the transfer of hazardous wastes from MDCs
to LDCs that provided the impetus for the meetings that led to
the Basel Convention. Perhaps the best known of these incidents
was the long voyage of the freighter Khian Sea, described previ-
ously. A number of other similar events, however, contributed to
a growing international concern about the problem of hazardous
waste transfers across national boundaries.
As with many international agreements, the Basel treaty had
a long gestation period. The first formal step in the development
of an international agreement about trade in hazardous wastes oc-
curred in May 1981, when the governing council of the UN Envi-
ronmental Programme (UNEP), meeting in Montevideo, Uruguay,
appointed the Ad Hoc Committee of Legal Experts to review the
problem of international trade in hazardous wastes. The commit-
tee recommended the appointment of a working group to develop
policies and plans for the handling, transport, and disposal of haz-
ardous wastes. More than six years later, the governing council of
UNEP accepted a report of the working group (known as the
Cairo Guidelines) and authorized the appointment of a new work-
ing group to begin planning for an  international convention on the
94
Worldwide Perspective

international movement of hazardous wastes. The first steps in
planning for that convention were a series of organizational meet-
ings involving experts from 96 nations and 50 organizations held
in Budapest, Hungary; Geneva (twice); Caracas, Venezuela; Lux-
embourg; and Basel. These organizational meetings, in turn, led fi-
nally to the Basel Convention itself, held in the Swiss city of that
name in March 1989.
The Basel Convention met with mixed success. On the one
hand, 35 individual nations and the European Community did
sign the convention. But a number of important states, most
prominently, the United States, refused to sign. The U.S. govern-
ment strongly opposed any ban on the shipment of hazardous
waste to developing nations even though those nations them-
selves strongly supported such a ban. In the end, no African gov-
ernment signed the convention either. The most prominent
nongovernmental environmental group present at the meeting,
Greenpeace International, walked out of the final meetings,
claiming that the convention had become an “instrument of le-
galization of waste trade [because it failed] to ban even the most
immoral and environmentally damaging waste trade” (Basel Ac-
tion Network 2008).
As with all international treaties, signings and ratifications
continued over many years. In May 1992, the convention entered
into force when Australia became the 20th nation to ratify the
treaty. As of late 2008, 170 nations had signed the Basel Conven-
tion, and all but a handful had also ratified the treaty. The current
holdouts are Afghanistan, Haiti, and the United States. Authori-
ties have offered a number of reasons for the unwillingness of the
United States to sign the amended Basel treaty, but some believe
that companies interested in continuing the trade in hazardous
wastes have had an important influence on the government’s de-
cision. In the view of Jim Pluckett, coordinator of the Basel Action
Network, for example, “the United States position on this impor-
tant moral and environmental question has been dictated by a
very small sector of the business community. This special interest
lobby wishes to maintain a free trade in toxic wastes so that they
can export their pollution problems to dubious, dangerous and
dirty recycling operations in developing countries” (Center for
International Environmental Law 2001). Reasons for the failure of
Afghanistan and Haiti to sign the Basel treaty are not clear, al-
though the disorganized state of both national governments over
the past decade or more may well be a factor.
A Background for the Transboundary Dumping of Hazardous Wastes
95

Other Treaties and Bans
Perceived deficiencies in the final Basel treaty of 1989 were seri-
ous enough that a handful of the 116 nations attending the con-
vention refused to sign the final agreement and walked out of
the meetings before they were adjourned. Feelings ran highest
among African nations, which were angry that actual bans on the
trade of hazardous wastes were not instituted. These nations de-
cided to conduct a series of their own meetings on the trade in
hazardous wastes. Those meetings eventually led to a number of
other agreements. The first such agreement was negotiated in
1989 as part of a series of treaties between the European Union
(EU) and 71 African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) nations. These
treaties are known as the Lomé Conventions, after the capital
city of Togo, where most of the meetings were conducted. Lomé
IV, concluded in December 1989, contained provisions severely
limiting the shipment of hazardous wastes from the EU to any
ACP country without that country’s express permission.
Three other international agreements were signed in the
next two years. The first was concluded in October 1990 at a
meeting in Trinidad and Tobago of environment ministers from
Latin America and the Caribbean. A second agreement was
signed two months later by presidents of Central American
countries. And the third treaty—the Bamako Convention—was
adopted in January 1991, when 12 African nations meeting under
the auspices of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) agreed
to prohibit imports of hazardous wastes to the African continent.
Meanwhile, individual nations and regional groups had be-
gun to pass legislation and adopt regulations related to the trans-
boundary shipment of hazardous wastes. On February 1, 1993,
for example, the EU adopted Shipping Regulation 259/93, which
banned the shipment of hazardous wastes from EU member
states to any country other than those that are members of the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA). That ban became effec-
tive on May 1, 1994 (European Economic Community 2008). Sim-
ilar bans on the shipment of hazardous wastes were
recommended and/or adopted later in the same year by other
regional groups: the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in September, members of the Convention for the Pro-
tection of the Mediterranean Sea against Pollution (the so-called
Barcelona Convention) in October, and attendees at a meeting of
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
96
Worldwide Perspective

(ECLAC) in November. By the end of 1993, more than 100 na-
tions had also adopted bans on the exportation and/or importa-
tion of hazardous wastes into and/or out of their own countries
under at least some circumstances (Basel Action Network 2008).
Adoption of the Basel Convention has by no means solved
the problem of the transboundary shipment of hazardous
wastes. The original treaty was somewhat vague in many re-
spects, and a number of meetings were held to clarify the mean-
ings of terms and to develop clear and strong bans against the
shipment of hazardous wastes to developing countries. In Sep-
tember 1995, the third conference of the Parties to the Basel Con-
vention meeting in Geneva adopted an amendment to the treaty
intent on clarifying and strengthening the original document’s
stand on hazardous wastes. A group of developed countries, in-
cluding Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea,
and the United States, opposed the amendment, so other mem-
bers of the convention decided to go ahead without the support
of these nations. The conference adopted the amendment with
specific reference to the group of nations most strongly in agree-
ment with its intent: the EU, the OECD, and the principality of
Liechtenstein (Basel Convention 2008). As of late 2008, 63 nations
have ratified the ban amendment. As noted above, the United
States has still not ratified either the original Basel Convention or
the ban amendment. Although many government officials,
politicians, experts, and ordinary citizens in the country do sub-
scribe to the philosophy that developed nations should not
dump their hazardous wastes in developing nations, the federal
government has not yet become a formal member of the interna-
tional organization espousing and acting on that view.
Environmental Justice and Climate Change
Individuals and groups interested in environmental justice on
both a national and an international scale have recently turned
their attention to a new facet of the problem: global climate
change. Since the 1970s, evidence has been collecting to indicate
that the world’s average annual temperature is rising. Most ex-
perts agree that the primary reason for this change is the release
of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases pro-
duced by human activities that trap heat reflected from the
Earth’s surface. Increases in Earth’s average annual temperature,
Environmental Justice and Climate Change
97

most experts believe, are likely to result in a number of signifi-
cant changes in the planet’s surface characteristics, such as melt-
ing of glaciers, ice sheets, and other accumulations of ice, as well
as a significant warming of the oceans. These changes, in turn,
may produce dramatic effects on human civilizations, such as
drowning of coastal cities and some low-lying islands; changes
in precipitation and local temperature patterns; alterations in the
distribution of natural plant and animal species; changes in dis-
ease patterns among humans, other animals, and plants; and
new patterns of severe storm systems, such as hurricanes, ty-
phoons, cyclones, and tornadoes.
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) released its most recent report on these changes (Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change 2007a). It concluded, as
in earlier reports, that some aspects of climate change are well
documented and virtually beyond dispute (such as changes in
global temperature patterns), that other data are generally ac-
cepted, although legitimate disputes still exist as to their signifi-
cance (such as the causes of temperature change), and that still
other conclusions about climate change are subject to consider-
able disagreement and dispute (such as possible effects on the
human and natural environment of temperature changes).
Some of the most pessimistic commentators predict very
troubling consequences of global climate change. A 2008 report
by Cable News Network highlighted some of these predictions.
The report warned that
• more than a billion people worldwide will face water
shortages because of the melting ice pack;
• about a billion people will lose their livelihoods because
of desertiﬁcation of their lands;
• more than 200 million people will become refugees be-
cause of rising sea levels, erosion, and loss of agricultural
lands;
• in one country alone, Bangladesh, about 17 million
people could lose their homes because of ﬂooding and
severe storms;
• the number of Africans at risk for malaria will increase
by more than 60 million if temperatures rise by 2°C; and
• more than 180 million residents of sub-Saharan Africa
could die of diseases “directly attributable” to climate
change. (Oliver 2008)
98
Worldwide Perspective

Nearly all aspects of the global climate change problem have
strong racist and classist elements. In December 2006, Oxford
University professor J. Timmons Roberts and Bradley C. Parks of
the Millennium Challenge Corporation in Washington, D.C.,
published a thorough-going analysis of this problem in their
book, A Climate of Injustice: Global Inequality, North-South Politics,
and Climate Policy (Roberts and Parks 2006). They showed that,
although the richest nations in the world produce more than 60
percent of all greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere, de-
veloping nations face by far the greatest risk of damages caused
by climate change.
A number of factors contribute to the greater risk faced by
poor people and people of color throughout the world as a result
of climate change. One factor is simply geographical location.
Many of the areas most likely to be affected by rising ocean levels
are occupied by people of color: the low-lying regions of the In-
dian subcontinent and many small Pacific islands. Among the
first communities of color to be threatened by rising ocean levels
are likely to be those residents of small island nations, such as
Kiribati, the Maldives, Nauru, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. Some of
these island nations are no more than a few meters in elevation at
their highest points, and residents may have no choice other than
to abandon their homelands to avoid being swamped by the
ocean. In fact, the first population to have been relocated as a re-
sult of rising ocean waters was probably the residents of the vil-
lage of Lateu, on Vanuatu, who were evicted from their homes in
December 2005 because of the risk of rising tides (Environment
News Service 2005).
Similarly, populations living in coastal regions in East Asia
(almost exclusively communities of color) are at high risk from
more frequent and severe storms, such as cyclones that strike the
area every year. The devastating cyclone that hit the Irrawaddy
River delta of Myanmar (formerly Burma) on May 9, 2008, un-
derlines the problems faced by people who are already poor
when they are the victims of a severe storm. When even their
own national government refused aid from other nations, these
people suffered death, injury, and disease not only from the di-
rect effect of winds and water but also from the loss of access to
food, clean water, clothing, shelter, and medicine, some of which
were lacking in their lives even before the cyclone struck.
Some of the specific consequences resulting from climate
change predicted by the IPCC in its 2007 report are as follows:
Environmental Justice and Climate Change
99

• Between 75 million and 250 million people will be ex-
posed to increased water stress due to climate change by
the year 2020.
• In some countries, yields from rain-dependent crops
could be reduced by up to 50 percent.
• Climate change will intensify already severe pressure on
populations in all parts of Asia as a result of urbaniza-
tion, industrialization, and economic development.
• The populations of eastern, southern, and southeastern
Asia will face the threat of endemic morbidity and mor-
tality as a result of increased diarrheal diseases associ-
ated primarily with ﬂoods and droughts.
• Extensive tropical forests in central South America will
gradually convert to savannahs, and semi-arid regions
will convert to arid land as the result of signiﬁcant de-
creases in annual rainfall and increases in temperature.
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2007b)
Over the last decade, a number of environmental justice
groups have begun to stress the environmental justice aspects of
the climate change problem, referring in many cases to a cam-
paign for “climate justice.” One of the most important of these ef-
forts was a statement of general principles adopted in August
2002 by a group of organizations meeting during the 2002 Earth
Summit conference of the UN Environment Programme in
 Johannesburg, South Africa. In all, 14 organizations— CorpWatch,
US; Friends of the Earth International; Global Resistance; Green-
peace International; Groundwork, South Africa; the Indigenous
Environmental Network; Indigenous Information Network,
Kenya; the National Alliance of People’s Movements of India;
National Fishworkers Forum, India; Oilwatch Africa; OilWatch
International; Southwest Network for Environmental and Eco-
nomic Justice, US; Third World Network, Malaysia; and World
Rainforest Movement, Uruguay—signed the agreement, now
known as the Bali Principles of Climate Justice. The statement
was developed using Environmental Justice Principles adopted
at the People of Color Environmental Justice Leadership Summit
held in Washington, D.C., in 1991 as a blueprint.
Among the principles enunciated in the statement are de-
mands that:
• “governments are responsible for addressing climate
change in a manner that is both democratically account-
100
Worldwide Perspective

able to their people and in accordance with the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities”;
• “communities, particularly affected communities[,] play
a leading role in national and international processes to
address climate change”;
• “fossil fuel and extractive industries be held strictly liable
for all past and current life-cycle impacts relating to the
production of greenhouse gases and associated local pol-
lutants”;
• governments recognize “the rights of victims of climate
change and associated injustices to receive full compen-
sation, restoration, and reparation for loss of land, liveli-
hood and other damages“;
• “the right of all workers employed in extractive, fossil
fuel and other greenhouse-gas producing industries to a
safe and healthy work environment without being forced
to choose between an unsafe livelihood based on unsus-
tainable production and unemployment”;
• “the right to self-determination of Indigenous Peoples,
and their right to control their lands, including  sub-
surface land, territories and resources and the right to the
protection against any action or conduct that may result
in the destruction or degradation of their territories and
cultural way of life”; and
• “the right of indigenous peoples and local communities
to participate effectively at every level of  decision-
making, including needs assessment, planning, imple-
mentation, enforcement and evaluation, the strict
enforcement of principles of prior informed consent,
and the right to say ‘No.’” (India Resource Center 
2002)
The analysis of climate change issues from an environmen-
tal justice perspective often highlights unexpected consequences
of climate-control actions that otherwise receive favorable re-
views—for example, one of the powerful tools developed as a re-
sult of the Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted
at a conference held in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997. Accord-
ing to this agreement, nations and corporations can reduce their
measured contribution to climate change by engaging in carbon
trades. A company that produces large amounts of greenhouse
gases, for example, can have the overall contribution to climate
change reduced by buying carbon credits from companies that
Environmental Justice and Climate Change
101

pollute less (such as those, perhaps, found in LDCs) or by con-
tributing to the development of climate change–ameliorating
projects, such as the development of tree farms in undeveloped
areas. But analysis often shows that such carbon-trading efforts
actually result in a disproportionate effect on poor people of
color. As one scholar has written, “Climate change policies
 addressing transportation, energy production, industry, com-
mercial enterprises, housing, land use, and agriculture will in-
evitably have significant social and economic repercussions—on
the poor, on consumers, and on affected industries. Notwith-
standing the critical importance of significant greenhouse gas
(GHG) reductions, policies designed in a vacuum, focusing
solely on reductions, could create significant and unintentional
adverse consequences. Moreover, policies to address climate
change have the potential to address long-standing societal
problems, like distributional inequities” (Kaswan 2008, 1; also
see EJ Matters 2008; Smith 2007).
Concerns about the environmental justice aspect of climate
change policies has resulted in the growth in the number of aca -
demic papers on the subject, activist efforts to influence domestic
and international policy, the formation of new organizations, and
other activities associated with the appearance of new political
movements. For example, in the United States, a number of new
organizations have appeared to study, educate, and lobby about
issues in “climate justice.” One of the most influential of these
 organizations is the Environmental Justice and Climate Change
Initiative (EJCCI), located in Oakland, California. EJCCI is a
 consortium of 28 environmental, civil rights, and environmental
justice groups, including the Black Leadership Forum, Communi-
ties for a Better Environment, CorpWatch, the Deep South Center
for Environmental Justice at Xavier University, the Indigenous
Environmental Network, Southern Organizing Committee,
Southwest Network for Economic and Environmental Justice,
and West Harlem Environmental Action.
In 2001, EJCCI developed a document titled “10 Principles
for Just Climate Change Policies in the U.S.” Those principles
were as follows:
1. Stop Cooking the Planet
2. Protect and Empower Vulnerable Individuals and
 Communities
3. Ensure Just Transition for Workers and Communities
102
Worldwide Perspective

4. Require Community Participation
5. Global Problems Need Global Solutions
6. The U.S. Must Lead
7. Stop Exploration for Fossil Fuels
8. Monitor Domestic and International Carbon Markets
9. Caution in the Face of Uncertainty
10. Protect Future Generations (Environmental Justice and
Climate Change Initiative 2008)
EJCCI says that these 10 principles form the guidelines for
changing the focus of the debate over climate change in the
United States, for attempting to improve the accountability of in-
dustry and the U.S. government in matters of climate change, for
involving more youth in the campaign against climate change,
and for driving its efforts for fund-raising.
As efforts to control human activities that may be responsible
for climate change increase, efforts to monitor the disproportion-
ate effects on low-income and minority communities around the
world are almost certain to continue and, most likely, intensify.
Environmental Justice and
Sustainable Development
Perhaps the most popular catchphrase making the rounds
among environmentalists on an international scale today is sus-
tainable development. The term first became generally known as
the result of its use in the UN World Commission on Environ-
ment and Development’s report Our Common Future (also known
as the Brundtland Report), published in 1987. The report defined
sustainable development as “development that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of future gener-
ations to meet their own needs” (World Commission on Environ-
ment and Development 1987, 43). The concept of a world in
which all people live safely and comfortably without devastating
the environment is an overwhelmingly attractive idea. However,
the precise mechanisms by which such a goal can be reached
have never been entirely clear. As the editor of a special issue of
the Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum has observed, “Sus-
tainable development is a little like Zen. Everybody talks about
it, but few people really know what it is” (Murray 1999, 148).
Environmental Justice and Sustainable Development
103

Over the past two decades, the significance of sustainable
development as a guiding principle in policy making around the
world has been increasingly accepted by international, regional,
and national organizations and agencies. For example, the World
Summit for Social Development held in Copenhagen in 1995 pro-
claimed that “[w]e are deeply convinced that economic develop-
ment, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustain-
able development, which is the framework for our efforts to
achieve a higher quality of life for all people” (World Summit for
Social Development 2008).
In spite of any uncertainty about the exact meaning of the
term sustainable development, its connection with the field of envi-
ronmental justice has long been clear and unquestionable to
many observers. The Copenhagen Declaration went on to con-
nect sustainable development specifically with the principles of
environmental justice: “Equitable social development that recog-
nizes empowering the poor to utilize environmental resources
sustainably is a necessary foundation for sustainable develop-
ment. We also recognize that broad-based and sustained eco-
nomic growth in the context of sustainable development is
necessary to sustain social development and social justice”
(World Summit for Social Development 2008).
The task for individuals and organizations, then, is to find
the specific points at which the goals and methods of sustainable
development intersect with those of environmental justice. A re-
port by the Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL),
One Species, One Planet, suggests three points of confluence:
• the right to life, including the right to a healthy environ-
ment;
• the traditional and customary property rights of indige-
nous and other local communities, especially those in the
global south; and
• participatory and procedural rights. (Center for Interna-
tional Environmental Law 2002)
A significant portion of One Species, One Planet is devoted to
an analysis of the way in which environmental justice and sus-
tainable development intersect in these three areas. In the first
case, the report emphasizes the fact that the right to life is the
most basic of all human rights and, by its very nature, implies a
104
Worldwide Perspective

right to a healthy environment. Without such an environment, a
healthy life, and even life itself, may not be possible. Many na-
tions have now adopted constitutional or legal guarantees for a
safe and healthy environment that may also include the right to a
safe workplace, the right to organize, the right to an adequate
standard of living, and the right to participate in decision mak-
ing that affects peoples’ lives.
One Species, One Planet points out the importance of commu-
nity rights in addition to the rights of individual persons. It takes
special note of the fact that, in many nations, this concept is still
largely lacking. Those nations may acknowledge the individual
rights of its citizens but ignore the special and legitimate claims
of ethnic, racial, linguistic, or other groups. Such a philosophy is
especially injurious to communities dependent on natural re-
sources for their survival. When a national government places
resource recovery over the needs of individual communities, the
rights of those communities have been violated. Any number of
examples of this political philosophy can be found in many
countries of the world, not the least of which is the United States.
In this country, the federal government has long regarded lands
owned by Native Americans as fair game in the search for and
extraction of natural resources such as coal, oil, and uranium,
even though such activities may profoundly disrupt the lives of
Native Americans.
The CIEL report also reviews the concept of community-
based property rights (CBPRs), which has been developed by legal
experts interested in environmental justice and sustainable de-
velopment. CBPRs are quite different from more traditional and
familiar “common property” and “community-based natural re-
source management” legal strategies in that they place much
more emphasis on the rights of an ethnic, racial, or other group.
“The distinguishing feature of CBPRs,” the report explains, “is
that their exercise derives its authority from the community in
which they exist, not from the state where they are located”
(Center for International Environmental Law 2002, 14 [emphasis
in original]).
Finally, the report explains the critical role of community
participation in making decisions related to community survival
and livelihood. Currently, hundreds of millions of natural re-
source–dependent poor and indigenous people, primarily in the
global south, have essentially no control over the environmental
factors that affect their lives. They are almost entirely at the
Environmental Justice and Sustainable Development
105

mercy of national governments and, sometimes, transnational
corporations that make decisions about resource allocation on
the basis of factors that have little or no connection with the lives
of local inhabitants. Neither environmental justice nor sustain-
able development can have any meaning at all unless local com-
munities develop the skills for analyzing and solving the
environmental and social problems they face. To achieve this
goal, the CIEL report argues, national governments must accept
the importance of and be willing to promote the concept of par-
ticipatory democracy among their poor and indigenous commu-
nities. Implied by this term are a number of individual rights,
such as the right to receive and disseminate information, the
right to take part in planning and decision making, and the right
of access to administrative and judicial justice.
One Species, One Planet is only one of many documents that
have tried to establish a philosophical basis for the intersection of
sustainable development and environmental justice. There ap-
pear to have been fewer instances in which national, regional,
state, or local governments have tried to develop policies and
programs that actually put this philosophy into practice. One in-
teresting exception is a report released by the Scottish govern-
ment in December 2005 titled Choosing Our Future: Scotland’s
Sustainable Development Strategy. The report attempts to show
how the principles of sustainable development can be used to in-
form and drive culture, policy, and action in Scotland. Chapter 8
of the report deals specifically with the intersection between sus-
tainable development and environmental justice. After explain-
ing that a major emphasis of the report is to “improv[e] the
quality of life of individuals and communities in Scotland, secur-
ing environmental justice for those who suffer the worst local en-
vironments,” the report lists a number of specific actions through
which those goals can be achieved. They include reducing the
country’s dependence on landfills (which have disproportionate
effects on nearby communities); improving transport systems in
such a way as to more evenly distribute the costs of road traffic,
congestion, and air pollution; tackling problems of fuel poverty
and unsafe construction in communities dealing with these prob-
lems; providing more parks and green spaces to make neighbor-
hoods safer and healthier places in which to live and work;
improving protection from floods; enhancing public access to in-
formation about their environment and to participation in deci-
sion making; and developing new educational programs to
106
Worldwide Perspective

provide special benefits to communities where they are needed
(Scottish Executive 2005, 42).
The challenge for both environmental justice and sustain-
able development groups today is to find specific ways in which
objectives from both areas of concern can be achieved at the
same time. People around the world are trying various pro-
grams to achieve this goal. As only one example, concerned citi-
zens in the Dudley Street neighborhood of Roxbury in Boston
have founded the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative (DSNI)
to work for sustainable development of their community based
on the principles of environmental justice. The organization was
created by members of the community in 1984 “out of fear and
anger to revive their neighborhood that was devastated by ar-
son, disinvestment, neglect and redlining practices, and protect
it from outside speculators” (“Dudley Street Neighborhood Ini-
tiative” 2008).
By the early 1980s, the Dudley Street neighborhood had be-
come a classic run-down, crime-infested urban slum with a pop-
ulation that was about three-quarters African American and
Cape Verdean, about one-quarter Latino, and less than 5 percent
white. About 1,300 parcels of land, nearly a third of the district’s
60 acres, had been abandoned by their owners. The vacant land
had become a convenient location for trash companies and indi-
viduals to deposit their garbage, and the neighborhood soon be-
came known as “Boston’s dump yard” (Porter 2005).
In contrast to many urban neighborhoods of this kind, how-
ever, Dudley residents decided to do something about their in-
creasingly desperate situation. The organization they formed has
since become a model of what highly motivated activists can
achieve when they use the best features of both the environmen-
tal justice and sustainable development movements. Within
three years, DSNI had become the first (and so far only) commu-
nity group in the United States to achieve the right to use the
power of eminent domain over property within its area, had
formed a land trust to administer that property, and had been the
first inner-city neighborhood to win a state grant to create a town
common. Over the succeeding two decades, it built on these
early beginnings, eventually developing more than 600 of the
original vacant lots and building more than 300 units of afford-
able housing in the process.
Typical of DSNI’s commitment to the melding of  en viron -
mental justice and sustainable development is the  or gan ization’s
Environmental Justice and Sustainable Development
107

urban agricultural project in which rehabilitated brownfields
have been turned into urban gardens. In 2002, the group received
a $25,000 grant from the EPA for its Food Project. The money
went for training, educating, and employing youth in the neigh-
borhood to practice sustainable agriculture and integrated pest
management as ways of creating a sustainable food supply
within the context of an environmental justice philosophy. DSNI
also continues to work with 14 waste-related industries in the
neighborhood to develop systems for waste reduction and waste
recycling. For its achievements in combining the best features of
environmental justice and sustainable development, DSNI has
received a number of awards, including Boston’s Best Kept
Neighborhood Civic Award, the 1997 American Planning Associ-
ation Award for housing planning, and the 2001 American Ex-
press Building Leadership Award. Without much doubt, as
prestigious as these awards may be, the greatest accomplishment
of DSNI has been the revitalization and enhancement of its own
community. Today, DSNI remains a powerful force in the inte-
gration of sustainable development and environmental justice
principles in the Boston metropolitan area.
Stories similar to that of the Dudley Street neighborhood are
now beginning to appear in low-income and people-of-color
communities around the world. They illustrate some of the great
accomplishments that can be realized when the principles of en-
vironmental justice are melded with the ideals of sustainable de-
velopment in enhancing the lives of people who have long faced
profound social, health, political, and environmental challenges.
References
Alter, Harvey. 1995. “Halting the Trade in Recyclable Wastes Will Hurt
Developing Countries.” In Environmental Justice, edited by J. S. Petrikin,
chap. 9. San Diego: Greenhaven Press.
Basel Action Network. 2008. “About the Basel Ban/A Chronology of the
Basel Ban.” [Online article or information; retrieved May 18, 2008.]
http://www.ban.org/about_basel_ban/chronology.html. 
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Haz-
ardous Wastes and Their Disposal. 2008. “Ban Amendment to the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and Their Disposal Geneva, 22 September 1995.” [Online article
108
Worldwide Perspective

or information; retrieved May 20, 2008.] http://www.basel.int/ratif/
ban-alpha.htm.
Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL). 2001 (August 9).
“Green Groups Call on USA to Ratify International Toxic Waste Dump-
ing Ban as Part of Basel Treaty.” http://www.ciel.org/Chemicals/
Ban_BASEL_9Aug01.html.
Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL). 2002. One Species,
One Planet: Environmental Justice and Sustainable Development. Washing-
ton, DC: Center for International Environmental Law.
Clapp, Jennifer. 2001. Toxic Exports: The Transfer of Hazardous Wastes from
Rich to Poor Countries. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Cook, Jaclyn, and Eddie Koch, eds. 1992. Going Green: People, Politics and
the Environment in South Africa. Cape Town, South Africa: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
“Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative.” 2008. [Online article or infor-
mation; retrieved May 24, 2008.] http://www.dsni.org/. 
EJ Matters. 2008. “The California Environmental Justice Movement’s
Declaration on Use of Carbon Trading Schemes to Address Climate
Change.” [Online article or information; retrieved May 20, 2008.]
http://www.ejmatters.org/declaration.html. 
Environment News Service. 2005 (December 6). “Paciﬁc Island Villagers
Become Climate Change Refugees.” [Online article or information; re-
trieved 5/20/08.] http://www.ens-newswire.com/ens/dec2005/2005–12
–06–02.asp.
Environmental Justice and Climate Change Initiative. 2008. “10 Principles
for Just Climate Change Policies in the U.S.” [Online article or informa-
tion; retrieved May 20, 2008.] http://www.ejcc.org/10%20Principles%
20of%20Climate%20Justice.pdf.
European Economic Community. 2008. “Council Regulation (EEC) No
259/93 of 1 February 1993 on the Supervision and Control of Shipments
of Waste within, into and out of the European Community.” [Online ar-
ticle or information; retrieved May 20, 2008.] http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31993R0259:EN:NOT. 
Fondaw, Corey. 2008. “Environmental Justice Case Study: Thor Chemi-
cals and Mercury Exposure in Cato-Ridge, South Africa.” [Online article
or information; retrieved May 18, 2008.] http://www.umich.edu/
~snre492/Jones/thorchem.htm. 
Friends of the Earth. “The Bakun Hydroelectric Project: Impacts on the
Indigenous People.” [Online article or information; retrieved 5/20/08.]
References  109

http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/brieﬁngs/bakun_indigenous_people
.html. Last modiﬁed November 1996.
Greenpeace. 2008. “Philadelphia Ash Dumping Chronology.” [Online
article or information; retrieved May 18, 2008.] http://www.essential
action.org/return/chron.html. 
India Resource Center. 2002 (August 28). “Bali Principles of Climate
 Justice.” http://www.indiaresource.org/issues/energycc/2003/bali
principles.html.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007a. Climate Change
2007: Synthesis Report. Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. [Online article or information; retrieved May 20, 2008.]
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr.pdf. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007b. Climate Change
2007: Synthesis Report: Summary Report. Geneva, Switzerland: Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Online article or information; re-
trieved May 20, 2008.] http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/
ar4/syr/ar4_syr_spm.pdf.
Johnston, Barbara Rose. 1994. Who Pays the Price: The Sociocultural Con-
text of Environmental Crises. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Kaswan, Alice. 2008. “Environmental Justice and Domestic Climate
Change Policy.” Environmental Law Reporter (May). Posted online January
18. [Online article or information; retrieved 5/20/08] http://papers.ssrn
.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1077675.
Knight, Danielle. 2001 (March 29). “Foreign Mercury Waste Still Contam-
inating South Africa.” [Online article or information; retrieved 5/20/08.]
http://www.afrol.com/News2001/sa017_mercury_waste.htm. 
Maasai Environmental Resource Coalition (MERC). 2008. [Online article
or information; retrieved May 16, 2008] http://www.maasaierc.org/
missionandprojects.html. 
Malaysian Timber Council (MTC). “Bakun Hydroelectric Project.” [On-
line article or information; retrieved 5/20/08.] http://www.mtc.com
.my/publication/library/bakun/bakun1.htm. Last modiﬁed on Janu-
ary 25, 2002.
Marshall, Will. 2002 (April 9). “Australian Mining Giant Leaves Environ-
mental Disaster in Papua New Guinea.” World Socialist Web Site. [On-
line article or information; retrieved 5/20/08.] http://www.wsws.org/
articles/2002/apr2002/png-a09.shtml.
Mpanya, Mutombo. 1992. “The Dumping of Toxic Waste in African
Countries: A Case of Poverty and Racism.” In Race and the Incidence of
Environmental Hazards: A Time for Discourse, edited by Bunyan Bryant
and Paul Mohai, chap. 15. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
110
Worldwide Perspective

Murray, Kali N., ed. 1999. “Introduction.” Duke Environmental Law & Pol-
icy Forum 9 (Spring): 147–152.
Narimatsu, Julie. 2008. “Environmental Justice Case Study: Maasai Land
Rights in Kenya and Tanzania.” [Online article or information; retrieved
May 16, 2008.] http://www.umich.edu/~snre492/Jones/maasai.htm. 
Norris, Ruth, ed. 1982. Pills, Pesticides & Proﬁts: The International Trade in
Toxic Substances. Croton-on-Hudson, NY: North River Press.
Oliver, Rachel. 2008 (February 18). “Rich, Poor and Climate Change.”
CNN.com. [Online article or information; retrieved 5/20/08.]
http://edition.cnn.com/2008/BUSINESS/02/17/eco.class/.
Porter, Tim. 2005 (September 22). “One Neighborhood, Many Stories.”
Poynternonline. http://www.poynter.org/column.asp?id=69. 
Roberts, J. Timmons, and Bradley C. Parks. 2006. A Climate of Injustice:
Global Inequality, North-South Politics, and Climate Policy. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Schwartz, Jerry. 2000 (September 5). “The Full Story of the Khian Sea and
the Gonaives Ash Mountain.” [Online article or information; retrieved
5/20/08.] http://www.webster.edu/~corbetre/haiti-archive/msg05049
.html.
Scottish Executive. 2005. Choosing Our Future: Scotland’s Sustainable De-
velopment Strategy. Edinburgh, UK: Scottish Executive.
Smith, Kevin. 2007. The Carbon Neutral Myth: Offset Indulgences for Your Cli-
mate Sins. Amsterdam: Transnational Institute. [Online article or informa-
tion; retrieved 5/20/08.] http://www.carbontradewatch.org/pubs/
carbon_neutral_myth.pdf.
Steger, Tamara. 2007. Making the Case for Environmental Justice in Central
& Eastern Europe. Budapest, Hungary: CEU Center for Environmental
Policy and Law, the Health and Environment Alliance, and the Coalition
for Environmental Justice.
Wade, Robert. 1997. “Greening the Bank: The Struggle over the Environ-
ment (1970–1995).” In The World Bank: Its First Half Century, edited by
Devesh Kapur, John P. Lewis, and Richard Webb, chap. 13. Washington,
DC: The Brookings Institution.
Whirled Bank Group. 2008. “Larry Summers: The Bank Memo.” [Online
article or information; retrieved May 18, 2008.] http://www.whirled
bank.org/ourwords/summers.html. 
World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our Com-
mon Future. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
World Summit for Social Development. 2008. “Copenhagen Declaration
on Social Development.” [Online article or information; retrieved May
20, 2008.] http://www.un-documents.net/cope-dec.htm.
References  111


4
Chronology
T
he environmental justice movement is relatively young. Its
origin is often traced to the protests held in Warren County,
North Carolina, in 1982. Yet, many of the elements of the
modern movement can be traced back much further, at least to
the Civil Rights Act of 1875 and the first environmental law of
1899. This chapter summarizes some of the most important
events in the history of the modern environmental justice
movement.
1899
America’s first environmental law, the Refuse Act of
1899, is passed. The act is originally written to protect
navigable waters from pollution by sediments, dis-
ease-carrying organisms, and oil discharges, but it is
broad enough to cover many environmental prob-
lems through the early 1970s.
1947
The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act of 1947 is passed by Congress. The act originally
deals only with pesticides shipped across state lines.
The act is amended and extended in 1972 to cover
broader aspects of pesticide production and use.
1948
The Water Pollution Control Act of 1948 is passed 
by Congress. The statute provides a mechanism by
which the federal government can work with state
and local governments to reduce or eliminate pollu-
tion of interstate waterways and to improve the
113

 quality of surface and underground water resources.
The act is never implemented because almost no
funds are appropriated for it.
1956
A stronger version of the 1948 Water Pollution Con-
trol Act is adopted. The act is amended and strength-
ened a number of times in following years.
1960
The U.S. Supreme Court rules that segregation in in-
terstate bus and train stations is illegal. A year later,
the Interstate Commerce Commission officially pro-
hibits such practices.
1964
The 24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution is
adopted. The amendment abolishes the poll tax, a
primary means by which people of color were long
prevented from voting.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 is adopted, guaranteeing
to all American citizens equal access to employment
and public accommodations, regardless of race,
creed, color, sex, or national origin.
1965
The Voting Rights Act of 1965, strengthening its pre-
decessor, the Voting Rights Act of 1957, is passed.
1968
The Fair Housing Act of 1968 is adopted, prohibiting
discrimination based on race, color, religion, or na-
tional origin in rental or purchase of homes, real es-
tate advertising, mortgage lending, homeowner’s
insurance, and zoning.
1969
Ralph Abascal, a young attorney and general counsel
to California Rural Legal Assistance, files suit on be-
half of six migrant farmworkers that eventually re-
sults in a ban on the use of the pesticide DDT.
1970
Congress passes and President Richard M. Nixon
signs the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
of 1969. The act is the single most comprehensive leg-
islative action dealing with environmental issues in
the nation’s history. It establishes, for the first time, a
114
Chronology
1948
(cont.)

comprehensive environmental policy for the U.S.
government and all of its constituent agencies. It also
creates the President’s Council on Environmental
Quality, the primary responsibility of which is to de-
velop regulations that will implement the law’s poli-
cies. Of perhaps greatest significance, NEPA requires
that all federal agencies submit environmental im-
pact statements that describe the impact of major
agency actions on the human, biological, and physi-
cal environment.
Congress passes and the president signs the Clean
Air Act of 1970, the strongest and most comprehen-
sive air pollution legislation to date in the United
States. The two most important features of the law
are the creation of new standards for the presence of
air pollutants—the New Source Performance Stan-
dards (NSPS) and National Emissions Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP). These stan-
dards express maximum tolerable limits that will
protect human health for a variety of pollutants.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is
created as an independent agency in the Reorganiza-
tion Plan No. 3 of 1970.
Sen. Philip Hart (D-MI) arranges a meeting among
environmental groups, labor unions, and minority
organizations to consider issues of the urban envi-
ronment of concern to all such groups.
April 22 is declared to be Earth Day. By some esti-
mates, more than 20 million people demonstrate on
behalf of improved environmental conditions in the
United States and around the world.
1971
The annual report of the Council on Environmental
Quality acknowledges that environmental quality is
affected by the racial and class status of communities.
1972
The Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 is adopted.
The act represents a giant step forward in the nation’s
Chronology
115

commitment to protect its water resources from pol-
lution. Its primary achievement is to consolidate and
reorganize provisions for dealing with water pollu-
tion contained in 11 preceding laws dealing with var-
ious aspects of water quality.
1975
The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act Amendments of 1975 are adopted. These amend-
ments update the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act of 1947, as amended in 1964, and the
Federal Environmental Pesticide Control Act of 1972.
These laws are further updated and extended in
1980, 1988, 1990, 1991, and 1996. In each case, the au-
thority of the federal government to regulate and
control the production, sale, and use of a variety of
pesticides is made more comprehensive.
1976
The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) of 1976 and
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of
1976 are adopted. TSCA is the first comprehensive
legislation giving the federal government authority
to regulate new and existing chemical substances.
RCRA requires federal agencies to develop methods
for assessing the impact of hazardous wastes on the
physical, biological, and human environment.
A conference on the urban environment is held at
Black Lakes, Michigan. The conference is organized
by the United Auto Workers and includes representa-
tives from unions, environmental organizations, reli-
gious groups, and those concerned with economic
justice.
The Urban League creates Project Que: Environmen-
tal Concerns in the Inner City.
1977
The Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act are revised
and updated.
Grants totaling $66,000 permit the Urban Environ-
ment Conference to fund 11 nationwide conferences
on issues related to environmental justice.
116
Chronology
1972
(cont.)

1978
Lois Gibbs first takes action on the health threats
posed by hazardous wastes buried beneath the Nia-
gara Falls, New York, neighborhood in which she
lives. Gibbs’s efforts eventually lead to the abandon-
ment of the Love Canal area in which she lived and a
cleanup that eventually leads to the relocation of
more than 800 families.
1979
“City Care: A Conference on the Urban Environ-
ment” is held in Detroit. Organizers include the Na-
tional Urban League, the Urban Environment
Conference, and the Sierra Club. One result of the
meeting is a sense that traditional environmental
groups are going to be uncomfortable with the inclu-
sion of social justice issues in their agendas.
Residents of the Northwood Manor neighborhood of
Houston sue Southwestern Waste Management, Inc.,
to prevent the construction of a waste disposal site in
their community. The 82 percent black neighborhood
claims that it is being unfairly discriminated against
by the company’s plans. The community eventually
loses the lawsuit, but Bean v. Southwestern becomes a
landmark case in that it is the first time a claim of en-
vironmental discrimination forms the basis of legal
action.
1982
Residents of Warren County, North Carolina, sup-
ported by the United Church of Christ, stage a
demonstration in opposition to the siting of a poly-
chlorinated biphenyl (PCB) landfill near the commu-
nity of Afton. More than 500 African American
protestors are arrested in an unsuccessful attempt to
block construction of the landfill. This event is
widely regarded as the real beginning of the modern
environmental justice movement.
1983
“Taking Back Our Health—An Institute on Surviving
the Toxic Threat to Minority Communities” is held in
New Orleans. The conference is sponsored by the Ur-
ban Environment Conference shortly before it loses
its funding and goes out of business.
Chronology
117

A report by the General Accounting Office (now the
Government Accountability Office; GAO) states that
three out of four hazardous waste sites in EPA Region
4 (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee) are
located in African American communities.
The Olin Corporation announces that it will fund the
cleanup of a waste site near Triana, Alabama, that
had been contaminated by DDT wastes from the
Redstone Arsenal. The action is the first time that an
EPA order has resulted in a health care settlement for
a specific local population. The total cost of the oper-
ation is about $25 million. Triana had earlier been
called the “unhealthiest town in the United States” as
a result of the contaminated site.
1985
The grassroots committee, People Concerned about
MIC (methyl isocyanate), is organized in Institute,
West Virginia. Consisting largely of African Ameri-
cans, the group is created in response to a chemical
leak from a nearby Union Carbide plant that resulted
in about 135 residents being sent to the hospital.
The EPA commissions the Council of Energy Re-
source Tribes to conduct a study of potential haz-
ardous waste sites located on or near Indian lands.
The survey reveals as many as 1,200 hazardous waste
sites on or near 25 Indian reservations.
1986
Activists in the West Harlem neighborhood of New
York City organize to take action against pollution
being produced by the city’s North River Sewage
Treatment plant. Two years later, the organization is
formalized as West Harlem Environmental Action
(WE ACT), still one of the strongest and most active
neighborhood environmental justice groups in the
United States.
Juana Beatriz Gutierrez leads a group of her neigh-
bors in protesting the construction of a new state
prison in their community. They are eventually suc-
118
Chronology
1983
(cont.)

cessful, and the state decides in 1992 not to build the
structure. The protestors eventually organize as the
Las Madres del Este de Los Angeles (Mothers of East
Los Angeles).
1987
The Commission for Racial Justice of the United
Church of Christ publishes a report, “Toxic Wastes
and Race in the United States,” showing that race,
even more than income level, is the critical factor
shared by communities exposed to toxic wastes.
Robert D. Bullard publishes Invisible Houston, one of
the first books to describe in detail environmental
racism and social injustice in black neighborhoods of
Houston.
Italian businessmen Gianfranco Raffaeli and Renato
Pent sign an illegal agreement with Nigerian busi-
nessman Sunday Nana, to use his property for the
disposal of hazardous wastes from Italy. The wastes
are shipped under the guise of building materials and
waste chemicals. More than two dozen workers be-
come ill as a result of handling the wastes in Nigeria.
The government of Haiti issues a permit for the im-
portation of fertilizer from the United States onboard
the freighter Khian Sea. The shipment contains, in
fact, not fertilizer, but 13,476 tons of toxic wastes
from a Philadelphia incinerator.
1988
The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the development
of geothermal energy plants in the Hawaiian Islands
does not impinge on the First Amendment right to
freedom of religion among native Hawaiians. Native
Hawaiians had claimed that the development of such
plants would destroy the rainforests and interfere
with their worship of the volcanic goddess Pele.
A shipment of garbage and incinerator ash from
Philadelphia, originally rejected by both Haiti and
Panama aboard the Khian Sea, is accepted by the
Guinean government. Later reports claim that the
Chronology
119

trees on Guinea’s Kasa  Island, where the shipment is
dumped, turn brown and die.
1989
Residents of the “Cancer Alley” section of the lower
Mississippi River organize the Great Louisiana Toxic
March in an attempt to bring attention to their pol-
luted living conditions.
Representatives of a number of Indian tribes meet to
discuss issues related to natural resource extraction
and environmental issues affecting Native Americans.
This and succeeding meetings lead to the creation of
the Indigenous Environmental Network in 1990.
Las Madres del Este de Los Angeles successfully
protest the construction in their neighborhood of a
$29 million incinerator designed to burn 125,000
pounds of toxic wastes per day.
Thirty-three nations sign the Basel Convention on the
Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and Their Disposal (the “Basel treaty”). To
date, 170 nations have signed the treaty, and 63 have
ratified it.
1990
Students at the Harvard Law School, the New York
University Law School, the University of California
at Berkeley Law School, and Washington University
in St. Louis hold conferences on the issue of environ-
mental justice.
The first national gathering on environmental justice
is held at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
The attendees at that conference, the so-called Michi-
gan Coalition, issue a report titled “Race and the Inci-
dence of Environmental Health.” They send a letter
to William Reilly, administrator of the EPA, “de-
manding action on environmental risks in minority
and low-income communities and on tribal lands.” In
response to the letter, Reilly appoints the Environ-
mental Equity Workgroup.
120
Chronology
1988
(cont.)

A number of grassroots environmental justice organi-
zations, including the Gulf Coast Tenants Organiza-
tion, the Southwest Organizing Project, the United
Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice, and
the Southern Organizing Committee for Economic
and Social Justice, jointly write to the so-called “big
10” of mainstream environmental groups, expressing
their concerns about the groups’ historic lack of at-
tention to the special needs and interests of people of
color and other minorities and challenging them to
end their racist and elitist policies and practices.
New York City adopts a “fair share” act intended to
ensure that every part of the city receives a fair share
of hazardous facility sitings.
Robert D. Bullard publishes one of the classic texts on
environmental justice, Dumping in Dixie.
1991
The Dow Chemical company pays about $10 million
to relocate 110 homes near its plant in Morrisonville,
Louisiana. The company decides it is cheaper to
move residents than to invest in pollution abatement
equipment at the plant.
The First National People of Color Environmental
Leadership Summit is held in Washington, D.C. At-
tendees adopt the 17-point “Principles of Environ-
mental Justice,” which has served as a guideline for
the movement ever since.
In what is apparently the first significant contribu-
tion from the law community on the issue of environ-
mental justice, Rachel D. Godsil, a student, publishes
a commentary on the subject in the University of
Michigan Law Review. The article is titled “Remedying
Environmental Racism.”
The U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry (ATSDR) initiates a number of actions re-
lating to environmental inequities, including the
Chronology
121

Minority Environmental Health Conference and a
study of minority communities located near Na-
tional Priorities List hazardous waste landfills.
1992
The Charles Stewart Mott Foundation provides a
grant for the publication of the first edition of the
People of Color Environmental Groups Directory. It listed
more than 300 such groups.
Students at Columbia University and the Universi-
ties of Michigan and Minnesota hold conferences on
issues of environmental justice.
The EPA establishes the Office of Environmental
 Justice.
The EPA releases a report, “Environmental Equity:
Reducing Risks for All Communities.”
A report in the National Law Journal, “Unequal Protec-
tion: The Racial Divide in Environmental Law,” claims
that the EPA pursues discriminatory practices in en-
forcement of environmental laws and regulations.
A national workshop, “Equity in Environmental
Health: Research Issues and Needs,” is held at Re-
search Triangle Park, North Carolina, under the
sponsorship of the EPA, ATSDR, and the National In-
stitute for Environmental Health Sciences.
Rep. John Lewis (D-GA) and Sen. Al Gore Jr. (D-TN)
introduce the Environmental Justice Act of 1992.
Rep. Cardiss Collins (D-IL) introduces an amend-
ment to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act that would require a “community information
statement” for the construction of any new haz-
ardous facility. The statement would include a de-
scription of the demography of the proposed site as
well as a projected estimate of the impact of the facil-
ity on the area.
122
Chronology
1991
(cont.)

1993
On Earth Day, President Bill Clinton pledges that he
will issue an executive order instructing federal
agencies to take cognizance of the issues raised by
the environmental justice movement and to take ac-
tions that will reduce the problems emphasized by
that movement.
The EPA establishes the National Environmental Jus-
tice Advisory Council.
Representative Lewis and Sen. Max Baucus (D-MT)
reintroduce the Environmental Justice Act.
Hearings on the proposed promotion of the EPA to
cabinet status include discussion of environmental
justice issues.
The Texas Air Control Board and the Texas Water
Commission jointly create the statewide Task Force on
Environmental Equity and Justice to deal with basic is-
sues, such as the reasons hazardous facilities tend to
be located in minority communities, policies and pro-
cedures of the two agencies that relate to issues of en-
vironmental inequities, methods by which the
agencies can become more “user friendly” to commu-
nities of color, and data-gathering methods by which
the government might become more aware of environ-
mental inequities in hazardous facilities sitings.
Citizens of Wallace, Louisiana, in the state’s notorious
Cancer Alley, successfully defeat plans for the con-
struction of a new rayon and pulp-processing plant in
their community by Louisiana Formosa Plastic. Ten-
sas Parish had rezoned part of the town to permit
construction of the plant, but residents, concerned
about health effects of the plant’s waste products,
were able to deter Formosa’s plans to build the plant.
The Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN) is
established to provide a mechanism by which Asian
Americans and Pacific Islanders can express their
Chronology
123

concerns about environmental injustices suffered by
their communities.
Nine farmworker organizations from the United
States and the Caribbean with a combined member-
ship of about 50,000 join to create the Farmworker
Network for Economic and Environmental Justice
(FNEEJ).
Environmental justice groups file the first law-suits
under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 against
the Louisiana and Mississippi Departments of Envi-
ronmental Quality. The suits are based on the
premise that the two state agencies discriminate
against low-income and minority communities in
making environmental policies and decisions,
thereby violating the provisions of Title VI. Over the
next decades, more than a hundred such suits are
filed against state, regional, and local agencies, al-
though very few are successfully prosecuted.
1994
President Bill Clinton signs Executive Order 12898 on
Environmental Justice ordering federal agencies to
abolish and prevent policies that lead to a dispropor-
tionate distribution of environmental hazards to
communities of color or low income.
The Interagency Symposium on Health Research and
Needs to Ensure Environmental Justice, sponsored
by the EPA, is held in Arlington, Virginia.
The Federal Interagency Working Group on Environ-
mental Justice is created.
The Environmental Justice Resource Center (EJRC) at
Clark Atlanta University, in Atlanta, is created with
Robert D. Bullard as its director.
EJRC publishes the second edition of its People of
Color Environmental Groups Directory, listing more
than 600 environmental justice groups in the United
States, Puerto Rico, Canada, and Mexico.
124
Chronology
1993
(cont.)

The United Church of Christ issues an update of its
1987 report, “Toxic Waste and Race Revisited,” pro-
viding further evidence on the relationship between
race and toxic waste facilities.
The Environmental Law and Justice Center at Texas
Southern University’s Thurgood Marshall School of
Law is formed.
Researchers at the University of Massachusetts pub-
lish a study indicating that minorities and  low-
income people may not be disproportionately
targeted in the construction of waste sites and that, in
fact, such sites may actually have benefits for such
communities. The study is funded by Waste Manage-
ment, Inc., the largest solid waste disposal company
in the world.
1995
The first public meeting of the Interagency Working
Group on Environmental Justice is held at Clark At-
lanta University.
The EPA announces the award of $3 million to assist
174 community-based organizations, tribal govern-
ments, and academic institutions to address environ-
mental justice issues in their communities. The
awards reflect an increase from the $500,000 awarded
to 61 recipients in 1994.
A conference, “Environmental Justice and Trans-
portation: Building Model Partnerships,” is held in
Atlanta, under the joint sponsorship of the U.S. De-
partment of Transportation and the Clark Atlanta En-
vironmental Justice Resource Center. The conference
is a part of the department’s public outreach plan as
mandated by President Clinton’s Executive Order
12898.
Six environmental justice networks—the Asian Pa-
cific Environmental Network, Southwest Network
for Environmental and Economic Justice, Indigenous
Environmental Network, Farmworker Network for
Chronology
125

Economic and Environmental Justice, Southern Or-
ganizing Committee for Economic and Social Justice,
and Northeast Environmental Justice Network—join
to establish the Environmental Justice Fund, an alter-
native mechanism for funding grassroots environ-
mental justice organizations.
Diné CARE, a Navajo Nation environmental justice
group, prevails on the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the
U.S. Department of the Interior to develop an envi-
ronmental impact statement (EIS) and a 10-year for-
est management plan (FMP) for the Navajo Nation.
Previously, both plans had been developed by the
Peabody Coal Company, which was responsible for
extensive mining projects on the tribal reservation.
The Asian Pacific Environmental network initiates its
Laotian Organizing Project (LOP) to provide a means
by which members of the Laotian immigrant com-
munity in Richmond, California, can express their
views on environmental justice issues.
1996
The Seventh Generation Fund sponsors the  Anti-
Nuclear Summit in Albuquerque. Indigenous peo-
ples from North America and the Pacific whose lives
are affected by the production of nuclear materials
agree on a joint declaration of their approach to nu-
clear issues.
Grassroots leaders in Pensacola, Florida, convince the
EPA to relocate an entire community of 358 African
American and/or low-income households living ad-
jacent to the Escambia Wood Treatment waste treat-
ment facility in Pensacola.
The African American Environmental Justice Action
Network is formed as a collaborative activity of
about 75 community groups working for environ-
mental justice in 11 southern states.
The U.S. Institute of Medicine conducts a “toxic tour”
of the so-called Cancer Alley in Louisiana as part of
126
Chronology
1995
(cont.)

its data-gathering activities in preparation for its 1999
report Toward Environmental Justice.
1997
The People of Color and Disenfranchised Communi-
ties Environmental Health Summit is held in Wave-
land, Mississippi, to develop plans for dealing with
the disproportionate effect of nuclear materials de-
velopment activities on minority communities. As a
result of the conference, the Department of Energy
and other federal agencies begin to work with the
coalition to build more positive relationships with
such communities.
The “Healthy and Sustainable Communities Confer-
ence: Building Model Partnerships for the 21st Cen-
tury” is held in Atlanta. The conference focuses on
success stories in the environmental justice move-
ment; conducts a review of best practices and model
community initiatives; discusses successful tools,
methodologies, and strategies; and provides oppor-
tunities for workers in the field to network with each
other about common areas of interest.
The ATSDR of the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) creates the Community/Tribal Sub-
committee of the ATSDR Board of Scientific Coun-
selors to advise it on issues relating to tribal
communities that are affected by hazardous waste
sites or other facilities.
Citizens against Nuclear Trash (CANT), an organiza-
tion of grassroots activists from Forest Grove (popu-
lation 150) and Center Springs (population 100),
Louisiana, are successful in their efforts to prevent
British Nuclear Fuels from constructing a uranium-
processing plant in their neighborhood.
1998
The EPA issues its “Interim Guidance for Investigat-
ing Title VI Administrative Complaints Challenging
Permits.” The purpose of the document is to update
the EPA’s procedural and policy framework to deal
with the increasing number of Title VI complaints
Chronology
127

that allege discrimination in the environmental per-
mitting context. The guidelines meet with consider-
able opposition, and the EPA begins to revise them
almost immediately.
The EPA rules on the first two Title VI complaints
brought to its attention. In one, involving Shintech,
Inc., the case becomes moot when the company de-
cides to build its new polyvinyl plant at a different
location. In the second, involving Select Steel, the
EPA rules against the complainants. Select Steel is an
important case because it is the first decision the EPA
makes on Title VI claims.
Florida A&M University establishes the Environmen-
tal Justice and Equity Institute in Tallahassee.
The Wisconsin state legislature passes the Wisconsin
Mining Moratorium Law, placing strict conditions on
the issuance of permits for new metal sulfide mines.
The law is strongly supported by Indian tribes be-
cause of their concerns about the adverse effects of
mining on their lands and people.
1999
More than 300 black grassroots environmental justice
activists from 37 states meet in New Orleans to dis-
cuss issues of common interest. They agree to form a
new organization, which they call the Interim Na-
tional Black Environmental and Economic Justice Co-
ordinating Committee (INBEEJCC). In 2001, the
organization changes its name to the National Black
Environmental Justice Network (NBEJN).
The Institute of Medicine releases its landmark study
on environmental inequities in the United States, To-
ward Environmental Justice: Research, Education, and
Health Policy Needs.
Rep. James Clyburn (D-SC), chair of the Congres-
sional Black Caucus, convenes a conference titled
“Environmental Justice: Strengthening the Bridge be-
tween Economic Development and Sustainable Com-
128
Chronology
1998
(cont.)

munities,” held at Hilton Head, South Carolina. The
conference is hosted by the Medical University of
South Carolina’s Environmental Biosciences Program.
California state senator Hilda L. Solis introduces the
first state legislation on environmental justice to be
adopted in the United States. Since that time, the
state has developed an extensive and aggressive pro-
gram for discovering and combating environmental
inequities in California.
2000
The Environmental Justice Resource Center pub-
lishes the third edition of the People of Color Environ-
mental Groups Directory, listing more than 1,000
environmental justice groups in the United States,
Puerto Rico, Canada, and Mexico.
The Indigenous Environmental Network and Project
Underground join forces to establish the Indigenous
Mining Campaign Project, an effort to train indige-
nous people in dealing with mining issues on tribal
lands.
The National Environmental Policy Commission
(NEPC) is created, largely as a result of recommenda-
tions made by the Congressional Black Caucus (CBC)
Environmental Justice Braintrust, led by Representa-
tive Clyburn (D-SC). The purpose of the NEPC is to
develop an alternative environmental policy that
takes into account environmental justice, human
health, economic considerations, and other impor-
tant factors.
The North Carolina General Assembly allocates $7
million to begin cleanup of the PCB landfill in War-
ren County, the environmental inequity issue that
marked the beginning of the environmental justice
movement in 1982.
2001
Greenpeace sponsors the “Celebrity Tour of Cancer
Alley,” which features actor Mike Farrell, Rep. Max-
ine Waters (D-CA), and writer Alice Walker. The tour
Chronology
129

revisits a number of infamous sites on the lower Mis-
sissippi River that have been denuded and devas-
tated by industrial pollution and hazardous wastes.
A New Jersey district court rules in South Camden Cit-
izens in Action v. NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
that compliance with environmental laws is not
equivalent to compliance with civil rights laws. The
court rules that the state of New Jersey has violated
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The case is sig-
nificant because it is the first instance in which a
complaint of this kind has prevailed. The district
court’s decision is later overturned by the Third Cir-
cuit of Appeals.
After nearly six years of litigation, the Monsanto
Company agrees to a $42.8 million settlement with an
environmental justice group called the Sweet Val-
ley/Cobb Town Environmental Task Force, repre-
senting residents of a neighborhood of primarily
black and low-income people adjacent to Monsanto’s
Solutia PCB plant. The production of PCBs was out-
lawed in the United States in 1978, and the Monsanto
plant was only one of two facilities in the country
where the chemicals were being made.
2002
After more than four decades of protests, negotia-
tions, and litigation, the Shell chemical company
agrees to pay for the relocation of more than 100
homeowners in the town of Norco, Louisiana. Some
homes had been located less than 15 feet from the
company’s plant, and residents blamed the high rate
of cancer and other disorders on exposure to emis-
sions from the facility.
A total of 2,500 tons of toxic incinerator ash are
buried at the Mountain View Reclamation Landfill,
in Franklin County, Pennsylvania. The ash was part
of a shipment of municipal wastes originally shipped
from Pennsylvania on the freighter Khian Sea in 1986
for disposal in the Bahamas. When the Bahamian
government, the Dominican Republic, Honduras,
130
Chronology
2001
(cont.)

Panama, Bermuda, Guinea Bissau, and the Dutch
Antilles all refused to accept the wastes, the Khian Sea
dumped 4,000 tons of the wastes on a beach near
 Gonaives, Haiti. It proclaimed that the wastes were
fertilizer. Now, 14 years later, Waste Management,
Inc., recovers the 2,500 tons of ash and returns it to
the United States, where it is eventually buried in
Pennsylvania.
The Second People of Color Environmental Leader-
ship Summit is held in Washington, D.C. More than
1,400 activists attend the conference.
A coalition of environmental justice groups consist-
ing of the Black Leadership Forum, the Southern Or-
ganizing Committee for Economic and Social Justice,
the Georgia Coalition for the Peoples’ Agenda, and
Clear the Air release a report, Air of Injustice: African
Americans and Power Plant Pollution, on the differen-
tial effects on African American communities of air
pollution from power generation.
The University of Michigan School of Natural Re-
sources and Environment sponsors a conference ti-
tled “Latinos and the Environment.”
2003
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights issues its re-
port, Not in My Backyard: Executive Order 12898 and
Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice.
The report attempts to assess the effectiveness with
which four federal agencies—the EPA, the U.S. De-
partment of the Interior, the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. De-
partment of Transportation—have implemented Ex-
ecutive Order 12898 and Title VI of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act. They find that the four agencies have a
relatively poor record in this regard.
The state of North Carolina completes its cleanup of
the PCB toxic waste site in Warren County, where the
environmental justice movement began more than
two decades earlier.
Chronology
131

The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation issues a new policy that environmental
justice concerns are to be included in decisions on the
issuance of permits.
The University of Michigan School of Natural Re-
sources and Environment establishes the Minority
Environmental Leadership Development Initiative
(MELDI) to enhance the leadership and career devel-
opment opportunities available to minority students
and minority environmental professionals.
The University of Michigan School of Natural Re-
sources and Environment sponsors the conference
“Environmental Justice and Climate Change.”
2004
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
publishes its policy on the treatment of environmen-
tal justice issues in the issuance of licenses for nu-
clear power plants. Critics suggest that the NRC
policies will actually limit the attention it pays to
 environmental justice issues in general and to Execu-
tive Order 12898 in particular.
The Special Committee on Environmental Justice of
the American Bar Association (ABA) publishes Envi-
ronmental Justice for All: A Fifty-State Survey of Legisla-
tion, Policies, and Initiatives, summarizing statutes,
policies, and other legal rulings on environmental jus-
tice. The report is also made available on the ABA’s
Web site, where it is updated on a regular basis.
The Office of Inspector General of the EPA issues its
report, EPA Needs to Conduct Environmental Justice Re-
views of Its Programs, Policies, and Activities, summa-
rizing the agency’s progress (or lack of it) in dealing
with issues of environmental inequity.
The District Court for the Eastern District of Texas
finds “a reasonable trier of fact to find racially dis-
criminatory intent” in the city of Dallas’s refusal to
close down an illegal hazardous waste disposal site
132
Chronology
2003
(cont.)

in a neighborhood of predominantly black residents
(Cox v. City of Dallas).
Parents and the Detroit Public Schools reach an
agreement on a pending case concerning the con-
struction of a public school on an industrial site. The
school system agrees to develop a system to ensure
the safety of the site and a set of mechanisms permit-
ting parents to monitor that safety (Lucero v. Detroit
Public Schools).
2005
The EPA issues the document “Draft Final Title VI
Public Involvement Guidance for EPA Assistance Re-
cipients Administering Environmental Permitting
Programs (Recipient Guidance).” The document is
designed to provide guidance for personnel who ad-
minister environmental permitting programs and en-
hance public participation in those programs.
White residents of Dallas sue the city, claiming envi-
ronmental racism in the construction of public hous-
ing in their neighborhood. They claim that the city’s
choice of their neighborhood for public housing was
racially motivated and violated their equal protection
rights under the Fourteenth Amendment. The  local
court disagrees with this reasoning and rejects the
residents’ suit, a decision that is later affirmed by the
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals (Walker v. City of
Mesquite).
The EPA issues the “Draft Framework for Integrating
Environmental Justice” and the “Draft Environmen-
tal Justice Strategic Plan Outline,” which together
form the foundation for the agency’s Environmental
Justice Strategic Plan for 2006–2011. The EPA plan is
met with severe and widespread complaints, and
more than 45 organizations interested in environ-
mentalism and environmental justice sign a letter ob-
jecting to the plans.
The GAO publishes Environmental Justice: EPA Should
Devote More Attention to Environmental Justice When
Chronology
133

Developing Clean Air Rules, a report on the EPA’s im-
plementation of Executive Order 12898 with regard
to air quality. The GAO concludes that the EPA has
not been sufficiently vigilant in following the provi-
sions of the order.
The California legislature passes a bill requiring local
governments to include consideration of environ-
mental justice issues in the development of their gen-
eral plans.
New Mexico governor Bill Richardson signs an execu-
tive order requiring all state departments, boards, and
commissions to provide “meaningful opportunities”
for local communities to be involved in decisions af-
fecting minority and low-income communities.
2006
Warren County begins plans for the construction of
Justice Park at the site of the former PCB waste dis-
posal dump, where the environmental justice move-
ment began in 1982.
The NRC Licensing Board rules that a claim of envi-
ronmental inequity filed by neighbors of the Pal-
isades Nuclear Plant near South Haven, Michigan, is
not valid and that the plant is eligible for relicensing.
The EPA issues its “Title VI Public Involvement
Guidance for EPA Assistance Recipients Administer-
ing Environmental Permitting Programs.” The pur-
pose of the document is to assist licensing agencies in
paying proper attention to issues of environmental
justice so that they will not eventually be exposed to
Title VI claims by affected groups.
The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006
requires regulators to consider how emissions control
systems may affect low-income and minority com-
munities disproportionately.
The nonpartisan think tank Resources for the Future
(RF) issues a report suggesting that grants issued by
134
Chronology
2005
(cont.)

the EPA’s Office of Environmental Justice (OEJ) tend
to go to communities with large minority and low-in-
come populations, but that grant recipients tend to be
exposed to relatively low concentrations of haz-
ardous materials. RF recommends that the OEJ
reevaluate the criteria under which it issues its grants
to remedy this problem.
The NRC rules that five environmental justice groups
objecting to the construction of the new Vogtle Elec-
tric Generating Plant near Waynesboro, Georgia,
have not provided evidence that minority and low-
income communities in the area will be dispropor-
tionately affected by the plant’s operation.
A coalition of more than 70 organizations concerned
with issues of environmental justice initiate the Na-
tional Environmental Justice Tour for All, with simul-
taneous trips in the Northeast, the South, and the
West to highlight the effects of environmental racism
on poor and minority communities around the
United States.
2007
An environmental justice conference is held at
Howard University in Washington, D.C., “to explore
new ideas and new approaches to environmental jus-
tice.” A similar conference is held in 2008.
Michigan governor Jennifer Granholm signs an execu-
tive directive requiring the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality to develop and implement a
state environmental justice plan that, among other
things, ensures that all state agencies and departments
integrate the principles of environmental justice into
their decision-making procedures and activities.
A coalition of environmental justice groups in Los An-
geles defeats efforts to approve the drilling of 24 new
oil wells in the Baldwin Hills neighborhood of the
city. Members of the same coalition had earlier pre-
vented the construction of a power plant (2001) and a
garbage dump (2003) in the area. The city  finally
Chronology
135

agrees to build a two-square-mile park in Baldwin
Hills, which has one of the most heavily concentrated
populations of blacks in the city.
2008
The Oregon Task Force on Environmental Justice, cre-
ated by the legislature in 2007, begins operation. Its
responsibilities include ensuring that all 14 of the
state’s natural resources departments and commis-
sions include procedures for input by minority, low-
income, and other affected groups on issues that may
involve disproportionate environmental effects on
projects for which the agencies are responsible.
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-NY) introduces the
latest version of the federal environmental justice
bill, S. 2549. The bill has been introduced, but never
acted upon, in every legislative session for more than
a decade.
136
Chronology
2007
(cont.)

5
Biographical Sketches
T
he biographical history of the environmental justice move-
ment is quite different in some ways from that of other major
movements, such as the traditional environmental and civil
rights movements. The environmental justice movement is
largely decentralized, manifested in the activities of dozens or
hundreds of local groups, rather than centralized, operating un-
der the direction of large national organizations. As a result,
many of the real heroes and heroines of the environmental justice
movement are organizers or chairpersons of town, county, vil-
lage, or parish organizations; they are people whose names are
probably not well known outside of the environmental justice
movement itself.
To be fair, this chapter should probably contain biographical
sketches of many of those who have led small, local groups as
well as those whose names are more widely known. Since space
does not permit the inclusion of all of those whose names belong
here, the chapter provides a sample of women and men who
have made significant contributions to the environmental justice
movement, at whatever level they may have worked.
Dana Ann Alston (1951–1999)
Among her many accomplishments, Dana Ann Alston is per-
haps best remembered for an inspiring speech at the 1991 First
National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit.
In that speech, she challenged mainstream environmental
groups to expand their view of environmental issues to include
137

the  problem of environmental inequities. Modern-day leaders
of the environmental justice movement continue to refer to and
quote from that speech. Only a year later, Alston led a delega-
tion of leaders from the environmental justice movement at the
1992 Earth Summit and Global Forum meeting in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. There she spoke fervently about the interna-
tional character of environmental racism and the need for envi-
ronmentalists from all parts of the world to join together to deal
with the problem. In 2002, the Bannerman Fellowship Program
was renamed the Alston/Bannerman Fellowship Program in
her honor. The program was founded in 1988 to provide sup-
port for individuals involved in organizing low-income and
minority people for social causes. Alston had, herself, been a
Bannerman Fellow in 1992.
Alston was born in Harlem on December 18, 1951, to Garlen
and Betty Alston. She attended Wheelock College in Boston,
where she served as president of the Black Student Organization
and worked to increase the number of black students and faculty
at the college. After receiving her BS from Wheelock in 1973, she
continued her studies at the Columbia University School of Pub-
lic Health, where she received her master’s degree in occupa-
tional and environmental health in 1979.
One of Alston’s first jobs was with Rural America, an orga-
nization formed to deal with farmworker exposure to pesticides.
At the time, there was wide concern about the possible health
risks posed by pesticide residues remaining on foods but rela-
tively little attention to the hazards posed to workers in the field
who were exposed to those pesticides. Partly as a result of this
experience, Alston began to formulate a new understanding of
environmentalism, one that does not focus as much on recre-
ational and wildlife concerns as on the harmful effects of pollu-
tion on minority and low-income communities. Alston later held
a number of positions with groups interested in environmental
justice, including the National Black United Fund, where she
served as president from 1985 to 1987; the Southern Rural
Women’s Network; the TransAfrica Forum; the Panos Institute;
and the National Committee for Responsive Philanthropy. In
1991, she was recruited to serve as program officer for the envi-
ronment at the Public Welfare Foundation, a philanthropic orga-
nization formed to support and finance a wide range of social
groups and activities. Alston held that post until her death on
138
Biographical Sketches

August 7, 1999, in San Francisco from kidney disease and com-
plications from a stroke.
Bunyan Bryant (1935–)
An important conference on environmental justice was the 1990
Conference on Race and the Incidence of Environmental Haz-
ards. It was sponsored by and held at the University of Michigan
in Ann Arbor. A co-organizer of the conference was Dr. Bunyan
Bryant. One consequence of the Michigan Conference was a se-
ries of high-level policy discussions with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) administrators William K. Reilly and
Carol Browner—discussions to which Bryant was an important
contributor.
Bryant has also been involved in a number of other seminal
meetings and organizations from which has grown the modern
environmental justice movement. For three years, he was cofacil-
itator of the Martin Luther King Planning Committee at the Uni-
versity of Michigan, where workshops on environmental justice
were an integral part of celebrating Dr. King’s legacy. Bryant
served on the Advisory Committee of the First National People
of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in 1991, was cofacil-
itator of the Symposium for Health Research and Needs to En-
sure Environmental Justice in 1994, and was a member of the
EPA’s National Environmental Justice Advisory Council in
1994–1995. He has also served on dozens of boards, commis-
sions, caucuses, committees, and task forces dealing with issues
related to environmental justice.
Bryant was born in Little Rock, Arkansas, on March 6, 1935.
He received his BS degree in social science from Eastern Michi-
gan University in 1958, his MSW in social work from the Univer-
sity of Michigan in 1965, and his PhD in education, also from the
University of Michigan, in 1970. Bryant did his postdoctoral re-
search in town and country planning at the University of Man-
chester in England in 1973. He then returned to the University of
Michigan as assistant professor in the School of Natural Re-
sources and Environment. He has remained at Michigan ever
since and currently holds a joint appointment as professor in the
School of Natural Resources and Environment and at the Center
of African-American and African Studies.
Biographical Sketches  139

Bryant is author, coauthor, and editor of more than 60 books
and articles, including Environmental Advocacy: Concepts, Issues,
and Dilemma; Race and the Incidence of Environmental Hazards: A
Time for Discourse (with Paul Mohai); Environmental Justice: Issues,
Policies, and Solutions; and Social Environmental Change. He has re-
ceived a number of honors and awards, including the first Damu
Smith Power-of-One Environmental Justice Award of the Deep
South Center for Environmental Justice (2006), the Ann Bonar
Award for Gray Activism (2006), and the University of Michigan
Regents’ Award for Distinguished Public Service (2005).
Robert Bullard (1946–)
One of the most prolific and articulate writers in the field of envi-
ronmental justice is Robert Doyle Bullard, currently Ware Distin-
guished Professor of sociology and director of the Environmental
Justice Resource Center at Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta.
Bullard’s book Dumping in Dixie (1990, 2000, 2004) is regarded by
some authorities as one of the most powerful statements on the
issue of environmental justice yet to be written. Among his most
recent books are The Quest for Environmental Justice: Human Rights
and the Politics of Pollution (2005); Growing Smarter: Achieving Liv-
able Communities, Environmental Justice, and Regional Equity (2007);
and The Black Metropolis in the Twenty-First Century: Race, Power,
and the Politics of Place (2007). For his many contributions to the
field, Bullard is often called the father of the environmental jus-
tice movement.
Bullard was born in Elba, Alabama, on December 21, 1946.
He received his bachelor’s degree in government from Al-
abama A&M University in 1968, his MA in sociology from At-
lanta University in 1972, and his PhD in the same field from
Iowa State University in 1976. He also worked as an urban
planner in Des Moines, Iowa (1971–1974), administrative assis-
tant in the Office of Minority Affairs at Iowa State (1974–1975),
research coordinator in Polk County, Iowa, and director of re-
search at the Urban Research Center of Texas Southern Univer-
sity (1976–1978).
In 1976, Bullard was appointed assistant professor at Texas
Southern University, and, in 1980, he was promoted to associate
professor. He went on to hold a series of academic appointments
at Rice University (1980), the University of Tennessee (1987–1988),
140
Biographical Sketches

the University of California at Berkeley (1988–1989), the Univer-
sity of California at Riverside (1989–1993), and the University of
California at Los Angeles (1993–1994). In 1994, Bullard was ap-
pointed to his current position at Clark Atlanta University.
Bullard has twice won awards from the Gustavus Myers
Center for the Study of Human Rights in North America for his
books, the first for In Search of the New South: The Black Urban Ex-
perience in the 1970s and 1980s in 1980, and the second for Residen-
tial Apartheid: The American Legacy (edited with J. Eugene Grigsby
III and Charles Lee) in 1996. In August 2007, Bullard was pre-
sented with the William Foote Whyte Distinguished Career
Award by the American Sociological Association’s Section on So-
ciological Practice for his contributions to the founding and de-
velopment of the environmental justice movement.
Dollie Burwell (1948 –)
Dollie Burwell was a leader of the protests in Warren County,
North Carolina, during the late 1970s and early 1980s against the
dumping of 32,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated with poly-
chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). When that effort was unsuccessful,
she later spearheaded efforts to clean up the dump area and re-
store it to its natural condition, a campaign that eventually was
successful. Nearly 15 years after the initial dumping in Warren
County, the state of North Carolina allocated $1 million to study
the toxicity of soils at the Warren County dump. As a result of
that study and continued pressure by residents of the county, the
state then allocated an additional $15 million for cleanup of the
dump. That task was finally completed, and the former dump has
become clean enough that it is now used as a recreational site.
Burwell was born in Warren County in 1948. She became in-
terested in politics early in life and worked on a voter registra-
tion project at the age of 12. Although she came from a very poor
family, she was determined to have a college education and took
courses at Durham College and Shaw University. In 1971, she
married William J. Burwell and moved with him to an army post
at West Point. There she continued her political activities by or-
ganizing couples of color who had been denied government
housing because of their race. The Burwells eventually returned
to Warren County, where Dollie became involved in the dump-
ing protest, while also raising her two young daughters. The
Biographical Sketches  141

older of those daughters, Kimberly, has also become an activist
in the environmental justice movement.
Besides the four-decade battle in Warren County, Burwell
has worked on other issues of environmental justice and human
and civil rights problems. In addition to her private efforts, 
she has been involved as an aide to Rep. Eva Clayton (D-NC;
1992–2003) and, later, to Rep. G. K. Butterfield Jr. (D-NC; 2004–
present). In these posts, she has served as a link between the
Congress member and his or her constituents, has represented
the Congress member at various events within the district, has
been a caseworker in three towns in the district, and has served
as the Congress member’s field representative in the towns of
Rocky Mount, Granville, Halifax, Person, and Vance.
César Chávez (1927–1993)
By some standards, the senior member of the environmental jus-
tice movement could be considered to be César Estrada Chávez.
Decades before the Warren County protests, the Michigan Con-
ference, or the First National People of Color Environmental
Leadership Summit, Chávez was working and organizing to
deal with environmental issues (as well as other kinds of prob-
lems) faced by farmworkers.
Chávez was born on a small farm near Yuma, Arizona, on
March 31, 1927. His family lost its farm during the Great Depres-
sion, and they joined the exodus to California, looking for a bet-
ter life. That “better life” turned out to be that of migrant
workers, moving from field to field when and if work was avail-
able. Chávez attended more than 30 different schools before
dropping out to continue working full time in the fields. His
work there was interrupted briefly when he served in the U.S.
Navy during the last two years of World War II.
Chávez’s political career began in 1952, when he was invited
to become first a volunteer and then a paid staff member with
the Community Service Organization (CSO), an organization cre-
ated by activist Saul Alinsky (1909–1972) to help the poor and
politically powerless develop their own political organizations.
Chávez worked his way up the ranks in the CSO until becoming
general director in 1958. By that time, however, the organization
was beginning to change in character, losing contact with its
grassroots origins, according to Chávez. He thus resigned from
142
Biographical Sketches

the CSO in 1962, withdrew his savings from the bank, and cre-
ated the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA).
The NFWA grew slowly at first as Chávez organized farm-
workers one field at a time, one community after another. It
recorded a few small victories in the San Joaquin and Imperial val-
leys of California, winning pay increases, for example, for workers
in the Delano area in 1965. The major breakthrough for the NFWA
came in 1968, however, when migrant grape pickers in the Delano
area went on strike for higher wages. Chávez seized the opportu-
nity to make the strike a national campaign for the workers and
for the NFWA itself. He sought the aid and cooperation of major
liberal establishments throughout the United States, including
civil rights groups, religious organizations, major newspapers and
magazines, and political leaders such as Robert F. Kennedy. The
grape strike continued in one form or another for three decades,
winning a number of concessions for workers along the way and
establishing the NFWA (later renamed the United Farm Workers
of America, or UFWA) as the most powerful representative for
farmworkers, a position it held for many years.
Among Chávez’s specific contributions within the UFWA
were the establishment of a burial insurance program (1963); a
union newspaper, El Malcriado; the Farm Workers Credit Union
(1963); a theater group, El Teatro Campesino (1965); an artists
group, El Taller Gráfico (1965); the National Farm Workers Ser-
vice Center (1966); the Robert F. Kennedy Farm Worker Medical
Fund (1967); the National Farm Workers Health Group (1969);
Agbayani Village, a farmworker retirement community (1969);
and the Juan de la Cruz Farm Workers Pension Fund (1973).
Chávez died in San Luis, Arizona, on April 23, 1993. His birth-
day has become a holiday in eight states—Arizona, California, Col-
orado, Michigan, New Mexico, Texas, Utah, and  Wisconsin—
and a number of schools, libraries, streets, parks, and other facili-
ties have been named in his honor. On August 8, 1994, President
Bill Clinton awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthu-
mously to Chávez.
Torri Estrada (1969–)
Torri Estrada is currently a program officer at the Marin Commu-
nity Foundation, where he is responsible for determining the or-
ganization’s grant awards in the area of the environment. He has
Biographical Sketches  143

a long and impressive history of work in the field of environ-
mental justice. He earned his BA in sociocultural and ecological
anthropology (1991) and his BS in environmental science, policy,
and management (1992), both at the University of California at
Berkeley; his AA in labor studies from the City College of San
Francisco in 1994; and his MS in natural resources policy and en-
vironmental sociology from the University of Michigan in 2002.
Estrada’s work résumé is extensive. It includes more than a
dozen positions over the past two decades, including that of re-
search investigator at the Pacific Energy and Resources Center in
Sausalito, California; environmental educator with the East Bay
Municipal Utility District in Oakland, California; research ana-
lyst for the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund in San Francisco; me-
diation consultant at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service in Oakland; project investigator at the Native American
Renewable Energy Evaluation Project in Berkeley, California;
project director at the Urban Habitat Program in San Francisco;
consultant at the Environmental Justice Coalition on Water in
Oakland; senior policy fellow at the Latino Issues Form in San
Francisco; and program officer at the Unitarian Universalist
Veatch Program at Shelter Rock in Manhasset, New York.
Estrada was born in Montclair, California, on November 13,
1969. He has been honored with a School of Natural Resources
and Environment Merit Award (1995–1997), a Rackham Merit
Fellowship from the University of Michigan (1995–1998), a Wa-
ter Education Foundation Fellowship (1998–1999), an Environ-
mental Leadership Fellowship (1999–2002), and a New Voices
Fellowship (2001–2003).
Margie Eugene-Richard (dates unknown)
Margie Eugene-Richard is a longtime activist in the environmen-
tal justice movement, working on health issues arising out of ex-
posure to hazardous materials in Louisiana’s notorious “Cancer
Alley.”
In the 1970s, Eugene-Richard was a middle school teacher
living in Norco, Louisiana, in Cancer Alley. The region’s name
came from the extensive land, air, and water pollution produced
by numerous petroleum and chemical plants in the area. Eugene-
Richard, in fact, had grown up in a house located less than 25 feet
from a 15-acre Shell Oil chemical plant. The predominance of
144
Biographical Sketches

 industry in the area is reflected in the name of the town itself, an
acronym for the New Orleans Refinery Company. The Old Dia-
mond community in which Eugene-Richard grew up is trapped
between Shell refineries on two sides. Residents have long been
accustomed to explosions, toxic spills, and all forms of pollution
from the two facilities.
Eugene-Richard says that a defining event in her life oc-
curred in 1973, when an exploding pipeline blew one house off
its foundations and killed an elderly woman and a young boy.
From that point on, she realized that community action was nec-
essary to combat the dangers posed by Shell and other industrial
operations in the area. She planned workshops for local citizens
and developed methods for monitoring pollution in the commu-
nity. One especially effective program was the Bucket Brigade, a
system by which local citizens could capture air pollutants in
“buckets,” allowing them to identify and quantify the environ-
mental risks to which they were being exposed. In 1989, Eugene-
Richard founded Concerned Citizens of Norco (CCN) to
strengthen and formalize the battles against Shell.
Those battles went on for more than a decade before the
company agreed to a number of actions to reduce its impact on
the surrounding environment. It agreed to pay relocation costs
for citizens of Norco closest to its outer boundaries, to reduce its
emissions by 30 percent, to contribute $5 million to a community
development fund, and to develop an emergency evacuation
plan and system in case of a major disaster. Since the Shell agree-
ment was signed in 2000, the company has bought up more than
200 of the 225 residential lots in Norco.
In addition to her work with CCN, Eugene-Richard has testi-
fied at hearings before the U.S. Congress and the UN Human
Rights Commission and has spoken before the World Conference
against Racism in 2001 and the World Summit on Sustainable De-
velopment in 2002. In 2004, she became the first African American
to win the prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize honoring
grassroots environmental heroes. The prize carries with it a cash
award of $150,000 and a bronze sculpture called the Ouroboros.
Jay Feldman (1953–)
Jay Feldman has been a prominent spokesman for issues involv-
ing farmworker health issues for more than three decades.
Biographical Sketches  145

 Feldman was one of the founders of the National Coalition
against the Misuse of Pesticides (NCAMP) in 1981 and has
served as its executive director ever since. In 1998, NCAMP
changed its name to Beyond Pesticides to better reflect the orga-
nization’s mission and goals. In his role as executive director,
Feldman provides policy direction and overall coordination of
Beyond Pesticide’s activities in controlling the use of pesticides
and promoting nonsynthetic chemical alternatives. He is also
editor of the organization’s newsletter, “Pesticides and You.”
Jay Feldman was born in Brooklyn, New York, on May 9,
1953. He earned his BA in political science from Grinnell Col-
lege, in Grinnell, Iowa, in 1975 and his MA in urban and re-
gional planning from Virginia Polytechnic Institute (now
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University) in 1977. In
1974, he was a researcher for Associated Colleges of the Mid-
west in San Jose, Costa Rica. From 1977 to 1979, Feldman
worked as a rural health specialist at Rural America, a national
advocacy organization for people living in small towns and
rural areas, and from 1979 to 1981 he was director of the organi-
zation’s health programs.
Among Feldman’s publications are Rural Health Directory: A
Resource Guide to Nongovernmental Organizations Involved in Rural
Health (1978), Pesticide Use and Misuse: Farmworkers and Small
Farmers Speak on the Problem (1980), and Voices for Pesticide Reform:
The Case for Safe Practices and Sound Policy (with Sandra Schubert
and Terry Shistar, editors, 1996). He has also written for a num-
ber of newspapers and journals, including the New York Times,
Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, and Environmental Law Re-
porter. Feldman is also a popular guest on a number of radio and
television programs, including Nightline, The NewsHour with Jim
Lehrer, Good Morning America, and The Today Show.
Deeohn Ferris (1953–)
For nearly three decades, Deeohn Ferris has worked on issues of
environmental law. During the last quarter of that period, she
has focused on the topic of environmental justice.
Ferris was born on November 3, 1953, in Norwalk, Ohio. She
received her BA from Ashland University in Ashland, Ohio, and
her JD from Georgetown University Law Center in 1978. Her
146
Biographical Sketches

first job was with the EPA, where she worked as  attorney-
advisor in the Office of Legislation (1979–1983), as assistant en-
forcement counsel in the Office of Enforcement and Compliance
Monitoring (1983–1984), and as director of the Special Litigation
Division (1984–1986). Her key accomplishments at EPA included
handling civil litigation aimed at fostering compliance with
chemical assessment and control programs, implementing the
first full-scale environmental and management audits, and
demonstrating effective new federal compliance tools.
From 1986 to 1989, Ferris worked as environmental counsel
on liability and toxic tort issues at the American Insurance Asso-
ciation. She then moved to the National Wildlife Federation
(NWF) as director of environmental quality from 1990 to 1992. At
NWF, she published a quarterly newsletter, “The Gene Ex-
changed”; coauthored a national report, Waters at Risk: Keeping
Clean Waters Clean; and was awarded the Charlie Shaw Award
for exceptional contributions to the shared mission of NWF and
its affiliates.
In 1992, Ferris accepted a position as program director of the
Environmental Justice Project at the Lawyer’s Committee for
Civil Rights under Law. While there, she organized and
launched a national environmental justice project that provides
legal and technical assistance to clients and advocates for legisla-
tion and regulation. During this period, she was also appointed
to the EPA Federal Environmental Justice Advisory Committee.
In 1993, Ferris conceptualized the executive order on environ-
mental justice issued by President Bill Clinton in 1994.
In 1994, Ferris was appointed director of the newly created
Alliance for the Washington Office on Environmental Justice,
an international collaborative of community-based regional
networks and organizations. She is currently president of both
the Sustainable Community Development Group, Inc., a not-
for-profit corporation dedicated to metropolitan sustainability,
environmental health, smart growth, and regional equity, and
Global Environmental Resources, Inc., working to “help clients
reach a goal of sustainable development by taking into account
the causes and effects of environmental, health and economic
factors.” Ferris is a popular speaker on law, public health, and
policy and has presented addresses and worked with commu-
nities in Brazil, China, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nepal,
South Africa, Turkey, and Mexico.
Biographical Sketches  147

LaDonna Harris (1931–)
For more than 40 years, LaDonna Vita Tabbytite Harris has been
an advocate for the rights of Native Americans. One of her earli-
est accomplishments was the founding in 1965 of Oklahomans for
Indian Opportunity (OIO), the first intertribal organization in the
state. In 1970, she established a national organization similar to
OIO, Americans for Indian Opportunity (AIO), an organization
for which she has served as president for nearly four decades.
Harris was born in Temple, Oklahoma, on February 15,
1931, to Lily Tabbytite, a member of the Comanche tribe, and
Donald Crawford, of Irish heritage. Her parents separated when
LaDonna was still a young child, and she was raised by her ma-
ternal grandparents on a small farm outside Walters, Oklahoma.
She spoke only her native Comanche language until she entered
elementary school. Since she inherited some of her father’s
white skin color, she experienced less racism while growing up
than did most Native Americans at the time. She had no formal
education beyond high school, from which she graduated in
1949, but she has received several honorary degrees from insti-
tutions such as the University of Oklahoma, Northern Michigan
University, Antioch College, Dartmouth College, and Mary-
mount College of New York. While still a senior in high school,
she married her high school sweetheart, Fred Harris, who was
later to serve in the Oklahoma State Senate at the age of 25. Har-
ris was also elected to the U.S. Senate from Oklahoma in 1964.
He served in the Senate until 1972, when he decided to run for
president of the United States, a campaign that was eventually
unsuccessful.
In addition to her work with OIO and AIO, Harris has been
involved in the establishment of the Council for Energy Resource
Tribes, the National Women’s Political Caucus, the National In-
dian Housing Council, the National Indian Business Association,
and the National Tribal Council on the Environment. In recent
years, much of Harris’s work has focused on the AIO’s Ambas-
sador’s Program, designed to foster leadership growth within
Native American communities. That program has now been ex-
tended to include indigenous communities in other parts of the
world, such as New Zealand and Bolivia.
Among the many awards Harris has received are the Out-
standing American Citizen Award, the United Nations Peace
Medal, the Ladies’ Home Journal Woman of the Year Award, the
148
Biographical Sketches

Human Rights Award of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, and the
Award for Public Service of Theta Sigma Phi, National Journal-
ism Fraternity for Women. Harris’s publications include To Gov-
ern and to Be Governed: American Indian Tribal Governments at the
Crossroads (1983), Survey of American Indian Environmental Protec-
tion Needs on Reservation Lands (1986), Partnerships for the Protec-
tion of Tribal Environments (1991), and LaDonna Harris: A
Comanche Life (2000). In 1980, Harris was nominated for vice
president of the United States by the short-lived Citizens Party.
Hazel Johnson (dates unknown)
In 1969, Hazel Johnson’s husband died of lung cancer at the age
of 41. Instead of just acknowledging her sorrow and going on
with her life, Johnson began to question the cause of death of
such a young man. The more she asked, the more she learned
about the unhealthy housing development—Altgeld Gardens—
in which she lived. She soon found that Altgeld Gardens was at
the center of a “toxic doughnut,” with the highest incidence of
cancer of any neighborhood in Chicago. The toxic doughnut con-
sisted of a ring more than 140 miles in circumference of incinera-
tors, water and sewage treatment plants, steel mills, paint
factories, scrap yards, more than 50 landfills, and 3 abandoned
wastewater lagoons. The effluents from these facilities appeared
to be responsible for the astonishing number of health prob-
lems—asthma and other allergies, excessive nosebleeds and
headaches, dizziness and fainting spells, and high rates of can-
cer—recorded for Altgeld Gardens.
By 1979, Johnson had begun to organize her community to
learn more about the health problems they faced and to do some-
thing about those problems. The organization she formed,
People for Community Recovery (PCR), was eventually incorpo-
rated in 1982. Conducting door-to-door surveys of health issues
among local residents, PCR volunteers found that more than 90
percent of the 10,000 residents of Altgeld Gardens reported one
health problem or more. When Johnson presented these results
to city officials, they rejected pending plans for the construction
of a new chemical waste incinerator in the area and decided not
to expand existing landfills, as they had planned to do.
Johnson and the PCR have accomplished a number of other
successes. They organized a campaign to have asbestos removed
Biographical Sketches  149

from resident apartments and local schools, developed a pro-
gram on lead poisoning in the community, created a special
study group to deal with a sodium oxide spill in the community,
monitored the cleanup of PCB contamination in the area, and
sponsored a number of regional conferences on environmental
justice issues. Today, Johnson has ceded many leadership re-
sponsibilities at PCR to her daughter, Cheryl.
For her many accomplishments, Hazel Johnson was named
the “mother of the environmental justice movement” at the First
National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in
1991. In December 2006, Illinois lieutenant governor Pat Quinn
awarded Johnson a state Environmental Hero Award in recogni-
tion of her commitment to environmental health and protection.
Johnson has also accepted the President’s Environment and Con-
servation Challenge Award on behalf of PCR from President
George H. W. Bush.
Pamela Tau Lee (1948–)
Pamela Tau Lee has been coordinator of public programs in the
Labor Occupational Health Program (LOHP) in the School of
Public Health at the University of California at Berkeley since
1990. In that position, she is responsible for training, technical as-
sistance, materials development, and planning of conferences on
occupational health issues. She also coordinates outreach efforts
to labor, community, and environmental justice groups.
Lee was born in San Francisco in 1948. She attended Califor-
nia State University at Hayward (CSU-H; now California State
University, East Bay), from which she received her bachelor’s de-
gree in sociology in 1969. She then attended a Teacher Corps
training program at the Secondary Education Teacher Post Grad-
uate Program at CSU-H. (The Teacher Corps was created in 1965
to provide teachers for underserved low-income areas through-
out the nation.) As part of this program, she did her student
teaching in nearby Oakland, where she was first introduced to
problems faced by inner-city minority adults and children. She
later said that the experience was very influential in her life be-
cause “[t]here was so much activism then.” As a result, she her-
self became involved in efforts to identify and deal with the
issues faced by inner-city minorities.
150
Biographical Sketches

After completing her Teacher Corps training, Lee returned
to San Francisco, where she worked as a volunteer for the Chi-
nese Progressive Organization. There she saw firsthand the
health issues endemic among members of the Asian American
community, who were often required to work at backbreaking
jobs in environmentally hazardous conditions. In connection
with her own job as a hotel maid, she eventually became in-
volved as a job steward with the Hotel Employees/Restaurant
Employees Union Local 2 AFL-CIO in San Francisco. Over time,
she was promoted to higher positions until she was named staff
director of the union in 1985. She held that post until moving to
LOHP in 1990.
Since 1990, Lee has been involved in a number of local, re-
gional, and national conferences on environmental justice. At the
1991 People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, she
and about 30 other Asian and Pacific Island Americans realized
that a formal organization was needed to deal with specific is-
sues related to their communities. Two years later, that concern
was expressed in the formation of the Asian Pacific Environmen-
tal Network (APEN), for which she has served in a number of ca-
pacities. In 2005, she resigned as chair of the board of directors of
APEN because of term limits. She is currently a member of the
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council of the EPA and
of the National Liaison Committee for the National Occupational
Research Agenda (NORA) and the National Institute for Occupa-
tional Safety and Health (NIOSH). Among her awards are the
Golden Apple, Distinguished Community Member for Excel-
lence Award of the University of California School of Public
Health; the Lorin E. Kerr Award of the American Public Health
Association; the Changing Face of Women’s Health Recognition
Award of the National Health Sciences Consortium; and the
Bread and Roses Recognition Award of the Second People of
Color Environmental Leadership Summit.
Graciela Martinez (1945–)
Graciela Martinez learned about environmental issues early in
her life. When she was still a young girl, her mother, a farm-
worker, often took her into the gladiolus fields where she
worked. When she did so, she made her wear long pants, even
Biographical Sketches  151

though it was very hot. After finishing work every day, she also
had to wash those pants and all the other clothes she wore in the
fields very thoroughly. Her mother explained that these actions
were necessary to remove all traces of the pesticides used on the
flowers, pesticides that could cause serious health problems for
workers in the fields.
Martinez was born on January 29, 1945, in Harlingen, Texas,
to Paula and José Martinez. José was a stonemason, and Paula, a
housewife, in addition to her work in the fields. The family
moved to Farmersville, California, in 1955, where Graciela grad-
uated from high school. Her first job was as a typist for the
American Friends Service Committee (AFSC). That job did not
last long, however, as Martinez was offered an opportunity to
work as secretary to labor organizer and activist César Chávez, a
position that allowed her to become involved in her true love,
the environmental justice movement. Martinez remained with
Chávez’s United Farm Workers for a number of years as both a
paid and volunteer worker. She was also involved in a number of
environmental, civil rights, and community organizations and
activities.
For the past decade, Martinez has been employed as pro-
gram coordinator for the AFSC’s Proyecto Campesino program
in its Visalia, California, office. In that position, she is responsible
for organizing tenant associations, assisting with immigration
and naturalization issues, supporting local community organiz-
ing efforts, and advocating for labor and human rights. She also
hosts an AFSC radio program, The Voice of the Community, that
deals with issues of interest to local listeners, such as water use
and pollution, health, immigration and naturalization, and un-
fair labor practices. In 2006, Martinez was awarded the 15th An-
nual Dorothy Richardson Leadership Award of the Institute for
Developing Emerging Area Leaders (IDEAL), a program from
which she was a graduate in 1999.
Norris McDonald (1953–)
Norris McDonald is president of the African American Envi-
ronmentalist Association (AAEA), a group he founded in 1985.
He saw a need for a group consisting primarily of people of
color interested in environmental issues, because most existing
152
Biographical Sketches

environmental groups were largely made up of whites. He felt
that people of color did not feel they had a vested interest for
dealing with critical environmental problems that had a direct
impact on their lives. Today, AAEA engages in a wide variety of
activities to educate people of color, such as conducting tours of
toxic sites, power plants, water purification and sewage treat-
ment plants, and conservation facilities. The organization also
lobbies local and federal decision-making agencies and cooper-
ates with a number of other organizations interested in envi-
ronmental justice.
McDonald was born in Thomasville, North Carolina, on
February 8, 1953, to Sandy Norris McDonald Sr. and Katie Lou-
venia Best, a high school principal and an assistant in the public
school system, respectively. He attended Wake Forest University,
from which he received his bachelor’s degree in education in
1977. Shortly thereafter, an event occurred that was to have a cru-
cial impact on his life: the accident at the Three Mile Island nu-
clear power plant near Middletown, Pennsylvania, on March 28,
1979. McDonald was struck by the magnitude of the environ-
mental problems facing the nation and decided to make a career
in the environmental movement. A few months after the Three
Mile Island event, he joined the Environmental Policy Center
(EPC; now Friends of the Earth), where he became director of the
Energy Conservation and Transportation Project. A series of per-
sonal events only strengthened McDonald’s decision to focus on
environmental issues. In 1991, he developed chronic, acute
asthma, which led to two life-threatening episodes in July of that
year and again in 1996. He is convinced that his health problems
are directly attributable to air pollution. In 1985, McDonald left
EPC to found AAEA.
Paul Mohai (1949–)
One of the most active researchers in the field of environmental
inequities has been Paul Mohai. For more than two decades, Mo-
hai has analyzed the social, political, and organizational processes
that influence and shape environmental and natural resource pol-
icy. He has also explored public attitudes toward environmental
and natural resource issues, analyzing the factors that affect polit-
ical activism, assessing the impact of environmental pollution
Biographical Sketches  153

and resource scarcities on low-income and minority groups, and
evaluating the contribution of wildland recreation to the quality
of life.
Mohai was born on June 20, 1949, in Linz, Austria. For his
undergraduate education, he attended Michigan State Univer-
sity (1967–1968), the University of Birmingham, England (1969–
1970), and the University of California at Berkeley (1968–1971),
from which he received his BA in mathematics. He then earned
his MS degree in forestry and statistics from Syracuse Univer-
sity in 1976 and his PhD in natural resource policy and the soci-
ology of natural resources from Pennsylvania State University
in 1983.
Mohai’s first professional appointment was as mathematics
teacher at Fox Lane Middle School in Bedford, New York. He
then held assignments as teaching assistant and instructor at the
State University of New York College of Environmental Science
and Forestry at Syracuse (1973–1976), as project intern and pro-
gram assistant at the Natural Resources and Forestry Group of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative State Re-
search Service (1977–1979), as instructor in the School of Forest
 Resources at Penn State (1979–1983), and as assistant professor
in the College of Natural Resources, Utah State University
(1983–1987).
In 1987, Mohai accepted an appointment in the School of
Natural Resources and Environment at the University of
Michigan. He now holds a professorship in the School of Nat-
ural Resources and Environment and is a faculty associate in
the Social Environment and Health Program of the Survey Re-
search Center of the Institute for Social Research at Michigan.
During the summer of 1995, Mohai was visiting professor in
the Department of Rural Sociology at the University of Wis-
consin, Madison.
Mohai has published more than 40 papers in  peer-
reviewed journals and made more than 40 presentations at var-
ious conferences and meetings. He has testified twice before
congressional committees on environmental justice issues. His
most recent publication is Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty,
1987–2007: Grassroots Struggles to Dismantle Environmental
Racism in the United States (with Robert D. Bullard, Robin Saha,
and Beverly Wright; 2007). Mohai currently serves as a repre-
sentative of academia on the National Environmental Justice
Advisory Council of the EPA.
154
Biographical Sketches

Richard Moore (dates unknown)
Richard Moore has been involved in a variety of social issues for
more than 40 years. He has worked with community-based
groups around issues such as welfare rights, police brutality,
street gang activities, drug abuse, low-cost health care, child nu-
trition, and the fight against racism. He has been active in the
environmental justice movement from its earliest days, serving
on the planning committee for the First National People of Color
Environmental Leadership Summit in October 1991. In 1969,
while a member of the Black Beret organization centered in the
San Jose district of Albuquerque, Moore founded the Bobby
Garcia Memorial Clinic, named in honor of a local community
organizer and activist. He was also a founding member of the
Southwest Organizing Project (SWOP), a multiracial organiza-
tion working to empower the disenfranchised in the Southwest,
and of the Southwest Network for Environmental and Economic
Justice (SNEEJ), a regional organization consisting of more than
80 community-based grassroots organizations working in com-
munities of color in six southwestern states and Mexico. Moore
currently serves as executive director of SNEEJ. In 2005, he was
awarded the Ford Foundation Leadership for a Changing World
Award.
Moore credits his interest in social issues to his upbringing
in a poor, single-parent family in Albuquerque. The family home
was adjacent to the city’s sewage treatment plant, and he saw
firsthand the offensive and dangerous effects of the facility on
the neighborhood. He dropped out of high school at the age of 16
convinced that he wanted to do what he could to make a change
in his community. He knew, he later said, that “things should not
be this way, and don’t need to be this way.” Much of his early
work was couched not in terms of “environmental justice,” he
notes, but as a form of social justice. Through his work, Moore
has woven a whole range of issues, including both social and en-
vironmental issues, into a single campaign to improve the lives
of poor and minority communities.
Na’taki Osborne (1974–)
Na’taki Osborne had an early introduction to the issue of envi-
ronmental justice. She was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, not
Biographical Sketches  155

far from the state’s notorious Cancer Alley. The region is so
named because experts believe the high rates of cancer and other
diseases observed in the region are caused by toxic chemicals re-
leased by petroleum refineries, chemical plants, and other indus-
tries in the area. The potential threat posed by Cancer Alley was
brought home to Osborne when her mother, then an English pro-
fessor, was diagnosed with breast cancer. Osborne could not but
wonder if there was a connection between her mother’s health
problems and the effluents from chemical plants in the area. She
decided that the study of environmental problems and actions
for dealing with such problems were to be an important part of
her life.
Osborne attended Spelman College in Atlanta, from which
she earned her BA degree in chemistry in 1996. Concurrently, she
received a BS degree in civil and environmental engineering
from Georgia Institute of Technology. She continued her studies
at the Rollins School of Public Health at Emory University in At-
lanta, earning her master’s degree in environmental and occupa-
tional health in 2002. She is currently enrolled in a doctoral
program at Emory University.
Osborne’s first work experience was as an intern in the Su-
perfund and Hazardous Waste Division of the EPA in 1994. Her
job description called for her to survey people living near waste
sites, identifying existing and potential health problems and de-
veloping methods for preventing or ameliorating those problems
by cleaning up the waste sites. She also worked as an intern for
the National Wildlife Federation (NWF) during her undergradu-
ate years at Spelman. After graduation, she took a paid full-time
job at NWF working with a minority community in Atlanta on
issues of environmental education, environmental justice, com-
munity organizing, watershed and green space protection, envi-
ronmental health, and related issues.
Osborne is currently the national leadership development
coordinator for NWF, with responsibility for developing urban
environmental initiatives and building partnerships among
grassroots community organizations, academic institutions, lo-
cal and state environmental agencies, and health agencies for
dealing with problems such as watershed protection; land-use
and habitat protection and restoration; and the effects of sprawl
on plant, animal, and human communities. She is also a senior
fellow at the Environmental Leadership Program in Washing-
156
Biographical Sketches

ton, D.C., and a community health team teacher and guest envi-
ronmental health professional at the Morehouse School of Medi-
cine in Atlanta.
Swati Prakash (1975–)
Swati Prakash was formerly the director of Environmental
Health and Community-Based Research at West Harlem Envi-
ronmental Action (WE ACT). Her responsibilities there included
the education and empowerment of community residents for ad-
dressing environmental health issues, the promotion of commu-
nity-driven environmental health research, and the conduct of
air pollution monitoring and reduction projects. In January 2006,
Prakash left WE ACT to become program director at the Pacific
Institute for Studies in Development, Environment, and Security
in Oakland, California.
Prakash’s early life was not one that might suggest a later
involvement in the environmental justice movement. She was
born on August 7, 1975, to Indian immigrants Jaya and Madhavi
Prakash, an electrical engineer and administrator, respectively.
She grew up in a white middle-class neighborhood in suburban
New Jersey with one serious drawback: It was located near a
number of petrochemical refineries, incinerators, and industrial
plants for which New Jersey is famous. Later in life, she learned
that the high school she had attended was built on top of a med-
ical waste dump.
Her awareness of environmental justice issues came slowly.
During high school, she became involved in both the Student En-
vironmental Action Coalition (SEAC) and the Green Party, as
well as in an antiracism club, Students Helping Overcome Ten-
sions. She eventually realized that she was the only student en-
gaged in both environmental and racism issues in her school.
Her efforts to get students from both groups working together,
however, were largely a failure.
An important turning point in Prakash’s life came in 1993,
when she attended a national conference of SEAC held in Berke-
ley, California. She was shocked to discover that, in contrast to
her experience in New Jersey, virtually every person at the meet-
ing was a person of color. For the first time in her life, the connec-
tion between race and environmentalism became clear. As one of
Biographical Sketches  157

her biographers has written, “It was the first time she felt that
she did not have to trade off her identity as a South Asian person
with her desire to be an environmentalist.”
Prakash holds a bachelor’s degree in environmental science
and public policy from Harvard University and a master’s  degree
in environmental health from Harvard’s School of Public Health.
Patricia E. Salkin (dates unknown)
Patricia E. Salkin has long been involved in issues of land-use
law, especially as they relate to problems of environmental
racism and environmental justice. She is currently Raymond and
Ella Smith Distinguished Professor of Law, associate dean, and
director of the Government Law Center at Albany Law School in
Albany, New York.
Salkin received her BA from the University at Albany and
her JD from Albany Law School. Prior to joining the Albany Law
faculty in 1992, she was an intern in the office of Rep. Benjamin
A. Gilman (R-NY); legal aide for the New York State Department
of State, Office of Local Government Services and Coastal Zone
Management Program; law clerk at Ruthman, Feinberg & Dumas
in Albany; and assistant counsel for the New York State Office of
Rural Affairs. In addition to her faculty appointment at Albany
Law, Salkin has taught at Sage Junior College in Albany (1989),
the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Center for Urban and Envi-
ronmental Studies (1990–1992), the University at Albany
(1993–present), and the University of Pennsylvania’s School of
Design (2007). She is currently a member of the National Envi-
ronmental Justice Advisory Council of the EPA.
Salkin has written more than two dozen books, textbooks,
and treatises on land use and related topics. She has also written
more than 50 law articles and columns and more than three-dozen
articles for other scholarly publications. Among the many honors
she has been accorded are the Outstanding Young Alumna Award,
Albany Law School (1996); the Bernard E. Harvith Award for En-
vironmental Law of the Albany Law School Environmental
Alumni (2000); the Award for Excellence in Public Service of the
New York State Bar Association’s Committee on Attorneys in Pub-
lic Service (2002); and the Distinguished Member Award of the
Capital District Women’s Bar Association (2007).
158
Biographical Sketches

Peggy Shepard (1946–)
In 1988, Peggy Shepard cofounded (with Vernice Miller) West
Harlem Environmental Action (WE ACT), an organization of
which she is still executive director.
Shepard was born on September 16, 1946, in Lawrenceville,
New Jersey. She received her BA degree in English from Howard
University in 1967 and continued her studies in management at
Baruch College in New York City from 1983 to 1985. Over the last
two decades, she has had two careers, first as a journalist and
then as a political activist. In her first career, she became the first
African American reporter at the Indianapolis News in 1969,
where she was later home furnishings editor for the paper. She
then moved on to a number of other positions, including text and
photo researcher for Time-Life Books (1971–1973), copy editor
for the San Juan Star (1974–1975), associate editor at Redbook
(1976–1977), and editorial director of Verve (1977–1978).
In 1978, Shepard began a long career in government-related
work when she accepted a position as consumer affairs specialist
at the New York State Division of Housing and Community Re-
newal. She later became consumer affairs director at the division
(1980–1983), special assistant to the commissioner (1983–1985),
director of public information for rent administration (1985–
1988), and special assistant for government and community af-
fairs (1988–1993). She was then appointed women’s coordinator
for the New York City Office of the Comptroller.
Shepard’s life took a dramatic turn in 1988, when she be-
came involved in efforts to prevent the construction of the North
River sewage treatment plant and a Metro Transit Authority bus
stop in north Manhattan. During a protest demonstration, she
and six other community organizers were arrested, an action that
only confirmed her commitment to work for environmental jus-
tice. Later in the year, she and Vernice Miller joined to establish
WE ACT to work against environmental racism in the commu-
nity. The organization was the first African American and His-
panic American community-based group for educating about
and mobilizing residents around environmental health and qual-
ity-of-life issues exclusively. WE ACT was later party to a suit
against New York City that resulted in an odor abatement addi-
tion to the sewage treatment plant and a $1.1 million settlement
fund for the West Harlem community.
Biographical Sketches  159

In addition to her current position as executive director of
WE ACT, Shepard has held a number of other posts, including
president of the Manhattan chapter of the National Women’s Po-
litical Caucus from 1993 to 1997 and cochair of the Northeast En-
vironmental Justice Network. In 2002, she was elected the first
woman chair of the National Environmental Justice Advisory
Council of the EPA. Shepard also serves on a number of other
boards and committees dealing with environmental issues.
Among the many honors and awards she has received are the
New Yorker for New York Award from the Citizens Committee
of New York (1990), a People Who Make a Difference Award
from National Wildlife magazine (1993), the Earth Day Award for
Excellence in Environmental Advocacy from Earth Day New
York (1998), the 10th Annual Heinz Award for the Environment
from the Heinz Foundation (2003), and the Dean’s Distinguished
Service Award from Columbia University’s School of Public
Health (2004).
Gail Small (dates unknown)
Issues of environmental racism affect every minority community
in the United States: African American, Hispanic American,
Asian American, and Native American, to name only the most
prominent groups. Every community owes progress in the field
of environmental justice to a number of leaders who have spo-
ken and worked to combat the injustices their people have en-
countered. One of the longtime leaders of the Native American
environmental justice communities is Gail Small, whose
Cheyenne name is Head Chief Woman.
Small became involved in environmental justice while still a
teenager in Montana. She became involved in the infamous
Montana Coal Wars, initiated as a result of efforts by coal compa-
nies and the federal government to conduct extensive mining
under reservation lands. She recalls that, at the time, she was the
youngest person (at the age of 21) to be involved in the commit-
tee working to get coal leases canceled. As with many environ-
mental issues, the dispute between coal companies and tribes
was not easily resolved. Indeed, it was another 15 years before
the companies agreed to discontinue their operations on reserva-
tion lands.
160
Biographical Sketches

By that time, Small had finished high school, gone on to col-
lege, and earned her BA degree from the University of Montana
(1978) and her JD and Certificate of Completion in Environmen-
tal and Natural Resource Law from the University of Oregon
School of Law (1982). She then returned to the Northern
Cheyenne reservation in southeastern Montana to discover that
there was no work available for her. To resolve that problem and
to continue her efforts against environmental racism, Small and a
group of friends founded Native Action, one of the first non-
profit organizations established on a Native American reserva-
tion. Native Action has taken a number of steps toward
improving the quality of reservation life, including the creation
of the first bank, the first public high school, and the first cham-
ber of commerce on the reservation; the development of a tribal
environmental policy; a campaign against Native American
voter discrimination; and the creation of a number of tribal laws
dealing with community issues such as traditional burial rites,
sexual assault, and domestic violence and of a uniform commer-
cial code for small business operations.
Environmental issues remain at the top of Small’s agenda.
Most recently, she has been campaigning against plans to bore as
many as 75,000 methane wells in areas around the reservation.
The pollution produced by those wells, Small says, would turn
the reservation into a wasteland.
Small has received a number of honors and awards for her
work, including a 1995 Ms. Magazine Gloria Steinem Women of Vi-
sion Award and a 1997 Territory Resource Foundation Jeanette
Rankin Award. She has served as an elected member of the North-
ern Cheyenne Tribal Council; has taught natural resource law and
federal Indian law at the University of California at Humboldt,
Chief Dull Knife Memorial College, and Little Big Horn Commu-
nity College; has testified before congressional oversight hearings;
and has served on the Federal Reserve Board’s Consumer Advi-
sory Council. She is also the mother of four children.
Damu Smith (1952–2006)
Environmental justice is only one of many causes to which
Damu Smith devoted his life. Born in St. Louis, on December 6,
1952 (some sources say 1951), Smith was given the baptismal
Biographical Sketches  161

name of Leroy Wesley. He later changed his name to Damu
Amiri Imara Smith. In Swahili, his new name means “blood,
leadership, and strength”; Smith said that he chose the name be-
cause he was willing to shed his own blood for the liberation of
his people. Smith’s father was a fireman and an air pollution in-
spector, and his mother, a licensed practical nurse. The family
often struggled to make ends meet, and Smith later wrote that
he knew what it was like to study by candlelight, survive on
food stamps and government handouts, and go to schools that
had no heat. As a result, he said, he had “great sensitivity to the
plight of poor people.”
A seminal event in Smith’s life occurred while he was still in
high school. He was invited to an after-school program for disad-
vantaged young men that involved a field trip to Cairo, Illinois,
for Black Solidarity Day. On the trip, he toured African American
neighborhoods where houses had been sprayed with gunfire by
white supremacists. Damu later noted that the experience of see-
ing those bullet holes changed his life. He developed a new ap-
preciation for the political issues important in his life and a
commitment to working on those issues.
After completing high school, Smith enrolled at St. John’s Uni-
versity in Collegeville, Minnesota, where he served as president of
the Organization of Afro-American Students. In that post, he led a
protest and takeover of the school’s administrative offices, de-
manding a black studies program. In 1973, Smith moved to Wash-
ington, D.C., to attend Antioch College’s Center for the Study of
Basic Human Problems and, as he said, “to be closer to the action.”
For Smith, that “action” involved work with a wide variety of or-
ganizations, including the United Church of Christ Commission
for Racial Justice, Black Voices for Peace, the American Friends Ser-
vice Committee, the Jesse Jackson presidential campaign of 1984,
Greenpeace USA, the National Black Independent Political Party,
the National Alliance against Racist and Political Repression, and
the National Wilmington 10 Defense Committee.
In 1991, Smith became the first coordinator for environmen-
tal justice for the Southern Organizing Committee for Economic
and Social Justice. In that capacity, he visited more than 40 towns
and cities to view the effects of chemical dumping on minority
communities. He later drew on that experience as national asso-
ciate director for Greenpeace by organizing a series of Toxic
Tours in the South, in which he brought celebrities to Cancer
 Alley in Louisiana.
162
Biographical Sketches

In December 1999, Smith and about 200 other black com-
munity leaders and activists met in New Orleans to form the In-
terim National Black Environmental & Economic Justice
Coordinating Committee, later renamed the National Black En-
vironmental Justice Network (NBEJN). The organization’s mis-
sion is to “enable African Americans to secure environmental
and economic justice, health equity, political power, and civil
rights and human rights.” Smith served as executive director of
NBEJN until his death from colorectal cancer on May 5, 2006, in
Washington, D.C.
Beverly Wright (1947–)
Beverly Hendrix Wright has been engaged over the past three
decades in a number of activities, including as a member of the
Michigan Coalition, the National Advisory Committee for the
First National People of Color Environmental Leadership Sum-
mit, the Planning and Protocol committees for the National Insti-
tute for Environmental Health Sciences’ Health and Research
Needs to Ensure Environmental Justice National Symposium,
and the EPA’s National Environmental Justice Advisory Council,
as well as being founder and director of the Deep South Center
for Environmental Justice. She has also been active in other pro-
fessional activities sponsored by the National Council for Negro
Women, the Association of Black Psychologists, the Association
of Social and Behavioral Scientists, and the Society for the Study
of Social Problems.
Wright was born in New Orleans on October 1, 1947. She
earned her BA degree in sociology from Grambling College in
1969, and her MA (1971) and PhD (1977), both in sociology, from
the State University of New York at Buffalo. She served as in-
structor in the department of sociology at Millard Fillmore Col-
lege (1970–1971) and at the State University of New York at
Buffalo (1970–1974). Wright was appointed to the faculty at the
University of New Orleans in 1974 and was promoted to assis-
tant professor in 1977 and to associate professor in 1987. During
the period from 1989 to 1993, she served as associate professor of
sociology at Wake Forest University. In 1992, she founded the
Deep South Center for Environmental Justice (DSCEJ) at Xavier
University of Louisiana in New Orleans. She was named director
of the center, a post she continues to hold.
Biographical Sketches  163

In 2005, DSCEJ made plans to move its operations from
Xavier to Dillard University, across town in New Orleans. That
move was scheduled to take place on September 1 but was dis-
rupted when Hurricane Katrina struck the city three days earlier.
In spite of the chaos and destruction caused by the hurricane, the
move eventually took place, and the center is now at its new
home at Dillard. One of the major projects on which it has fo-
cused its attention in the past few years has been assisting in the
city’s recovery from one of the nation’s greatest natural disasters.
In addition to her work at DSCEJ, Wright has served on a
number of community and professional committees and commis-
sions, including the New Orleans Mayor’s Environmental Advi-
sory Committee, the Mayor’s Office of Environmental Affairs
Brownfields Consortium, the New Orleans Mayor’s Committee
on Solid Waste, the Army Corps of Engineers’ Environmental Ad-
visory Board, and the U.S. Commission of Civil Rights for the
state of Louisiana. She is the author or coauthor of more than two
dozen papers, reviews, and book chapters. She has received a
number of awards and honors, most recently a Special Gulf Coast
Award for outstanding leadership in the aftermath of Hurricane
Katrina from the Robert Wood Johnson Community Health Lead-
ership Program in 2006.
164
Biographical Sketches

6
Data and Documents
L
egislative and legal issues are an important part of the envi-
ronmental justice movement. To a large extent, obtaining re-
dress for environmental inequities and preventing such
inequities from occurring in the future mean that people must
know about existing environmental and civil rights laws and
know how to use those laws. It also means having new laws and
regulations written that will accomplish these same goals.
Early regulation and legislation dealing speciﬁcally with en-
vironmental justice date to less than two decades ago. In 1994,
President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 12898, requiring
that all federal agencies develop a policy for dealing with envi-
ronmental justice. In the same year, the state of New Hampshire
became the ﬁrst state to issue a similar requirement of all its agen-
cies. Currently, 32 states and the District of Columbia have
adopted some type of environmental justice law, regulation, or
policy. Ten additional states have informal policies about environ-
mental justice and/or individuals or ofﬁces with responsibility
for enforcing environmental equity for all people in the state. An
excellent source of information about state laws, regulations, and
policies is Environmental Justice for All: A Fifty State Survey of Legis-
lation, Policies and Cases, 3rd edition, Public Law Research Insti-
tute, University of California Hastings College of the Law, 2007.
Federal legislation on environmental justice has been very
limited. In 2008, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-NY) intro-
duced legislation establishing the Interagency Working Group
on Environmental Justice to provide guidance to all federal agen-
cies on issues related to environmental justice. Other than Clin-
ton’s bill, there has been almost no federal legislation dealing
165

166
Data and Documents
speciﬁcally with environmental justice. Nonetheless, legislative
justiﬁcation for many principles of environmental justice can be
found in a number of more general laws dealing with civil rights
and environmental issues. This chapter includes a number of
laws, bills, executive orders, regulations, and policy statements
dealing with environmental justice. It also includes portions of
the Basel Convention, probably the most signiﬁcant international
environmental justice treaty ever written. Some documents have
been abridged, with the most salient sections provided and less
important sections omitted. Editorial comments indicate the con-
tent of the deleted sections.
Documents
Civil Rights Act of 1964
The fundamental statement of the nation’s position on civil rights is
contained in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Public Law 88-352). This
sweeping piece of legislation covered nearly every aspect of American
public life, including institutionalized persons (Chapter I), public ac-
commodations (Chapter II), public facilities (Chapter III), education
(Chapter IV), and employment (Chapter VI). Three sections of the law
provide the fundamental philosophy for the equal treatment of all
Americans.
Sec. 1981. Equal Rights under the Law
(a) Statement of equal rights.
All persons within the jurisdiction of
the United States shall have the same right in every State and Territory
to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give evidence, and to
the full and equal beneﬁt of all laws and proceedings for the security of
persons and property as is enjoyed by white citizens, and shall be
subject to like punishment, pains, penalties, taxes, licenses, and
exactions of every kind, and to no other.
Sec. 1982. Property Rights of Citizens
All citizens of the United States shall have the same right, in every State
and Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to inherit,
purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property.
Sec. 2000d. Prohibition against exclusion from participation in, denial of
beneﬁts of, and discrimination under federally assisted programs on
ground of race, color, or national origin

No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or
national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
beneﬁts of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or
activity receiving Federal ﬁnancial assistance.
Source: U.S. Code Title 42, Chapter 21, Sections 1981 and 1982; and Title
42, Subchapter V, Section 2000d.
Fair Housing Act of 1968
Some experts believe that the Fair Housing Act of 1968 provides a
strong justiﬁcation for cases brought against companies responsible for
the pollution of neighborhoods and communities. They argue that the
act calls for all residents to receive equal treatment in the United
States, but that the presence of disproportionate siting of polluting and
hazardous waste sites violates that principle. Section 3601 lays out the
general philosophy behind the act, and then section 3604 outlines some
of the details of nondiscrimination required by the act. Probably the
most important part of the following selection is section 3604(b).
Sec. 3601. Declaration of Policy
It is the policy of the United States to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the United States.
Sec. 3604. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing and other
prohibited practices
As made applicable by section 3603 of this title and except as exempted
by sections 3603(b) and 3607 of this title, it shall be unlawful—
(a) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make un-
available or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, reli-
gion, sex, familial status, or national origin.
(b) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status, or national origin.
(c) To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the
sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial sta-
tus, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, lim-
itation, or discrimination.
(d) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
Documents  167

available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
(e) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
Source: U.S. Code Title 42, Chapter 45, Subchapter 1, Sections 3601 
and 3604.
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
The cornerstone of American environmental policy is the National En-
vironmental Policy Act of 1969, now Chapter 55 of Title 42 of the U.S.
Code. The act was signed by President Richard Nixon on January 1,
1970, and has been amended a number of times since then. Subchapter I
of Chapter 55 lays out the nation’s general policy regarding environ-
mental issues. The sections below are generally used by proponents of
environmental justice to provide the legal basis of their arguments in
court cases and in the public forum.
Sec. 4331. Congressional declaration of national environmental policy
(a) The Congress, recognizing the profound impact of man’s activity
on the interrelations of all components of the natural environment,
particularly the profound inﬂuences of population growth, high-
density urbanization, industrial expansion, resource exploitation, and
new and expanding technological advances and recognizing further
the critical importance of restoring and maintaining environmental
quality to the overall welfare and development of man, declares that it
is the continuing policy of the Federal Government, in cooperation
with State and local governments, and other concerned public and
private organizations, to use all practicable means and measures,
including ﬁnancial and technical assistance, in a manner calculated to
foster and promote the general welfare, to create and maintain
conditions under which man and nature can exist in productive
harmony, and fulﬁll the social, economic, and other requirements of
present and future generations of Americans.
(b) In order to carry out the policy set forth in this chapter, it is the
continuing responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practica-
ble means, consistent with other essential considerations of national
policy, to improve and coordinate Federal plans, functions, programs,
and resources to the end that the Nation may—
(1) fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the
environment for succeeding generations;
168
Data and Documents

(2) assure for all Americans safe, healthful, productive, and esthet-
ically and culturally pleasing surroundings;
(3) attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment
without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and
unintended consequences;
(4) preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our
national heritage, and maintain, wherever possible, an environment
which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;
(5) achieve a balance between population and resource use which will
permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and
(6) enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the
maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources. 
(c) The Congress recognizes that each person should enjoy a
healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to con-
tribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.
Sec. 4332. Cooperation of agencies; reports; availability of information;
recommendations; international and national coordination of efforts
The Congress authorizes and directs that, to the fullest extent possible:
(1) the policies, regulations, and public laws of the United States
shall be interpreted and administered in accordance with the policies
set forth in this chapter, and
(2) all agencies of the Federal Government shall—
(A) utilize a systematic, interdisciplinary approach which will in-
sure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the envi-
ronmental design arts in planning and in decisionmaking which may
have an impact on man’s environment;
(B) identify and develop methods and procedures, in consultation
with the Council on Environmental Quality established by subchapter
II of this chapter, which will insure that presently unquantified envi-
ronmental amenities and values may be given appropriate considera-
tion in decisionmaking along with economic and technical
considerations;
(C) include in every recommendation or report on proposals for
legislation and other major Federal actions significantly affecting the
quality of the human environment, a detailed statement by the respon-
sible official on—
(i) the environmental impact of the proposed action,
(ii) any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided
should the proposal be implemented,
(iii) alternatives to the proposed action,
(iv) the relationship between local short-term uses of man’s envi-
ronment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term produc-
tivity, and
Documents  169

(v) any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources
which would be involved in the proposed action should it be
 implemented. 
Prior to making any detailed statement, the responsible Federal official
shall consult with and obtain the comments of any Federal agency
which has jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to any
environmental impact involved. Copies of such statement and the
comments and views of the appropriate Federal, State, and local agen-
cies, which are authorized to develop and enforce environmental stan-
dards, shall be made available to the President, the Council on
Environmental Quality and to the public as provided by section 552 of
title 5, and shall accompany the proposal through the existing agency
review processes;
(D) Any detailed statement required under subparagraph (C)
 after January 1, 1970, for any major Federal action funded under a
 program of grants to States shall not be deemed to be legally insuffi-
cient solely by reason of having been prepared by a State agency or
 official, if:
(i) the State agency or official has statewide jurisdiction and has
the responsibility for such action,
(ii) the responsible Federal official furnishes guidance and partici-
pates in such preparation,
(iii) the responsible Federal official independently evaluates such
statement prior to its approval and adoption, and
(iv) after January 1, 1976, the responsible Federal official 
provides early notification to, and solicits the views of, any other 
State or any Federal land management entity of any action or any 
alternative thereto which may have significant impacts upon such
State or affected Federal land management entity and, if there is 
any disagreement on such impacts, prepares a written assessment 
of such impacts and views for incorporation into such detailed
 statement. 
The procedures in this subparagraph shall not relieve the Federal
official of his responsibilities for the scope, objectivity, and content of
the entire statement or of any other responsibility under this chapter;
and further, this subparagraph does not affect the legal sufficiency 
of statements prepared by State agencies with less than statewide
 jurisdiction.
(E) study, develop, and describe appropriate alternatives to rec-
ommended courses of action in any proposal which involves unre-
solved conflicts concerning alternative uses of available resources;
(F) recognize the worldwide and long-range character of environ-
mental problems and, where consistent with the foreign policy of 
the United States, lend appropriate support to initiatives, resolutions,
170
Data and Documents

and programs designed to maximize international cooperation in
 anticipating and preventing a decline in the quality of mankind’s
world  environment;
(G) make available to States, counties, municipalities, institutions,
and individuals, advice and information useful in restoring, maintain-
ing, and enhancing the quality of the environment;
(H) initiate and utilize ecological information in the planning and
development of resource-oriented projects; and
(I) assist the Council on Environmental Quality established by
subchapter II of this chapter.
Source: U.S. Code, Title 42, Chapter 55, Subchapter I, Sections 4331 
and 4332.
Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and 
Their Correlation with Racial and Economic
Status of Surrounding Communities (1983)
In 1982, Rep. James Florio (D-NJ) asked the General Accounting Ofﬁce
(GAO) to determine the correlation between hazardous waste landﬁll
siting and racial and economic status. The GAO report is one of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcial governmental studies to clearly show the effects of environ-
mental racism in the United States. The most important ﬁndings of the
study are given below.
We found that:
—There are four offsite hazardous waste landﬁlls in Region IV’s
eight States. Blacks make up the majority of the population in three of
the four communities where the landﬁlls are located. At least 26 percent
of the population in all four communities have income below the
poverty level and most of this population is Black.
—The determination of where a hazardous waste landﬁll will be
located is currently a State responsibility. Federal regulations, effective
in January 1983, require that selected sites meet minimal location stan-
dards. EPA has just begun its review process to determine if sites meet
these standards.
—Federal legislation requires public participation in the hazardous
waste landﬁll permit process except for the approval of disposal for poly-
chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which are regulated under separate legis-
lation that does not provide for public participation. Because of delays in
issuing ﬁnal regulations three of the four landﬁlls in Region IV have not
yet undergone the ﬁnal permit process where public participation is re-
quired. The fourth is a PCB landﬁll and even though not subject to
Documents  171

 Federal requirements, had undergone this process. Only one site in the
Nation (in Region VI) has been granted a ﬁnal hazardous waste landﬁll
permit and had been subjected to the public participation process.
[The speciﬁc data on which the above conclusions were based are then reported
on page 4 of the report.]
Source: General Accounting Ofﬁce. Siting of Hazardous Waste Landﬁlls
and Their Correlation with Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Com-
munities. Gaithersburg, MD: General Accountability Ofﬁce, June 1, 1983.
http://archive.gao.gov/d48t13/121648.pdf.
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States
(1987)
In 1987, the Commission on Racial Justice of the United Church of
Christ commissioned a study on the extent and character of environ-
mental racism in the United States. That study is now regarded as one
of the landmark pieces of research on environmental justice in U.S. his-
tory. As a result of its ﬁndings in that study, the commission made a
number of recommendations to governmental and nongovernmental
bodies as to how they should respond to the problems the commission
discovered. Those recommendations are reprinted below.
172
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
1980 Census Population, Income, and 
Poverty Data for Census Areas Where Landﬁlls Are Located
Mean Family Income
Population below Poverty Level
Landﬁll
Percent Black 
All
Number
Population
Races
Blacks
Number
Percent
Black
Chemical Waste 
90
$11,198
$10,752
265
42
100
Management, 626
SCA Services, 849
38
$16,371
$6,781
260
31
100
Industrial Chemical 
52
$18,996
$12,941
188
26
92
Co., 728
Warren County PCB 
66
$10,367
$9,285
256
32
90
Landfill, 804
Source: General Accounting Office. Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with
Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Communities, Washington, DC: Report GAO/RCED-83-168,
June 1, 1983.

—We urge the President of the United States to issue an executive
order mandating federal agencies to consider the impact of current
policies and regulations on racial and ethnic communities.
—We urge the formation of an Ofﬁce of Hazardous Wastes and
Racial and Ethnic Affairs by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
This ofﬁce should insure that racial and ethnic concerns regarding haz-
ardous wastes, such as the cleanup of uncontrolled sites, are adequately
addressed. In addition, we urge the EPA to establish a National Advi-
sory Council on Racial and Ethnic Concerns.
—We urge state governments to evaluate and make appropriate
revisions in their criteria for the siting of new hazardous waste facilities
to adequately take into account the racial and socioeconomic character-
istics of potential host communities.
—We urge the U.S. Conference of Mayors, the National Confer-
ence of Black Mayors and the National League of Cities to convene a
national conference to address these issues from a municipal
 perspective.
—We urge civil rights and political organizations to gear up voter
registration campaigns as a means to further empower racial and ethnic
communities to effectively respond to hazardous waste issues and to
place hazardous wastes in racial and ethnic communities at the top of
state and national legislative agendas.
—We urge local communities to initiate education and action pro-
grams around racial and ethnic concerns regarding hazardous wastes.
We also call for a series of additional actions. Of paramount im-
portance are further epidemiological and demographic research and the
provision of information on hazardous wastes to racial and ethnic
 communities.
Source: The Commission for Racial Justice (United Church of Christ).
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States: A National Report on the Racial
and Socio-Economic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste
Sites, pp. xv–xvi. Copyright 1987 United Church of Christ. All rights re-
served. Used by permission.
Principles of Environmental Justice (1991)
The following position statement was adopted at the National People of
Color Environmental Leadership Summit in Washington, D.C., Octo-
ber 24–27, 1991. The statement is still widely regarded as making up
the environmental justice movement’s deﬁning principles.
Preamble
WE, THE PEOPLE OF COLOR, gathered together at this multinational
People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, to begin to build a
Documents  173

national and international movement of all peoples of color to fight the
destruction and taking of our lands and communities, do hereby re-es-
tablish our spiritual interdependence to the sacredness of our Mother
Earth; to respect and celebrate each of our cultures, languages and be-
liefs about the natural world and our roles in healing ourselves; to in-
sure environmental justice; to promote economic alternatives which
would contribute to the development of environmentally safe liveli-
hoods; and, to secure our political, economic and cultural liberation
that has been denied for over 500 years of colonization and oppression,
resulting in the poisoning of our communities and land and the geno-
cide of our peoples, do affirm and adopt these Principles of
 Environmental Justice:
1) Environmental Justice affirms the sacredness of Mother Earth,
ecological unity and the interdependence of all species, and the right to
be free from ecological destruction.
2) Environmental Justice demands that public policy be based on
mutual respect and justice for all peoples, free from any form of dis-
crimination or bias.
3) Environmental Justice mandates the right to ethical, balanced
and responsible uses of land and renewable resources in the interest of
a sustainable planet for humans and other living things.
4) Environmental Justice calls for universal protection from nu-
clear testing, extraction, production and disposal of toxic/hazardous
wastes and poisons and nuclear testing that threaten the fundamental
right to clean air, land, water, and food.
5) Environmental Justice affirms the fundamental right to political,
economic, cultural and environmental self-determination of all peoples.
6) Environmental Justice demands the cessation of the production
of all toxins, hazardous wastes, and radioactive materials, and that all
past and current producers be held strictly accountable to the people
for detoxification and the containment at the point of production.
7) Environmental Justice demands the right to participate as equal
partners at every level of decision-making, including needs assessment,
planning, implementation, enforcement and evaluation.
8) Environmental Justice affirms the right of all workers to a safe
and healthy work environment without being forced to choose between
an unsafe livelihood and unemployment. It also affirms the right of
those who work at home to be free from environmental hazards.
9) Environmental Justice protects the right of victims of environ-
mental injustice to receive full compensation and reparations for dam-
ages as well as quality health care.
10) Environmental Justice considers governmental acts of
 environmental injustice a violation of international law, the Universal
 Declaration on Human Rights, and the United Nations Convention on
Genocide.
174
Data and Documents

11) Environmental Justice must recognize a special legal and nat-
ural relationship of Native Peoples to the U.S. government through
treaties, agreements, compacts, and covenants affirming sovereignty
and self-determination.
12) Environmental Justice affirms the need for urban and rural
ecological policies to clean up and rebuild our cities and rural areas in
balance with nature, honoring the cultural integrity of all our commu-
nities, and provided fair access for all to the full range of resources.
13) Environmental Justice calls for the strict enforcement of princi-
ples of informed consent, and a halt to the testing of experimental re-
productive and medical procedures and vaccinations on people of
color.
14) Environmental Justice opposes the destructive operations of
multi-national corporations.
15) Environmental Justice opposes military occupation, repression
and exploitation of lands, peoples and cultures, and other life forms.
16) Environmental Justice calls for the education of present and fu-
ture generations which emphasizes social and environmental issues,
based on our experience and an appreciation of our diverse cultural
perspectives.
17) Environmental Justice requires that we, as individuals, make
personal and consumer choices to consume as little of Mother Earth’s
resources and to produce as little waste as possible; and make the con-
scious decision to challenge and reprioritize our lifestyles to insure the
health of the natural world for present and future generations. 
Source: Environmental Justice Resource Center. http://www.ejrc.cau
.edu/princej.html. Accessed May 14, 2008.
Environmental Equity: 
Reducing Risks for All Communities (1992)
In 1991, Environmental Protection Agency administrator William K.
Reilly appointed a commission to study environmental inequities in the
United States based on race, income status, and other factors. The com-
mission released its report on July 22, 1992, the main features of which
are quoted below.
Summary of Findings
• There are clear differences between racial groups in terms 
of disease and death rates. There are also limited data to ex-
plain the environmental contribution to these differences. In
fact, there is a general lack of data on environmental health ef-
fects by race and income. For diseases that are known to have
Documents  175

environmental causes, data are not typically dis-aggregated by
race and socioeconomic group. The notable exception is lead
poisoning: A significantly higher percentage of Black children
compared to White children have unacceptably high blood lead
levels.
• Racial minority and low-income populations experience higher
than average exposures to selected air pollutants, hazardous
waste facilities, contaminated fish and agricultural pesticides in
the workplace. Exposure does not always result in an immediate
or acute health effect. High exposures, and the possibility of
chronic effects, are nevertheless a clear cause for health concerns.
• Environmental and health data are not routinely collected and
analyzed by income and race. Nor are data routinely collected
on health risks posed by multiple industrial facilities, cumula-
tive and synergistic effects, or multiple and different pathways
of exposure. Risk assessment and risk management procedures
are not in themselves biased against certain income or racial
groups. However, risk assessment and risk management proce-
dures can be improved to better take into account equity
 considerations.
• Great opportunities exist for EPA and other government agen-
cies to improve communication about environmental problems
with members of low-income and racial minority groups. The
language, format and distribution of written materials, media 
relations, and efforts in two-way communication all can be im-
proved. In addition, EPA can broaden the spectrum of groups
with which it interacts.
• Since they have broad contact with affected communities, EPA’s
program and regional offices are well suited to address equity
concerns. The potential exists for effective action by such offices
to address disproportionate risks. These offices currently vary
considerably in terms of how they address environmental eq-
uity issues. Case studies of EPA program and regional offices re-
veal that opportunities exist for addressing environmental
equity issues and that there is a need for environmental equity
awareness training. A number of EPA regional offices have initi-
ated projects to address high risks in racial minority and low-in-
come  communities.
• Native Americans are a unique racial group that has a special
relationship with the federal government and distinct environ-
mental problems. Tribes often lack the physical infrastructure,
institutions, trained personnel and resources necessary to pro-
tect their members.
176
Data and Documents

Summary of Recommendations
Although large gaps in data exist, the Workgroup believes that enough
is known with sufﬁcient certainty to make several recommendations to
the Agency. These recommendations are also applicable to other public
and private groups engaged in environmental protection activities. The
job of achieving environmental equity is shared by everyone.
• EPA should increase the priority that it gives to issues of envi-
ronmental equity.
• EPA should establish and maintain information which provides
an objective basis for assessment of risks by income and race,
beginning with the development of a research and data collec-
tion plan.
• EPA should incorporate considerations of environmental equity
into the risk assessment process. It should revise its risk assess-
ment procedures to ensure, where practical and relevant, better
characterization of risk across populations, communities or geo-
graphic areas. These revisions could be useful in determining
whether there are any population groups at disproportionately
high risk.
• EPA should identify and target opportunities to reduce high
concentrations of risk to specific population groups, employing
approaches developed for geographic targeting.
• EPA should, where appropriate, assess and consider the distrib-
ution of projected risk reduction in major rulemakings and
Agency initiatives.
• EPA should selectively review and revise its permit, grant, mon-
itoring and enforcement procedures to address high concentra-
tions of risk in racial minority and low-income communities.
Since state and local governments have primary authority for
many environmental programs, EPA should emphasize its con-
cerns about environmental equity to them.
• EPA should expand and improve the level and forms with
which it communicates with racial minority and low-income
communities and should increase efforts to involve them in en-
vironmental policy-making.
• EPA should establish mechanisms, including a center of staff
support, to ensure that environmental equity concerns are incor-
porated in its long-term planning and operations.
Source: “Release of Environmental Equity Report.” http://www.
epa.gov/history/topics/justice/01.htm. Accessed May 14, 2008.
Documents  177

Executive Order 12898 (President Clinton)—
Federal Actions to Address Environmental
Justice in Minority Populations and Low-
Income Populations (1994)
One of the most important documents in the history of the environmen-
tal justice movement in the United States is Executive Order 12898, is-
sued by President Bill Clinton on February 11, 1994. In this order,
Clinton established a national policy for the role of environmental jus-
tice issues in the federal government and provided a structure by which
this policy was to be implemented.
February 11, 1994
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the
laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1-1. Implementation
1-101. Agency Responsibilities.
To the greatest extent practicable and
permitted by law, and consistent with the principles set forth in the
report on the National Performance Review, each Federal agency shall
make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying
and addressing, as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse
human health or environmental effects of its programs, policies, and
activities on minority populations and low-income populations in the
United States and its territories and possessions, the District of
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the Commonwealth
of the Mariana Islands.
1-102. Creation of an Interagency Working Group on Environmental
Justice.
(a) Within 3 months of the date of this order, the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency (“Administrator”) or the
Administrator’s designee shall convene an interagency Federal Working
Group on Environmental Justice (“Working Group”). The Working
Group shall comprise the heads of the following executive agencies and
ofﬁces, or their designees: (a) Department of Defense; (b) Department of
Health and Human Services; (c) Department of Housing and Urban
Development; (d) Department of Labor; (e) Department of Agriculture;
(f) Department of Transportation; (g) Department of Justice; (h)
Department of the Interior; (i) Department of Commerce; (j) Department
of Energy; (k) Environmental Protection Agency; (l) Ofﬁce of
Management and Budget; (m) Ofﬁce of Science and  Technology Policy;
178
Data and Documents

(n) Ofﬁce of the Deputy Assistant to the President for Environmental
Policy; (o) Ofﬁce of the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy; (p)
National Economic Council; (q) Council of Economic Advisers; and (r)
such other Government ofﬁcials as the President may designate. The
Working Group shall report to the President through the Deputy
Assistant to the President for Environmental Policy and the Assistant to
the President for Domestic Policy.
(b) The Working Group shall:
1. provide guidance to Federal agencies on criteria for identifying
disproportionately high and adverse human health or environ-
mental effects on minority populations and low-income
 populations;
2. coordinate with, provide guidance to, and serve as a clearing-
house for, each Federal agency as it develops an environmental
justice strategy as required by section 1–103 of this order, in or-
der to ensure that the administration, interpretation and en-
forcement of programs, activities and policies are undertaken in
a consistent manner;
3. assist in coordinating research by, and stimulating cooperation
among, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department
of Health and Human Services, the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, and other agencies conducting research or
other activities in accordance with section 3–3 of this order;
4. assust in coordinating data collection, required by this order;
5. examine existing data and studies on environmental justice;
6. hold public meetings as required in section 5–502(d) of this
 order; and
7. develop interagency model projects on environmental justice
that evidence cooperation among Federal agencies.
1-103. Development of Agency Strategies.
(a) Except as provided in
section 6–605 of this order, each Federal agency shall develop an
agency-wide environmental justice strategy, as set forth in subsections
(b)–(e) of this section that identiﬁes and addresses disproportionately
high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its
programs, policies, and activities on minority populations and low-
income populations. The environmental justice strategy shall list
programs, policies, planning and public participation processes,
enforcement, and/or rulemakings related to human health or the
environment that should be revised to, at a minimum: (1) promote
enforcement of all health and environmental statutes in areas with
 minority populations and low-income populations; (2) ensure greater
public participation; (3) improve research and data collection relating to
the health of and environment of minority populations and low-income
Documents  179

populations; and (4) identify differential patterns of  consumption of
natural resources among minority populations and low-income
populations. In addition, the environmental justice strategy shall
include, where appropriate, a timetable for undertaking identiﬁed
revisions and consideration of economic and social implications of the
revisions.
[Sections (b) through (g) and 1–104 provide “housekeeping” rules for the con-
duct of these responsibilities.]
Section 2-2. Federal Agency Responsibilities for Federal Programs
Each Federal agency shall conduct its programs, policies, and activities
that substantially affect human health or the environment, in a manner
that ensures that such programs, policies, and activities do not have the
effect of excluding persons (including populations) from participation
in, denying persons (including populations) the benefits of, or subject-
ing persons (including populations) to discrimination under, such pro-
grams, policies, and activities, because of their race, color, or national
origin.
Section 3-3. Research, Data Collection, and Analysis
[This section directs all agencies to collect and analyze data and carry
out research on environmental risks faced by minority and low-income
populations and workers who may be exposed to “substantial environ-
mental risks.”]
Section 4-4. Subsistence Consumption of Fish and Wildlife
[This section directs agencies to conduct research on the consumption
of ﬁsh and wildlife as a result of exposure to hazardous materials and
to provide nutritional guidance to populations that may be at risk be-
cause of their consumption of such foods.]
Section 5-5. Public Participation and Access to Information
[This section clariﬁes the right of the general public to provide input on
environmental justice issues to federal agencies and the manner by
which that information is to be utilized by those agencies.]
Section 6-6. General Provisions
[This section provides additional “housekeeping” instructions about
the relationships of this executive order to other laws and regulations,
special cases, costs, and judicial  review.]
Source: Executive Order no. 12898. Federal Register 59, no. 32 (February
16, 1994): 7629–7633.
180
Data and Documents

Not in My Backyard: Executive Order 12898
and Title VI as Tools for Achieving
Environmental Justice (2003)
In 2003, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights undertook a study to de-
termine how well four government agencies—the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency, the U.S. Department of the Interior, the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Transportation—have implemented Executive Order 12898
and Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The commission concluded
that these agencies had not made much progress in this regard. In its
letter of transmittal to the president and the Congress, the commission
made the following observation.
[S]ignificant problems and shortcomings remain. Federal agencies still
have neither fully incorporated environmental justice into their core
missions nor established accountability and performance outcomes for
programs and activities. Moreover, a commitment to environmental jus-
tice is often lacking in agency leadership, communities are not yet full
participants in environmental decision-making, and there is still inade-
quate scientific and technical literature on the relationship between
 environmental pollutants and human health status. Although poor com-
munities and communities of color are becoming more skilled at using
Title VI administrative processes to seek recourse and remedies, agen-
cies seldom, if ever, revoke a permit or withhold money from the recipi-
ents of federal funding for violating Title VI. Strong administrative
enforcement of Title VI is required in light of court decisions limiting ac-
cess to judicial recourse and remedies under Title VI. Uncertainty about
the use and effectiveness of Title VI in protecting the poor and commu-
nities of color is created by the absence of final investigative and recipi-
ent guidance by EPA. The agency was moving toward finalizing its Title
VI guidance at the time the Commission report was drafted, and we
look forward to its release. The other agencies, unlike EPA, lacked any
comprehensive Title VI investigation and recipient  guidance.
[Some of the conclusions offered by the commission are as follows:]
• A renewed effort by federal agencies to collect, analyze, and
maintain data on risks and exposures be undertaken.
• Formal guidance on assessing cumulative risk should be created
by federal agencies that considers the roles of social, economic,
and behavioral factors when assessing risk.
• Guidance should include a presumption of adverse health risks
when populations are exposed to multiple hazards from multi-
ple sources.
Documents  181

• Federal agencies should disaggregate data on risks and expo-
sures by race, ethnicity, gender, age, income, and geographic
location if communities are to have the tools they need to de-
fend environmental and human health and if agencies are to
fulfill their obligations under Executive Order 12898 and 
Title VI.
• Federal agencies should require state and local zoning and land-
use authorities, as a condition for receiving and continuing to
receive federal funding, to incorporate and implement the prin-
ciples of environmental justice into their zoning and land-use
policies.
• The funding scheme for the Superfund program should be re-
viewed by Congress to ensure that the program is effectively
funded and administered.
Source: U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Not in My Backyard: Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice.
Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, October 2003, pp.
iii, 27–28.
2003–2008 EPA Strategic Plan: Direction for
the Future (2003)
In September 2003, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pub-
lished a ﬁve-year plan for the agency that focused on ﬁve major goals:
clean air and addressing global climate change, clean and safe water,
land preservation and restoration, healthy communities and ecosys-
tems, and compliance and environmental stewardship. Each goal in-
cluded some discussion of environmental justice, but by far the greatest
emphasis occurred in Goal 4: Healthy Communities and Ecosystems.
The section on environmental justice in that part of the report included
the following discussion.
Restoring Healthy Communities: Environmental Justice
EPA remains committed to environmental justice for all people,
regardless of race, color, national origin, or income, in accordance with
Executive Order 12898, “Federal Actions to Address Environmental
Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations.”
Recognizing that minority and/or low-income communities may be
disproportionately exposed to environmental hazards and risks, we
will work to protect these and other affected communities.
Environmental justice means not only protecting human health and the
environment for everyone, but also ensuring that all people are treated
fairly and are given opportunities to participate meaningfully in
182
Data and Documents

developing, implementing, and enforcing environmental laws,
regulations, and policies.
EPA is establishing measurable environmental justice commit-
ments for eight national priorities: reducing asthma attacks, reducing
exposure to air toxics, increasing compliance with regulations, reducing
incidence of elevated blood lead levels, ensuring that ﬁsh and shellﬁsh
are safe to eat, ensuring that water is safe to drink, revitalizing brown-
ﬁelds and contaminated sites, and using collaborative problem-solving
to address environmental and public health concerns. We will promote
environmental justice in all aspects of our work by training staff; pro-
viding guidance, online tools, and other resources; sharing information
about successful strategies; and enhancing staff skills in working with
community-based organizations. We will continue to use dispute reso-
lution, facilitation, listening sessions, and other consensus-building
techniques and to convene stakeholders to address environmental and
public health issues.
Assessing and Cleaning Up Brownﬁelds
Brownﬁelds are real properties where expansion, redevelopment, or
reuse may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants. Assessing
brownﬁelds can help communities understand the risks these
properties pose and provides the information needed to undertake
cleanup and reuse. Cleaning up and reinvesting in these properties may
increase local tax bases, facilitate job growth, utilize existing
infrastructure, take development pressures off undeveloped land, and
improve and protect the environment. EPA will continue to award
competitive grants to assess and clean up brownﬁelds and to provide
job training opportunities within affected communities.
Awards are based on a number of factors including how well the
project reduces threats to human health and the environment, and cre-
ates and/or preserves greenspace. In addition, the Brownﬁelds Revi-
talization Act requires us to consider “the extent to which the grant
would address or facilitate the identiﬁcation and reduction of threats
to the health or welfare of minority or low-income communities, or
other sensitive populations,” underlining our commitment to environ-
mental justice. Our Brownﬁelds Program is also developing a method-
ology to assess the relationship between EPA-funded brownﬁelds
projects and the sensitive, socio-economically disadvantaged commu-
nities that they serve. EPA will use this methodology to improve how
the Brownﬁelds Program incorporates environmental justice concerns
into its operations.
We will continue to provide funds to state and tribal governments
to establish and enhance response programs that oversee the majority
of brownﬁelds assessments and cleanups. These programs provide
Documents  183

technical oversight and assist property owners; create inventories of
brownﬁelds sites; and develop policies, regulations, and  ordinances.
Funding can also be used to conduct assessment and cleanup activities
at brownﬁelds properties. EPA funding is often critical for operating
these response programs, particularly for tribal governments.
We will also continue to provide outreach and technical assis-
tance to communities confronting brownfields and perform targeted
assessments at sites where stakeholders are seeking federal assistance
to identify the extent of contamination. Through the Brownfields and
Land Revitalization Technology Support Center, we will help stream-
line site investigations and cleanup processes, identify technology op-
tions, evaluate contractor capabilities and recommendations, and
explain complex technologies to communities. Technical tools such as
Triad and SMARTe can aid communities’ brownfields efforts. EPA will
continue to sponsor brownfields workshops and educational events
that provide forums for sharing ideas, lessons learned, and best
 practices.
Reducing Transboundary Threats along the U.S.–Mexico Border
The U.S.-Mexico Border 2012 Program, a joint effort between the
governments of the United States and Mexico, works with the 10
border states and border communities to reduce transboundary threats
to improve the region’s environmental and ecosystem health. As part
of our continuing commitment to environmental justice, EPA is
working with some disadvantaged border communities to improve
water quality in both the United States and Mexico. For decades, raw
sewage posed a signiﬁcant public health and environmental threat to
U.S. and Mexican communities. Inadequate water and sewage
treatment cause border residents to suffer disproportionately from
hepatitis A and other waterborne diseases. EPA assists communities in
the U.S.-Mexico border region to increase the number of homes with
access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. As this infrastructure
comes on line, discharges of raw sewage will be reduced and surface
water quality will improve. Restoration of surface water quality on 10
impaired transboundary waters is an EPA priority. EPA also will
address health and environmental risks presented by abandoned tires
and hazardous waste. Piles of waste tires breed mosquitoes and other
disease-carrying organisms, and they are prone to ﬁres that are difﬁcult
to extinguish. Contaminated hazardous waste sites pose acute and
long-term risks from metal poisoning. We will address key sites on the
border, laying the foundation for future remediation efforts.
Source: 2003–2008 EPA Strategic Plan: Direction for the Future. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, September 30, 2003, 
pp. 91–93.
184
Data and Documents

Toolkit for Assessing Potential 
Allegations of Environmental Injustice (2004)
The ultimate federal authority for dealing with claims of environmental
inequities in the United States is the EPA. The agency has developed
the “Toolkit for Assessing Potential Allegations of Environmental In-
justice” for use when possible instances of environmental injustice are
brought before it. The Toolkit outlines four stages for analysis of an al-
leged case of environmental injustice: (1) problem formulation, (2) data
collection, (3) assessment of the potential for adverse environmental
and human health effects, and (4) assessment of the potential for dispro-
portionately high and adverse effects. A key part of this scheme is stage
2, data collection. To aid agency employees in collecting data relevant to
a claim of environmental inequity, the EPA has developed a detailed list
of relevant factors. They are as follows:
(1) Identiﬁcation of Environmental Sources of Stress and Likeli-
hood of Exposure.
Information is collected to determine the sources of environmental
pressures or stress in the affected area that are different from or addi-
tional to those in the reference community. This includes an assessment
of existing or likely future additional pressures or sources of stress and
their proximity to the community (compared with the reference com-
munity), that may result from a particular decision or activity. Speciﬁc
types of data to be considered include:
• Sources of stressors placed on the community
– Number of environmentally regulated facilities within a
 community
– Length of time regulated facilities have operated within a
 community
– Number of current and past permit exceedances by regulated
facilities
– Number or extent of non-point sources of pollution
– Noise levels
• Potential exposure to stressors
– Proximity of regulated facilities to the majority of the commu-
nity’s population
– Proximity to multiple contaminant sources
– Potential or actual cumulative exposure across multiple  locations
– Potential or actual exposure to multiple stressors
– Number of biomarkers of exposure that are evident 
• Environmental conditions resulting from stressors
–“Quality” of the air, water, and other environmental media
– Density of contaminants in biota (living organisms)
Documents  185

• Environmental vulnerability
– Climate
– Geomorphic features
– Hydrogeomorphic features
– Presence of ecologically sensitive areas
(2) Collection of Data on Affected Area and Reference Community.
Health-related, social, and economic data on the affected area and
on the potential reference communities are collected. This information
will be used to compare impacts on the affected area in comparison
with the reference community. Generally speaking, the geographic
boundaries for a potentially affected area will be deﬁned by the prob-
lem (e.g., deﬁning an impact zone around a hazardous waste site or
permitted facility) or by the community itself.
Health Indicators provide information on the general health of the
community’s residents and their ability to cope with environmental
stresses. Speciﬁc types of data that would be considered include:
• Existing health conditions
– Percent of infant mortality within the community (per 1000
births)
– Average birth weight
– Adult mortality
– Life expectancy at birth
• Health impacts from environmental stressors
– Number of illnesses attributable to chemical contaminants—
if contaminant stressors are in question.
– Number of diseases attributable to pathogens—if pathogenic
stressors are in question.
Social Indicators include data on the distribution of certain popula-
tion characteristics (e.g., race, color, or ethnicity). Specific types of data
that would be considered include:
• General demographics
– Percent of population (that have various ethnic and national
origins)
– Population density, including the distribution of urban and
rural populations
– Percent of the population that is Native American
– Distribution of languages spoken in population
– Percent of the population that is literate in English or other
 languages
• Vulnerability to exposure
– Percent of community with access to public transportation
and services
186
Data and Documents

– Percent of community with access to health care facilities
– Percent of community that uses regulated (cigarettes, alcohol)
and unregulated (drugs) substances
– Percent of community with access to alternative sources of
drinking water
– Percent of community with sewage treatment
– Percent of community that relies on local food sources
• Government response actions
– Expenditure/investment on providing access to environmen-
tal information (as a percent of total community budget)
– Expenditure/investment on environmental education and
training (as a percent of total community budget)
– Number and frequency of public meetings on proposed
 actions and policy decisions
– Number of different types of materials distributed
– Percent of households that received distributed materials
– Number of documents available in the various languages as-
sociated with a community
• Community participation
– Community identiﬁcation
– Cultural dynamics
– Quality of public participation of community residents
– Number of community residents participating in non-govern-
mental organizations
– Number of community members participating in the decision-
making process
Economic Indicators reveal trends about the community’s economic
wellbeing. Specific types of data that would be considered include:
• Economic information
– Unemployment rate
– Income level and distribution
– Percent of homeowners in a community or the percent of
renters in a community
– Percent of community residents with employment in pollu-
tion-generating industrial facilities or services
– Number of brownﬁelds in the community
– Reliance on natural resources for the community’s economic
base (as a percent of total community budget)
Source: Desk Reference to the Toolkit for Assessing Potential Allegations of
Environmental Injustice. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection
Agency, 2006, pp. 2–5. http://www.epa.gov/compliance/resources/
policies/ej/ej-toolkit-desk-ref.pdf.
Documents  187

Evaluation Report: EPA Needs to Consistently
Implement the Intent of the Executive Order
on Environmental Justice (2004)
In late 2003, the Ofﬁce of Inspector General of the EPA initiated a study
to determine the extent to which the EPA had implemented Executive
Order 12898 on Environmental Justice, issued by President Bill Clin-
ton a decade earlier. As the title of the report suggests, the inspector
general found that the agency had failed in a number of ways to carry
out the spirit and the letter of the executive order. The report’s general
conclusions are summarized below. Note that the EPA was required to
respond to the report; that response is appended as a part of this report.
Executive Summary
Purpose
In 1994, President Clinton issued Executive Order 12898, “Federal
Action to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and
Low-Income Populations,” to ensure such populations are not
subjected to a disproportionately high level of environmental risk. The
overall objective of this evaluation was to determine how the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is integrating environmental
justice into its day-to-day operations. Speciﬁcally, we sought to answer
the following questions:
• How has the Agency implemented Executive Order 12898 and
integrated its concepts into EPA’s regional and program ofﬁces?
• How are environmental justice areas deﬁned at the regional lev-
els and what is the impact?
Results in Brief
EPA has not fully implemented Executive Order 12898 nor consistently
integrated environmental justice into its day-to-day operations. EPA has
not identiﬁed minority and low-income, nor identiﬁed populations
addressed in the Executive Order, and has neither deﬁned nor
developed criteria for determining disproportionately impacted
[deﬁnitional footnote omitted here]. Moreover, in 2001, the Agency restated
its commitment to environmental justice in a manner that does not
emphasize minority and low-income populations, the intent of the
Executive Order.
Although the Agency has been actively involved in implementing
Executive Order 12898 for 10 years, it has not developed a clear vision
or a comprehensive strategic plan, and has not established values,
188
Data and Documents

goals, expectations, and performance measurements. We did note that
the Agency made an attempt to issue an environmental justice toolkit;
endorsed environmental justice training; and required that all regional
and programmatic offices submit “Action Plans” to develop some ac-
countability for environmental justice integration.
In the absence of environmental justice definitions, criteria, or
standards from the Agency, many regional and program offices have
taken steps, individually, to implement environmental justice policies.
This has resulted in inconsistent approaches by the regional offices.
Thus, the implementation of environmental justice actions is dependent
not only on minority and income status but on the EPA region in which
the person resides. Our comparison of how environmental justice pro-
tocols used by three different regions would apply to the same city
showed a wide disparity in protected populations.
We believe the Agency is bound by the requirements of Executive
Order 12898 and does not have the authority to reinterpret the order.
The Acting Deputy Administrator needs to reaffirm that the Executive
Order 12898 applies specifically to minority and low-income popula-
tions that are disproportionately impacted. After 10 years, there is an
urgent need for the Agency to standardize environmental justice defini-
tions, goals, and measurements for the consistent implementation and
integration of environmental justice at EPA.
Recommendations
We recommended that the Acting Deputy Administrator issue a
memorandum reafﬁrming that Executive Order 12898 is an Agency
priority and that minority and low-income populations
disproportionately impacted will be the beneﬁciaries of this Executive
Order. Additionally, EPA should establish speciﬁc time frames for the
development of deﬁnitions, goals, and measurements. Furthermore, we
recommended that EPA develop and articulate a clear vision on the
Agency’s approach to environmental justice. We also recommended
that EPA develop a comprehensive strategic plan, ensure appropriate
training is provided, clearly deﬁne the mission of the Ofﬁce of
Environmental Justice, determine if adequate resources are being
applied to environmental justice, and develop a systematic approach to
gathering information related to environmental justice.
Agency Comments and OIG Evaluation
In the response to our draft report, the Agency disagreed with the central
premise that Executive Order 12898 requires the Agency to identify and
address the environmental effects of its programs on minority and low-
income populations. The Agency believes the Executive Order “instructs
the Agency to identify and address the disproportionately high and
Documents  189

adverse human health or environmental effects of it [sic] programs,
policies, and activities.” The Agency does not take into account the
inclusion of the minority and low-income populations, and indicated 
it is attempting to provide environmental justice for everyone. While
providing adequate environmental justice to the entire population is
commendable, doing so had already been EPA’s mission prior to
implementation of the Executive Order; we do not believe the intent 
of the Executive Order was simply to reiterate that mission.
A summary of the Agency’s response and our evaluation is in-
cluded at the end of each chapter. The Agency’s complete response and
our evaluation of that response are included in Appendices D and E,
 respectively.
Source: Ofﬁce of Inspector General. EPA Needs to Consistently Implement
the Intent of the Executive Order on Environmental Justice. Report No.
2004-P-00007. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
March 1, 2004, pp. i–ii.
Redefining Rights in America: The Civil Rights
Record of the George W. Bush Administration,
2001–2004 (2004)
In 2004, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights undertook a compre-
hensive review of the civil rights record of the ﬁrst administration of
President George W. Bush. The review covered subjects such as judi-
cial nominations, federal appointments, the federal workforce, voting
rights, fair housing, afﬁrmative action, racial proﬁling, and environ-
mental justice. The report is no longer easily available from the com-
mission, but a draft of the ﬁnal report is available at a number of sites
online. The section of the report dealing with environmental justice is
reprinted below. Numerous footnotes and other citations are omitted
from the selection.
Environmental Justice
Researchers have asserted that “there are times when environmental
problems raise important civil rights questions.” Civil rights violations
occur when certain communities, especially black, Hispanic, and Native
American, are inequitably burdened by environmental ills. There are
many historical and present-day examples of environmental injustice.
Among them:
• Public and private initiatives have targeted minority communi-
ties for locating toxic facilities, such as incinerators, oil reﬁner-
ies, power plants, landﬁlls, and diesel bus stations;
190
Data and Documents

• Land-use policies and unhealthy and hazardous conditions
have uprooted working class minority communities from neigh-
borhoods; and
• Low-income people and minorities have been excluded from
decisionmaking regarding environmental policies, programs,
and permits that affected them.
Myriad reasons account for the fact that many hazardous waste
sites are located in minority communities, ranging from discrimination
to economic motivation. Regardless, minority communities bear a dis-
proportionate share of the burden of these sites, including exposure to
hazardous conditions and life-threatening chemicals, such as pesticides
and cancer-causing solvents, a circumstance that has led people of color
to increasingly seek justice from discriminatory environmental policies
over the past three decades.
Environmental justice seeks the equitable treatment of all racial
and income groups and cultures in the development, execution, and
 enforcement of environmental laws, rules, and policies, including their
meaningful participation in the decisionmaking processes of the gov-
ernment. Further, environmental justice provides a framework for
 minorities and low-income populations to identify the continually rein-
forced political and economic assumptions underlying  environmental
injustices.
A History of Environmental Justice Policies
In 1970, to better address pollution concerns, President Nixon
reorganized environmental functions of federal agencies and created
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). As a federal grant-making
agency, EPA has an obligation to ensure compliance with Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination based on race,
color, or national origin in programs and activities receiving federal
ﬁnancial assistance and requires federal agencies to regulate against
discriminatory practices. The law protects against both intentional
discrimination and actions that have a disparate impact on minorities,
although the Supreme Court has determined that individuals can only
pursue cases alleging the former. They must rely on federal agencies to
bring disparate impact environmental justice lawsuits against entities
that receive federal funding. The statute and Title VI regulations
provide EPA with the authority to promote environmental justice
policies.
In the 1970s, mounting evidence of discrimination prompted the
birth of the environmental justice movement. In 1979, the residents of
an East Houston, Texas, community alleged that the decision to place a
garbage dump in their neighborhood was racially motivated and in vi-
olation of their civil rights. Although the court found that the place-
ment of the dump would irreparably harm the community, it was
Documents  191

unable to establish whether intentional discrimination had occurred or
whether the site’s placement reﬂected a discriminatory pattern. The
case, however, launched the use of courts as a tool and highlighted the
need to collect data and make it available to communities challenging
environmental decisions.
In 1982, a citizen protest against a dump containing highly toxic
waste, which the state of North Carolina was forcing on one of the
poorest counties in the state with a population that was more than 84
percent black, captured national attention. As a result, a congressional
delegate asked the U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce to conduct a study
of hazardous waste landﬁll sites in the region. The study located four
hazardous commercial waste landﬁlls—three were in predominantly
black communities and the fourth was in a low-income neighborhood.
As evidence mounted, the need for strong enforcement became
clear. EPA issued Title VI regulations in 1972. In 1984, EPA strengthened
the regulations to grant the administrator authority to refuse, delay, or
discontinue funding to any program recipient operating in a discrimi-
natory manner. The regulations, however, were not enforced against
state and local funding recipients until 1993.
The documented patterns of discriminatory dumping and the lack
of environmental justice enforcement precipitated President Clinton’s
1995 [sic] issuance of Executive Order 12898, “Federal Actions to Ad-
dress Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income
Populations.” The order directs federal agencies to develop agencywide
environmental justice strategies and to review their programs, policies,
and activities that have a negative environmental impact on minority
and low-income communities. Federal agencies are required to create
accountability standards and measures to evaluate the goals of the ex-
ecutive order, with EPA the lead agency.
Integration of Environmental Equity in EPA Policy
To promote Executive Order 12898, in August 2001 President Bush
asked then EPA Administrator Christine Todd Whitman to issue a
memorandum afﬁrming the administration’s commitment to
environmental justice, including its integration into all programs,
policies, and activities. EPA headquarters and regional ofﬁces
responded to the memorandum by developing action plans for
obtaining measurable justice outcomes. The plans mandate that
information be shared between program ofﬁces; establish data
collection, management, and evaluation standards; and require that
information be shared with and input accepted from external
stakeholders. Program and regional ofﬁces began implementing the
plans in 2003.
In the summer of 2003, EPA also launched a $1.5 million Environ-
mental Justice Collaborative Problem Solving Grant Program for 15
192
Data and Documents

nonproﬁt community-based organizations, the goal of which is to assist
community organizations in ﬁnding viable solutions. Among the bene-
ﬁciaries are the Coalition for West Oakland Revitalization, which is ad-
dressing the air quality problem in one of the poorest neighborhoods in
the Bay Area of California, and the Pioneer Valley Project, Inc., which
seeks to resolve health and related economic problems of Vietnamese
women employed in nail salons in Springﬁeld, Massachusetts, and
 surrounding areas caused by exposure to hazardous chemicals. Despite
these initiatives, the National Academy of Public Administration
(NAPA) recommended that EPA set clear expectations for producing re-
sults and that the agency establish accountability standards. According
to NAPA, the administrator’s August 2001 memorandum was an exam-
ple of how the agency espouses strong language and expectations, but
fails to provide speciﬁc agencywide measures of accountability. The
study identiﬁed several reasons for the deﬁciency, including EPA’s fail-
ure to establish goals for speciﬁc outcomes or adopt methods for mea-
suring progress. Witnesses testifying before the Commission at a 2002
hearing on environmental justice stated that similar problems are found
at other agencies. Since EPA does not identify speciﬁc outcomes nor
measure progress, it is difﬁcult to assess whether progress has been
made toward its goals.
Furthermore, EPA’s inspector general has determined that the for-
mer Bush administrator’s memorandum changed the focus of the envi-
ronmental justice program by deemphasizing minority and low-income
populations. The inspector general also found that despite a decade of
active pursuit, Executive Order 12898 is still not part of EPA’s core mis-
sion. President Bush did not consider implementation of the order a
primary goal. The inspector general notes that EPA has not developed a
clear vision or a comprehensive strategic plan, nor established values,
goals, expectations, and performance measurements regarding the or-
der. Further, EPA has not provided regional or program ofﬁces with
standards for what constitutes a minority or low-income community, or
deﬁned the term “disproportionately” as it relates to environmental jus-
tice. If EPA does not identify parameters for environmental justice, it
will not be able to comply with Executive Order 12898.
Environmental Justice Enforcement and Guidance
In May 2001, Administrator Whitman formed a task force to resolve 66
open Title VI complaints that had accumulated at EPA between 1998
and 2001. Whitman assembled the task force to take advantage of a
congressional decision to allow EPA to use its 2002 appropriations to
investigate and resolve Title VI complaints. By February 8, 2002,
Whitman had reduced the complaint backlog to 41. Of the 41 remaining
cases, 34 were identiﬁed as acceptable for investigation. Of the 23
complaints ﬁled since February 2002, two were accepted for
Documents  193

investigation and 13 were under review as of May 2004. Although 
EPA was commended for reducing the existing backlog and accepting
complaints for investigation, environmental justice experts testiﬁed
before the Commission that some had been improperly handled. For
example, a complaint against the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality concerning its issuance of permits for a
proposed steel mill was rejected without an investigation into its
disparate impact claim. According to one researcher, EPA’s neglect of
the disparate impact claim raises concerns that the task force’s objective
to reduce the backlog supercedes its obligation to appropriately
investigate complaints.
These concerns merit attention because EPA receives the bulk of
Title VI environmental grievances and has taken the lead in providing
guidance to environmental stakeholders, advocates, and legal scholars.
Adding to uncertainties over EPA’s complaint processing is its failure to
issue ﬁnal Title VI guidance deﬁning: (1) what constitutes disparate im-
pact; (2) when complaints can be ﬁled; (3) how long complaints take to
process; (4) how communities are given information about participation
in decisionmaking; and (5) how the interests of industry and communi-
ties can be balanced. Although EPA has issued various Title VI interim
guidance on these issues, ﬁnal guidance is needed to inform communi-
ties continually exposed to environmental pollutants of the important
elements of an adverse disparate impact violation. Furthermore, the de-
lay has left state and local regulators, among others, unable to deter-
mine when an industrial facility may be violating Title VI.
Deﬁning Environmental Standards and Identifying Hazards
The Bush administration has undertaken several actions that
undermine environmental justice. In so doing, it seems to believe that
minority and low-income populations are not disproportionately
affected by environmental pollutants. For example, a 2003 EPA report
failed to embrace the notion that poor and disadvantaged populations
reside in areas with higher concentrations of pollutants, or that the
distribution of environmental burdens is based on race, income, and
political power. According to researchers, this claim was a clear reversal
of EPA’s historical stand that minority and low-income communities
are overburdened with environmental pollutants and an apparent
retreat from Executive Order 12898. EPA and other federal agencies
typically do not cooperate with health policy experts and affected
minority and low-income communities to eliminate or reduce
environmental pollutants.
Furthermore, under President Bush, the EPA has yet to develop 
a standard for assessing the cumulative impact of environmental haz-
ards. Cumulative impact is the “threat to public health caused by the
exposure to the sum total of releases” of these hazards. EPA ofﬁces,
194
Data and Documents

 including the Ofﬁce for Civil Rights, have published guidance on mea-
suring the risks. The agency has not, however, developed a cumulative
impact standard, indicating that the effort to establish a causal relation-
ship between pollutants and health problems is difﬁcult. EPA’s 
delay prevents the government from eliminating the hazardous
 environmental conditions foisted upon minority communities. For
 example, one  researcher described a mostly minority community in a
region between Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana, where the
cumulative  environmental hazards produced by local industry far ex-
ceed the U.S.  average. According to this researcher, environmental pol-
lutants are so numerous that the region is known as “Cancer Alley.”
Fostering Public Participation
The administration has also failed to increase the participation of
affected minority and low-income communities in information
gathering and dissemination and decisionmaking processes.
Meaningful public participation by affected communities in the
decisionmaking process is one of the cornerstones of environmental
justice. Furthermore, community input is integral  to planning,
monitoring, problem solving, implementation, and evaluation of
environmental policies and practices. Yet, EPA has not conducted
public meetings to explain Executive Order 12898, its other
environmental justice policies, or how affected communities could
participate in decisionmaking. Other agencies with environmental
justice components have similar problems.
General Environmental Policies with Civil Rights Relevance
Finally, the administration has adopted general environmental 
policies that affect minority and low-income communities seemingly
without considering the civil rights consequences. For example, 
in 2002, President Bush signed the Small Business Liability Relief 
and Brownﬁelds Revitalization Act of 2001 into law. Although on 
its face, the act seems like a viable plan to clean up abandoned and
contaminated sites and redevelop them for commercial and residential
purposes, it fails to account for the reality that white neighborhoods,
regardless of economic status, generally fare better under such
programs than minority communities. White communities experience
faster cleanup, better results, and harsher assessments against those
failing to clean them up as expected, despite that many abandoned
industrial sites exist in minority and low-income communities.
Moreover, the act removes legal responsibility for contaminated sites
from prospective buyers, contiguous property owners, and “innocent”
landowners. In so doing, it exempts small businesses from ﬁnes when
they or their agents, for example, dispose of trash at waste sites and
provides incentive for redevelopment. However, this exemption raises
Documents  195

concern that removing responsibilities from companies will also
remove legal remedies available to those most hurt by contamination,
which are disproportionately minority and low-income communities.
Furthermore, redevelopment in minority communities is not always
successful because there is no vigorous enforcement of regulations that
establish redevelopment standards.
Similarly, the Bush administration has supported the proposed
Clean Skies Act despite that the proposal does not provide environmen-
tal justice safeguards. The Clean Skies Act would repeal the Clean Air
Act’s requirement that facilities install updated pollution control
 equipment when expanding their capacities. The Clean Skies Act also
expands emissions allowances within geographic regions to include ni-
trogen oxides and mercury, in addition to sulfur dioxide. Under the
Clean Skies Act, power plants must have one allowance for every ton of
pollution they emit. A power plant that reduces emissions can sell un-
used allowances on the open market to another power plant. Conse-
quently, the proposed act permits power plants to emit unlimited
amounts of nitrogen oxides and mercury provided they purchase al-
lowances from environmentally sound plants.
According to researchers, allowing power plants to increase their
emissions may heighten the concentration of toxins in predominantly
minority and low-income communities because many of the plants that
purchase allowances are located in such areas. For example, in San
Francisco, 87 percent of the pollution allowances produced by environ-
mentally sound power plants were purchased by reﬁneries and power
plants in heavily industrialized and predominately minority and low-
income communities.
In sum, the Bush administration has not adequately addressed en-
vironmental justice issues. Despite developing environmental justice
goals, EPA has not created methods to measure the administration’s
progress toward them. Although EPA has reduced its backlog of Title
VI complaints, concerns have been raised about those that were dis-
missed or rejected. The administration also does not recognize or ac-
knowledge that minority and low-income communities are
disproportionately exposed to environmental pollutants. Despite both
the administration’s position and whether municipalities and states are
intentionally carrying out discriminatory policies, numerous studies re-
veal that minority communities are home to a disproportionate share of
health hazards and waste sites. Minority and low-income people are
victimized, and the Bush administration must acknowledge that envi-
ronmental injustice exists.
Source: U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Ofﬁce of Civil Rights Evalua-
tion. Redeﬁning Rights in America: The Civil Rights Record of the George W.
Bush Administration, 2001–2004. Draft Report. Washington, DC: U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights, September 2004, pp. 72–79.
196
Data and Documents

Documents  197
Environmental Justice: EPA Should Devote
More Attention to Environmental Justice
When Developing Clean Air Rules (2005)
In 2005, at the request of Hilda L. Solis (D-CA), ranking member on
the House Subcommittee on Environment and Hazardous Materials of
the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the Government Account-
ability Ofﬁce (GAO) conducted a study to see how effectively the EPA
incorporated principles of environmental justice in its rulemaking
about clean air regulations. The GAO’s conclusions and recommenda-
tions are listed below.
Conclusions
We found some evidence that EPA ofﬁcials considered environmental
justice when drafting or ﬁnalizing the three clean air rules we examined.
During the drafting of the three rules, even when the workgroups
discussed environmental justice, their capability to identify potential
concerns may have been limited by a lack of guidance, training, and
involvement of EPA’s environmental justice coordinators. It is important
that EPA thoroughly consider environmental justice because the states
and other entities, which generally have the primary permitting
authority, are not subject to Executive Order 12898.
EPA’s capability to identify environmental justice concerns
through economic reviews also appears to be limited. More than 10
years have elapsed since the executive order directed federal agencies,
to the extent practicable and permitted by law, to identify and address
the disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmen-
tal effects of their programs, policies, and activities. However, EPA ap-
parently does not have sufﬁcient data and modeling techniques to be
able to distinguish localized adverse impacts for a speciﬁc community.
For example, EPA has not agreed upon the complete list of data that
would be needed to perform an environmental justice analysis. This
suggests that, although EPA has developed general guidance for con-
sidering environmental justice, it has not established speciﬁc modeling
techniques for assessing the potential environmental justice implica-
tions of any clean air rules. In addition, by not including a discussion of
environmental justice in all of the economic reviews, EPA decision mak-
ers may not have been fully informed about the environmental justice
impacts of all the rules.
Finally, even though members of the public commented about two
rules’ potential to increase reﬁnery emissions—potential environmental
justice issues, (1) in one case, EPA did not provide a response and (2) in
the other case, it did not explain the basis for its response, such as the
rationale for its beliefs and the data on which it based its beliefs. While

these may not have been signiﬁcant comments requiring a response,
EPA’s public involvement policy calls for EPA to provide responses
when feasible, and this policy does not appear to distinguish comments
on Advanced Notices of Proposed Rulemaking from comments on pro-
posed rules.
Recommendations for Executive Action
In order to ensure that environmental justice issues are adequately
identiﬁed and considered when clean air rules are being drafted and
ﬁnalized, we recommend that the EPA Administrator take the following
four actions:
• ensure that the workgroups devote attention to environmental
justice while drafting and ﬁnalizing clean air rules;
• enhance the workgroups’ ability to identify potential environ-
mental justice issues through such steps as (1) providing work-
group members with guidance and training to help them
identify potential environmental justice problems and (2) in-
volving environmental justice coordinators in the workgroups
when appropriate;
• improve assessments of potential environmental justice impacts
in economic reviews by identifying the data and developing the
modeling techniques that are needed to assess such impacts;
and
• direct cognizant ofﬁcials to respond fully, when feasible, to pub-
lic comments on environmental justice, for example, by better
explaining the rationale for EPA’s beliefs and by providing its
supporting data.
Source: U.S. Government Accountability Office. Environmental Justice:
EPA Should Devote More Attention to Environmental Justice When Develop-
ing Clean Air Rules. Report GAO-05-289. Washington, DC: Government
Accountability Office, July 2005, 23–24.
Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty (2007)
In 2007, the Justice and Witness Ministries of the United Church of
Christ published a report on the status of the environmental justice
movement in the United States, an updated version of its groundbreak-
ing 1987 report. In the executive summary of the report, its authors
presented the key ﬁndings and conclusions of their study.
Key Findings
The application of these new methods, which better determine where
people live in relation to where hazardous sites are located, reveals that
racial disparities in the distribution of hazardous wastes are greater
198
Data and Documents

than previously reported. In fact, these methods show that people of
color make up the majority of those living in host neighborhoods
within 3 kilometers (1.8 miles) of the nation’s hazardous waste facilities.
Racial and ethnic disparities are prevalent throughout the country.
National Disparities.
More than nine million people (9,222,000) are
estimated to live in circular host neighborhoods within 3 kilometers 
of the nation’s 413 commercial hazardous waste facilities. More than 
5.1 million people of color, including 2.5 million Hispanics or Latinos, 1.8
million African Americans, 616,000 Asians/Pacific Islanders and 62,000
Native Americans live in neighborhoods with one or more commercial
hazardous waste facilities. Host neighborhoods of commercial hazardous
waste facilities are 56% people of color whereas non-host areas are 30%
people of color. Percentages of African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos
and Asians/Pacific Islanders in host neighborhoods are 1.7, 2.3 and 1.8
times greater (20% vs. 12%, 27% vs. 12%, and 6.7% vs. 3.6%), respectively.
Poverty rates in the host neighborhoods are 1.5 times greater than non-
host areas (18% vs. 12%).
Neighborhoods with Clustered Facilities.
Neighborhoods with
facilities clustered close together have higher percentages of people of
color than those with non-clustered facilities (69% vs. 51%). Likewise,
neighborhoods with clustered facilities have disproportionately high
poverty rates. Because people of color and the poor are highly
concentrated in neighborhoods with multiple facilities, they continue to
be particularly vulnerable to the various negative impacts of hazardous
waste facilities.
EPA Regional Disparities.
Racial disparities for people of color as a
whole exist in nine out of 10 U.S. EPA regions (all except Region 3).
Disparities in people of color percentages between host neighborhoods
and non-host areas are greatest in: Region 1, the Northeast (36% vs.
15%); Region 4, the southeast (54% vs. 30%); Region 5, the Midwest
(53% vs. 19%); Region 6, the South (63% vs. 42%); and Region 9, the
southwest (80% vs. 49%). For Hispanics, African Americans and
Asians/Paciﬁc Islanders, statistically signiﬁcant disparities exist in the
majority or vast majority of EPA regions. The pattern of people of color
being especially concentrated in areas where facilities are clustered is
also geographically widespread throughout the country.
State Disparities.
Forty of the 44 states (90%) with hazardous waste
facilities have disproportionately high percentages of people of color in
circular host neighborhoods within 3 kilometers of the facilities. States
with the 10 largest differences in people of color percentages between
host neighborhoods and non-host areas include (in descending order by
Documents  199

the size of the differences): Michigan (66% vs. 19%), Nevada (79% vs.
33%), Kentucky (51% vs. 10%), Illinois (68% vs. 31%), Alabama (66% vs.
31%), Tennessee (54% vs. 20%), Washington (53% vs. 20%), Kansas (47%
vs. 16%), Arkansas (52% vs. 21%) and California (81% vs. 51%). Thirty-
ﬁve states have socioeconomic disparities, i.e., in poverty rates. In these
states, the average poverty rate in host neighborhoods is 18% compared
to 12% in non-host areas.
Metropolitan Disparities.
In metropolitan areas, where four of every
ﬁve hazardous waste facilities are located, people of color percentages in
hazardous waste host neighborhoods are signiﬁcantly greater than those
in non-host areas (57% vs. 33%). Likewise, the nation’s metropolitan
areas show disparities in percentages of African Americans,
Hispanics/Latinos and Asians/Paciﬁc Islanders, 20% vs. 13%, 27% vs.
14% and 6.8% vs. 4.4%, respectively. Socioeconomic disparities exist
between host neighborhoods and non-host areas, with poverty rates of
18% vs. 12%, respectively. One hundred and ﬁve of the 149 metropolitan
areas with facilities (70%) have host neighborhoods with
disproportionately high percentages of people of color, and 46 of these
metro areas (31%) have majority people of color host neighborhoods.
Continuing Signiﬁcance of Race.
In 1987, Toxic Wastes and Race in the
United States found race to be more important than socioeconomic
status in predicting the location of the nation’s commercial hazardous
waste facilities. In 2007, our current study results show that race
continues to be a signiﬁcant and robust predictor of commercial
hazardous waste facility locations when socioeconomic factors are
taken into account.
Conclusions
Twenty years after the release of Toxic Wastes and Race, signiﬁcant
racial and socioeconomic disparities persist in the distribution of the
nation’s commercial hazardous waste facilities. Although the current
assessment uses newer methods that better match where people and
hazardous waste facilities are located, the conclusions are very much
the same as they were in 1987.
Race matters. People of color and persons of low socioeconomic sta-
tus are still disproportionately impacted and are particularly concen-
trated in neighborhoods and communities with the greatest number of
facilities. Race continues to be an independent predictor of where haz-
ardous wastes are located, and it is a stronger predictor than income,
education and other socioeconomic indicators. People of color now
comprise a majority in neighborhoods with commercial hazardous
200
Data and Documents

waste facilities, and much larger (more than two-thirds) majorities can
be found in neighborhoods with clustered facilities. African Americans,
Hispanics/Latinos and Asian Americans/Pacific Islanders alike are dis-
proportionately burdened by hazardous wastes in the U.S.
Place matters. People of color are particularly concentrated in
neighborhoods and communities with the greatest number of haz-
ardous waste facilities, a finding that directly parallels that of the origi-
nal UCC report. This current appraisal also reveals that racial
disparities are widespread throughout the country, whether one exam-
ines EPA regions, states or metropolitan areas, where the lion’s share of
facilities is located. Significant racial and socioeconomic disparities ex-
ist today despite the considerable societal attention to the problem
noted in this report. These findings raise serious questions about the
ability of current policies and institutions to adequately protect people
of color and the poor from toxic threats.
Unequal protection places communities of color at special risk. Not only
are people of color differentially impacted by toxic wastes and contami-
nation, they can expect different responses from the government when
it comes to remediation—as clearly seen in the two case studies in Post-
Katrina New Orleans and in Dickson County, Tennessee. Thus, it does
not appear that existing environmental, health and civil rights laws and
local land use controls have been adequately applied or adapted to re-
ducing health risks or mitigating various adverse impacts to families
living in or near toxic “hot spots.”
Polluting industries still follow the path of least resistance. For many
industries it is a “race to the bottom,” where land, labor and lives are
cheap. It’s about profits and the “bottom line.” Environmental “sacrifice
zones” are seen as the price of doing business. Vulnerable communities,
populations and individuals often fall between the regulatory cracks.
They are in many ways “invisible” communities. The environmental
justice movement served to make these disenfranchised communities
visible and vocal.
The current environmental protection apparatus is “broken” and needs to
be “fixed.” The current environmental protection system fails to provide
equal protection to people of color and low-income communities. Vari-
ous levels of government have been slow to respond to environmental
health threats from toxic waste in communities of color. The mission of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was never to
address environmental policies and practices that result in unfair, unjust
and inequitable outcomes. The impetus for change came from grassroots
mobilization that views environmental protection as a basic right, not a
privilege reserved for a few who can “vote with their feet” and escape
from or fend off locally undesirable land uses—such as landfills, inciner-
ators, chemical plants, refineries and other polluting facilities.
Documents  201

Slow government response to environmental contamination and toxic
threats unnecessarily endangers the health of the most vulnerable populations
in our society. Government officials have knowingly allowed people of
color families near Superfund sites, other contaminated waste sites and
polluting industrial facilities to be poisoned with lead, arsenic, dioxin,
TCE, DDT, PCBs and a host of other deadly chemicals. Having the facts
and failing to respond is explicitly discriminatory and tantamount to an
immoral “human experiment.”
Clearly, the environmental justice movement over the last two
decades has made a difference in the lives of people of color and low-
income communities that are overburdened with environmental pollu-
tion. After years of intense study, targeted research, public hearings,
grassroots organizing, networking and movement building, environ-
mental justice struggles have taken center stage. However, community
leaders who have been on the front line for justice for decades know
that the lethargic, and too often antagonistic, government response to
environmental emergencies in their communities is not the exception
but the general rule. They have come to understand that waiting for the
government to respond can be hazardous to their health and the health
of their communities.
In fact, the U.S. EPA, the governmental agency millions of Ameri-
cans look to for protection, has mounted an all-out attack on environ-
mental justice and environmental justice principles established in the
early 1990s. Moreover, the agency has failed to implement the Environ-
mental Justice Executive Order 12898 signed by President Bill Clinton
in 1994 or adequately apply Title VI of the Civil Rights Act.
Source: Justice and Witness Ministries (United Church of Christ). Toxic
Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987–2007, x–xiii. Copyright March 2007
United Church of Christ. The Commission for Racial Justice (United
Church of Christ). All rights reserved. Used by permission.
S. 2549: Environmental Justice 
Renewal Act (2008)
Environmental justice legislation has been introduced into the U.S.
Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives a number of times in the
past two decades. None of the bills has ever been passed by either body.
The most recent form of the legislation was introduced by Sen. Hillary
Rodham Clinton (D-NY) on January 23, 2008. Senator Clinton’s bill
was referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works, but
no action was taken on it during the 110th Congress. Portions of the
bill are reprinted here.
202
Data and Documents

A Bill
To require the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
to establish an Interagency Working Group on Environmental Justice to
provide guidance to Federal agencies on the development of criteria for
identifying disproportionately high and adverse human health or envi-
ronmental effects on minority populations and low-income popula-
tions, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled,
Section 1. Short Title
This Act may be cited as the “Environmental Justice Renewal Act.”
Section 2. Deﬁnitions
[This section deﬁnes key terms used in the bill.]
Section. 3. Interagency Working Group on Environmental Justice
(a) Establishment—Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Administrator shall establish a working group to be known
as the “Interagency Working Group on Environmental  Justice.”
(b) Purposes—The purposes of the Working Group are—
(1) to provide guidance to Federal agencies on the development of
the guidance document under subsection (f)(1) for identifying dispropor-
tionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects on—
(A) minority populations; and
(B) low-income populations;
(2) to coordinate with, provide guidance to, and serve as a clear-
inghouse for, each Federal agency during the development by each
Federal agency of an environmental justice strategy;
(3) to ensure that the administration, interpretation, and enforce-
ment of each applicable program, activity, and policy of each Federal
agency is undertaken in a manner that minimizes or eliminates dispro-
portionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects
on racial minority, ethnic minority, or low-income populations;
(4) to assist in the coordination of research conducted by, and stim-
ulate cooperation among—
(A) the Agency;
(B) the Department of Health and Human Services;
(C) the Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(D) the Department of Transportation; and
(E) any other Federal agency that conducts research or any other
activity relating to the study of human health and environmental re-
search and analysis;
Documents  203

(5) to assist in the coordination of data collection activities con-
ducted by each Federal agency described in paragraph (4);
(6) to examine each study and available data with respect to issues
relating to environmental justice in existence as of the date of enactment
of this Act;
(7) to hold public meetings to conduct fact-finding, receive 
public comments, and conduct inquiries concerning issues relating to
environmental justice, the summaries of the comments and recommen-
dations from which shall be made available to the public;
(8) to develop interagency model projects on issues relating to en-
vironmental justice that evidence cooperation among Federal agencies;
(9) to engage in regular consultation with the Advisory Council,
but not less than once per year;
(10) to assess and review the activities of the Federal Government
(including any policy or program of the Federal Government in exis-
tence as of the date of enactment of this Act) to minimize and eliminate
disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental
effects on racial minority, ethnic minority, or low-income populations;
and
(11) to seek advice from community-based organizations and aca-
demic experts who are engaged in environmental justice research and
other activities.
(c) Composition—The Working Group shall be composed of—
(1) the Administrator (or a designee);
(2) the Secretary of Defense (or a designee);
(3) the Secretary of Health and Human Services (or a designee);
(4) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (or a
 designee);
(5) the Secretary of Labor (or a designee);
(6) the Secretary of Agriculture (or a designee);
(7) the Secretary of Transportation (or a designee);
(8) the Attorney General (or a designee);
(9) the Secretary of the Interior (or a designee);
(10) the Secretary of Commerce (or a designee);
(11) the Secretary of Energy (or a designee);
(12) the Secretary of Homeland Security (or a designee);
(13) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
(or a  designee);
(14) the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy 
(or a designee);
(15) the Deputy Assistant to the President for Environmental
 Policy (or a designee);
(16) the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy (or a designee);
(17) the Director of the National Economic Council (or a designee);
204
Data and Documents

(18) the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (or a de-
signee); and
(19) any other official of the Federal Government that the Presi-
dent may designate.
(d) Chairperson—The President (or a designee) shall serve as the
Chairperson of the Working Group.
(e) Report to President—The Working Group shall report to the
President through—
(1) the Deputy Assistant to the President for Environmental 
Policy; or
(2) the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy.
(f) Uniform Consideration Guidance Document—
(1) IN GENERAL—To ensure that there is a common level of un-
derstanding of terminology used in dealing with environmental justice
issues, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Working Group shall develop and publish in the Federal Register a guid-
ance document that outlines the ways in which the following consider-
ations will be taken into account in defining communities as
environmental justice communities:
(A) A disproportionate burden of adverse human health or envi-
ronmental impacts, or the potential for those impacts.
(B) Aggregation of risk.
(C) Cumulative sources of risk.
(D) Additional elements in the community that indicate vulnera-
bility, such as a high incidence of disease and lower income levels.
(E) The capacity of communities to address environmental
 concerns.
[The remainder of this section deals with “housekeeping” issues, such as public
comment, reports, and documentation.]
Section 4. Responsibilities of Federal Agencies
(a) Conduct of Programs—Each Federal agency shall conduct each
program, policy and activity of the Federal agency that adversely
affects or has the potential to affect human health or the environment in
a manner that ensures that each program, policy, and activity does not
have an effect of excluding any individual from participating in,
denying any individual the beneﬁts of, or subjecting any individuals to
discrimination or disparate impact under any program, policy, or
activity of the Federal agency because of the race, color, national origin,
or income level of the individual.
(b) Federal Agency Environmental Justice Strategies—
(1) DEVELOPMENT—Each Federal agency that participates in the
Working Group shall develop an agency-wide environmental justice
strategy that—
Documents  205

(A) identifies and addresses any disproportionately high or ad-
verse human health or environmental effects of each program, policy,
and activity of the Federal agency on—
(i) minority populations; and
(ii) low-income populations; and
(B) complies with each requirement described in paragraph (2).
(2) CONTENTS—Each environmental justice strategy developed
by a Federal agency under paragraph (1) shall contain—
(A) an assessment that identifies each program, policy, planning
and public participation process, enforcement activity, and rulemaking
procedure relating to human health or the environment that the Federal
agency determines should be revised—
(i) to ensure the enforcement by the Federal agency of each health
or environmental statute relating to—
(I) minority populations; and
(II) low-income populations;
(ii) to ensure greater and more meaningful public participation;
(iii) to improve the conduct by the Federal agency of research and
data collection activities relating to the health and environment of—
(I) minority populations; and
(II) low-income populations;
(iv) to facilitate the identification of differential development pat-
terns and access to natural resources among—
(I) minority populations; and
(II) low-income populations;
(v) to integrate environmental justice into the activities of the Fed-
eral agency; and
(vi) to ensure that the Federal agency undertakes activities to re-
duce or eliminate disproportionately high and adverse human health or
environmental effects on racial minority, ethnic minority, and low-in-
come populations; and
(B) a timetable for the completion of—
(i) each revision identified under subparagraph (A); and
(ii) an assessment of the economic and social implications of each
revision identified under subparagraph (A).
[The rest of this section deals with details as to the adoption and implementa-
tion of agency plans for environmental justice actions.]
Section 5. Ombudsmen
[This section establishes a position of environmental justice ombudsman
within the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).]
Section 6. Training of Employees of Federal Agencies
[This section requires that employees of the EPA be offered an opportunity to
receive training in environmental justice theory and practices.]
206
Data and Documents

Section 7. Grant Programs
[This section authorizes the establishment of small grants, collaborative
grants, interagency cooperative agreement programs, state grants, and
community-based participatory research grant programs to carry out the
provisions of the act and allocates up to $5 million for the implementation 
of most programs.]
Section 8. Environmental Justice Basic Training Program
(a) Estab lishment—The Administrator shall establish a basic training
program to increase the capacity of residents of environmental justice
communities to identify and address disproportionately high and
adverse human health or environmental effects by providing culturally
and linguistically appropriate—
(1) training relating to—
(A) basic and advanced techniques for the detection, assessment,
and evaluation of the effects of hazardous substances on human health;
(B) methods to assess the risks to human health presented by haz-
ardous substances;
(C) methods and technologies to detect hazardous substances in
the environment; and
(D) basic biological, chemical, and physical methods to reduce the
quantity and toxicity of hazardous substances; and
(2) short courses and continuation education programs for resi-
dents of communities who are located in close proximity to hazardous
substances to provide—
(A) education relating to—
(i) the proper manner to handle hazardous substances;
(ii) the management of facilities at which hazardous substances are
located (including facility compliance protocols); and
(iii) the evaluation of the hazards that facilities described in clause
(ii) pose to human health; and
(B) training on environmental and occupational health and safety
with respect to the public health and engineering aspects of hazardous
waste control.
(b) Grant Program—
[This section describes the grant program established to support training in
environmental justice.]
Section 9. National Environmental Justice Advisory Council
[This section provides for a national environmental justice advisory council
consisting of representatives from community-based organizations, state and
local governments, Indian tribes and other indigenous groups, nongovernmental
and environmental organizations, and private-sector organizations, as well as
experts from a number of ﬁelds related to environmental justice.]
Documents  207

Section 10. Environmental Justice Clearinghouse
[This section establishes a reference center consisting of “culturally and lin-
guistically appropriate materials” that includes:]
(1) information describing the activities conducted by the Environ-
mental Protection Agency to address issues relating to environmental
justice;
(2) copies of training materials provided by the Administrator to
help individuals and employees understand and carry out environmen-
tal justice activities;
(3) links to webpages that describe environmental justice activities
of other Federal agencies;
(4) a directory of individuals who possess technical expertise in is-
sues relating to environmental justice;
(5) a directory of nonprofit and community-based organizations
that address issues relating to environmental justice at the local, 
State, and Federal levels (with particular emphasis given to nonprofit
and community-based organizations that possess the capability to pro-
vide advice or technical assistance to environmental justice communi-
ties); and
(6) any other appropriate information, as determined by the
 Secretary.
[The remainder of this section deals with “housekeeping” issues about the
clearinghouse.]
[The ﬁnal three sections of the bill deal with public meetings, supplemental en-
vironmental projects for environmental justice communities, and evaluation by
the comptroller general of the United States.]
Source: S. 2549. Environmental Justice Renewal Act (introduced in Sen-
ate). http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.2549:.
208
Data and Documents

Data  209
Data
Some of the most complete data on environmental inequities come from
the 2007 report by the Justice and Witness Ministries of the United
Church of Christ, Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987–2007. The
following tables are reprinted from that report.
TABLE 6.2
Racial and Socioeconomic Characteristics of 
People Living Near Hazardous Waste Facilities
Within
Between
Between 3 km
Beyond
1 km
1 km and 3 km
and 5 km
5 km
Population
Total population (in 1,000s)
845
7,828
14,101
225,936
Population density (persons 
690
840
810
24
per square kilometer)
Race/ethnicity
People of color (%)
47.7
46.1
35.7
22.2
African American (%)
20.6
20.4
20.6
11.2
Hispanic (%)
23.1
20.4
18.1
7.8
Asian/Pacific Islander (%)
4.4
5.4
5.3
2.7
Native American (%)
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.8
Socioeconomic characteristics
Poverty rate (%)
20.1
18.3
16.9
12.7
Mean household income
$31,192
$33,318
$36,920
$38,745
Mean housing value
$93,985
$102,594
$111,915
$111,956
Source: Justice and Witness Ministries (United Church of Christ). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty
1987–2007, p. 13. Copyright March 2007 United Church of Christ. The Commission for Racial
Justice (United Church of Christ). All rights reserved. Used by permission.

TABLE 6.3
Racial and Socioeconomic Disparities between Host Neighborhoods and Non-Host Areas for the
Nation’s 413 Commercial Hazardous Waste Facilities (1990 and 2000 Census)
2000
1990
Host
Non-Host Difference
Ratio
Host
Non-Host Difference
Ratio
Population
Total population  
9,222
272,200
262,979
0.03
8,673
240,037 231,364
0.04
(in 1,000s)
Population density 
870
29.7
840
29.0
820
25.1
790
27.3
Race/ethnicity
People of color 
55.9%
30.0%
25.9%
1.86
46.2%
23.4%
22.8%
1.97
African American 
20.0%
11.9%
8.0%
1.67
20.4%
11.7%
8.7%
1.74
Hispanic or Latino 
27.0%
12.0%
15.0%
2.25
20.7%
8.4%
12.3%
2.47
Asian/Pacific Islander
6.7%
3.6%
3.0%
1.83
5.3%
2.8%
2.5%
1.88
Native American 
0.7%
0.9%
0.2%
0.77
0.6%
0.8%
0.3%
0.68
Socioeconomics
Poverty rate 
18.3%
12.2%
6.1%
1.50
18.5%
12.9%
5.6%
1.43
Mean household 
$48,234
$56,912
$8,678
0.85
$33,115
$38,639
$5,524
0.86
income
Mean owner-occupied $135,510
$159,536
$24,025
0.85
$101,774
$111,954 $10,180
0.91
housing value
With four-year college 
18.5%
24.6%
6.1%
0.75
15.4%
20.5%
5.1%
0.7
degree
Professional white 
28.0%
33.8%
5.8%
0.83
21.8%
26.6%
4.8%
0.82
collar occupations
Employed in blue-collar 
27.7%
24.0%
3.7%
1.15
30.0%
26.1%
3.9%
1.15
occupations
Source: Justice and Witness Ministries (United Church of Christ). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987–2007, 
p. 13. Copyright March 2007 United Church of Christ. The Commission for Racial Justice (United Church of Christ).
All rights reserved. Used by permission.

TABLE 6.4
People of Color Percentages for
Host Neighborhoods and Non-Host Areas by EPA Region
Number of
Host
Facilities
Neighborhoods
Non-Host Areas
Difference
Ratio
U.S. total 
413
55.9%
30.0%
25.9%
1.86
Region 1 
23
36.3%
15.0%
21.3%
2.43
Region 2 
32
51.5%
36.0%
15.6%
1.43
Region 3 
35
23.2%
24.5%
1.33%
0.95
Region 4 
67
54.3%
30.4%
23.8%
1.78
Region 5 
85
52.6%
18.8%
33.8%
2.80
Region 6 
61
62.7%
41.8%
20.9%
1.50
Region 7 
32
29.1%
13.4%
15.7%
2.17
Region 8 
15
31.2%
18.2%
13.0%
1.72
Region 9 
55
80.5%
49.4%
31.1%
1.63
Region 10 
8
38.9%
19.1%
19.9%
2.04
Source: Justice and Witness Ministries (United Church of Christ). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty
1987–2007, p. 13. Copyright March 2007 United Church of Christ. The Commission for Racial
Justice (United Church of Christ). All rights reserved. Used by permission.

TABLE 6.5
Socioeconomic Disparities between Host Neighborhoods and Non-Host Areas by EPA Region
Poverty Rates
Mean Household Income
Mean Housing Value
EPA region
Host
Non-host
Diff.
Ratio
Host
Non-host
Diff.
Ratio
Host
Non-host
Diff.
Ratio
Region 1
15.7%
8.7%
7.0%
1.80
$48,368
$65,296
$16,928
0.74
$143,840
$202,102
$58,261
0.71
Region 2
19.4%
12.3%
7.1%
1.57
$50,793
$66,137
$15,344
0.77
$171,083
$202,579
$31,496
0.84
Region 3
12.6%
10.7%
1.9%
1.18
$47,493
$57,479
$9,986
0.83
$97,971
$139,278
$41,307
0.70
Region 4
15.7%
13.7%
2.0%
1.15
$45,811
$50,931
$5,120
0.90
$97,673
$118,962
$21,288
0.82
Region 5
19.4%
9.6%
9.7%
2.01
$44,933
$56,955
$12,022
0.79
$103,812
$137,470
$33,658
0.76
Region 6
18.8%
16.0%
2.8%
1.18
$45,072
$50,616
$5,545
0.89
$83,602
$101,518
$17,916
0.82
Region 7
15.0%
10.4%
4.7%
1.45
$44,084
$50,308
$6,224
0.88
$84,028
$106,808
$22,780
0.79
Region 8
14.8%
10.3%
4.4%
1.43
$40,801
$55,413
$14,612
0.74
$105,286
$163,390
$58,104
0.64
Region 9
20.7%
13.5%
7.2%
1.54
$52,947
$64,146
$11,199
0.83
$218,576
$246,673
$28,096
0.89
Region 10
10.9%
11.0%
0.1%
0.99
$55,599
$55,889
$290
0.99
$180,716
$179,522
$1,193
1.01
Source: Justice and Witness Ministries (United Church of Christ). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987–2007, p. 13. Copyright March 2007 United Church of Christ. The
Commission for Racial Justice (United Church of Christ). All rights reserved. Used by permission.

7
Directory of Organizations
T
he number of organizations interested in the issue of envi-
ronmental justice continues to grow with each passing year.
Some of these organizations have broad-based interests,
ranging from social, economic, and political issues faced by
nonwhite and/or lower-income populations to environmental
issues of every kind. Other organizations are focused more
specifically on environmental racism, environmental equity,
and environmental justice on a local, regional, or national level.
Probably the single most useful resource listing these organiza-
tions is People of Color Environmental Groups Directory, compiled
and edited by Robert D. Bullard. The current edition was
 published in 2000 and is an update of the original 1992 version
of the directory. It contains information on more than 400
groups in 45 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
That number represents a doubling of the list of groups listed 
in the 1992 directory. The book includes an excellent general in-
troduction to environmental justice, a listing of groups, an
 annotated bibliography, and additional information on envi-
ronmental justice.
Given the scope of the environmental justice movement, the
present chapter can do no more than list some of the major na-
tional organizations with a significant interest in environmental
justice, along with a sampling of regional and local groups of
special interest. The chapter is divided into two major sections:
(1) governmental agencies and (2) private and nongovernmental
organizations.
213

214
Directory of Organizations
Governmental Organizations
Federal Highway Administration (FHA)
Web site: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/ej2.htm
e-mail: brenda.kragh@dot.gov
Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
Web site: http://www.fta.dot.gov/
e-mail: FTA.ADAAssistance@dot.gov
Under the mandate of Executive Order 12898, the Federal High-
way Administration and the Federal Transit Administration
now include a number of environmental justice considerations
in their planning, grant making, and program development.
These considerations include the development of transit sys-
tems that will be of greatest benefit to all people, the construc-
tion of such systems with the least possible impact on citizens of
all color and economic classes, the integration of transit systems
into community environments, an increase in the involvement
of individual citizens and citizen groups in transit planning, and
improvement of data collection and analysis on the impact of
transit systems on communities.
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council. See U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Environmental Justice
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS)
Web site: http://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/supported/
programs/justice/
e-mail: ofallon@niehs.nih.gov
In 1994, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
(NIEHS) created the Environmental Justice: Partnerships for
Communication Program. The program provides grants to local
consortia that consist of three components: a community organi-
zation, an environmental health researcher, and a health care
professional. Members of the consortia work together to develop

methods by which local citizens can be involved in research on
environmental issues relating to their own lives.
Office of Environmental Justice (EPA). See U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Office of Environmental Justice
Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response. See U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste
and Emergency Response
U.S. Department of the Interior (USDI) Assistant Secretary for
Policy, Management, and Budget
Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance (OEPC)
Web site: http://www.doi.gov/oepc/ej_goal1.html
e-mail: Emily_Joseph@ios.doi.gov
In 1994, the Department of the Interior (USDI) adopted four
goals to guide its implementation of Executive Order 12898: (1)
to involve low-income and minority communities in making
environmental decisions and to provide those communities
with information about the decisions; (2) to provide members
of low-income and minority communities with the type of
training that will help them reduce their exposure to haz-
ardous materials; (3) to expand research and data gathering on
problems of environmental inequities; and (4) to expand de-
partmental connections with grassroots organizations, envi-
ronmental groups, businesses, academic institutions, and other
organizations to work toward environmental justice in fields
for which the USDI is responsible. The department’s Web site
also provides a detailed discussion of the ways in which the
goals have been met by the its major divisions, the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Mines,
Bureau of Reclamation, Minerals Management Service, Na-
tional Biological Survey, National Park Service, Office of Sur-
face Mining, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and U.S. Geological
Survey. As even a cursory review of these titles suggest, the
 Department of the Interior is intimately involved in many of
the controversies characteristic of the environmental justice
movement.
Governmental Organizations  215

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Office of Environmental Justice (OEJ)
Web site: http://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/
e-mail: See “Contact Us” page on Web site
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) created the Office
of Environmental Justice (OEJ) in 1992 to ensure that concerns
about environmental equality are integrated with all parts of the
agency’s mission and activities. It consists of two major divi-
sions, the Executive Steering Committee, representing each
headquarter’s office and region, and the Environmental Justice
Coordinators Council, responsible for the day-to-day operations
of the office. In 1993, the EPA also formed the National Environ-
mental Justice Advisory Council consisting of about 26 members
who represent academia, community-based organizations, in-
dustry and business, nongovernmental and environmental
groups, state and local governments, and tribal governments and
indigenous organizations. The council is responsible for analyz-
ing environmental justice issues and suggesting new and innov-
ative solutions for resolving those problems.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response (OSWER)
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
MC-5101T
Telephone: (202) 529-7534
Web site: http://www.epa.gov/oswer/ej/index.html
The EPA’s Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
 (OSWER) has regulatory responsibility for some of the primary
areas in which advocates for environmental justice are con-
cerned, areas such as brownfields cleanup and redevelopment;
Superfund programs; underground storage tanks; emergency
prevention, preparedness, and response; and federal facilities
restoration. In response to Executive Order 12898, OSWER has
developed a series of ongoing programs for ensuring that waste
disposal projects do not produce a disproportionate risk for mi-
nority and low-income populations. The agency’s Web site lists a
number of examples of its programs that have worked to achieve
this goal over the last decade or more.
216
Directory of Organizations

Nongovernmental Organizations
National and International
African American Environmentalist Association (AAEA)
Web site: http://www.aaenvironment.com
e-mail: africanamericanenvironmentalist@msn.com
The African American Environmentalist Association (AAEA)
was founded in 1985 by Norris McDonald to protect the environ-
ment, promote the efficient use of natural resources, increase the
participation of African Americans in the environmental move-
ment, and aid African American communities in dealing with en-
vironmental problems impacting their own communities. The
organization has a wide range of interests, including toxic chem-
icals, nuclear power plants, stem cell research, nanotechnology,
global climate change, and alternative energy sources. AAEA is
an affiliate of a larger association also founded by McDonald, the
Center for Environment, Commerce & Energy.
Alliance for Nuclear Accountability (ANA)
Web site: http://www.ananuclear.org/
e-mail: See “Contact Us” page on Web site
The alliance was founded in 1987 as the Military Production Net-
work. It is currently a network of 35 local, regional, and national
organizations representing communities located near nuclear
weapons sites and radioactive waste dumps. The major issues
with which ANA deals are the health issues of nuclear weapons
construction, testing, and use; disposal and storage of nuclear
wastes; and budget issues related to nuclear weapons manufac-
ture and nuclear waste disposal. The organization maintains an
extensive online library of articles dealing with nuclear weapons
and nuclear wastes.
Americans for Indian Opportunity (AIO)
Web site: http://www.aio.org/
e-mail: mlucero@aio.org
Americans for Indian Opportunity (AIO) was founded in 1970
by LaDonna Harris to serve as a catalyst for finding new con-
cepts and new opportunities for Indian people. The organization
Nongovernmental Organizations  217

works with tribal governments and peoples to find ways to deal
with a changing world based on traditional tribal values. AIO’s
best-known program may be its American Indian Ambassador
Program, a leadership program in which mid-level professionals
are trained to improve the well-being and growth of their own
communities. Other important AIO programs are its Indigenous
Leaders Interactive System (ILIS™), which brings together tribal
members to work on common problems; Intergovernmental Re-
lations, which promotes ongoing projects involving federal and
tribal leaders; and Community Service and Sharing Common
Causes, through which the organization sponsors conferences,
forums, and other meetings for tribal leaders, government offi-
cials, and representatives of other organizations.
Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN)
Web site: http://www.apen4ej.org/
e-mail: apen@apen4ej.org
The Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN) was orga-
nized in 1993 to provide a vehicle by which Asian Americans and
Pacific Islanders could learn more about and begin to deal with
environmental issues of particular concern to their neighbor-
hoods. The organization works on three levels: direct organizing
in local communities, building a network of Asian American and
Pacific Islander organizations, and working in multiracial al-
liances to bring about national and regional change. An example
of the organization’s direct organizing focus is its Laotian Orga-
nizing Project (LOP). Created in 1995, LOP aims to assist a large
Laotian community in California’s Contra Costa County in com-
bating the problems it faces as a result of its location in one of the
most toxic areas anywhere in the United States.
Basel Action Network (BAN)
c/o Earth Economics
122 S. Jackson, Suite 320
Seattle, WA 98104
Telephone: (206) 652-5555
Web site: http://www.ban.org/
The Basel Action Network (BAN) is a program of Earth Eco-
nomics, a 501(c)(3) charitable organization whose goal is to use
economics to promote healthy ecosystems, communities, and
218
Directory of Organizations

economies. BAN is concerned with the economic and environ-
mental inequities associated with the worldwide trade of
 hazardous materials, as well as the potential health and envi-
ronmental hazards posed by such trade. The organization fo-
cuses its efforts on four major campaigns: the E-Waste
Stewardship Project, a program aimed at reducing and, eventu-
ally, eliminating the export of electronic wastes from the
United States to developing countries; Green Shipbreaking, an
effort to ensure that U.S. shipping vessels do not carry haz-
ardous materials; Zero Mercury Campaign, a program to de-
velop an international treaty controlling the international
transport of mercury; and Basel Ban Ratification, an effort to
have the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal ratified
by the United States.
Beyond Pesticides (BP)
Web site: http://www.beyondpesticides.org/
e-mail: info@beyondpesticides.org
Beyond Pesticides was founded in 1981 as the National Coalition
against the Use of Pesticides to protect the general public against
the health risks of many pesticides in common use by the agri-
cultural industry. It has historically taken a two-pronged ap-
proach to meeting this objective: educating the public on the
health risks posed by chemical pesticides and promoting the use
of natural and other safe pesticides. The organization publishes
two newsletters, Pesticides and You, with articles of general inter-
est and published quarterly, and Technical Report, reviewing cur-
rent information on pesticide issues and published monthly.
Center for Environmental Health (CEH)
Web site: http://www.cehca.org/
e-mail: See “Contact Us” page on Web site
The purpose of the Center for Environmental Health (CEH) 
is to eliminate the health risks posed by industrial chemicals to
individuals, families, and communities. As part of its efforts,
CEH has acknowledged the Principles of Environmental Justice
and incorporates those principles into its own efforts to protect
communities from the risks posed by chemical factories and
waste sites. Through its Justice Fund, it provides grants to
Nongovernmental Organizations  219

 community-based, grassroots organizations striving to deal
with environmental inequities in their areas. CEH has also
taken legal action against industries and companies whose ac-
tivities disproportionately affect low-income and ethnic com-
munities. Its Web site lists a number of successes achieved over
the past decade in combating environmental racism in Califor-
nia and other areas.
Center for Health, Environment and Justice (CHEJ)
Web site: http://www.chej.org
e-mail: chej@chej.org
One of the earliest events in the environmental justice move-
ment involved an action by neighbors in the Love Canal dis-
trict of New York State protesting the toxic environment on
which their community was built. The leader of that move-
ment, Lois Gibbs, later formed the Citizens Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Waste in 1981 to provide support and advice for
other communities faced with similar environmental prob-
lems. The organization later changed its name to the Center for
Health, Environment and Justice, although it continues to pro-
vide the same services it did under its original name. It cur-
rently receives about 1,500 requests each year for assistance in
protecting individuals and communities against toxic waste
hazards, promoting children’s health, and protecting con-
sumers against hazardous products.
Center for Policy Alternatives (CPA)
Web site: http://www.cfpa.org/
e-mail: info@cfpa.org
The Center for Policy Alternatives (CPA) was established in
1975 as a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization promoting pro-
gressive policies in all 50 states. The center provides a network
for state officials and activities to advance “proactive, progres-
sive policy solutions” to common problems. The organization
works at three levels: (1) providing leadership training pro-
grams for legislators; (2) developing policy tools on a wide vari-
ety of issues; and (3) building a network among like-minded
legislators in all parts of the nation. CPA’s model legislation for
environmental justice has been a particularly helpful tool for
legislators interested in  environmental issues. Similar model
220
Directory of Organizations

legislation is provided for  issues such as campaign finance re-
form, child-care financing, family and work issues, health care,
and women and the economy.
Chemical Weapons Working Group (CWWG)
Web site: http://cwwg.org/
e-mail: kefcwwg@cwwg.org
The Chemical Weapons Working Group (CWWG) is a project of
the Kentucky Environmental Foundation (KEF) and consists of a
number of organizations working to oppose the incineration of
chemical weapons. These organizations are located throughout
the United States, Russia, and the Pacific Rim. Some members of
the network are Families Concerned about Nerve Gas Incinera-
tion (Alabama), Citizens for Safe Weapons Disposal (Colorado),
the Oregon Clearinghouse for Pollution Reduction, the Pacific
Asia Council of Indigenous Peoples, and the Center for Assis-
tance to Ecological Initiatives (Russia). The organization was
 created at a 1991 meeting sponsored by the KEF at which repre-
sentatives of eight sites in the United States, the Pacific area, and
Russia agreed on certain general principles that would form the
basis of the new Chemical Weapons Working Group. Among
those principles was opposition to incinerating chemical
weapons and to moving them from place to place, and support
for the development of alternative methods of destroying these
weapons.
Citizens Coal Council (CCC)
Web site: http://www.citizenscoalcouncil.org/
e-mail: ccc@citizenscoalcouncil.org  
The Citizens Coal Council (CCC) was organized in 1989 as a
grassroots federation of citizen groups working for social and en-
vironmental justice in the area of coal mining. The council con-
sists of six member groups: Black Warrior Riverkeeper, Dakota
Resource Council, Friends of Hurricane Creek, West Virginia
Highlands Conservancy, Mountain Watershed Association, and
Save Our Cumberland Mountains. The organization has three
objectives: (1) to protect people, their homes and communities,
and the environment from damage caused by coal mining; (2) to
ensure enforcement of the federal Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act; and (3) to “help each other win our issues.”
Nongovernmental Organizations  221

Community Toolbox for Children’s Environmental Health
Web site: http://www.communitytoolbox.org/
e-mail: information@communitytoolbox.org
Community Toolbox for Children’s Environmental Health works
to eliminate environmental health risks (such as lead poisoning)
faced by children, especially in high-risk communities. The orga-
nization currently focuses its efforts into four major programs.
 Organizational Development provides groups with the organiza-
tional tools they need to operate efficiently and effectively, includ-
ing information on the establishment of an administrative
structure, guidance on finance planning, methods of fund-raising,
and effective use of technology. The Peer Network program en-
courages the development of connections among groups and indi-
viduals engaged in many groups and organizations. Leadership
Development and Base Building teaches community leaders about
principles of leadership skills, mentoring, constituency develop-
ment, and community organizing. Policy, Media, and Research
provides instruction on policy development and the use of media
and research in community action.
CorpWatch
Web site: http://www.corpwatch.org/
e-mail: See “Contact” page on Web site
CorpWatch was founded in Oakland, California, in 1996 as
TRAC—Transnational Resource and Action Center. It changed
its name to CorpWatch in 2001 to make its overall mission
clearer. The organization’s mission is to investigate and expose
corporate violations of human rights, environmental crimes, and
fraud and corruption around the world. One of CorpWatch’s
many campaigns involved its participation in recent efforts to
ensure the consideration of environmental justice issues in inter-
national programs to reduce and eliminate the shipment of haz-
ardous wastes across national borders.
Diné CARE
Web site: http://dinecare.org/
e-mail: kiyaani@frontier.net
Diné CARE was formed in 1988 to defend the community of
Dilkon in the southwestern region of the Navajo Nation, in the
state of Arizona. After the tribal government had “signed off” on
222
Directory of Organizations

the construction of a toxic waste incinerator and dump near the
town, some tribal members decided to take action against that de-
cision. They educated themselves as to how they could take ac-
tion and were eventually successful in preventing the incinerator
and dump from being built. In 1990, Diné CARE cofounded the
Indigenous Environmental Network. In the Navajo language,
Diné means “the people.”
Earthjustice
Web site: http://www.earthjustice.org/
e-mail: info@earthjustice.org
Earthjustice was created in 1971 as the Sierra Club Legal Defense
Club. It changed its name in 1997 to better reflect the wide variety
of programs in which it had become involved. Today, the organi-
zation claims to be “the leading nonprofit environmental law firm
in the country.” It is regularly involved in a number of different le-
gal actions, ranging from efforts to improve the nation’s smog
standards, conducting ocean seismic surveys, fighting exemptions
by the EPA for a number of industries that heavily pollute the en-
vironment, pressuring the EPA to develop regulations for mine
cleanups by mining companies, and pressuring New York State to
implement legislation for the cleanup of state brownfields.
Energy Justice Network (EJN)
Web site: http://www.energyjustice.net/
e-mail: See “Contact Us” page on the Web site
Energy Justice Network (EJN) was founded by Mike Ewall in 1999
after he heard a presentation by an environmental justice network
in Louisiana. The purpose of the organization is to work for a clean
energy, zero-emission, zero-waste future for all Americans. A major
thrust of EJN’s work is the total elimination of nuclear power gen-
eration in the country. The network takes as its guide the Principles
of Environmental Justice adopted at the First National People of
Color Environmental Leadership Summit held in 1991.
Environmental Justice and Climate Change Initiative (EJCCI)
Web site: http://www.ejcc.org/
e-mail: info@ejcc.org
Environmental Justice and Climate Change Initiative (EJCCI) is a
coalition of organizations and networks concerned with issues of
Nongovernmental Organizations  223

environmental justice, climate justice, religion, policy develop-
ment, and political advocacy. The organization’s mission is to ed-
ucate and energize the people of North America in the
development and implementation of just climate policies at both
domestic and international levels. In 2001, the organization de-
veloped “10 Principles for Just Climate Change Policies in the
U.S.,” to be used as the foundation for ensuring that environ-
mental justice is involved in the development and implementa-
tion of climate change policies in the United States. In December
2007, four members of EJCCI attended the UN Climate Change
Conference in Bali, Indonesia, to represent concerns for environ-
mental justice in climate change discussions.
Environmental Justice and Health Union (EJHU)
Web site: http://www.ejhu.org/
e-mail: ejhu@ejhu.org
The Environmental Justice and Health Union (EJHU) is an inde-
pendent project of the Center for Environmental Health. It was
formed in 2001 to improve the ability of environmental justice
and environmental health groups to work with each other. The
organization provides information about funding, partner-
ships, research, policy, and other tools through its monthly
newsletter Catalyst and a regularly updated Web site. Topics
currently discussed on the organization’s Web site include dis-
parities in the distribution of lead, PCBs, dioxins, and other en-
vironmental hazards; information on law, policy, training, and
other aspects of environmental justice and environmental
health issues; and background information on affirmative ac-
tion and cultural competence.
Environmental Justice Coalition for Water (EJCW)
Web site: http://www.ejcw.org/
e-mail: debbie@ejcw.org
The Environmental Justice Coalition for Water (EJCW) was
formed in 1999 as a project of the Pacific Institute to deal with en-
vironmental problems caused by construction in the San Fran-
cisco Bay–Delta region of California. It is now a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization with a greatly expanded mission. It has
become a network of more than 50 grassroots organizations,
224
Directory of Organizations

working to help local communities develop water-use programs
equitable to all citizens. Among its constituent members are the
Alliance for a Clean Waterfront; Butte Environmental Council;
Californians for Pesticide Reform; Center for Race, Poverty, and
the Environment; Feather River Coordinated Resources Manage-
ment; La Union del Pueblo Entero; People for Children’s Health
and Environmental Justice; and Winnemem Wintu tribe.
Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF)
Web site: http://www.ejfoundation.org/
e-mail: info@ejfoundation.org
The Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF) was established in
the United Kingdom in 2001 for the purpose of “investigating,
exposing and resolving environmental abuses” in any and all
parts of the world. Over the past decade, EJF has worked with
regional and national civil rights and environmental justice or-
ganizations in 15 countries, including Cambodia, Guatemala,
Guinea, and Uzbekistan. The organization has produced 17
campaign reports, 6 films, and a training manual for grassroots
activities.
Environmental Justice Resource Center (EJRC)
Web site: http://www.ejrc.cau.edu/
e-mail: ejrc@cau.edu
The Environmental Justice Resource Center (EJRC) is one of the
nation’s oldest organizations devoted to research, technical, and
legal support for communities dealing with environmental
racism and related problems. The center was founded in 1994
and has long been led by Dr. Robert D. Bullard, commonly
known as the father of the environmental justice movement.
Much of the center’s work is organized into programmatic ar-
eas, such as the Program to Facilitate Environmental Justice in
Minority and Under Served Communities, the Race and Re-
gional Equity project, the Disaster and Emergency Response
program, and the National Equity and Smart Growth Initiative.
The center also offers three training programs: the Brownfields
Job Training Program, the Minority Worker Training Program,
and the Atlanta Housing Authority Youth Apprenticeship Train-
ing Program.
Nongovernmental Organizations  225

Environmental Law Alliance Worldwide (ELAW)
Web site: http://www.elaw.org/
e-mail: elawus@elaw.org
The Environmental Law Alliance Worldwide (ELAW) was
formed in 1989 at a University of Oregon School of Law confer-
ence on public interest law. A group of attendees realized that the
nations from which they came all faced similar environmental
challenges and that their work could be facilitated by developing
a network of lawyers with common interests and skills. ELAW
now has more than 300 members from 60 nations who share sci-
entific equipment and training to monitor environmental condi-
tions, develop model laws and regulations, provide expert
testimony on pollution issues, assist in the drafting of petitions
and other court filings, share environmental and human rights
records of multinational corporations, and provide support for
colleagues in the drafting and conduct of cases.
Environmental Law and Policy Center (ELPC)
Web site: http://www.elpc.org/
e-mail: elpcinfo@elpc.org
The Environmental Law and Policy Center (ELPC) was founded
in 1993 for two major purposes: to provide the Midwest with (1)
public interest legal, economic, and scientific resources for deal-
ing with area-wide environmental and energy issues, and (2) a
strategic regional perspective on issues such as energy, trans-
portation, and land use and conservation. Today, ELPC works on
a large and variable group of problems, including dirty coal-
powered plants, oil refineries, farm energy, global climate
change, nuclear power, electrical grid connections, municipal
utilities, high-speed rail systems, sustainable growth, clean wa-
ter, water conservation, and forest preservation. The center fo-
cuses on problems in the nine states that make up the upper
Midwest region: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota,
North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.
Environmental Leadership Program (ELP)
1609 Connecticut Ave NW, #400
Washington, DC 20009
Telephone: (202) 332-3320
Web site: http://www.elpnet.org/
226
Directory of Organizations

In the late 1990s, a group of young men and women interested in
environmental issues in the United States met to discuss the pos-
sibility of forming an organization to train leaders like them-
selves for the environmental movement. The program they
developed admitted its first group of 22 student leaders in De-
cember 1999. Since that time, the Environmental Leadership Pro-
gram (ELP) has expanded to include three campuses: the
Delaware Valley (serving New Jersey, central and eastern Penn-
sylvania, and Delaware), New England (Connecticut, Massachu-
setts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont), and
the Southeast (Alabama, Georgia, northern Florida, North and
South Carolina, and central and eastern Tennessee). Each year,
ELP selects about 20 to 25 promising leaders in the environmen-
tal movement to study at each of the three regional centers. The
organization provides instruction, networking opportunities,
and financial support to help improve their effectiveness as envi-
ronmental leaders. Many of the current leaders in the environ-
mental justice movement are products of ELP programs,
including Torri Estrada, Luis Fernandez, Shalini Gupta, Marcus
Johnson, Khiet Luong, Janani Narayanan, Na’Taki Osborne,
Pablo Padilla, and Swati Prakash.
Environmental Research Foundation (ERF)
Web site: http://www.rachel.org/
e-mail: info@rachel.org
The Environmental Research Foundation (ERF) is a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization founded in 1980 on toxics and social jus-
tice issues in New Jersey. In 1986, it began publishing the journal
for which it is probably best known, Rachel’s Environment and
Health News (now Rachel’s Democracy and Health News). The goal
of the journal is to show the connection among a variety of social,
economic, political, environmental, and other issues that, at first
glance, seem independent of each other. It is now one of the most
highly respected sources for information on the effects of haz-
ardous wastes on human health and the environment. In 2005,
ERF added a sister publication, Precaution Reporter, which reports
on current developments in the use of the precautionary princi-
ple to deal with environmental problems. The precautionary
principle says that, if some policy or action is likely to cause se-
vere or irreversible harm to the public, the burden of proof for
initiating that policy or action falls on advocates for taking the
Nongovernmental Organizations  227

action (unless there is indisputable scientific evidence to the con-
trary). ERF and Rachel’s News make a clear and consistent con-
nection between the information they provide and the goals and
activities of the environmental justice movement.
Environmental Support Center (ESC)
Web site: http://www.envsc.org
e-mail: See “Contact Information” page on Web site
As its name suggests, the mission of the Environmental Support
Center (ESC) is to provide administrative, organizational, and
other forms of the support environmental groups of all sizes and
types need to continue operating effectively and efficiently. The
center was formed in 1999 following meetings among a group of
local, regional, and state leaders in the environmental justice and
environmental advocacy movements. One of ESC’s first pro-
grams was its Training and Organizational Assistance Program,
which, between 1991 and 2007, made over 3,200 small grants to
more than 1,800 grassroots groups and coalitions. The center’s
two other major programs are its Leadership and Enhanced As-
sistance and its Fundraising for Sustainable Organizations pro-
grams. In addition to these programs, ESC offers technical
assistance to groups through its Technology Resources program
and maintains a directory of consultants, management support
organizations, and other people who help groups with skills and
tools.
Global Community Monitor (GCM)
Web site: http://gcmonitor.org/
e-mail: denny@gcmonitor.org
Global Community Monitor (GMC) is an international organiza-
tion whose goal is to assist industrial communities in developing
clean and sustainable environments in which to live and work.
Its partners currently include the Louisiana Bucket Brigade, Citi-
zens for Environmental Justice (Corpus Christi, Texas), ground-
Work (South Africa), and the South African Exchange Program
on Environmental Justice. GMC currently operates six major
campaigns: Oceans and Communities Project, Citgo Justice, Ire-
land: Shell to Sea, Shell Facts, Refinery Reform Campaign, and
India Community Environmental Monitoring.
228
Directory of Organizations

The organization provides a wide array of tools for use by
environmental justice workers, including an air pollution man-
ual, an introduction to wipe sampling, an introduction to soil
sampling, odor analysis techniques, and odor pollution detection
systems. It has also published reports on a variety of hazardous
chemicals, including dioxins, PCBs, perchlorates, and polyvinyl
chloride (PVC).
Greenpeace International
Web site: http://www.greenpeace.org/international/
e-mail: supporter.services@int.greenpeace.org
Greenpeace USA
Web site: http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/
e-mail: info@wdc.greenpeace.org
Greenpeace began in 1971, when a small group of environmen-
tal activists rented the fishing boat Phyllis Cormack to mount a
protest against an underground nuclear test on the island of
Amchitka off the west coast of Alaska. Over the next four
decades, the organization grew to become one of the world’s
largest and most highly respected environmental organizations.
Today, Greenpeace has offices in more than 40 countries, rang-
ing from Spain and Portugal to Lebanon and Israel to Fiji and
Papua New Guinea. The organization operates a number of ma-
jor environmental campaigns dealing with issues such as cli-
mate change, protection of the oceans and ancient forests,
elimination of toxic chemicals, and reduction of genetic engi-
neering programs. Greenpeace USA has been very active in a
variety of domestic environmental justice campaigns, and
Greenpeace International has been at the forefront of efforts to
eliminate the shipment of hazardous waste materials across na-
tional boundaries.
Honor the Earth
Web site: http://www.honorearth.org/
e-mail: info@honorearth.org
Honor the Earth was formed in 1993 by Winona LaDuke and In-
digo Girls members Amy Ray and Emily Saliers to educate the
general public about the many environmental issues faced by
Nongovernmental Organizations  229

Native Americans. The organization’s board of directors consists
of representatives of two national Native American groups—the
Indigenous Environmental Network and the Indigenous
Women’s Network. Honor the Earth achieves its goal through
music, the arts, and the media. The profits from its programs are
used to make grants to organizations working on indigenous en-
vironmental issues.
Indian Law Resource Center (ILRC)
Web site: http://www.indianlaw.org/
e-mail: mt@indianlaw.org
Land rights, environmental protection, native sovereignty and
self-government, human rights, and law reform are the major is-
sues in which the Indian Law Resource Center (ILRC) is in-
volved. Founded in 1978, the center is a tax-exempt organization
under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. It is funded
entirely by grants and contributions from Indian nations and re-
ceives no other governmental support. An example of the cen-
ter’s work in the area of environmental justice is its 10-year effort
on behalf of the Ahahnenin and Nakota tribes, whose land and
water resources have been extensively contaminated by two gold
mines located adjacent to the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation in
Montana.
Indigenous Environmental Network (IEN)
Web site: http://www.ienearth.org/
e-mail: ien@igc.org
The Indigenous Environmental Network (IEN) was founded in
1990 to address issues of economic and environmental justice af-
fecting indigenous peoples. The organization’s mission is to
strengthen the capacity of indigenous communities and tribal
governments to deal with a variety of issues, such as building
economically sustainable communities, protecting the health of
people and the environment, and guarding sacred sites and nat-
ural resources in indigenous communities. IEN activities include
the maintaining of an informational clearinghouse; organizing
campaigns and direct actions; working with communities on en-
vironmental justice issues; building alliances among indigenous
communities and tribes, people-of-color and ethnic organiza-
tions, women’s groups, and labor and environmental organiza-
230
Directory of Organizations

tions; and conducting local, regional, national, and international
conferences and other meetings on economic and environmental
justice issues.
Just Transition Alliance (JTA)
Web site: http://www.jtalliance.org/
e-mail: justtransition@sbcglobal.net
The Just Transition Alliance (JTA) is a coalition of labor, eco-
nomic, and environmental justice activists; indigenous people;
and working-class people of color formed in 1996. Its name sug-
gests its mission, namely, to develop methods by which commu-
nities where working conditions are dangerous can be converted
into communities that are healthy and safe with a sustainable
economy. Members of the alliance include the Asian Pacific Envi-
ronmental Network; the Farmworker Network for Economic and
Environmental Justice; the Indigenous Environmental Network,
the Northeast Environmental Justice Network; the United Steel,
Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied In-
dustrial; Service Workers of the United Steelworkers; and the
Southwest Network for Environmental and Economic Justice. As
an example of its work, JTA developed an alliance among work-
ers at the Arizona Portland Cement factory in Rillito, Arizona,
the local community, and Tucsonians for a Clean Environment to
deal with ongoing air pollution problems resulting from the
plant’s operation.
Madres del Este de Los Angeles Santa Isabel
Web site: http://clnet.ucla.edu/community/intercambios/
melasi/
e-mail: mothermelasi@earthlink.net
Madres del Este de Los Angeles Santa Isabel (Mothers of East
Los Angeles–Santa Isabel) was formed in 1984 with the sole pur-
pose of fighting the construction of a state prison in East Los An-
geles. That battle ended successfully for the organization when
the state legislature passed a bill prohibiting the construction of
state prisons in Los Angeles County. After that success, the group
continued to work on other environmental problems facing the
community. In 1987, for example, it successfully blocked the con-
struction of an oil pipeline that would have been laid under a lo-
cal junior high school. Today, Madres del Este sponsors a number
Nongovernmental Organizations  231

of programs focusing on topics such as water conservation, lead
poison awareness, graffiti abatement, the preservation of Mono
Lake, and a mentoring task force.
Military Toxics Project (MTP)
Web site: http://www.miltoxproj.org/
e-mail: mtp@miltoxproj.org
The Military Toxics Project (MTP) was started in 1989 by the Na-
tional Toxics Campaign as a way of providing support and assis-
tance to grassroots organizations in areas where military
activities resulted in health and environmental risks to the com-
munity. Among the issues with which MTP has had to deal are
solid and liquid wastes produced by the construction and use of
chemical weapons, nuclear materials, and conventional muni-
tions, as well as pollution and contamination resulting from base
operations and closures. The organization has experienced a
long series of successes in its activities. It has been instrumental,
for example, in assuring that attention to environmental issues is
written into legislation dealing with military base closures.
National Black Environmental Justice Network (NBEJN)
Web site: http://www.nbejn.org/
e-mail: info@nbejn.org
The National Black Environmental Justice Network (NBEJN)
was formed in December 1999 at a meeting of more than 300
black grassroots economic, social, and environmental activists.
The organization was originally called the Interim National
Black Environmental and Economic Justice Coordinating Com-
mittee (INBEEJCC). It adopted its present name in 2001. NBEJN
now consists of environmental justice activists, community orga-
nizers, researchers, lawyers, public health specialists, technical
experts, and authors from 33 states and the District of Columbia
who are interested in the impact of economic development, pub-
lic health, and environmental hazards on black communities.
The organization currently focuses its activities on four major ar-
eas: (1) safe and healthy communities; (2) sustainable develop-
ment, climate justice, and clean energy production; (3) civil
rights and equal protection laws and policies; and (4) interna-
tional human rights protection.
232
Directory of Organizations

National Tribal Environment Council (NTEC)
2501 Rio Grande Blvd. N.W., Suite A
Albuquerque, NM 87104
Telephone: (505) 242-2175
The National Tribal Environment Council (NTEC) is a member-
ship organization with about 184 member tribes. It was formed
in 1991, when seven tribes joined together to create an organiza-
tion that provides assistance for the protection of Native Ameri-
can lands from environmental degradation. NTEC offers
programs that allow tribes to share information about common
environmental problems and to join with each other in dealing
with such problems. It maintains a clearinghouse of environmen-
tal information available not only to member tribes but also to
any Native American group that requests assistance. Each year,
the council sponsors an annual convention dealing with an envi-
ronmental issue of special concern.
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
Web site: http://www.nrdc.org/
e-mail: nrdcinfo@nrdc.org
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRCD) is a nonprofit
organization of more than 1.2 million members and a staff of
lawyers, scientists, and other environmental specialists. The
council is dedicated to protecting the world’s natural resources
and ensuring a safe and healthy environment for all people. It
works through legal action, scientific research, advocacy, and
public education. One of NRDC’s current areas of concern is en-
vironmental justice. It provides guides, fact sheets, a photo al-
bum, and other resources related to environmental justice issues
on its Web site at http://www.nrdc.org/ej/.
Service Training for Environmental Progress (STEP)
Web site: http://www.mc.vanderbilt.edu/root/vumc.php?site
=step&doc=813
e-mail: barbara.clinton@vanderbilt.edu
Service Training for Environmental Progress (STEP) is a service
of the Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) in
Nashville. STEP originated in 1981 as the Student  Environmental
Nongovernmental Organizations  233

Health Project, which itself evolved out of the university’s Occu-
pational Health Project. The organization’s purpose is to provide
assistance to community-based environmental organizations in
low-income communities. STEP places students in communities
to assist local leaders in educating residents about health issues.
The program also has provisions by which communities can
sponsor Vanderbilt interns to work on environmental issues
within a community. This program additionally allows the com-
munity to take advantage of a variety of university resources.
Sierra Club
Web site: http://www.sierraclub.org/
e-mail: information@sierraclub.org
The Sierra Club was formed in 1892 to defeat a proposed reduc-
tion in the size of Yosemite National Park. Over the years, it has
become one of the leading conservation groups in the United
States, with programs in a diverse range of fields, such as urban
sprawl, clean water, forest protection, global warming, human
rights, and global population. It currently sponsors environmen-
tal justice projects in eight parts of the United States, including
Detroit; Appalachia; New Orleans; Flagstaff, Arizona; and El
Paso, Texas. Its Web page provides information about these pro-
jects and about environmental justice news and events. The club
also publishes a newsletter, EJ Activist.
Student Environmental Action Coalition (SEAC)
Web site: http://www.seac.org/
e-mail: seac@seac.org
The Student Environmental Action Coalition (SEAC) grew out of
a national meeting, Threshold, held at the University of North
Carolina in Chapel Hill on October 27–29, 1989. More than 1,700
students from 43 states and over 225 colleges and universities at-
tended the meeting. The organization has experienced varying
degrees of success over the past two decades, partly because of
inadequate funding and partly because of changes in leadership.
It currently is focusing on two major campaigns, one dealing
with global climate change and the other with the health risks of
tampons. It is also conducting three major initiatives, one sup-
porting the Coalition of Immokalee Workers, a group of Florida
234
Directory of Organizations

workers in low-wage jobs throughout the state; one on Mili-
tarism and the Environment, dealing with the connection be-
tween military action and environmental degradation; and one
on Mountain Justice, focusing on the environmental damage
caused by surface coal mining.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops’ Environmental
Justice Program: Caring for God’s Creation (USCCB-EJP)
Web site: http://www.usccb.org/sdwp/ejp/
e-mail: sdwpmail@usccb.org
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops’ Environmen-
tal Justice Program (USCCB-EJP) was initiated in 1993 to educate
Catholics and motivate them to have a greater appreciation of
God’s creations, as well as to encourage parishes and dioceses to
become active in programs to promote environmental justice. To-
day, USCCB-EJP supports a program consisting primarily of four
elements: scholarly activities; leadership development; public
policy and advocacy; and special projects, such as children’s en-
vironmental health, youth leadership development, and regional
grants.
State, Regional, and Local
Alaska Community Action on Toxics (ACAT)
Web site: http://www.akaction.org/
e-mail: info@AKAction.net
Alaska Community Action on Toxics (ACAT) was organized in
1997 to deal with environmental justice issues in Alaska and other
regions. It currently has four major programs focusing on military
toxics and health, special issues related to the presence of contam-
inants and health in northern regions, right-to-know issues in-
volving pesticides, and water quality protection. ACAT provides
services associated with geographic information and computer
mapping, investigative research, advocacy, and training. The or-
ganization has produced a number of reports, newsletters, and
fact sheets, the most recent of which are the spring 2007 “Health
and Environment Bulletin for Health Care Providers” and a
newsletter, Reproductive Health and the Environment.
Nongovernmental Organizations  235

Alternatives for Community and Environment (ACE)
Web site: http://www.ace-ej.org/
e-mail: info@ace-ej.org
Alternatives for Community and Environment (ACE) was
founded in 1993 to assist residents of Boston’s predominantly
black Roxbury neighborhood in dealing with its environmental
problems. Since that time, the organization has expanded its mis-
sion by partnering with more than 40 groups in the greater
Boston area and the cities of Lowell, Lawrence, and New Bedford,
Massachusetts. Some of the organization’s accomplishments in-
clude the cleanup of large amounts of asbestos and toxic-laden
dirt in Roxbury, promotion of the adoption of pollution-free buses
by local transportation authorities, successful opposition to a
diesel-fueled power plant in the Chelsea neighborhood of Boston,
and construction of an air monitoring station in the Dudley
Square neighborhood of Boston.
Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice
(CCAEJ)
Web site: http://www.ccaej.org/
e-mail: admin@ccaej.org
The Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice
(CCAEJ) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization located in River-
side, California. The center’s goal is to bring groups of people to-
gether to work on problems of common interest, a goal it
achieves primarily by partnering with other organizations to
provide information and publications; outreach, referral, and
network development; and training and leadership programs.
The organization’s primary fields of interest are air quality and
the movement of goods; the desert protection campaign; the per-
chlorate campaign; the community empowerment campaign;
and the local voices, local votes campaign.
Communities for a Better Environment (CBE)
1440 Broadway, Suite 701
Oakland, CA 94612
Telephone: (510) 302-0430
Web site: http://www.cbecal.org
5610 Pacific Boulevard, Suite 203
236
Directory of Organizations

Huntington Park, CA 90255
Telephone: (323) 826-9771
Communities for a Better Environment (CBE) works with  low-
income Latinos, African Americans, and other minority groups to
deal with problems of environmental pollution. The group pro-
vides legal assistance, scientific and policy research and advice,
and aid in organizing the community. It operates on the assump-
tion that local populations are best able to understand and deal
with the environmental problems affecting their communities.
Deep South Center for Environmental Justice (DSCEJ)
Web site: http://www.dscej.org/
e-mail: dscej@aol.com
The Deep South Center for Environmental Justice (DSCEJ) was
founded in 1993 to provide a means by which universities and
communities could work together to deal with issues of environ-
mental justice. The center is located at Dillard University in New
Orleans, in a region where many communities are severely af-
fected by environmental hazards. One of DSCEJ’s major goals is to
develop minority leadership in the areas of social, economic, and
environmental justice for communities along the Mississippi River
corridor. It uses a model called “communiversity,” which makes
use of the special knowledge and skills of community leaders and
academicians. Since 2005, the center has also focused its resources
and skills in helping the New Orleans area recover from and re-
build after the devastating Hurricane Katrina of that year.
Detroiters Working for Environmental Justice (DWEJ)
Web site: http://www.dwej.org/
e-mail: See “Contact Us” page on Web site
Detroiters Working for Environmental Justice (DWEJ) was orga-
nized in 1994 to provide assistance to minority and low-income
people in the Detroit area in dealing with problems of environ-
mental racism. The organization currently operates a half-dozen
major programs on topics such as hazard awareness training and
lead dangers in the home, is involved in a state campaign for en-
vironmental justice, and runs a program for monitoring pollu-
tion by youth in the community.
Nongovernmental Organizations  237

Greenaction
Web site: http://www.greenaction.org/
e-mail: greenaction@greenaction.org
Greenaction was formed in the late 1990s when Bradley Angel,
then a member of Greenpeace, felt that the organization was not
doing enough to deal with issues of environmental justice. He
organized a new group whose first action was to support a
protest by five Native American tribes against the construction of
a nuclear waste dump in California’s Ward Valley. It was success-
ful in convincing Gov. Gray Davis to issue an order prohibiting
further work on the dump. Currently, Greenaction supports an
expanded program that includes a campaign to deal with pollu-
tion issues in San Francisco’s Bayview-Hunters Point neighbor-
hood, a protest against the use of certain types of incinerators for
solid waste disposal, a campaign against pollution produced by
Pacific Steel’s casting operations, and two environmental justice
programs—one focusing on the environmental health, justice,
and sovereignty of indigenous lands, and one on environmental
health and justice issues in California’s San Joaquin Valley.
KATRINA ORGANIZATIONS
When Hurricane Katrina struck the New Orleans area in August
2005, minority and low-income communities in the region expe-
rienced a significant deterioration in their environment, an issue
with which they had already been dealing for many years. When
the outside assistance needed for recovery from hurricane dam-
age failed to materialize, local residents formed a number of
grassroots organizations to deal with their problems using their
own resources. As of 2008, more than two dozen such organiza-
tions are still in operation. Their names and links to their Web
sites can be found on the Internet at http://www.cwswork
shop.org/katrinareader/view/org_listing. The following orga-
nization is typical of the kinds of groups found on that list.
New Orleans Workers’ Center for Racial Justice (NOWCRJ)
803 Baronne Street
New Orleans, LA 70113
Telephone: (504) 309-5165
Web site: http://www.neworleansworkerjustice.org
The New Orleans Workers’ Center for Racial Justice (NOWCRJ)
was organized in August 2006 by a coalition of law students
238
Directory of Organizations

from about a dozen organizations, including the Advancement
Project, Common Ground, Gillis Long Poverty Law Center, Hope
House, Latino Health Outreach Project, Louisiana Environmen-
tal Action Network, National Immigration Law Center, New
 Orleans Students United for Worker Justice, and Safe Streets/
Strong Communities. The original purpose of the coalition was
to collect information for a publication, And Injustice for All:
Workers’ Lives in the Reconstruction of New Orleans. Since that time,
NOWCRJ has continued to function as a grassroots organization
working for racial justice across races and occupations. Three of
its current projects are the Alliance of Guest Workers for Dignity,
working for the rights of foreign workers who have come to New
Orleans since the hurricane; the Congress of Day Laborers,
which focuses on problems of workers who depend on day work
to survive; and the Homeless Worker Organizing Project, which
offers aid and resources to the estimated 12,000 homeless resi-
dents of the city.
Liberty Hill Foundation–Environmental Justice Fund (EJF)
Web site: http://libertyhill.org/donor/environment.html
e-mail: info@libertyhill.org
Liberty Hill Foundation is a Los Angeles–based organization that
makes grants to combat poverty and injustice and to transform
the city into a community that “promises safety, equality and op-
portunity for everyone who lives here.” Its activities are divided
into four major areas: providing training and networking for
grassroots leaders in the community, making grants, providing
programs and services, and helping to shape the debate on key
issues in the community. Between 1996 and 2008, the foundation
made grants of more than $2.4 million to environmental justice
groups through its Environmental Justice Fund (EJF). Examples
of the groups funded include Amigos de los Rios, the California
Environmental Rights Alliance, the Coalition for Economic Sur-
vival, Del Amo Action Committee, and Los Angeles Alliance for
a New Economy.
Literacy for Environmental Justice (LEJ)
Web site: http://www.lejyouth.org/
e-mail: ej@lejyouth.org
Literacy for Environmental Justice (LEJ) is an organization
based in the Bayview-Hunters Point neighborhood of San
Nongovernmental Organizations  239

 Francisco whose mission is to promote an understanding of en-
vironmental justice among young men and women of the com-
munity. Since its founding in 1998, LEJ has involved more than
10,000 young people in programs designed to promote its goals
and objectives. Its current efforts are organized into six major
programmatic areas: Environmental Health and Justice Educa-
tion, Heron’s Head Park Education, the Living Classroom Pro-
gram, Youth Envision Program, Slough Youth Program, and
Youth for Environmental Health Program. The organization’s
educational programs include an initial project planning meet-
ing with teachers and students, a series of lessons that define
and explain the issue to be studied, field research and/or com-
munity investigations, an action project, and a final evaluation.
Little Village Environmental Justice Organization (LVEJO)
Web site: http://www.lvejo.org/
e-mail: info@lvejo.org
Little Village Environmental Justice Organization (LVEJO) is a
neighborhood grassroots organization of people living in the
Little Village neighborhood of Chicago that works for eco-
nomic, environmental, and social justice. The organization’s
current campaigns focus on the cleanup of the Celotex section
of Little Village, the promotion of clean power sources for 
the area, the mapping of the community and its resources, the
development of clean and safe Latino schools, the expansion of
park and recreational areas in the neighborhood, and the
 promotion of urban agricultural projects. The organization
publishes a regular newsletter about its projects and accom-
plishments, El Cilantro.
Louisiana Environmental Action Network (LEAN)
Web site: http://leanweb.org/
e-mail: contact@leanweb.org
The Louisiana Environmental Action Network (LEAN) consists
of more than 100 grassroots organizations and more than 1,700
individuals working to deal with environmental issues caused
by one of the most hazardous collections of industrial facilities
anywhere in the United States. The network works with individ-
ual groups that are attempting to deal with local conditions by
providing expert advice, media resources, leadership training,
and legal advice. The organization also conducts the annual
240
Directory of Organizations

LEAN People’s Conference providing members with support,
solidarity, and education. Recent network campaigns have fo-
cused on the environmental effects of hurricanes Rita and Kat-
rina, management of hurricane debris, climate change issues,
and threats posed to cypress resources as a result of cypress
mulch collection.
New York City Environmental Justice Alliance (NYCEJA)
Web site: http://www.nyceja.org/
e-mail: generalinfo@nyceja.org
The New York City Environmental Justice Alliance (NYCEJA) is
a 501(c)(3) corporation formed in 1991 to bring together the ef-
forts of a number of environmental justice groups working in
New York City. Today NYCEJA consists of 15 local grassroots or-
ganizations such as El Puente, Lower Washington Heights
Neighborhood Association, Magnolia Tree Earth Center, Morn-
ingside Heights/West Harlem Sanitation Coalition, Nos
Quedamos, and United Puerto Ricans’ Organization of Sunset
Park (UPROSE). NYCEJA action is currently organized around
four major campaigns: Apollo and Energy Advocacy, which pro-
motes sustainable environmental and economic development;
Brownfield Redevelopment and Advocacy, which involves iden-
tifying brownfields in the community and working to develop
safe and useful alternatives for the land; Open Space Equity
Campaign, which works to increase the amount of open space in
neighborhoods of poor and minority people; and Solid Waste
Management Advocacy, which deals with inequities in the siting
of solid waste disposal sites. NYCEJA publishes newsletters for
each of these campaigns and has produced two major reports on
environmental justice in New York City: New York Urban Environ-
ment: Underfunded and Underserved and Reaching for Zero: A Citi-
zens Plan for Zero Waste in New York City.
SouthWest Organizing Project (SWOP)
Web site: http://www.swop.net/
e-mail: swop@swop.net
The SouthWest Organizing Project (SWOP) was founded in 1981
as a statewide, multiracial, multi-issue, grassroots membership
organization in New Mexico. One of its guiding principles is that
people will live peacefully with each other only with the elimina-
tion of racism, sexism, and age and social class discrimination.
Nongovernmental Organizations  241

The project is working for the self-determination of all peoples
and for social, environmental, and economic justice at home and
abroad. Among its activities are the registration of voters, pri-
marily in Hispanic American and African American communi-
ties; efforts to promote community control of housing, zoning,
and local economic development; the promotion of health and
safety concerns of workers; and the development of educational
materials. Its current campaigns include Intel: What Are We
Breathing, an effort to hold Intel accountable for damage it has
caused to the environment and economy; Youth, a program for
the development of young leaders in the community; Bucket
Brigade, a community air pollution monitoring program; and Pa-
jarito Mesa, a campaign to assist a community facing especially
difficult economic and environmental issues.
Southwest Research and Information Center (SRIC)
Web site: http://www.sric.org/
e-mail: info@sric.org
The Southwest Research and Information Center (SRIC) is one of
the oldest environmental justice groups in the United States. It
was formed in 1971 to provide citizens of the southwestern
United States with the information they needed to understand
how their lives were being impacted by a variety of operations,
such as uranium mining and nuclear waste disposal, and how
they could most effectively deal with those problems. The orga-
nization’s mission has not changed significantly in the last four
decades. Currently, its activities are organized into five major
programs: uranium impact assessment, community develop-
ment and economics, energy and natural resources, environmen-
tal information and education, and nuclear waste safety. SRIC
publishes a quarterly journal, Voices from the Earth.
West Harlem Environmental Action (WE ACT)
Web site: http://www.weact.org/
e-mail: Peggy@weact.org
One of the oldest, best-known, and most prestigious environmen-
tal justice organizations is West Harlem Environmental Action
(WE ACT). It was formed in 1988 as a means through which com-
munity members could begin to take action against the operation
of the notorious North River Sewage Treatment Plant in West
Harlem and the proposed construction of a diesel bus depot in
242
Directory of Organizations

northern Manhattan. Today, WE ACT is a community-based, non-
profit organization working to inform, educate, train, and mobi-
lize the predominantly African American and Latino residents of
northern Manhattan. The organization deals with any issue that
affects the quality of life in the area, including air and water pol-
lution, housing problems, toxic materials, land use and open
space, waterfront development and usage, sanitation, transporta-
tion, historic preservation, regulatory enforcement, and citizen
participation in public policy making.
Examples of the activities in which WE ACT has been en-
gaged are health surveys, a youth program to build awareness of
environmental issues, a lead poisoning prevention program, a
neighborhood environmental center, community forums, and a
community environmental resources library.
Nongovernmental Organizations  243


8
Resources
E
nvironmental justice is still a relatively young field. Insuffi-
cient time has passed to permit the development of an exten-
sive literature base about the subject, as is now the case in
other fields of social injustice or environmentalism. This chapter
lists some of the most important works currently available on en-
vironmental justice, environmental racism, and related topics.
The chapter is divided into four major sections: books, articles,
reports, and Internet sources.
The resources in this chapter deal with all aspects of the en-
vironmental justice movement, including topics such as the his-
tory of the movement, research evidence dealing with the extent
and characteristics of environmental inequities, methodological
issues in the study of environmental inequities, grassroots and
other types of efforts to deal with environmental inequities, the
relationship of the environmental justice movement with sus-
tainable development and climate change, case studies in the
battle against environmental inequities, international aspects of
the environmental justice movement, responses to environmen-
tal inequities by governmental agencies and businesses, legal is-
sues related to the environmental justice movement, and
regulatory issues in dealing with environmental inequities.
Books
Adamson, Joni, Mei Mei Evans, and Rachel Stein, eds. The En-
vironmental Justice Reader: Politics, Poetics, & Pedagogy. Tuc-
son: University of Arizona Press, 2002.
245

246
Resources
A fascinating book that claims to be the first text “to link political
studies, literary analysis, and teaching strategies.” Accordingly,
the book includes a wide-ranging collection of articles by schol-
ars and workers in the field on some general principles of envi-
ronmental justice as well as a number of interesting and
instructive case studies from the United States and other parts of
the world.
Agyeman, Julian. Sustainable Communities and the Challenge
of Environmental Justice. New York: NYU Press, 2005.
The author begins by providing a general introduction to envi-
ronmental justice and then explains the special problems faced in
developing sustainable communities where environmental in-
equities exist. He then discusses the concept of “just sustainabil-
ity” in both theory and practice, concluding with some specific
recommendations for finding ways of providing communities
with both a sustainable basis and environmental justice.
Allen, Barbara L. Uneasy Alchemy: Citizens and Experts in
Louisiana’s Chemical Corridor Disputes. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2003.
The author analyzes a number of events in which social and en-
vironmental activists in Louisiana’s Cancer Alley confronted
chemical and petroleum industries in the area over the pollution
they were producing. She explores the factors that led to the con-
siderable number of successes achieved by citizen groups and
finds that a critical factor in success was the establishment of al-
liances among grassroots activists and experts in the field of en-
vironmental health and related areas.
Anand, Ruchi. International Environmental Justice: A North-
South Dimension. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Publishing, 2005.
This book discusses environmental inequities in three general ar-
eas: climate change, ozone politics, and hazardous waste dis-
posal. The author points out some major themes in international
environmental inequities that parallel those found in domestic
cases in the United States.

Bowen, William M. Environmental Justice through Research-
Based Decision-Making. London: Routledge Press, 2001.
This scholarly treatise presents a detailed analysis of the re-
search technology available for the study of environmental in-
equity problems. Part I deals with general methodological
issues, such as the definition of terms and concepts used in the
field, research methods available for the study of environmental
inequity issues, and the design and validation of research stud-
ies. Part II reviews existing research on environmental inequities
and suggests some general principles for the design of future
studies. Part III outlines some lessons to be learned from re-
search on environmental inequities for administrative decision
making.
Bryant, Bunyan. Environmental Justice: Issues, Policies, and So-
lutions. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1995.
This collection of articles covers a broad range of topics, such as
“Health-Based Standards: What Role in Environmental Justice?”
“Environmental Justice Centers: A Response to Inequity,” “Envi-
ronmentalists and Environmental Justice Policy,” “Residential
Segregation and Urban Quality of Life,” “The Net Impact of En-
vironmental Protection on Jobs and the Economy,” “Towards a
New Industrial Policy,” “Environmental Equity and Economic
Policy: Expanding the Agenda of Reform,” “Indigenous Nations:
Summary of Sovereignty and Its Implications for Environmental
Protection,” “Sustainable Agriculture Embedded in a Global Sus-
tainable Future: Agriculture in the United States and Cuba,” and
“Rethinking International Environmental Policy in the Late
Twentieth Century.”
Bryant, Bunyan, and Paul Mohai, eds. Race and the Incidence of
Environmental Hazards. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.
This book is one of the classic references in the field of environ-
mental justice. Its 14 articles are divided between discussions of
specific examples of environmental racism (“Environmentalism
and Civil Rights in Sumter County, Alabama,” “Invitation to Poi-
son? Detroit Minorities and Toxic Fish Consumption from the
Detroit River,” and “Uranium Production and Its Effects on
Books
247

Navajo Communities along the Rio Puerco in Western New
 Mexico”) and more general discussions of fundamental issues in
environmental justice (“Toxic Waste and Race in the United
States,” “Can the Environmental Movement Attract and Main-
tain the Support of Minorities?” and “Environmental Black Mail
in Minority Communities”).
Bullard, Robert D., ed. Confronting Environmental Racism:
Voices from the Grassroots. Boston: South End Press, 1993.
Some of the 12 chapters in this anthology describe specific in-
stances of environmental racism, including discussions as to how
individuals and organizations dealt with those instances. Exam-
ples of these cases are the chapters “Race and Waste in Two Vir-
ginia Communities,” “Environmental Politics in Alabama’s
Blackbelt,” and “Sustainable Development at Gannados del
Valle.” Other chapters consider broader issues in environmental
justice, such as Bullard’s introductory chapter, “Anatomy of En-
vironmental Racism and the Environmental Justice Movement,”
and later chapters titled “Environmentalism and the Politics of
Inclusion” and “Coping with Industrial Exploitation.”
Bullard, Robert D. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environ-
mental Quality, 3rd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2000.
This book is one of the seminal works in the environmental jus-
tice movement. It arose out of Bullard’s research in Houston on
the spatial distribution of municipal solid waste disposal sites.
Bullard then extended his research to other areas in which envi-
ronmental racism appeared to exist, specifically, West Dallas,
Texas; Institute, West Virginia; Alsen, Louisiana; and Emelle–
Sumter County, Alabama. The book reports the results of his re-
search in these areas in addition to providing a general analysis
of the nature of environmental racism and the ways in which it
can be combated.
Bullard, Robert D., ed. Growing Smarter: Achieving Livable
Communities, Environmental Justice, and Regional Equity.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.
The contributors to this book, a group of urban planners, sociolo-
gists, economists, educators, lawyers, health professionals, and
248
Resources

environmentalists, discuss the concept of “smart growth” within
the context of environmental racism and environmental in-
equities. Smart growth is a movement that emphasizes the devel-
opment of holistic communities on a pedestrian scale that value
diversity and mixed land use. The authors point out how the
smart growth movement has largely ignored problems related to
environmental justice and suggest ways in which this deficiency
can be overcome in the future.
Bullard, Robert D., ed. The Quest for Environmental Justice:
Human Rights and the Politics of Pollution. San Francisco:
Sierra Club Books, 2005.
This book is a follow-up to the author’s highly regarded Unequal
Protection: Environmental Justice and Communities of Color (see be-
low) that updates the status of the environmental justice move-
ment in the 21st century. It includes a number of case studies of
the ongoing problem of environmental racism in communities
such as the Cancer Alley region of Louisiana, metropolitan Los
Angeles, the New Jersey waterfront, and the island of Vieques,
Puerto Rico. The last chapter focuses on international aspects of
the environmental inequities problem.
Bullard, Robert D., ed. Unequal Protection: Environmental Jus-
tice and Communities of Color. San Francisco: Sierra Club
Books, 1994.
The essays that make up Unequal Protection are divided into three
parts. The first part covers the historical background of the envi-
ronmental justice movement. It includes a review of two early
cases that helped define the movement, at Indian Creek, Al-
abama, and Warren County, North Carolina. Part II describes
cases that have arisen in “sacrifice zones,” areas where high con-
centrations of industrial pollution are found. Among the exam-
ples discussed in this section are a Superfund site in Texarkana,
Texas, a lead smelter in Dallas, and the area of the Mississippi
River Valley known as Cancer Alley. Part III of the book focuses
on the alliances that have developed between mainstream envi-
ronmentalists and grassroots organizations interested specifically
in issues of environmental justice. Among the organizations dis-
cussed are the SouthWest Organizing Project, Concerned Citizens
of South Central Los Angeles, and Mothers of East Los Angeles.
Books
249

Bullard, Robert D., and Dana A. Alston, eds. We Speak for Our-
selves: Social Justice, Race, and Environment. Washington, DC:
Panos Institute, 1990.
Most of the 13 articles in this book describe specific instances in
which activists have worked to deal with environmental issues
in communities of color. Other articles discuss the issues in-
volved in bringing together people of color and people from low-
income groups with more traditional (and, usually, mostly
white) environmental groups. The final chapter describes inter-
national aspects of the environmental justice issue.
Bullard, Robert D., and Glenn S. Johnson, eds. Just Transporta-
tion: Dismantling Race and Class Barriers to Mobility. Gabriola
Island, BC: New Society Publishers, 1997.
The essays in this book by environmental activists, transporta-
tion experts, and lawyers point out how institutionalized racism
affects the way public transportation systems are designed and
built, resulting in unequal health and environmental damage to
communities with large low-income and minority populations.
The book not only discusses general principles but also provides
specific examples of cases in which transportation decisions have
had unequal effects on different kinds of local communities.
Camacho, David E., ed. Environmental Injustices, Political
Struggles: Race, Class, and the Environment. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1998.
The essays that make up this book are divided into four sections,
the first of which provides a general theoretical framework for
the environmental justice movement. The second section dis-
cusses specific examples of environmental inequity, whereas the
third section reviews some methods that have been developed
for dealing with such inequities. The final section, “Environmen-
tal Justice,” contains essays with mixed foci.
Caruthers, David V. Environmental Justice in Latin America:
Problems, Promise, and Practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2008.
While the environmental justice movement in the United States
and, more recently, Europe and Africa have been studied in some
250
Resources

detail, there has been relatively little attention given to the prob-
lems of environmental inequity in Latin America. This book at-
tempts to remedy that deficiency by outlining some theoretical
concepts with unique application to Latin America as well as an
extensive review of some instructive case studies from the region.
Checker, Melissa. Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism
and the Search for Justice in a Southern Town. New York: NYU
Press, 2005.
The author tells the story of yet one more community affected by
environmental inequities (the Hyde Park neighborhood of Au-
gusta, Georgia), reviews the health problems endemic in the
area, and discusses the activities of local citizens fighting for en-
vironmental justice.
Cole, Luke W., and Sheila R. Foster, eds. From the Ground Up:
Environmental Racism and the Rise of the Environmental Jus-
tice Movement. New York: NYU Press, 2000.
The authors draw from their own experiences as activists in the
environmental justice movement as well as from specific case
studies of communities confronted by environmental inequities
to review the history of the environmental justice movement and
to analyze methods that have proved to be and not to be success-
ful in dealing with environmental racism. Reviews of the book
praise its ability to draw some important general conclusions
from the specific cases presented.
Faber, Daniel Richard, ed. The Struggle for Ecological Democ-
racy: Environmental Justice Movements in the United States.
New York: Guilford Press, 1998.
The dozen essays in this book discuss a number of issues related
to the environmental justice movement, including specific case
studies, such as Hispanic use of land for grazing purposes in the
Southwest, environmental politics in the upper Rio Grande, and
the Earth First! movement in northern California, as well as more
general analyses of issues such as the political ecology of Ameri-
can capitalism, the use of epidemiology in environmental justice
studies, and the effects of capitalist production systems on the
environment.
Books
251

Foreman, Christopher H. The Promise and Peril of Environmen-
tal Justice. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998.
Although acknowledging a number of victories as a result of the
environmental justice movement, the author claims that many
challenges still face the movement, including a tendency to accept
one-sided approaches to dealing with problems of environmental
inequities and an unwillingness to accept necessary compro-
mises. For this reason, he argues, the movement may be avoiding
or ignoring other critical elements related to social and health
problems confronting low-income and minority communities.
Gerrard, Michael B., and Sheila R. Foster, eds. The Law of Envi-
ronmental Justice, 2nd ed. Chicago: American Bar Association,
2008.
The 21 papers in this book discuss legal theory and practice re-
lated to environmental justice and include topics such as federal
and state regulations and programs, Native American law, access
to information, impact and risk assessment, challenges to per-
mits for new and existing facilities, brownfields, and residential
and workplace exposure.
Gibbs, Lois Marie. Love Canal: The Story Continues. Gabriola
Island, BC: New Society Publishers, 1998.
Although not commonly thought of as part of the environmental
justice movement, Gibbs’s campaign at the Love Canal site in
New York State where she lived remains one of the signature
events in the early history of the movement to protect communi-
ties against the dangers of hazardous waste dumps. This book
retells that story and explains how the Love Canal battle led to
the development of the Center for Health, Environment and Jus-
tice, which remains one of the premier organizations in the envi-
ronmental justice movement.
Girdner, Eddie J., and Jack Smith. Killing Me Softly: Toxic
Waste, Corporate Profit, and the Struggle for Environmental
Justice. New York: Monthly Review Press, 2002.
The authors explore the subject of environmental justice from the
standpoint of the growth of the industries whose products are
252
Resources

 responsible for environmental inequities. They demonstrate the
economic forces that have led to the vastly increased problem of
hazardous waste disposal and the mushrooming health risks this
trend has produced. They focus in particular on the struggle of
people in Mercer County, Missouri, against plans by Amoco
Waste-Tech to build a large toxic waste landfill in the county and
the success achieved by those people.
Glazer, Phyllis, Roy Flukinger, Eugene Hargrove, and Marvin
Legator (photographs by Tammy Cromer-Campbell). Fruit of
the Orchard: Environmental Justice in East Texas. Denton: Uni-
versity of North Texas Press, 2006.
Through words and photographs, this book tells the story of
Winona, Texas, a small town of 500 people living downwind of a
toxic waste injection well facility built in 1982 by American Ecol-
ogy Environmental Services (AEES). As the result of efforts by a
local environmental justice group, Mothers Organized to Stop
Environmental Sins (MOSES), AEES closed the well in 1997, but
not before adults and children in Winona had developed an un-
usually high number of health problems allegedly because of
chemicals deposited in the well.
Goldman, Benjamin A. The Truth about Where You Live. New
York: Random House, 1992.
Under the Freedom of Information Act, the author and his col-
leagues obtained voluminous data about a variety of environ-
mental hazards to which American citizens are exposed and
assessed the degree of exposure to such hazards by residents in
every county and parish in the nation. The result is a book con-
sisting of hundreds of maps and tables describing the extent to
which various regions of the nation are at risk for health prob-
lems, such as heart disease, birth defects, all forms of cancers, in-
fectious diseases, industrial toxins, and nonindustrial pollution.
Chapter 6, “Environmental Justice,” focuses on the dispropor-
tionate extent to which minorities and poor communities are ex-
posed to such hazards. The book is a critical reference for those
interested in studying the factual data upon which claims of en-
vironmental inequities are often based.
Books
253

Grijalva, James M. Closing the Circle: Environmental Justice in
Indian Country. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2008.
The author discusses special problems created by the confluence
of federal and tribal laws in dealing with environmental in-
equities among Indian tribes. The book analyzes air, water, and
land pollution issues within the context of Indian traditions and
tribal values.
Hall, Bob, ed. Environmental Politics: Lessons from the Grass-
roots. Durham, NC: Institute for Southern Studies, 1988.
Environmental Politics consists of 11 essays relating important
case studies in the early years of the environmental justice move-
ment. Two of the most interesting took place in Warren County,
North Carolina, often thought of as the beginning of the environ-
mental justice movement, and in Robeson County, North Car-
olina, the infamous case of “the river that would not die.”
Harding, Andrew, ed. Access to Environmental Justice: A Com-
parative Study. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2007.
This book reports the results of a study of 11 countries widely
distributed throughout the world to determine the extent to
which ordinary citizens can and do have influence over the envi-
ronments in which they live, using both legal and extra-legal
means. The study finds that the problems faced by communities,
the methods used to deal with those problems, and the relative
success in resolving the problems vary widely from place to
place.
Hofrichter, Richard, ed. Reclaiming the Environmental Debate:
The Politics of Health in a Toxic Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000.
The essays that make up this anthology describe the general so-
cial, economic, and political conditions in the United States that
make possible the environmental inequities against which the
environmental justice movement struggles. The authors point
out that society’s unquestioned acceptance of the production of
hazardous wastes, economic blight, substandard housing,
chronic stress, exploitative working conditions, and dangerous
technologies cumulatively provide a context in which health
risks for certain groups of people are an inevitable result.
254
Resources

Hofrichter, Richard, ed. Toxic Struggles: The Theory and Prac-
tice of Environmental Justice. Salt Lake City: University of
Utah Press, 2002.
The editor of this collection of essays explains that they are writ-
ten “from a perspective that places environmental issues in a
larger context of struggles for social change, locally and glob-
ally.” The essays are divided into two sections, the first of which
provides a theoretical perspective on the context of environmen-
tal justice. They consider topics such as “Capitalism and the Cri-
sis of Environmentalism,” “Creating a Culture of Destruction:
Gender, Militarism, and the Environment,” and “Feminism and
Ecology.” Part II of the book deals with practical issues and in-
cludes chapters such as “Blue-Collar Women and Toxic-Waste
Protests: The Process of Politicization,” “Ecofeminism and Grass-
Roots Environmentalism in the United States,” and “Farm Work-
ers at Risk.”
Legg, Janine. Building Healthy Communities in Environmental
Justice Areas. Charleston, SC: BookSurge Publishing, 2006.
The author covers a wide range of topics related to health issues
in communities affected by environmental inequities. She begins
with a general introduction to the subject of environmental jus-
tice and explains how environmental inequities arise in some
communities and not in others. She then describes a number of
research tools that can be used to assess the presence and extent
of health problems related to environmental factors. She con-
cludes by discussing the role of health policy planning in the pre-
vention of health problems in communities at risk from
environmental inequities. She concludes with a discussion of a
research study conducted on environmental inequities in a nine-
county region of Pennsylvania.
Lerner, Steve. Diamond: A Struggle for Environmental Justice in
Louisiana’s Chemical Corridor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2006.
The author tells the history of the battle between the Concerned
Citizens of Norco (CCN) and the Shell Oil Company over envi-
ronmental inequities in Louisiana’s notorious Cancer Alley.
Norco is located between a chemical plant owned by Shell and
an oil refinery owned by one of its subsidiaries, Motiva. CCN
Books
255

eventually won its battle with Shell, which made a number of ad-
justments in its operations to reduce its impact on the Diamond
neighborhood of Norco and eventually paid to relocate many cit-
izens of the town.
Lucas, Karen, ed. Running on Empty: Transport, Social Exclu-
sion and Environmental Justice. Bristol, UK: Policy Press, 2004.
This book explores a topic that is often ignored in discussions of
environmental justice, the unequal benefits and costs of the sit-
ing of transportation systems. Contributors to the volume dis-
cuss past failure of planners to take into consideration these
benefits and costs, discuss a number of case studies that illustrate
the problem of environmental inequities in transportation plan-
ning, and suggest new options being developed to overcome this
deficiency.
Malone, Linda A., and Scott Pasternack. Defending the Environ-
ment: Civil Society Strategies to Enforce International Environ-
mental Law. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2006.
The authors provide an analysis of some international environ-
mental inequity issues (such as transnational shipments of haz-
ardous wastes), with a discussion of legal remedies that have
been and can be used to enforce existing international and na-
tional laws prohibiting such practices.
McDonald, David A., ed. Environmental Justice in South Africa.
Athens: Ohio University Press, 2002.
The papers in this volume provide a comprehensive review of
the emergence and evolution of environmental justice in South
Africa and consider some unique characteristics and problems
related to environmental justice in the nation.
McGurty, Eileen. Transforming Environmentalism: Warren
County, PCBs, and the Origins of Environmental Justice. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2007.
The author presents a detailed and intensive analysis of an event
that has been called the defining moment in the environmental
justice movement, a protest that occurred in Warren County,
256
Resources

North Carolina, in 1982. She argues that the event transformed
the nature of the environmentalist movement in the United
States.
Pellow, David Naguib. Garbage Wars: The Struggle for Environ-
mental Justice in Chicago. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
The author points out that Chicago has more landfills per square
mile than any other American city, explaining perhaps its long
history of controversy over the siting of garbage dumps and the
deleterious effects they have on local communities. He traces the
development of this ongoing problem to its origins in the 1880s
and explores a number of current controversies in Chicago
neighborhoods.
Pellow, David Naguib. Resisting Global Toxics: Transnational
Movements for Environmental Justice. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2007.
The author explores the increasing trade and dumping of haz-
ardous wastes produced in developed nations and delivered to
poorer, developing nations. He also examines the increasingly
sophisticated responses by poor and ethnic communities to this
practice in countries throughout the world. He particularly fo-
cuses on the wastes associated with pesticide production and
with the manufacture of computer components, such as inte-
grated chips.
Pellow, David Naguib, and Robert J. Brulle, eds. Power, Justice,
and the Environment: A Critical Appraisal of the Environmental
Justice Movement. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
The premise of this book is that, although the environmental jus-
tice movement has experienced considerable success in the last
three decades, no critical analysis has yet been made of the
movement’s effectiveness. This book attempts to do so, focusing
first on the development of the movement itself, especially in
comparison to the civil rights movement. It then examines the
possibility of new approaches to environmental justice activism
and alternative methods of community organization. Finally, it
explores the spread of the environmental justice movement to
other countries, particularly with regard to the transnational
trade in hazardous materials.
Books
257

Pellow, David Naguib, and Lisa Park. The Silicon Valley of
Dreams: Environmental Injustice, Immigrant Workers, and the
High-Tech Global Economy. New York: NYU Press, 2002.
The authors explore the environmental problems created by the
huge electronics industry in Silicon Valley, California, and
demonstrate its disproportionate health effects on those who
work in the industry, especially poor immigrants whose commu-
nities bear the brunt of the industry’s waste products.
Rechtschaffen, Clifford, and Eileen Gauna. Environmental Jus-
tice: Law, Policy, and Regulation. Durham, NC: Carolina Acad-
emic Press, 2002.
This textbook is designed for courses in environmental justice
and related topics. It makes use of materials from case studies,
empirical research, agency actions, and laws and regulations and
documents from sociology, political science, risk assessment, and
environmental and civil rights laws.
Rhodes, Edwardo Lao. Environmental Justice in America: A
New Paradigm. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005.
The author provides an interesting review of the history of the
environmental justice movement, examines the reasons that mi-
nority groups and low-income people have not generally been
involved in the environmental movement, and suggests some
new ways of analyzing and attacking problems of environmen-
tal inequity.
Roberts, J. Timmons, and Melissa M. Toffolon-Weiss. Chroni-
cles from the Environmental Justice Frontline. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
This book focuses on battles for environmental justice in
Louisiana, providing first a general introduction to the history of
those struggles and then a review of four specific cases in which
communities challenged industry over the health and environ-
mental damage they were causing.
Sandler, Ronald, and Phaedra C. Pezzullo. Environmental Jus-
tice and Environmentalism: The Social Justice Challenge to the
Environmental Movement. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.
258
Resources

Most books tend to look at environmental justice from the stand-
point of human rights. This book raises issues about the move-
ment from the standpoint of environmentalism. The three major
sections of the book examine conceptual issues, environmental
inequities in the United States, and environmental inequities on
the international scene.
Shrader-Frechette, Kristin. Environmental Justice: Creating
Equality, Reclaiming Democracy. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2005.
The author begins with a somewhat abstruse philosophical
analysis of the principles of environmental justice but then goes
on to review and analyze a number of problem areas with sharp
understanding and perception. She explores land issues in the
Appalachians, exposure to chemical toxics in Louisiana, nuclear
waste disposal issues in Nevada, and environmental inequities
among the Mescalero Apache tribe in the western United States.
Smith, Ted, David A. Sonnenfeld, and David Naguib Pellow,
eds. Challenging the Chip: Labor Rights and Environmental Jus-
tice in the Global Electronics Industry. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press, 2006.
The production of computer chips, one of the world’s most im-
portant industries, results in widespread pollution of air, water,
and land resources. Those most seriously affected by this pollu-
tion tend to be poor, female, minority, and, in many cases, immi-
grants. This book examines the nature and extent of this
environmental inequity in communities around the world.
Stein, Rachel, ed. New Perspectives on Environmental Justice:
Gender, Sexuality, and Activism. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 2004.
This book examines issues in environmental justice from a femi-
nist and lesbian perspective. It offers both theoretical analyses
(“Toward a Queer Ecofeminism” and “Feminist Theory and En-
vironmental Justice”) and reviews of practical case studies (“Pro-
ducing ‘Roundup Ready®’ communities?” and “No Remedy for
the Inuit”).
Books
259

Van Wynsberghe, Robert M. AlterNatives: Community, Iden-
tity, and Environmental Justice on Walpole Island. Boston:
 Allyn & Bacon, 2002.
This monograph in the Cultural Survival Studies in Ethnicity and
Change series discusses efforts by an Ojibwe community in
southern Ontario to protect its unique environmental heritage
and the health of its own people from air, water, and land pollu-
tion caused by a number of industrial operations in its immediate
area. Based on its successes in this effort, the Walpole Island com-
munity is placed by the author at the forefront of the environmen-
tal justice movement among First Nation people in Canada.
Westra, Laura. Environmental Justice and the Rights of Indige-
nous Peoples: International and Domestic Legal Perspectives.
London: Earthscan Publications, 2007.
The author argues that more than 300 million people in over 70
countries worldwide are now being affected by environmental
changes that seriously threaten their health and well-being.
Moreover, these populations are largely unprotected by laws and
regulation, making it possible for corporations to continue envi-
ronmental inequities with little or no opportunity for legal re-
course. She recommends some “modest proposals” for dealing
with this situation.
Wilks, Sarah. Seeking Environmental Justice. Amsterdam:
Rodopi, 2008.
This publication in Rodopi’s At the Interface/Probing the
Boundaries series consists of articles based on presentations
made at the 5th Environmental Justice and Global Citizenship
conference held in Oxford, UK, in 2006. Participants represented
a wide range of academic disciplines, and their papers covered
topics such as environmental education, environmental activism,
sustainable communities, genetic modification, free trade and in-
ternational environmental law, and multinational corporations.
Wulfhorst, J. D., and Anne K. Haugestad, eds. Building Sus-
tainable Communities: Environmental Justice and Global Citi-
zenship. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2006.
The 14 papers that make up this volume were originally pre-
sented at the 2004 Ecological Justice and Global Citizenship
260
Resources

 Conference in Copenhagen. They discuss issues posed by the de-
velopment of sustainable communities among populations that
are often at risk from environmental inequities. Authors draw on
examples from communities in Europe, North America, and
Australia.
Articles
The only journal devoted specifically and exclusively to the sub-
ject of environmental justice was started in the spring of 2008. En-
vironmental Justice is a peer-reviewed quarterly publication of the
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., company. Its ISSN is 1939-4071. Articles in
the journal deal with all aspects of the environmental justice
movement, such as research on health effects resulting from envi-
ronmental inequities; efforts to reduce and protect communities
from such health effects; analysis of policies and regulations re-
lated to issues in environmental justice; the connection between
siting of hazardous waste sites and environmental inequities;
multidisciplinary studies of the interrelationship of economic, ge-
ographical, political, and environmental issues; historical studies
of efforts to deal with environmental issues in poor and minority
communities; and problems involved in the relocation of haz-
ardous facilities. The journal is intended for a wide variety of
readers, including legislators, attorneys, environmentalists, social
activists, industry leaders, and public health officials.
Adler, J. H. “There’s No Justice in EPA’s Environmental Justice
Policy.” Corporate Environmental Strategy 6 (1999): 183–189.
The author discusses the EPA’s Interim Guidance for investigat-
ing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, issued in 1998, as a
mechanism for ensuring that environmental inequities do not oc-
cur as a result of the issuance of air quality permits. He finds
some serious problems with the regulations.
Agyeman, J., and B. Evans. “‘Just Sustainability’: The Emerg-
ing Discourse of Environmental Justice in Britain?” The Geo-
graphical Journal 170 (2004): 155–164.
The authors review the emergence and growth of environmental
justice in Great Britain and suggest that the concepts of sustain-
able development and environmental justice have some common
Articles
261

elements (which they call “just sustainability”) that can be used
to develop public policy and actions for the good of low-income
and minority communities as well as the society as a whole.
Baden, B. M., and D. L. Coursey. “The Locality of Waste Sites
within the City of Chicago: A Demographic, Social, and Eco-
nomic Analysis.” Resource and Energy Economics 24 (2002):
53–93.
The authors describe this study as a follow-up to the 1987 United
Church of Christ study, Toxic Waste and Race in the United States,
with some of its methodological shortcomings corrected. They
find that Hispanics in the city are disproportionately exposed to
environmental hazards but that similar patterns for African
Americans do not occur, and probably never have existed.
Block, Walter, and Roy Whitehead. “The Unintended Conse-
quences of Environmental Justice.” Forensic Science Interna-
tional 100 (1999): 57–67.
Actions taken by the federal government to ensure that environ-
mental inequities do not occur as a result of the siting of indus-
trial facilities may have concurrent harmful economic effects on
the communities in question. The authors suggest a number of
ways in which industries can make siting decisions that produce
less harm to neighboring communities.
Blodgett, Abigail D. “An Analysis of Pollution and Community
Advocacy in ‘Cancer Alley’: Setting an Example for the Envi-
ronmental Justice Movement in St James Parish, Louisiana.”
Local Environment 11 (2006): 647–661.
The author investigates the problem of environmental inequities
along the 85-mile stretch of the Mississippi River known as Can-
cer Alley. She finds that the largest concentration of health prob-
lems occurs among communities with the highest percentage of
African Americans, the lowest average household income, and
the lowest rate of high school graduation. She also finds that the
best predictors of effectiveness in dealing with environmental
justice issues is the ability of a community to network with
groups that have expertise in dealing with environmental justice
issues, to educate its residents about problems and possible solu-
tions, and to obtain expert legal representation.
262
Resources

Bowen, William M., and Michael V. Wells. “The Politics and
Reality of Environmental Justice: A History and Considera-
tions for Public Administrators and Policy Makers.” Public Ad-
ministration Review 62 (2002): 688–698.
This article is a brief review of the environmental justice move-
ment intended for public administrators and policy makers, in-
cluding some recommendations for placing the efforts of the
movement on a more rational ground. The authors suggest that
issues of environmental inequities can be more effectively dealt
with if (1) the quality of empirical research in the field is im-
proved, (2) more emphasis is placed on the difference between
“hazard” and “risk” in dealing with environmental inequities,
and (3) advocates of environmental justice focus more on public
health issues than on “fear, blame, procedural inclusion, and
power politics.”
Bullard, Robert D., and Glenn S. Johnson. “Environmentalism
and Public Policy: Environmental Justice; Grassroots Activism
and Its Impact on Public Policy Decision Making.” Journal of
Social Issues 56 (2000): 555–578.
A broad, general introduction to the history of the environmental
justice movement. The authors follow the history of the movement
from its origins in Warren County, North Carolina, in 1982, with a
review of some of its successes and the growth of grassroots orga-
nizations designed to deal with environmental inequities.
Cantzler, Julia Miller. “Environmental Justice and Social
Power Rhetoric in the Moral Battle over Whaling.” Sociological
Inquiry 77 (2007): 483–512.
The controversy over the Makah Indian tribe’s campaign to re-
new its millennia-old ceremonial whale hunt raises environmen-
tal justice questions that are framed from two very different
perspectives, which are studied and analyzed in this paper.
Carruthers, David V. “Environmental Justice and the Politics of
Energy on the US-Mexico Border.” Environmental Politics 16
(2007): 394–413.
The environmental justice movement has begun to spread
rapidly through Latin America. An example of the issues being
raised is the production of a large energy-generation facility in
Articles
263

northern Baja California as a way of meeting energy needs in
California. The author explores the resistance by environmental
justice groups that emerged in Baja to this project.
Charley, Perry, et al. “Navajo Uranium Education Programs:
The Search for Environmental Justice.” Applied Environmental
Education and Communication: An International Journal 3
(2004): 101–108.
The authors describe an education program on nuclear materials
developed for members of the Navajo tribe in the Four Corners
region of the southwestern United States. Since the tribe had no
context within which to understand and deal with issues of ra-
dioactive materials, new courses had to be developed within the
tribal traditions to explain the disproportionate risk to which
they were exposed as a result of uranium mining in the area.
Chess, Caron, Joanna Burger, and Melanie McDermott.
“Speaking Like a State: Environmental Justice and Fish Con-
sumption Advisories.” Society and Natural Resources 18 (2005):
267–278.
Government agencies tend to speak in bland, generic language
(“government-speak”) when issuing warnings about contami-
nated fish to recreational anglers. As a result, poor and  non-
English-speaking populations are not aware of the risks posed
by such catches and are disproportionately exposed to health
hazards caused by eating the fish.
Claudio, Luz. “Standing on Principle: The Global Push for En-
vironmental Justice.” Environmental Health Perspectives 115
(2007): A500–A503.
The author argues that environmental justice is a growing move-
ment throughout the world. After a brief review of the history of
international environmental justice activities, she discusses in
some detail current programs for environmental justice in Brazil
and South Africa.
Coburn, Jason. “Confronting the Challenges in Reconnecting
Urban Planning and Public Health.” American Journal of Pub-
lic Health 94 (2004): 541–546.
264
Resources

The author points out that the disciplines of public health and
urban planning had a common origin but that they have very lit-
tle overlap in the modern world. He reviews the history of the
two fields and shows how they have grown apart. He then sug-
gests some ways in which they can be reintegrated so as to more
effectively deal with problems of environmental inequities.
Cubie, Doreen. “And Clean Water for All.” National Wildlife
42 (2004): 18–19.
The author explains the National Wildlife Federation’s (NWF)
environmental justice efforts to ensure that all Americans have
equal access to clean and safe water resources. The article in-
cludes a profile of Na’take Osborne, now NWF’s national leader-
ship development coordinator.
Derezinski, D. D., M. G. Lacy, and P. B. Stretesky. “Chemical
Accidents in the United States, 1990–1996.” Social Science
Quarterly 84 (2003): 122–143.
The vast majority of research on environmental inequities exam-
ines long-term chronic exposure of communities to environmen-
tal hazards. This study is one of the very few to ask about the
inequities of acute events, such as chemical spills and explosions.
The authors find that, although inequities in exposures to acute
events do exist, they are less pronounced than in the case of
chronic exposures.
Dodds, Lyn, and Bill Hopwood. “BAN Waste, Environmental
Justice and Citizen Participation in Policy Setting.” Local Envi-
ronment 11 (2006): 269–286.
In 2000, a group of citizens in Newcastle upon Tyne in England
organized to lobby against the construction of a new incinerator
in a working-class neighborhood of the city. That group, later
given the name of BAN Waste, was eventually successful in pre-
venting construction of the facility. This article explores some of
the issues with which BAN Waste dealt and the methods by
which they achieved their goal.
Dolinoy, Dana C., and Marie Lynn Miranda. “GIS Modeling of
Air Toxics Releases from TRI-Reporting and  Non-TRI-Reporting
Articles
265

Facilities: Impacts for Environmental Justice.” Environmental
Health Perspectives 112 (2004): 1717–1724.
Environmental justice researchers usually use records of pollu-
tion produced by industries that release large quantities of haz-
ardous materials into the atmosphere (TRI reporters). The
authors decided to also use data from smaller polluters, so-called
non-TRI reporters. They found that environmental inequities as
measured by data from non-TRI reporters were often much
greater than those calculated with TRI data. They conclude that
these results suggest some important changes in the way envi-
ronmental justice research should be conducted.
Downey, Liam, and Marieke Van Willigen. “Environmental
Stressors: The Mental Health Impacts of Living Near Indus-
trial Activity.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 3 (2005):
289–305.
Although the health effects of environmental inequities have
been rather widely studied, little research has been done on the
mental health effects of poor and ethnic populations living near
hazardous sites. In this study, Downey and Van Willigen found
that such populations are significantly more likely to suffer men-
tal health problems, much as they do physical health problems.
Edwards, B., and A. E. Ladd. “Environmental Justice, Swine
Production and Farm Loss in North Carolina.” Sociological
Spectrum 20 (2000): 263–290.
North Carolina has had the largest growth of swine farms over
the last decade in the United States. This growth has had delete-
rious effects on land, air, and water and has led to the loss of
large amounts of farmland. The authors report that African
American and low-income communities have disproportionately
been affected by these trends in the state.
Elliott, M. R., et al. “Environmental Justice: Frequency and
Severity of US Chemical Industry Accidents and the Socioeco-
nomic Status of Surrounding Communities.” Journal of Epi-
demiology and Community Health 58 (2004): 24–30.
The authors study the relationship between certain types of
 industrial accidents and demographic characteristics of the
 communities adjacent to the industrial facilities. As one might
266
Resources

 predict, they find that chemical and industrial plants are sited near
minority communities more often than near white communities.
They also discover, however, that industrial facilities located near
minority communities are more likely to have accidents than are
those near white communities. They recommend that greater ef-
forts be made not only to more fairly distribute the location of haz-
ardous industrial facilities but also to better enforce regulations
designed to reduce the likelihood of accidents.
Elliott, S. J., et al. “The Power of Perception: Health Risk At-
tributed to Air Pollution in an Urban Industrial Neighbour-
hood.” Risk Analysis 19 (1999): 621–634.
The authors report on environmental justice action in a Hamil-
ton, Ontario, Canada, neighborhood using health assessment re-
sults from a group of experts in the field, on the one hand, and
from a community survey, on the other. They point out that resi-
dents had a greater degree of confidence in the results obtained
by the latter method.
Faber, D., and D. McCarthy. “The Evolving Structure of the En-
vironmental Justice Movement in the United States: New Mod-
els for Democratic Decision-Making.” Social Justice Research
14 (2001): 405–421.
The authors point out that mainstream environmental organiza-
tions in the United States have, over the last few decades, reduced
rather than expanded the participation of ordinary citizens in the
environmental movement. By contrast, the environmental justice
movement has moved in just the opposite direction, bringing
more and more diverse individuals into the movement. The au-
thors claim that this pattern in the long run will ultimately result
in more tolerable levels of environmental hazards for more afflu-
ent populations and continued environmental battles for  low-
income and minority communities. They recommend new ways
of conceptualizing environmental issues to avoid this scenario.
Fan, Mei-Fang. “Nuclear Waste Facilities on Tribal Land: The
Yami’s Struggles for Environmental Justice.” Local Environ-
ment 11 (2006): 433–444.
The striking similarities of struggles for environmental justice
in many parts of the world are illustrated by this case study of
Articles
267

the battle by members of the Yami tribe against the construction
of a nuclear waste depository on their land on Orchid Island,
Taiwan.
Fricker, R. D., and N. W. Hengartner. “Environmental Equity
and the Distribution of Toxic Release Inventory and Other En-
vironmentally Undesirable Sites in Metropolitan New York
City.” Environmental and Ecological Statistics 8 (2001): 33–52.
The authors study 354 “environmentally undesirable facilities”
located in or adjacent to 2,216 census tracts in New York City to
determine if there is a disproportionate exposure of ethnic
groups to environmental hazards. They find differing patterns in
each of the city’s boroughs with, in general, Hispanic neighbor-
hoods more likely to be associated with hazard sites than African
American neighborhoods, and both groups at greater risk than
white neighborhoods.
Gandy, M. “Between Borinquen and the Barrio: Environmental
Justice and New York City’s Puerto Rican Community,
1969–1972.” Antipode 34 (2002): 730–761.
Although most historians trace the origins of the environmental
justice movement in the United States to the early 1980s, precur-
sors of the movement appeared much earlier in history. This
book describes the work of a radical Puerto Rican organization
called the Young Lords, which fought for environmental justice
in a number of cities in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Godsil, Rachel D. “Remedying Environmental Racism.” Michi-
gan Law Review 90 (1991): 394–427.
This article has special significance because it appears to be the
first note written in a law journal about the topic of environmen-
tal justice. The author provides a detailed review of the history
of the environmental justice movement, from its beginnings in
Warren County, North Carolina, in 1982, along with an analysis
of legal issues involved in the identification, analysis, and reme-
diation of problems related to environmental inequities.
Gouldson, Andy. “Do Firms Adopt Lower Standards in Poorer
Areas? Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental
Justice in the EU and the US.” Area 38 (2006): 402–412.
268
Resources

Using new data on pollution produced by oil refineries in the
United States and the European Union, the author asks (1) how
international environmental standards adopted by corporations
are translated on a local scale, (2) whether implementation of
these standards differs from place to place, and (3) whether the
implementation of standards reflects any understanding and ap-
plication of environmental justice principles.
Gowda, M. V. Rajeev, and Doug Easterling. “Voluntary Siting
and Equity: The MRS Facility Experience in Native America.”
Risk Analysis 20 (2000): 917–930.
The U.S. government’s monitored, retrievable storage (MRS)
program was a plan for the siting of nuclear waste disposal sites
in various parts of the western United States. The program even-
tually became focused on the use of Native American lands for
the siting of nuclear dumps, resulting in a complex and diverse
set of problems for various tribes. The authors review the history
of the MRS program and analyze its implications for environ-
mental justice among Native American populations.
Griffith, Matt, Mansoureh Tajik, and Steve Wing. “Patterns of
Agricultural Pesticide Use in Relation to Socioeconomic Char-
acteristics of the Population in the Rural U.S. South.” Interna-
tional Journal of Health Services 37 (2007): 259–277.
The authors attempted to assess the amount spent by agricul-
tural companies on pesticides in a county compared to the racial
composition and income of residents in the county. They found
very significant relationships, with up to eight times as much
spent on pesticides for low-income communities with a high per-
centage of nonwhite residents.
Grineski, Sara, Bob Bolin, and Christopher Boone. “Criteria
Air Pollution and Marginalized Populations: Environmental
Inequity in Metropolitan Phoenix, Arizona.” Social Science
Quarterly 88 (2007): 535–554.
The authors suggest that new research technologies are available
for assessing the effects of air pollutants on specific human pop-
ulations. They employ these technologies to assess the differen-
tial effects of air pollution on residents of Phoenix. They find that
neighborhoods with a large proportion of Latino immigrants,
Articles
269

low-income individuals, and renters (but not African Americans)
tend to have higher rates of health problems associated with air
pollutants.
Hooks, Gregory, and Chad L. Smith. “The Treadmill of De-
struction: National Sacrifice Areas and Native Americans.”
American Sociological Review 69 (2004): 558–575.
The authors argue that in the history of the environmental justice
movement the special problems of Native Americans have been
largely ignored. They point to the widespread use of Native
American lands for waste dumps by the U.S. military and pro-
vide data to show how even abandoned bases pose serious and
disproportionate threats to Indian communities.
Hornberg, Claudia, and Andrea Pauli. “Child Poverty and En-
vironmental Justice.” International Journal of Hygiene and En-
vironmental Health 210 (2007): 571–580.
The authors consider the special question of the effects of envi-
ronmental inequities on the health of children and suggest that
greater attention be paid to this issue within the environmental
justice movement and by governmental agencies.
Illsley, B. M. “Good Neighbour Agreements: The First Step to
Environmental Justice?” Local Environment 7 (2002): 69–79.
Good neighbor agreements are contracts drawn up between in-
dustries and the communities in which they are located promis-
ing to promote environmental justice practices in the community.
The author explores the good neighbor agreement drawn up be-
tween Dundee Energy Recycling Limited and the city of Dundee
in the United Kingdom. She suggests that the agreement appears
to hold the potential for preventing environmental inequities but
that the long-term effectiveness of the tool has not yet been
demonstrated.
Ishiyama, N. “Environmental Justice and American Indian
Tribal Sovereignty: Case Study of a Land-Use Conflict in Skull
Valley, Utah.” Antipode 35 (2003): 119–139.
The author describes a case in which the Skull Valley Band of
Goshute Indians agrees to host a nuclear waste disposal site on
its lands and explains why the case is far more complex than it
270
Resources

appears to be at first glance. Native Americans have, the author
argues, fewer options than are at first apparent, making their
choices on issues of environmental inequity more difficult.
Koenig, Thomas H., and Michael L. Rustad. “Toxic Torts, Poli-
tics, and Environmental Justice: The Case for Crimtorts.” Law
& Policy 26 (2004): 189–207.
The authors point out that so-called crimtorts, which include
penalties calibrated to the wealth of a guilty party, are currently
under attack by neoconservatives. The loss of such penalties,
they say, may greatly reduce the effectiveness of many actions
taken by environmental justice groups.
Krieg, Eric. “Race and Environmental Justice in Buffalo, NY: A
ZIP Code and Historical Analysis of Ecological Hazards.” Soci-
ety and Natural Resources 18 (2005): 199–213.
An analysis of hazardous waste disposal patterns reveals evi-
dence that low-income populations are disproportionately af-
fected, whereas such patterns are not observed for various ethnic
groups. The author explains that these differences are a result of
historic patterns of housing discrimination in the city.
Krieg, E. J., and D. R. Faber. “Not So Black and White: Environ-
mental Justice and Cumulative Impact Assessments.” Environ-
mental Impact Assessment Review 24 (2004): 667–694.
While acknowledging that the specific impacts of environmental
inequities on minority and low-income communities have been
well demonstrated, the authors suggest that a more comprehen-
sive analysis of such impacts would be useful. In using this type
of analysis of a Massachusetts community, they found a linear re-
lationship between minority composition of a community and
environmental inequities over a broad range of compositions.
Kushmerick, Ann, Lindsay Young, and Susan Stein. “Environ-
mental Justice Content in Mainstream US, 6–12 Environmental
Education Guides.” Environmental Education Research 13
(2007): 385–408.
The authors ask to what extent the principles of environmental
justice are incorporated into national programs of environmental
education, such as Project WILD, Project Learning Tree, and
Articles
271

 Project WET. They find that, while the programs often address is-
sues of importance in environmental justice, they seldom make
explicit connections between those principles and the environ-
mental justice movement itself.
Lavelle, Marianne, and Marcia Coyle. “Unequal Protection:
The Racial Divide in Environmental Law.” National Law Jour-
nal 21 (1992): 81–92.
A very important historical document in which the authors re-
port on an eight-month-long investigation of actions and deci-
sions taken by the EPA on issues of environmental inequities in
low-income and minority communities. Researchers concluded
that the EPA did not provide equal treatment to polluters and
that there is a “racial divide” in EPA’s policies and actions in
dealing with environmental problems.
Maantay, Juliana. “Asthma and Air Pollution in the Bronx:
Methodological and Data Considerations in Using GIS for En-
vironmental Justice and Health Research.” Health & Place 13
(2007): 32–56.
The author considers some methodological issues in using the
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) program for the study of
environmental problems and reports on the use of GIS for the
study of asthma and air pollution in the Bronx, New York City.
She finds that people living near noxious land-use sites are 66
percent more likely to be hospitalized for asthma that those out-
side the area.
Maclachlan, John C., et al. “Mapping Health on the Internet: 
A New Tool for Environmental Justice and Public Health Re-
search.” Health & Place 13 (2007): 72–86.
The authors describe the use of Internet-based Geographic Infor-
mation Services (Web-GIS) for collecting data needed for studies
on environmental inequities, thus alleviating problems of cost
and data availability that often arise in such studies.
McCarthy, L. “The Brownfield Dual Land-Use Policy Chal-
lenge: Reducing Barriers to Private Redevelopment While
Connecting Reuse to Broader Community Goals.” Land Use
Policy 19 (2002): 287–296.
272
Resources

The development of brownfields for beneficial purposes raises a
number of social, economic, and environmental questions. While
the recovery of previously unusable land is largely beneficial to
the general community, the potential health risks of the brown-
fields pose concerns for people living in the area. Policies must
be developed that allow development without creating risks for
the community as a whole or for specific nearby communities.
Mohai, Paul, and Robin Saha. “Reassessing Racial and Socio -
economic Disparities in Environmental Justice Research.” De-
mography 43 (2006): 383–399.
Studies on environmental inequities tend to show that  low-
income and minority populations bear an unequal share of envi-
ronmental hazards. But those studies show a widely variable
correlation between health risk and race or income. The authors
suggest some improvements in research methodology that can
result in clearer relationships among the variables being studied.
Morello-Frosch, Rachel, et al. “Environmental Justice and Re-
gional Inequality in Southern California: Implications for Fu-
ture Research.” Environmental Health Perspectives 110 (April
2002): 149–154.
The authors discuss some of the methodological issues involved
in assessing the quantitative relationships between pollution
sources and environmental inequities, and they report on a study
on the health effects of air pollution in Southern California. They
conclude that communities of color “bear a disproportionate
burden in the location of treatment, storage, and disposal facili-
ties and Toxic Release Inventory facilities.”
Murphy-Greene, Celeste, and Leslie Leip. “Assessing the Ef-
fectiveness of Executive Order 12898: Environmental Justice
for All?” Public Administration Review 62 (2002): 679–687.
The authors ask how well laws and regulations designed to pro-
tect farmworkers in Florida from exposure to pesticides are
working. They conclude that the laws and regulations are not
implemented very effectively, and farmworkers have little un-
derstanding of the protections the laws and regulations are sup-
posed to provide.
Articles
273

Newell, Peter. “Trade and Environmental Justice in Latin
America.” New Political Economy 12 (2007): 237–259.
The author explores the relationship between changing trade
policies that involve the expansion of free trade among nations
and environmental justice issues. He points out that environ-
mental justice issues are increasingly a part of agreements made
between and among countries. This trend, he believes, creates
both potential benefits and risks for environmental justice
groups in less-developed nations.
Norton, Jennifer M., et al. “Race, Wealth, and Solid Waste Fa-
cilities in North Carolina.” Environmental Health Perspectives
115 (2007): 1344–1350.
This report on the distribution of solid waste disposal sites in
North Carolina finds that low-income communities and those
with large percentages of people of color are much more likely to
be situated near waste sites.
Nussbaum, Rudi, et al. “Community-Based Participatory
Health Survey of Hanford, WA, Downwinders: A Model for
Citizen Empowerment.” Society and Natural Resources 17
(2004): 547–559.
As early as the mid-1940s, people living near the Hanford, Wash-
ington, nuclear research facility began to experience health prob-
lems that, they believed, were associated with the facility. This
article reviews the long battle by the Hanford Downwinders to
obtain evidence for this connection and to force the federal gov-
ernment to take action to deal with the problem. The authors
suggest that the success of the Downwinders may serve as a
model for other groups working for environmental justice in
their own communities.
O’Neil, Sandra George. “Superfund: Evaluating the Impact of
Executive Order 12898.” Environmental Health Perspectives 115
(2007): 1087–1093.
The author reviews the status of 1,540 sites selected for cleanup
under the Superfund program of the EPA before and after Execu-
tive Order 12898 in 1994 and finds that the order has had no dis-
cernible effect in increasing the rate at which environmental
inequities are being addressed.
274
Resources

Pastor, Manuel, Rachel Morello-Frosch, and James L. Sadd.
“Breathless: Schools, Air Toxics, and Environmental Justice in
California.” Policy Studies Journal 34 (2006): 337–362.
This study confirms that air pollution has a disparate effect on
the academic achievements of children of color in California. The
authors suggest the need for special remediation in “hot spots”
where pollution is most serious.
Pastor, Manuel, Jim Sadd, and John Hipp. “Which Came First?
Toxic Facilities, Minority Move-In, and Environmental Jus-
tice.” Journal of Urban Affairs 23 (2001): 1–21.
This article addresses one of the fundamental issues in the study
of environmental inequities: Do people move into areas that are
already hazardous, or do industries choose to place hazardous
facilities in existing minority and low-income communities? The
authors perform a sophisticated analysis on a community in Los
Angeles on this question and conclude that the latter appears to
be the case in this instance.
Pellow, D. N., A. Weinberg, and A. Schnaiberg. “The Environ-
mental Justice Movement: Equitable Allocation of the Costs
and Benefits of Environmental Management Outcomes.” So-
cial Justice Research 14 (2001): 423–439.
The authors suggest a number of changes in the nature of envi-
ronmental justice research, including greater attention to the his-
torical context of disputes, a better understanding of the role of
all stakeholders in a controversy, possible trade-offs between en-
vironmental protection and social equity, and the impact of social
movement activity on the state of environmental protection.
Petersen, Dana, et al. “Community-Based Participatory Re-
search as a Tool for Policy Change: A Case Study of the South-
ern California Environmental Justice Collaborative.” Review of
Policy Research 23 (2006): 339–354.
This article explains how research by the Southern California En-
vironmental Justice Collaborative, an environmental justice
group, was instrumental in the state of California’s reduction of
its allowable risk levels for stationary sources by 75 percent. It
discusses the implications of this experience for other environ-
mental justice groups.
Articles
275

Petrie, Michelle. “Environmental Justice in the South: An
Analysis of the Determinants and Consequences of Commu-
nity Involvement in Superfund.” Sociological Spectrum 26
(2006): 471–489.
The study reported here examines demographic factors involved
in communities where Superfund cleanups have taken place. Re-
search shows that cleanups occurred more slowly and were more
likely to have deleterious effects in communities with the great-
est level of environmental justice activism, and that communities
with higher percentages of minority groups were less likely to
become involved in cleanup efforts.
Petts, Judith. “Enhancing Environmental Equity through Deci-
sion-Making: Learning from Waste Management.” Local Envi-
ronment 10 (2005): 397–409.
A study conducted in Los Angeles finds that access to park space
is significantly less for low-income, African American, Pacific Is-
lander, and Latino populations than for predominantly white
populations. The author points out some practical problems in-
volved in resolving this environmental inequity.
Postma, Julie. “Environmental Justice: Implications for Occu-
pational Health Nurses.” AAOHN Journal 54 (2006): 497–498.
The author suggests that occupational health nurses have special
opportunities to discover, assess, and deal with environmental
justice issues in their daily work. She outlines some methods that
nurses can use in integrating environmental justice principles
into their occupation, including the mapping of hazardous risks,
developing strategic plans for dealing with risks, and making
available their specialized skills in working with grassroots orga-
nizations.
Powell, Dana E. “Technologies of Existence: The Indigenous
Environmental Justice Movement.” Development 49 (2006):
125–132.
The author suggests that new emphases on wind and solar en-
ergy present indigenous peoples with an alternative to the ex-
ploitation of their lands by the petroleum industry and serve as a
way of handling the environmental inequities with which the
tribes have traditionally had to deal.
276
Resources

Ranco, Darren, and Dean Suagee. “Tribal Sovereignty and the
Problem of Difference in Environmental Regulation: Observa-
tions on ‘Measured Separatism’ in Indian Country.” Antipode
39 (2007): 691–707.
Since American Indian tribes are supposed to have legal and ju-
dicial sovereignty, they apparently have the right to take actions
necessary to reduce or eliminate environmental inequities that
affect their communities. U.S. courts, however, have often at-
tempted to abridge those rights. The authors argue for a stronger
position on American Indian sovereignty and suggest that prin-
ciples involved in making this claim may be applicable to other
minority groups facing issues of environmental injustice.
Rogge, Mary E., et al. “Leveraging Environmental, Social, and
Economic Justice at Chattanooga Creek: A Case Study.” Journal
of Community Practice 13 (2005): 33–53.
This case study describes the successful efforts by an African
American community located on the most polluted river in the
southeastern United States to reduce the contamination in the
waterway. The authors analyze the sociological and other factors
involved in the group’s efforts.
Schlosberg, David. “Reconceiving Environmental Justice:
Global Movements and Political Theories.” Environmental
Politics 13 (2004): 517–540.
The author argues that little effort has been expended in explain-
ing what people mean by “justice” when they refer to environ-
mental justice. The term should, he says, refer to more than equal
distribution of environmental hazards. A clarification of the
meaning of the term, he goes on, has significant implications for
the extension of environmental justice throughout the world.
Shulman, Stuart W., et al. “Empowering  Environmentally-
Burdened Communities in the US: A Primer on the Emerging
Role for Information Technology.” Local Environment 10
(2005): 501–512.
The authors discuss the use of information technology (IT) in
dealing with problems of environmental injustice. They argue
that disproportionate knowledge about and access to IT is an im-
portant issue for activists dealing with such issues.
Articles
277

Sobotta, Robin R., Heather E. Campbell, and Beverly J. Owens.
“Aviation Noise and Environmental Justice: The Barrio Bar-
rier.” Journal of Regional Science 47 (2007): 125–154.
The authors suggest that exposure to aviation noise is a possible
manifestation of environmental inequities, and they conduct a
study on this topic. They find, as in other forms of environmental
inequities, that minority communities are more likely to suffer
health effects from living near sources of noise.
Sperber, Irwin. “Alienation in the Environmental Movement:
Regressive Tendencies in the Struggle for Environmental Jus-
tice.” Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 14 (2003): 1–43.
This article suggests the very interesting hypothesis that envi-
ronmental justice organizations are increasingly being co-opted
by capitalist forces because of their increasing dependence on
corporate foundation grants and their interaction with corporate
foes and government regulators. He suggests that organizations
need to restore their traditional connection with and dependence
on grassroots organizations and forces.
Tajik, Mansoureh, and Meredith Minkler. “Environmental Jus-
tice Research and Action: A Case Study in Political Economy
and Community-Academic Collaboration. International Quar-
terly of Community Health Education 26 (2006–2007): 213–231.
Partnerships between academic researchers and grassroots com-
munity activists are increasingly common in efforts to reduce en-
vironmental inequities in minority and low-income communities.
This paper reviews such a collaboration between Concerned Citi-
zens of Tillery (North Carolina) and the University of North Car-
olina, Chapel Hill, School of Public Health to deal with the health
problems posed by the siting of a large-scale hog operation in
Halifax County.
Toffolon-Weiss, Melissa, and J. Timmons Roberts. “Toxic Torts,
Public Interest Law, and Environmental Justice: Evidence from
Louisiana.” Law & Policy 26 (2004): 259–287.
Some poor and minority communities that take action against in-
dustries that pollute their neighborhoods call on assistance from
private injury lawyers, while others go to public interest groups.
278
Resources

The authors ask whether this choice makes any difference in the
ultimate results obtained by the groups.
Warner, K. “Linking Local Sustainability Initiatives with Envi-
ronmental Justice.” Local Environment 7 (2002): 35–47.
Over the last decade, a number of people have attempted to link
the goals and actions of the environmental justice movement
with the movement for sustainable development. In this paper,
the author reports on a survey of 33 large cities in the United
States to see which and how many consciously incorporate the
principles of environmental justice into their programs for the
development of sustainable communities in the city.
Williams, Robert W. “Environmental Injustice in America and
Its Politics of Scale.” Political Geography 18 (1999): 49–73.
The author argues that laws and regulations in the United States
treat environmental injustice as if it were a national, or at least
widespread, problem. He claims, however, that nearly all in-
stances of environmental inequity are essentially local, making
laws and regulations irrelevant or ineffective. He concludes that
government regulation may be largely unnecessary in dealing
with cases of environmental inequities.
Wolch, Jennifer, John P. Wilson, and Jed Fehrenbach. “Parks
and Park Funding in Los Angeles: An Equity-Mapping Analy-
sis.” Urban Geography 26 (2005): 4–35.
The authors not only discover significant environmental in-
equities in Los Angeles public park siting but also find endemic
factors in city funding policies that perpetuate these patterns.
Zaferatos, Nicholas. “Environmental Justice in Indian Country:
Dumpsite Remediation on the Swinomish Indian Reserva-
tion.” Environmental Management 38 (2006): 896–909.
Members of the Swinomish tribe struggled for more than two
decades to convince the EPA to require PM Northwest, Inc., to
clean up a hazardous waste dump on its reservation. The author
uses this case study to review some fundamental problems of en-
vironmental justice with which Indian communities have had 
to deal.
Articles
279

Reports
American Lung Association. State of Lung Disease in Diverse
Communities: 2007. New York: American Lung Association,
2007.
The American Lung Association has conducted an exhaustive
survey on respiratory problems in a variety of specialized com-
munities, including those of African Americans, Native Ameri-
cans, Puerto Ricans, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific
Islanders, Asian Americans, and Hispanic Americans. The orga-
nization’s research confirms that such health problems tend to
occur significantly more often among minority groups than
among white Americans.
Bonorris, Steven. Environmental Justice for All: A Fifty-State
Survey of Legislation, Policies, and Initiatives. San Francisco:
Hastings College of the Law, University of California, January
2004.
This report is the third edition of the most complete and compre-
hensive survey of legislation, policies, and initiatives in the 50
states. For each state, it provides a summary of statutes, policies,
partnership agreements, and other documents, along with a list
of contacts for queries about environmental justice issues.
Bullard, Robert D., Paul Mohai, Robin Saha, and Beverly
Wright. Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty: 1987–2007. Cleve-
land, OH: United Church of Christ, March 2007.
This report is a follow-up to the classic 1987 study, Toxic Wastes
and Race in the United States, which documented the widespread
existence of environmental inequities within low-income and
minority communities. The purpose of this study was to deter-
mine the progress made in the 20 years since the original study
was published. The researchers conclude that conditions in 2007
are “very much the same as they were in 1987.”
Committee on Environmental Justice, Institute of Medicine.
Toward Environmental Justice: Research, Education, and Health
Policy Needs. Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
1999.
280
Resources

One of the classic studies in environmental justice, this report re-
views five case studies in environmental inequities, identifies
hazards facing low-income and minority communities, suggests
methods for studying problems of environmental inequity, dis-
cusses some essential characteristics of environmental education,
and recommends a number of actions to be taken by decision
makers and policy makers.
Office of Inspector General, Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA Needs to Conduct Environmental Justice Reviews of Its
Programs, Policies, and Activities. Washington, DC: Environ-
mental Protection Agency, September 18, 2006.
The inspector general’s review team finds that senior managers
at the EPA have not sufficiently directed subordinate offices to
conduct environmental justice reviews and that, as a result, the
majority of those offices have not as yet conducted such reviews.
Office of Inspector General, Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA Needs to Consistently Implement the Intent of the Execu-
tive Order on Environmental Justice. Washington, DC: Environ-
mental Protection Agency, March 1, 2004.
Ten years after President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order
12898, the EPA’s Office of the Inspector General conducts a study
to see how effectively the agency is carrying out the require-
ments of the order. It finds that the agency has made little
progress in achieving the objectives of the order and, in fact, has
reinterpreted the meaning of the order to exclude minorities and
low-income populations.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Not in My Backyard: Execu-
tive Order 12898 and Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environ-
mental Justice. Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights, October 2003.
This report examines how well four federal agencies—the EPA,
the U.S. Department of the Interior, the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. Department of
Transportation—have implemented Executive Order 12898 and
Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The authors of the report
conclude that the answer to that question is: “Not very well.”
Reports
281

U.S. Government Accountability Office. Environmental Justice:
EPA Should Devote More Attention to Environmental Justice
When Developing Clean Air Rules. Washington, DC: Govern-
ment Accountability Office, July 2005.
At the request of the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
Environment and Hazardous Materials of the House Committee
on Energy and Commerce, the Government Accountability Of-
fice (GAO) undertook a study to determine whether the EPA had
taken into consideration the principles of environmental justice
in drafting three new regulations on air quality control. The
GAO found that the EPA, in contradiction to the provisions of
Executive Order 12898, had essentially ignored concerns about
environmental inequities in drafting those regulations.
Internet Sources
American Bar Association, Section on Energy, Environment,
and Resources. “The Law of Environmental Justice: Update Ser-
vice.” Available at http://www.abanet.org/environ/committees/
envtab/ejweb.html.
This Web site may be the best single source of information on
laws, regulations, court cases, and other legal issues related to
environmental justice. Citations date as far back as 1998.
Barbalance, Roberta C. “Environmental Justice and the NIMBY
Principle.” Available at http://environmentalchemistry.com/
yogi/hazmat/articles/nimby.html.
The author discusses the issue of environmental inequities
within the larger context of the well-known principle of “not in
my backyard” (NIMBY).
Collado, Jonathan, et al. “Environmental Justice through Youth
Empowerment.” Available at http://www.ejconference2008.org/
images/Chelsea_Creek.pdf.
Ten members of an environmental justice movement in metro-
politan Boston, the East Boston Environmental Chelsea Creek
Crew (all under the age of 30), describe their environmental jus-
tice activities and explain how their concept of environmental
282
Resources

justice differs from those who have been involved in the move-
ment over much longer periods of time.
Ecofeminism.net. “Environmental Racism.” Available at http://
www.ecofeminism.net/content/environmental_racism.htm.
This Web site provides links to a number of publications and In-
ternet sites with information about environmental racism and
environmental justice topics.
EJCONFERENCE2008.ORG. Available at http://www.ejcon-
ference2008.org/.
EJCONFERENCE2008.ORG is the official Web site of the 2008
Environmental Justice in America Conference held at Howard
University, Washington, D.C., on May 21–24, 2008. Presenta-
tions at the conference discussed success stories in the environ-
mental justice movement; corporate/community relations;
environmental justice implications in the Hurricane Katrina re-
sponse; just and sustainable energy policies; community partic-
ipation in environmental decision making; environmental
health in disadvantaged communities; environmental educa-
tion; and innovations in environmental justice legislation, regu-
lation, and litigation.
Endres, Danielle. “The State of Environmental Justice in High-
Level Nuclear Waste Siting Decisions.” Available at http://
www.ejconference2008.org/images/Endres.pdf.
This paper was presented at the 2007 Environmental Justice Con-
ference at Howard University. The author reviews events in the
siting of nuclear waste disposal sites on Indian lands and sug-
gests some further steps that can be taken to reduce environmen-
tal inequities in such actions.
Environmental Education and Training Partnership. “Environ-
mental Justice and Environmental Education.” Available at
http://eelink.net/eetap/info59.pdf.
This short paper explains what environmental justice is and dis-
cusses some issues on including environmental justice in pro-
grams of environmental education.
Internet Sources  283

“Environmental Justice/Environmental Racism.” Available at
http://www.ejnet.org/ej/. 
This Web site provides a general introduction to environmental
justice, lists some important documents in the field, and pro-
vides links to other Web sites and resources and to information
on government policies on environmental justice.
“The Environmental Justice Information Page.” Available at
http://eelink.net/EJ/.
This Web site was prepared by members of the Ecological Issues
class at the University of Michigan’s School of Natural Resources
and Environment. Although now outdated, it still provides some
useful information on basic aspects of the environmental justice
movement.
Environmental Justice Resource Center at Clark Atlanta Uni-
versity. Available at http://www.ejrc.cau.edu/. 
This Web site is a treasure trove of information on the environ-
mental justice movement, with lists of books, articles, reports,
curriculum guides, and other documents on environmental jus-
tice; articles on a variety of specialized topics related to environ-
mental inequities; news and events related to environmental
justice; and links to other sites with information on environmen-
tal justice.
Federal Highway Administration and Federal Transit Admin-
istration. “Environmental Justice.” Available at http://www
.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/ej2.htm.
Of all federal agencies, the Federal Highway Administration and
Federal Transit Administration appear to have been among the
most active in developing programs of environmental justice for
which they are responsible. Their Web site provides an excellent
review of those programs as well as a good general introduction
to the field of environmental justice as it relates to transportation
issues.
“Indian Land and Dumpsites.” Available at http://nativenet
.uthscsa.edu/archive/nl/91c/0053.html.
284
Resources

This now outdated blog provides an excellent introduction to the
problems faced by Indian tribes that are offered the opportunity
to host hazardous waste sites on their lands. The episode de-
scribed here is only one of many similar events that occurred on
Indian reservations during the 1990s.
Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California at
Berkeley. “Environmental Justice & Transportation: A Citizen’s
Handbook.” Available at http://www.its.berkeley.edu/research/
ejhandbook/ejhandbook.html.
This Web site provides access to the institute’s booklet. The book-
let provides a general introduction to environmental justice and
discusses its application to problems of transportation policy and
planning.
Jantz, Eric. “Environmental Racism with a Faint Green Glow:
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s Missed Opportu-
nity to Create a Meaningful Environmental Justice Policy.”
Available at http://www.ejconference2008.org/images/Jantz.pdf. 
The author reviews the development of an environmental justice
policy by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and dis-
cusses shortcomings in that policy.
MapCruzin.com. “Environmental Justice.” Available at http://
www.mapcruzin.com/environmental_justice.htm. 
This Web site focuses on mapping, education, and research re-
lated to Geographic Information System (GIS) technology. The
environmental justice page has links to organizations, issues,
academics, bibliographies, articles, agencies, and research in the
field that use GIS.
Nauman, Talli. “Indigenous Environmental Justice Issues En-
ter the Global Ring.” Available at http://americas.irc-on-
line.org/am/837.
The author presents a superb introduction to the rise of environ-
mental justice among indigenous people, both in the United
States and other parts of the world; discusses some issues that
are of particular interest to such communities; and provides an
extensive set of references and links to U.S. and international
Internet Sources  285

governmental and nongovernmental groups working in the field
of environmental justice for indigenous communities.
New York State, Department of Environmental Conservation,
Office of Environmental Justice. “Environmental Justice.”
Available at http://www.dec.ny.gov/public/333.html. 
Many states now have offices, departments, divisions, or other
units with specific responsibility for environmental justice issues
in the state. The New York State office is one of the largest, best
organized, and most user friendly. This Web site describes the of-
fice’s organization and functions in detail.
Robinson, Deborah M. “Environmental Racism: Old Wine in a
New Bottle.” Available at http://www.wcc-coe.org/wcc/what/
jpc/echoes/echoes-17-02.html.
This article reviews the history of the environmental justice
movement in the United States, provides examples of environ-
mental racism in both the United States and the rest of the world,
and discusses the World Conference against Racism held in Dur-
ban, South Africa, on August 31 to September 7, 2001.
Scorecard: The Pollution Information Site. “Environmental
Justice.” Available at http://www.scorecard.org/community/ej-
index.tcl.
This Web site is an outstanding source of information about envi-
ronmental inequities for every part of the United States. For any
zip code area, it provides data on the distribution of environmen-
tal burdens by race, ethnicity, income, occupation, and other
variables; comparisons for these variables for other parts of the
same state; and detailed information on related topics, such as
Superfund sites, toxic chemicals, and air pollutants.
Sierra Club. “Environmental Justice.” Available at http://www
.sierraclub.org/ej/.
This section of the Sierra Club Web site provides information on
the organization’s environmental justice regional  projects; its
286
Resources

newsletter, EJ Activist; and news about the environmental justice
movement and upcoming events.
Stokes, Lance, and Kenneth L. Green. “Twenty-Five Years of
‘Change’ and Things Remain the Same.” Available at http://
www.ejconference2008.org/images/Green_Stokes.pdf. 
The authors point out that remediation of brownfield sites is re-
quired by law to include black-owned firms but that government
agencies over the past few decades have consistently ignored
that requirement.
Sze, Julie. “Toxic Soup Redux: Why Environmental Racism and
Environmental Justice Matter after Katrina.” Available at
http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/Sze/.
The author points out that most discussions of Hurricane Katrina
and cleanup efforts following that disaster have largely ignored
issues of environmental racism, which have strong bearing on
the failures of efforts to help New Orleans residents recover from
the event.
University of Michigan, School of Natural Resources and Envi-
ronment. “Environmental Justice Initiative.” Available at
http://eji.snre.umich.edu/.
The University of Michigan’s School of Natural Resources and
Environment has long been an important center of research and
activism in the field of environmental justice. This Web page de-
scribes the school’s Environmental Justice Initiative, courses of-
fered in the school, research related to environmental inequities,
and events related to environmental justice.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Environmental Jus-
tice.” Available at http://www.epa.gov/compliance/environmen
taljustice/.
This page is the starting point for all EPA documents dealing
with environmental justice, including information on the Na-
tional Environmental Justice Advisory Committee, the Federal
Interagency Working Group, and grants available in the field of
environmental justice.
Internet Sources  287

Wikipedia. “Environmental Justice.” Available at http://en.wiki
pedia.org/wiki/Environmental_justice.
This Wikipedia entry provides a good general introduction to the
topic of environmental justice, with a number of recommended
references with which to follow up.
288
Resources

Glossary
acceptable risk
Possible hazard whose magnitude is considered to be
small enough to accept in exchange for some valuable outcome.
ambient
An adjective referring to surrounding conditions. Ambient
air, for example, is the surrounding air.
BANANA (building absolutely nothing anywhere near anything)
principle
A term ascribed to some environmentalists who would op-
pose the construction of any environmentally harmful facility anywhere
because of its potential effects on plant, animal, and human life. See also
NIMBY and NOPE.
benign neglect
A policy of ignoring an unpleasant situation rather
than finding ways to deal with the situation.
best available technology (BAT)
The most efficient and/or effective
way of dealing with some environmental issue, such as the control of air
pollution, no matter what the cost of that technology may be.
blaming the victim
A philosophy that bad things happen to people
because it is their own fault.
boomerang effect
An effect that may occur when pesticides or other
chemicals banned in the United States are shipped to other nations and
then returned to this country, causing unanticipated health effects.
boycott
A nonviolent form of protest in which a group of people
jointly agree not to purchase a product or patronize an establishment to
demonstrate their opposition to some policy or action supported by the
manufacturer or establishment.
brownfield
An abandoned industrial site where soil and groundwater
have been polluted.
burden of proof
In law, the determination as to who must prove that
harm has or has not, will or will not, be caused by some practice.
289

290
Glossary
business as usual
The tendency of a company or the government to
continue conducting business as it has in the past without regard to con-
ditions that might reasonably warrant changes in that business pattern.
buyout
To completely purchase a home, business, or other operation.
capability analysis
A study of the ways in which a piece of land can
be used.
circle of poison
See boomerang effect.
civil disobedience
The refusal to obey certain laws and regulations to
protest governmental or other policies.
class action suit
A legal action taken on behalf of all members of a
group directly affected by a case.
clawback agreement
A provision by which one member of an agree-
ment is able to collect compensation, usually in the form of money, from
a second party to the agreement if and when that second party does not
fulfill its obligations according to the terms of that agreement.
cleanup
The actions taken to neutralize and/or remove hazardous
wastes from an area.
community buyout
The practice by which a governmental body or
private industry pays for the complete removal of a community because
of its proximity to one or more environmentally dangerous facilities.
correlation
A statistical term that refers to the extent to which two
variables are mathematically related to each other. Correlation does not
necessarily prove causation.
cost/benefit analysis
Any attempt to compare the advantages of tak-
ing some action (such as installing a waste disposal incinerator) with the
disadvantages of that action (such as the release of harmful gases from
the incinerator).
cost effectiveness analysis
An attempt to compare the effectiveness
and desirability of achieving an improvement in environmental condi-
tions (such as a reduction in air pollution) by various technologies.
DAD (decide, announce, defend)
An acronym used to describe a
common industrial practice of making decisions about the siting of envi-
ronmentally harmful facilities.
de facto
Latin for “by fact,” referring to practices and policies that ac-
tually exist, whether or not they are established and maintained by laws
and regulations.
de jure
Latin for “by right,” referring to practices and policies that are
established and maintained by law and regulation.
debt-for-nature swap
A mechanism by which poor countries agree to
set aside parts of their land for conservation purposes in exchange for

the cancellation of all or part of a financial debt that they owe to another
country or to an international bank.
demography
The statistical study of human populations, including
such information as numbers, distributions among race and ethnic
group, and birth- and death rates.
development rights
Concessions that allow the conversion of land
from natural area or agricultural use to residential, commercial, or in-
dustrial use.
discrimination
The practice of judging people on the basis of one or
more classes to which they belong rather than on the basis of their indi-
vidual characteristics.
discriminatory intent
A legal term that means that plaintiffs in an en-
vironmental justice (or other) case must be able to prove that race is a
“motivating factor” in a decision made by an individual or corporation
that brings harm to a person or group of people.
disproportionate
An adjective that refers to the fact that something is
made available, distributed, or presented to people in a ratio that differs
from the percentage of those people in the general population.
easement
A right granted by a landowner to another person or organi-
zation to use a piece of her or his land.
economic blackmail
A practice in which a corporation offers financial
benefits to individuals or a community in exchange for putting up with
environmental or other hazards.
effluent
Any material, usually a liquid, discharged from a point
source into the surrounding environment.
emission standard
The maximum amount of any pollutant that is per-
mitted by law or regulation to be released into the environment.
environmental discrimination
The disproportionate exposure to ad-
verse environmental conditions as a result of racial, ethnic, economic, or
other characteristics of a community.
environmental equity
A condition in which the burdens and benefits
resulting from technological development are shared equally by all
groups within society.
environmental high-impact area
An area that is subject to a higher-
than-normal concentration of hazardous conditions, such as air and wa-
ter pollution and/or hazardous waste sites.
environmental impact statement
A document that describes the ef-
fects that a proposed action is likely to have on the environment.
environmental justice
The attempt to achieve environmental equity
for all groups within society.
Glossary  291

environmental racism
A term coined in 1982 by Benjamin F. Chavis
meaning “racial discrimination in environmental policy making and the
unequal enforcement of environmental laws and regulations” (U.S.
Congress 1993).
environmental screening
Tests performed to determine the exposure
that an individual or a community has had to a hazardous substance.
environmentally disadvantaged community
An area in which there
exists at least one hazardous waste facility and that contains a higher-
than-average percentage of low-income or minority residents.
environmentally sound management
A term introduced in the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and Their Disposal to describe an environmentally correct way
for handling hazardous waste.
external cost
See negative externality.
fair share legislation
A type of legislation that requires that environ-
mental hazards be shared equally within a community and across com-
munities.
grandfather right
An exemption from a law or regulation because of the
fact that a condition existed before the law or regulation was adopted.
grassroots
A term describing any organization or movement that is
derived from the most fundamental level of society; being organized
from the bottom up, rather than from the top down.
growth management
All processes involved in controlling the rate
and circumstances under which new developments take place in a com-
munity.
hazardous waste
Any solid, liquid, or gas released into the environ-
ment by an industrial process or from a municipal outlet that may cause
damage to the health of a living organism.
host fee
A payment made to individual homeowners or to the general
fund of a community in return for its accepting the siting of a polluting
or hazardous facility in its area.
hot spot
An area that contains a dangerously high level of some haz-
ardous material.
impact analysis
A study conducted to find out how development will
affect a particular area.
indigenous people
People who are native to a particular area, region,
or country.
institutional racism
A form of racism that is maintained by a variety
of legal and customary practices.
internal costs
Costs of production that are paid by the producer or the
consumer.
292
Glossary

job blackmail
See economic blackmail.
laissez-faire
From the French, “allow to act,” the principle of allowing
people to act as they please.
litigation
Legal action.
LULUs (locally undesirable land uses)
Facilities such as polluting
factories, hazardous waste dumps, and strip mines that make signifi-
cantly negative environmental contributions to the region in which they
are located.
mainstream environmentalism
A form of environmentalism that has
grown up over the past century or more in which the emphasis has been
on the conservation or preservation of natural resources or the solution
of pollution problems.
move to the nuisance
A phrase that describes the tendency of people
from lower economic groups to move into less-desirable living areas
(such as those in which pollution is a serious problem) because housing
prices are lower in those areas.
negative externality
A term used by economists to describe an un-
pleasant condition (such as the presence of air pollution) that is beyond
the control of those people who are exposed to it. The condition is also
known as an external cost.
negotiated compensation
A proposed method for dealing with the in-
equities of environmental racism by charging those entities that create
environmental problems (such as the owners of a waste incineration
plant) while compensating those who have to live in the area where the
environmental degradation has taken place.
NIMBY (not in my backyard)
A phrase used to describe the opposi-
tion of individuals who oppose the siting of any environmentally harm-
ful facility anywhere near the property they own or reside on.
NOPE (no place on Earth)
A somewhat pejorative term sometimes
used to describe the position of “radical environmentalists” who oppose
the construction of any facility that would produce pollution or other ef-
fects damaging to the environment anywhere on Earth.
nuisance law
Any regulation that prohibits a person or business from
interfering with others’ enjoyment and use of property.
offsetting benefits
Certain advantages given to a community in ex-
change for its accepting an environmentally hazardous facility in its
area.
PIBBY (put in the blacks’ backyard)
A policy, usually unspoken, by
which facilities with adverse environmental effects are sited in neigh-
borhoods occupied primarily by African Americans or other nonwhite
groups.
Glossary  293

point source
Any readily identifiable location, such as a smokestack
or sewage outlet pipe, from which pollution is released.
prior informed consent
A term that means that a pesticide that has
been banned, withdrawn, or severely restricted in one country cannot
be exported to another country until and unless the second country has
been informed of such action and has agreed to accept the pesticide un-
der these conditions.
proof of intent
A legal term that means that a complainant in a case
must be able to show that a person or a company planned or knew that
some damage would result from his, her, or its actions.
quality of life
The extent to which a person is satisfied with his or 
her life.
rebuttable presumption
An assumption about a situation that anyone
is allowed to challenge.
Reserved Rights Doctrine
A legal principle that states that rights
mentioned in treaties between the U.S. government and Indian tribes
were not granted by the government but were rights that belonged to
Native Americans in the first place and that were only confirmed by the
treaties.
right to inspect
A policy under which industries extend to workers,
neighbors, and others the right to enter and inspect their facilities to
 become more familiar with any potential environmental threat they 
may pose.
right to know
A policy under which industries are required to provide
information to workers, neighbors, and others exposed to hazardous en-
vironmental conditions about the nature of those conditions.
sacrifice zone
An area in which there is an unusually high concentra-
tion of industries releasing pollutants to the surrounding region.
suitability analysis
A study to find out if a piece of land should be
used for some given purpose, such as urban development.
Superfund site
Land that has been contaminated by hazardous waste
and has been chosen by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as
a site for cleanup because of the risks it poses to human health.
sustainable development
Development that takes place with minimal
harmful effects on the physical and biological environment.
threshold effect
A consequence that occurs only when a certain level
of exposure has occurred.
294
Glossary

Acid Rain Foundation, 20
Afghanistan, 95
Africa
and Basel Convention, 95, 96
and dumping of wastes from
developed countries, 91
and environmental inequities
for Maasai, 85–86
African American Environmentalist
Association (AAEA), 217
African Americans and
environmental inequities
“Cancer Alley” (Louisiana),
9–11, 55–56
consumption of toxic fish
(Detroit River, Michigan),
13–14
diesel bus pollution (West
Harlem, New York), 16–17
and environmental activism
and attitudes, 44–45
PCB pollution (Sweet Valley
and Cobb Town, Alabama),
15–16
and research of United Church
of Christ, Commission on
Racial Justice, 23–25, 38–39
Warren County, North
Carolina, 1–3, 23
West Dallas, Texas, 6–7
Alabama, and environmental
justice regulations, 73
Alaska, and environmental
justice regulations, 63
Alaska Community Action on
Toxics (ACAT), 235
Alexander v. Sandoval, 70–71
Alliance for Nuclear
Accountability (ANA), 217
Alston, Dana Ann, 137–139
Alter, Harvey, 93
Alternatives for Community and
Environment (ACE), 236
American Bar Association,
Individual Rights and
Responsibilities section,
62–65
American Cyanamid, 88
Americans for Indian
Opportunity (AIO),
217–218
Anderton, Douglas L., 39–40
Arizona, and environmental
justice regulations, 63
Asian Pacific Environmental
Network (APEN), 218
Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), 96
Atlanta Women’s Action for New
Directions, 17–18
295
Index
Note: t. indicates table.

296
Index
Bakun hydroelectric facility
(Malaysia), 86–87
Baldwin Hills, California, 32
Bali Principles of Climate Justice,
100–101
Bamako Convention, 96
Barcelona Convention, 96
Basel Action Network (BAN),
218–219
Basel Convention, 93–95, 166
Baucus, Max, 31
Bean v. Southwestern Waste
Management, Inc., 38
Been, Vicki, 56–57
Berhad, Ekran, 86
Beyond Pesticides (BP), 219
BHP-Billiton, 82–83
Blue Ridge Environmental
Defense League, 17–18
Borden Chemicals and Plastics,
88
Boston, Massachusetts, Dudley
Street Neighborhood
Initiative, 107–108
Bowler, Shaun, 45–46
Bryant, Bunyan, 25, 39
biographical sketch, 139–140
Bulkhandling, Inc., 91
Bullard, Robert D., 5, 26, 213
biographical sketch, 140–141
on discriminatory
environmental protection
policies, 53
“Economic Blackmail in
Minority Communities,” 49
on environmental equity and
civil rights movements, 23
findings on African American
environmental activism, 44
on governmental
responsibilities in
environmental justice, 59
on mainstream
environmentalists’
indifference to
environmental inequities,
21–22
research supporting Bean v.
Southwestern Waste
Management, Inc., 38
study on siting of waste
disposal facilities, 25
on West Dallas inequity, 6
Burwell, Dollie, 141–142
Bush, George W., and
administration
and environmental justice
issues, 30–31, 66–68
and Redefining Rights in
America: The Civil Rights
Record of the George W. Bush
Administration, 2001–2004
(excerpt), 190–196
Cairo Guidelines, 94–95
California
and environmental justice
regulations, 63
University of, Hastings College
of Law, 62–65
“Cancer Alley” (Louisiana), 9–11
and debate over issue of
environmental racism, 55–56
carbon trading, 101–102
Carson, Rachel, 11, 20
Center for a Sustainable Coast,
17–18
Center for Community Action
and Environmental Justice
(CCAEJ), 236
Center for Environmental Health
(CEH), 219–220
Center for Health, Environment
and Justice (CHEJ), 220
Center for International
Environmental Law
(CIEL), 104–106
Center for Policy Alternatives
(CPA), 220–221
Chávez, César, 140–141

Index
297
Chavis, Benjamin, 4, 26, 53
Chemical Waste Management,
Inc., 39
and Sumter County (AL)
hazardous waste landfill, 47
Chemical Weapons Working
Group (CWWG), 221
Chiaverini, Joanne, 14
Chippewa tribe, 75–76
Choosing Our Future: Scotland’s
Sustainable Development
Strategy, 106
Churchrock, New Mexico, 7–9
Citizens Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Wastes, 20
Citizens Coal Council (CCC), 221
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 22
excerpts, 166–167
Title VI, 14, 29–31, 61
civil rights movement
and environmental justice
movement, 22–23
history of, 22
influence on Warren County
(North Carolina) protests,
1–2
Clean Air Act, 51
Clean Water Act, 8
and Maine paper industry,
49–50
climate change, 97–98
acceptance of scientific data
on, 98
and Bali Principles of Climate
Justice, 100–101
and carbon trading, 101–102
and hazards for developing
nations, 98–100
predicted negative
consequences, 98
“10 Principles for Just Climate
Change Policies in the U.S.,”
102–103
climate justice, 100–103
A Climate of Injustice, 99
Clinton, Bill, and administration
Executive Order 12898, 26, 29,
30–31, 61, 165
Executive Order 12898
(excerpts), 178–180
Clinton, Hillary Rodham,
165–166
and Environmental Justice
Renewal Act (bill S. 2549;
excerpt), 202–208
Coastal Carriers, Inc., 90
Cobb Town, Alabama, 15–16
Commission on Racial Justice. See
United Church of Christ,
Commission on Racial
Justice
common property, 105
Communities for a Better
Environment (CBE),
236–237
communities of color
defined, 3
percentages for host
neighborhoods and non-host
areas by EPA region, 210t.
research findings on
environmental attitudes, 46
as those most subject to
environmental inequity, 3
See also African Americans and
environmental inequities;
Latinos and environmental
inequities; National People
of Color Environmental
Leadership Summit; Native
Americans and
environmental inequities
Community Toolbox for
Children’s Environmental
Health, 222
community-based natural
resource management, 105
community-based property
rights, 105
Copenhagen Declaration, 104

298
Index
corporations, and effect of
environmental safeguards
on business, 49–50
CorpWatch, 222
Council on Environmental
Quality, 25
Davidson, Pamela, 40
Deep South Center for
Environmental Justice
(DSCEJ), 237
Deland, Michael R., 25
Desert Land Act of 1877, 19
Detroit River, Michigan, 
13–14
Detroiters Working for
Environmental Justice
(DWEJ), 237
Diné CARE, 222–223
Dowd, John Patrick, 90
Dudley Street Neighborhood
Initiative (Boston), 
107–108
Earthjustice, 223
economic blackmail, 47–50
“Economic Blackmail in Minority
Communities,” 49
Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC), 96–97
ecotourism, and Maasai, 85–86
Energy Justice Network (EJN),
223
Engler, John, 15
Environmental Action
Foundation, 20
environmental degradation, and
material progress, 42–43
environmental discrimination, 4
environmental equity, defined, 5
“Environmental Equity:
Reducing Risks for All
Communities” (excerpts),
175–177
environmental inequities, 3
acknowledgment that they
exist, 60–61
approaches to solving, 59–60,
69–71, 73–76
census data for areas where
landfills are located, 172t.,
209t.
chemical plant pollution in
“Cancer Alley” (Louisiana),
9–11, 55–56
consumption of toxic fish
(Detroit River, Michigan),
13–14
defined, 3
examples, 6–18
farmworkers and pesticide
exposure, 11–13
forces contributing to, 41
lead smelter placement (West
Dallas, Texas), 6–7
and legal question of intent,
57–58
location of Select Steel Corp.
plant (Flint, Michigan),
14–15, 29
and minority groups, 3, 6
PCB pollution (Sweet Valley
and Cobb Town, Alabama),
15–16
and political power, 43–44, 46
proving, 4
and question of intent, 53–57
question of which comes first:
LULU or minority/poor
community, 56–57
racial and socioeconomic
characteristics of people
living near hazardous waste
facilities, 209t.
racial and socioeconomic
disparities between host
neighborhoods and non-host
areas for hazardous waste
facilities, 210t.

Index
299
research confirming, 38–39
research denying, 39–41
socioeconomic disparities
between host neighborhoods
and non-host areas by EPA
region, 212t.
and Southern Nuclear
Operating Co. power plant
(Georgia), 17–18
types of, 5
water pollution and other
uranium mining–related
problems (Churchrock, New
Mexico), 7–9
West Harlem Environmental
Action and diesel buses,
16–17
worldwide, 81–90
See also economic blackmail
environmental justice, 3
environmental justice
and Baldwin Hills, California,
32
as confluence of environmental
and civil rights movements,
18–23
current status of movement,
60–76
defined, 4–5
geographic equity, 5
groups, 27–28
growth of movement and
challenges remaining, 29–33,
37
and justice system, 69–71
maturation of movement, 23–27
periodical publications, 28
“Principles of Environmental
Justice” (text), 173–175
procedural equity, 5
as redefined by Bush
administration, 67–68
and social equity, 5
as social movement, 27–28
and women, 28
See also climate change;
environmental inequities;
sustainable development
Environmental Justice and
Climate Change Initiative
(EJCCI), 102–103, 223–224
Environmental Justice and
Health Union (EJHU), 224
Environmental Justice Coalition
for Water (EJCW), 224–225
Environmental Justice for All: 
A Fifty State Survey of
Legislation, Policies and
Cases, 165
Environmental Justice for
Cleaning Workers
Campaign, 73–75
Environmental Justice
Foundation (EJF), 225
Environmental Justice Renewal
Act (bill S. 2549; excerpt),
202–208
Environmental Justice Resource
Center (EJRC), 225
Environmental Justice: EPA Should
Devote More Attention to
Environmental Justice When
Developing Clean Air Rules
(excerpt), 197–198
Environmental Law Alliance
Worldwide (ELAW), 226
Environmental Law and Policy
Center (ELPC), 226
Environmental Leadership
Program (ELP), 226–227
environmental movement
conservationist wing, 19
mainstream groups as largely
white and indifferent to
environmental inequities,
20–22
modern, 20–22
origins (19th and early 20th
centuries), 18–20
preservationist wing, 19

300
Index
Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). See U.S.
Environmental Protection
Agency
environmental racism, 3
debates over, 53–56
defined, 4, 53
proving, 4
environmental regulations
air pollution improvements
greater for whites than
people of color, 51–52
beneficial effect on business, 50
negative effects on minorities,
50–51
neutral effect on business,
49–50
and transboundary dumping,
91, 94
See also Clean Air Act; Clean
Water Act; Executive Order
12898; Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act; governmental
responsibilities and actions;
Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act; U.S.
Environmental Protection
Agency
Environmental Research
Foundation (ERF), 
227–228
Environmental Support Center
(ESC), 228
EPA Needs to Consistently
Implement the Intent of the
Executive Order on
Environmental Justice
(excerpt), 188–190
Estrada, Torri, 141–142
Eugene-Richard, Margie, 144–145
European Union, and
transboundary dumping,
96, 97
Everyone’s Backyard, 28
Executive Order 12898, 26, 29,
30–31, 61, 165
and Bush administration,
66–68
congressional response to, 72
excerpts, 178–180
See also Not in My Backyard
Fair Housing Act of 1968, 22
excerpts, 167–168
farmworkers
and Chávez, César, 142–143
and economic blackmail, 47
and pesticides, 11–13, 21, 47
See also Latinos and
environmental inequities
Fauntroy, Walter E., 23
Federal Highway Administration
(FHA), 214
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA), 11
Federal Transit Administration
(FTA), 214
Feldman, Jay, 145–146
Ferris, Deeohn, 146–147
Florida, and environmental
justice regulations, 63–64
Florio, James, 171
Framework Convention on
Climate Change, 101–102
Friends of the Earth, 20
Gelobter, Michel, 51–52
General Accounting Office (GAO),
Siting of Hazardous Waste
Landfills and Their
Correlation with Racial and
Economic Status of
Surrounding Communities
(excerpt), 171–172
geographic equity
and “Cancer Alley”
(Louisiana), 9–11, 55–56
defined, 5

Index
301
Georgia, and environmental
justice regulations, 73
Gianessi, Leonard P., 51
Global Community Monitor
(GCM), 228–229
Goldman, Benjamin, 57
Gore, Al, 31
Government Accountability
Office (GAO), 61
Environmental Justice: EPA
Should Devote More Attention
to Environmental Justice When
Developing Clean Air Rules
(excerpt), 197–198
governmental responsibilities
and actions, 59, 61–65
Bullard on, 59
congressional inaction, 
71–73
and state governments, 72–73
and weak efforts of federal
government, 65–68, 71–73
See also environmental
regulations
Greenaction, 238
Greenpeace International, 229
and transboundary dumping,
90, 95
Greenpeace USA, 229
GSX Corporation, 58
Guinea, 91
gypsies. See Roma
Haiti, 95
and Philadelphia ash, 90
Hamilton, James T., 57
Harris, LaDonna, 148–149
Hatcher, Richard, 21
hazardous wastes
and Massachusetts Native
Americans, 38
racial and socioeconomic
characteristics of people
living near hazardous waste
facilities, 209t.
racial and socioeconomic
disparities between host
neighborhoods and non-host
areas for hazardous waste
facilities, 210t.
and research of United Church
of Christ, Commission on
Racial Justice, 23–25, 38–39
socioeconomic disparities
between host neighborhoods
and non-host areas by EPA
region, 212t.
Sumter County (Alabama)
hazardous waste, 47
See also Basel Convention;
Citizens Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Wastes;
RACHEL’s Hazardous Waste
News; transboundary
dumping
Henson, Mike, 50
Hispanics. See Latinos
Honor the Earth, 229–230
Houston, Texas, and siting of
waste disposal facilities, 25,
38
Hungary, and environmental
racism toward Roma,
83–84
Indian Law Resource Center
(ILRC), 230
Indiana, and environmental
justice regulations, 64
Indigenous Environmental
Network (IEN), 230–231
Interagency Working Group 
on Environmental Justice, 
165
Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, 98
Jeffreys, Kent, 54
job blackmail. See economic
blackmail

302
Index
Johnson, Hazel, 149–150
Just Transition Alliance (JTA), 
231
Katrina Organizations, 238
Kentucky, and environmental
justice regulations, 64
Kerr-McGee Nuclear
Corporation, 8
Khian Sea, and wayward attempt
to dump ash, 89–90, 94
La Jolla Energy Development,
Inc., 32
landfills
census data for areas where
landfills are located, 172t.,
209t.
Siting of Hazardous Waste
Landfills and Their Correlation
with Racial and Economic
Status of Surrounding
Communities (excerpt),
171–172
Sumter County, AL, 47
Latinos and environmental
inequities
research findings on
environmental attitudes,
45–46
and research of United Church
of Christ, Commission on
Racial Justice, 23–25, 38–39
See also farmworkers
lead smelting, 6–7
Lee, Pamela Tau, 151–152
legislation, 165–166. See also Civil
Rights Act of 1964; Clean
Air Act; Clean Water Act;
Desert Land Act of 1877;
Fair Housing Act of 1968;
Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act; National Environ -
mental Policy Act of 1969;
Preemption Act of 1841;
Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act; Voting
Rights Act of 1957
Lewis, John, 31, 71
Liberty Hill Foundation—
Environmental Justice
Fund (EJF), 239
Literacy for Environmental
Justice (LEJ), 239–240
Little Village Environmental
Justice Organization
(LVEJO), 240
Lomé Conventions, 96
Louisiana Environmental Action
Network (LEAN), 240–241
LULUs (locally unwanted land
uses), 43–44
and negotiations between
companies and communities,
59–60
siting as economic vs.
prejudicial decisions, 54–55
Lumbee Indians, 58
Maasai, and environmental
inequities, 85–86
Madres del Este de Los Angeles
Santa Isabel, 231–232
Maine, and paper industry, 
49–50
Malaysia, and displacement of
indigenous peoples for
hydroelectric plant, 86–87
market forces, 59–60
Martinez, Graciela, 151–152
Massachusetts, University of, at
Amherst, 39
Massachusetts Coalition for
Occupational Safety and
Health, 73–75
McDonald, Norris, 152–153
McGreevey, James, 62
McKinney, Larry J., 70
mercury, and Thor Chemicals
plant relocated to South
Africa, 87–89

Index
303
Michigan, University of
National Opinion Research
Center Detroit Studies, 45
School of Natural Resources
and Environment, 13, 25, 39
Michigan Conference, 25–26, 27
migrant workers. See
farmworkers
Military Toxics Project (MTP),
232
mining
Nicolet Mineral Co. and Native
Americans (Wisconsin),
75–76
and Papua New Guinea, 
82–83
uranium, 7–9
Mississippi, and environmental
justice regulations, 73
Mohai, Paul, 25, 39
biographical sketch, 153–154
findings on African American
environmental activism,
44–45
Monsanto PCB plant (Alabama),
15
Moore, Richard, 155
Muir, John, 19
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored
People (NAACP), 4
National Black Environmental
Justice Network (NBEJN),
232
National Environmental Justice
Advisory Council
(NEJAC), 26
National Environmental Policy
Act of 1969 (NEPA;
excerpts), 168–171
National Institute of
Environmental Health
Sciences (NIEHS), 214
National Parks and Conservation
Association, 20
National People of Color
Environmental Leadership
Summit, 26–27
“Principles of Environmental
Justice” (text), 173–175
National Tribal Environmental
Council (NTEC), 233
Native Americans and
environmental inequities
Churchrock, New Mexico, 7–9
consumption of toxic fish
(Detroit River, Michigan),
13–14
contaminated fish around
Puget Sound, 38
and economic blackmail, 48–49
hazardous waste sites in
Massachusetts, 38
and Nicolet Mineral Co. mine,
75–76
radioactive waste sites on land
of, 38
Natural Resources Defense
Council (NRDC), 233
Navajo Nation, and Desert Rock
power plant, 48–49
New Jersey
and environmental justice
regulations, 62, 64–65
and Philadelphia ash, 89
New Orleans Workers’ Center for
Racial Justice (NOWCRJ),
238–239
New York City, New York, and
West Harlem
Environmental Action and
diesel buses, 16–17
New York City Environmental
Justice Alliance (NYCEJA),
241
New York State Department of
Environmental
Conservation, 62
Nicolet Mineral Co., 75–76
NIMBY (not in my backyard),
43–44

304
Index
North Carolina, and
environmental justice
regulations, 73
Northern Wisconsin Resources
Group, 75–76
Not in My Backyard: Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI
as Tools for Achieving
Environmental Justice, 60–61
excerpts, 181–182
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC), 17–18
Office of Environmental Justice.
See under U.S.
Environmental Protection
Agency
Office of Environmental Policy
and Compliance (OEPC).
See under U.S. Department
of the Interior
Office of Inspector General,
66–67, 68
One Species, One Planet, 104–106
Oregon, and environmental
justice regulations, 72
Organisation for Economic
Development and Co-
operation (OECD), 93, 97
Organization of African Unity
(OAU), 96
Orofsky, Stephen, 70
Osborne, Na’taki, 155–157
Our Common Future, 103
Pan, 28
Paolino and Sons, 89–90
paper industry, 49–50
Papua New Guinea, and mineral
extraction, 82–83
Parks, Bradley C., 99
Parks, Rosa, 2, 22
PCBs (polychlorinated
biphenyls)
Sweet Valley and Cobb Town,
Alabama, 15–16
Warren County, North
Carolina, 1–3
people of color. See communities
of color
People of Color Environmental
Groups Directory, 29, 45, 213
Peskin, Henry M., 51
pesticides
and farmworkers, 11–13, 21
and negative effects of
regulations, 21
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
and incinerator ash shipped to
Africa, 91
and wayward path of ash
waste (Khian Sea), 89–90
PIBBY (put it in the blacks’
backyard), 44
Pinchot, Gifford, 19
Pluckett, Jim, 95
poor people
as those often subject to
environmental inequity, 3, 4
See also communities of color;
economic blackmail;
environmental inequities
Port Arthur, Texas, 70
Potawatomi tribe, 75–76
Prakash, Swati, 157–158
Preemption Act of 1841, 18–19
“Principles of Environmental
Justice,” 27
text, 173–175
Pritchett, Lant, 92
procedural equity, defined, 5
protests
compared with other responses
to environmental inequities,
59–60
Warren County, North Carolina
(re toxic waste), 1–2, 23
Queen City Barrels, 50
Race and the Incidence of
Environmental Hazards, 25

Index
305
Race, Poverty, and the Environment,
28
RACHEL’s Hazardous Waste News,
28
Redefining Rights in America: The
Civil Rights Record of the
George W. Bush
Administration, 2001–2004
(excerpt), 190–196
Reilly, William K., 25, 175
Reilly, William P., 90
Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), 40
Return to Sender project, 90
Rio Puerco Valley, New Mexico,
7–9
Roberts, J. Timmons, 99
Robeson County, North Carolina,
and dispute between
Lumbee Indians and GSX
Corporation, 58
Robinson, William Paul, 9
Roma, and environmental 
racism in Central Europe,
83–84
Roosevelt, Theodore, 19
RSR lead smelter, 6–7
Salkin, Patricia E., 158
Savannah Riverkeeper, 17–18
Scalia, Antonin, 70–71
Schmitter, Phil, 14
Scotland, 106
Segura, Gary M., 45–46
Select Steel Corporation, 14–15,
29
Service Training for
Environmental Progress
(STEP), 233–234
Shepard, Peggy, 159–160
Sierra Club, 19, 20, 234
members’ indifference to
environmental inequities, 
21
Sierra Club v. Gates, 69–70
Silent Spring, 11, 20
Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills
and Their Correlation with
Racial and Economic Status
of Surrounding Communities
census data for areas where
landfills are located, 172t.,
209t.
excerpt, 171–172
Small, Gail, 160–161
Smith, Damu, 161–163
social benefits and burdens,
42–43
social equity, defined, 5
“Solid Waste Sites and the Black
Houston Community,” 38
Solis, Hilda L., 197–198
South Africa, and Thor
Chemicals plant, 87–89
South Camden Citizens in Action v.
New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 70
Southern Alliance for Clean
Energy, 17–18
Southern Nuclear Operating Co.,
17–18
SouthWest Organizing Project
(SWOP), 241–242
Southwest Research and
Information Center (SRIC),
8, 9, 242
St. Francis Prayer Center (Flint,
Michigan), 29
St. Lawrence Cement Company,
70
Student Environmental Action
Coalition (SEAC), 234–235
Sullivan, Louis W., 25
Summers, Lawrence, 92–93
Sumter County (Alabama)
hazardous waste landfill,
47
Superfund sites, 52
sustainable development,
103–104, 106–108
and community-based
property rights, 105

306
Index
sustainable development
(continued)
Copenhagen Declaration, 104
and One Species, One Planet,
104–106
Sweet Valley, Alabama, 15–16
“10 Principles for Just Climate
Change Policies in the
U.S.,” 102–103
Thor Chemicals, mercury
reprocessing plant
relocated to South Africa,
87–89
Thoreau, Henry David, 19
Title VI, Civil Rights Act, 14,
29–31, 61
and EPA, 68–69
Toolkit for Assessing Potential
Allegations of Environmental
Injustice (excerpt),
185–187
Toxic Times, 28
Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty
(excerpt), 198–202
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United
States (excerpt), 172–173
transboundary dumping, 91–93
miscellaneous treaties and
bans, 96–97
See also Basel Convention
2003–2008 EPA Strategic Plan:
Direction for the Future
(excerpt), 182–184
United Church of Christ
Commission on Racial Justice,
23–25, 38–39
Commission on Racial Justice:
Toxic Wastes and Race in the
United States (excerpt),
172–173
Justice and Witness Ministries:
tables on environmental
inequities, 209t.–212t.
Justice and Witness Ministries:
Toxic Wastes and Race at
Twenty (excerpt), 198–202
United Kingdom, and Thor
Chemicals plant relocated
to South Africa, 87–89
United Nations
Environmental Programme
(UNEP), 94–95
World Commission on
Environment and
Development, 103
United Nuclear Corporation, 8–9
United States, and Basel
Convention, 95
United States Conference of
Catholic Bishops’
Environmental Justice
Program: Caring for God’s
Creation (USCCB-EJP), 
235
uranium mining, 7–9
Urban League, 45
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 93
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
Not in My Backyard: Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI as
Tools for Achieving
Environmental Justice,
60–61
Not in My Backyard: Executive
Order 12898 and Title VI as
Tools for Achieving
Environmental Justice
(excerpts), 181–182
Redefining Rights in America:
The Civil Rights Record of the
George W. Bush
Administration, 2001–2004
(excerpt), 190–196
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 25
U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development,
181–182

Index
307
U.S. Department of the Interior
Not in My Backyard on, 181–182
Office of Environmental Policy
and Compliance (OEPC), 
215
U.S. Department of
Transportation, 181–182
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA)
and “Environmental Equity:
Reducing Risks for All
Communities,” 175–177
and Environmental Justice: EPA
Should Devote More Attention
to Environmental Justice When
Developing Clean Air Rules
(excerpt), 197–198
“Environmental Justice
Bibliography Database,” 38
EPA Needs to Consistently
Implement the Intent of the
Executive Order on
Environmental Justice
(excerpt), 188–190
and Executive Order 12898,
66–67, 181–182, 188–190
and fewer Superfund sites in
minority or poor
communities, 52
Interim Guidance for
Investigating Title VI
Administrative Complaints
Challenging Permits, 14
and Michigan Conference, 25
Not in My Backyard on, 181–182
Office of Environmental
Justice, 26, 27, 216
Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response, 216
Office of the Inspector General,
186
and paucity of minority
employees, 52–53
and PCB regulations, 15
and pesticide regulation, 11
and redefinition of
environmental justice, 67–68
responses to Title VI
complaints, 29–31, 68–69
and Select Steel Corp. plant
location (Michigan), 14–15,
29
Toolkit for Assessing Potential
Allegations of Environmental
Injustice (excerpt), 185–187
2003–2008 EPA Strategic Plan:
Direction for the Future
(excerpt), 182–184
and Warren County (NC)
pollution, 1–2
and WE ACT complaint
regarding diesel bus
pollution, 16–17
Veolia Environmental Services,
69–70
Virginia, and environmental
justice regulations, 65
Voces Unidas, 28
Voting Rights Act of 1957, 22
VX (chemical warfare agent),
69–70
wage gaps, 42
Warren County, North Carolina
disposal of PCBs, 1–3
protests against toxic waste
dumping, 1, 2–3, 4, 23
Washington, Mayor of Washington,
D.C., et al. v. Davis et al., 58
Waste Management, Inc., 90
West, Patrick C., 13
West Dallas, Texas, 6–7
West Harlem Environmental
Action (WEA CT), 16–17,
242–243
Whittaker, Matthew, 45–46
Wilderness Society, 20
Wolff, Edward, 51
Wright, Beverly, 163–164

About the Author
David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a BA in chemistry
(with high distinction) and an MA in education from the Univer-
sity of Michigan, and an EdD in science education from Harvard
University. He is the author of more than 400 textbooks, encyclo-
pedias, resource books, research manuals, laboratory manuals,
trade books, and other educational materials. He taught mathe-
matics, chemistry, and physical science in Grand Rapids, Michi-
gan, for 13 years; was professor of chemistry and physics at
Salem State College in Massachusetts for 15 years; and was ad-
junct professor in the College of Professional Studies at the Uni-
versity of San Francisco for 10 years. Previous books for
ABC-CLIO include Global Warming: A Reference Handbook (1993),
Gay and Lesbian Rights: A Reference Handbook (1994), The Ozone
Dilemma: A Reference Handbook (1995), Violence and the Mass Media:
A Reference Handbook (1996), Encyclopedia of Cryptology (1997), and
Social Issues in Science and Technology: An Encyclopedia (1999).
308

