 


ESPIONAGE
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Capital Punishment, Second Edition, Michael Kronenwetter
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
The Religious Right, Second Edition, Glenn H. Utter and John W.
Storey
U.S. National Security, Cynthia Watson
War Crimes and Justice, Howard Ball
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as terrorism, sexual harassment,
homelessness, AIDS, gambling, animal rights, and air pollution.
Written by professional writers, scholars, and nonacademic
experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written, up-to-
date, and objective. They provide a good starting point for
research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject; a detailed chronology; biographical
sketches; facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material; a directory of organizations and agencies;
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources; a glossary; and
an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to better understand the
social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.


ESPIONAGE
A Reference Handbook
Glenn Hastedt
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2003 by Glenn Hastedt
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hastedt, Glenn.
Espionage : a reference handbook / Glenn Hastedt.—1st ed.
p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues)
Summary: Explores the role that espionage plays in world politics today,
discussing how it has changed over time, profiling famous spies, and
pointing out the key role that advanced warning plays in national security.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-950-3 (alk. paper); ISBN 1-57607-951-1 (e-book)
1.  Espionage—History—20th century. 2.  Espionage—History. 3.
Spies—History—20th century. [1. Espionage. 2. Spies. 3. Intelligence
service.]  I. Title. II. Series.
JF1525.I6H36 2003
327.12—dc21
2003009680
07
06
05
04
03
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an e-book. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

To Cathy, Sarah, and Matthew


Contents
Preface and Acknowledgments, xiii
1
Espionage in the United States, 1
The American Revolution, 1
The Early Republic, 4
The Civil War, 5
World War I and the Interwar Years, 7
World War II, 9
The Cold War, 13
America on the Defense, 13
The United States on the Offensive, 30
The Post–Cold War Period, 34
Post–September 11, 2001, 38
Further Reading, 40
References, 42
2
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate, 45
Spies and Spy Catchers, 45
Espionage and the Nature of World Politics, 47
Espionage and Surprise, 49
Espionage and the Intelligence Cycle, 52
Espionage and the National Security Bureaucracy, 55
Espionage and National Security Threats, 58
Economic Espionage, 60
Controlling Espionage, 62
Counterespionage and National Security, 65
Espionage and 9/11, 66
Further Reading, 72
References, 73
ix

3
Espionage around the World, 75
Great Britain, 78
Kim Philby, 80
Israel, 82
Jonathan Jay Pollard, 84
China, 88
Larry Wu-tai Chin, 89
Soviet Union/Russia, 90
Oleg Penkovsky, 94
Other States, 97
Further Reading, 100
References, 101
4
Biographical Sketches, 103
Rudolf Abel (1903–1971), 103 
Aldrich Ames (1941– ), 105
James Jesus Angleton (1917–1987), 106
Benedict Arnold (1741–1801), 108
Lafayette Baker (1826–1868), 109
Whittaker Chambers (1901–1961), 110
Frank Church (1924–1984), 112
William Donovan (1883–1959), 112
Allen Welch Dulles (1893–1969), 114
Felix Dzershinsky (1877–1926), 116
Klaus Fuchs (1911–1985), 117
Rose O’Neal Greenhow (1815?–1864), 117
Nathan Hale (1755–1776), 118
Lee H. Hamilton (1931– ), 119
Philip (Robert) Hanssen (1945– ), 120
Alger Hiss (1904–1996), 120
John Edgar Hoover (1895–1972), 122
Joseph McCarthy (1908–1957), 124
Robert S. Mueller III (1944– ), 126
Richard Milhous Nixon (1913–1994), 126
A. Mitchell Palmer (1872–1936), 127
Oleg Vladimirovich Penkovsky (1919–1963), 128
Harold “Kim” Philby (1912–1988), 130
Allan Pinkerton (1819–1884), 132
Jonathan Jay Pollard (1943– ), 133
Francis Gary Powers (1929–1977), 133
x
Contents

Thomas Joseph Ridge (1945– ), 135
Julius Rosenberg (1918–1953) and Ethel Rosenberg
(1915–1953), 135
Sir William Samuel Stephenson (1896–1989), 137
George J. Tenet (1953– ), 138
Ralph H. Van Deman (1865–1952), 139
Elizabeth Van Lew (1818–1900), 140
John Walker (1938– ), 140
Herbert Yardley (1889–1958), 141
5
Documents, 143
Organizational Procedures and Authorities, 144
Presidential Order, July 11, 1941, 144
Military Order, June 13, 1942, 145
The Central Intelligence Agency (National Security Act
of 1947, July 26, 1947, Excerpts), 146
Executive Order 13228 Establishing the Office of
Homeland Security and the Homeland Security
Council, 149
The Department of Homeland Security: Homeland
Security Act of 2002, November 25, 2002 (Excerpts),
151
Coordination of Counterintelligence Activities (Title 50,
Section 402 of the U.S. Code, Excerpts), 153
Laws, 156
Loyalty Programs: Executive Order 9835, 1947
(Excerpts), 157
Laws Governing Espionage: Title 18 of the U.S. Code
Sections 793, 794, 798, 783b (Excerpts), 159
Laws Governing Economic Espionage: Economic
Espionage Act of 1996 (Excerpts), 164
Evidence of Domestic Spying, 166
Statement by Senator Frank Church, October 21, 1975,
166
Project MINARET: Domestic Spying on Antiwar
Protestors, 168
Project SGPOINTER/HGLINGUAL: Mail Openings, 170
6
Chronology, 175
Contents
xi

7
Print and Nonprint Resources, 185
Books, 185
Journal Articles, 200
Government Documents, 204
Electronic Sources, 204
Glossary, 207
Index, 211
About the Author, 225
xii
Contents

Preface and
Acknowledgments
E
spionage and its inevitable partner, counterespionage, are cen-
tral to the pursuit of a state’s national security. This is true
regardless of whether the state is large or small, rich or poor,
democratic or authoritarian, new or old. Without intelligence
about the plans and capabilities of others, and the ability to pro-
tect one’s own plans and capabilities from being discovered, a
state’s foreign policy will be ineffective and ultimately doomed to
failure. For all of its importance, however, most of us know very
little about espionage. It receives far less attention than covert
action or intelligence analysis in academic literature, and it
appears in the popular literature irregularly and most frequently
as a journalistic account of an exposed spy’s life history that is
written in a “whodunit” fashion that pits the spy against the spy
catcher. Although spies and spy catchers are the central players in
the game of espionage, in a democracy there is a third key actor:
the overseers whose task it is to make sure that laws are obeyed
and citizens’ rights are protected. More often than not they come
onto the scene only after transgressions have been committed or
intelligence failures revealed.
This reference handbook introduces interested readers to the
field of espionage and provides a road map of where to go next to
gain additional insight. It presumes no special knowledge, only
an interest in the subject. Increased knowledge about espionage is
especially important today in the world after 9/11. Anxieties
about the ability to protect American national security have been
raised as new threats and enemies appear. Espionage and coun-
terespionage are emerging as central policy tools to address these
xiii

national security concerns. An enlightened public discussion of
American national security policy in the coming years requires
that we obtain a better understanding of the potentials and pit-
falls of espionage.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of espionage in the United
States going back to the American Revolution. In addition to pro-
viding a historical context for understanding the present, the
chapter also introduces key themes and people in American espi-
onage. Chapter 2 surveys the major academic and policy debates
surrounding the conduct of espionage and counterespionage. It is
organized around ten major themes and issues and provides
readers with the “big picture” of espionage policy. Chapter 3
places espionage in a comparative and global context. The opera-
tion of the British, Chinese, Russian, and Israeli intelligence agen-
cies are detailed as they relate to espionage. Case studies of
important espionage events are presented for each. Chapter 4
presents biographical sketches of important figures in espionage
who have been introduced in previous chapters. Here an effort is
made to summarize key events in their lives and their roles either
as spies, spy catchers, or spy overseers. Chapter 5 presents a
selection of key U.S. government espionage documents. They
provide an overview of the legal and institutional environment in
which the spies and spy catchers have operated in the United
States. The documents are organized into three sections: organi-
zational procedures and authorities to act, laws, and evidence of
domestic spying. Chapter 6 presents a brief chronology of key
espionage events and chapter 7 provides an annotated bibliogra-
phy of print and nonprint resources on espionage.
I would like to thank Alicia Merritt and Gina Zondorak at
ABC-CLIO for all of their hard work and efforts on this project. At
James Madison Uniersity I would like to thank Gordon Miller,
Political Science Liaison Librarian, for his help on this project.
Over the years, Gordon has given untiringly of his time to the fac-
ulty and students in the political science department and at JMU
in aiding and simplifying their research efforts.
xiv
Preface and Acknowledgments

1
Espionage in the
United States
E
spionage is the act of secretly collecting information. Americans
more commonly refer to it as spying. Though in the United
States people tend to associate spying with the Cold War, it is
an age-old activity. By necessity espionage occurs out of sight;
only occasionally does it burst out of the shadows and into the
open. However, even then a full picture rarely emerges. People
find bits and pieces of evidence that point to an explanation for
why an act of espionage occurred or how it was discovered, but
important questions frequently remain unanswered long after the
fact. This chapter will present a historical overview of espionage
involving the United States.
Two points are worth noting in advance. First, this is a history
told more in terms of the activities of individuals than of organi-
zations, because it is only relatively recently that large intelligence
bureaucracies have become prominent features of the national
security landscape. Second, the history of espionage entails telling
more than one story. Two play at the “spy game”; there are spies
and spy catchers.
The American Revolution
For most observers the history of American espionage begins
after World War II when the United States abandoned its staunch
isolationist outlook on world affairs and entered into the Cold
War with the Soviet Union. A closer look reveals that a much
1

longer legacy exists, though. Several notable cases of espionage
occurred during the period surrounding the American Revolu-
tion. For example, after the Boston Tea Party a group of some
thirty Americans formed the Revere Gang or Mechanics to secretly
gather information about British troop movements. It was their
information that provided warning to the Minutemen about the
pending British advance on Lexington.
In 1776 with his retreating forces threatened by superior
British firepower, General George Washington enlisted the ser-
vices of Nathan Hale to spy on the British. Hale is best remem-
bered for his famous last words, “I only regret that I have but one
life to lose for my country” (Corson 1977, 490). Hale joined the
Continental army in 1775 and agreed to be a spy only after his
commanding officer had twice failed to obtain a volunteer as
requested by Washington. Hale posed as a Loyalist schoolteacher
and traveled on Long Island gathering information and drawing
pictures of enemy fortifications. He did not fare well as a spy; his
mission only lasted from September 1 to 22, 1776. He was cap-
tured while attempting to return to Washington’s forces and was
executed without a trial the following day.
The Continental army made good use of information
obtained by spies on several occasions. Washington’s famous
crossing of the Delaware River on Christmas night 1776 was
made possible by information supplied by a Trenton butcher who
had customers among the British forces. General Horatio Gates’s
successful campaign against British General John Burgoyne,
which led to the capture of Saratoga, was aided by an American
spy posing as a tailor in Burgoyne’s camp.
Two notable spy rings were organized and run by the
Continental army during the Revolutionary War. One spy ring
operated in Philadelphia from September 1777 to June 1778.
Organized by Major John Clark, it provided Washington’s forces
at Valley Forge with information about British General Howe’s
capabilities and movements. This information is credited with
having prevented the destruction of Washington’s forces at least
three times. A second spy ring, the Culper Net, operated in the
New York City and Long Island area. Characterized as the most
successful spy operation of the Revolutionary War, it was organ-
ized at Washington’s request by Major Benjamin Tallmadge.
Consisting of a network of farmers, barmaids, merchants, fisher-
men, domestics, and clerks, the Culper Net played a key role in
exposing General Benedict Arnold as a British spy.
2
Espionage in the United States

Benedict Arnold was a “walk-in”: rather than being recruited
as a spy he volunteered his services to the British. Arnold had a
checkered military and personal career before offering to become
a spy. He had developed a reputation for being an aggressive and
spirited military officer for the colonies but at the same time re-
peatedly found himself the subject of investigations by the Con-
tinental Congress for corruption and abuse of power. Arnold
apparently approached British General Henry Clinton in May
1779, claiming he had become disillusioned with the revolution-
ary cause. In July he quoted 10,000 pounds as the price of his
services. The British asked for information about the American
defenses at West Point in return for this payment. By August,
Arnold had succeeded in being placed in command of this mis-
sion. His British handler, John Andre, was captured with incrim-
inating documents on the way to a meeting with Arnold. With
his treason disclosed, Arnold fled to New York to be with Clinton.
For the remainder of the war he would serve in the British army,
leading campaigns in Virginia and Connecticut.
Arnold was not the only British spy during the American
Revolution. Dr. Benjamin Church, the director of hospitals for the
Continental Congress and a member of the Massachusetts Con-
gress, was a spy for British General Gage. General Howe captured
Philadelphia in September 1777 with the help of information pro-
vided by a spy. And, in Paris, the British relied upon information
secretly provided to them by Benjamin Franklin’s personal secre-
tary while Franklin was trying to negotiate an alliance with France
against the British. The danger posed by spies was recognized by
all concerned. On the American side of the war, Committees of
Safety were established to provide secure means of communica-
tion, crack British codes, and run security checks on all members
of revolutionary groups (Ameringer 1990).
Finally, it should be noted that the colonists and the British
were not the only ones running spies in this country during the
Revolution. Using Havana as a base, Spain sent agents to the
rebelling colonies disguised as merchants. One agent, Juan de
Miralles, not only provided information to Spain about political
and military events during the Revolutionary War but also made
contact with American officials in hopes of bringing Spain into
the war on the colonists’ side in exchange for the return of Florida
to Spain.
The American Revolution
3

The Early Republic
The first decades of the American Republic saw espionage move
from a wartime setting to a peacetime one. The transition
brought out a theme that would be repeated time and again in
the history of American espionage. The public’s attention
became riveted on the dangers posed by domestic spies who
came from groups outside the mainstream of American society.
Caught up in a battle for their political survival, the Federalists
depicted immigrants as spies and supported the passage of the
Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798. These laws were directed largely
at French and Irish immigrants who had emerged as strong sup-
porters of Thomas Jefferson and his Republican Party. The split
between the Federalists led by Alexander Hamilton and John
Adams and the Republicans led by Thomas Jefferson repre-
sented the beginnings of the American party system. The
Federalists drew their political strength from wealthy merchants
and landowners. These groups could easily be outnumbered in
time by newly arriving immigrants. The three alien laws
extended the period required to obtain citizenship from five to
fourteen years, permitted detention of aliens without cause, and
allowed the U.S. president to expel aliens.
The clandestine collection of information to further national
security interests continued at a measured pace up until the Civil
War. One area to which it made a significant contribution was the
exploration of the trans–Mississippi West. In 1832, for example,
Captain Benjamin Bonneville took a leave from the War Depart-
ment to pose as a fur trapper and explore the continental United
States all the way to the Pacific Ocean. Decades earlier, Captain
Meriwether Lewis and Lieutenant William Clark had undertaken
their famous expedition to the Pacific. The trip was officially
described as a commercial expedition, but President Thomas
Jefferson also entrusted Lewis and Clark with the task of bringing
back basic intelligence about the region, including the economic
and military activities of the Indians they encountered along the
way.
Two wars punctuated this time period; espionage played a
minimal role in each. The War of 1812 saw no organized
American efforts directed at secretly collecting information about
the British; American intelligence was as unprepared for war as
the rest of the country. The United States possessed little intelli-
gence of merit on the state of British forces in Canada and little
4
Espionage in the United States

basic intelligence about Canada itself. The most notable espi-
onage activities during the War of 1812 were carried out by
pirates who were allied with the United States. They reported on
British naval movements throughout the Gulf coast and West
Indies. This general lack of American intelligence preparedness
stood in contrast to British capabilities. The British had continued
their intelligence collection efforts in the United States after the
American Revolution.
Organized spying also played only a minor role in the Mex-
ican War. In part this was due to the absence of any concrete war
plans. Without such plans military intelligence could not be effec-
tively tasked to collect information. Also, General Zachary Taylor
simply did not value intelligence. During the war, intelligence
was collected on an ad hoc basis, with American military officials
relying upon non-Americans to conduct espionage. Bands of out-
laws were recruited at a base pay of  $2 per day. Although their loy-
alty was suspect, as many as 200 such bandits were recruited
(Ameringer 1990).
The Civil War 
American espionage in the Civil War continued to focus on the
actions of individuals rather than organizations. For the North, the
first leading force in intelligence work was Allan Pinkerton, who
founded the Pinkerton Detective Service in 1850. Pinkerton was
hired by President Abraham Lincoln to evaluate the state of the
North’s security, and he later joined General George McClellan’s
staff. Not surprisingly given his background, Pinkerton was far
more successful at counterespionage than he was at producing
analytical intelligence for McClellan. One of his most successful
spy catching efforts was the arrest of Rose O’Neal Greenhow, a
Confederate agent in Washington, D.C., whose spy ring Pinkerton
infiltrated. Her information sources included antislavery North-
ern senators, foreign diplomats, bankers, doctors, and house-
wives. The North also had its spies. One of the most successful
was Elizabeth Van Lew, who lived in Richmond, Virginia. One of
her agents was a servant in the home of Jefferson Davis, president
of the Confederacy, and her home often served as temporary quar-
ters for visiting military officers.
Also notable in the history of Civil War espionage were the
actions of Lafayette Baker. He engaged in espionage behind the
The Civil War
5

Confederate lines in the first year of the war. When his true
intentions became suspect by Confederate officials, he fled to
Washington, D.C., where he was put in charge of a new Secret
Service Bureau. By all accounts Baker was an intolerant individ-
ual who abused his newfound power. In his hunt for enemy
spies he adopted brutal interrogation techniques and built a
large network of informers and secret agents. Thousands of sus-
pected Confederate spies were arrested and sent to prison by
Baker. In defending his actions Baker asserted that “my duties
are hard to define . . . [they] are to obey the Secretary of War in
looking after the interests of the Government, arresting disloyal
persons, . . . and other duties which I cannot enumerate” (Corson
1977, 540). Baker’s outlook on spy catching as an activity carried
out according to rules of war rather than peace, and his sense of
commitment to a set of values that transcended democratic pro-
cedures, foreshadowed the outlook of future generations of
American spy catchers.
Perhaps more so than with any other conflict in the United
States’s past, the American Civil War has been engulfed in an
espionage mythology that makes it difficult to distinguish fact
from fiction in assessing the impact made by spies and spy catch-
ers. For example, on the spy side, both the efforts of Pinkerton
and Greenhow have been reinterpreted. Pinkerton is generally
condemned for his constant overstatement of Confederate troop
strength, suggesting not only a failure in analysis but also in espi-
onage and data collection. When Lee’s army numbered 80,000,
Pinkerton placed it at 200,000. It is now suggested that Pinker-
ton’s estimates may in fact have been tailored to the needs of
General McClellan, who displayed a consistent unwillingness to
engage Confederate forces. In modern parlance this would be
referred to as producing “intelligence to please,” and though it
represents a failing of intelligence, it is not a failing of espionage.
At the other extreme, it is now argued that Greenhow’s contri-
butions have been overrated. She is credited with having pro-
vided Confederate forces with key information on Union
strategy prior to the First Battle of Bull Run. Historians now
doubt that was the case because the timing of events would have
required her to know the details of these plans before the Union
army had formulated them. Regarding the spy catchers, both
Pinkerton and Baker referred to their organizations as “the Secret
Service” (as this book did above), but in reality neither of their
spy catching organizations had official bureaucratic titles. The
6
Espionage in the United States

U.S. Secret Service was not created until 1865, after the Civil War,
without the help of either Pinkerton or Baker (Fishel 1996).
The establishment of the Secret Service actually had little to
do with espionage. It was established in 1865 with the assigned
mission of suppressing the spread of counterfeit currency. It was
for this reason that the Secret Service organizationally was placed
in the Treasury Department. By the end of the Civil War, some-
where between one-third and one-half of currency circulating in
the United States was counterfeit. Two years later, its mission was
expanded to include “detecting persons perpetuating frauds
against the government.” Under this mandate the Secret Service
has investigated the Ku Klux Klan, land-fraud schemes, and the
Teapot Dome oil scandal. This broadened mission statement also
provides the grounds for engaging in counterespionage activities.
Following the assassination of President William McKinley in
1901, the Secret Service was also tasked with the responsibility of
protecting the president. Protection of the White House first took
place during the Civil War when the “Bucket Brigade,” composed
of members of the 150th Regiment of the Pennsylvania Volunteers
and members of the Washington police force, had this responsi-
bility. A White House police force was established in 1922 by
President Warren Harding. It was placed under the supervision
of the Secret Service in 1930.
World War I and the Interwar Years
Espionage from World War I through the interwar years began to
take on a permanent organizational form, but the activities of indi-
viduals continued to be crucial to its historical development. One
such individual was Major General Ralph H. Van Deman.
Overcoming the anti-intelligence bias of Army Chief of Staff
General Hugh Scott, Van Deman successfully lobbied for the cre-
ation of a Military Intelligence Section during World War I. In
rejecting the need for a special intelligence unit with the military,
Scott shared the prevailing organizational wisdom that intelligence
was not central to success on the battlefield. Scott went so far as to
assert that since the British and French military had intelligence
units, there was no need for an independent American capability.
The United States, he affirmed, could simply ask for that intelli-
gence to be given to it. William Corson suggests that in challenging
this denigration of the value of intelligence, Van Deman was acting
World War I and the Interwar Years
7

much as Martin Luther did in challenging the teachings of the
Catholic Church (Corson 1977, 48). After the war it would become
the Military Intelligence Division. Van Deman’s view of intelli-
gence included information gathering, espionage, and counteres-
pionage activities. His success in creating an organizational basis
for combining these different aspects of intelligence into a coherent
whole has earned Van Deman the title “Father of American Mili-
tary Intelligence” (Corson 1977, 53). Van Deman also saw the intel-
ligence problem in all of its dimensions as one transcending the
dividing line between foreign and domestic policy.
This view of intelligence, and especially of espionage, became
a defining feature of the interwar period. In 1917 the attorney gen-
eral encouraged the organization of private volunteer citizen
groups to uncover disloyalty. Singled out for high praise in the
report was the American Protective League (APL). In search of
traitors and spies, the APL infiltrated anarchist groups and leftist
labor groups such as the International Workers of the World. Once
these perceived threats had been squelched, the APL directed its
attention to draft evaders.
Once the war ended a concern for countering foreign espi-
onage remained. This fear exploded onto the political scene with
the Red Scare of 1919–1920. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer
announced that the United States was being consumed by a
“blaze of revolution.” He placed J. Edgar Hoover in charge of a
newly created General Intelligence Division within the Bureau of
Investigation with orders to compile a listing of radical organiza-
tions and individuals. Palmer’s raids of January 2, 1920, resulted
in the arrest of practically every leader of the American Com-
munist Party or allied labor organization. Often carried out with-
out warrants, these raids resulted in many innocent people being
arrested and also resulted in a public outcry over their excesses.
One technological espionage achievement of note occurred
during World War I. In 1917 in anticipation of beginning a policy
of unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, Germany
secretly contacted Mexico with an offer of alliance. American ves-
sels approaching Great Britain would be targeted as part of this
policy, and it was expected that the United States might be pro-
voked into war. Mexico was offered the return of territory it had
lost in the Mexican War for entering into an alliance with
Germany. British authorities intercepted the message as it was
relayed from the German embassy in the United States to the one
Mexico. The British passed the document on to American military
8
Espionage in the United States

intelligence. The release of this Zimmermann Telegram by the
Wilson administration fueled anti-German and pro-war senti-
ments in the United States. The content of the Zimmermann Tele-
gram was also released in such a fashion as to protect the fact that
the British had broken the German code. They key accomplish-
ment in producing the Zimmermann telegram was breaking the
German code. Breaking the German code was the result of a mar-
riage of intelligence analysis and technology since the encoding
of messages is entrusted to machines that generate the codes, and
these machines must be duplicated if the code is to be cracked.
The success was also made possible in large part by the fact that
the British had severed most undersea cables, thus forcing the
Germans to send messages through cables that passed through
British territory or by wireless methods. This permitted the
British to have almost unfettered access to German communica-
tions, providing them with a large database to use in attacking the
German code.
World War II
Espionage and counterespionage moved forward in three direc-
tions during World War II. One involved creating the Office of
Strategic Services (OSS). In 1941 President Franklin Roosevelt put
in place the forerunner of the OSS when he created the post of
Coordinator of Information (COI) and tabbed William “Wild Bill”
Donovan for the position. He authorized Donovan to collect and
analyze information and gave him the informal authority to
engage in espionage. Once the United States entered World War II,
Roosevelt expanded on the COI and through an executive order
established the OSS. It was formally charged with collecting and
analyzing information and carrying out special duties. This mar-
riage of intelligence analysis, covert operations, and espionage
provided a rough blueprint for the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) that came into existence after the war (Dunlop 1982).
Although Roosevelt officially created the OSS and Donovan
had lobbied for its establishment, the OSS actually was created
with a great deal of covert help from Great Britain. The British
recognized that success in World War II would depend heavily
on close cooperation between the two governments. A major
impediment standing in the way of such cooperation was the
absence of any centralized institutions within the United States
World War II
9

for prosecuting the war effort. One need lay in the area of mili-
tary coordination. The British possessed a centralized military
command structure, but the United States did not. To address
this void, Roosevelt established the Joint Chiefs of Staff that
brought together army, army air force, and navy officers. A sec-
ond gap existed in the area of intelligence gathering and covert
operations. Again, the British possessed such organizations, but
the United States did not. Intelligence, such that it existed, was
divided among several different organizations. Creating a cen-
tral intelligence organization in the United States was further
complicated by the American de-emphasis of intelligence that
has already been noted. These considerations led the British to
employ a clandestine strategy to accomplish the goal of creating
an American central intelligence organization.
The guiding British force behind the creation of the OSS was
Sir William Stephenson, who was a chief British espionage agent
in New York. Stephenson had initially hoped to work with the
FBI and J. Edgar Hoover, but that relationship did not develop
largely due to Hoover’s intransigence. Stephenson then identi-
fied Donovan as the person he would work with to promote the
British vision of a central intelligence organization in the United
States. Donovan was experienced in intelligence but lacked offi-
cial standing in the Roosevelt administration. Roosevelt’s personal
intelligence envoy to Europe, there Donovan met Stephenson who
helped him form his views on intelligence.
Donovan created two branches within the OSS to carry out
espionage-related tasks. The Secret Intelligence Branch (SI) con-
ducted espionage. Stations were set up in Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Portugal, Spain, and Vichy France. General Douglas
MacArthur succeeded in keeping the OSS out of Asia, where he
was the commanding military officer and jealously guarded his
dominance in the Pacific war theater. Likewise, J. Edgar Hoover,
now head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, was able to
keep the OSS out of Latin America, an area it claimed exclusive
jurisdiction over. The FBI was established in President Theodore
Roosevelt’s administration in 1908 by Attorney General Charles
Bonaparte as a force of Special Agents. Their creation is best
understood in the context of the Progressive movement of the
times that sought to replace a government of special favors and
political payoffs with one rooted in professionalism, expertise,
and efficiency. These agents and their support staff became the
10
Espionage in the United States

Bureau of Investigation in 1909. By law, the OSS was not to oper-
ate inside the United States. The Spanish OSS station ran more
than 1,000 agents into France in addition to carrying out espi-
onage in neutral Spain. One of the most successful SI station
chiefs was Allen Dulles who would become a future head of the
Central Intelligence Agency. One of Dulles’s agents was Fritz
Kobel who worked in the German foreign office and delivered
more than 1,600 diplomatic cables. Spy catching was the prov-
ince of the Counterespionage (X-2) Branch. Accounts suggest
that the OSS station in Sweden ran double agents that resulted
in the neutralization of over 150 German agents (Karalekas
1977).
The second direction in which espionage made great advances
involved the use of technology as a means of spying on the
enemy. Logically, breakthroughs in cryptanalysis, the breaking of
codes and ciphers, followed breakthroughs in the technology that
governments used to communicate with their diplomats, military
officers, and spies that were stationed abroad. The first great fig-
ure in American cryptanalysis was Herbert Yardley, who was
recruited by Van Deman to join his Military Intelligence Division.
After World War I Yardley set up an operation in New York to
break the codes used by foreign governments. An agreement with
Western Union and one with Postal Telegraph gave him illegal
access to these communications. Yardley’s Black Chamber, as his
operation came to be known, succeeded in breaking the codes of
Argentina, China, Cuba, Great Britain, France, Germany, Japan,
and others before it was shut down in 1929 because, according to
Secretary of State Henry Stimson, “gentlemen do not read each
other’s mail.”
The value of reading each other’s mail became apparent dur-
ing World War II as the United States and its Allies experienced
two great triumphs in cryptanalysis. The first involved the war
with Japan. Codenamed MAGIC, this effort allowed the United
States to read key diplomatic traffic between the government of
Japan and its embassies. Tightly held within Washington policy-
making circles, the information provided by MAGIC did not pre-
vent the Pearl Harbor attack. Once the Unites States entered the
war, MAGIC was expanded to include Japanese naval codes.
Information provided by MAGIC to Admiral Chester Nimitz
proved to be invaluable in defeating the Japanese navy at the bat-
tle of Midway. The second cryptanalytic triumph was realized by
World War II
11

the British, who successfully solved one of Germany’s key cipher
machines. Codenamed ULTRA, it provided the Allies with key
information regarding German land, sea, and air campaigns in
Europe and North Africa (Kahn 1967).
The third direction in which espionage moved forward
involved increased counterespionage activities inside the United
States. During 1942 the FBI uncovered three major espionage
rings. One involved a group of eight saboteurs recruited and led
by George John Dasch. His handler was Lieutenant Walter Kappe
of German intelligence. One group of four landed on Long Island
on June 13, 1942, and the other landed in Florida on June 17. They
were to bring the war onto American soil and thereby demoralize
and intimidate the United States. By June 27 all eight saboteurs
were under arrest before they could carry out any part of their
mission. One was sentenced to life imprisonment, one was sen-
tenced to thirty years, and six received a death penalty that was
carried out within days.
The second espionage ring was uncovered by the FBI that
month. On June 10, 1942, three individuals were indicted for con-
spiracy to violate the Espionage Act. At the center of this con-
spiracy was Count Anastase Andreievitch Vonsiatsky, the self-
proclaimed führer of American fascism. Evidence indicates that
at no time did these three individuals actually make contact with
German agents or pass intelligence to them. Vonsiatsky received
a five-year prison term and was fined $5,000.
The third espionage ring involved thirty-three members and
was headed by Frederick Joubert Duquesne. On January 2, 1942,
the members of this ring were sentenced to a total of more than
300 years in prison. Duquesne was a naturalized American citizen
born in South Africa. Much of the information that he obtained
and tried to pass on to Germany involved industrial and techno-
logical matters; he acquired the information through correspon-
dence with American business concerns in which he pretended to
be a student. The key to uncovering the espionage ring was
William Sebold, a German-born naturalized American citizen. On
a trip to Germany Sebold was approached by Nazi intelligence
and was asked to spy against the United States. Sebold quickly
informed American authorities of this, and he agreed to serve as
a double agent.
12
Espionage in the United States

The Cold War
America on the Defense
The OSS was disbanded with the end of World War II and its var-
ious functions distributed among existing intelligence agencies
spread through the foreign affairs agencies and military bureau-
cracy. It was not until 1947 that the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) was established. It should be stressed, however, that this
centralization of intelligence was incomplete in may respects.
Although the head of the CIA, the Director of Central Intelligence
(DCI), was also the head of the intelligence community, he pos-
sessed only limited budgetary powers over other bureaucracies.
Furthermore, different agencies took different approaches to intel-
ligence issues. For the CIA, counterespionage involved protecting
secrets. For the FBI, it entailed catching spies so they could be
prosecuted for violating the law. This difference in perspective
would become a major source of friction between the two agen-
cies throughout the Cold War.
All of the historical trends outlined to this point accelerated as
the Cold War era unfolded. Quantum leaps were made in the area
of espionage through technological means. The launching point
for many of these efforts was the 1954 report of the Killian
Committee. Charged with suggesting ways for monitoring Soviet
military capabilities, this committee recommended the develop-
ment of a high-speed plane equipped with a high-definition cam-
era. Seventeen months after government approval was given, the
U-2 was operational, and nine months later the first U-2 flight was
taking pictures of targets in the Soviet Union. U-2 flights ended
after the May 1960 downing of the plane piloted by Francis Gary
Powers. At first the United States denied Soviet accusations that it
was spying, but President Dwight Eisenhower was forced to
acknowledge U.S. actions after the Soviets captured Powers. The
accompanying diplomatic fallout caused the collapse of a sched-
uled summit meeting between Eisenhower and Soviet leader
Nikita Khrushchev in Paris. The Francis Gary Powers incident
also heightened ongoing interest in space surveillance as an alter-
native to overhead reconnaissance. Responsibility for managing
satellite reconnaissance was given to the National Reconnaissance
Office (NRO). Created in 1960 by an executive order, it remains
one of the most secret U.S. intelligence organizations. Its existence
was not even acknowledged until 1973 (Andrew 1995).
The Cold War
13

A second area of technological espionage centered on the
acquisition of signals intelligence. The lead intelligence organiza-
tion here was the National Security Agency (NSA). Secretly cre-
ated in 1952, its existence was not officially acknowledged until
1957. Signals intelligence (SIGINT) involves several different
types of activities. One form of signals intelligence involves
eavesdropping on secure conversations between diplomats, mili-
tary officials, and political leaders. A second form involves inter-
cepting data being relayed by weapons during tests or spy
satellites. Finally, it can refer to electronic emissions given off by
weapons and tracking systems. One of the most successful SIG-
INT satellites was Rhyolite. Its primary mission was intercepting
telemetry from Soviet missile tests. It was also capable of simul-
taneously transmitting 11,000 two-way telephone conversations.
The Rhyolite program was compromised in 1975 when Christo-
pher Boyce and Andrew Lee provided the Soviet Union with
information about its technological capabilities. In 1995 the CIA
released SIGINT intercepts from project VENONA. Project VENONA
was set up secretly in February 1943 by the U.S. Army Signals
Intelligence Service, the predecessor of the National Security
Agency. Its mission was to intercept and analyze Soviet diplo-
matic communications. The SIGINT intercepts played a central
role in identifying Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, Klaus Fuchs, and
Alger Hiss as Soviet spies. Along with others (more than 100 indi-
viduals, according to one informant), they constituted a Soviet
“atom spy” ring that penetrated the Manhattan Project and
passed secret information about the atomic bomb to the Soviets
(Romerstein and Breindel 2000).
Spy catching efforts continued to be directed both at foreign
threats to U.S. security and at suspected domestic threats. The
most famous spy catchers of the Cold War were James Angleton,
J. Edgar Hoover, and Senator Joseph McCarthy. McCarthyism
burst onto the U.S. political scene on February 9, 1950. On that
date in Wheeling, West Virginia, Senator McCarthy gave a speech
in which he claimed to have a list of 205 names “that were known
to the secretary of state as being members of the communist party
and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the
State Department.” McCarthy’s charges were never documented,
but his speech set off a nationwide search for communists and
communist sympathizers within the government and in posi-
tions of influence throughout American society. The most politi-
cally charged investigation was into the activities of former State
14
Espionage in the United States

Department employee Alger Hiss. Two weeks before McCarthy’s
speech, Hiss had been convicted of perjury for having denied that
he passed secret material to Whittaker Chambers, a communist
agent.
In 1953 McCarthy became chair of the Permanent Subcom-
mittee on Investigations of Government Operations. He de-
manded positive loyalty oaths from State Department personnel
and ran background checks on them that involved the use of lie
detectors and phone taps. Almost 200 individuals were identi-
fied as security risks and were fired as a result of these investi-
gations. In 1954 McCarthy turned his attention on the U.S. Army.
McCarthy’s attack on the army proved to be his undoing, as a
coalition of political forces soon mobilized against him.
The Rosenberg and Hiss cases provide two powerful stories
that illustrate just how differently espionage can be uncovered.
The Rosenberg case involved spying during World War II that
resulted in atomic secrets being passed on to the Soviet Union
from the Los Alamos Laboratories, where work on the American
atomic bomb was being conducted. The trial and execution of the
Rosenbergs were politically charged events that brought forward
protests from around the world as both Rosenbergs maintained
their innocence. The first piece of evidence in the case surfaced in
1944–1945 when the FBI intercepted coded messages between the
Soviet consulate in New York City and Soviet intelligence in
Russia. Because the FBI lacked the ability to break the code, noth-
ing came of this intercept for some two years. In 1947, however,
with the help of the Army Security Agency, the FBI was able to
break the code, and it discovered the first evidence of an atomic
spy ring. The intercepted messages indicated that the Soviet
Union had managed to penetrate the British contingent of the
Manhattan Project. Armed with this information, a mole hunt
began that culminated in the 1949 arrest of Klaus Fuchs. The
intercepted communications also pointed to the existence of a
courier, whom the FBI came to suspect was Harry Gold. Fuchs
confirmed their suspicions, and Gold was arrested and pled
guilty. Gold then began to cooperate with the FBI and identified
David Greenglass as a Soviet spy at Los Alamos. Greenglass was
then arrested and began cooperating with the FBI in hopes of
receiving a more lenient sentence. Greenglass identified his sister
and her husband, Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, as having recruited
him as a Soviet spy. Greenglass, Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, and
Morton Sobell, a fourth member of the atomic spy ring, were tried
The Cold War
15

together and found guilty in March–April 1951. It was primarily
on the basis of Greenglass’s testimony that the Rosenbergs were
convicted. Greenglass received a fifteen-year prison sentence.
Sobell was sentenced to thirty years’ imprisonment. Ethel and
Julius Rosenberg were sentenced to death. Gold received a thirty-
year prison sentence. Fuchs was arrested in Great Britain in 1950
and sentenced to prison. He remained in prison until 1959 when
he was released and went to East Germany.
The Hiss case evolved quite differently. Hiss was accused of
spying by Whittaker Chambers. Chambers, then an editor of
Time and himself a former communist spy, had sought for some
time to convince government officials that the State Department
had been penetrated by a spy ring in the 1930s. He finally suc-
ceeded in finding a sympathetic audience in 1948 when he testi-
fied before the House Un-American Activities Committee and
accused Hiss of being a communist. Hiss denied the charge, and
in the public and private exchanges that followed, Chambers
also alleged that Hiss had engaged in spying, and by implica-
tion now acknowledged that he, too, had spied. The most sen-
sational and damning evidence against Hiss consisted of
microfilms of papers that Chambers argued Hiss had given him.
They were hidden for safekeeping in hollowed-out pumpkins
on Chambers’s farm. Hiss continued to maintain his innocence
throughout the affair. Because of the statute of limitations, his
trial focused on the charge of perjury. He was convicted of two
counts and served forty-four months in prison. Chambers
escaped punishment of any kind in spite of the fact that he vir-
tually confessed to spying. He went on to enjoy a long career in
journalism and commented frequently on the political scene in
the United States.
In both the Rosenberg and Hiss cases the principal evi-
dence used to convict them of being spies was the testimony of
an acknowledged spy. Each trial also saw corroborating evi-
dence produced. In neither case were the defendants caught in
the act of spying. In the Rosenberg case the chain of accusations
and evidence was lengthy. In the Hiss case it consisted of the
testimony of one individual whose story changed over time
and had internal inconsistencies. In the public dimension both
cases also occurred against a backdrop of communist Cold War
victories and domestic political attempts to lay blame for these
developments.
16
Espionage in the United States

A key ally of the House Un-American Activities Committee
in its search for communist spies was J. Edgar Hoover, who can
properly be identified as the first expert on domestic commu-
nism. He rose to the position of director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation by virtue of his prosecution of anarchists, commu-
nists, and radicals during and after World War I. In the 1930s his
undercover investigations led to the arrest of key American Nazi
officials. Hoover’s key counterespionage initiative in the Cold
War era was the Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO).
Originally targeting the American Communist Party and designed
to carry out “dirty tricks” as much as it was to gather intelli-
gence on espionage activities, COINTELPRO’s operations were
expanded to include leftist groups such as the Black Panthers. All
totaled, between 1955 and 1975 the FBI conducted 740,000 inves-
tigations into subversive matters and 190,000 investigations into
extremist matters (Donner 1981).
The FBI was not alone in carrying out investigations of
Americans for possible security violations. In 1967 the CIA began
Operation CHAOS. It was designed to determine the extent to
which foreign governments and organizations were directing the
behavior of groups within the United States. Antiwar protest
groups were a particular concern. Over the course of five years
Operation CHAOS created 13,000 files and a computerized index
list of more than 300,000 people and organizations.
Most of the CIA’s interest in counterespionage, however, was
directed inward to its own operations. James Angleton was head
of the CIA’s counterintelligence operation. For a decade he was at
the center of a raging controversy within the CIA over the extent
to which it was penetrated by Soviet spies. Angleton’s principal
source of information was Anatoliy Golitsyn, who was a walk-in
defector to the United States in 1961 when he literally appeared
unannounced at the doorstep of the CIA station chief in Helsinki.
Walk-ins, those who volunteer their services as a spy without any
prior inducement from another intelligence service, are one type
of spy. Most commonly, spies are recruited by intelligence ser-
vices after a careful appraisal both of the potential information
they have to offer and the likelihood that they will be receptive to
such a proposal. The offer of money, appeals to an ideology or
cause, and blackmail are among the most frequently employed
recruitment tools. Golitsyn contended that the KGB had deeply
penetrated most Western intelligence agencies, including the
CIA. Although many doubted Golitsyn, Angleton was a firm
The Cold War
17

believer in the accuracy of his information. During the ensuing
counterintelligence investigation, no one was above suspicion.
Possible spies were dismissed or isolated within the CIA, and for
a time the Soviet bloc division was cut off from sensitive infor-
mation. No mole was found, but the CIA was wracked with self-
doubt, something Golitsyn’s detractors claimed was one of his
true goals (Martin 1980).
However, spies did exist in the United States’s national secu-
rity bureaucracy. This chapter will use the cases of Philip (Robert)
Hanssen, the Johnny Walker family spy ring, and Aldrich Ames
to illustrate the nature of the Cold War spy game. Respectively,
they were Soviet spies in the FBI, U.S. Navy, and CIA.
Philip (Robert) Hanssen
In February 2001, Philip (Robert) Hanssen, a twenty-seven-year
FBI veteran who specialized in counterintelligence, was arrested
and charged with having spied for Russia since 1985. (Hanssen,
as a double agent, used both the names Philip and Robert.) He
was the third FBI agent ever charged with espionage. The 109-
page affidavit released at the time and the indictment that fol-
lowed in May asserted that Hanssen had received some $600,000
in cash and diamonds along with $800,000 escrowed in Russian
bank accounts for his efforts. Included among the charges leveled
at Hanssen were fourteen that were punishable by death. Specific
charges against Hanssen included the following: in 1986 he told
Soviet officials that the United States was exploiting a weakness
in Soviet satellites to intercept transmissions. In 1988 he told them
about limitations in National Security Agency eavesdropping
technology that helped the Soviets protect their secrets. That
same year he also provided them with top secret documents
detailing an FBI list of defectors and recruits and a secret CIA
study of KGB recruitment. Hanssen was also charged with
betraying the identities of American intelligence sources operat-
ing secretly in Russia. The most important of these was Russian
Army General Dimitri Polyakov, who was subsequently executed
for treason. Hanssen turned over twenty-six computer disks and
more than 6,000 pages of documents to Soviet officials. In 1989 he
gave the Russians information about how the United States
planned to “ensure the continuity of the government in case of a
Soviet military attack.” He informed his Soviet contacts about the
existence of a secret tunnel that lay beneath the Soviet embassy in
Washington that was being used for electronic spying.
18
Espionage in the United States

Hanssen was excellently placed to spy on the United States
intelligence system. From 1987 to 1990 he was deputy chief of the
FBI’s Soviet Analytical Unit. He also served as a key supervisor in
a mid-1980s FBI domestic spying program that monitored the
activities of Americans thought to be Soviet spies. The principal
targets of these investigations were Americans involved in peace
protests and antinuclear activities. From 1995 until January 2001
Hanssen was on assignment from the FBI to the State Depart-
ment’s Office of Foreign Missions, which was responsible for
monitoring foreign diplomats. In that position Hanssen handled
requests from FBI counterterrorism officials about diplomats in
the United States from Libya, Syria, Iran, and other countries
believed to be sponsoring international terrorism.
The damage done by Hanssen’s spying is not easy to calcu-
late. Not all of this information was equally valuable. The tunnel
beneath the Soviet embassy, for example, was troubled by engi-
neering problems, so some U.S. government officials doubt that
any important information was ever obtained from it; also, the
tunnel had not been used for spying for many years. On the other
hand, Hanssen’s information was directly linked to the execu-
tions of KGB officers Sergey Motorin and Valeriy Martynov. Both
of these KGB officers were American spies, and their deaths
reduced the flow of information to the United States. Hanssen
also gave the Soviets key information that compromised the
investigation into the actions of Felix Bloch, a State Department
official who was under investigation for spying in the late 1980s.
Hanssen was arrested right after being videotaped leaving a
garbage bag of secret documents for his Russian controllers at a
dead drop site (a site whose location had been previously agreed
upon by coded communications). It was not an accident that
Hanssen was able to operate as a spy for as long as he did. In part,
he was helped by FBI standard operating procedures. Unlike the
CIA, which requires random lie detector tests of its employees,
the FBI has no such requirement. Hanssen also succeeded due to
the great lengths he took to protect his identity. He refused to
meet with his Russian controllers because he knew they would be
under surveillance. Instead, information was exchanged using
dead drops, in which codes were employed to establish the loca-
tions and dates of information exchanges. He refused to accept
KGB radio transmitters that could be used for arranging contact,
because they would immediately implicate him as a spy should
they be discovered. He frequently searched the FBI’s electronic
The Cold War
19

case file to determine whether it contained any references to him.
It is clear that over time Hanssen developed a strong psychologi-
cal bond with his Russian controllers. This type of relationship is
typical in espionage cases in which the spy leads a vulnerable and
solitary existence. In correspondence, he and his contacts fre-
quently addressed each other as “friend.”
Much remains unclear about the Hanssen case. A key issue is
why it took so long for the FBI to determine that Hanssen was a
spy. Part of the answer appears to lie in the reluctance of spy
catching agencies to believe that one of their own could be a spy
and in the low level of cooperation and trust that exists among
the members of the intelligence community. The FBI was con-
vinced that the source of the intelligence leak was within the CIA
and had actually identified Brian Kelly as the spy. Unfortunately,
it could not find any information that proved that Kelly was spy-
ing. In the end the FBI turned to the Russians for help. It con-
tacted a retired KGB official and set up a meeting. To their
astonishment, the KGB official had removed Hanssen’s case file
from KGB headquarters upon retiring. The FBI paid $7 million for
the file and agreed to bring the KGB official’s family to the United
States for protection. Included in the file was a tape recording that
contained Hanssen’s voice and some material that contained his
fingerprints (Wise 2002).
Hanssen pled guilty to spying as part of a deal to avoid the
death penalty. This type of plea bargain agreement is not unusual
in spy cases. From the prosecution’s point of view, accumulating
evidence against a spy is a time-consuming process, and there is
little incentive to make it public. Doing so risks revealing sensi-
tive sources of information and investigative techniques. It is
partly for this reason that, once detected, spies are often allowed
to continue in their places. Far more can be gained by following
their activities and hoping that it leads to other spies than by
arresting them and putting an end to their spying. The scale of
espionage in which Hanssen engaged and the damage done to
U.S. national security interests precluded him from being left in
his position. For the spy, a plea bargain often provides the only
escape from the death penalty. What the spy can offer in return
for a reduced sentence is his or her cooperation in helping gov-
ernment officials construct a complete picture of their activities.
Hanssen’s capture set in motion a chain reaction in the spy
game between Russia and the United States. Russian authorities
launched an aggressive investigation to determine who may have
20
Espionage in the United States

tipped off American authorities about Hanssen. Speculation at
the time of this writing centered on Sergei Tretyakov, who served
under diplomatic cover as a member of Russia’s mission to the
United Nations. Tretyakov defected to the United States in
October 2000 around the time when U.S. authorities got hold of
the KGB case file that ultimately led them to Hanssen. One month
after Hanssen was arrested, President George W. Bush expelled
fifty-two Russian diplomats in retaliation. Four were suspected
spies, who were given ten days to leave. Another forty-six were
given until July 1 to leave, and two others who had already left
were forbidden from returning to the United States. The next day,
Russia ordered four American diplomats to leave within days,
and another forty-six were ordered to leave by the summer
(Havill 2001).
The Johnny Walker Family
The second Cold War spy case discussed in this chapter involves
the activities of the Johnny Walker family spy ring. Shortly after
3:30 A.M. on May 20, 1985, FBI agents arrested John Walker at a
Ramada Inn in Rockville, Maryland. At 11:30 the next morning
FBI agents confronted Jerry Whitworth in California. At about
9:00 that evening, they confronted Arthur Walker, John’s brother,
at his home in Norfolk, Virginia. That same day Seaman Michael
Walker, John’s son, was placed into custody aboard the aircraft
carrier USS Nimitz. The arrests of these men would bring to an
end the operation of what some considered the most successful
Soviet spy ring of the Cold War.
John Walker was the head of the spy ring. He began spying
for the Soviet Union in 1968, apparently out of boredom and
depression over the state of his marriage and of his career as a
communications watch officer on the Norfolk staff of the com-
mander of submarine forces in the Atlantic. He was the classic
“walk-in” spy, appearing at the Soviet embassy in January of that
year and announcing that he wished to speak with someone from
security. To prove his seriousness and value to the Soviets, Walker
brought with him the key lists (lists of the formulas necessary to
break codes) for the past thirty days to the KL-47 cipher machine.
The heart of a cipher machine is a mathematical formula that
is used to transform a plain-text message into an encrypted one.
The logic is so sophisticated that there is no one-to-one corre-
spondence between a real letter and the letter that appears in the
encrypted text. That is, no single letter will represent the letter o
The Cold War
21

throughout the encrypted text. To further ensure the security of
the communication system, a key is required to read the
encrypted message. The key is a single-use card that is used to
engage the cipher machine. In essence it sets the starting point for
the mathematical formula. Keys are changed every twenty-four
hours. The KGB recognized the potential value of the information
Walker was peddling. Walker told them he could also provide
complete data for the KRW-37 cipher system (the primary system
used to communicate with U.S. submarines and naval forces in
Europe) and other cipher machines. Additionally, he said he
could provide copies of secret messages sent to submarines and
ships in the Atlantic. For his efforts Walker wanted to be paid
$1,000 per week. The meeting ended with Walker receiving $2,000
or $3,000 (it is unknown what amount he received because
Walker simply did not remember what amount it was) and
instructions for a meeting in February.
In February Walker flew to Washington National Airport
from Norfolk to meet with a KGB officer. Without even inspecting
the material Walker delivered, the Soviets gave him $5,000. They
also informed him that this would be the last face-to-face meeting
he would have with them. From then on, dead drops would be
used, and he was given an elaborate signaling system that required
him to go to six different locations before dropping off his mate-
rial. Every few weeks Walker returned to the Washington, D.C.,
area to deliver information. The volume and quality of the infor-
mation apparently overwhelmed the Soviets, who soon instructed
Walker to only make deliveries once every few months.
For the next two years, Walker provided the Soviet Union
with information that, for all practical purposes, allowed them
to read all messages to and from American submarines and sup-
porting ships. In 1970 Walker was transferred by the navy to San
Diego. With this transfer the quality of his information deterio-
rated. The quality of information improved, however, with his
next transfer, which was to the USS Niagara Falls, a supply ship.
This was an ideal platform from which to conduct espionage, as
it had to communicate with a wide range of naval vessels and
therefore had access to the codes used by all of them. Walker
was the naval officer responsible for guarding all cryptographic
material. Two or three times per year Walker dropped material
off to his Soviet controllers. Especially valuable to the Soviets
was information about the operational plans for the Atlantic
22
Espionage in the United States

fleet as well as the radio frequencies they would use to commu-
nicate.
The KGB did not want Walker to recruit other spies but did
ask him to identify potential spies. Acting against KGB instruc-
tions, Walker recruited Jerry Whitworth and began his own spy
ring. The two first met in February 1971. Whitworth was work-
ing in a communications training laboratory, and Walker was
his supervisor. They parted ways and did not meet again until
Walker made contact with him in 1974. By then, Walker had
been given orders transferring him from the USS Niagara Falls.
Walker feared he would loose access to the cryptographic data
he was giving the Russians. With the promise of money (Walker
promised perhaps a couple thousand dollars a month) he con-
vinced Whitworth to reenlist in the navy, obtain a position in
communications, and deliver information to him. Whitworth
accepted Walker’s offer and began supplying him with infor-
mation. In July 1978 Whitworth received $24,000 from Walker
for his efforts. In a stunning turn of events, Whitworth was then
transferred to the Niagara Falls, where he took up duty as the
Communications Materials Systems custodian, Walker’s old job.
In September Whitworth made what he described as the most
significant single delivery of his spy career: he provided the
Soviet Union with the complete diagrams for several cipher
machines along with keys for ships deployed in the Pacific. In
May 1980 he received a payment of $100,000 from Walker. In
June the payment was $120,000, and in September it was
$60,000. In each case Walker reserved a similar amount for him-
self. Around this time Whitworth began expressing doubts
about continuing as a spy. Walker now recruited his son,
Michael, into his spy ring in order to replace Whitworth in case
he quit. Walker’s concerns about Whitworth quitting were
proven to be well founded: in October 1983 Whitworth retired
from the navy with no warning. In April John Walker gave
Michael $1,000 for material he stole. Michael joined the navy in
December 1982. He began a tour of duty aboard the USS Nimitz
in January 1984 where he stole documents for his father. In
October Michael was transferred to the Operations Admin-
istrations Office where he obtained access for the first time to
secret information. Though he continued to gather information
until his arrest, this would be the only payment he would
receive. Arthur Walker, John’s brother, was also recruited into
the spy ring.
The Cold War
23

Walker’s activities as a spy and spy master went unnoticed
for more than fifteen years although signs abounded that the U.S.
communication system has been compromised. The problem was
that these separate warning signs were never brought together at
a single place or before a single individual who could see an
emerging pattern. It was a phone call from Barbara Walker, by
then John’s ex-wife, to the FBI on November 17, 1984, that
marked the beginning of the end for the Walker spy ring. Barbara
Walker had known about Walker’s spying since 1968, almost
from the beginning. She was supported and prompted into mak-
ing the phone call by their daughter, Laura, whom Walker had
also tried to recruit as a spy in 1982. Barbara’s phone call led to
her being interviewed by FBI officials but little else. Eventually,
though, the FBI acted on the information. After six weeks of elec-
tronic surveillance that produced no leads, FBI agents received a
break when, on May 17, 1985, Walker indicated that he could not
attend the funeral of a relative he was particularly close to.
Physical surveillance of Walker on May 19 led the FBI from
Norfolk to the Washington, D.C., area where Walker attempted to
drop information to his Soviet handlers. That drop was inter-
cepted by the FBI, and early the next morning Walker was
arrested.
In the final analysis, the FBI’s case against Whitworth was
based largely on circumstantial evidence. The information confis-
cated from Walker when he was captured was stolen from the FBI
by his son, so the key to a conviction lay in getting John Walker to
testify against Whitworth. Walker agreed to testify against
Whitworth in hopes of getting a reduced sentence for his son.
Whitworth’s trial began on March 6, 1986, and ended on July 24.
Found guilty by the jury, Whitworth was sentenced to 365 years
in prison and fined $410,000. Michael Walker was sentenced to
twenty-five years in prison (Barron 1987).
Aldrich Ames
The third Cold War case of espionage involves the activities of
Aldrich Ames. His spying activities for the Soviet Union are
widely considered to be the single most damaging breach of secu-
rity in the CIA’s history, costing at least ten agents their lives and
compromising more than fifty-five intelligence operations over
nearly a decade.
On the morning of February 21, 1994, Aldrich Ames received
an unexpected phone call asking him to come to CIA headquar-
24
Espionage in the United States

ters where he worked. Ames was set to depart for Moscow the
next day to represent the CIA in a meeting with the Russian
Federal Security Service, one of the successor intelligence organi-
zations to the KGB following the fall of the Soviet Union. Ames
drove away from his $540,000 home in his $40,000 Jaguar. About
one and one-half blocks from his house, Ames’s car was stopped
and surrounded by FBI agents, who placed him under arrest for
violating U.S. espionage statutes. Simultaneously, they sur-
rounded his home and arrested his wife, Rosario, for espionage.
Ames began working in the CIA’s Directorate of Operations
in 1968. His first overseas posting came in 1969 with his assign-
ment to Ankara, Turkey. His job was to recruit communist intelli-
gence officials and diplomats as spies. He did not excel in this
capacity. His performance evaluation states that Ames was
“unsuited for field work and should spend the remainder of his
career at Headquarters.” Ames returned to Washington, D.C., in
1972. In the first of many surprising turns of events Ames was
promoted in 1976 to serve in New York in the CIA’s Foreign
Resources Division office, which was in charge of operations
against foreign targets. Ames’s next posting took him to Mexico
City, where he stayed from 1981 until 1983. As in Ankara, he was
supposed to recruit Soviet diplomats as spies. Once again he
received low performance evaluations. On the personal side,
Ames’s life was entering a turbulent period. His marriage was
failing and he was becoming a heavy drinker, something noted in
his performance evaluations.
Instead of his career stalling, as one might expect given his
poor performance evaluations, Ames’s next assignment was a
prized position. He became head of the Soviet branch of the coun-
terintelligence group at CIA headquarters. In this capacity he had
access to highly secret information regarding CIA operations
against Soviet intelligence agencies outside of the Soviet Union,
and he supervised CIA assets inside the Soviet Union. One of the
most important duties Ames was responsible for in his new posi-
tion was to identify possible Soviet spies, or moles, within the
CIA. Ames was appointed to this position on the recommenda-
tion of someone who had supervised him in New York. His poor
performance evaluation in Mexico City was not given great
weight, and his drinking problem was unknown to those who
selected him and approved his appointment, despite the fact that
his drinking problem was recorded in his evaluation. (The failure
of officials in one part of the CIA to inquire about information
The Cold War
25

held by other sections is a reoccurring theme in the literature on
the intelligence community.)
In September 1984 Nancy Ames filed for divorce. The settle-
ment left Aldrich Ames, who was now living with Rosario Casas
Dupuy, facing what he perceived to be a significant debt that
embarrassed him. It was to escape this debt that Ames later
claimed he turned to espionage. On April 16, 1985, Ames walked
into the Soviet embassy and presented the guard with a letter
addressed to the resident KGB officer. The letter Ames gave to
embassy officials provided the Soviet Union with the descriptions
of two CIA moles operating within the Soviet embassy. Along
with those names, he provided the Soviets with information that
established his identity as chief of the Soviet counterintelligence
branch of the CIA. In return, Ames sought to be paid $50,000.
Realizing that he would have been observed entering the Soviet
embassy, Ames reported his visit to the Soviet embassy to the
CIA. To his superiors, he explained it as part of an effort to recruit
the embassy’s First Secretary Sergei Chuvakhin as a spy.
On May 15 Ames was contacted by the KGB and told he
would be paid his $50,000. The transaction took place two days
later. Ames later claimed that this was to have been a onetime act
of espionage, but in mid-June Ames provided the Soviet Union
with the identities of virtually all of the Soviet agents working for
the CIA and other intelligence services. He did so without
prompting from the Soviets and without demanding payment.
Ames simply walked out of CIA headquarters with between five
and seven pounds of cable traffic and other secret documents.
The KGB responded by indicating to Ames that it had put away
$2 million for him.
Among those whose files came across Ames’s desk were Lt.
Col. Valeriy Martynov, a KGB officer who began spying for the
United States in 1982; KGB Major Sergey Motorin; and General
Dimitri Polyakov of Soviet military intelligence. All three were
betrayed by Ames and were executed by the Soviets. Polyakov
had spied for the United States for twenty years and provided
important information on Soviet strategic missiles, chemical and
biological warfare programs, and nuclear strategy. Near the end
of his tour of duty in his post, Ames helped debrief Soviet defec-
tor Vitaly Yurchenko in August–September 1985. A senior KGB
official, Yurchenko was a walk-in defector who provided infor-
mation about two KGB penetrations into the U.S. intelligence
community. One operative was a CIA officer, Edward Lee
26
Espionage in the United States

Howard; the other, Ronald Pelton, worked for the National
Security Agency (NSA). Ames reported all of the information
given by Yurchenko to his KGB handlers. The CIA had known for
two years that Howard was a spy but had not informed the FBI.
He had been allowed to resign from the agency and now lived in
Santa Fe, New Mexico. Now aware of his activities, the FBI con-
fronted Howard, who eluded them and fled to Russia. Pelton was
caught after six months of intensive investigation. In a twist that
still causes a debate among intelligence officials, Yurchenko
defected back to the Soviet Union in November 1985.
From CIA headquarters, Ames’s next assignment took him to
Rome in 1986, where he served as Soviet branch chief. Before
leaving for Rome, Ames took and passed a polygraph test. He
was specifically asked if he had any unauthorized contact with
foreign intelligence officials or had disclosed classified informa-
tion. A CIA report describes his performance in Rome in these
terms: “he once again began to drink heavily . . . did little work,
sometimes slept at his desk in the afternoon, rarely initiated
developmental activity, and often fell behind in accounting.” In
Rome, Ames followed procedures he had initiated at CIA head-
quarters in spying for the Soviet Union. He simply walked out of
the embassy with secret material and literally gave shopping bags
full of secret material to his handlers in return for cash payments
that ranged from $20,000 to $50,000. So large were these pay-
ments that Ames deposited almost $1 million into two Swiss bank
accounts during his tour of duty. Near the end of his time in
Rome, Ames’s Soviet handlers provided him with a list of infor-
mation they wanted once he returned to CIA headquarters.
Included were the identities of CIA moles operating within Soviet
intelligence services and possible Soviet spy recruits within the
CIA. They also provided him with pictures of land in the Soviet
Union where his retirement dacha (a small summer house) would
be built. KGB payments continued to flow to Ames following his
return from Rome. In addition to his Swiss bank accounts in
Zurich, he had deposits in banks in Geneva, Bogota, and Rome as
well as eight investment accounts. In 1991 Ames deposited
$91,100 into his accounts. The following year he deposited
$187,000. All totaled, between 1985 and 1993 Rosario and Aldrich
Ames (they married in 1984) spent almost $1.4 million. By con-
trast, Ames’s yearly salary with the CIA was $69,843.
It did not take long for the Soviets to act on Ames’s informa-
tion. As the CIA report into the Ames affair observes, “in 1985 and
The Cold War
27

1986, it became increasingly clear to officials within the CIA that
the Agency was faced with a major CI problem. A significant
number of CIA Soviet sources began to be compromised, recalled
to the Soviet Union, and, in many cases, executed” (Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence, House of Representatives 1994,
14). It is still uncertain how many agents were compromised.
Published numbers run from some twenty agents up to nearly
fifty. Ames placed the number at twenty-five. At least ten are now
presumed to have been executed. The speed with which CIA
sources were disappearing was unusual. Under normal operating
procedures the KGB would not have moved so quickly on Ames’s
information for fear of drawing attention to him. The decision to
proceed appears to have been taken at the highest levels of the
Soviet system and reflects the dominance of political concerns in
the decision-making process.
The CIA was slow to react for several reasons. At first, the
losses of personnel were attributed to Edward Lee Howard. In
some instances this was correct: Howard’s information had
alerted the KGB to several CIA penetrations. However, by late
1985 it became clear that Howard did not possess information
concerning all of the CIA spies now being compromised.
Attention then shifted to the possibility that the losses were due
to bad luck, faulty practices and handling by CIA officers, or an
electronic penetration of CIA property or communications. It was
with great reluctance that still another possibility was embraced:
the CIA had been penetrated by a Soviet agent.
The CIA authorized a mole hunt in October 1986 when it set
up a Special Task Force. For about two years it focused on the
possibility of a communications breach. The FBI began its own
probe that month. The FBI probe ended in 1987. The CIA investi-
gation continued but at a reduced pace. The KGB also began a
concerted program of disinformation designed to protect Ames
by sending the investigation down false paths and dead ends.
Attention first began to center on Ames in late 1989 when a CIA
employee reported that Ames was living beyond his means. An
investigation into Ames’s finances discovered that he and Rosario
had paid cash for a $540,000 home upon their return from Rome.
It would be December 1990, however, before a formal request was
made that Ames be the subject of an investigation and a poly-
graph test administered. The information produced in this inves-
tigation was not shared with those conducting the polygraph test.
Ames passed the lie detector test.
28
Espionage in the United States

In April 1991 a joint CIA-FBI investigation was launched in
search of uncovering the Soviet mole. By August the CIA-FBI
team had identified 198 CIA employees with access to all of the
compromised cases. Twenty-nine individuals were identified as
leading suspects, with Ames numbered among them. A major
breakthrough occurred in late 1992 when investigators were able
to match dates of Ames’s meetings with Soviet officials with large
bank deposits on his part. The joint investigative team issued its
report in March 1993. It concluded that the CIA had been pene-
trated. The FBI formally opened an investigation that month. In
May it opened a case file on Ames, and he was placed under sur-
veillance. In June a wiretap was placed on his home phone, and
his CIA office was searched. There they found 144 secret docu-
ments and ten top secret documents, many of which were unre-
lated to his work. It was not until September, however, that the
FBI obtained conclusive proof that Ames was spying for the
Soviet Union. In his trash they found a Post-It note containing the
draft of a message to his Soviet handler regarding an upcoming
meeting. A surreptitious entry into his home that involved copy-
ing computer files produced more proof that Ames was an active
spy. Throughout the remainder of 1993 the FBI kept its distance
from Ames, hoping to catch him in the act. Unable to accomplish
this goal, they determined not to allow Ames to escape and flee
the country as Howard had done. The day before he was sched-
uled to leave for Moscow as part of a CIA team that would confer
on international narcotics trafficking with Russian internal secu-
rity officials, Ames was arrested.
A few months later, on April 28, 1994, Ames pled guilty to
espionage. Rosario did not have access to secret material and was
charged with being part of conspiracy to commit espionage. At
first she denied any knowledge of Ames’s spying activities but
later recanted. In return for cooperating with U.S. officials, Ames
received a life sentence with no possibility of parole, and Rosario
received a five-year sentence. In 1999 Ames unsuccessfully
sought to have his sentence reduced, saying he was surprised by
the extent of the espionage activities attributed to him. He
claimed his arrest was a way of putting off responsibility for intel-
ligence failures and compromises for which he was not truly
responsible (Wise 1995).
The Cold War
29

The United States on the Offensive
The Soviet Union did not have a monopoly on espionage during
the Cold War. A full accounting of espionage during these four
decades also requires recounting American efforts to spy on the
Soviet Union. The most important American spy of the Cold War
was KGB Colonel Oleg Penkovsky (his story will be more fully
recounted in chapter 3), but he was neither the first nor the last
American spy of note. The most important American spy in the
1950s was “Major B.” He was a walk-in who recruited himself in
Vienna on January 1, 1953, by handing a letter to an American
embassy official. Major B served in Soviet military intelligence
(GRU). He claimed he was motivated by ideological considera-
tions, but later it became clear that he was also involved in an
extramarital affair and needed money. Major B met with his CIA
handler once or twice per month for up to eight or nine hours at
a time. He was arrested in September 1959 shortly after he was
recalled to Moscow from Vienna. His case officer was arrested in
October after an emergency meeting was arranged, and Major B
was executed shortly after that. Major B provided technical infor-
mation on conventional weapons and Soviet tanks, detailed
orders of battle plans, and Soviet tactical missile systems.
In the mid 1970s another GRU officer approached the United
States in Algeria and offered his services as a spy. Colonel Anatoli
Filatov spied for the United Sates for fourteen months, providing
the American government with military and political secrets. He
continued to spy for the United States for about a year after his
transfer to Moscow. He was caught at a dead drop leaving mate-
rial for his CIA contact. He was sentenced to death, but his sen-
tence was commuted to fifteen years in prison as part of a spy
exchange in which two KGB agents captured in the United States
were sent to the Soviet Union. A second and controversial spy in
the 1970s was Alexsadr Ogorodnik. Depending upon what
account is accepted, he either was an ideologically motivated
walk-in or was entrapped in a compromising sexual relationship
and blackmailed. Recruited in Colombia, he began spying for the
CIA in 1974. He was later transferred back to Moscow and served
in the Foreign Ministry’s Global Affairs Department, where he
had access to secret documents containing Soviet evaluations of
international events and trends. It is unclear how much informa-
tion Ogorodnik had passed to the Americans by the time he came
under suspicion of espionage, and whether or not he was being
30
Espionage in the United States

used to pass inflammatory documents to the United States. All
accounts agree that he eventually committed suicide.
The most publicized spy penetration in the 1980s involved
A. G. Tolkachev, who was a staff member of one of Moscow’s
research institutes. He was caught in the act of passing secret
defense material to a CIA official who was serving undercover as
the second secretary of the American embassy. He was arrested in
June 1985 and executed. Tolkachev’s case is linked to Edward
Hunt. Hunt was a CIA official who was being trained to be
Tolkachev’s case officer in Moscow. He had been dismissed from
the CIA for failing a lie detector test that pointed to drug use and
petty theft. A Soviet spy, Hunt tipped the KGB off to Tolkachev
and then fled the United States. Tolkachev is credited with having
provided the United States with key information about Soviet
military aviation programs involving stealth technology and elec-
tronic guidance systems (Richelson 1987).
With World War II over and the Cold War beginning to heat
up, the realization gripped American officials that they had little
intelligence information on the Soviet Union. Gaps in their
knowledge extended down to the most basic features such as the
distribution and state of repair of road and railroad systems and
the location of bridges, factories, and airports. Information from
diplomats and military attachés in the American embassy was of
little value due to the secrecy of Soviet society and the travel and
living restrictions placed on these individuals by Soviet authori-
ties. As the United States tried to fill in the missing pieces, the ini-
tial source of their information was refugees and prisoners of war.
By 1948 these sources of information were drying up, and the CIA
faced the challenge of replacing them. The fear of war over Berlin
gave an urgency to the search for new sources of information. The
former German capital was a highly contested prize in the early
years of the Cold War. Divided into East and West occupation
zones, deep within Soviet-controlled East Germany, Berlin was
the site of U.S.-Soviet confrontations in 1948, 1958, and 1961.
Soviet control over all of Berlin would have given the Soviet
Union a significant psychological and political edge in the Cold
War competition in Europe by calling into question the American
commitment to defend its allies.
The answer hit upon was to secretly drop agents by plane
into the Soviet Union. The first mission took place on September
5, 1949. It took off from an airfield in the American zone of
Germany and dropped two Ukrainian nationals into the Soviet
The Cold War
31

Union. In the tradition of the OSS, their mission was to collect
information and to work with Ukranian resistance groups. Their
primary intelligence charge was to provide early warning of a
Soviet attack. For the next five years these intelligence drops
became a key element of the American espionage program.
Agents were recruited from among defectors, refugees, and
Soviet citizens living in the West. Preparation for these missions
was time-consuming. Proper documents had to be forged in
order to legitimize these agents to the Soviet police and other offi-
cials. The individuals had to learn the details of their legends, or
fictional lives, in the smallest detail. They had to learn key fea-
tures of their new careers such as being able to correctly identify
planes; learn how to send and receive secret radio messages as
well as put together, repair, and dismantle a transceiver; and learn
to take photographs with cameras that were disguised as ciga-
rette lighters. In all, the training took ten months. One such agent
whose career has been documented reported for thirteen months
before going silent. He sent five radio messages and three letters
containing secret writings. Secret writing was necessary, as it was
common practice for both the U.S. and Soviet intelligence agen-
cies to open mail going in and out of the Soviet Union. Agents
often relied on letters rather than radios to transmit information
so as not to call attention to themselves. Although this helped
protect their identities, it also worked against providing early
warning about an attack. U-2 overflights began two years after
the last agent was dropped into the Soviet Union.
Beyond trying to penetrate the Soviet Union itself, the CIA
and other American intelligence organizations have sought to
penetrate the second and third circles of communist power. The
second circle consisted of the Soviet’s allies in Eastern Europe,
China, and North Korea. The third circle consisted of the Soviet
Union’s Third World allies. Before the Berlin Wall went up in
1961, a common stratagem was to provide an agent with false
documentation and a railway ticket into East Germany. From
there, American spies could readily fan out into regions under
Soviet domination and influence. A number of strategies were
employed to recruit spies. One method was to place a job
announcement in West Berlin newspapers and try and recruit
those who applied. A second approach was to simply ask defec-
tors and refugees if they knew of anyone who would be inter-
ested in spying. A third approach, and the least successful, was a
cold call in which someone would be approached to act as a spy
32
Espionage in the United States

without any prior indication of a willingness to do so on their
part. Reportedly, the agents who were recruited infiltrated high
party offices, economic ministries, police and militia offices, and
railway and postal services.
Throughout this process the Soviet Union engaged in a
campaign of counterespionage to ferret out spies. They infil-
trated refugee and émigré groups. These Soviet counterspies
would identify Western spies and also serve as conduits for false
information back to the West. Because of this, the value of intel-
ligence produced by these spies and those who had previously
been dropped into Soviet territory is considered to have been
minimal compared to the amount of effort that went into these
operations.
Following Stalin’s death a thaw occurred in U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions that resulted in an influx of tourists into the Soviet Union
and the freer movement of American citizens there. These tourists
became a ready source of intelligence for the United States. They
would be recruited and briefed on points of information that
were of interest to the intelligence community. Tourists pho-
tographed such things as Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM)
production facilities and deployment sites, the first Soviet nuclear
submarine, and the construction of a missile test range. The CIA
also began a major covert operation to obtain Soviet military equip-
ment, operating specifications, training manuals, and related mate-
rial. Their targets were not so much located inside the Soviet
Union as they were in recipient states where security was lax and
bribery easier. It is estimated that 90 percent of the Soviet military
equipment in the hands of the Pentagon in the 1960s came from
the CIA.
A principal target for penetration in third-circle countries
was the Communist Party. Two methods were followed in recruit-
ing someone to spy within the party. The first was by “seeding” a
young person into a party cell and guiding his or her career
upward. The second approach was to recruit an individual who
already held a high-ranking position. Of the two approaches, the
first was the easiest but often ended up being nonproductive
because the person’s career never developed as hoped for or the
individual changed his or her mind. The information produced
by spies in the third circle covered a wide variety of political mat-
ters. Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization speech to the Twentieth Party
Congress reportedly came to light this way, as did information
about the Sino-Soviet split (Rositzke 1977).
The Cold War
33

The Post–Cold War Period 
Just as the onset of the Cold War did not mark the beginning of
espionage by and against the United States, so its passing in 1989
did not mark the end of espionage. If anything, espionage in the
post–Cold War era is a more complex phenomenon and therefore
one more difficult to counter.
During the Cold War the United States concentrated its
national security resources on one enemy: the Soviet Union. Like-
wise, it had to protect its secrets from only one enemy. The end of
the Cold War reduced but did not eliminate the Russian security
threat. At the same time it elevated the challenges and threats
posed by other countries. As a consequence the United States
faces a situation in which prudence suggests that it must seek to
obtain information about the policies and capabilities of many
countries and it must protect its own secrets from a larger num-
ber of countries.
In addition, the national security agenda of countries has ex-
panded. Where once, questions of military capability and strategy
sat atop this agenda and dominated all others, today one is as likely
to find trade, monetary, scientific, and technology issues being con-
tested at the highest levels of government. Just as espionage served
to further the development of military policy in the Cold War, it has
the potential for advancing state policy in these areas as well.
The simultaneous expansion of the national security agenda
along with the expansion in the number of potential national secu-
rity threats have resulted in a blurring of the line between friend
and foe. Allies in some policy areas find themselves as competi-
tors in others, with the result that espionage is now often directed
at friends in these areas of competition. Spying on friends has
always occurred; one particularly controversial episode of Israeli
spying on the United States will be examined in chapter 3. Recent
revelations suggest either that this form of espionage is on the rise
or that states are devoting more resources to stopping it.
Evidence on the continued relevance of espionage surfaces
regularly. In 1996 CIA officer Harold Nicholson was arrested and
charged with spying for Russia. He pled guilty and is serving a
twenty-three-year sentence. In 1997 Earl Pitts, a thirteen-year FBI
agent, was charged with spying for Russia. The FBI was tipped
off to his case by a Russian double agent. Pitts is serving a
twenty-seven-year prison term. In 1998 David Boone, an analyst
34
Espionage in the United States

with the National Security Agency, was arrested for spying for
Russia. Boone was a walk-in. Among the information he passed
to the Russians was the list of Russian sites targeted by U.S.
nuclear weapons. In 2000 Army Reserve Colonel George Trofi-
moff was arrested for spying for Russia for more than twenty-
five years. He is the highest-ranking military officer ever charged
with espionage.
On the subject of non-Russian hostile spying, in 2002 the
Defense Intelligence Agency’s senior Cuban analyst, Ana Belan
Montes, pled guilty to spying for Cuba for more than sixteen
years. In October 2002 she was sentenced to twenty-five years in
prison. Montes began spying in 1992. She communicated with her
Cuban handlers via shortwave radio or by pay phones at the
National Zoo in Washington, D.C., using prepaid calling cards and
a beeper system. By all accounts, Montes was only paid for her
expenses and nothing more. In the courtroom she told the judge
that she “obeyed my conscience rather than the law.” In retaliation
for Montes’s actions, in November 2002 the United States expelled
two Cuban diplomats and requested that two others also be sent
home. The four officials were given ten days to leave.
Two years earlier Mariano Faget, a senior immigration offi-
cial based in Miami, was charged with spying for Cuba. Faget
received a light five-year prison sentence reflecting the value of
the information he passed on. Also in 2002 a federal grand jury
indicted Brian Regan, a retired air force master sergeant, with try-
ing to spy for Iraq, Libya, and China. He wrote encrypted letters
to leaders of Iraq and Libya, offering them American intelligence
reports on their countries, satellite spy photographs, and related
information. In March 2003 Regan accepted a surprise deal when
he assented to a life sentence for engaging in espionage. Prose-
cutors had sought the death penalty, but the jury that convicted
him ruled that he was ineligible for the death penalty. This same
year the George W. Bush administration also expelled an Iraqi
diplomat, who had been posted to the United Nations, for spying.
The Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations protested by affirm-
ing that his staff were diplomats, not spies. This was the first time
the United States had expelled an Iraqi diplomat since 1994. In the
1994 case the charge was not espionage but lobbying Congress to
end UN economic sanctions.
In April 2003 yet another spy case broke into public view.
Katrina Leung, a prominent Republican Party campaign contrib-
utor in California, was arrested as a Chinese double agent. She
The Post–Cold War Period
35

had been employed under the cover position of PARLOR MAID by
the intelligence community to transmit tainted intelligence to
China. The FBI paid her $1.7 million for these efforts. Unknown
to the U.S. intelligence community, Leung was working for the
Chinese government. In its initial damage assessment the FBI
concluded that all Chinese counterintelligence operations since
1991 had to be considered as compromised. She was aided in her
spy efforts on behalf of China by a twenty-year-long affair with
FBI agent James Smith and another lengthy affair with another
agent. In 1991 the FBI alerted Smith that Leung could be a double
agent.
Cases of friendly spying have also emerged. In 1988, one year
before the fall of the Berlin Wall and the symbolic end of the Cold
War, Douglas Tsou was arrested for spying for Taiwan. He had
worked for the FBI for six years as a translator. In 1998 German
counterintelligence reported a CIA attempt to recruit a German
government official for espionage. French officials have also com-
plained about American electronic espionage activities directed
against their country. Perhaps proving the point, the United
States uncovered evidence that French authorities had tried to
bribe Brazilian officials into awarding a communications con-
tract to a French firm. After the United States protested, Brazil
awarded the contract to an American firm.
Advances in technology have not stopped, and the game of
spy and counterspy continues apace in this country. In 1999, for
example, India knew when American spy satellites would be
over their nuclear testing facilities and took countermeasures to
ensure that their development of a nuclear weapon would go
undetected. And although satellite technology remains very
much an area in which the advanced industrial states of the
North hold a comparative advantage over all others, the bur-
geoning commercial satellite industry is making satellite tech-
nology available to all.
President George W. Bush’s first foreign policy crisis
involved the downing of a spy plane over China on March 31,
2001. A U.S. Navy surveillance plane collided with a Chinese
fighter pilot who had been “playing tag” with it in international
airspace over the South China Sea. The American plane and crew
landed safely in China. China demanded an apology for the inci-
dent and called for the pilot to be executed. The United States
refused and demanded the return of its plane and crew; however,
36
Espionage in the United States

the Chinese pilot was executed. The crisis ended peacefully, but
not until the U.S. aircraft had been subjected to careful analysis by
Chinese authorities.
Spy satellites also remain very much an important part of
the United States’s espionage arsenal, especially in war or in
preparations for war. Published accounts suggest that Keyhole
and Lacrosse satellites (the former produces digital pictures; the
latter, radar images) flew over Baghdad nineteen times in the
first eighteen hours of the land war against Iraq during the
Persian Gulf War. More recently, in Afghanistan as part of the
war against terrorism, the United States made use of Predator
drone aircraft that provided long-range coverage. The Keyhole
and Lacrosse satellites were over their Iraqi targets for only a few
minutes at a time, but the Predator could provide twenty-four-
hour coverage. Some suggest that perhaps the most significant
long-term post–Cold War development in the technology area
was the decision of the Clinton administration to approve the
export of advanced encryption software. This will greatly com-
plicate the task of trying to intercept and break enemy codes and
ciphers.
Lastly, there is no evidence that those engaged in American
counterespionage efforts will not continue to look upon non-
mainstream domestic groups with suspicion in the post–Cold
War era. The most notable case involves Wen Ho Lee. A physicist
at Los Alamos, he was arrested in December 1999 on charges of
spying for China. As part of his indictment Lee was accused of
downloading classified information to a nonsecure computer.
The government’s handling of the case came under heavy criti-
cism when an FBI agent admitted giving false testimony against
Lee and when Asian-American groups argued that he was being
singled out because of his Asian heritage. In the end, Lee pled
guilty in September 2000 to one count of mishandling informa-
tion, and the government dropped the other fifty-eight charges it
had lodged against him (Stober and Hoffman 2001). Even with
this result, in January 2001 President Clinton established a new
counterintelligence board, bringing together the FBI, CIA, and
Defense Department in an effort to be more proactive in conduct-
ing counterespionage. Known as CI-21, or Counterintelligence for
the Twenty-First Century, it seeks to improve information sharing
and place a heightened focus on economic espionage.
The Post–Cold War Period
37

Post–September 11, 2001
The events of September 11, 2001, were a transformational event
for the United States’s intelligence services. Both the FBI and CIA
came under public and congressional criticism for their failure to
anticipate and provide warning of the terrorist attacks on the
Pentagon and World Trade Center. The last time their perfor-
mance was the subject of such sustained and highly visible criti-
cism was following the revelations of questionable covert action
and illegal domestic espionage uncovered by the Church
Committee in 1975. This was a Senate Select Committee that was
established following revelations about illegal activity by the
Nixon administration in its reelection bid that became known as
the Watergate scandal and revelations about illegal CIA activity
abroad. Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho) chaired the committee.
Selected documents from the committee’s hearings are included
in the appendix. President George W. Bush resisted efforts by
Congress to establish an independent bipartisan commission to
study the performance of the intelligence community leading up
to 9/11, but he ultimately relented in November 2002. If there had
been any doubt, the politically charged nature of this inquiry
quickly became apparent when Henry Kissinger, Bush’s choice to
head the commission, was forced to step down almost immedi-
ately due to charges of potential conflicts of interest with clients
in his consulting firm and due to veiled critiques over the policies
he had advocated as secretary of state and national security advi-
sor in the Nixon and Ford administrations. The first Democratic
choice for cochair, former Senator George Mitchell, also resigned.
Kissinger and Mitchell were replaced by former New Jersey gov-
ernor Thomas Keane and former congressman Lee Hamilton,
respectively.
A joint congressional intelligence committee investigation
into those 9/11 events provides insight into the initial analysis of
what went wrong. It calls for disciplining those officials whose
poor decisions or inaction contributed to the success of the terror-
ist attack, creating a cabinet-level intelligence czar to oversee the
operation of the intelligence community, and it also calls for the
creation of a separate domestic spy agency. Asserting that respon-
sibility begins at the top, Senator Richard Shelby (R-Alabama),
who sat on the intelligence committee, has called upon Director of
Central Intelligence George Tenet to resign. In the report the FBI
is criticized for its bureaucratic culture and cumbersome bureau-
38
Espionage in the United States

cracy, which prevent it from adequately responding to national
security threats. The FBI and CIA are also criticized for their fail-
ure to share information. To some observers this problem is not
new. Mark Riebling (2002) traces it back to the Ames and Hanssen
cases, in which the FBI and CIA engaged in a halting and unpro-
ductive cooperation that was marked by mutual suspicion and
distrust.
The possibility of creating a new, independent domestic
intelligence agency was also supported by an independent ter-
rorism commission chaired by the former Republican governor of
Virginia, James Gilmore III. FBI director Robert Mueller III gave a
spirited defense of the FBI in December 2002. He rejected calls for
separating domestic intelligence and law enforcement into two
different organizations. He also claimed that the FBI was adapt-
ing to the post-9/11 world and that the FBI had thwarted almost
100 terrorist attacks since that date and helped capture some 3,000
terrorists worldwide.
The new emphasis on domestic spying and counterespi-
onage that comes with this antiterrorist focus also raises some
concerns. Some within the intelligence community are concerned
that it will lead to a neglect of spy satellites. In place is a program
to develop a new generation of spy satellites, the Future Imagery
Architecture program. One estimate suggests that between $625
and $900 million is needed to get the program back on track so
that new satellites will be operational when needed to replace the
existing inventory of KH-11 Keyhole satellites. Others are con-
cerned about possible violations of civil rights and liberties that
might accompany an overzealous or excessive interpretation of
the mandate given to those charged with domestic spying. Less
than one week after Mueller defended the FBI, a coalition of Arab
and Muslim groups brought a class action lawsuit against the
Justice Department for its mass detention of immigrants from
Muslim countries who registered with the Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS) as required by post-9/11 legislation.
One estimate placed the number of detainees in Los Angeles at
1,000. Official INS figures placed it at less than 250.
As daunting as the counterespionage challenge facing the
intelligence community is in the area of terrorism, it pales in scope
when compared to the challenge of recruiting spies within these
terrorist organizations. Operating in small cells, these groups are
not easily penetrated. Walk-ins are highly valued but less likely to
surface, or survive, in nonbureaucratic environments. There are
Post–September 11, 2001
39

also the issues of language and ethnicity. Not everyone can be a
spy in a Muslim- or Arab-centered terrorist network. Indicative of
the extent of the problem is the difficulty the intelligence commu-
nity is having in hiring Arab linguists. The head of the FBI’s lan-
guage services estimates that it takes interviewing ten applicants
for the FBI to find one acceptable linguist. She estimates that 65
percent fail the language test, 20 percent fail the polygraph, and 10
percent are eliminated for security reasons. Another FBI official
commented: “kitchen Urdu is not the same as how to make a
bomb Urdu.”
The following chapter turns to the debate over the practice of
espionage in the contemporary world. The chapter will examine
how espionage relates to world politics, other elements of intelli-
gence, the intelligence bureaucracy, and national security policy.
Further Reading
A good place to start studying espionage in the United States is with his-
torical overviews of the subject. Several very readable ones exist. They
tend to be told from either a supportive or critical perspective, so more
than one should be consulted in order to maintain objectivity. Among
them are Christopher Felix, A Short Course in the Secret War (New York:
Dell, 1988, second edition); G. J. A. O’Toole, Honorable Treachery: A History
of Intelligence, Espionage, and Covert Action from the American Revolution to
the CIA (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1991); John Ranelagh, The
Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA (New York: Touchstone, 1987);
John Waller, The Unseen War in Europe: Espionage and Conspiracy in the
Second World War (New York: Random House, 1966); John Prados, Presi-
dents’ Secret Wars: CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations from World War II to
Iranscam (New York: William Morrow, 1986); and David Robarge,
Intelligence in the War for Independence (Washington, DC: Center for the
Study of Intelligence, 1997).
Given the prominence of the CIA in the study of espionage in the
United States, it is also important to develop a good sense of this organ-
ization and its internal dynamics and history. Again, because of the
highly charged nature of CIA activities over the years it is important to
read more than one of these before making conclusions. Starting places
include Ray Cline, The CIA: Reality vs. Myth (Washington, DC: Acropolis,
1982); Burton Hersh, The Old Boys: The American Elite and the Origins of the
CIA (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1992); Loch Johnson, The Central
Intelligence Agency: History and Documents (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1989); David Rudgers, Creating the Secret State: The Origins of the
Central Intelligence Agency, 1943–1947 (Lawrence: Kansas University Press,
40
Espionage in the United States

2000); Thomas Troy, Will Bill and Intrepid: Donovan, Stephenson, and the
Origins of the CIA (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1966); Patrick
McGarvey, CIA: The Myth and the Madness (Baltimore: Penguin, 1973);
David Wise, The Politics of Lying: Government Deception, Secrecy, and Power
(New York: Vintage, 1973); Morton Halperin et al., The Lawless State: The
Crimes of the U.S. Intelligence Agencies (Baltimore: Penguin, 1976); and
David Wise and Thomas Ross, The Invisible Government (New York:
Vintage, 1964).
A valuable source of insight into the operation of the intelligence
agencies comes from memoir-type accounts written by retired intelli-
gence professionals or about them. As the intelligence organizations
engage in activities that extend beyond espionage (and many are written
by intelligence officials engaged in covert action), espionage is not
always a prominent theme in the writings. Among the most popular of
these accounts are Victor Marchetti and John Marks, The CIA and the Cult
of Intelligence (New York: Dell, 1974); Frank Snepp, Decent Interval: An
Insider’s Account of Saigon’s Indecent End Told by the CIA’s Chief Strategy
Analyst in Vietnam (New York: Vintage, 1977); David Atlee Phillips, The
Night Watch, 25 Years of Peculiar Service (New York: Atheneum, 1977);
William Colby, Honorable Men: My Life in the CIA (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1978); Tom Mangold, Cold Warrior: James Jesus Angleton, the
CIA’s Master Spy Hunter (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1991); Mary
Bancroft, Autobiography of a Spy (New York: Morrow, 1983); and Thomas
Powers, The Man Who Kept Secrets: Richard Helms and the CIA (New York:
Pocket Books, 1979).
A number of good works are readily available on the technological
dimension of espionage both as it relates to codebreaking and aerial sur-
veillance. See James Bamford, The Puzzle Palace: A Report on America’s
Most Secret Agency (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1982); William Burrows,
Deep Black: Space Espionage and National Security (New York: Random
House, 1986); Dwayne Day et al., eds., Eye in the Sky: The Story of Corona
Spy Satellites (Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 1998); Jeffrey Richelson,
America’s Secret Eyes in Space: The History of U.S. Spy Satellites (New York:
Harper and Row, 1990); Peter Calvocoressi, Top Secret Ultra (New York:
Ballantine, 1980); and Paul Lasher, Spy Flights of the Cold War (London:
Sutton, 1996).
Finally, a number of treatments of individual cases of espionage
against the United States are available. They include Robert Lindsey, The
Falcon and the Snowman: A True Story of Friendship and Espionage (London:
Jonathan Cape, 1980) [about Christopher Boyce and Andrew Lee]; Pete
Early, Confessions of a Spy: The Real Story of Aldrich Ames (New York: G. P.
Putnam’s Sons, 1997); and William Blum, I Pledge Allegiance (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1987) [about the Walker spy ring].
Further Reading
41

References
Ameringer, Charles. 1990. U.S. Foreign Intelligence: The Secret Side of
American History. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Andrew, Christopher. 1995. For the President’s Eyes Only: Secret Intelli-
gence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush. New York:
HarperCollins.
Barron, John. 1987. Breaking the Ring: The Bizarre Case of the Walker Family
Spy Ring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Corson, William. 1977. The Armies of Ignorance: The Rise of the American
Intelligence Empire. New York: Dial.
Donner, Frank. 1981. The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of
America’s Political Intelligence System. New York: Vintage.
Dunlop, Richard. 1982. Donovan: America’s Master Spy. Santa Monica, CA:
Rand Corporation.
Fishel, Edwin C. 1996. The Secret War for the Union: The Untold Story of
Military Intelligence in the Civil War. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Havill, Adrian. 2001. The Spy Who Stayed Out in the Cold: The Secret Life of
FBI Double Agent Robert Hanssen. New York: St. Martin’s.
Kahn, David. 1967. The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. New York:
Macmillan.
Karalekas, Anne. 1977. The History of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Laguna Hills, CA: Aegean Park.
Martin, David. 1980. Wilderness of Mirrors. New York: Ballantine.
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, United States House of
Representatives. 1994. Report of Investigation: The Aldrich Ames Espionage
Case. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Richelson, Jeffrey. 1987. American Espionage and the Soviet Target. New
York: Quill.
Riebling, Mark. 2002. Wedge: From Pearl Harbor to 9/11: How the Secret War
between the FBI and CIA Has Endangered National Security. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Romerstein, Herbert, and Eric Breindel. 2000. The VENONA Secrets:
Exposing Soviet Espionage and America’s Traitors. Washington, DC:
Regnery.
Rositzke, Henry. 1977. CIA’s Secret Operations: Espionage, Counter-
espionage, and Covert Action. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Stober, Dan, and Ian Hoffman. 2001. Convenient Spy: Wen Ho Lee and the
Politics of Nuclear Espionage. New York: Simon and Schuster.
42
Espionage in the United States

Wise, David. 1995. Nightmover: How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the KGB
for $4.6 Million. New York: HarperCollins.
Wise, David. 2002. Spy: The Inside Story of How the FBI’s Robert Hanssen
Betrayed America. New York: Random House.
References
43


2
Understanding the
Contemporary
Espionage Debate
C
hapter 1 surveyed the history of espionage with a special focus
on the American experience. This chapter will examine espi-
onage in a global context in order to provide a comparative
perspective from which to better judge the American experience.
Here, the purpose is to place the history of espionage, and in par-
ticular its contemporary forms, in a conceptual context. This
chapter will examine ten issues that go to the heart of questions
concerning espionage and the dilemmas of counterespionage
today.
Spies and Spy Catchers
It was noted at the outset of this book that two people play the
game of espionage. One is the spy; the other is the spy catcher.
Spy novels, movies, and Cold War propaganda on both the
American and Soviet sides have conspired to create a popular
image of spies and of spy catchers that bears little resemblance to
reality. Spies and spy catchers come from a variety of back-
grounds, but it is not easy to find a James Bond among them.
Spies are motivated by a number of factors that are not
unique to any country or historical period. One motivation to spy
is blackmail. It is often associated with Soviet recruitment prac-
tice, but others practice it as well. Sexual preference or illicit
45

affairs are common fodder for blackmail. In pre–World War I
Austria-Hungary the Russians blackmailed Alfred Redl, who was
homosexual and was the head of the Austro-Hungarian Empire’s
counterespionage unit, into spying for them. He spied for Russia
from 1902 to 1913. After World War II the Soviet Union recruited
a number of spies in Europe by threatening to expose their fascist
or Nazi backgrounds. Blackmail is also employed in trying to
turn an exposed spy into a double agent. A second motivation for
spying is money. In some cases the amounts may be large, but this
is not necessarily the case. Often only small sums of money are
sufficient to induce someone to spy or to keep him or her engaged
as a spy. As has been shown in this book, paying spies large sums
of money is often dangerous because it attracts attention to them.
Often, spies will have most of their money placed in bank
accounts that are beyond the view of their home governments.
They will then draw upon this money during their retirements. A
third motivational factor is ideology. Some spies are politically
motivated; they believe in the cause they are working for and do
not judge their actions as treasonous. The “isms” involved may
be quite varied: communism, capitalism, ethnic nationalism, or
patriotism are among the most prevalent. Finally, some spies are
motivated by a complex set of psychological needs that combine
ambition, power, and adventure.
In all likelihood, more than one set of motives is present in
any given situation. It is up to the spy handler to understand his
or her agent and manage him or her accordingly. Spies who work
for money are likely to exaggerate their accomplishments or per-
haps try to sell their services to a higher bidder. The ideological
spy may loose sight of his or her immediate objective and over-
reach it, thereby risking exposure. The blackmailed spy may grow
resentful, become unproductive, or come to present a security risk.
Counterespionage, or spy catching, is an endeavor beset by
contradictory forces. It is defensive in nature yet offensive in out-
look. Where covert action seeks to secretly bring about changes in
policies on conditions abroad, spy catching is passive and defen-
sive. It is designed to protect secrets. Yet to successfully protect
secrets requires that spy catchers go on the offensive. They must
actively be on the lookout for spies and take steps to frustrate
them. In outlook, the spy catcher is part detective and part spy.
Counterespionage requires an awareness of the motivations of
spies, their standard operating procedures or tradecraft, and their
targets. It requires care and stealth in order not to draw attention
46
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

to oneself and alert the spy. The goal of the spy catcher is also
marked by contradictions. On the one hand, the spy catcher seeks
to capture the spy so that he or she may be punished and the spy
catcher’s secrets protected. On the other hand, the spy catcher is
interested in leaving spies in place, observing their behavior in
hopes of tracing their activity to other spies. Finally, the success of
spy catching efforts depends simultaneously on close cooperation
between intelligence services and on compartmentalization of
effort. Close cooperation and trust is needed in order to ensure
that information is passed quickly between those seeking to pro-
tect secrets and those engaged in covert action or the collection,
analysis, and dissemination of information. But, distance and dis-
trust (or at least a healthy skepticism) are also needed if spy catch-
ers are to practice their craft effectively and the damage caused by
spies is to be minimized.
Espionage and the Nature of
World Politics
There is disagreement on the fundamental nature of world poli-
tics. Realists see world politics as an arena in which states strug-
gle to survive by acquiring and managing power. In their view
the game of world politics is played with few rules. International
law, pubic opinion, and the promises of other states count for lit-
tle. Sovereignty is the key concept, and, by definition, this means
that there exists no source of authority above the state. In the real-
ist view, the only rules of world politics are those agreed upon by
states and that states can enforce. Self-reliance and self-protection
are the highest values.
Liberals view world politics through a neo-Wilsonian lens.
They see the root causes of conflict as lying less in the basic nature
of world politics as in flawed policies and flawed individuals. In
particular, they reject policies that stress balancing power and
zero-sum approaches to promoting security. Where realists tend
to see promoting the national interest and promoting the global
interest as incompatible goals, liberals see no inherent tension.
Promoting democracy, building international institutions, linking
people through free trade, and respecting fundamental human
rights are viewed as providing a solid foundation for a successful
foreign policy.
Espionage and the Nature of World Politics
47

Realism and liberalism are not the only perspectives from
which world politics can be studied. Many scholars also employ
dependency theory, feminism, globalism, and postmodernism as
the starting point for their studies. Regardless of which perspec-
tive is used, one of the fundamental problems that must be
explained is why states cooperate. Again, realists and liberals
tend to put forward different answers. Liberals stress the impor-
tance of absolute gains: states will cooperate as long as they
improve their position in some absolute sense. Realists stress the
importance of relative gains: states will only cooperate when they
can improve their position relative to an adversary.
Agreement between the two positions does exist, however, at
a more fundamental level. Both agree that a major obstacle to
cooperation is uncertainty. It is uncertainty over what can be
gained by cooperating. It is uncertainty over whether the other
states can be trusted. It is uncertainty over what the motives are
behind the actions of the other states. The starting point for over-
coming uncertainty and increasing the predictability of the actions
of other states is the acquisition of information about them. Espio-
nage is a means of doing so, but given the deceit and potentially
treasonous nature of the act, it is also one surrounded by ambiva-
lence (Stein 1990).
International law recognizes the central role played by espi-
onage in information gathering in times of war. As far back as the
Declaration of Brussels of 1874, espionage has been considered to
be a lawful means of warfare. Its unique nature has also been rec-
ognized. Spies, for example, need to be captured in the act of spy-
ing in order to be convicted. A spy who flees the country he or she
was spying in and returns to his or her homeland is not consid-
ered to be a spy any longer. This is different from a criminal, who
remains a criminal until captured. If captured in the act of spying,
however, international law supports denying a spy certain rights
and privileges that would otherwise be afforded to people
charged with a crime. The peacetime status of espionage is less
clear. Some international law scholars treat espionage as illegal in
times of peace. It is seen as a violation of sovereignty and the
political independence of states. Others see it as a morally, politi-
cally, and legally acceptable activity (Demerest 1996).
The distinction between wartime and peacetime espionage is
losing its theoretical and practical importance. The formal decla-
ration of war is becoming an anachronism. World War II was the
last declared war the United States participated in. Korea,
48
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

Vietnam, the Persian Gulf War, peacekeeping operations in
Kosovo and Lebanon, Grenada, and the war against terrorism
have all been conducted without an official declaration of war. In
operational terms the boundary between peace and war is also
fading. During the Cold War the United States and Soviet Union
considered themselves to be in a state of warfare short of actual
combat but one that included military, political, and diplomatic
competition and conflict. The foreign policies of many lesser
states, especially those locked into rivalry wars such as those
between India and Pakistan and Israel and its Arab neighbors,
also do not make a distinction between war and peace. Nowhere
is the boundary between war and peace more blurred and ill
defined than in the case of terrorism. As the events of 9/11 reveal,
successful antiterrorist policy making depends upon information,
but the collection and analysis of information cannot wait until
the terrorist act has taken place. It must precede it and take place
during times of peace.
Espionage and Surprise
On any given day there is little reason for policymakers to expect
the unexpected when taking an inventory of the state of the
world. Bureaucratic inertia, domestic political pressures, vested
personal interests, and constraints imposed by other states and
existing policies conspire to prevent much more than incremental
change from taking place. The normal solution to a stubborn
diplomatic or military problem is to undertake a new initiative.
On close inspection, however, that new initiative is generally lit-
tle more than a variation on an old theme.
But, surprise does happen. At 3:00 A.M. on June 22, 1941, 151
German divisions supported by some 3,500 tanks and 1,800 air-
craft caught the world by surprise and crossed into the Soviet
Union. In its first four weeks Operation BARBAROSSA swept across
400 miles and closed in on Moscow. By midsummer, German
forces had conquered an area twice the size of France. The
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, was equally
spectacular in its results. The United States suffered the severe
damage or loss of eight battleships, three light cruisers, four other
ships, and 188 planes, and it suffered 3,435 casualties. On July 15,
1971, in less than ninety seconds, President Richard Nixon star-
tled the world when he announced that he would soon make a
Espionage and Surprise
49

visit to the People’s Republic of China, bringing an end to more
than two decades of diplomatic isolation and hostility between
these two states (Betts 1982).
In and of itself, surprise is not important, though. As Hitler’s
invasion of Russia and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor illus-
trate, surprise, no matter how great, does not guarantee victory.
Surprise is important when it invalidates the fundamental
assumptions on which policies are based. In doing so, surprise
acts as a power multiplier. It dramatically increases the amount of
power possessed by the state carrying out the surprise. This is
true irrespective of whether the power is military, diplomatic,
technological, or economic in nature.
The power-multiplying impact of surprise is thus a constant
danger that policymakers must guard against. Preventing sur-
prise, however, is not an easy task, because the root causes of sur-
prise are numerous. First, surprise can come about due to the
deliberate actions of the enemy. At a minimum, states contem-
plating surprise will try to cloak their actions in secrecy. They will
also engage in deception. Second, surprise may come about
because of the decision-making processes of the enemy state.
Indecision may make it difficult to identify an emerging pattern
of behavior. Also, the attacking state always has the option of
changing its plans, and in the process falsifying intelligence pre-
dictions of a pending attack.
A second set of obstacles to anticipating surprise is found in
the normal ebb and flow of world events. Major lines of policy
simply do not come in nice, neat packages. It is only with 20-20
hindsight that the correct interpretation of information is obvi-
ous. The most commonly cited impediments to correctly assess-
ing a situation are the inherent ambiguity of information and
noise. On the eve of Pearl Harbor the problem was not too little
information but too much information. A great deal of informa-
tion existed supporting all the wrong interpretations of the last-
minute information being received. Where deception deliberately
seeks to confuse an adversary, noise confuses the adversary sim-
ply by existing as extraneous information that intelligence ser-
vices pick up. It is information that must be examined, evaluated,
and dismissed in the search for signals of possible surprise.
Afinal set of obstacles to anticipating surprise is self-generated.
Policymakers do not sit back and passively take in information.
They interact with it, picking and choosing which pieces are rele-
50
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

vant to their needs and which are not. One of the most important
filters that determines what is seen is the immediate concerns that
dominate the policymakers’ agenda. Concerned only with mili-
tary espionage, they may be blind to signs of economic espionage.
Fearful of overseas terrorism, they may not pick up signs of
domestic terrorist threats. Contingency plans may have the same
blinding effect. Having spent considerable time and energy put-
ting together a plan of action, the tendency is for it to color one’s
perceptions to the point where all future events are seen as being
consistent with its fundamental assumptions. In a similar fashion,
adherence to an ongoing line of action can blind policymakers to
signs of a surprise. Selecting a course of action and building sup-
port for it is an expensive undertaking. Once adopted, personal
and institutional prestige becomes attached to its success, and
policymakers often find it difficult to accept information that sug-
gests impending failure (Jervis 1976).
Espionage is an important means of trying to avert surprise.
It offers policymakers a window through which to accurately
gauge an adversary’s true intentions and capabilities. It can
negate deception and cut through noise. For these reasons espi-
onage is unlikely ever to disappear. Though the risks of failure
are great and the instances of failure may far outnumber the
instances of success, policymakers will judge the effort worth-
while if even one Pearl Harbor or 9/11 can be averted. Espionage
is not, however, a panacea or cure-all for the problem of surprise.
It may yield a great amount of noise. We routinely see spies gath-
ering more information then their handlers know what to do
with. John Walker, it will be recalled, passed so much information
to the Soviet Union that they reduced the frequency with which
he passed secrets to them.
Espionage cannot overcome the self-generated blinders that
prevent policymakers from seeing signs of surprise. If discovered,
espionage may also become an instrument of deception by the
target state, as it allows false and misleading information to be
transmitted back to its adversary’s intelligence services. The
desire to do this is one reason that intelligence services are reluc-
tant to expose a spy once he or she is identified. Their preference
is to allow the spy to continue to engage in espionage in order to
identify the entirety of the spy ring and to use the spy for their
own purposes by feeding him or her false information.
Espionage and Surprise
51

Espionage and the Intelligence Cycle
Espionage does not occur in isolation. It is part of a broader set of
activities that are designed to inform policymakers about the
world around them. Collectively these activities are referred to as
the intelligence cycle. Successful intelligence estimating requires
that all aspects of the intelligence cycle function effectively and
that its individual parts interact in a productive fashion (CIA
1975).
The first step in the intelligence cycle is tasking. It is here that
policymakers and senior intelligence officials determine what
information they need to help them accomplish their missions
and policy objectives. Without such guidance, intelligence agen-
cies have no means of setting their collection priorities or targets.
Personal and institutional definitions of national security threats
and foreign policy goals will by default become the basis on
which information is gathered.
The second step in the intelligence process is collection. It is
here that espionage enters the intelligence cycle. It is one way of
obtaining the information that was identified as important in the
first stage. The intelligence community has a wide variety of col-
lection strategies to choose from. A more basic choice is between
open source information and secret information. Open source
information is publicly available information. It may be obtained
from a wide variety of sources including newspapers, the other
media, government documents, databases, academic and profes-
sional journals, and the Internet.
Espionage is used to obtain secret information. A funda-
mental choice here is between technological espionage and clas-
sic human espionage. Technological espionage relies heavily
upon satellites, planes, and electronic means to map the adver-
sary’s capabilities and intercept human communications. Human
espionage seeks to directly acquire photographs, documents, and
other materials of intelligence value by infiltrating key organiza-
tions.
The third step in the intelligence cycle is processing and eval-
uating the information obtained. Within the intelligence commu-
nity a distinction is drawn between information and intelligence.
Information is the raw material collected by overt and secret
means that is provided to intelligence analysts. Information
becomes intelligence only after it is evaluated and assessed. The
evaluation of information involves two judgments. First, how
52
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

reliable is the source? Second, how good is the information? As
this suggests, spies who over time prove themselves to be reliable
and provide good information are particularly valued.
The “goodness” of information can be established in several
ways. It can be judged by the extent to which it fits with other
information being collected and thus is part of a larger and inter-
nally consistent picture of the adversary. It is also judged by the
extent to which other collection sources report the same informa-
tion. Confidence about the value of the information under review
increases as multiple sources report the same information. In
order to boost confidence in the information they are working
with, intelligence organizations will task multiple collection plat-
forms (spies, satellites, military attachés, etc.) with obtaining the
same information.
Processing information can be a complicated undertaking.
In the area of technological espionage, intercepted messages must
be decoded and translated, telemetry and signals intercepts must
be displayed in a meaningful fashion, and photographic images
must be produced. A key concern in classic human intelligence is
protecting the spy. In the cases of John Walker, Philip (Robert)
Hanssen, and Aldrich Ames, great care was given to protecting
their identities through the use of code signals, periodic meet-
ings that changed location, and dead drops. An important by-
product of the need to protect the spy is that real-time crisis
information will be difficult to obtain, as it places the spy at great
risk of discovery.
Counterespionage enters the intelligence cycle at this point.
By actively searching for spies and protecting one’s own secrets,
counterintelligence operations serve to increase the confidence of
analysts and consumers in the information they are receiving.
Paradoxically, counterespionage can also have the opposite effect.
It can cripple intelligence analysis by calling the loyalty of every-
one into doubt, and with it the information being provided. When
the suspicions and doubts created by the conspiratorial mindset
of counterespionage are left unchecked, a “wilderness of mirrors”
is created from which there is no escape. Both the CIA under
James Angleton and the British SIS in its search for the fifth man,
to be discussed in the following section of this chapter, fell into
this trap (Martin 1980).
The fourth stage in the intelligence cycle is analysis and pro-
duction. Here the individual pieces of information that have been
collected and assessed are now brought together. It is the job of
Espionage and the Intelligence Cycle
53

analysts to determine their collective meaning and importance
and to convey this intelligence to policymakers. Analysis can be
both an individual and a group exercise, depending upon the
nature of the issue being investigated. Intelligence estimates of
enemy troop strength in Vietnam and the state of Soviet nuclear
weapons programs routinely brought together officials from
many intelligence organizations.
Finished intelligence, that which has been analyzed and
assessed, is made available to policymakers in a number of forms.
Current intelligence reports on day-to-day events provide policy-
makers with new developments and warnings about future
developments. Intelligence estimates are reports that deal with
specific problems. They are intended to help shape thinking
about a problem by laying out its history, detailing what is known
and unknown, and suggesting alternative futures. These reports
may be produced on a regular basis, such as with the annual esti-
mate on Soviet nuclear forces, or they may be commissioned on a
onetime basis as new issues arise. A third type of finished intelli-
gence is warnings intelligence. It focuses on urgent problems that
may require action. Research intelligence provides in-depth back-
ground studies on a particular problem. Most commonly it either
takes the form of basic background information or operational
support information for the military. The final category of fin-
ished intelligence is scientific and technical intelligence. It gener-
ally focuses on the technical characteristics and performance
capabilities of weapons systems.
The final stage in the intelligence cycle is a feedback stage in
which policymakers respond to the intelligence they have received.
In the process of doing so, they set in motion the first stage in
which tasks and priorities are developed. When the intelligence
cycle is working smoothly, such feedback occurs on an almost
daily basis. One of the most important forms of current intelli-
gence is the daily intelligence briefing given by the Central Intel-
ligence Agency (CIA) to the president. The questions asked by
the president, and his interest or disinterest in items in the brief-
ing, are used by the CIA in organizing the next day’s presenta-
tion.
One of the key questions that must be addressed in reaching
a judgment on the future of espionage is: how central a role does
it play in the intelligence cycle? If we in the modern world were
to stop spying, what impact would that have on our ability to
understand and anticipate the actions of adversaries? There is no
54
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

clear-cut answer here. In some instances information might be
obtained by alternative means that are less risky or morally com-
promising. It is also quite likely that some information considered
vital can only be obtained through espionage. The impact of no
longer engaging in espionage is also likely to be felt unevenly
across the different reporting areas. Basic reports and background
intelligence pieces might be least affected. The quality of warn-
ings intelligence and estimates, however, might suffer greatly.
Although there is no easy resolution of this matter, a starting
point for thinking about how to make better use of espionage (or
limit its use) is with intelligence tasking. Clearly stated and well-
thought-out intelligence priorities and objectives might reduce
the danger that espionage and other collection means will pro-
ceed with little oversight or purpose other than to collect every-
thing possible.
Espionage and the National
Security Bureaucracy
The game of spy versus spy catcher is played by individuals. As
such, personality counts for a great deal, both in the motivation of
the spy and the ability of the spy catcher to see through the decep-
tion. It is impossible to read the accounts of John Walker, Philip
(Robert) Hanssen, or Aldrich Ames (presented previously) or
those of Jonathan Pollard and Oleg Penkovsky (presented in the
following chapter) and not come away with a sense of how pecu-
liar spies are. Just as important, however, for understanding the
dynamics of espionage is its bureaucratic setting. The spy and spy
catcher are supported by large organizations. Policymakers create
organizations to address problems. The temptation is to view the
organizations as neutral machines that respond in almost auto-
matic fashion to external directives regarding goals, missions, tac-
tics, and procedures, but only at the most general level is this
imagery correct. It belies a more complex reality in which both
competition between organizations and internal bureaucratic
norms shape the behavior of organizations and their ability to
achieve the purposes set for them.
Before examining the ways in which bureaucracy affects espi-
onage, this chapter will briefly introduce some of the key organi-
zational players. To simplify matters this chapter will only note
Espionage and the National Security Bureaucracy
55

those organizations that play active roles in the collection stage of
the intelligence cycle, as the previous section has already noted
that espionage enters the intelligence cycle in the collection stage. 
The CIA is a major collector; two of its four directorates col-
lect information. The Directorate of Operations is responsible for
the clandestine collection of information. In an effort to facilitate
cooperation with the military within the Directorate of Opera-
tions, there is an Office of Military Affairs. There is also a Counter-
intelligence Center and a Counterterrorism Center. The
Directorate of Science and Technology provides support for the
entire intelligence community in the areas of collecting, process-
ing, and exploiting intelligence from open and secret sources of
intelligence. In doing so it works closely with other non-CIA
intelligence organizations such as the Foreign Broadcast Infor-
mation Service and the National Photographic Interpretation
Center. The other two directorates of the CIA are Administration
and Intelligence. The latter is responsible for producing analysis
and estimates. 
Five units within the Department of Defense collect informa-
tion. The National Security Agency collects, processes, and
reports signals intelligence (SIGINT). The Defense Intelligence
Agency oversees an all-source collection effort to ensure that cur-
rent and future Department of Defense military requirements are
met. The National Reconnaissance Office manages the govern-
ment’s spaceborne reconnaissance system. The Defense Airborne
Reconnaissance Office operates the Defense Department’s air-
borne reconnaissance program, including manned and un-
manned aircraft and their ground processing stations. Finally,
each of the military services maintains their own collection efforts
within their areas of specialization.
Moving beyond these two main collectors of information,
there are four other organizations. The State Department collects
and transmits information through its diplomatic reports. The
Treasury Department collects open source data on financial and
monetary matters. The FBI has primary responsibility for coun-
terintelligence and counterterrorism in the United States. In the
course of carrying out these tasks the FBI will generate informa-
tion that may be of value to other members of the intelligence
community. Finally, the Department of Energy collects informa-
tion regarding nuclear proliferation and related weapons devel-
opment issues (Richelson 1985).
56
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

These organizations and others that are active in the pro-
duction and dissemination of intelligence make up the U.S. intel-
ligence community, which, however, is a community only in the
loosest sense. The concept of community implies likeness and
similarity; it suggests a group of organizations that share com-
mon goals and outlooks. More accurately, though, the members
of the intelligence community constitute a federation of units
that coexist and are jealous of maintaining their institutional
autonomy. Within the U.S. intelligence community cooperation
between the CIA and FBI on espionage matters has often been
strained. This was especially true in the case of Edward Lee
Howard, whom the CIA suspected of spying but about whom
the CIA said nothing to the FBI until it was too late to stop him
from fleeing to the Soviet Union. This has become an issue again
in efforts to prevent terrorist attacks in the post-9/11 era as ques-
tions have been raised about internal information processing
procedures and cooperation between these two institutions.
There is nothing abnormal about this conflict. Organization
theorists note that specialization breeds parochialism as the lines
on an organizational chart become lines of secrecy and loyalty.
Hierarchy has a similar effect. Rank in an organization is a source
of power and status. When hierarchy is combined with control
over information, a situation results in which subordinates will
often resist transmitting information to superiors that could be
used to disparage their performance or upset comfortable rou-
tines. Because organizations are in competition with one another,
the means selected to achieve policy objectives will be hotly con-
tested. Organizations do not simply propose policy options; they
lobby for the option that they are best able to implement or con-
trol. The CIA will not propose that the Defense Intelligence
Agency collect certain data if it can do so. The FBI will not pro-
pose that the CIA be given the lead in counterespionage activity
(Wilensky 1967).
The internal value system of intelligence organizations affects
espionage and counterespionage in several important ways. First,
there exists a kind of professional pecking order within intelli-
gence agencies. Certain skills and career tracks are more highly
valued than are others. Intelligence analysis is most favored, with
covert action and counterintelligence being considered second
rank.
Espionage and the National Security Bureaucracy
57

Second, one finds a tendency for those inside an intelligence
bureaucracy to adopt a protective and paternalistic attitude
toward its members. Theirs is not a 9–5 job but a way of life, and
one that requires a certain degree of separation from the rest of
society. It also requires personal sacrifices of a magnitude that are
seen as not being fully appreciated by those outside the secret
world of intelligence. Background checks and lie detector tests
are formal ways of screening candidates for membership into this
fraternal order, but once admitted their loyalty and fitness for
duty are rarely questioned. The discovery of Aldrich Ames was
significantly delayed because the possibility that a spy might
exist within the CIA was discounted. It was further hindered by
the blocking effect that specialization had on information flow.
An even more stunning case emerged in Great Britain, where Kim
Philby and his spy ring went undetected in large part because
their Cambridge credentials made them accepted members in
intelligence circles (see the following chapter).
Espionage and National Security Threats
When the Cold War ended with the disintegration of the Soviet
Union and repudiation of communism, there were frequent refer-
ences to a peace dividend, the idea that it would no longer be pos-
sible to reduce the high level of federal government spending.
National security expenditures could be reduced because the
threat to the United States had diminished significantly. The
United States had emerged from the Cold War triumphant and
was the only remaining superpower. The major target for advo-
cates of a peace dividend was the military budget, but other ele-
ments of the national security and foreign policy bureaucracy
were not immune from calls for downsizing. The State Depart-
ment was forced to close embassies and consulates, and it under-
went a major reorganization. The intelligence community found
itself on the defensive for its failure to predict the end of the Cold
War. There were even calls in the Senate for dismantling the CIA.
Because so much of the United States’s espionage effort was
targeted either directly or indirectly at Soviet targets, it is not sur-
prising that many saw a diminished need for classical human
espionage in the post–Cold War world. The prospect of a demo-
cratic Russia held the hope that whatever information might be
needed could be obtained through open sources and that Russian
58
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

compliance with arms control agreements and other cooperative
measures could be verified through technical means and through
increased transparency and the open exchange of information.
Proponents of espionage found it difficult to challenge the
view that the scope of the Soviet threat to the United States had
diminished greatly. Instead, they built their case on three differ-
ent arguments. First, although the threat of deliberate Soviet mil-
itary action against the United States had diminished, a different
threat existed. The problem now was accidental war and the
uncontrolled proliferation of Soviet nuclear weapons and related
technologies. The root causes of these problems were found in the
decay of the Soviet system. Organizational decay and political
infighting had created a situation in which the Russian govern-
ment lacked the capability to control its own military forces. The
disintegration of the military had left many scientists in poverty,
and many were reportedly willing to sell their services to the
highest bidder.
A second line of argument held that although the United
States was the sole remaining superpower, this condition could
not last. The fundamental dynamics of world politics required
that other world states move to balance the power of the United
States. The emergence of challengers was inevitable, the espi-
onage proponents warned. The prudent exercise of American
power could delay this process but not prevent it from occurring.
It was simply a matter of when and what state or states would be
the challenger. Some expected a resurgence of Russian power.
Others pointed to China as the most likely challenger. Japan and
Germany were also identified as states that needed to be watched
closely.
Finally, some argued that although the Russian threat had
diminished, a new breed of security threats now faced the United
States. Although in the Cold War and throughout American his-
tory foreign states had been the primary threat to American secu-
rity, in the post–Cold War era nonstate actors would constitute
the greatest threat. In the popular imagery employed to make this
argument it was asserted that during the Cold War the United
States had faced a dangerous dragon, and in the post–Cold War
era it was being confronted by a legion of poisonous snakes. Two
types of snakes were singled out as especially dangerous. The
first type was international criminal groups and drug smugglers.
The second type was international terrorist groups (Berkowitz
and Goodman 1989).
Espionage and National Security Threats
59

From the point of view of intelligence collection, these new
threats are extremely challenging. The sheer size of the Soviet mil-
itary, diplomatic, and espionage operations provided American
intelligence organizations with multiple points of entry, but this is
not the case with these new threats. They require that espionage
be directed at either individuals or small groups. Gaining access
to these people and gaining their confidence will not be easily
done. It will require time and the recruitment of new individuals
into the spy game as well as the development of new competen-
cies. Someone who has spied or run agents in the Soviet Union
targeting Soviet diplomats is not necessarily qualified to operate
in the Middle East, Africa, or Asia against a drug smuggler, ter-
rorist cell, or ex-patriot Russian physicist.
Directing espionage against potential challengers to the
United States’s superpower status, such as China, is also fraught
with danger. Without clearly articulated collection tasks and pri-
orities it is quite possible that little information of value will be
collected. Organizational routine and bureaucratic inertia could
come to dominate the espionage effort. Moreover, there is a dan-
ger of setting in motion a self-fulfilling prophecy: if, or more accu-
rately when, these new U.S. spies are caught, it is possible that the
targeted state may respond by increasing its military power or
taking steps to distance itself politically from the United States.
These are the very events that are most undesirable.
Economic Espionage
By definition espionage is not an activity that is directed solely at
military targets. Espionage is a means of acquiring information
that would otherwise be unavailable. One area of espionage that
has begun to receive a great deal of attention is economic espi-
onage. It is estimated that in the post–Cold War era the percent-
age of collection and analysis resources devoted to economic
issues by the U.S. intelligence community has risen from 10 per-
cent to 40 percent. Unlike most espionage directed at military tar-
gets, economic espionage is as likely to be carried out by an ally
as it is an adversary. The top twelve states placing economic spies
in the United States are China, Canada, France, India, Japan,
Germany, South Korea, Russia, Taiwan, Great Britain, Israel, and
Mexico (Johnson 2000).
60
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

Three broad styles of economic espionage against the United
States have been identified. The first targets are present and for-
mer nationals who work for American companies. China, Taiwan,
and South Korea are said to practice this type of economic espi-
onage. The second type of economic espionage relies heavily on
traditional forms of Cold War military-oriented techniques and
practices such as bribery, theft, and wiretapping. France, Russia,
and Israel are identified as the leading practitioners of this type of
economic espionage. The third style of economic espionage is
practiced by Japan. It relies upon networks of industry and pri-
vate organizations to obtain desired information.
Insight into the type of information sought after in economic
espionage comes from a U.S. government study of Israeli spying.
The report identifies three primary types of information being
targeted. They are information to strengthen Israel’s industrial
base; information that can be exchanged with others for profit;
and information that can be used to strengthen Israeli political
ties with other states, especially as they relate to arms and intelli-
gence needs. In concrete terms this translates into an interest in
technology related to artillery gun tubes, coating for missile reen-
try vehicles, avionics, missile telemetry, and aircraft communica-
tions systems (Fialka 1997).
The existence of a globalized economy means that economic
espionage against American firms does not have to be carried out
in the United States. Many of the most aggressive spy operations
are run abroad, where communication security is more lax and
surveillance less sophisticated. According to one estimate, about
40 percent of economic espionage cases occur in Asia and 30 per-
cent occur in Western Europe. A Canadian study concluded that
roughly 1/3 of a group of 500 companies operating there had
experienced security problems.
For its part the United States has refused to spy on private
companies. Instead it focuses its resources on uncovering unfair
trading practices and providing support for U.S. trade negotia-
tions. One of the most celebrated cases involved a 1994 incident
in which the United States uncovered evidence of a French bribe
of Brazilian officials that was intended to steer a communica-
tions contract to a French firm. The U.S. government intervened
and Brazil awarded the contract to Raytheon. All that is refer-
enced is the fact that the U.S. government approached Brazil
and complained. A similar situation had developed earlier with
Economic Espionage
61

a potential French contract in Saudi Arabia that was suddenly
awarded to a U.S. firm after the American government com-
plained to the Saudis about bribery being involved in the deal
with the French.
This case highlights some of the difficult issues that must
constantly be addressed in economic espionage and that separate
economic espionage from military espionage. In cases of military
espionage, the discovery of a spy does not necessarily lead to
immediate action. The spy may be fed false information, and his
or her network of agents and handlers will be mapped. It is also
quite clear that it is national security concerns that are being pro-
tected in this sort of spy catching. But what of economic espi-
onage? If espionage uncovers evidence that secrets are being
stolen, that a company is being undermined from within, or that
competitors hold an unfair advantage, what should be done?
What is the government’s responsibility to private firms? Who is
economic counterespionage intended to protect: a firm, an indus-
try, or the American economy? What should one do if economic
espionage helps General Motors but harms Ford? Complicating
matters even further is the question, what is an American firm in
an era of globalization?
Controlling Espionage
No one doubts the need for secrecy in the area of intelligence. No
one doubts the need for control over intelligence. Espionage is not
immune from the tension inherent in these competing impera-
tives. The enduring challenge of intelligence policy is to accom-
plish both objectives at the same time without sacrificing the
effectiveness of either one.
The conventional starting place in thinking about control is
passing laws and exercising legislative oversight. Each is prob-
lematic in the area of intelligence. Most of the rules governing
intelligence agencies, such as the prohibition on assassinations,
are found in executive orders and not in laws passed by
Congress. Lawmakers have been reluctant to pass legislation
detailing how espionage, counterespionage, covert action, and
intelligence analysis should be conducted. Instead, Congress has
treated these activities as executive functions best left to the dis-
cretion of the president. What Congress does insist upon is that it
be informed and briefed by the intelligence community. Since the
62
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

mid-1970s each house of Congress has had a standing intelligence
committee for this purpose. Prior to that, the intelligence com-
munity briefed a variety of committees, and congressional over-
sight was haphazard. A key factor prompting the creation of these
committees was a series of revelations that the CIA had been spy-
ing on American citizens (Johnson 1988).
Presidential control presents its own problems. Crowded
agendas, limited time, and limited interest conspire to push intel-
ligence to the background. Even presidents who are interested in
intelligence matters may not be interested in the details of espi-
onage operations. Because espionage operations involve deceit
and treasonous activity, a case can be made that presidents should
not know all the details of espionage operations. “Plausible
denial” is a valued and time-honored phrase in intelligence work
that allows policymakers to feign ignorance of operations gone
wrong. The more intimately presidents or legislators are involved
in espionage operations, the more difficult it is to assert such a
claim. It will be shown in the next chapter that the close interac-
tion of key Israeli officials ultimately made it impossible to sus-
tain the argument that Jonathan Jay Pollard was part of a rogue
operation in spying on the United States.
In addition to thinking about controlling espionage in terms of
externally imposed restrictions and standards, one can approach it
from the perspective of control being provided by the intelligence
organizations themselves. This brings this discussion back to the
subject of espionage and bureaucracy. It has already been asserted
that the organizational culture within which espionage is carried
out serves to protect its members and not to control their behavior.
To this, one can add a further complicating factor. Espionage
involves deceit and treachery. In most Americans’ everyday lives
and in their dealings with friends, family, and coworkers, these
are not traits people value or respect. Their inclination is to follow
Secretary of State Henry Stimson’s lead when he rejected
American espionage on the grounds that it was ethically wrong to
read other people’s mail. A basis for morally imposed standards
to control espionage would thus seem to exist. Working against
this moral imperative are the reasons of state doctrine. This doc-
trine asserts that although certain actions are clearly indefensible
in people’s personal lives, they can be justified as necessary in the
realm of foreign policy because the survival of the state is at stake.
Espionage and counterespionage are easily justified from this
value perspective.
Controlling Espionage
63

To point out the difficulties with internal control over espi-
onage, however, is not to assert that it is impossible. Military offi-
cers often find themselves in circumstances in which externally
imposed controls are imprecise and distant and in which the
moral basis for their decisions is far from clear. We rely upon their
professionalism to guide them in their decision making. We also
hold them accountable for their actions. The same logic can be
applied to intelligence work. Just as is the case for military officers,
intelligence professionals operate in a turbulent environment for
which detailed rules of conduct cannot be written in advance or to
cover all possibilities. Superiors rely upon the professionalism of
intelligence officials to act in an appropriate manner when recruit-
ing agents, countering foreign espionage efforts, or intercepting
and handling secret information. The rough and tough image of
intelligence work should not hide the reservoir of professionalism
that exists within the intelligence community. It needs only to be
recalled that much of the information wrongdoing that formed the
heart of the Church Committee Report on abuses by the intelli-
gence community (a portion of which is included in chapter 5)
was provided by CIA intelligence officers in response to a call by
Director of Central Intelligence William Colby for them to come
forward with information of wrongdoing.
Within the CIA and the intelligence community a series of
directives provide a baseline for exercising such professional
judgment. Guidelines were issued in 1995 that instructed CIA
case officers to balance human rights concerns and other criminal
violations against the value of the intelligence the agent might
provide in making a decision as to whether or not to recruit an
individual. In 1975 Director of Central Intelligence George Bush
issued guidelines restricting the recruitment of members of the
clergy and the media. The CIA’s use of the media and the clergy
for intelligence operations had emerged as one of the major areas
of concern in congressional investigations of questionable activity
by the intelligence community. It was widely held by political
commentators across the political spectrum that the integrity of a
free press and the principle of separation of church and state had
to be placed above suspicion.
The popular image of the CIA in the 1970s was that of a
rogue elephant out of control engaging in covert operations and
espionage with little regard to laws or the national interest.
Investigations by the Church and Pike Committees showed this
reputation to be unwarranted. The external and internal control
64
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

mechanisms in place provide a forum for public debate and gov-
ernment supervision over espionage. It is important to recognize
that this system of oversight may produce widely differing out-
comes. In the mid 1990s the CIA came under criticism for having
on its payroll several agents in Guatemala who had a record of
human rights abuses. The CIA took steps such as instructing offi-
cers to weigh the human rights and criminal records of potential
intelligence sources in their recruitment programs. After the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Congress urged the CIA to
reconsider its “dirty hands” prohibition and to take greater risks
in recruiting agents that might possess valuable information
(Hitz 2002).
Counterespionage and National Security
Espionage makes counterespionage necessary. Counterespionage
efforts can range from the passive protection of secrets to proac-
tive efforts to ferret out spies and turn them into double agents.
Counterespionage is police work and involves a different mind-
set than does intelligence. This is most evident when sufficient
evidence exists to arrest a spy. Intelligence agencies prefer not to
make that arrest, in hopes that surveillance will provide addi-
tional information about the spy and his or her level of penetration
into the organization. The FBI, which has primary jurisdiction for
counterespionage, would prefer that the arrest be made. Its
record of success and failure is measured by the number of spies
that are caught and successfully prosecuted. Both approaches to
counterespionage make valid points, and thus the tension
between counterespionage as police work and as intelligence
work can never be fully reconciled. Further complicating matters
is the reality that identifying and pursuing someone as a spy from
the perspective of counterespionage as intelligence and coun-
terespionage as police work proceed from different standards of
evidence. The FBI must have sufficient evidence to make its case
stand up in a court of law. The CIA can proceed with less-
compelling evidence and with evidence that will remain secret if
no arrest is made.
Most damaging to the conduct of counterespionage in the
United States has been the repeated tendency for counterintelli-
gence to be directed at domestic groups. Especially vulnerable
have been ethnic groups and dissident political groups that hold
Counterespionage and National Security
65

views outside of the political mainstream. Two sets of factors
combine to make members of these groups the target of counter-
intelligence efforts. The first lies with the political insecurity of
government leaders. These groups are viewed as political ene-
mies that have to be defeated.
The second factor is more fundamental and transcends the
identities of the individuals in office. It lies in the quest for
absolute security (Chace and Carr 1988). Linked closely to the his-
torical American sense of exceptionalism and separation from the
world is the belief that proper policies can make the United States
immune to foreign threats. Foreign policies of isolationism and
unilateralism help to ensure that foreign governments cannot
directly harm the United States either through war or entrap-
ment. The danger remains, however, that hostile foreign powers
could attack American national security indirectly by working
from within, by using domestic American groups as proxies.
Because this danger is general rather than specific it requires con-
stant vigilance and surveillance. And it is only a short step from
vigilance and surveillance to infiltration and manipulation.
Historically, legal, political, and bureaucratic measures have
been taken to reduce this potential for abuse and excess in the
conduct of counterespionage activities. On the legal front, the
constitutional ban on unwarranted searches and seizures makes
no exception for counterespionage operations. Politically it is
hoped that congressional oversight powers will detect and limit
excesses. Bureaucratically, an organizational division of labor
exists in which the FBI has primary jurisdiction for counterespi-
onage activities in the United States, and the CIA is prohibited
from having domestic law enforcement, subpoena, or police pow-
ers. Neither collectively nor individually have these control
mechanisms succeeded in totally preventing counterespionage
abuses. In politically charged times the quest for absolute security
has proven to be too strong and the shroud of secrecy surround-
ing espionage too blinding.
Espionage and 9/11
Previously in this chapter, the changing nature of national secu-
rity threats was noted. Up until the terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon on September 11, 2001, few citizens
were involved in the debate over how best to protect American
66
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

national security or where those threats emanated from. This has
now changed, and the place of intelligence in American national
security policy is very much debated. Much of this attention has
been focused on the analytical challenge involved in detecting an
impending terrorist attack (along with recriminations for why the
attacks of September 11 were not more precisely foreseen). A con-
cern for improved intelligence analysis leads one quickly to the
field of espionage and counterespionage, for as was noted in the
discussion of the intelligence cycle, espionage is one important
tool used by the intelligence community in collecting the data on
which to base its analysis, and counterespionage is a necessary
activity to protect one’s own secrets. The unique challenge that
terrorism presents to espionage and counterespionage is twofold.
First, the nongovernmental nature of the enemy requires the
rethinking of penetration strategies and of who might be an
enemy agent. Keeping track of possible Soviet agents and pene-
tration targets in the United States during the Cold War was an
immense task but one that is now dwarfed by the challenge pre-
sented by terrorist groups. Second, it is not just government or
economic secrets that must be protected. Terrorists are interested
in obtaining a much wider set of information, and much of it is
publicly available.
Two major initiatives have been taken in the year following
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks that potentially hold
great significance for the conduct of espionage and counterespi-
onage by American authorities. The first is the USA PATRIOT Act.
The second is the establishment of the Department of Homeland
Security.
Officially known as the Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act, the USA PATRIOT Act was adopted by
Congress on October 25, 2001, and signed into law the following
day by President George W. Bush. The USA PATRIOT Act, 342
pages in length, emerged as the Bush administration’s immediate
legislative response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Its intent is to provide
law enforcement officials with an enhanced ability to investigate
and prosecute terrorism. One of its provisions expands the defi-
nition of engagement in terrorist activity to include providing
support for groups that the individual “knew or should have
known were terrorist organizations.” Rather than obtain a wire-
tap order, authorities will be able to use search warrants to read
Espionage and 9/11
67

opened voice mail messages and electronic mail from Internet
providers. The USA PATRIOT Act also expands the list of toxins
that are classified as dangerous and requires background checks
of scientists who work with them.
One of the most important sets of provisions in the USA
PATRIOT Act affects the conduct of intelligence activities in the
United States. Intelligence surveillance is not permitted when for-
eign intelligence is a “significant purpose” rather than “the pur-
pose” of the undertaking. The act broadens the authority of the
government to contract for terrorist information with individuals
who were once placed off-limits because of human rights viola-
tions or other transgressions. It also contains a number of direc-
tives intended to promote intelligence sharing and cooperation
among intelligence agencies. Included here is the prompt disclo-
sure of information obtained in a criminal investigation and the
establishment of a virtual translation center within the intelli-
gence community, the center’s purpose being to speed the rate of
translation of information and its dissemination through the
entire intelligence community.
Many of the provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act (some of
which contain sunset provisions that take effect on December 31,
2005), as well as the speed with which the act was passed, concern
many onlookers. The legislation was passed so quickly that there
were no committee reports or votes taken, thus denying law
enforcement officials and outside experts the opportunity to com-
ment on the act’s  provisions. Furthermore, the absence of typical
committee hearings deprived implementers and legal officials of
insight into the congressional intent in passing the USA PATRIOT
Act. Congress did not establish oversight procedures for measur-
ing the effectiveness of these provisions and by which to judge
the actions of those who were carrying them out. Finally, the sun-
set provisions written into many portions of the USA PATRIOT
Act guarantee that Congress will have to return to these issues in
2005.
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush signed
into law the bill creating the Department of Homeland Security.
Bush encountered considerable opposition in the pre-November
2002 general election in his attempt to create the department. It
was only with the Republican Party’s victories in that election,
which guaranteed a Republican Congress in 2003, that the bill
was passed. The most significant stumbling block centered on
civil service protections and bargaining rights of those who were
68
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

slated to work in the new agency. Most Democrats supported a
plan that would have required Bush to work closely with labor
unions before changing the personnel system. The president
wanted the agency itself to have the freedom to hire, fire, move,
and discipline workers in the Department of Homeland Security.
The impasse was broken when the election provided the
Republican Party with a majority in the next Congress.
According to the legislation the Department of Homeland
Security is to combine activities from twenty-two different federal
agencies in order to better protect the United States from terror-
ism. It is envisioned that all agencies will be merged into the
Department of Homeland Security by September 20, 2003. The
total work force will bring together 170,000 employees. Agencies
targeted for incorporation include the Immigration and Natural-
ization Service, the Secret Service, the Customs Service, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Transportation
Security Administration, the Coast Guard, and the Border Patrol.
Originally President Bush had resisted the idea of creating a
Department of Homeland Security. He preferred the establish-
ment of an Office of Homeland Security within the White House.
He established this office on October 8, 2001, by an executive
order. Tom Ridge, whom Bush nominated to be the first secretary
of the Department of Homeland Security, was selected to serve as
the assistant to the president for Homeland Security. Bush’s line
of action produced a negative response from Congress on two
counts. First, as an assistant to the president, Ridge’s appoint-
ment was not subject to confirmation by the Senate, nor could he
easily be compelled to testify. This angered congressional leaders
who sought access to information from the Bush administration
about intelligence leading up to the 9/11 attacks and about steps
taken to prevent future terrorist attacks. Second, congressional
dissatisfaction with the performance of the Central Intelligence
Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation resulted in
mounting pressure for organizational reform. Bush changed his
position in June 2002, at which time he proposed creating the
Department of Homeland Security.
The intent of both measures—the USA PATRIOT Act and the
creation of the Department of Homeland Security—is to improve
the ability of the U.S. intelligence community to respond to the
terrorist challenge. In terms of the discussion of issues in this
chapter, these measures raise two very different sets of concerns
for the conduct of espionage and counterespionage. The USA
Espionage and 9/11
69

PATRIOT Act, along with laws and executive orders associated
with it, is intended to make it easier to gather intelligence and
conduct counterespionage operations. The principal concern
expressed here centers on the potential excesses that may accom-
pany this loosening of restraint. As has been seen, previous
episodes in American history suggest that when espionage and
counterespionage turn their attention away from foreign targets
to domestic ones, the civil liberties of immigrants and members of
radical political groups are frequently the first victims.
A related human rights concern that has been expressed
deals with the conduct of interrogations by the CIA and foreign
intelligence agencies of foreigners suspected of involvement in
terrorist operations in or against the United States. It is not
uncommon for those who do not cooperate with American inter-
rogators to be turned over to foreign intelligence services for
questioning. Among the practices reportedly employed by the
CIA are sleep deprivation and requiring suspects to remain
standing or kneeling for hours with black hoods over their heads.
Some civil rights groups claim that these tactics are in violation of
international human rights agreements and could be defined as
torture. Other human rights experts disagree. Because Congress
recognized the controversial nature of key provisions of the USA
PATRIOT Act, it was to expire in 2005. In spring 2003 the Bush
administration began preparing for a USA PATRIOT Act II that
would make many of its provisions permanent. Attention has
focused most closely on those expanding the authority of law
enforcement officials to conduct telephone and Internet surveil-
lance with minimal legal supervision and jail noncitizens for up
to six months without any formal charges being presented. Early
draft language would also allow the government to “infiltrate
and monitor” worship services.
One of the most ambitious programs to come out of the
increased concern with obtaining information on terrorists has
been the FBI’s attempt to enlist private citizens in espionage. A
first attempt was the Operation TIPS program (Terrorism
Information and Prevention System) in which truckers, bus driv-
ers, and others would be asked to watch out for suspicious activ-
ity in the normal routine of their work and report it to authorities.
The move was criticized by forces from both the political left and
right, such as the American Civil Liberties Union and House
Majority Leader Richard Armey (R-Texas). The bill creating the
Department of Homeland Security outlawed the concept. In
70
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

December 2002 the FBI went forward on a different tack to accom-
plish the same end. It placed pictures of five individuals on its
Web site who were believed to be in the United States illegally.
The FBI asked the public to be on the lookout for them, although
it acknowledged that it had no concrete information that they
were connected to any potential terrorist activities.
The creation of the Department of Homeland Security
raises a different sort of problem for espionage and counterespi-
onage. Here, the question is one of effectiveness of effort. Com-
mentators are concerned that it will take considerable time for
the twenty-two agencies and 170,000 employees in the new
department to meld into a coherent whole. At least three distinct
tasks face those in charge of the new department. The first is
building a sense of identity among those employed that will fos-
ter the achievement of common goals. Members of the new
department are being drawn from organizations that currently
differ in their internal bureaucratic cultures and value systems,
standard operating procedures, and goals and priorities. A sec-
ond task is to construct clear lines of accountability and control.
Under the best of times a certain amount of trial and error can
be expected that will lead to further reorganizations. But, in a
turbulent operational environment such as the one the new
department finds itself in, the pressure to demonstrate accom-
plishments competes with and may negate efforts at creating an
administratively efficient body. Third, the Department of Home-
land Security must establish working relationships with the
other members of the intelligence community. One factor com-
plicating this task is that it joins the intelligence community
because of the perceived failings of other members, most
notably the CIA and FBI. As was noted in the previous discus-
sion of the intelligence community, it is a community in name
only. In reality it is populated by competing organizations that
jealously guard their turfs. Evidence of that is already emerging.
The FBI, in particular, is concerned with proposals to create a
new domestic spying agency and proclaims itself capable of car-
rying out this mission. As the year 2002 ended, the FBI and CIA
had convinced the White House that the Department of
Homeland Security should only receive summary intelligence
reports and not raw intelligence. 
Should those working to establish the Department of
Homeland Security not be able to master these three tasks, twin
dangers may be encountered. The first is that espionage and
Espionage and 9/11
71

counterespionage efforts will not operate at their maximum
potential. The second is that a new wave of recriminations and
blame laying may be spawned that will prove damaging to the
overall functioning of the intelligence system.
Further Reading
The suggested further readings in this section are analytical in nature.
They help place espionage and counterespionage in a conceptual con-
text. Almost any comprehensive introductory college-level textbook on
international relations will provide a solid analytic overview of world
politics. Examples include Glenn Hastedt and Kay Knickrehm, Inter-
national Politics in a Changing World (New York: Longman, 2003); John
Rourke, International Politics on the World Stage (New York: McGraw-
Hill/Dushkin, 2003); and Joshua Goldstein, International Relations (New
York: Longman, 2001). Important accounts of the role of surprise in
world politics include Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and
Decision (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 1962); and Epharim
Kam, Surprise Attack: The Victim’s Perspectives (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1988).
Analytical treatments of the intelligence function and the operation
of the intelligence community include Walter Laqueur, A World of Secrets:
The Uses and Limits of Intelligence (New York: Basic, 1985); Scott
Breckinridge, The CIA and the U.S. Intelligence System (Boulder, CO:
Westview, 1986); Arthur Hulnik, Fixing the Spy Machine: Preparing
American Intelligence for the Twenty-First Century (Westport, CT: Praeger,
1999); Harry Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1970); Alfred Maurer et al., eds., Intelligence
Policy and Process (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1985); J. F. Holden-Rhodes,
Sharing the Secrets: Open Source Intelligence and the War on Drugs
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997); Glenn Hastedt, ed., Controlling Intelligence
(London: Frank Cass, 1991); Mark Reibling, Wedge: The Secret War between
the FBI and CIA (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1994 and 2002); Abraham
Shulsky, Silent Warfare (Washington, DC: Pergamon-Brassey’s, 1991); and
Craig Eisendrath, ed., National Insecurity: U.S. Intelligence after the Cold
War (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2000).
The field of economic intelligence is growing in importance, but
much of the literature remains in the area of corporate spying, which is
beyond the scope of this book. Also informative to read are hearings
before congressional committees. For example, see The Threat of Foreign
Economic Espionage against U.S. Corporations, Hearings before the
Subcommittee on Economic and Commercial Law of the Committee of
72
Understanding the Contemporary Espionage Debate

the Judiciary, House of Representatives, 102nd Congress, April 29, 1992;
and Economic Espionage, Technology Transfers, and National Security,
Hearings before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United
States, 105th Congress, June 17, 1997.
References
Berkowitz, Bruce, and Allan Goodman. 1989. Strategic Intelligence for
American National Security. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Betts, Richard. 1982. Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning.
Washington, DC: Brookings.
Central Intelligence Agency. 1975. A Consumer’s Guide to Intelligence.
Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency.
Chace, James, and Caleb Carr. 1988. America Invulnerable: The Quest for
Absolute Security from 1812 to Star Wars. New York: Summit.
Demerest, Geoffrey. 1996. “Espionage in International Law.” Denver
Journal of International Law and Policy 24: 321–348.
Fialka, John. 1997. War by Other Means: Economic Espionage in America.
New York: Norton.
Hitz, Frederick. 2002. “Unleashing the Rogue Elephant: September 11
and Letting the CIA Be the CIA.” Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy
25: 756–781.
Jervis, Robert. 1976. Perception and Misperception in International Politics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Johnson, Loch. 1988. A Season of Inquiry: Congress and Intelligence.
Chicago: Dorsey.
———. 2000. “Spies.” Foreign Policy 120: 18–28.
Martin, David. 1980. Wilderness of Mirrors. New York: Ballantine.
Richelson, Jeffrey. 1985. The U.S. Intelligence Community. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger.
Stein, Arthur. 1990. Why States Cooperate: Circumstance and Choice in
International Relations. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wilensky, Harold. 1967. Organizational Intelligence. New York: Basic.
References
73


3
Espionage around
the World
I
t was noted in chapter 1 that espionage and the intelligence
agencies that support it and seek to prevent it are not relics of
the Cold War. The American experience with espionage dates
back to the revolutionary period and continues into the present
day. The reasons for the continued importance of espionage,
along with the debate over its place in American foreign policy,
were reviewed in chapter 2. This chapter will place espionage in
a global context by presenting an overview that highlights its his-
tory and structure in other countries and then by reviewing sig-
nificant cases of espionage involving these states.
Placing espionage in a global context is important for several
reasons. First, most of the literature on American intelligence is
written without any reference to espionage and intelligence organ-
izations other than the United Kingdom and Soviet Union. It is not
the case that only great powers engage in spying. The nature of
world politics provides powerful incentives for countries of all
sizes and political philosophies to engage in espionage. Second,
context matters in studying espionage. For Americans the typical
starting point for thinking about security concerns—and therefore
the threat of espionage—is external. For other states, security
threats are seen as coming both from external enemies and inter-
nal ones. This dual focus can be reflected in both the conduct of
espionage and how it is bureaucratically organized. It explains
why in some countries espionage is looked upon as a dirty activ-
ity that is permissible only in times of national emergency and
why in others it is accepted as a political necessity. Third, the study
75

of espionage and, more broadly, intelligence is not carried out in
the same manner around the world. American studies of espi-
onage are dominated by political science. British and Soviet stud-
ies of espionage are heavily historical in focus. Scholars examining
intelligence practices and organizations in the developing world
often use sociology and anthropology as the starting points for
their studies (Godson, 1988).
Although the focus in this chapter is on espionage in
post–World War II international politics, it is important to recog-
nize the enduring role that espionage has played in political and
military affairs throughout history. It is frequently noted that the
Bible contains more than 100 references to spying and intelligence
gathering. As early as 500 B.C. Sun Tzu, the Chinese strategist,
argued that all war is based on deception and stressed the impor-
tance of intelligence in achieving victory. In the Middle Ages espi-
onage was employed to protect the interests of the Crown from
internal and external threats. Sir Francis Walsingham, who served
Queen Elizabeth I, is credited with preventing her overthrow by
Catholic forces aligned with Mary, Queen of Scots and by King
Philip II of Spain through carefully constructed espionage opera-
tions. On the negative side it is also believed that he concocted
many of the plots against Queen Elizabeth to enhance his own
reputation for spy catching. 
Two centuries later in France, Cardinal Richelieu set up an
intelligence service, the Cabinet Noir, to keep track of the activi-
ties of French nobles who might threaten the reign of Louis XIII.
Joseph Fouche is credited with establishing the first modern polit-
ical espionage system, which was done in the service of Napo-
leon. It provided Napoleon with important information about
Great Britain. Fouche, however, ultimately ran afoul of Napoleon,
who came to suspect that he was a British spy and who sent him
into exile. In Russia, the tsars set up an intelligence service that
spied on revolutionary groups. This group, the Okhrana, estab-
lished a system of spies and agents that successfully penetrated
revolutionary groups in the period leading up to the Russian
Revolution. Espionage could not, however, prevent the tsars’ ulti-
mate downfall. Once in power Vladimir Lenin would put
together his own intelligence service, the CHEKA (All-Russian
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counterrevolution,
Speculation, and Sabotage), under the leadership of Felix
Dzershinsky to protect Bolshevik rule.
76
Espionage around the World

Frederick II of Prussia is considered by many to be the first
architect of modern military intelligence organizations, and by
World War I all major powers except the United States possessed
such organizations. Russian intelligence was able to obtain Austria-
Hungary’s war plan by blackmailing a key Austrian army officer.
The most famous spy in World War I was Margaretha Zelle. She
was better known as Mata Hari. An exotic dancer, she became a
German spy in 1914 and obtained information from her lovers.
Not very skilled as a spy, Mata Hari soon came under suspicion
and was later identified in a message that was intercepted and
decoded by French authorities. She was shot in 1918.
During World War II all of the major combatants had intelli-
gence organizations in place, although as noted in chapter 1, the
United States again lagged behind the others with the creation of
the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). In addition to their estab-
lished intelligence organizations, the British set up a new unit in
1940, the Special Operations Executive (SOE). Like the Ameri-
cans’ OSS, the SOE combined multiple intelligence tasks includ-
ing espionage, guerrilla warfare, and sabotage. A key task of
theirs was to cooperate with resistance groups. The SOE’s casu-
alty rate was extraordinarily high. Of 393 agents sent to France
between 1940 and 1944, 102 were killed.
Both of the United States’s principal adversaries had multi-
ple intelligence services. In Germany there was the Abwehr and
the Sicherheitsdienst (SD). The Abwehr was the intelligence and
covert operations unit of the armed forces. The SD was the intel-
ligence arm of the Nazi Party. The two competed for political
influence and primacy within the Third Reich throughout the
war. Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, head of the Abwehr, was arrested
in July 1944 and executed in April 1945 for his involvement in a
failed plot to kill Adolph Hitler. 
In Japan, the Tokko was responsible for domestic counteres-
pionage. Formed in 1991, it was a branch of the Tokyo police that
had prevented the spread of communism to Japan after World
War I. Within the armed forces, the Kempei Tai was in charge of
counterespionage. Within Japan it was responsible for keeping
track of military personnel; abroad it was linked to atrocities in
Singapore when it executed hundreds of Chinese people sus-
pected of being security risks. Japanese naval intelligence suc-
cessfully placed a spy in Hawaii prior to the attack on Pearl
Espionage around the World
77

Harbor. Arriving there in March 1941, he sent weekly reports to
Japan through normal diplomatic channels about naval activity at
Pearl Harbor (Melton 1996).
Great Britain
The history of British espionage reaches back to the late sixteenth
century and moves forward in century-long leaps of time. It
begins when Francis Walsingham built up an intelligence net-
work in France—to which he was the British ambassador—and
throughout Europe, which alerted British authorities to Spanish
naval plans for attacking Great Britain. The uniqueness of
Walsingham was his employment of a network of agents to help
him gather intelligence about people and events. Following his
death in 1590, Great Britain returned to the more traditional prac-
tice of relying heavily on ambassadors for intelligence. It would
be more than 100 years, in 1703, before the British would create a
true intelligence agency. In that year the Decyphering Branch was
established. It would be shut down in 1844 just as the electronic
transmission of information (and its interception) became possi-
ble. One hundred years after the Decyphering Branch was created
the first military intelligence unit was established, the Depot of
Military Knowledge.
Excluding military intelligence organizations, four bodies
have dominated the field of British intelligence in the twentieth
century. The first is the Government Communications Head-
quarters (GCHQ). Its origins can be traced back to 1919 when
Room 40 (the Naval intelligence communications intercept organ-
ization that deciphered the Zimmermann telegram) and MI-8 (the
army’s cryptographic unit) were combined into the Government
Code and Cypher School. Among its notable espionage successes
was breaking the American diplomatic code in use at the Wash-
ington Naval Conference. This organization was better known by
its location, Bletchley Park, than by its formal name, the GCHQ.
Its mission is to monitor and decode electronic transmissions
in and out of Great Britain including those by foreign embassies
and companies. It also is responsible for developing codes for the
British government and for safeguarding British communications.
In order to accomplish its mission GCHQ directs the activities of
all military electronic monitoring groups and maintains a number
78
Espionage around the World

of overseas listening posts. Two major security breaches on record
include the 1982 arrest of Geoffrey Prime, who provided the Soviet
Union with GCHQ intelligence for fourteen years, and the 1981
loss of top secret material from a Hong Kong listening post that
was targeted on Chinese space and missile launches.
The second major intelligence organization in Britain is the
Secret Intelligence Service (SIS). The SIS was created in 1909 as a
subcommittee of the Committee of Imperial Defence and was
charged with establishing the nature and extent of foreign espi-
onage in Great Britain. Based on the subcommittee’s findings the
British set up a Secret Service Bureau under the jurisdiction of the
War Office. Very soon it settled into an organization that con-
tained two branches, a Home Section and a Foreign Section. The
Home Section evolved into MI-5 and then the civilian Security
Service. The Foreign Section evolved into MI-6 and then the civil-
ian Secret Intelligence Service.
The SIS is charged with the tasks of recruiting foreign spies
within Great Britain and of engaging in covert operations and the
clandestine collection of information abroad. Two notable SIS
successes in the area of human espionage include East German
agent Hans Joachim Koch, who provided important intelligence
during the East Berlin uprising in 1953 and was arrested in 1955,
and GRU Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, who provided information to
British and American authorities from early 1961 until his arrest
in October 1962. Technical espionage successes include placing
microphones in the offices of the Polish Trade Mission in Brussels
and the office of the Soviet commercial attaché in Copenhagen,
and intercepting cables from the Imperial Hotel in Vienna, which
served as the Soviet command center for occupied Austria during
World War II.
The third organization, the Security Service, is internally
focused. It conducts counterespionage operations against foreign
targets, monitors domestic movements for possible acts of sub-
version, and conducts security investigations of individuals with
access to secret information. Notable spies caught by this agency
include John Vassall, who spied for the Soviet Union from 1954 to
1961. Reportedly he was being blackmailed by the Soviets for his
homosexuality. Among the groups that the Security Service has
conducted countersabotage operations against are the National
Council for Civil Liberties and the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament.
Great Britain
79

It is reported that the Irish embassy was once bugged by the
Security Service. Ireland has been a special target of British intel-
ligence since 1883 when the Irish Special Branch of the
Metropolitan Police was set up to deal with Fenian bombings in
London. The Fenians were a secret group that engaged in terror-
ism. They were organized in Ireland and the United States
around 1858 for the purpose of winning Irish independence from
Great Britain. All references to “Irish,” as in the Irish Special
Branch of the Metropolitan Police, were dropped in subsequent
years, and the Special Branch now is charged with protecting key
government personnel and buildings, investigating violations of
the Official Secrets Act, and monitoring subversive organizations
and aliens entering Great Britain. It also makes arrests for the
Security Service (Richelson 1988). The fourth intelligence organi-
zation is the Special Branch that is a subdepartment of the Crime
Department of the Metropolitan Police, which operates through-
out Great Britain.
Kim Philby
British intelligence was the victim of one of the most serious
espionage penetrations in the Cold War. Harold Adrian Russell
(“Kim”) Philby was at the center of this storm. Kim Philby was a
product of upper-class British society and enrolled in Cambridge
in 1929. There he became radicalized by the Great Depression
and by the failure of the Labour Party or the Tories (the conser-
vative party) to respond effectively to it. Philby was recruited by
the Soviets in 1933 with instructions that his long-term objective
was to infiltrate the SIS. Before being able to do so he served as a
journalist during the Spanish civil war. Philby achieved his
assigned posting with the help of fellow spy Guy Burgess. Philby
was initially assigned to the SIS section charged with carrying
out acts of sabotage and stirring up resistance to Germany in
Europe. World War I’s end found Philby in charge of Section IX,
the anti-Soviet section of the SIS. There he energetically
advanced plans for a rapid expansion of the unit and for devel-
oping a network of agents in Eastern Europe. In this capacity he
knew of postwar covert operations supporting East European
resistance groups and British covert operations in Albania that
were designed to bring an end to communist rule. Philby had
also become the heir apparent to the position of director general
of the SIS. In order to give him the needed field experience
80
Espionage around the World

Philby was sent to Turkey from 1947 to 1949. He was then posted
to Washington where he served as the principal liaison between
the SIS and the CIA and FBI.
One of the cases the Philby was privy to was the defection of
Soviet spy William Weisband, who gave the Soviets a copy of
some American codes. U.S. authorities decided not to prosecute
Weisband, so as not to tip off the Soviets that they knew their
codes had been compromised. Philby was also kept abreast of the
accumulating evidence that fellow Cambridge alumni Donald
Maclean, a member of the British diplomatic corps stationed in
Washington, was a Soviet spy. Philby succeeded in warning
Maclean of his impending arrest by passing a message through
Burgess. By a stroke of fate Burgess had also been stationed in
Washington but was being sent back to Great Britain because of
alcoholism and associated behavior problems. Both Maclean and
Burgess fled to Moscow in May 1951.
Less than one month later the FBI identified Philby as a spy,
and the CIA informed the British that Philby was persona non
grata in the United States and must leave. Philby resigned from
the SIS shortly thereafter but was never prosecuted as a Soviet
spy. He remained free for more than a decade before fleeing to the
Soviet Union in 1963. In 1968 Philby wrote his memoirs, in which
he admitted spying for the Soviet Union (Knightly 1988).
Evidence pointing to Philby as a spy had been building for
some time. Among the earliest pieces of evidence was informa-
tion provided by Soviet General Walter Krivitsky, who defected
in 1938. Although unable to give names, Krivitsky indicated that
the Soviets had succeeded in penetrating British intelligence.
One, he said, was a young Scotsman who had entered the foreign
service (Maclean) and the other a journalist who had reported on
the Spanish civil war (Philby). Additional information was pro-
vided in 1945 by a defecting Soviet intelligence officer, Konstan-
tin Volkov, who stated that he knew of two Soviet spies in the
British foreign office and one in MI-6. Philby alerted the Soviets
to Volkov’s pending defection, and they arrested Volkov. That
same year Igor Gouzenko defected to Canada. His information
pointed to the existence of the atomic spies in the United States
and to two penetrations of British intelligence. Ethel and Julius
Rosenberg were the most notable atomic spies. They received
this nickname because they stole secrets about the atomic bomb
for the Soviet Union. Pursuit of these Soviet moles led them to
British and American intelligence to incorrectly identify Maclean
Great Britain
81

as one of these spies. After Philby’s defection they recognized
their mistake.
The true identity of one mole was Philby, but the identity of
the second mole remained in doubt. The possibility that further
penetrations beyond Philby, Burgess, and Maclean existed within
British intelligence came from yet another Soviet defector. In 1961
Anatoliy Golitsyn defected; he had worked in the KGB’s First
Chief Directorate, which is responsible for foreign operations. He
spoke of a “Ring of Five” Soviet agents within British intelligence.
In 1964 Anthony Blount confessed to being a Soviet spy. This
brought the known total to four spies. Speculation on the identity
of the fifth spy came to center on Sir Roger Hollis, the director
general of SIS from 1956 to 1965. Two separate investigations
failed to establish that he was a Soviet spy.
Israel
Israeli intelligence organizations trace their roots to the Zionist
underground organizations that existed in Palestine after World
War I when the League of Nations installed the British Mandate.
The best known of these was the Sherut Yedioth, or International
Service, which was popularly known as the SHAI. Operating
between 1929 and 1948, the SHAI worked to create an indepen-
dent Jewish state by infiltrating the British Mandate offices, pen-
etrating Arab and anti-Zionist groups in the region. It obtained
political intelligence that could further the Zionist cause and
could provide security for Jewish settlers being smuggled into
Palestine. Finally, it also spied on extremist Jewish groups on the
political left and right. The SHAI was disbanded in 1948 when
Israel became an independent state because the SHAI was a tool
of a nonstate actor, the Zionist underground. In its place three
organizations were created. The Israeli Defense Forces estab-
lished a military intelligence service, the Political Department
was established within the Foreign Ministry to collect intelligence
abroad, and the General Security Service, the SHABAK or Shin
Beth, was created to address internal security concerns.
Shin Beth is Israel’s counterespionage and internal security
service, with responsibility for gathering intelligence on and pen-
etrating foreign intelligence organizations. Historically its two
major targets have been Arab states and communist intelligence
services. Domestically, Shin Beth is credited with having pene-
82
Espionage around the World

trated Israeli communist parties and running a well-developed
network of Jewish and Arab informants who monitor the activity
of foreigners and especially Arabs.
Shin Beth has uncovered several spies and spy rings operat-
ing in Israel. These include Israel Beer, a Soviet mole who
assumed the identity of an individual who disappeared in 1938.
Beer served in high-ranking intelligence positions early in Israel’s
history before his arrest in 1962. Shin Beth uncovered a Syrian spy
ring operating in the Golan Heights in 1969. It was providing
Syria with military intelligence on Israeli troop movements. In the
early 1970s its investigations led to the arrest and conviction of a
British electrical engineer on charges of spying for Jordan. Here
again the material in question focused on military intelligence.
Shin Beth’s aggressive pursuit of its mission on occasion has
also placed it at the center of domestic controversy. In 1984 it
responded to a Palestinian hijacking of an Israeli bus. The first
story to emerge stated that all of the hijackers had been killed in
the rescue raid. Subsequent photographs showed two of the
hijackers in custody. They had been interrogated and beaten
before their deaths, and Shin Beth was accused of altering evi-
dence. Avraham Solon, head of Shin Beth, argued that he ordered
the evidence changed with the approval of high-ranking political
leaders. Israeli President Chaim Herzog issued a pardon to all
involved, and one member of the government asserted: “Israel is
in a state of war against terrorism . . . in a state of war the normal
rules don’t apply” (Richelson 1988, 288).
Perhaps the best-known Israeli intelligence organization is
the Mossad, the Central Institute for Intelligence and Special
Duties. It was created in 1951 and was originally charged with
selecting targets and approving intelligence operations carried
out by Israeli military intelligence. Today it is responsible for
conducting covert action, counterterrorism, and intelligence col-
lection operations. Two cases from the 1960s highlight Mossad’s
involvement in espionage. It recruited Eli Cohen to serve as a spy
in Syria. Mossad gave him a false identity and sent him to
Argentina to establish his business credentials. Cohen quickly
established connections with the Syrian community there, and,
upon returning to Syria, he was able to provide Israel with
important information regarding Syrian military plans. Cohen
was uncovered by Syrian intelligence in 1965 and publicly
hanged. A second Mossad spy, Wolfgang Lutz, operated in
Egypt, where he was able to obtain military secrets and even
Israel
83

toured surface-to-air missile sites. He was arrested in 1965 and
was subsequently exchanged for Egyptian POWs captured in the
June 1967 Six Day War.
Another important force in Israeli intelligence is AMAN, the
intelligence branch of the Israeli General Staff. It is tasked with
collecting, producing, and disseminating economic, political, and
military intelligence on states of concern to Israel. AMAN con-
tains an Intelligence Corps that is charged with the covert and
overt collection of intelligence. One means by which it does so is
through signals intelligence. Another branch runs agents into
neighboring countries. Israel’s failure to be adequately prepared
for the Egyptian and Syrian attacks in October 1973 is laid at the
feet of AMAN. The failure here was not a collection failure but an
interpretation one, as senior AMAN officials discounted warn-
ings of an impending war.
The least-publicized Israeli intelligence unit engaged in espi-
onage is LEKEM, the Bureau of Scientific Relations. It is responsi-
ble both for a major espionage success and for what is perhaps
Israel’s greatest espionage failure. The success involved acquiring
the blueprints for key parts of the Mirage fighter-bomber. Israel’s
inventory of Mirages had been heavily depleted as a result of the
June 1967 Six Day War. France, the manufacturer of the Mirage,
had placed an embargo on weapons sales to Israel and was refus-
ing to lift it. France, which had close relations with many of the
Arab states in the region, imposed the arms embargo to protest
Israel’s actions and in an effort to gain political leverage over
Israel’s war decisions. Obtaining these blueprints allowed Israel
to repair its own planes. Jonathan Jay Pollard’s recruitment is
considered a failure because the information he gave to Israel—
valuable as it was—did not offset the political damage done to
U.S.-Israeli security relations by the revelation that a trusted ally
was spying on the United States or the split it produced within
the Jewish community over whether or not the Israeli govern-
ment should have moved quickly to protect Pollard.
Jonathan Jay Pollard
Jonathan Jay Pollard joined U.S. Navy intelligence in 1979 after
being rejected for a position by the CIA because of a history of
occasional drug use while in college. He claims to have made the
decision to spy for Israel in 1982 following his participation in a
formal intelligence exchange between U.S. and Israeli intelligence
84
Espionage around the World

organizations. Pollard was angry that the United States did not
give Israel all of the intelligence it possessed. It was in 1984 that
Pollard took his first steps toward becoming an Israeli spy. He
told a friend about his interest in meeting Israeli Air Force
Colonel Aviem Stella. The request was passed on to Stella, who
sought instructions from the Israeli government on whether or
not to meet Pollard. The Mossad, which as a general principle had
no interest in running spy operations in or against the United
States, conducted a background check on Pollard and concluded
that the meeting should not take place. However, another Israeli
intelligence organization, LEKEM, gave its approval.
The meeting between Stella and Pollard took place on May
29, 1984, at the Washington Hilton. Pollard wasted little time
telling Stella he wished to spy for Israel. Stella had been author-
ized in advance to approve such a relationship, and it was agreed
that a second meeting would be held. This occurred on July 7. To
prove his worth, Pollard brought forty-eight documents with
him. Per his instructions, Stella refused to accept them but did
indicate to Pollard the type of intelligence Israel wished to
obtain. Specifically excluded from this list was information on
terrorism. Also following instructions, Stella raised the issue of
financial compensation. Pollard resisted. He was volunteering
his services as a spy out of a sense of commitment to Israel and
not for monetary reasons. Israeli intelligence pressed the issue of
financial compensation, as spies who provide their services on a
volunteer basis are not considered trustworthy or good long-
term agents.
The first exchange of intelligence came at a July 19, 1984,
meeting. A second meeting occurred on July 28, at which time
Pollard was paid $2,000. At a November meeting in Paris, Pollard
received detailed instructions on the type of intelligence Israel
was interested in. He also received $1,500 plus $10,000 for
expenses. In the following months Pollard would steal secret
information three times per week and make contact with his
Israeli handlers every other week. The procedure was simple.
Pollard brought the secret material to a safe house, where it was
photocopied. Pollard would then return the originals to their
places. In spring 1985 his monthly salary was raised from $1,500
to $2,500. While visiting Israel that summer at the request of his
handlers, Pollard was offered $30,000 for each of the next ten
years, to be placed in a Swiss bank account. The offer was
accepted.
Israel
85

A sampling of the intelligence given to Israel by Pollard
included all of the American information on Iraqi and Syrian
chemical and biological warfare capabilities; exact details on
Soviet arms shipments to Syria and other Arab states; and strate-
gic information collected by the United States concerning Libya,
Algeria, Iraq, and Pakistan. The most sensitive piece of informa-
tion was the U.S. handbook on communications intelligence.
Things began to unravel for Pollard soon after returning to
work in August 1985. He had made the decision to quit his job
with naval intelligence by the end of the year. In his mind he
would move on to some other espionage activity for Israel.
Rather than curtailing his spying Pollard accelerated it, and in
the process he drew attention to himself. In late October a
coworker who disliked him reported seeing Pollard leave work
with top secret intelligence. Armed with this information Jerry
Agee, Pollard’s boss, began to take an especially close look at
Pollard’s activity and concluded that Pollard was engaged in
espionage.
Pollard was apprehended on November 18, 1985, sitting in
his car as he was leaving work. During a break in the interro-
gations that followed he called his wife and by prearranged sig-
nal indicated that he was in trouble and she was to destroy all
secret documents in their apartment. Pollard had been assured
that an evacuation plan was in place for such a contingency,
and he stalled and misled his interrogators in the expectation
that it would be activated. In fact, no such plan existed, and
when his Israeli contacts found out about his situation, they
fled the United States. Initial searches of Pollard’s apartment
revealed seventy-five classified documents his wife had over-
looked. After two days of questioning, realizing that no escape
plan existed and that he would fail the polygraph test he was
soon to be given, Pollard was able to make a bold dash to the
grounds of the Israeli embassy because while undergoing ques-
tioning by U.S. intelligence officials, he and his wife were not
put under arrest. This again reflects the differing perspectives
of the traditional intelligence services, which are most inter-
ested in obtaining information about security breaches, and the
FBI, which is most interested in arrests and convictions. Pollard
was able to seek asylum by invoking the Law of Return. This
principle asserts that all Jews have a right by law to citizenship
in Israel and the right to reside there. To his amazement,
86
Espionage around the World

Pollard and his wife were forced to leave the embassy grounds,
after which he was promptly arrested again. Anne Pollard was
arrested the next day (Blitzer 1989).
On November 27, 1985, the same day that the Pollards were
arraigned in court, a damage control committee in Israel com-
pleted its report. It stated that Pollard was part of a rogue intelli-
gence operation that was taking place without the government’s
knowledge. This answer did not calm the Reagan administra-
tion’s anger over being spied upon by a friendly power. Besides,
sufficient evidence existed that pointed to the opposite conclu-
sion. The Reagan administration sought the Israeli government’s
cooperation into investigating the matter and the return of the
stolen documents. The Israeli government agreed but came under
heavy domestic pressure for doing so. Pollard was deeply
angered that the Israeli government would agree to participate in
an investigation of his activities without first securing his release.
Contributing to the U.S. government’s anger was the suspicion
that Pollard was not the only spy the Israelis were running.
Fueling this suspicion were the detailed tasking requirements
given to Pollard by his Israeli handlers. They referred to docu-
ments using terminology that could only have been provided by
someone working in the U.S. intelligence community.
With the case against him bolstered through Israeli coopera-
tion, Pollard had little choice but to enter into a plea bargain
agreement in hopes of obtaining a light sentence for Anne. As
part of the court hearings to establish what sentences should be
imposed, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger submitted a
forty-six-page secret document. Parts of it have since been declas-
sified; in these, Weinberger stated that Pollard’s activities had
caused significant harm to American national security. He also
stated that “punishment, of course, must be appropriate to the
crime, and in my opinion, no crime is more deserving of severe
punishment than conducting espionage activities against one’s
own country.”
On March 4, 1987, Jonathan Jay Pollard and his wife, Anne
Henderson Pollard, appeared before Judge Aubrey Robinson for
sentencing after having pleaded guilty to spying for Israel. Judge
Robinson sentenced Jay Pollard to life imprisonment and Anne
Pollard to five years imprisonment. Pollard’s fate has remained a
point of tension in U.S.-Israeli relations (Shaw 2001).
Israel
87

China
The foundations for China’s intelligence organizations were laid
during the revolutionary period in which the Chinese Com-
munist Party sought to establish its rule. In the early 1930s two
intelligence organizations existed. One was centered in Shanghai
in the Communist Party, the other in the Chinese communist gov-
ernment that existed in Kiangsi province where Mao Zedong
ruled. This later intelligence unit proved to be the stronger of the
two. By the late 1930s it was replaced by a newly created Social
Affairs Department (SAD) within the Communist Party that was
headed by a political ally of Mao. With the Communist Party’s
victory over Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist forces in 1949, a full
array of government intelligence organizations were created to
supplement party-based intelligence units such as SAD. The
Ministry of Public Security was given jurisdiction over counter-
subversion, counterintelligence, monitoring Chinese citizens who
returned from abroad, running the labor reform camps, and con-
ducting espionage in Macao, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. A reor-
ganization in 1983 left the Ministry of Public Security with only
traditional police functions. That year Chinese authorities
announced that some 200 Chinese people had been accused of
spying for the Soviet Union.
The Ministry of Public Security’s counterespionage func-
tions became the responsibility of the newly created Ministry of
State Security (MSS). One reason for transferring counterespi-
onage to the MSS was the apparent frustration with the high vol-
ume of secret information being leaked to the West. This was
particularly true with regard to information about debates
occurring within the Communist Party and reports of poor eco-
nomic and social conditions within China. Students, both in
China and abroad, have been a major concern of the MSS as
Chinese leaders have struggled to deal with the fallout from the
Tiananmen Square protests.
In addition to classical human espionage, China has also
engaged in technological espionage activities. It has conducted
photographic reconnaissance since 1970. By 1987 twenty-one
such satellites had been launched. Ten of these are assumed to be
military missions. China maintains a series of signals intelligence
stations. Both photo reconnaissance and signals intelligence
satellites are run by the Chinese military intelligence units
(Richelson 1988).
88
Espionage around the World

Larry Wu-tai Chin
In late 1982 a CIA informant inside the Chinese government noti-
fied the FBI that a Chinese-born American citizen held a sensitive
job inside the U.S. government and was spying for China. One
additional piece of information was soon provided. The Chinese
spy had flown aboard a Pan Am flight in the first week of
February in 1982. A check of individuals on those flights did not
produce any leads. The FBI was able to identify Chin as a possi-
ble spy by working backward: checking subsequent arrivals for
the returning spy.
Chin first made contact with American authorities in 1948
when he was hired as a translator and interpreter. Chin did not
take the job to spy on the United States, but to make money. Very
soon, however, he began to provide China with information. His
roommate, a fervent communist, recruited him. Chin left China in
1950 when the U.S. consulate moved to Hong Kong. He would
soon participate in the interrogation of Chinese prisoners cap-
tured during the Korean War. He passed the information thus
obtained back to China. According to some analysts, Chin’s
actions prolonged the Korean War and were behind China’s
demand that all prisoners from that particular war be repatriated.
Chin also identified many U.S. intelligence officers working out
of Hong Kong.
In 1965 Chin became a U.S. citizen and obtained a job with
the CIA. Chin, like other spies who are employed by U.S. intelli-
gence agencies, must pass background checks on being hired.
These checks involve passing lie detector tests and having one’s
life history examined for evidence of association with groups hos-
tile to the United States or that one could be blackmailed into spy-
ing. No background check is foolproof. Lie detector tests can be
“beaten.” Spies can have careers carefully constructed to pass
background checks as was the case with Kim Philby. And, as we
have seen with Hanssen, Pollard, Ames, and Walker, many who
turn to spying do so after they begin careers in intelligence. One
of the major critiques of counterespionage efforts in the United
States is the tendency to assume that those who have passed the
initial background security check and entered into the fraternity
of intelligence work are incapable of being spies. Time and time
again, evidence of spying or aberrant behavior was discounted or
not sought out. In the case of Chin we can surmise that having
gained employment first as a translator for the U.S. Army and
China
89

then in an American embassy, he faced little scrutiny in being
hired as a translator by the CIA to monitor Chinese broadcasts in
1952. Any possible doubts about Chin’s loyalty would have been
further dampened when he became an American citizen in 1965.
In his capacity as a Chinese language intelligence officer,
Chin had access to message traffic coming in and out of China.
This included reports by American spies. He also had access to
National Intelligence Estimates on China. In 1970 Chin became
privy to information that President Richard Nixon was planning
to open relations with China. He was able to provide Chinese
leaders with advance warning of Nixon’s plans and continued to
provide them with information throughout the diplomatic nego-
tiations leading up to the trip.
Chin retired from the CIA in 1981 with a medal for distin-
guished service. In 1982 he traveled to China, where he was feted
with a farewell banquet and given $50,000. This sum was in addi-
tion to the estimated $200,000 that he had already been paid for
engaging in espionage against the United States.
As a result of tips it had received, the FBI began monitoring
Chin’s movements in April 1983. It was not until November 22,
1985, however, that Chin was arrested. The key piece of evidence
against him was his Chinese case file that detailed all of his
actions. It had been secretly obtained by an American spy in the
Chinese Ministry of State Security. Chin confessed at his trial in
early February 1986. He claimed his intent was to help improve
Sino-American relations. Later that month he committed suicide
in his jail cell (Barron 1989).
Soviet Union/Russia
As with China and Israel, Soviet and Russian intelligence organi-
zations can trace their roots back beyond the founding of their
respective political systems. A convenient point to mark the
beginnings of intelligence organizations here is 1826, when Tsar
Nicholas I established the Third Directorate to serve as a political
force and protect the government from internal subversion. Its
failing to do so led to its replacement by the Okhrana in 1880. It
succeeded in penetrating revolutionary groups but also failed to
protect the tsarist regime from domestic challengers.
The first communist intelligence organization to succeed the
Third Directorate and Okhrana was the All-Russian Extraordinary
90
Espionage around the World

Commission for Combating Counterrevolution, Speculation, and
Sabotage, the Vecheka. The Chekas (by its Russian language ini-
tials this organization was known as the CHEKA and those who
worked in it were referred to as Chekas) pledged themselves to
“annihilating enemy agents, counterrevolutionaries, and specula-
tors.” Along with its successor organization, the State Political
Administration (GPU), these internal security organizations
played major roles in solidifying Soviet rule and transforming
Soviet society. In 1934 the GPU was absorbed into the just-
established People’s Commissariat for Internal Affairs (NKVD). It
played a key role in carrying out Stalin’s purges. Following
Stalin’s death in 1953 a power struggle broke out within the
Soviet Union. Nikita Khrushchev emerged as the winner, and
Lavrenty Beria, who once headed the NKVD, was one of the prin-
cipal losers. He was removed from the Politburo, and in March
1954 a new political police force, the Committee of State Security
(KGB), was established (Richelson 1988).
The KGB directed its energies at carrying out four tasks: frus-
trating and exposing the efforts of foreign spies, uncovering the
political crimes of Soviet citizens, guarding Soviet borders, and
protecting state secrets. Several of the KGB’s internal units had
jurisdiction over espionage-related matters. The First Chief Direc-
torate was responsible for all foreign operations and intelligence
gathering activities. The Second and Fifth Chief Directorates were
responsible for internal political security matters. The Third Chief
Directorate was responsible for military counterintelligence. The
Seventh Chief Directorate was responsible for technical and human
surveillance within the Soviet Union. The Eighth Chief Direc-
torate was responsible for the security of Soviet communications,
including its cipher systems. There is no Fourth Chief Directorate
and the Sixth Chief Directorate deals with a range of issues that
do not bear on intelligence work directly, such as finance, the
physical security of the KGB, and operational analysis.
The end of the Soviet Union also spelled the end for the KGB.
Just three months before its dissolution in December 1991, Mikhail
Gorbachev abolished the KGB by decree. In its place he created
three intelligence organizations: the Interrepublican Security
Service, which was concerned with internal security; the Central
Intelligence Service, which was put in charge of foreign intelli-
gence; and the Committee for the Protection of the State Border.
The KGB did not completely disappear, however. In the
chaotic period that characterized the last months of the Soviet
Soviet Union/Russia
91

Union, a unified KGB remained alive and well at the republic
level where Russian President Boris Yeltsin had insisted on its
continued existence.
Yeltsin did move to disband the KGB once and for all when
the Soviet Union collapsed. As head of the new Russian Federa-
tion, Yeltsin dispersed the KGB’s functions among five different
organizations. Foreign intelligence went to the Foreign Intelli-
gence Service, and counterintelligence and surveillance went to
the Ministry of State Security. Responsibility for communications
was given to the Federal Agency for Government Communi-
cations and Information. Commentators note that this division of
labor mirrors general Russian attitudes toward the KGB.
Although its domestic surveillance powers were feared and
resented, its foreign intelligence activities were never heavily crit-
icized. There was general agreement that the West was hostile to
the Soviet Union and that the KGB was needed.
Between 1975 and 1990 fifteen KGB agents were exposed as
spies. Six were arrested in the Soviet Union, but the remainder
defected. The rate of defection increased dramatically as the
Soviet Union collapsed. Between March 1991 and September 1992
ten intelligence agents defected. In 1993 twenty more were arrested
on espionage charges. Among the most notable defections was
that of FIS Colonel Vladimir Konoplev, who was serving under
the cover of first secretary of the Russian embassy in Brussels. His
case led to several other Russian diplomats being identified as
intelligence agents. Konoplev had, in fact, been spying for the
United States for some time before his defection. Another case
involved the defection of Viktor Oshchenko. Based on informa-
tion he provided, several French citizens were charged with giv-
ing secret scientific information to Russia, and a British engineer
whom Oshchenko had recruited to spy for Russia was exposed
(Knight 1996).
The KGB did not have a monopoly over espionage-related
intelligence activity in the Soviet Union. Military, scientific, and
industrial espionage was conducted by the chief intelligence
directorate (GRU) of the Soviet General Staff. Organizationally, its
roots can be traced to 1920 when, acting on poor intelligence, the
Red Army attacked Poland, expecting to set off an uprising.
Instead, the army was badly beaten. In response to this failure an
independent military intelligence unit was established that in
time came to be the GRU. Politically, the GRU suffered two major
setbacks. The first came in the 1930s when many of its most com-
92
Espionage around the World

petent officials, including its founder and director, Yan Berzin,
became victims of Stalin’s purges. The second politically crip-
pling setback came in the late 1950s and early 1960s when the
GRU was rocked by two espionage cases. In 1958 it discovered
that Lieutenant Colonel Pyotor Popov was an American spy; in
1962 Lieutenant Colonel Oleg Penkovsky was arrested for espi-
onage. As a consequence of these penetrations the GRU appears
to have lost political power within the Soviet system and fallen
under the general direction of the KGB.
In between these two major setbacks the GRU did enjoy sig-
nificant espionage successes. One such case involved Klaus
Fuchs. Born in Germany and a communist supporter, he fled to
England as Hitler rose to power. In late 1941 he volunteered to
spy for the Soviet Union. Fuchs proved to be a valuable spy. He
had obtained a Ph.D. in physics and was employed on a top
secret British project to build an atomic bomb. In 1943 Fuchs
moved to the United States and would soon join the project at Los
Alamos labs in which the American atomic bomb was being put
together. Fuchs’s case demonstrates the dangers in relying heav-
ily upon stolen material. He passed along to the Soviets work by
Edward Teller, an American physicist born in Hungary who
worked on the atomic bomb at Los Alamos and played a key role
in its development, that contained flaws and that probably con-
fused Soviet physicists in their efforts to build an atomic bomb.
Fuchs was arrested in 1950 for spying and was sentenced to four-
teen years in prison. Upon his release, he went to East Germany.
A second case involved Richard Sorge. Born to a German
father and Russian mother, Sorge was educated in Germany and
became a supporter of communism after the Russian Revolution.
In the 1920s he was sent on several intelligence gathering mis-
sions by Russian intelligence and was then recruited by Berzin.
Pretending to be a German journalist he was sent to run a spy
ring out of Shanghai. After returning to Germany and establish-
ing himself as a trustworthy member of the Nazi Party, Sorge was
posted to Tokyo where he was to provide Soviet leaders with
information pertaining to Japanese plans to attack the Soviet
Union. Perhaps as much as 80 percent of the military information
he obtained came from sources within the German embassy.
Sorge was arrested by the Japanese for espionage in 1941 and exe-
cuted in 1944. Although Sorge is praised in Soviet histories for his
espionage exploits, controversy exists concerning the overall
value of the intelligence sent by Sorge to his Soviet handlers. Some
Soviet Union/Russia
93

attribute greater importance to information provided by Soviet
signals intercepts and treat Sorge’s information as being used
largely to confirm the validity of these intercepts.
During the Cold War the United States did not have a
monopoly over satellite reconnaissance. The Soviet Union also
had an active technically based spy program. The first two Soviet
photo reconnaissance satellites, Cosmos 10 and 11, were launched
in October 1962 and provided Soviet leaders with important
information about U.S. military preparedness during the Cuban
missile crisis. The Soviet effort at photo reconnaissance differed
from its U.S. counterpart in a number of respects. First, Soviet
reconnaissance satellite launches occurred much more frequently.
Second, Soviet reconnaissance satellites were relatively simple.
Unlike U.S. reconnaissance satellites that were specifically
designed for espionage and contained highly sophisticated tech-
nology, Soviet spy satellites embodied relatively simple technolo-
gies and represented modifications of the Soyux space capsules.
Soyux is a name given to the Russian space capsules like our
Gemini, Apollo, and Mercury programs. Third, Soviet satellite
reconnaissance was largely reactive in nature. Where U.S. satellite
launches might require weeks of preparation, the Soviets were
known to launch reconnaissance satellites within twenty-four
hours of the onset of an international crisis. For example, during
the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Soviet Union launched seven recon-
naissance satellites in a three-week period, and instead of leaving
them in orbit for the standard two-week period, they were
brought down in less than six days in order to retrieve the film.
Evidence suggests that the Soviet signals intelligence program
mirrors that employed by the United States. Its first signals intel-
ligence satellite was Cosmos 148. It was launched in March 1967,
some five years after the U.S. program was initiated with the
launching of Ferret I in May 1962.
Oleg Penkovsky
Unlike the other spies whose stories are recounted in this chapter,
Penkovsky spied for only a brief time before he was exposed. The
information he provided on Soviet missile systems, however, is
generally cited as having played an important role in U.S. deci-
sion making during the Cuban missile crisis. Penkovsky was a
GRU colonel who had become angry with Soviet authorities for
their discriminatory treatment of him. At issue was the fact that
94
Espionage around the World

his father had been a tsarist judge and had fought with the white
forces against the communists during the Russian civil war.
Penkovsky first tried to defect in August 1960 when he
approached two American students after a performance of the
Bolshoi Ballet. He told them that the U-2 spy plane piloted by
Francis Gary Powers had not been shot down by surface-to-air
missiles as the Soviets claimed and asked them to give an enve-
lope to officials at the U.S. embassy that evening and relay his
story to them. Inside the envelope was a letter in which he vol-
unteered his services as a spy and gave instructions for a dead
drop site. The CIA was interested in continuing contact with
Penkovsky but did not succeed because it lacked personnel capa-
ble of eluding KGB surveillance. Penkovsky then switched his
attention to the British. In December 1960 he approached a mem-
ber of a British trade delegation offering him information and
asking that it be delivered to the American embassy. The trade
official rejected Penkovsky’s approach but did report it to British
authorities. British intelligence considered Penkovsky to be an
agent provocateur, but U.S. intelligence officials sought to make
still another contact with him. Working with British intelligence
the CIA arranged for another British trade mission to go to the
Soviet Union. Its leader, Greville Wynne, was instructed to try to
make contact with the GRU. Wynne succeeded in making contact
with Penkovsky. To the satisfaction of the CIA and British intelli-
gence, Penkovsky was chosen to lead a Soviet trade delegation to
Great Britain in 1961. In truth the mission was intended to obtain
technological intelligence, but this did not matter to the CIA or
MI-6.
No sooner had Penkovsky arrived in Great Britain in April
than he gave Wynne a package of material containing secret
information about Soviet rocket and missile systems. Penkovsky
would also meet British and American intelligence officials in the
evenings seventeen times during his stay and provide them with
voluminous amounts of information about Soviet military capa-
bilities, Soviet politics, and the identities of GRU agents operating
in Western countries. Penkovsky requested that he be given some
modest intelligence to bring back to the Soviet Union to prove
that his mission was a success. He also demanded money and
sexual favors for his services. He was offered $1,000 per month
but found that sum unsatisfactory. Penkovsky requested, but was
not granted, an audience with the queen. In a later meeting,
Penkovsky was given British and American army uniforms to try
Soviet Union/Russia
95

on as part of a plan to stroke his ego. Ostensibly they were to be
his uniforms and would be waiting for him when his espionage
days were over.
Penkovsky went back to the Soviet Union with a tiny camera
and a set of instructions about what types of information were
desired. When Wynne returned to Moscow in late May to attend
a French trade show, Penkovsky gave him three rolls of film and
a briefcase full of papers. Wynne gave Penkovsky 3,000 rubles. In
the coming months Penkovsky would pass additional informa-
tion to his Western handlers, including a Soviet transcript of the
Khrushchev-Kennedy summit conference in Vienna.
The KGB had begun to suspect Penkovsky of being a spy at
least as early as January 1962. Following the discovery that Pyotor
Popov was an American spy, the KGB began to undertake peri-
odic and sustained surveillance of personnel stationed at the
American and British embassies. This surveillance allowed the
KGB to observe a meeting between someone in the British em-
bassy and an unidentified Russian. Further surveillance of the
British embassy showed that the Russian was Penkovsky.
As the case against Penkovsky built, the KGB moved to stop
him from traveling abroad. They photographed him coming and
going from meetings with his contact. They followed him in cars.
A remote control camera directed at his apartment caught him lis-
tening to a radio and taking notes. The KGB rented the apartment
above his and drilled a small hole into the ceiling, where they
placed a camera. They would also secretly search his apartment.
Penkovsky made his last drop in August and warned that the
KGB was watching him.
Penkovsky was arrested on October 31, during the Cuban
missile crisis. Wynne was arrested two days later. Wynne report-
edly confessed in December, and Penkovsky was tried in May
1963. He was sentenced to death, and his execution was announced
by Pravda (the Russian newspaper) on May 17. Within a year
Wynne would be exchanged for a Soviet spy being held in Great
Britain. The timing of Penkovsky’s arrest has been remarked upon
by many. Standard operating procedure would be to hold off on
making an arrest for as long as possible in order to expose other
members of the spy ring and to try to feed disinformation back to
the United States. It has been suggested that the timing of
Penkovsky’s arrest during the Cuban missile crisis reflected a polit-
ical decision made at the Politburo and one designed to move the
96
Espionage around the World

crisis to a safer stage. It signaled to the United States that the infor-
mation Penkovsky gave them was correct.
Other States
Intelligence organizations and the practice of espionage are not
the monopoly of the great world powers or of states whose his-
tory is characterized by frequent wars, such as Israel. Espionage
is practiced by states of all sizes. In some cases the structure of a
state’s intelligence organizations can be traced to historically sig-
nificant or relevant states. For example, Cuba’s main foreign
intelligence organization, the Directorate of General Intelligence
(DGI), was founded in 1961 and modeled after the Soviet intelli-
gence system. Not surprisingly, the United States is a principal
intelligence target for Cuba. One estimate suggests that 40 per-
cent of Cubans assigned to that country’s United Nations mission
in New York are DGI agents. Cuban intelligence also makes
heavy use of the large émigré and refugee community in the
United States in running agents. In addition to the standard
politico-military targets, obtaining technology to help Cuba’s ail-
ing economy recover and grow.
Australia and India, both former British colonies, have intel-
ligence activities that are patterned after British intelligence. The
first intelligence service in India was established in 1892. A prin-
cipal espionage target was Russia, which had imperial ambitions
of its own in south Asia and which disguised intelligence officers
as representatives of the British East India Company in order to
collect information on British rule in India. In contrast, peacetime
Australian intelligence is of much more recent origin. The
Australian Security and Intelligence Organization, which is
responsible for counterintelligence, was set up in 1949. The
Australian Secret Intelligence Service was not set up until 1952.
Senior British intelligence officers served as midwives in its cre-
ation. Among them was Roger Hollis, who would later serve as
Director General of the British Security Service (MI-5) and come
under suspicion for spying. A common heritage has not trans-
lated into similar espionage concerns for these two states, how-
ever. Australian intelligence became very much involved in the
Cold War struggle. It sought to identify Soviet agents who
arrived in Australia disguised as immigrants and bugged the
Other States
97

Soviet and Chinese embassies. In turn, the Australian govern-
ment was the object of Soviet penetration efforts. For example,
Soviet spies were placed within the Department of External
Affairs. Of even greater concern to the West was the fact that two
of the key British intelligence officers who helped set up the
Australian intelligence system, Roger Hollis and C. H. “Dick”
Ellis, later came under suspicion for being Soviet spies them-
selves. Neutral during the Cold War, India’s intelligence service
developed a more localized focus. Much of India’s intelligence
effort is directed at running intelligence agents in Pakistan and
dealing with the Tamil separatist movement.
Postwar (West) German intelligence displays a rather differ-
ent historical pedigree. The longtime head of West German intel-
ligence was Richard Gehlen, who held the rank of major general
during World War II and who headed Foreign Armies East, the
Nazis’ intelligence organization responsible for collecting infor-
mation on Stalin’s army. Anticipating an imminent surrender to
American forces, Gehlen’s organization microfilmed their infor-
mation on the Soviet Union and buried it in the Austrian Alps.
Gehlen surrendered to American military officials. Once in cus-
tody he used his position within German military intelligence to
his advantage. He was flown to the United States where he met
with American intelligence officials. There he entered into an
agreement whereby he would use his network of agents to spy on
the Russians and East Europeans in return for operational auton-
omy from American intelligence organizations and the eventual
transfer of his intelligence organization to a new German govern-
ment. After the war, Gehlen used the existence of this information
as leverage to secure the release of many of his compatriots from
internment camps and to set up an anticommunist intelligence
organization that could run agents throughout Eastern Europe.
Gehlen set up his postwar intelligence organization in 1946. In
1956 Gehlen’s intelligence operation passed from loose American
control to West German control and became the Federal
Intelligence Service. Gehlen remained its director until his retire-
ment in 1968.
Intelligence organizations and espionage are also vital to the
security of states involved in regional struggles for power and
dominance in the post–Cold War era. No longer can they count
on the assistance of outside powers in pursuing their foreign pol-
icy objectives. Moreover, the pursuit of these objectives may place
them in conflict with the United States. In such situations intelli-
98
Espionage around the World

gence is invaluable because of its ability to act as a force multi-
plier. As in the distant past, intelligence organizations continue to
serve as means for protecting the government from hostile
domestic forces. The following section briefly surveys the intelli-
gence and espionage operations of some of the most prominent
states that fall into this category.
North Korea’s umbrella intelligence organization is the
National Intelligence Council (NIC) of the Central Committee of
the Korean Workers Party. All North Korean intelligence units
report to it. Among the most important of these for purposes of
espionage is the Liaison Department, which runs operations in
South Korea and Japan for purposes of gathering military infor-
mation on U.S forces. The Reconnaissance Department infiltrates
agents into the South Korean military. The State Security Depart-
ment is responsible for counterintelligence. 
Iraq possessed a well-developed intelligence system that
was under the control of the National Security Council, which, in
turn, was dominated by Saddam Hussein. Of particular interest
was the Special Security Service, which operated a system of
“dummy” companies used to obtain foreign equipment, technol-
ogy, and supplies from the West. A second important intelligence
organization was the Department of General Intelligence. It pro-
vided a springboard for Saddam Hussein to seize power and
continued to be a critical foundation on which his rule was built.
Within it was a special bureau that detectd and countered foreign
intelligence operations. 
Within Syria, air force intelligence has frequently been used
to conduct operations against domestic Islamic opposition
groups. A General Intelligence Directorate is responsible for sur-
veillance over members of the ruling party, the government
bureaucracy, and the public at large. In Libya intelligence organ-
izations also play an important role in sustaining the govern-
ment in power. Evidence suggests that Libyan and Syrian
intelligence agencies have cooperated over the years to help
“eliminate” opposition leaders in each other’s countries. As in
the case of Cuba, Libyan intelligence is patterned on the Soviet
model. Libya also shares with Iraqi intelligence an interest in the
clandestine acquisition of chemical and nuclear material. It is
also important to note that intelligence officials may be engaged
in more than the espionage or counterespionage activities. They
may also take part in operational plans that one would associate
with covert action. For example, two Libyan intelligence officers
Other States
99

were implicated in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie, Scotland.
One common problem faced by works on espionage regard-
less of the country or time period under study is the paucity of
data. Secrecy continues to surround espionage long after the act
in question has occurred. This is why oral histories and memoirs
play such a prominent role in the study of espionage. Secrecy also
produces gaps in researchers’ knowledge and leads to conflicting
theories over how to fill in the missing information. This makes
writing on espionage much more of an art than a science, with
some scholars doubting that a single overarching theory of intel-
ligence will ever emerge that can explain its conduct across coun-
tries and time. It also produces conflicting accounts of why an act
of espionage occurred or how it was discovered, and what its ulti-
mate importance is to national security concerns.
Further Reading
Comparative studies of intelligence organizations remain a very under-
developed field of inquiry. Typically accounts focus on the organiza-
tional structure of intelligence organizations, because little other
information is available. See Richard Bennett, Espionage: An Encyclopedia
of Spies and Secrets (London: Virgin, 2002). Also somewhat comparative in
nature is Martin Alexander, Knowing Your Friends: Intelligence inside
Alliances and Coalitions from 1914 to the End of the Cold War (London: Frank
Cass, 1998). Valuable articles on foreign intelligence services can also be
found in two journals, the Journal of Conflict Studies and the International
Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence. More extensive are individ-
ual countries’ treatments of intelligence and espionage.
On Great Britain see Nigel West and Oleg Tsarev, The Crown Jewels
(London: HarperCollins, 1998); William Stevenson, A Man Called Intrepid
(New York: Ballantine, 1976); Christopher Andrew, Her Majesty’s Secret
Service: The Making of the British Intelligence Community (New York:
Penguin, 1986); Peter Wright, Spy Catcher: The Candid Autobiography of a
Senior Intelligence Official (New York: Viking, 1987); Andrew Boyle, The
Fourth Man: The Definitive Account of Kim Philby, Guy Burgess, and Donald
Maclean and Who Recruited Them to Spy for Russia (New York: Dial, 1979);
and Phillip Knightly, The Master Spy: The Story of Kim Philby (New York:
Vintage, 1990).
On Russia/Soviet Union and other communist intelligence organi-
zations see Oleg Kalugin, The First Directorate: My 32 Years in Intelligence
and Espionage against the West (New York: St. Martin’s, 1994); Markus
Wolf, Man without a Face: The Autobiography of Communism’s Great
100
Espionage around the World

Spymaster (New York: Random House, 1997); John Haynes and Harvey
Klehr, Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1999); Ronald Kessler, Escape from the CIA (New York:
Pocket Books, 1991); David Murphy et al., Battleground Berlin: CIA vs.
KGB in the Cold War (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997);
Vladimir Sakharov, High Treason (New York: Ballantine, 1981); Jerold
Schechter and Peter Duriabin, The Spy Who Saved the World: How a Soviet
Colonel Changed the Cold War (New York: Charles Scribner’s, 1992);
Arkady Shevchencko, Breaking with Moscow (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1985); John Barron, KGB: The Secret Work of Soviet Secret Agents (New
York: Bantam, 1974); V. E. Rarrant, The Red Orchestra: The Soviet Spy
Network inside Nazi Europe (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995); and
Oleg Gordievsky and Christopher Andrew, KGB: The Inside Story of Its
Foreign Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev (New York: HarperCollins,
1990).
On Israel see Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman, Every Prince a Spy: The
Complete History of Israel’s Intelligence Community (New York: Houghton
Mifflin, 1990) and Ian Black and Benny Morris, Israel’s Secret Wars: A
History of Israel’s Intelligence Services (New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1991).
References
Barron, John. 1989. “Tracking China’s Master Spy.” Reader’s Digest
(December): 97–102.
Blitzer, Wolf. 1989. Territory of Lies: The Exclusive Story of Johnathon Jay
Pollard: The American Who Spied on His Country for Israel and How He Was
Betrayed. New York: Harper and Row.
Godson, Roy, ed. 1988. Comparing Foreign Intelligence. Washington, DC:
Pergamon-Brassey’s.
Knight, Amy. 1996. Spies without Cloaks: The KGB’s Successors. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Knightly, Phillip. 1988. The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying in the
Twentieth Century. New York: Penguin.
Melton, H. Keith. 1996. The Ultimate Spy Book. New York: DK Publishers.
Richelson, Jeffrey. 1988. Foreign Intelligence Organizations. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
Shaw, Mark. 2001. Miscarriage of Justice: The Jonathan Pollard Story. St.
Paul, MN: Paragon.
References
101


4
Biographical Sketches
T
his chapter provides brief biographical sketches of historical
and contemporary figures that are important to the study of
espionage in the United States and around the world. They can
be grouped into three categories. The first group is made up of
spies, individuals who participated in particularly damaging acts
of espionage. The second group is made up of spy catchers, those
who played important roles in catching spies. Often their signifi-
cance lies not so much in whom they caught but in how they
approached their job and the consequences that followed. The
third and smallest group consists of those charged with oversee-
ing the efforts of intelligence officials. Given the nature of the
information available, these are Americans. They are neither spies
nor spy catchers, so their role is often overlooked in the study of
espionage. Their significance to the study of espionage is found
in two areas. First, their actions set the broad legal parameters
within which spies and spy catchers interact. Second, their
actions also set the tone for thinking about the problem of intelli-
gence reform. Both of these points are particularly important in
the aftermath of the events of September 11, 2001, and the
renewed interest in espionage and counterespionage within the
United States.
Rudolf Abel (1903–1971)
Rudolf Abel was a Soviet spy ring operator who ran agents in the
United States from 1948 to 1957. Convicted of spying and two
lesser charges in 1957, he was sentenced to thirty years in jail for
espionage and an additional ten and five years on each of the
103

other charges, respectively. In 1962 he was exchanged for Francis
Gary Powers, who had been captured in May 1960 when his U-2
reconnaissance spy plane was shot down over Soviet airspace by
a surface-to-air missile. Much is unknown both about Abel’s early
life and the extent of his espionage activities in the United States.
He provided little information to American intelligence officials
during his interrogation. 
Though there is a Soviet biography of Abel, it is not consid-
ered to be authoritative. Histories tend to lack information on
spies because the spies’ very success depends on not leaving a
trail of evidence. It is known, however, that Abel was born
William Fisher in Great Britain, though he never went by his
birth name in the United States. He was taken to the Soviet
Union by his Russian-born father in 1921. In 1948 Abel came to
Canada using the identity of Andrew Kayotis, an American citi-
zen who had died in 1947 while visiting his Lithuanian home-
land. It is believed that Abel arrived in New York City in 1950.
He set up residence there as a photographer using the identity of
Emil Goldfus, who had died forty-seven years earlier as an
infant. In 1954 Abel was put into contact with Reino Hayhanen.
He was a Soviet intelligence officer who would serve as a “cut-
out” or courier for Abel. The relationship proved to be Abel’s
undoing. Hayhanen was an alcoholic who was not careful in
practicing his trade, either in sending intelligence to the Soviet
Union or in receiving intelligence information from members of
Abel’s spy ring. Concerned for the security of his operation, Abel
had Hayhanen recalled to the Soviet Union. In 1957 on his way
home during a stopover in Paris, Hayhanen made the decision to
defect to the United States. The information he gave American
intelligence officials allowed them to identify Abel as a Soviet
spy. On October 14, 1957, Abel was charged with illegal entry
into the United States, conspiring to obtain military secrets, and
failing to register as a foreign agent. When a radio transmitter
and microfilm were found in his apartment, Abel was convicted
on all charges. The crime of conspiring to obtain military secrets
carried the death penalty, but Abel’s lawyer, James B. Donovan,
successfully asked the court for clemency—in part on the
grounds that Abel might be worth more alive than dead.
Donovan suggested the possibility that Abel might be exchanged
for a captured American spy at some future point in time.
Exchanged for Powers in 1962, Abel died in the Soviet Union on
November 16, 1971.
104
Biographical Sketches

Aldrich Ames (1941– )
Aldrich Ames began working in the CIA’s Directorate of
Operations in 1968. His first overseas posting came in 1969 with
his assignment to Ankara, Turkey. His job was to recruit commu-
nist intelligence officials and diplomats as spies. Ames returned to
Washington, D.C., in 1972 and in 1976 went to the CIA’s Foreign
Resources Division office in New York, which was in charge of
operations against foreign targets. Ames’s next posting took him
to Mexico City, where he stayed from 1981 until 1983. As in
Ankara he was supposed to recruit Soviet diplomats as spies; also
as in Ankara, he received low performance evaluations. Ames’s
next assignment was as head of the Soviet branch of the counter-
intelligence group at CIA headquarters. Here he had access to
highly secret information regarding CIA operations against Soviet
intelligence agencies outside of the Soviet Union, and he super-
vised CIA assets inside the Soviet Union. He was also responsible
for identifying possible Soviet spies within the CIA. 
On April 16, 1985, Ames walked into the Soviet embassy and
offered them his services as a spy. In return he sought $50,000.
Ames claims that this was to have been a onetime act of espi-
onage, but in mid-June of that same year Ames provided the
Soviet Union with the identities of virtually all of the Soviet
agents working for the CIA and other intelligence services. He
did so without prompting and without demanding payment.
From CIA headquarters Ames’s next assignment took him to
Rome in 1986 where he served as Soviet branch chief. Here Ames
followed procedures he had initiated at CIA headquarters in spy-
ing for the Soviet Union. He simply walked out of the embassy
with secret material and turned it over to the Soviets in return for
cash payments. The CIA was slow to react to the consequences of
Ames’s betrayal. As a result of Ames’s actions, some estimate that
ten Soviet double agents were executed and another twenty or so
most likely were turned into spies for the KGB and continued to
work with the CIA or became “dangles,” decoys for the CIA and
therefore avenues of misinformation. It did not authorize an
inquiry until October 1986. The FBI also began its own probe that
month. The probe ended in 1987. In April 1991 a joint CIA-FBI
investigation was launched in search of the Soviet mole. The joint
investigative team issued its report in March 1993; it concluded
that the CIA had been penetrated. The FBI formally opened
another investigation that month. In May it opened a case file on
Biographical Sketches
105

Ames, and he was placed under surveillance. He was arrested on
February 21, 1994. Ames pled guilty to espionage. In return for
cooperating with U.S. officials Ames received a life sentence with
no possibility of parole.
James Jesus Angleton (1917–1987)
James Angleton was born in Boise, Idaho, and grew up in Arizona
and Italy. He did his undergraduate work at Yale and went on to
Harvard Law School. Angleton joined the newly established Office
of Strategic Services (OSS) in 1943 at the invitation of one of his pro-
fessors from Yale. He was assigned to the Counterespionage (X-2)
Branch and sent to Great Britain so that he could be trained by
agents in the British Secret Intelligence Service. There he met
Harold “Kim” Philby, a British intelligence agent who was also a
Soviet spy. When World War II ended the OSS was disbanded and
its functions split among other intelligence agencies. Angleton,
who had risen to the position of head of OSS counterintelligence
operations in Italy, stayed on with one of the OSS’s successor
organizations, the Strategic Services Unit. In its brief existence it
would first become part of the Central Intelligence Group (CIG) in
1946 and then part of the Central Intelligence Agency, which
replaced the CIG in 1947. Angleton would soon return to
Washington to work at the CIA’s headquarters, where he would
become chief of its counterintelligence staff. The staff’s functions
included security operations and serving as the point of contact for
friendly foreign intelligence organizations. Here again, Angleton
came into contact with Philby. counterintelligence was by now
Angleton’s life work, and by all accounts he became increasingly
suspicious of the motives of all those around him. Everything
became part of a grand conspiracy to mislead the United States,
including such major international developments as the Sino-
Soviet split in the 1960s and Yugoslavia’s earlier break with Stalin. 
This same conspiratorial and paranoid outlook on events
shaped his view of individuals. He believed that key American
diplomats were Soviet agents. In what was perhaps the most
damaging case to the ability of the CIA to conduct effective coun-
terespionage operations against the Soviet Union, he became
convinced that a Soviet spy, or mole, had penetrated the CIA.
Key to Angleton’s position was the word of Anatoliy Golitsyn, a
KGB officer who defected in 1961. Golitsyn was turned over to
Angleton, who wholeheartedly accepted his story of widespread
106
Biographical Sketches

Soviet penetrations into Western intelligence organizations, even
though Angleton was unsuccessful in searching for them within
the CIA. He also accepted Golitsyn’s assertion that others would
defect and contradict his story in an effort to discredit him. Such
a defector did appear in 1962 when Yuri Nosenko defected. He
provided information that not only challenged Golitsyn but
explained many troubling CIA cases such as the death of a long-
time CIA spy within the Soviet military, Colonel Popov. For a fee
of $100 per month, Popov had provided such intelligence as the
names of Soviet agents who had been infiltrated into the West.
Still, Angleton refused to budge from his support of Golitsyn.
So complete was Angleton’s mistrust of others and the paral-
ysis he inflicted on the CIA’s intelligence and espionage units that
some considered him to be a Soveit spy. His paranoia over the
possibility of Soviet penetration into the CIA caused him to dis-
count the information provided by other intelligence sources
about Soviet espionage in the United States and information that
challenged his beliefs. The result was a situation in which a rea-
sonable evaluation of competing bodies of information was vir-
tually impossible. Angleton’s downfall began in 1973 when
William Colby took over as director of the CIA. He began to cut
back on Angleton’s power. Angleton was stripped of his role as
liaison between the CIA and the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
and an illicit domestic mail-opening operation run by Angleton
since 1955 was shut down. Angleton resigned shortly after evi-
dence became public about the extent of illegal CIA domestic spy-
ing activities. They are chronicled in the Church Committee
Report, excerpts of which are included in the document appen-
dix. It was about this time that details of Angleton’s Operation
CHAOS were revealed. Set up with the approval of President
Lyndon Johnson, it had secretly collected information on the
anti–Vietnam War movement in hopes of ascertaining whether
foreign governments or agents were manipulating the move-
ment. After his retirement Angleton continued to work on behalf
of a strong intelligence community, serving as chairman of a pri-
vate organization that was active in intelligence-related issues,
the Security and Intelligence Fund. Angleton was the last of the
great American Cold War spy catchers. After him, a more bureau-
cratic culture came to dominate counterintelligence work. His
downfall, along with the legacy left by J. Edgar Hoover, illustrates
the danger inherent in counterintelligence when personal values
are allowed to transcend societal ones. 
Biographical Sketches
107

Benedict Arnold (1741–1801)
Benedict Arnold was a prominent military figure in the Conti-
nental army during the American Revolution who became a
British spy. Arnold was born in Connecticut and became a suc-
cessful merchant. When the American Revolution broke out with
the battles of Lexington and Concord, Arnold organized an army
and marched it to Boston. He thereupon began a military career
that centered on the Lake Champlain region. Obtaining the rank
of colonel and operating alongside Ethan Allen, Arnold captured
the British outpost Fort Ticonderoga. After returning to Boston,
Arnold then set out on a campaign against Quebec in the fall of
1775. Arnold had advocated an attack on Canada as a means of
securing the St. Lawrence River Valley and preventing British
attacks on the northern American frontier, but the operation
failed. Arnold next helped put together and command a naval
force to block a British southward advance. Although his forces
were outnumbered and took heavy casualties, Arnold succeeded
in blocking the British advance in a battle on October 11, 1776.
Arnold would return to the region in 1777 and participate in the
battles of Saratoga. Through all of this, Arnold quarreled with the
Continental Congress over the lack of promotions and recogni-
tion for his military accomplishments and over the punishments
handed out for his excessive and undisciplined behavior. 
In 1778 after one of those disputes, Arnold was put in com-
mand of Philadelphia. There he married a reputed Tory sympa-
thizer, Margaret Shippen, in April 1779 and became embroiled
with civil authorities and Congress over charges of corruption
and abuse of power. It was around this time that Arnold
approached Sir Henry Clinton with an offer to sell military
secrets. Arnold’s delivery of secret information began in May
1779. He temporarily stopped sending information in December
but resumed in May 1780 after he had been cleared of charges
filed in a court martial suit. 
Among the intelligence Arnold furnished to the British was
information that a French expeditionary force was expected to
arrive in Rhode Island. In late summer 1780 Arnold was given
command of the American post at West Point, New York, over-
looking the Hudson River. He worked out an arrangement with
Clinton in which for 10,000 pounds he would defect and for
another 20,000 pounds he would allow the British to seize West
Point and its 3,000 troops. The plan collapsed when British Major
108
Biographical Sketches

John Andre was captured in civilian clothes with incriminating
documents. Andre was hanged, and Arnold fled to New York to
join the British. He would lead British military campaigns in the
Chesapeake region of Virginia and in Connecticut. After the
British surrender, Arnold fled to Great Britain. In the latter part of
his career he would engage in a failed commercial venture in
Canada and one as a privateer in the West Indies, where he was
arrested by French authorities as a British spy. He died in London
on June 14, 1801.
Lafayette Baker (1826–1868)
Lafayette Baker was a Union intelligence officer during the Civil
War who founded an organization called the Secret Service after
serving as a spy behind Confederate lines. Baker was born in
New York and moved frequently throughout the United States
before the Civil War. For a time he lived in San Francisco where
he worked with vigilantes in trying to bring an end to the cor-
ruption and gambling there. In 1861 Baker volunteered to serve as
a spy for Union General Winfield Scott. Posing as a photographer
Baker crossed Union lines and entered into Virginia. His efforts
met with frequent failure, although the information he provided
Scott is considered to have been valuable. Several times he was
arrested by both Union and Confederate forces as a spy, and he
was imprisoned by Confederate forces in Fredericksburg. 
On his return to the North, Baker was placed in charge of a
counterespionage unit within the State Department. In February
1862 this organization was transferred to the War Department,
where it became the National Detective Bureau. In this capacity
Baker investigated charges of corruption in the Treasury Depart-
ment and disloyalty within the military. He provided information
about Confederate troop movements and a plot to capture Wash-
ington, D.C. Baker also captured Confederate spy Belle Boyd.
Following Lincoln’s assassination Baker took a leading a role in
the search for and capture of John Wilkes Booth. Although his
accomplishments were many, Baker operated with little regard
for warrants or the constitutional rights of those he pursued. He
is also reported to have employed brutal interrogation techniques
in order to obtain information. Baker’s fortunes declined dramat-
ically after the end of the Civil War. He clashed with President
Andrew Johnson, who dismissed Baker from the intelligence
service on suspicion of spying on him. At issue was Baker’s
Biographical Sketches
109

attempt to gain incriminating evidence against Lucy Cobb, a par-
don broker, one who acts as an intermediary helping convicted
people obtain a pardon by lobbying judicial officers, with whom
Johnson was reputed to be having an affair. Baker had warned
Johnson about Cobb’s activities and had set a trap to catch her
selling the documents needed to obtain a pardon. Baker testified
at Johnson’s impeachment hearings, falsely claiming that Johnson
had been engaged in a correspondence with Jefferson Davis in
which he expressed sympathies for the Confederate cause.
Anxious to regain his former status within Washington, Baker
lied about President Johnson as part of a conspiracy led by
Republican Congressman James Ashley, who was a political
opponent of Johnson. Baker was also indicted but he was acquit-
ted on the extortion charge but convicted on the false imprison-
ment charge and fined a token $1.35. Baker died in Philadelphia
shortly after Johnson’s impeachment trial ended.
Whittaker Chambers (1901–1961)
Whittaker Chambers was a communist spy who incriminated
Alger Hiss, a former high-ranking State Department official, as
being part of a 1930s spy ring in the United States. Whittaker’s
allegations set off one of the most complex and politically charged
spy investigations in history. Conservatives of the time deeply
distrusted the foreign policies of the Roosevelt and Truman admin-
istrations, believing they had sold out Eastern Europe to commu-
nism. In the months following the Hiss guilty verdict, Senator
Joseph McCarthy would unleash his hunt for communists within
the State Department. 
Chambers was born in Philadelphia. He joined the Com-
munist Party in 1924 and would become editor of its newspaper,
the Daily Worker. He left the party briefly in 1929 after losing a
power struggle for leadership within the Communist Party but
returned in 1931. In 1932 he became an agent for the Soviet Union,
working as a courier for a senior intelligence officer who had set
up a network of communists (known as the Ware Group) within
the Roosevelt administration. In 1937 Chambers had a change of
heart and rejected communism, but he continued to work as a
courier until the spring of 1938. In April of that year he defected
and went into hiding. Chambers had been ordered back to the
Soviet Union in 1937 but delayed going, fearing that he would
become a victim of Stalin’s purges. In 1939 Chambers came out of
110
Biographical Sketches

hiding, began working at Time magazine, and began ascending
the corporate ladder there, moving from book reviewer to editor
at large for special projects in 1945. 
In 1939 he also went to Adolf Berle, an assistant secretary of
state, and told him that several American senior government offi-
cials were members of the Communist Party. Chambers did not
reveal his own former role as a communist agent in the Ware
Group, but he did identify Hiss. Berle made a report, but no fur-
ther action was forthcoming. Chambers also went to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation with his charges but once again did not
reveal that he too had spied. On August 3, 1948, Chambers testi-
fied before the House Un-American Activities Committee and
accused Hiss of being a communist and a member of the Ware
Group. Hiss denied knowing Chambers and rejected the charge
that he was a communist. Hiss would soon identify Chambers as
being George Crossley, a freelance journalist whom he did have
dealings with in the 1930s. Hiss challenged Chambers to repeat
his charges in the media so that he might sue Chambers for libel,
which he did. Chambers then made the further accusation that
Hiss was engaged in spying. By doing so, Chambers revealed
his own involvement in espionage, but Hiss continued to deny
the charges. Richard Nixon, then a junior member of the House
Un-American Activities Committee, was assigned to investigate
Chambers’s allegation. Nixon became a staunch supporter and
promoter of Chambers in the unfolding controversy. His career
benefited greatly from Chambers’s accusations against Hiss. It
provided him with important media exposure and made him into
a national political figure. To substantiate his position Chambers
produced microfilm (previously hidden in pumpkins on his
farm) containing information that he claimed Hiss had stolen
from the State Department and given to him. Chambers had
retained the evidence as a type of personal insurance policy when
he had made the decision to leave the Communist Party. These
documents sealed Hiss’s fate. He was ultimately convicted by a
grand jury of two counts of perjury and sentenced to five years in
prison. The statute of limitations prevented any other conviction.
Hiss continued to maintain his innocence. 
Contradictions, incomplete revelations, and false statements
made by Chambers about his involvement with Hiss made the
verdict controversial. Evidence released by Russian authorities in
the 1990s tends to confirm the truth of Chambers’s allegations
that Hiss was a communist spy. Chambers resigned from Time in
Biographical Sketches
111

December 1948. In 1952 he wrote his autobiography, Witness, and
went on to work for a short time for the conservative National
Review. Chambers died on his Maryland farm on July 9, 1961. In
1984 he was awarded a posthumous Medal of Freedom by
President Ronald Reagan.
Frank Church (1924–1984)
Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho) gained notoriety in the 1970s
when he chaired the Senate Select Committee to Study Govern-
ment Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities. His com-
mittee focused on the actions of the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) with an emphasis on covert action. In the course of doing
so it uncovered CIA misuse of intelligence agencies to spy on
Americans. 
Church was elected to the Senate in 1957 as an international-
ist who pledged his support to President Dwight Eisenhower’s
Cold War foreign policies. The centerpiece was the concept of con-
tainment by which the United States sought to block any further
Soviet expansion. Among the most prominent actions taken to
carry out containment were the establishment of encircling mili-
tary alliances such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and covert action operations designed to bring down hos-
tile governments such as those in Iran, Guatemala, and Indonesia.
Once in office his foreign policy views had evolved such that by
the mid-1960s he was opposing the Vietnam War. Because it was
justified as necessary to stop the spread of communism, the
Vietnam War was a logical outgrowth of the containment doctrine.
Church rejected this rationale for the Vietnam War, arguing that
the United States had become obsessed with communism and that
America did not have legitimate national interests in Vietnam.
Church was defeated in a 1980 reelection bid. He had become a
primary target of conservatives who felt that he had crippled the
United States’s intelligence capabilities through his committee’s
hearings and his famous charge that the CIA was a “rogue ele-
phant” in need of control. Church made an unsuccessful run for
the Democratic presidential nomination in 1996.
William Donovan (1883–1959)
William “Wild Bill” Donovan founded the Office of Strategic
Services (OSS), the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency.
112
Biographical Sketches

For this, he is often referred to as the “father of modern
American intelligence.” Donovan was born in Buffalo, New
York. Prior to the American involvement in World War I,
Donovan served in Europe as part of the Rockefeller
Foundation’s War Relief Commission. He left Europe when his
National Guard unit was activated to serve along the Mexican
border in 1916. After the United States entered World War I,
Donovan saw combat in France as part of the 165th Regiment.
He was wounded three times and received the Medal of Honor
and other commendations. After the war he returned to Buffalo
to practice law and delve into politics. He was the unsuccessful
Republican candidate for lieutenant governor of New York in
1922 and for governor in 1932. In 1924 Donovan began work in
the attorney general’s office in the Criminal Division and then
the Anti-Trust Division. He remained there until 1929 when he
moved to New York City. Donovan had hoped to be named attor-
ney general by President Hoover but did not obtain the position.
As war grew nearer in the 1930s Donovan undertook several
trips to Europe and Africa at his own expense to gather intelli-
gence for the government. After war broke out, Donovan was
sent on official intelligence missions to Europe under the spon-
sorship of Frank Knox, a friend and fellow Republican whom
Franklin Roosevelt had appointed secretary of war. It was on
these intelligence trips that Donovan was introduced to William
Stephenson, chief of the Secret Intelligence Service (the British
intelligence organization)  in the United States. 
It was conversations with Stephenson that convinced Dono-
van of the need to establish a central intelligence organization in
the United States that combined intelligence analysis, espionage,
and covert action. No such organization currently existed; intelli-
gence responsibility at that time was divided among the military
services, the State Department, and the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation. Donovan proposed such a system to Roosevelt, who agreed
but stopped short of setting up as extensive and centralized a sys-
tem as Donovan (and Stephenson) had proposed. Donovan was
named coordinator of Central Intelligence on July 11, 1941. Within
a year Roosevelt abolished the existing COI (Coordinator of
Information) position and created the Office of Strategic Services
(OSS) with Donovan as director. This moved intelligence a step
closer to Donovan’s proposal, but Roosevelt still stopped short of
creating it as an independent agency. It was placed under the direc-
tion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Donovan proposed that the OSS be
Biographical Sketches
113

made a permanent institution after the war, but President Harry
Truman rejected the plan and in October 1945 divided its intelli-
gence duties among the existing intelligence organizations. Tru-
man reversed course in 1947 when he created the CIA. 
After leaving the OSS Donovan served for a short time as a
prosecutor at the Nuremburg War Crimes trials and then as
ambassador to Thailand during the Eisenhower administration.
After retirement Donovan advocated a strong policy of anticom-
munism and covert action. He died in Walter Reed Army Hospi-
tal in Washington, D.C., on January 19, 1970.
Allen Welch Dulles (1893–1969)
Allen Dulles was the third director of the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA). Along with his brother, John Foster Dulles, who
was secretary of state, Allen Dulles played a key role in laying the
foundations for American foreign policy in the second half of the
twentieth century. He headed the CIA from 1953 to 1961. This was
the height of the Cold War, and although Dulles’s tenure in office
is most associated with the high point of CIA covert action, it is
also a time period in which some of its most notable espionage
successes and failures took place. Although both covert action
and espionage are clandestine activities occurring in secret, they
differ in one important respect. The purpose of espionage is to
collect information in another country. The spy does nothing else.
The purpose of covert action is to influence or manipulate events
in another country. This may be done by such means as leading a
coup, supporting the career of a political official or military offi-
cer, or subsidizing a political party or magazine.
Dulles was born in Watertown, New York. He joined the
Foreign Service in 1916 after completing law school and was
assigned to Vienna. During World War I he was stationed in
Berne, Switzerland. One of his assignments was to make contact
with anticommunist Eastern European groups. His tour of duty
in Switzerland produced one of the most famous stories in the
lore of intelligence. Dulles claims that he received a phone call
from Vladimir Lenin, who was living in exile in Switzerland.
About to go off duty, Dulles put off Lenin’s request for a meeting
until the following day. That night Lenin left by train for Russia
to help launch the communist revolution. 
Dulles served on the staff of the American delegation to the
Paris Peace Conference. After World War I ended he was posted
114
Biographical Sketches

in Washington, D.C., where he was head of the Near Eastern Divi-
sion. In 1926 he left government service to enter into a New
York–based law practice with his brother. Dulles continued to be
involved in world politics, however, as he became affiliated with
the Council on Foreign Relations. This was, and still remains, one
of the most important and authoritative nongovernmental organ-
izations involved in foreign policy. The Council on Foreign Rela-
tions sponsors meetings, workshops, and publications that
examine foreign policy problems, and in the process influences
the content of decisions. When World War II broke out Dulles
joined the newly established Office of Strategic Services (OSS). He
returned to Berne and from there operated a spy ring inside
Germany. One agent of his provided more than 2,000 microfilmed
copies of Nazi documents. Dulles also secured information about
the Nazi V-2 rocket program and obtained proof that the
Germans had broken the code used by the U.S. diplomatic mis-
sion in Berne. Reportedly it was during his service with the OSS
that Dulles came into his strong anticommunist views. 
After the war ended Dulles returned to private law practice,
but his involvement in intelligence affairs continued. President
Harry Truman asked him to help draft the 1947 National Security
Act that created the CIA and then to serve on a committee to
make recommendations on how it should operate. Dulles was
called to Washington by the CIA’s first director, Walter Bedell
Smith, to help implement those recommendations. This led to
Dulles’s being appointed deputy director of the CIA in August
1951. In 1953 Dulles succeeded Smith as Director of Central
Intelligence. 
Among the notable espionage accomplishments during
Dulles’s stewardship of the CIA were digging a tunnel under the
Berlin Wall for purposes of eavesdropping; the design, building,
and flight of the U-2 spy plane; and obtaining a copy of Nikita
Khrushchev’s 1956 speech to the Soviet Communist Party elite in
which he denounced Joseph Stalin for his excesses. Significant as
these accomplishments were, they were also flawed efforts that
have contributed to the mixed legacy Dulles is seen as having left
the CIA. The Berlin tunnel is believed to have been compromised
and used by the Soviet Union to send disinformation to the
United States. A U-2 spy plane piloted by Francis Gary Powers
was shot down during a critical period in U.S.-Soviet diplomacy.
Khrushchev’s speech was altered and released by CIA propagan-
dists and thus lost some of its value. 
Biographical Sketches
115

President John F. Kennedy asked Dulles to resign in 1961 fol-
lowing the embarrassing failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion,
which was intended to remove Fidel Castro from power. Con-
ceived during the Eisenhower administration, it had evolved into
a CIA-trained and -organized invasion by Cuban dissidents. Up
until this failure, Dulles had overseen a series of successful, if now
controversial, covert actions in Indonesia, Iran, and Guatemala.
Dulles also left a mixed legacy in still another area: accountabil-
ity. On the one hand, he protected CIA officials from the anti-
communist investigations led by Senator Joseph McCarthy far
better than his brother protected Foreign Service officers. On the
other hand, Allen Dulles fiercely and successfully resisted mean-
ingful congressional oversight of the CIA. Dulles remained in
Washington, D.C., during his retirement and wrote one of the first
textbook treatments of intelligence, The Craft of Intelligence. He
also served on the Warren Commission that investigated the
assassination of President Kennedy.
Felix Dzershinsky (1877–1926)
Felix Dzershinsky was the founding force behind the Soviet secret
police and the CHEKA intelligence body established by the
Bolshevik government following their victory in the Russian civil
war. Born into an aristocratic Polish family in 1877, Dzershinsky
joined the Socialist Revolutionary Party as a youth. He followed
Vladimir Lenin and joined the Bolshevik Party when the socialist
revolutionary movement split into the Bolshevik and more mod-
erate Menshevik factions. Prior to the Russian revolution Dzer-
shinsky served as a courier between revolutionaries in Russia and
Russian exiles abroad. It took him only six months after the revo-
lution to transform his antiespionage commission, the All-Russian
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counterrevolution,
Speculation, and Sabotage (CHEKA), into a powerful bureaucratic
force. He divided his organization into two units. One dealt with
counterespionage; the other dealt with secret, or covert, opera-
tions. Those in his employ were personally loyal but also brutal in
their approach to intelligence. Such was the government’s dislike
of CHEKA that in December 1921 a government reorganization
replaced it with a new organization, the State Political Administra-
tion (GPU). Less than two years later it was replaced by the United
States Political Administration (OGPU). Dzershinsky remained in
charge of Soviet intelligence throughout these changes. He also
116
Biographical Sketches

constructed an anticommunist front organization, the Trust, that
he used to attract and identify opponents to communist rule. oper-
ating as the Moscow Municipal Credit Association, it was able to
trap British agent Sidney Reilly. Reportedly Reilly revealed all of
his contacts before being executed. 
Disagreement surrounds Dzershinsky’s death. Some claim
he died of natural causes on July 20, 1926. Others have him being
assassinated by his successor, Vyachesiav Menzhinsky.
Klaus Fuchs (1911–1985)
Considered by many to be the most important of the Soviet
“atomic spies,” Fuchs was born in Germany and fled to Great
Britain in 1933. A staunch anti-Nazi, Fuchs was also and openly
pro-communist. Fuchs was a physicist and became involved in
the British effort to build an atomic bomb. Participation in this
project required that Fuchs pass a security clearance and become
a British citizen, which he did in 1942. 
In 1943 Fuchs went to Columbia University to work on the
atomic bomb and in 1946 would become head of the theoretical
physics center of atomic research at Harwell, a research lab
roughly equivalent to Los Alamos in the United States, where
work on the atomic bomb was conducted. Fuchs is described as
becoming head of the Theoretical Physics Division of the Atomic
Research Center there. In 1949 the Federal Bureau of Investigation
uncovered a spy ring in the United States that was passing secrets
to the Soviet Union. One of the members of the spy ring was iden-
tified as a British physicist. Fuchs quickly became a suspect. He
was confronted after inquiring as to whether his father’s appoint-
ment to a position at the University of Leipzig in East Germany
would cause problems for his security clearance. Fuchs confessed
and was arrested in Great Britain. He was sentenced to the maxi-
mum term of fourteen years in prison. Upon his release Fuchs
returned to East Germany where he became head of the Nuclear
Research Institute at Dresden.
Rose O’Neal Greenhow (1815?–1864)
Rose O’Neal Greenhow was born in Maryland; during her early
teens she lived with her aunt, who owned the Old Capitol
Boardinghouse. Located near Capitol Hill, it served as home for
many prominent political figures including Senator John C.
Biographical Sketches
117

Calhoun. She married Robert Greenhow, a linguist in the State
Department, in 1835. Rose Greenhow soon became immersed in a
series of diplomatic intrigues that often placed her in the role of
spy or provocateur. She became a confident of then-Secretary of
State and later President James Buchanan. During Buchanan’s
administration Greenhow would become an outspoken advocate
of succession by the South. Earlier she had been suspected of spy-
ing for Great Britain during negotiations over the Oregon Ter-
ritory, and in 1849 Greenhow was associated with a plan to annex
Cuba and bring it into the United States as a slave state. 
Widowed in 1854, Greenhow was recruited as a Confederate
spy by Colonel Thomas Jordan who was then an officer in the U.S.
Army but would soon resign and join the Confederate army. There
Jordan served as an adjunct general to General P. G. T. Beaure-
gard who commanded Confederate troops at the Battle of Bull
Run. Her place in Washington society provided her with a vast
network of social and political contacts to obtain intelligence
from. The established mythology of the Civil War has Green-
how’s greatest intelligence coup as being that of providing infor-
mation to General P. G. T. Beauregard prior to the First Battle of
Bull Run. Other research suggests, however, that this account is
unlikely to be true or that the role it played in the Confederate vic-
tory has been greatly exaggerated. Greenhow was unschooled in
the techniques of espionage tradecraft and made little secret of her
Southern sympathies. It came as no surprise, then, that she was
arrested by Thomas Pinkerton—who served as director of intelli-
gence for the Union and was the founder of the Pinkerton detec-
tive agency—for spying, along with many of the other members of
the espionage ring she belonged to. First placed under house
arrest before being imprisoned in the Old Capitol Boardinghouse
that her aunt had owned, Greenhow was permitted to go to
Richmond in June 1862. The following year Greenhow went to
Europe and published her memoirs. In August 1864 she sailed
back to the Confederacy carrying messages from Confederate
agents. She drowned off the coast of North Carolina when the ship
she was on sank while she was trying to run a Union blockade.
Nathan Hale (1755–1776)
Nathan Hale was one of the first heroes of the American
Revolution and perhaps the first American spy to die in the ser-
vice of his country. A statue honoring him stands at the head-
118
Biographical Sketches

quarters of the Central Intelligence Agency, and his last words, “I
only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country,” are
engraved in its main entranceway. 
Hale was born in Connecticut and entered Yale at age four-
teen. Upon graduation he became a schoolteacher. When the
American Revolution began in April 1775 with the battles of
Lexington and Concord, Hale left to join the Continental army at
Boston. He quickly proved himself in combat and was promoted
to the rank of captain on January 1, 1776. Soon he was chosen to
lead a company of Knowlton’s Rangers, the first intelligence
reconnaissance unit of the American army. Established by George
Washington and led by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Knowlton, its
purpose was to provide forward intelligence on British forces and
engage in sabotage. In August of that year General George
Washington’s troops retreated to Manhattan; eager for intelli-
gence about the disposition of the British forces opposing him,
Washington asked Knowlton’s Rangers to provide a spy. No one
volunteered until Hale stepped forward. Disguised as a school-
teacher, Hale began his mission on September 12 knowing little if
anything about the practice of espionage. After collecting infor-
mation and making drawings of British fortifications, Hale
sought to return to Washington’s army. He was captured by the
British on the night of September 21 attempting to cross their
lines. British General William Howe ordered him hanged. He was
executed the following day, September 22, 1776.
Lee H. Hamilton (1931– )
Lee Hamilton (D-Indiana) was first elected to Congress in 1964
and served seventeen terms before retiring at the end of the 105th
Congress. Hamilton was the Democrats’ pick to replace retired
Senator George Mitchell as its ranking member on the bipartisan
committee to investigate the performance of the intelligence com-
munity leading up to the events of September 11, 2001. Henry
Kissinger had been the Republicans’ choice to chair the commit-
tee, but he resigned and was replaced by former New Jersey
Governor Thomas Keane. A domestic conservative who opposed
big government and spending on social welfare programs, he was
nevertheless an internationalist in foreign policy and opposed
isolationist conservative foreign policy initiatives such as cutting
foreign aid. Hamilton rose to prominence in the House for his
involvement in foreign policy matters. During the Reagan era he
Biographical Sketches
119

chaired the House Intelligence Committee and chaired the special
House committee that investigated the Iran-Contra scandal.
Hamilton’s belief that foreign policy was the prerogative of the
president led him to take a restrained and generally sympathetic
view to the Reagan administration’s handing of the matter.
During Clinton’s presidency Hamilton emerged as a vocal
supporter of that administration’s foreign policy toward events in
the former Yugoslavia. From his position as senior ranking Demo-
crat on the House International Relations Committee, Hamilton
worked to prevent a lifting of the Bosnian arms embargo. He also
authored an amendment to a House resolution that was critical of
Clinton’s handling of the peacekeeping operation in Bosnia. Ham-
ilton’s amendment permitted the administration to keep U.S.
forces in Somalia according to the administration’s timetable rather
than insisting on their prompt withdrawal.
Philip (Robert) Hanssen (1945– )
Philip Hanssen (also known as Robert Hanssen) was arrested for
spying in February 2001. He was a twenty-seven-year FBI veteran
who specialized in counterintelligence. Hanssen was excellently
placed to spy on the U.S. intelligence system. From 1987 to 1990
he was deputy chief of the FBI’s Soviet Analytical Unit. In the
mid-1980s he was active in the FBI’s domestic spying program,
which monitored the activities of Americans thought to be Soviet
spies. From 1995 until January 2001 Hanssen was on assignment
from the FBI to the State Department’s Office of Foreign Missions,
which is responsible for monitoring foreign diplomats believed to
be working with international terrorists. 
The U.S. government asserts that Hanssen received some
$600,000 in cash and diamonds, along with $800,000 escrowed in
Russian bank accounts, for his efforts. Included among the charges
leveled at Hanssen were fourteen charges that were punishable by
death. In all, he turned over twenty-six computer disks and more
than 6,000 pages of U.S. documents to Soviet officials. Hanssen
pled guilty to spying as part of a deal to avoid the death penalty.
Alger Hiss (1904–1996)
Alger Hiss was a prominent member of the American foreign pol-
icy establishment who was accused by Whittaker Chambers of
being a communist spy. Hiss steadfastly claimed his innocence
120
Biographical Sketches

during a complex series of congressional hearings and court pro-
ceedings in the 1950s. After one hung jury, Hiss was retried and
found guilty, but because the statute of limitations had expired
Hiss could not be charged with espionage. He was convicted of
two counts of perjury in 1950 and was sentenced to a five-year
prison sentence, which was commuted to four years for good
behavior in 1954. After his release he wrote a book defending
himself, In the Court of Public Opinion. Documents released by
Russia after the fall of communism in the Soviet Union point to
his guilt. 
Hiss was born in Baltimore and attended Harvard Law
School. In 1929 he obtained a clerkship with Supreme Court
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. After briefly serving in Franklin
Roosevelt’s administration in the Agricultural Adjustment
Administration and then on the Nye Committee (which investi-
gated charges that the arms industry was responsible for involv-
ing the United States in World War I), Hiss followed one of his
Harvard professors into the State Department in 1936. Before he
resigned in 1947 to become president of the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, Hiss rose to the upper levels of the State
Department. He served as advisor to Secretary of State Edward
Stettinus at the Yalta Conference in 1945 and played a key role in
establishing the United Nations. 
Things began to unravel for Hiss in 1948 when Whittaker
Chambers, a onetime communist spy but now fervently anticom-
munist, accused him of having belonged to a communist cell in
the 1930s. Hiss denied the allegations, and the House Un-
American Activities Committee, before which Whittaker had
made the charges, established a subcommittee to investigate the
matter. Richard Nixon, then a first-term congressman from Cali-
fornia, was placed in charge of the investigation. 
Hiss would identify Chambers as George Crossley, a free-
lance journalist he had once known, but he continued to deny
Chambers’s allegations of belonging to a communist cell. Hiss
then sued Chambers for libel, and a federal grand jury began
investigating the charge that Hiss was a communist. Before that
trial could begin, Chambers expanded on his charges against Hiss.
He now accused Hiss of not only being a communist but of engag-
ing in espionage. As proof he produced microfilm copies of some
of the material that Hiss had allegedly given him; Chambers had
kept this microfilm stored in hollowed-out pumpkins on his farm.
Soon Chambers would be testifying against Hiss in multiple
Biographical Sketches
121

venues and was giving contradictory testimony. Still, the weight
of evidence began to point to Hiss’s guilt, and he was indicted by
a grand jury on two counts of perjury in December 1948. One
count was for lying that he had turned over State Department
documents to Chambers and the other for lying that he had not
seen Chambers after 1937. His first trial began on May 31, 1949,
and ended in a hung jury. His retrial began on November 17,
1949, and he was convicted on both counts of perjury on January
21, 1950. After several appeals were denied Hiss began serving
his sentence on March 22, 1951.
John Edgar Hoover (1895–1972)
J. Edgar Hoover was director of the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation (FBI) for forty-eight years. In that capacity he became the
self-proclaimed expert on domestic communist subversion in the
United States. A classic example of a bureaucratic entrepreneur,
Hoover rose steadily through the ranks of the Justice Department,
escaping blame for policy excesses and adroitly working with the
media to establish his image as an indispensable defender of free-
dom. As the height of the Cold War competition gave way to
détente, and Hoover’s obsession with subversion extended
beyond communists to include black civil rights activists, anti-
Vietnam war protestors, and others on the political left. 
Hoover was born in Washington, D.C., and after completing
law school there he joined the Alien Enemy Bureau of the Justice
Department in 1917. Two years later he became a special assistant
to Attorney General Mitchell Palmer and was placed in charge of
a newly established General Intelligence Division. Its charge was
to collect intelligence on radical individuals and groups. There he
planned and directed the “Palmer Raids” that paid little respect
to civil liberties and that led to the arrest of thousands of political
radicals and the deportation of such notable figures as anarchist
Emma Goldman. Most of those arrested were released, however,
and not deported. 
Hoover survived the political backlash against the Palmer
Raids and the allegations of widespread corruption that plagued
the FBI in the early 1920s. The next decade of his career was spent
improving the FBI’s efficiency as a crime-fighting organization
from his position as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In the early 1930s he became involved in highly publicized battles
122
Biographical Sketches

with celebrity criminals such as John Dillinger. By the late 1930s
Hoover was again involved in collecting information on potential
subversives. President Franklin Roosevelt had secretly ordered
him to spy on the leadership of the American Nazi movement. 
During World War II Hoover clashed with British intelligence
officials in their efforts to coordinate counterespionage and intel-
ligence activities. Such was his intransigence that the British,
through William Stephenson, helped Bill Donovan create the Office
of Strategic Services (OSS). Hoover was reluctant to cooperate with
anyone, inside or outside the U.S. government. The British needed
to act, and when Hoover displayed little interest, they had to look
elsewhere. The British then turned to Donovan because of his ties
to Roosevelt and perceived willingness to embrace the idea of a
central intelligence organization. Hoover’s major success in this
bureaucratic war was to keep the OSS out of Latin America, where
the FBI was active in anti-Nazi surveillance efforts. 
With the onset of the Cold War, Hoover turned his attention
to communist subversion within the United States. Dissatisfied
with the Truman administration’s pursuit of communists within
the government, Hoover struck out on his own and in coopera-
tion with Republicans on the House Un-American Activities
Committee to expose this threat. These efforts led to the arrest of
Klaus Fuchs in 1950 and the 1951 convictions of Ethel and Julius
Rosenberg. 
A key tool in Hoover’s pursuit of domestic communist spies
was the Smith Act. Passed in 1940, the Smith Act made it illegal
to advocate overthrowing the government of the United States or
belonging to an organization that did. Members of the Commu-
nist and Socialist Parties were especially vulnerable to arrest. In
1956, however, a Supreme Court ruling severely limited its utility
to Hoover. He then adopted a different strategy, one that would
later place him at the center of controversy. Hoover established a
Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO) that employed
“dirty tricks” to disrupt the activities of the American Communist
Party. He then expanded the program to include attacks on the
Ku Klux Klan, the Black Panthers, and student groups. One of
Hoover’s main targets became Dr. Martin Luther King, who had
spoken out criticizing the FBI’s handling of civil rights cases. As
part of his campaign against King, Hoover secretly collected
information on King’s personal life that could be used for black-
mail. It was a practice that Hoover also employed against many
government officials, including presidents. 
Biographical Sketches
123

The national traumas of Vietnam and Watergate produced a
series of investigations and exposés of the intelligence commu-
nity. One of the most thorough was that conducted by Senator
Frank Church’s Committee to Study Government Operations
with Respect to Intelligence Activities. Its report concluded that
Hoover had engaged in a “sophisticated vigilante operation”
against domestic political dissenters. Hoover remained director
of the FBI until his death on May 2, 1972. Controversy continues
to surround his tenure in office and is fueled by the fact that his
personal files were destroyed after his death by his secretary and
his lifelong assistant.
Joseph McCarthy (1908–1957)
In 1952 Senator Joseph McCarthy became chairman of the Senate
Committee on Government Operations and headed its Subcom-
mittee on Investigations. He used those positions to launch what
is commonly described as a witch-hunt for communist sympa-
thizers within the government. He was known for his bullying
tactics, deceit, and loose use of facts. McCarthy eventually left the
Senate in disgrace. 
McCarthy was born in Wisconsin. His first foray into poli-
tics was an unsuccessful bid for district attorney as a Democrat.
In his next attempt he was elected as a circuit judge. McCarthy
won this position handily in a nonpartisan election in which he
misrepresented facts about the incumbent. McCarthy joined the
military in 1942 in hopes of laying a foundation that would
advance his postwar political career. For most of the war he
served as an intelligence officer and saw minimum combat duty.
In his political campaigns he would embellish this record to
make it appear that he was a war hero. In 1946 McCarthy pulled
off a stunning upset of Republican Senator Robert La Follette Jr.
in the primary and went on to win election to the Senate. Both
campaigns were marked by innuendo and falsehoods on
McCarthy’s part. 
McCarthy accomplished little during his first term. With his
reelection campaign in the offing, McCarthy made his most
famous speech on February 7, 1950, in Wheeling, West Virginia.
He boldly announced that he had in his possession the names of
205 known communists in the State Department. The allegations
were not new; they had first been raised in 1946 and were inves-
tigated at that time, with some seventy-nine people being fired.
124
Biographical Sketches

Spies were known to exist in and outside of the State Department.
Alger Hiss had recently been convicted for perjury, and Klaus
Fuchs confessed to sending atomic secrets to the Soviet Union.
Moreover, McCarthy did not have such a list, nor was he an
expert on espionage. His allegations created a sensation due to
their timing. China had “fallen” to the communists, Russia had
exploded an atomic bomb, and the Korean War was on the hori-
zon. The country was looking for answers as to why the United
States’s security was threatened, and the specter of spies from
within provided a plausible answer. 
Emboldened by the positive public response to his charges,
McCarthy went on the offensive. He referred to Secretary of State
Dean Acheson as the “Red Dean of Fashion” and called Secretary
of Defense George Marshall a traitor. Republican senators who
had once shunned him now urged him on, hoping to weaken the
Truman administration. McCarthy’s first series of public hear-
ings into communist influence within the government were held
in 1953 and produced little that was newsworthy. Hearings held
in the fall of that year, though, accomplished all that McCarthy
hoped. He now targeted the army for harboring a spy ring at
Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, and for coddling communists.
Army officials were constantly on the defensive, and McCarthy
pressed his case. 
By spring 1954, however, the political tide had turned
against McCarthy. Republican leaders expressed concern about
the impact of “McCarthyism” on what was now a Republican
foreign policy bureaucracy, and President Dwight Eisenhower,
who had resisted engaging in “politics” with McCarthy, was
now angry with McCarthy and wished to see him stopped. In
April 1954 the Senate held thirty-six days of televised hearings
into McCarthy’s conflict with the army. They proved to be
McCarthy’s undoing, as he came across to the American public
not as a defender of freedom but as a bully. In December 1954 the
Senate censured McCarthy for bringing “dishonor and disre-
pute” to that body by a vote of 67–22. Just as rising Cold War ten-
sions had earlier helped McCarthy, they now conspired against
him. The Korean War had ended, Joseph Stalin had died, and
European postwar economic recovery was under way. The world
no longer appeared to be quite as threatening. McCarthy was
now politically isolated within the Senate. He died on May 2,
1957, in a Bethesda, Maryland, military hospital of hepatitis,
reportedly brought on by alcoholism.
Biographical Sketches
125

Robert S. Mueller III (1944– )
Robert Mueller was serving as director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) at the time of the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks. He had been nominated for the position by President
George W. Bush and sworn in on September 4, 2001. In private
legal practice before entering government service in 1976,
Mueller’s practice had consisted largely of white-collar crime,
internal corporate investigations, establishing compliance pro-
grams, and complex civil litigation matters. Prior to becoming FBI
director, Mueller held a series of positions within the Justice
Department. From 1976 to 1988 he served in California and
Massachusetts in the U.S. attorney general’s office. 
In 1989 Mueller came to Washington, D.C., as an assistant to
Attorney General Richard Thornburgh. He soon moved on to
become assistant attorney general in charge of the Criminal
Division. In that capacity he investigated the Libyan terrorist
attack on Pan Am flight 103 that crashed over Lockerbie, Scot-
land. From 1995 to 2001 Mueller again worked in the U.S. attor-
ney general’s office, first in the District of Columbia and then in
California. 
Mueller has put forward a spirited defense of the FBI in the
face of charges that it failed to anticipate the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks or to work closely with other intelligence agen-
cies in preventing it from happening. He has argued against cre-
ating a new domestic spy agency and asserts that the FBI can
adapt and transform itself into such an agency. Because he
assumed the post of FBI director only days before the attack, his
stewardship of the bureau has not been called into question.
Rather, his challenge now is to deal with allegations of poor past
performance and weak leadership in the FBI.
Richard Milhous Nixon (1913–1994)
Richard Nixon served as the thirty-seventh president of the
United States. He held office from 1969 until 1974 when he
resigned as a consequence of the Watergate scandal, which led to
impeachment proceedings being brought against him by the
Senate. Nixon is best known for his foreign policy initiatives dur-
ing his presidency. Along with his national security advisor and
later Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Nixon redirected
American foreign policy away from an attitude of Cold War con-
126
Biographical Sketches

frontation with the Soviet Union to one of détente. As part of this
strategy the United States and Soviet Union entered into a series
of arms control talks. The United States also began the process of
normalizing relations with China during this period. Détente was
the centerpiece of Nixon’s post-Vietnam strategy for the United
States. For Nixon, the domestic politics of extracting the United
States from the Vietnam War proved every bit as challenging as
the foreign policy of doing so and placed him in constant conflict
with an antiwar movement.
Nixon entered national politics in 1946 when he defeated
incumbent Democrat Jerry Voorhis for the U.S. Senate seat from
California. During the campaign Nixon implied that Voorhis was
a communist sympathizer. (He used a similar tactic in his suc-
cessful 1950 senatorial campaign.) In 1948 Nixon cosponsored a
bill with Senator Karl Mundt that would have required commu-
nists and communist organizations to register with the govern-
ment. That same year he joined the House Un-American
Activities Committee and gained national attention for his work
on the Whittaker Chambers case. It was largely because of this
exposure that Nixon was selected by the Republicans to run as
Dwight Eisenhower’s vice presidential candidate in 1952. Nixon
served two terms as vice president and stepped in for the presi-
dent during his 1955 heart attack and 1957 stroke. Nixon was the
Republican Party’s nominee for president in 1960 but lost to John
Kennedy. Nixon then left public life briefly, angry at the press for
its treatment of him during the campaign, but he made a stunning
political comeback to win the presidency in 1968.
A. Mitchell Palmer (1872–1936)
A. Mitchell Palmer had a tumultuous political career that reached
its most controversial point during his service as President
Woodrow Wilson’s attorney general from 1919 to 1921. Palmer
worked his way quickly up the ranks of the Democratic Party in
Pennsylvania. Loyal to the party, elected to Congress, and a gifted
speaker, he served as Woodrow Wilson’s floor manager—a highly
important position since this person was in charge of managing
the candidate’s day-to-day campaign at the party’s presidential
nominating convention—in the 1912 Democratic presidential
convention. Following Wilson’s election as president, he offered
Palmer the position of secretary of war, but Palmer declined, cit-
ing his Quaker background and beliefs. Remaining in Congress,
Biographical Sketches
127

Palmer established himself as a champion of workers’ rights. In
1914 he failed to obtain a seat in the Senate, because his candidacy
was opposed by organized labor. In 1919 Wilson appointed
Palmer to be attorney general. With Wilson largely incapacitated
by a stroke and World War I not yet officially over, Palmer moved
vigorously to end strikes by miners and railroad workers by
invoking wartime powers. 
Allied with J. Edgar Hoover, who would later be director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Palmer unleashed a cam-
paign against political radicals, claiming to have uncovered a
worldwide communist conspiracy. Palmer’s legal justification for
acting in this matter was the Immigration Act of 1917, which as
amended allowed for the deportation of alien anarchists and
those who supported organizations that advocated violence. More
than 3,000 suspected anarchists and members of the Communist
Party were arrested, often without warrants. These “Palmer
Raids” are widely considered to be among the most notorious in
American history because of the widespread violations of civil
liberties they produced. Few of his arrests were later upheld. 
Politics figured prominently in Palmer’s thinking. Having
helped create the “Red Scare,” he had no choice but to take force-
ful action. This was especially the case because he was an active
candidate for the 1920 Democratic presidential nomination. He
failed to get the nomination, in part because party leaders feared
that labor would not support his ticket in the general election.
Palmer continued to be active in Democratic Party politics in his
later life. At Franklin Roosevelt’s invitation he played a central
role in writing the party’s 1932 platform, and he died while work-
ing on the 1936 platform.
Oleg Vladimirovich Penkovsky (1919–1963)
Oleg Penkovsky is arguably the most important (known) spy the
United States had in the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
Information he provided on Soviet missiles in Cuba during the
Cuban missile crisis is often cited as having been crucial to the
formation of American strategy and the outcome of the conflict. 
Born in 1919, Penkovsky never knew his father, a civil ser-
vant in the tsarist government who had died fighting Bolshevik
forces in the Russian civil war. Penkovsky’s father’s tsarist past,
though, played a significant role in Penkovsky’s career and
apparently contributed to his decision to spy for the United States.
128
Biographical Sketches

As a youth Penkovsky joined the Komsomol, or communist
youth league, and in 1937 he enlisted in the army. Connections
made during World War II helped secure him a postwar berth in
the Frunze Military Academy. In 1949 he accepted a post with the
GRU, the soviet military intelligence organization. While serving
there Penkovsky attended the Military Diplomatic Academy,
where he studied intelligence. 
His career then took a number of abrupt turns. In 1955 he
was sent to Turkey as an assistant military attaché but was disci-
plined and sent back to Moscow after a dispute with his superior.
After a two-year sojourn studying missile technology at the
Dzershinksy Military Artillery Engineering Academy, Penkovsky
was sent back to intelligence work with an assignment to India as
a military attaché. However, before he could take the position his
father’s political background was discovered, and Penkovsky’s
assignment was changed to a desk job in Moscow. Shortly there-
after, however, Penkovsky was able to secure a more prestigious
position as a senior officer in the GRU’s Third Division, which
was responsible for collecting scientific and technical intelligence
from the West. It was now that Penkovsky approached Great
Britain and the United States about spying. 
After several failed attempts, he made contact with these
intelligence agencies and established his credibility. It was
arranged that he would work through Greville Wynne, a British
citizen with business interests in the fields of science and tech-
nology. Penkovsky accompanied a Soviet trade mission to
London in April 1961 and began providing key information to the
West. He continued to do so either in Moscow or on trips to the
West for the next eighteen months. One estimate suggests that he
passed along more than 5,000 photographs during this period.
Penkovsky was arrested on October 22, 1962, while the Cuban
missile crisis was under way. Wynne was arrested shortly there-
after in Hungary. Both were tried by the Soviets on charges of
espionage and were convicted. Wynne was later exchanged for a
captured Soviet spy, Gordon Lonsdale, who operated in Great
Britain. Penkovsky’s death was announced by the Soviet press on
May 16, 1963. He was shot. 
Controversy surrounds Penkovsky’s espionage career on
two counts. The first concerns whether or not the Soviets knew
he was spying but allowed him to continue to feed information
and/or disinformation to the West. Some accounts suggest that
Soviet intelligence knew of his espionage for several months. The
Biographical Sketches
129

possibility has been raised that Penkovsky was a triple agent. A
triple agent is one who is employed as a spy for one country,
agrees to become a double agent by secretly spying on his coun-
try for the country he was supposed to spy on, while in fact con-
tinuing to spy on that country for the first country, which knows
that he has been employed as a double agent by them. The sec-
ond controversy about Penkovsky concerns why he was arrested
during the Cuban missile crisis and executed so quickly. Some
suggest that it was an effort by Soviet authorities at crisis man-
agement, signaling to the United States that the information he
had given them was accurate.
Harold “Kim” Philby (1912–1988)
Harold Adrian Russell “Kim” Philby was among the most signif-
icant of the Soviet Union’s Cold War espionage placements in
Great Britain. Prior to his exposure as a possible Soviet spy,
Philby had been considered a leading candidate to one day head
British counterintelligence. In addition to passing vital intelli-
gence information to Soviet authorities, Philby compromised a
series of covert action operations in Eastern Europe. His success
is attributed at least in part to the refusal of British intelligence
officials to believe that anyone with the proper social background
and education was not trustworthy. 
Philby was born in British-ruled India in 1912. In 1929 he
entered Trinity College at Cambridge University, where he
became a socialist and then a communist. It was at Cambridge that
Philby met Donald Maclean and Anthony Blount, who would also
become Soviet spies. After graduation Philby went to Vienna,
Austria, where he helped smuggle leftists out of the country
while right-wing oppression was becoming commonplace. While
there he met and married Alice Litzi, an ardent communist, in
1934. (He would divorce her in 1946 and would eventually marry
three more times.) Philby and his wife then returned to London,
where Philby was approached by Soviet intelligence about
becoming a spy. He agreed and, along with fellow Cambridge
graduate Guy Burgess, began to build a cover for himself by
becoming active in right-wing causes. In the 1930s Philby covered
the Spanish civil war for a London newspaper. It is suggested that
in reality he was spying on General Franco for the Soviet Union.
When World War II began Philby joined British forces in France
as a war correspondent. There he put British intelligence in con-
130
Biographical Sketches

tact with a Soviet espionage network that was spying on Nazi
Germany. This was done with the approval of Philby’s Soviet
handler; it was in Russia’s interest that Great Britain be as effec-
tive as possible in fighting the Germans. 
In 1940 with the help of Burgess, Philby joined MI-6, Britain’s
Secret Intelligence Service, which was responsible for counterin-
telligence operations. In that position he came into contact with
William Donovan, Allen Dulles, and James Angleton, all of whom
were founding figures in the American espionage and counteres-
pionage effort. Such was his position that he produced a report
for British intelligence on Boris Krotov, the Russian spy master
who had run Philby and other Cambridge spies in the 1930s. 
Philby was nearly exposed as a Soviet spy in the late 1940s
when a would-be Russian defector, Konstantin Volkov, the Soviet
counsel-general in Turkey, had offered to identify high-ranking
soviet agents working in Turkey, where Philby was now posted.
But Philby was able to take charge of the case and alert Soviet offi-
cials, who captured Volkov before he could provide this informa-
tion to the British. With his true identity secure, Philby went on to
Washington, D.C., in 1949 where he served as British liaison with
the Central Intelligence Agency and Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation. It was here that he betrayed Western covert operations
designed to unseat communist governments in Albania, Poland,
Latvia, and the Ukraine. As fate would have it, Philby was soon
joined in Washington by Guy Burgess. 
In May 1951 Philby was alerted by Blount (who worked in
MI-5) that Maclean was under suspicion of being a spy. With
some simplification, two major British intelligence services can be
identified. The Secret Intelligence Service (MI-6) is a civilian intel-
ligence service charged with gathering information. The Security
Service (MI-5) is charged with protecting British secrets from
spies and preventing sabotage. Maclean at that time worked in
the American department of the British Foreign Office in London.
Philby in turn alerted Maclean, who fled to Russia. Unfortunately,
Burgess fled as well, and this raised suspicions about Philby,
given their close association in the past. Although J. Edgar
Hoover was convinced that Philby was the “third man” involved
in the now-uncovered spy ring, there was not enough evidence to
convict him. Philby resigned “in disgust” from MI-6 only to be
rehired and sent to Lebanon in 1956. His career began to unravel
there. He became depressed and an alcoholic. New information
provided by a Soviet defector, Anatoliy Golitsyn, surfaced and
Biographical Sketches
131

again pointed to Philby as a spy. He was confronted with this evi-
dence in January 1963 and quietly escaped to the Soviet Union,
where he received the rank of major general in the KGB and
where he spent the remainder of his life. In 1968 he wrote an auto-
biography, My Silent War.
Allan Pinkerton (1819–1884)
Allan Pinkerton founded one of the United States’s most famous
detective agencies and served as director of intelligence for the
Union during the Civil War. His success in that role was limited,
however; the intelligence he provided was often inaccurate, and
his key agent was captured and executed by Confederate forces. 
Pinkerton was born in Glasgow, Scotland. Due to police per-
secution for his involvement in a workers’ protest movement, he
fled Scotland in 1842, going first to Canada and then to the United
States. Ultimately settling in Chicago in 1850, he became that city’s
first detective, setting up the North West Police Agency, which
later became Pinkerton’s National Detective Agency. Pinkerton
had entered the detective business accidentally when in 1847
Pinkerton had helped break up a rural counterfeiting ring and in
the process earned a reputation as a detective. 
Railroads provided the main source of employment for Pink-
erton’s firm. Railroad companies had dramatically increased the
miles of track laid in the 1850s to the point that they could no
longer police or secure the property themselves. Pinkerton focused
his efforts on dishonest employees and set up an espionage system
to uncover corrupt behavior. Not only was he successful; his suc-
cesses were also highly publicized and contributed to rising labor
tensions within the railroad industry. In early 1861 while he was
investigating the possibility of Confederate sabotage against the
Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Baltimore Railroad, Pinkerton
claimed to have uncovered a plot to assassinate president-elect
Abraham Lincoln. He met with Lincoln’s advisors and organized a
plan to get Lincoln safely to Washington for his inauguration. 
Pinkerton met with newly elected President Lincoln about
the establishment of a federal secret service, but nothing came of
the discussions. In May 1861 Pinkerton was asked by General
George McClellan to set up a spy ring that could be used to gain
information from the Confederacy. Pinkerton’s successes were
well publicized but not extensive. In the area of counterespionage
he did succeed in capturing Confederate spy Rose O’Neal
132
Biographical Sketches

Greenhow, but his own espionage efforts provided little intelli-
gence of value and were restricted in scope. When McClellan was
relieved of command in 1862, Pinkerton returned to his detective
business. Railroad companies continued to provide an important
segment of his business. He now expanded the scope of his efforts
from policing employee honesty to pursuing railroad robbers and
bank robbers such as the Dalton gang and the James brothers.
Jonathan Jay Pollard (1943– )
Jonathan Jay Pollard joined U.S. Navy intelligence in 1979. He
claims to have made the decision to spy for Israel in 1982 because
he was angry that the United States did not give Israel all of the
intelligence it possessed. In 1984 Pollard met with Israeli intelli-
gence officials and expressed his interest in becoming a spy. To
prove his worth as a spy Pollard brought forty-eight documents
with him to the meeting, but they were not accepted by the
Israelis. The first exchange of intelligence came at a July 19, 1984,
meeting. In the following months Pollard would remove secret
information three times per week. Each time Pollard brought the
secret material to a safe house, where it was photocopied. Pollard
would then return the originals. 
Pollard’s career as a spy ran into difficulty in August 1985.
He had made the decision to quit his job with naval intelligence
by the end of the year, and he hoped to move on to other espi-
onage activities for Israel. He became careless in his tradecraft
and drew attention to himself. Pollard was apprehended on
November 18, 1985, sitting in his car as he was leaving work. He
had been led to believe (incorrectly) that an evacuation plan
existed for him and his wife and was in place for such a contin-
gency, so after two days of questioning, the Pollards drove onto
the grounds of the Israeli embassy and sought asylum. They were
turned down and forced to leave. Pollard was sentenced to life
imprisonment, and his wife, Anne, received a five-year prison
sentence. His arrest and the handling of the matter by Israel ele-
vated the case into a recurring source of tension in U.S.-Israeli
relations.
Francis Gary Powers (1929–1977)
Francis Gary Powers was a U-2 reconnaissance aircraft pilot whose
spy plane was shot down over Russia in 1960. The United States
Biographical Sketches
133

first denied that it was involved in spying, but when Russian
authorities produced Powers, they were forced to recant their story.
Powers’s failed mission led to the discontinuation of a Paris sum-
mit conference between President Dwight Eisenhower and Soviet
leader Nikita Khrushchev that was under way at the time. 
Powers was born in Kentucky and enlisted in the air force
upon graduation from Milligan College. Commissioned in 1952,
he was assigned to the Strategic Air Command. In January 1956
Powers and other pilots were recruited by the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) to fly the new U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance air-
craft on spy missions over the Soviet Union and other key sites.
For example, in 1956 Powers flew missions over the Mediter-
ranean Sea to provide information on the Suez crisis. Powers’s
unit was based at Incerlik Air Force Base at Adana, Turkey, and
operated under the cover of the Weather Observational Squadron
of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. This was
the predecessor body to the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). 
Powers flew his first mission over the Soviet Union in
November 1956. He would fly his last on May 1, 1960. On that
date he was flying a mission that was to take him from Peshawar,
Pakistan, to Bodo, Norway. As his plane approached Sverdlovsk,
Soviet Union, it was hit by a surface-to-air missile. The Soviets
had known about the U-2 overflights from the beginning and had
protested about them to the United States. Initially they lacked
the capacity to shoot down these planes due to the high altitude
at which they flew, some 80,000 feet, but that capacity improved.
The CIA had provided Powers with suicide poison, but he chose
to eject from the aircraft. On the ground he was captured with
documents identifying him as a CIA agent. Under interrogation
he admitted to being a spy. Khrushchev made his confession pub-
lic along with some of the aerial photographs he had been taking,
thereby nullifying the American cover story that a weather plane
was missing along the Soviet border. 
Powers was put on trial by Soviet authorities in August 1960.
He pled guilty to spying and was sentenced to ten years in prison.
Two years into his sentence he was exchanged for Soviet spy
Rudolf Abel on February 10, 1962, at one of the checkpoints along
the Berlin Wall. Powers died on August 1, 1977, when the helicop-
ter he was piloting as part of his job as a traffic reporter for a radio
station in Los Angeles crashed. With the permission of President
Jimmy Carter, Powers was buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
134
Biographical Sketches

Thomas Joseph Ridge (1945– )
Nine days after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center and Pentagon, Tom Ridge was selected by
President George W. Bush to be director of the cabinet-level Office
of Homeland Security. At the time, Ridge was serving his second
term as governor of Pennsylvania. Having won a hotly contested
election in 1994, Ridge had established himself as a popular gov-
ernor and had easily won reelection. He is characterized by many
as moderate and pragmatic and as having bridged the gap
between social and economic conservatives. Ridge had served six
terms in Congress before winning the governorship. Ridge was
mentioned as a possible vice presidential running mate for both
Robert Dole in 1996 and George W. Bush in 2000. In each case his
pro-choice abortion views reportedly kept him off the ticket. 
As president-elect, Bush considered Ridge for the position of
secretary of defense. Colin Powell reportedly supported his nomi-
nation, but it was rejected by conservative Republicans who
objected to his Reagan-era record of opposition to the Strategic
Defense Initiative, the MX missile, and U.S. policy in Nicaragua.
Nevertheless, he remained on good terms with Bush, who, in his
announcement appointing Ridge to the head of the Office of
Homeland Security, referred to him as a “trusted friend.” In
November 2002 Bush nominated Ridge for the position of secretary
of the Department of Homeland Security. In some ways Ridge was
seen as an unconventional choice due to the low profile he kept in
the White House and his lack of experience and success in bureau-
cratic infighting, a skill seen as vital for trying to establish the new
department’s place in the national security bureaucracy.
Julius Rosenberg (1918–1953) and Ethel
Rosenberg (1915–1953)
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, a husband and wife, were convicted
of spying for the Soviet Union in 1951 and were executed in 1953.
Both steadfastly proclaimed their innocence. Their case sparked
domestic and international protests that they had been falsely
convicted as part of an upswing in anti-Semitic and anticommu-
nist hysteria that gripped the United States in the early 1950s. The
case remains controversial, although evidence released from the
National Security Agency’s VENONA project in 1995 strongly
points to their guilt. 
Biographical Sketches
135

Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were born and grew up in New
York City in orthodox Jewish families in a Jewish neighborhood.
In their youth both were politically active, Julius in left-wing stu-
dent groups and Ethel in the labor movement. They were married
in 1939, and in 1940 Julius began working as a junior engineer for
the Army Signals Corps. He lost that job in 1945 due to allegations
(which he denied) that he was a communist. Julius would even-
tually enter into a struggling machine shop business with his
brother-in-law, David Greenglass. Ethel stayed at home with their
two sons. During World War II Greenglass had served in the
army and had worked as a machinist in the Los Alamos, New
Mexico, laboratories that produced the atomic bomb. In June 1950
Greenglass was arrested for spying for the Soviet Union. He was
accused of having given the Soviet Union vital information about
the triggering mechanism for detonating the bomb. 
Julius Rosenberg was arrested on July 17, 1950, and charged
with being the central figure in a World War II atomic spy ring.
Ethel was similarly charged with espionage on August 11 follow-
ing her testimony to a federal grand jury. The case against Ethel
was far weaker than that against Julius, and speculation exists
that she was indicted in hopes of pressuring Julius to confess in
order to obtain a lenient sentence for her. In fact, Julius and Ethel
were identified as spies by Greenglass in an effort on his part to
obtain a more lenient sentence for himself. The Rosenbergs’ trial
began on March 6, 1951, with the principal evidence against the
Rosenbergs being presented by Greenglass, who detailed his own
espionage activities in the process. He also indicated that he had
been recruited into spying by the Rosenbergs. One of the lawyers
assisting in the prosecution was Roy Cohen, who would go on to
assist Senator Joseph McCarthy in his search for communist infil-
trators of the U.S. government. The Rosenbergs’ attorney was
Emanuel Bloch, who put forward a weak and ineffective defense.
He failed to cross-examine either Greenglass or Harry Gold,
another witness who admitted being a courier for the spy ring. 
The Rosenbergs were convicted of espionage on April 5, 1951,
and sentenced to death by Judge Julius Kaufman. The Rosenbergs
appealed their conviction and were supported by thousands in the
United States and abroad. However, neither the Truman nor
Eisenhower administrations granted them a stay of execution,
although the Eisenhower administration did offer to commute the
sentence if they confessed. They were executed in Sing Sing prison
on June 19, 1953. They were the first American civilians executed
136
Biographical Sketches

for espionage. Their arrest, trial, and execution occurred against a
backdrop of rising Cold War anxieties. The Rosenbergs were
arrested less than one year after the Soviet Union exploded their
first nuclear weapon, and their indictment came shortly after the
Korean War began. The Rosenbergs’ two sons, Robert and Michael
Meeropol, worked to establish their parents’ innocence after their
parents’ execution, and a National Committee to Re-Open the
Rosenberg Case now exists. Their case remains one that scholars
and commentators revisit and continue to disagree about.
Sir William Samuel Stephenson
(1896–1989)
A Canadian, Sir William Stephenson was instrumental in estab-
lishing the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the forerunner of the
Central Intelligence Agency. He did so while covertly working for
British intelligence under the guise of the British Security Coordi-
nation Office in New York City. This office, which he headed, was
charged with conducting a propaganda campaign and secret
diplomacy in the United States to bring it into the war as well as
engaging in a full range of intelligence operations against Nazi
targets in the Western Hemisphere. 
Stephenson had served with honor in World War I as a
fighter pilot. In one encounter Stephenson’s plane was shot
down, and he was imprisoned in a prisoner-of-war camp, from
which he escaped. After the war Stephenson became a millionaire
from his patenting of a machine that made possible the radio
transmission of photographs. From there he expanded into a
number of other business ventures including steel mills. When
World War II broke out, he used his knowledge of a range of tar-
gets for the British to pursue to help British intelligence and took
part in a failed sabotage mission. British intelligence next asked
him to serve as a liaison with American officials in order to ferret
out German espionage and sabotage programs in the United
States. When his efforts to work with Federal Bureau of
Investigation director J. Edgar Hoover produced few positive
results, Stephenson turned his attention to one of President
Franklin Roosevelt’s many confidants, William “Wild Bill”
Donovan. He accompanied Donovan on a trip to London in 1940
during which Donovan was evaluating the strategic situation in
Europe and the Mediterranean for Roosevelt. Bad weather
delayed their flight for eight days, and Stephenson used the time
Biographical Sketches
137

to press his case for a centralized American civilian intelligence
agency that would engage in covert action, espionage, and analy-
sis. Donovan proved to be far more receptive to Stephenson’s
message than had Hoover, and he produced a report for Roose-
velt urging the creation of such an organization. Donovan’s pro-
posal led to the creation first of the Office of the Coordinator of
Information and then the OSS. 
Stephenson worked closely with these bodies in order to pro-
vide them with the necessary skills to carry out their missions and
to ensure that their activities were consistent with British objec-
tives. At war’s end Stephenson went back into private business.
He was knighted in 1945 and also received the U.S. Medal of
Merit.
George J. Tenet (1953– )
George Tenet was director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
at the time of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. In this post
he was both head of the Central Intelligence Agency and of the
broader intelligence community. Tenet was appointed to the CIA
position by President Bill Clinton and sworn in on July 11, 1997.
He had previously served as deputy director of central intel-
ligence and later as acting director of central intelligence. Prior to
coming to the CIA Tenet had served as special assistant to the
president and senior director for intelligence programs at the
National Security Council under Clinton. Among the projects he
supervised were ones on U.S. counterterrorism effectiveness and
U.S. remote-sensing space capabilities. Tenet assumed the head
CIA post after having served on Clinton’s presidential transition
committee and before that as staff director on the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence. 
Tenet’s background is typical of more recent appointments to
the position of director of the CIA in that he is an intelligence out-
sider, unlike Allen Dulles, Richard Helms, or William Colby, who
all had extensive careers in the CIA. Outsiders such as Tenet have
come to be favored by presidents because they are uncertain of
the political loyalty and foreign policy perspectives of those who
have had extensive experience in the intelligence community.
Presidents and foreign policy bureaucrats routinely approach for-
eign policy issues with differing perspectives. A president’s time
frame, or period of interest on a problem, is limited by electoral
politics, as are his evaluation of policy options. Career foreign
138
Biographical Sketches

policy bureaucrats (for example, intelligence officials, diplomats,
soldiers) tend to have a longer perspective and view issues not in
terms of what is best for the president but what is best for their
organization. In an effort to minimize the potential conflict here
and stop “political end runs” by the foreign policy bureaucracies
to friendly congresspeople and senators, presidents have opted to
avoid placing careerists with strong ties to an organization in
charge of them. In that regard, Tenet is seen as a team player, and
it is noteworthy that the Bush administration assigned him an
unprecedented task in sending him to the Middle East to mediate
the Palestinian-Israeli dispute. It falls upon Tenet to improve the
CIA and the intelligence community’s performance and standing
with the public and elected officials following the September 11
terrorist attacks.
Ralph H. Van Deman (1865–1952)
Ralph Van Deman is considered by many to be the father of
American military intelligence because it was under his direction
that the War Department’s Military Intelligence Branch became a
viable organization and developed a counterespionage capability.
Van Deman was born in Ohio and joined the U.S. Army as a sur-
geon in 1893. He soon undertook a career change within the army
and in 1897 he was assigned to the Military Information Division
(MID) of the Adjunct General’s Office. At the time this unit was
responsible for army intelligence. During the Spanish-American
War he saw duty in both Cuba and the Philippines, and after the
war ended he stayed on in the Philippines as part of the occupy-
ing army, working with the Bureau of Insurgent Records in the
army’s Philippines Department. From there he went to the Army
War College in Washington, D.C., as a student, and then in 1906
he was sent on a secret intelligence mission to China to collect
basic intelligence regarding China’s transportation system and
topography. 
Van Deman made his biggest impact on military intelligence
when, in the years prior to the United States’s entry into World
War I, he lobbied for the creation of a separate division of the
General Staff that would be devoted to intelligence. Not only did
Van Deman succeed in having such an office created, he was
placed in charge of it. He held that position from May 1917 until
June 1918 when he was transferred to France to serve in General
John Pershing’s intelligence unit. Van Deman attended the Paris
Biographical Sketches
139

Peace Conference and was responsible for security and coun-
terespionage at the conference. He retired in 1929 and went on to
establish a private counterespionage and countersubversion
operation that compiled information on suspected subversives
and foreign agents. Van Deman made this information available
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and military intelligence
units. During World War II he served as an advisor on intelli-
gence matters to the War Department.
Elizabeth Van Lew (1818–1900)
Elizabeth Van Lew was a Union spy in Richmond, Virginia, dur-
ing the Civil War. She ran a highly successful spy ring, the Rich-
mond Underground, which engaged in espionage and sabotage.
She financed her spy ring out of her own funds, which she had
because her father had moved to Richmond in his youth and over
time established himself as a prosperous merchant.
Van Lew’s parents were born in the North, but she as a native
of Richmond. She was a fervent abolitionist who freed all of her
father’s slaves upon his death. Little is known about her activities
as a spy; after the Civil War ended Van Lew obtained all of the
War Department documents detailing her activities and destroyed
them. It is believed that Van Lew began spying for the Union in
1863 or 1864. Reportedly among her agents was Mary Elizabeth
Bowser, one of her own former slaves, who was now a servant in
the home of Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy. Van
Lew also obtained access to Confederate prisons, where she
worked with Union soldiers and helped some escape. She was
credited by General U. S. Grant’s intelligence officer with provid-
ing key intelligence in support of his advance on Richmond in
1864. When Congress refused to reimburse Van Lew for the cost
of running the Richmond Underground after the war ended,
President Grant appointed her postmaster of Richmond, a post
she held until Rutherford Hayes became president and removed
her. After having held a civil service position in Washington, Van
Lew lived the last years of her life in Richmond and died there.
John Walker (1938– )
John Walker was the head of a spy ring that he created. He began
spying for the Soviet Union in 1968, using his position with the
140
Biographical Sketches

U.S. Navy to gather information. He was the classic “walk-in,”
appearing at the Soviet embassy in January of that year to volun-
teer. To prove his credentials, he brought with him the key lists for
the past thirty days to the KL-47 cipher machine (a spy code).
Walker wanted to be paid $1,000 per week to spy for the Soviets.
In February Walker met with a KGB officer who paid him $5,000
without even looking at the material Walker was delivering. For
the next two years, Walker provided the Soviet Union with infor-
mation that for all practical purposes allowed them to read all
messages to and from American submarines and supporting
ships. In 1970 Walker was transferred to San Diego and from
there to the USS Niagara Falls, a supply ship where he was placed
in charge of guarding all cryptographic material. 
In the late 1970s Walker began his own spy ring. He recruited
fellow navy officer Jerry Whitworth, who by a quirk of fate would
come to hold Walker’s old job on the USS Niagara Falls. In Sep-
tember 1978 Whitworth delivered to the Soviets the complete dia-
grams for several cipher machines, along with keys for ships
deployed in the Pacific. Walker next recruited his son, Michael,
into his spy ring. Walker was arrested on May 20, 1985. The next
day, Whitworth and Michael Walker were also arrested.
Herbert Yardley (1889–1958)
Herbert Yardley is generally regarded as the father of American
cryptology. Born in Indiana, Yardley moved to Washington, D.C.,
in 1912 where he obtained work as a telegrapher and code clerk
in the State Department. Working on his own and with no formal
training Yardley was able to break the codes used by the State
Department. When the United States entered World War I,
Yardley convinced Major Ralph Van Deman, head of military
intelligence, to have him assigned to the War Department, where
he was put in charge of MI-8, a newly created cryptological sec-
tion of military intelligence. Under his supervision MI-8 suc-
ceeded in breaking most of the codes used in German diplomatic
and army communications and established new codes for use by
the American army. Yardley accompanied the American mission
to the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 as chief cryptologist. With
the war over, the initial response of the American government
was to disband MI-8, which was retained and was simply
renamed as the Cipher Bureau, and since Yardley successfully
Biographical Sketches
141

resisted the move, he was placed in charge of the renamed Cipher
Bureau. It was jointly funded by the War Department and the
State Department. As by law the State Department could not
spend funds within the boundaries of Washington, D.C., the
Cipher Bureau set up operations in New York City under cover as
the Code Compilation Company, which produced commercial
codes. Its New York location gave it easy access to Western Union
and Postal Telegraph messages. 
Once again Yardley’s operation enjoyed great success. In
December 1919 it broke the Japanese diplomatic code, which
allowed the United States to have access to the negotiating
instructions given to the Japanese delegation at the Washington
Conference on the Limitations of Arms. This was one of the first
modern disarmament conferences and was called to avoid a
naval arms race in the Pacific Ocean. Yardley’s bureau was closed
in 1929 when Secretary of State Henry Stimson concluded it was
not essential to American security. It was Stimson’s position that
“gentlemen do not read each other’s mail.” By that time the
Cipher Bureau had read more than 45,000 secret telegrams from
more than twenty countries. Yardley had referred to his operation
as the American Black Chamber. He named it after the French
Black Chamber, which he had visited in Europe in 1918. 
Now unemployed, Yardley wrote his memoirs, The American
Black Chamber. It was first serialized in the Saturday Evening Post
and then published as a book. His story caused a sensation. Yet,
even though confronted with stories of code breaking, the U.S.
government denied the existence of the Cipher Bureau. Later in
his life Yardley would go on to write several novels that involved
cryptology. He was also hired in 1938 by Chiang Kai-shek’s gov-
ernment in China and then by the Canadian government to make
and break codes.
142
Biographical Sketches

5
Documents
G
iven the clandestine nature of espionage it is not surprising to
find that many key documents are secret. For example,
secrecy continues to engulf the annual budget of the intelli-
gence community. Many of the organizations involved in espi-
onage were not established through laws passed by Congress or
through published executive orders. The National Reconnais-
sance Office, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and the National
Security Agency, for example, were created by secret intelligence
directives. Likewise, lines of action have been authorized by ref-
erences to vague phrases or secret directives. 
The general authority for covert action lies in the 1947
National Security Act, which authorizes the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) to undertake “other duties as directed.” Today spe-
cific covert action operations are authorized through presidential
findings that are shared with congressional intelligence commit-
tees. Here again the authorization may be quite specific, or it may
be stated in broad generalities. It is not unusual to have key infor-
mation emerge as part of a congressional or presidential investi-
gation into acts of alleged wrongdoing by the intelligence
community or as deliberate leaks by people within the govern-
ment who oppose a course of action. 
The documents presented here were chosen because they
provide an overview of the legal and institutional environment in
which the spies and spy catchers have operated in the United
States. The documents in this section are organized under three
sections: Organizational Procedures and Authorities, Laws, and
Evidence of Domestic Spying.
143

Organizational Procedures
and Authorities
This section presents the founding documents of five intelligence
organizations.
Presidential Order, July 11, 1941
This document is the presidential order establishing the office of the
Coordinator of Information (COI). One of the major weak points in the
pre–World War II American intelligence system was the absence of any
centralized unit within the U.S. government with responsibility for ana-
lyzing intelligence. The idea for such a position was advanced by William
“Wild Bill” Donovan, who served as President Franklin Roosevelt’s per-
sonal envoy to Europe. In his dealings with Great Britain, Donovan
worked closely with Sir William Stephenson, an intelligence agent of the
British government, who helped steer Donovan’s thinking in this direc-
tion. The COI was to collect and analyze information for senior govern-
ment officials and was intended to report directly to President Roosevelt.
The COI was replaced by the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) once the
United States became involved in World War II.
Coordinator of Information
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United
States and as Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United
States, it is ordered as follows:
1.
There is hereby established the position of Coordinator of
Information, with authority to collect and analyze all
information and data, which may bear upon national
security; to correlate such information and data available to
the President and to such departments and officials of the
Government as the President may determine; and to carry
out, when requested by the President, such supplementary
activities as may facilitate the securing of information
important for national security not now available to the
Government.
2.
The several departments and agencies of the Government
shall make available to the Coordinator of Information all
and any such information and data relating to national
security as the Coordinator, with the approval of the
President, may from time to time request.
144
Documents

3.
The Coordinator of Information may appoint such
committees, consisting of appropriate representatives of the
various departments and agencies of the Government, as he
may deem necessary to assist him in the performance of his
functions.
4.
Nothing in the duties and responsibilities of the Coordinator
of Information shall in any way interfere with or impair the
duties and responsibilities of the regular military and naval
advisers of the President as Commander in Chief of the Army
and Navy.
5.
Within the limits of such funds as may be allocated to the
Coordinator of Information by the President, the Coordinator
may employ necessary personnel and make provision for the
necessary supplies, facilities, and services.
6.
William J. Donovan is hereby designated as Coordinator of
Information.
Franklin D. Roosevelt
The White House
July 11, 1941
Military Order, June 13, 1942
This Military Order established the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).
The OSS replaced the Coordinator of Information that was established
on July 11, 1941. The OSS is the forerunner of the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA). Unlike the COI, which reported to the president, the
OSS reported to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The OSS was the United
States’s first true independent intelligence agency. It had responsibility
in a broad array of intelligence areas. Its Research and Analysis branch
was charged with conducting economic, social, and political analysis of
events abroad. Open sources such as foreign newspapers and periodicals
provided much of the information it relied upon. A Secret Intelligence
branch secretly collected information in enemy and neutral states. A
Special Operations branch engaged in covert action abroad and worked
with resistance groups in German-occupied territories. A Counterespio-
nage branch was charged with protecting American secrets and institu-
tions from foreign penetrations. The Morale Operations branch engaged
in propaganda targeted on the populations of enemy states. Operational
Groups conducted guerrilla warfare. Finally, a Maritime Unit carried
out maritime sabotage operations. 
William Donovan became the head of the OSS. President Harry
Truman disbanded the OSS by executive order on October 1, 1945, and
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
145

distributed its duties among other existing departments. For example,
the Research and Analysis branch went to the State Department, and
the Secret Intelligence and Special Operations branches went to the War
Department.
Office of Strategic Services
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United
States and as Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United
States, it is ordered as follows:
1. The office of Coordinator of Information established by Order
of July 11, 1941, exclusive of the foreign information activities
transferred to the Office of War Information by Executive Order
of June 13, 1942, shall hereafter be known as the Office of
Strategic Services, and is hereby transferred to the jurisdiction
of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.
2. The Office of Strategic Services shall perform the following
duties:
(a) Collect and analyze such strategic information as may be
required by the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.
(b) Plan and operate such special services as may be directed
by the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.
3. At the head of the Office of Strategic Services shall be a Director
of Strategic Services who shall be appointed by the President
and who shall perform his duties under the direction and
supervision of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.
4. William J. Donovan is hereby appointed as Director of Strategic
Services.
5. The Order of July 11, 1941, is hereby revoked.
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Commander in Chief
The Central Intelligence Agency (National
Security Act of 1947, July 26, 1947,
Excerpts)
The National Security Act of 1947 is widely regarded as the foundation
document for establishing the contemporary national security bureau-
cracy. It combined the War and Navy Departments along with the air
force into a single bureaucratic unit, the Department of Defense, and
provided for the position of a civilian secretary of defense. Furthermore,
it provided for unified military commands but prohibited the merger of
146
Documents

the military services into a single force. The need for this reorganization
had been recognized during World War II. 
The National Security Act of 1947 also created the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA). During World War II the United States
had established the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) as its first central
intelligence unit. President Truman disbanded the OSS after the war
and scattered its responsibilities and units among the State
Department and War Department. Several studies were conducted
after the war as to how to organize defense and intelligence functions.
One of the most influential was the Eberstadt Report, which recom-
mended the creation of a central intelligence unit that would synthesize
departmental intelligence. 
Truman acted on this advice and issued an executive order on
January 22, 1946, creating the Central Intelligence Group (CIG). Along
with analytic responsibilities the CIG was also permitted to engage in
clandestine operations by this executive order. The new CIG was headed
by a Director of Central Intelligence. The CIG was the immediate pre-
decessor of the CIA. Interestingly, the creation of the CIA was not con-
troversial. Virtually everyone recognized the need for a more centralized
intelligence agency in the rapidly shifting geopolitical landscape of the
immediate post–World War II international system. Most of the debate
on the National Security Act of 1947 focused on the merits of defense
reorganization and the degree to which the services should be brought
under a single authority.
National Security Act of 1947, July 26, 1947
An act to promote the national security by providing for a
Secretary of Defense; for a National Military Establishment; for a
Department of the Army, a Department of the Navy, and a Department
of the Air Force; and for the coordination of the activities of the
National Military Establishment with other departments and agencies
of the Government concerned with the national security.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
That [50 U.S.C. 401 note] this Act may be cited as the “National
Security Act of 1947.”
DECLARATION OF POLICY
Section 2. [50 U.S.C. 401] In enacting this legislation, it is the intent
of Congress to provide a comprehensive program for the future
security of the United States; to provide for the establishment of
integrated policies and procedures for the departments, agencies, and
functions of the Government relating to the national security; to
provide a Department of Defense, including the three military
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
147

Departments of the Army, the Navy (including naval aviation and the
United States Marine Corps), and the Air Force under the direction,
authority, and control of the Secretary of Defense; to provide that each
military department shall be separately organized under its own
Secretary and shall function under the direction, authority, and control
of the Secretary of Defense; to provide for their unified direction under
civilian control of the Secretary of Defense but not to merge these
departments or services; to provide for the establishment of unified or
specified combatant commands, and a clear and direct line of command
to such commands; to eliminate unnecessary duplication in the
Department of Defense, and particularly in the field of research and
engineering by vesting its overall direction and control in the Secretary
of Defense; to provide more effective, efficient, and economical
administration in the Department of Defense; to provide for the unified
strategic direction of the combatant forces, for their operation under
unified command, and for their integration into an efficient team of
land, naval, and air forces but not to establish a single Chief of Staff
over the armed forces nor an overall armed forces general staff.
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Section 102. [50 U.S.C. 403]
(a)
There is hereby established under the National Security
Council a Central Intelligence Agency with a Director of
Central Intelligence who shall be the head thereof, and with a
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence who shall act for, and
exercise the powers of, the Director during his absence or
disability. The Director and the Deputy Director shall be
appointed by the President, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, from among the commissioned officers
of the armed services, whether in an active or retired status,
or from among individuals in civilian life: Provided, however,
That at no time shall the two positions of the Director and
Deputy Director be occupied simultaneously by
commissioned officers of the armed forces, whether in an
active or retired status. . . .
(d) For the purpose of coordinating the intelligence activities of
the several government departments and agencies in the
interest of national security, it shall be the duty of the Agency,
under the direction of the National Security Council—
(1)
to advise the National Security Council in matters
concerning such intelligence activities of the Government
departments and agencies as relate to the national
security;
(2)
to make recommendations to the National Security
Council for the coordination of such intelligence
activities of the departments and agencies of the
Government as relate to the national security;
148
Documents

(3)
to correlate and evaluate intelligence relating to the
national security, and provide for the appropriate
dissemination of such intelligence within the
Government using where appropriate existing agencies
and facilities: Provided, That the agency shall have no
police, subpoena, law-enforcement powers, or internal
security functions: Provided further, That the departments
and other agencies of the Government shall continue to
collect, evaluate, correlate and disseminate departmental
intelligence: And provided further, That the Director of
Central Intelligence shall be responsible for protecting
intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized
disclosure;
(4)
to perform, for the benefit of existing intelligence
agencies, such additional services of common concern as
the National Security Council determines can be more
efficiently accomplished centrally;
(5)
to perform such other functions and duties related to
intelligence affecting the national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time direct. 
Executive Order 13228 Establishing the
Office of Homeland Security and the
Homeland Security Council
This executive order established the Office of Homeland Security as a
unit within the Office of the President in the White House. It followed
in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon. The move was welcomed by most as a
necessary response to the threat of terrorism in the United States. Still,
points of controversy arose. By placing the Office of Homeland Security
in the White House, President George W. Bush was not required to have
its head, the assistant to the president for Homeland Security, confirmed
by the Senate, nor was the Senate empowered to force this person to ever
testify about the Office of Homeland Security’s actions. Republican
Pennsylvania Governor Thomas Ridge was selected by President Bush
to be the head of this new office. 
The second controversy, which was linked to the first, involved the
role that the Office of Homeland Security would play in detecting and
coordinating efforts to obtain information about terrorist threats.
Concerns were raised about the potential for violating civil rights and
liberties when the efforts of the Office of Homeland Security were com-
bined with other initiatives put into place by President Bush and
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
149

Attorney General John Ashcroft that made it easier to obtain informa-
tion on individuals and to detain them without being charged or having
access to counsel.
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the
laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Sec. 1. Establishment. I hereby establish within the Executive
Office of the President an Office of Homeland Security (the “Office”) to
be headed by the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.
Sec. 2. Mission. The mission of the Office shall be to develop and
coordinate the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to
secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks. The Office
shall perform the functions necessary to carry out this mission,
including the functions specified in section 3 of this order.
Sec. 3. Functions. The functions of the Office shall be to coordinate
the executive branch’s efforts to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect
against, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks within the
United States.
(a)
National Strategy. The Office shall work with executive
departments and agencies, State and local governments, and
private entities to ensure the adequacy of the national
strategy for detecting, preparing for, preventing, protecting
against, responding to, and recovering from terrorist threats
or attacks within the United States and shall periodically
review and coordinate revisions to that strategy as necessary.
(b)
Detection. The Office shall identify priorities and coordinate
efforts for collection and analysis of information within the
United States regarding threats of terrorism against the
United States and activities of terrorists or terrorist groups
within the United States. The Office also shall identify, in
coordination with the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs, priorities for collection of intelligence
outside the United States regarding threats of terrorism
within the United States.
(i)
In performing these functions, the Office shall work with
Federal, State, and local agencies, as appropriate, to:
(A) facilitate collection from State and local governments
and private entities of information pertaining to
terrorist threats or activities within the United States;
(B)
coordinate and prioritize the requirements for
foreign intelligence relating to terrorism within the
United States of executive departments and
150
Documents

agencies responsible for homeland security and
provide these requirements and priorities to the
Director of Central Intelligence and other agencies
responsible for collection of foreign intelligence;
(C)
coordinate efforts to ensure that all executive
departments and agencies that have intelligence
collection responsibilities have sufficient
technological capabilities and resources to collect
intelligence and data relating to terrorist activities
or possible terrorist acts within the United States,
working with the Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs, as appropriate;
(D) coordinate development of monitoring protocols
and equipment for use in detecting the release of
biological, chemical, and radiological hazards; and
(E)
ensure that, to the extent permitted by law, all
appropriate and necessary intelligence and law
enforcement information relating to homeland
security is disseminated to and exchanged among
appropriate executive departments and agencies
responsible for homeland security and, where
appropriate for reasons of homeland security,
promote exchange of such information with and
among State and local governments and private
entities. . . .
(d)
Prevention. The Office shall coordinate efforts to prevent
terrorist attacks within the United States. In performing this
function, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local
agencies, and private entities, as appropriate, to:
(i)
facilitate the exchange of information among such
agencies relating to immigration and visa matters and
shipments of cargo; and, working with the Assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs, ensure
coordination among such agencies to prevent the entry
of terrorists and terrorist materials and supplies into the
United States and facilitate removal of such terrorists
from the United States, when appropriate;
(ii)
coordinate efforts to investigate terrorist threats and
attacks within the United States; and
(iii) coordinate efforts to improve the security of United
States borders, territorial waters, and airspace in order to
prevent acts of terrorism within the United States,
working with the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs, when appropriate.
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
151

The Department of Homeland Security:
Homeland Security Act of 2002, November
25, 2002 (Excerpts)
The Homeland Security Act replaced the Office of Homeland Security, a
unit in the Office of the President, with a new cabinet-level department,
the Department of Homeland Security. The primary mission of the
department is defined in terms of preventing terrorist attacks within the
United States, reducing the vulnerability of the United States to terror-
ism, and minimizing the damage from terrorist attacks that do occur and
speeding the recovery from those attacks. The Department of Homeland
Security is also charged with the responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting terrorism. It is here that the primary linkage to espionage
exists. 
As was repeatedly noted in this book’s overview of American espi-
onage, the outward-looking orientation of espionage and spy catching
has turned inward and focused on Americans who held unpopular views
or were recent immigrants. Support for the establishment of a Depart-
ment of Homeland Security was widespread and reflected a sense that
the established intelligence agencies charged with espionage, counteres-
pionage, and analysis (the Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation) had failed to meet the terrorist challenge. Still,
the Homeland Security Act met with considerable opposition within the
Senate, principally from Democrats. Their opposition was based less on
the issue of counterespionage excesses than on concerns for the rights of
federal employees who were being brought into the new department. The
George W. Bush administration sought maximum flexibility in the hir-
ing, firing, and management of personnel. 
A second concern was related to the size of the Department of
Homeland Security. Among the intelligence-related agencies brought
under its umbrella were the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
the U.S. Coast Guard, and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. In all, 170,000 employees from twenty-two agencies were
united into the Department of Homeland Security. The Department is
divided into four units: a Border and Transportation Security unit; an
Emergency Preparedness and Response unit; a Chemical, Biological,
Radiological, and Nuclear Countermeasures unit; and an Information
Analysis and Infrastructure Protection unit. The Homeland Security
Act passed with relative ease after the November 2002 election, in which
the Republican Party won control of both houses in the upcoming
Congress. Thomas Ridge, who headed the Office of Homeland Security,
became the first secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.
152
Documents

PUBLIC LAW 107-296 [H.R. 5005]
NOV. 25, 2002 HOMELAND SECURITY ACT OF 2002
107 P.L. 296; 116 Stat. 2135; 2002 Enacted H.R. 5005; 107 Enacted
H.R. 5005
An Act
To establish the Department of Homeland Security, and for other
purposes.
TITLE I—DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
[*101] Sec. 101. EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT; MISSION.
(a)
Establishment.—There is established a Department of
Homeland Security, as an executive department of the United
States within the meaning of title 5, United States Code.
(b)
Mission.—
(1)
In general.—The primary mission of the Department is
to—
(A) prevent terrorist attacks within the United States;
(B)
reduce the vulnerability of the United States to
terrorism;
(C)
minimize the damage, and assist in the recovery,
from terrorist attacks that do occur within the
United States;
(D) carry out all functions of entities transferred to the
Department, including by acting as a focal point
regarding natural and manmade crises and
emergency planning;
(E)
ensure that the functions of the agencies and
subdivisions within the Department that are not
related directly to securing the homeland are not
diminished or neglected except by a specific explicit
Act of Congress;
(F)
ensure that the overall economic security of the
United States is not diminished by efforts, activities,
and programs aimed at securing the homeland; and
(G) monitor connections between illegal drug
trafficking and terrorism, coordinate efforts to sever
such connections, and otherwise contribute to
efforts to interdict illegal drug trafficking.
(2)
Responsibility for investigating and prosecuting
terrorism.—Except as specifically provided by law with
respect to entities transferred to the Department under
this Act, primary responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting acts of terrorism shall be vested not in the
Department, but rather in Federal, State, and local law
enforcement agencies with jurisdiction over the acts in
question.
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
153

Coordination of Counterintelligence
Activities (Title 50, Section 402 of the U.S.
Code, Excerpts)
One of the most enduring criticisms of the operation of the U.S. intelli-
gence community in the areas of espionage and counterespionage is the
lack of coordination and cooperation among units. This has especially
been the case with regard to the behavior of the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Often this
is presented as a matter of personality; the counterespionage efforts of
both of these bureaucracies have been led by strong-willed individuals,
most notably J. Edgar Hoover in the FBI and James Angleton in the
CIA. Several other factors contribute to this problem as well. One is the
natural tendency to trust one’s own people. As can be seen in the case
studies of espionage in this book, the tendency is to blame improper
tradecraft and communication intercepts first before blaming one’s own
people for security breaches. A second impediment to cooperation is how
these two agencies define their missions. The CIA sees counterespionage
as a threat that is to be countered, neutralized, and—if possible—
exploited. The FBI sees counterespionage as leading to prosecutions that
may demand evidence the CIA is unwilling to make available. It should
also be noted that the charge of noncooperation has been made in the
areas of intelligence analysis and covert action, and that it is not simply
a problem of counterespionage. This document lays out a bureaucratic
attempt to legislate cooperation among members of the intelligence com-
munity. The document is important not so much for what it has accom-
plished but because it recognizes the problem and provides a basis for
joint action. Because coordinating intelligence is a key issue in coun-
terespionage efforts, presented here is a core document that details how
this coordination is to occur.
(a)
Establishment of Counterintelligence Policy Board
There is established within the executive branch of
Government a National Counterintelligence Policy Board (in
this section referred to as the ‘‘Board’’). The Board shall
report to the President through the National Security Council.
(b)
Function of Board
The Board shall serve as the principal mechanism for—
(1)
developing policies and procedures for the approval of
the President to govern the conduct of
counterintelligence activities; and
154
Documents

(2)
resolving conflicts, as directed by the President, which
may arise between elements of the Government which
carry out such activities.
(c)
Coordination of counterintelligence matters with [the]
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(1)
Except as provided in paragraph (5), the head of each
department or agency within the executive branch shall
ensure that—
(A) the Federal Bureau of Investigation is advised
immediately of any information, regardless of its
origin, which indicates that classified information is
being, or may have been, disclosed in an
unauthorized manner to a foreign power or an
agent of a foreign power;
(B)
following a report made pursuant to subparagraph
(A), the Federal Bureau of Investigation is consulted
with respect to all subsequent actions which may be
undertaken by the department or agency concerned
to determine the source of such loss or compromise;
and
(C)
where, after appropriate consultation with the
department or agency concerned, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation undertakes investigative
activities to determine the source of the loss or
compromise, the Federal Bureau of Investigation is
given complete and timely access to the employees
and records of the department or agency concerned
for purposes of such investigative activities.
(2)
Except as provided in paragraph (5), the Director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation shall ensure that
espionage information obtained by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation pertaining to the personnel, operations, or
information of departments or agencies of the executive
branch, is provided through appropriate channels in a
timely manner to the department or agency concerned,
and that such departments or agencies are consulted in a
timely manner with respect to espionage investigations
undertaken by the Federal Bureau of Investigation which
involve the personnel, operations, or information of such
department or agency.
(3)
(A) The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
shall submit to the head of the department or
agency concerned a written assessment of the
potential impact of the actions of the department or
agency on a counterintelligence investigation.
Organizational Procedures and Authorities
155

(B)
The head of the department or agency concerned
shall—
(i)
use an assessment under subparagraph (A)
as an aid in determining whether, and
under what circumstances, the subject of an
investigation under paragraph (1) should
be left in place for investigative purposes;
and
(ii) 
notify in writing the Director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation of such
determination.
(C)
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
and the head of the department or agency
concerned shall continue to consult, as appropriate,
to review the status of an investigation covered by
this paragraph, and to reassess, as appropriate, a
determination of the head of the department or
agency concerned to leave a subject in place for
investigative purposes.
(4)
(A) The Federal Bureau of Investigation shall notify
appropriate officials within the executive branch,
including the head of the department or agency
concerned, of the commencement of a full field
espionage investigation with respect to an employee
within the executive branch.
(B)
A department or agency may not conduct a
polygraph examination, interrogate, or otherwise
take any action that is likely to alert an employee
covered by a notice under subparagraph (A) of an
investigation described in that subparagraph
without prior coordination and consultation with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(5)
Where essential to meet extraordinary circumstances
affecting vital national security interests of the United
States, the President may on a case-by-case basis waive
the requirements of paragraph (1), (2), or (3), as they
apply to the head of a particular department or agency,
or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Such waiver shall be in writing and shall fully state the
justification for such waiver. Within thirty days, the
President shall notify the Select Committee on
Intelligence of the Senate and the Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence of the House of
Representatives that such waiver has been issued, and at
156
Documents

that time or as soon as national security considerations
permit, provide these committees with a complete
explanation of the circumstances which necessitated such
waiver.
Laws
This section presents key documents that relate to espionage and
counterespionage. The first is an executive order that established
procedures for a loyalty program within the government. The
second originally comes from the 1917 Espionage Act, which was
the first law governing espionage in the United States. The third
is a recent law governing economic espionage.
Loyalty Programs:
Executive Order 9835, 1947 (Excerpts)
Spying against one’s own country is an act of treason that has been pun-
ished by the ultimate penalty in both the United States and abroad.
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were convicted of stealing atomic secrets and
passing them to the Soviet Union in the 1950s and were executed. So too
was Oleg Penkovsky. He was captured by Soviet authorities for spying
on behalf of the United States. Such is the nature of espionage, however,
that spies are not always damned and viewed with dishonor. During the
War for Independence, Nathan Hale was executed for spying on Great
Britain in an effort to aid the cause of the American revolutionaries. His
statue now adorns the entranceway to the headquarters of the Central
Intelligence Agency and serves as a symbol of sacrifice and patriotism.
Given the seriousness of espionage it is not surprising that establishing
the loyalty of those who work in sensitive government positions is a con-
stant concern. Lie detector tests and background checks are performed as
a matter of routine for new employees. The often haphazard nature of
security checks for those employed in the intelligence community has
emerged as a key contributing factor to the success of individuals spying
on the United States. At the same time, concerns exist that the search for
spies can lead to uncontrolled witch-hunts in which the rights of indi-
viduals are trampled if those inquiries are not conducted according to
clearly prescribed rules. The early 1950s McCarthyite investigations
into the loyalty of members of the national security bureaucracies and
Laws
157

the blackballing of entertainers for their political beliefs stand as vivid
examples of this excess. This document from 1947 is an example of an
effort to set standards and procedures for investigating loyalty among
employees of the executive branch.
Prescribing Procedures for the Administration of an Employees
Loyalty Program in the Executive Branch of the Government
WHEREAS each employee of the Government of the United States
is endowed with a measure of trusteeship over the democratic
processes which are the heart and sinew of the United States; and
WHEREAS it is of vital importance that persons employed in the
Federal service be of complete and unswerving loyalty to the United
States; and
WHEREAS, although the loyalty of by far the overwhelming
majority of all Government employees is beyond question, the presence
within the Government service of any disloyal or subversive person
constitutes a threat to our democratic processes; and
WHEREAS maximum protection must be afforded the United
States against infiltration of disloyal persons into the ranks of its
employees, and equal protection from unfounded accusations of
disloyalty must be afforded the loyal employees of the Government:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, including the Civil
Service Act of 1883 (22 Stat. 403), as amended, and section 9A of the act
approved August 2, 1939 (18 U.S.C. 61i), and as President and Chief
Executive of the United States, it is hereby, in the interest of the internal
management of the Government, ordered as follows:
PART I—INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS
1.
There shall be a loyalty investigation of every person entering
the civilian employment of any department or agency of the
executive branch of the Federal Government.
a.
Investigations of persons entering the competitive
service shall be conducted by the Civil Service
Commission, except in such cases as are covered by a
special agreement between the Commission and any
given department or agency.
PART V—STANDARDS
1.
The standard for the refusal of employment or the removal
from employment in an executive department or agency on
158
Documents

grounds relating to loyalty shall be that, on all the evidence,
reasonable grounds exist for belief that the person involved is
disloyal to the Government of the United States.
2.
Activities and associations of an applicant or employee which
may be considered in connection with the determination of
disloyalty may include one or more of the following:
a.
Sabotage, espionage, or attempts or preparations
therefor[e], or knowingly associating with spies or
saboteurs;
b.
Treason or sedition or advocacy thereof;
c.
Advocacy of revolution or force or violence to alter the
constitutional form of government of the United States;
d.
Intentional, unauthorized disclosure to any person,
under circumstances which may indicate disloyalty to
the United States, of documents or information of a
confidential or non-public character obtained by the
person making the disclosure as a result of his
employment by the Government of the United States;
e.
Performing or attempting to perform his duties, or
otherwise acting, so as to serve the interests of another
government in preference to the interests of the United
States[;]
f.
Membership in, affiliation with or sympathetic
association with any foreign or domestic organization,
association, movement, group or combination of persons,
designated by the Attorney General as totalitarian,
fascist, communist, or subversive, or as having adopted a
policy of advocating or approving the commission of
acts of force or violence to deny other persons their
rights under the Constitution of the United States, or as
seeking to alter the form of government of the United
States by unconstitutional means.
6.
Executive Order No. 9300 of February 5, 1943, is hereby
revoked.
Harry S. Truman
The White House,
March 21, 1947
Laws
159

Laws Governing Espionage:
Title 18 of the U.S. Code Sections 793, 794,
798, 783b (Excerpts)
Espionage is a crime. This document is a compilation of key sections of
the U.S. Code that define espionage and specify permissible punish-
ments. The laws center on the gathering, transmitting, or losing of
defense information; the gathering or delivering of defense information
to aid foreign governments; the disclosure of classified information; and
the communication of classified information. The first espionage law
was written in 1917, and provisions have been added in subsequent
years. For those not familiar with the legal writings, this document is
important because it sheds light on the degree to which espionage laws
seek to cover all potentialities both as to the material being stolen or the
nature of activities involved. Note that in some cases the punishment is
defined as being fined “not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more
than ten years or both” (18 U.S.C. 793 f) and in other cases “death or
imprisonment for any term of years or life” (18 U.S.C. 794 a).
18 U.S.C. Sec. 793
Gathering, transmitting or losing defense information
(a)
Whoever, for the purpose of obtaining information respecting
the national defense with intent or reason to believe that the
information is to be used to the injury of the United States, or
to the advantage of any foreign nation, goes upon, enters,
flies over, or otherwise obtains information concerning any
vessel, aircraft, work of defense, navy yard, naval station,
submarine base, fueling station, fort, battery, torpedo station,
dockyard, canal, railroad, arsenal, camp, factory, mine,
telegraph, telephone, wireless, or signal station, building,
office, research laboratory or station or other place connected
with the national defense owned or constructed, or in
progress of construction by the United States or under the
control of the United States, or of any of its officers,
departments, or agencies, or within the exclusive jurisdiction
of the United States, or any place in which any vessel,
aircraft, arms, munitions, or other materials or instruments
for use in time of war are being made, prepared, repaired,
stored, or are the subject of research or development, under
any contract or agreement with the United States, or any
department or agency thereof, or with any person on behalf
160
Documents

of the United States, or otherwise on behalf of the United
States, or any prohibited place so designated by the President
by proclamation in time of war or in case of national
emergency in which anything for the use of the Army, Navy,
or Air Force is being prepared or constructed or stored,
information as to which prohibited place the President has
determined would be prejudicial to the national defense; or
(b)
Whoever, for the purpose aforesaid, and with like intent or
reason to believe, copies, takes, makes, or obtains, or attempts
to copy, take, make, or obtain, any sketch, photograph,
photographic negative, blueprint, plan, map, model,
instrument, appliance, document, writing, or note of
anything connected with the national defense; or
(c)
Whoever, for the purpose aforesaid, receives or obtains or
agrees or attempts to receive or obtain from any person, or
from any source whatever, any document, writing, code
book, signal book, sketch, photograph, photographic
negative, blueprint, plan, map, model, instrument, appliance,
or note, of anything connected with the national defense,
knowing or having reason to believe, at the time he receives
or obtains, or agrees or attempts to receive or obtain it, that it
has been or will be obtained, taken, made, or disposed of by
any person contrary to the provisions of this chapter; or
(d)
Whoever, lawfully having possession of, access to, control
over, or being entrusted with any document, writing, code
book, signal book, sketch, photograph, photographic
negative, blueprint, plan, map, model, instrument, appliance,
or note relating to the national defense, or information
relating to the national defense which information the
possessor has reason to believe could be used to the injury of
the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation,
willfully communicates, delivers, transmits or causes to be
communicated, delivered, or transmitted or attempts to
communicate, deliver, transmit or cause to be communicated,
delivered or transmitted the same to any person not entitled
to receive it, or willfully retains the same and fails to deliver
it on demand to the officer or employee of the United States
entitled to receive it; or
(e)
Whoever having unauthorized possession of, access to, or
control over any document, writing, code book, signal book,
sketch, photograph, photographic negative, blueprint, plan,
map, model, instrument, appliance, or note relating to the
national defense, or information relating to the national
defense which information the possessor has reason to
Laws
161

believe could be used to the injury of the United States or to
the advantage of any foreign nation, willfully communicates,
delivers, transmits or causes to be communicated, delivered,
or transmitted, or attempts to communicate, deliver, transmit
or cause to be communicated, delivered, or transmitted the
same to any person not entitled to receive it, or willfully
retains the same and fails to deliver it to the officer or
employee of the United States entitled to receive it; or
(f)
Whoever, being entrusted with or having lawful possession
or control of any document, writing, code book, signal book,
sketch, photograph, photographic negative, blueprint, plan,
map, model, instrument, appliance, note, or information,
relating to the national defense, (1) through gross negligence
permits the same to be removed from its proper place of
custody or delivered to anyone in violation of his trust, or to
be lost, stolen, abstracted, or destroyed, or (2) having
knowledge that the same has been illegally removed from its
proper place of custody or delivered to anyone in violation of
his trust, or lost, or stolen, abstracted, or destroyed, and fails
to make prompt report of such loss, theft, abstraction, or
destruction to his superior officer—Shall be fined not more
than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both.
(g)
If two or more persons conspire to violate any of the
foregoing provisions of this section, and one or more of such
persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each
of the parties to such conspiracy shall be subject to the
punishment provided for the offense which is the object of
such conspiracy.
June 25, 1948, c. 645, 62 Stat. 736; Sept. 23, 1950, c. 1024, Title I, § 18, 64
Stat. 1003.
18 U.S.C. Sec. 794
Gathering or delivering defense information to aid foreign government
(a)
Whoever, with intent or reason to believe that it is to be used
to the injury of the United States, or to the advantage of a
foreign nation, communicates, delivers, or transmits, or
attempts to communicate, deliver, or transmit, to any foreign
government, or to any faction or party or military or naval
force within a foreign country, whether recognized or
unrecognized by the United States, or to any representative,
officer, agent, employee, subject, or citizen thereof, either
directly or indirectly, any document, writing, code book,
signal book, sketch, photograph, photographic negative,
162
Documents

blueprint, plan, map, model, note, instrument, appliance, or
information relating to the national defense, shall be
punished by death or by imprisonment for any term of years
or for life.
(b)
Whoever, in time of war, with intent that the same shall be
communicated to the enemy, collects, records, publishes, or
communicates, or attempts to elicit any information with
respect to the movement, numbers, description, condition, or
disposition of any of the Armed Forces, ships, aircraft, or war
materials of the United States, or with respect to the plans or
conduct, or supposed plans or conduct of any naval or
military operations, or with respect to any works or measures
undertaken for or connected with, or intended for the
fortification or defense of any place, or any other information
relating to the public defense, which might be useful to the
enemy, shall be punished by death or by imprisonment for
any term of years or for life.
(c)
If two or more persons conspire to violate this section, and
one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of
the conspiracy, each of the parties to such conspiracy shall be
subject to the punishment provided for the offense which is
the object of such conspiracy.
June 25, 1948, c. 645, 62 Stat. 737; Sept. 3, 1954, c. 1261, Title II, § 201, 68
Stat. 1219.
18 U.S.C. 798
Disclosure of Classified information
(a)
Whoever knowingly and willfully communicates, furnishes,
transmits, or otherwise makes available to an unauthorized
person, or publishes, or uses in any manner prejudicial to the
safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States any
classified information—
(1)
concerning the nature, preparation, or use of any code,
cipher, or cryptographic system of the United States or
any foreign government; or
(2)
concerning the design, construction, use, maintenance, or
repair of any device, apparatus, or appliance used or
prepared or planned for use by the United States or any
foreign government for cryptographic or communication
intelligence purposes; or
(3)
concerning the communication intelligence activities of
the United States or any foreign government; or
Laws
163

(4)
obtained by the processes of communication intelligence
from the communications of any foreign government,
knowing the same to have been obtained by such
processes—
Shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not
more than ten years, or both.
(b)
As used in subsection (a) of this section—
The term ‘‘classified information’’ means information
which, at the time of a violation of this section, is, for reasons
of national security specifically designated by a United States
Government Agency for limited or restricted dissemination
or distribution; 
The terms ‘‘code,’’ ‘‘cipher,’’ and ‘‘cryptographic system’’
include in their meanings, in addition to their usual
meanings, any method of secret writing and any mechanical
or electrical device or method used for the purpose of
disguising or concealing the contents, significance, or
meanings of communications;
The term ‘‘foreign government’’ includes in its meaning
any person or persons acting or purporting to act for or on
behalf of any faction, party, department, agency, bureau, or
military force of or within a foreign country, or for or on
behalf of any government or any person or persons
purporting to act as a government within a foreign country,
whether or not such government is recognized by the United
States;
The term ‘‘communication intelligence’’ means all
procedures and methods used in the interception of
communications and the obtaining of information from such
communications by other than the intended recipients;
The term ‘‘unauthorized person’’ means any person
who, or agency which, is not authorized to receive
information of the categories set forth in subsection (a) of this
section, by the President, or by the head of a department or
agency of the United States Government which is expressly
designated by the President to engage in communication
intelligence activities for the United States.
(c)
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the furnishing, upon
lawful demand, of information to any regularly constituted
committee of the Senate or House of Representatives of the
United States of America, or joint committee thereof.
Added Oct. 31, 1951, c. 655, § 24(a), 65 Stat. 719.
50 U.S.C 783(b)
164
Documents

Communication of classified Information by Government officer or
employee
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the United
States or of any department or agency thereof, or of any
corporation the stock of which is owned in whole or in major
part by the United States or any department or agency
thereof, to communicate in any manner or by any means, to
any other person whom such officer or employee knows or
has reason to believe to be an agent or representative of any
foreign government or an officer or member of any
Communist organization as defined in paragraph (5) of
section 782 of this title, any information of a kind which shall
have been classified by the President (or by the head of any
such department, agency, or corporation with the approval of
the President) as affecting the security of the United States,
knowing or having reason to know that such information has
been so classified, unless such officer or employee shall have
been specifically authorized by the President, or by the head
of the department, agency, or corporation by which this
officer or employee is employed, to make such disclosure of
such information.
Laws Governing Economic Espionage:
Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Excerpts)
Economic espionage is not necessarily a problem that governments need
to concern themselves with. Firms have long been engaged in spying on
one another in order to obtain an advantage or to negate an existing one.
Yet there are cases in which economic espionage is a national security
concern. The conceptual starting point for this view is the idea of a
strategic trade policy. According to such a policy, “potato chips are not
computer chips.” That is, what matters is not just how much you pro-
duce and trade but what you produce and trade. Competitiveness in a
globalized economy depends upon obtaining and holding a technological
edge. Moreover, many of the key technologies that produce an economic
advantage in the private sector are dual use technologies; they also hold
significant military applications. Under these circumstances govern-
ments as well as firms have an incentive to engage in economic espi-
onage. This document presents a definition of economic espionage as it
relates to trade secrets and sets forward punishments for engaging in
economic espionage.
Laws
165

PUBLIC LAW 104-294 [H.R. 3723]
OCTOBER 11, 1996
ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE ACT OF 1996
1831 Sec. 1831. Economic espionage
(a)
In General.—Whoever, intending or knowing that the offense
will benefit any foreign government, foreign instrumentality,
or foreign agent, knowingly—
(1)
steals, or without authorization appropriates, takes,
carries away, or conceals, or by fraud, artifice, or
deception obtains a trade secret;
(2)
without authorization copies, duplicates, sketches,
draws, photographs, downloads, uploads, alters,
destroys, photocopies, replicates, transmits, delivers,
sends, mails, communicates, or conveys a trade secret;
(3)
receives, buys, or possesses a trade secret, knowing the
same to have been stolen or appropriated, obtained, or
converted without authorization;
(4)
attempts to commit any offense described in any of
paragraphs (1) through (3); or
(5)
conspires with one or more other persons to commit any
offense described in any of paragraphs (1) through (3),
and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the
object of the conspiracy, shall, except as provided in
subsection (b), be fined not more than $500,000 or
imprisoned not more than 15 years, or both.
(b)
Organizations.—Any organization that commits any offense
described in subsection (a) shall be fined not more than
$10,000,000.
1832 Sec. 1832. Theft of trade secrets
(a)
Whoever, with intent to convert a trade secret, that is related
to or included in a product that is produced for or placed in
interstate or foreign commerce, to the economic benefit of
anyone other than the owner thereof, and intending or
knowing that the offense will, injure any owner of that trade
secret, knowingly—
(1)
steals, or without authorization appropriates, takes,
carries away, or conceals, or by fraud, artifice, or
deception obtains such information;
(2)
without authorization copies, duplicates, sketches, draws,
photographs, downloads, uploads, alters, destroys,
photocopies, replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails,
communicates, or conveys such information;
166
Documents

(3)
receives, buys, or possesses such information, knowing
the same to have been stolen or appropriated, obtained,
or converted without authorization;
(4)
attempts to commit any offense described in paragraphs
(1) through (3); or
(5)
conspires with one or more other persons to commit any
offense described in paragraphs (1) through (3), and one
or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of
the conspiracy, shall, except as provided in subsection
(b), be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than
10 years, or both.
(b)
Any organization that commits any offense described in
subsection (a) shall be fined not more than $5,000,000.
Evidence of Domestic Spying
As has been noted throughout this book, the effort to catch spies
in the United States has often resulted in excesses and illegalities.
The two sets of documents in this section are found in the Church
Committee Hearings [Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, October and
November, 1975].
Statement by Senator Frank Church, October
21, 1975
The Church Committee, more formally known as the Senate Select
Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities, was established by a vote of 82–4 on January 27,
1975. It followed the publication of a story by Seymour Hirsh in the
New York Times barely a month earlier, on December 22, 1974, reveal-
ing that the Nixon administration had engaged in a “massive, illegal
domestic intelligence operation” against the anti–Vietnam War move-
ment and other political dissident groups. Talk had already been under
way in Congress over the need for an investigation into the operations
of the intelligence community, but Hirsh’s story dramatically escalated
the pressure for action. Much of the material in his story had originally
come from an in-house Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) inquiry
directed by John McCone that came to be known as the “family jewels.”
One of the first casualties of the revelations was the resignation of long-
time CIA counterintelligence chief James Angleton, who had led an ille-
gal mail-opening operation. 
Evidence of Domestic Spying
167

In early January 1975 President Gerald Ford sought to avert con-
gressional investigations by establishing a special commission chaired
by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, but the move failed because it did
not avert these investigations. The Church Committee, a congressional
investigation that Ford did not want, consisted of six Democrats and
five Republicans. Frank Church (D-Idaho) chaired the committee, and
John Tower (R-Texas) was its cochair. It operated largely by consensus,
but its deliberations were often complicated by Church’s presidential
ambitions in the upcoming 1976 election. At the height of its operation
the committee had 150 staffers. It conducted more than 800 interviews.
Its work was broken into three broad stages. The first stage consisted of
a closed-door examination of CIA involvement in assassination plots.
The second stage consisted of twenty-one days of public hearings into
illegal activities of the intelligence community. The final stage involved
the writing and release of its report. In the course of its investigations
the Church Committee had very different relations with the CIA and
the FBI. 
On two occasions the White House refused to allow members of the
executive branch to testify. One occasion involved the illegal activities of
the National Security Agency, and the other involved covert operations
in Chile that led to the downfall of the Allende government. The CIA,
through McCone, who now headed the agency, was largely cooperative,
although this stance was not popular in the White House. The FBI was
largely uncooperative. The committee held 126 full committee meetings,
40 subcommittee meetings, and 250 executive committee hearings. Its
full report runs 110,000 pages and consists of 14 public volumes of hear-
ings and reports. Three chapters of the final report, dealing with
“Cover,” “Espionage,” and “Budgetary Oversight,” were not released.
Its final report presented 183 recommendations concerning the future of
the intelligence community. 
The two documents that follow are from the second stage of the
Church Committee’s operation. In this second stage the committee heard
testimony regarding the unauthorized storage of toxic agents; the
Huston Plan, a plan proposed by Nixon’s White House advisor Tom
Charles Huston that called for using the capabilities of the intelligence
community to spy on American citizens through such measures as elec-
tronic surveillance, mail openings, and infiltrating campus radical
groups; the Internal Revenue Service; mail openings; the National
Security Agency; the FBI; and covert action.
168
Documents

Beginning in 1953 and ending finally in 1973, the figures show that
there was a total volume of letters coming through the New York Post
Office that was subject to culling and opening and photographing by
the CIA, in this particular program, a total of 28,322,796. Of that
number, based as we have heard now on certain watch lists that were
established, but in the main, on random selection accounting for 
two-thirds of the inspections, there was a total of 2,705,726 envelopes
that were photographed plus 389,324 envelopes that were copied.
And the number of those letters that were illegally opened and
whose contents were photographed came to 215,820, of which the
photographed contents were distributed as follows: 57,846 were sent to
the FBI; 31,436 were sent to the Soviet division of the CIA; and 57,894
were sent to other departments, largely counterintelligence
departments of the CIA.
Project MINARET: Domestic Spying on Antiwar
Protestors
Among the most controversial aspects of the Church Committee’s inves-
tigation was its examination of the actions of the National Security
Agency (NSA) and Fourth Amendment rights. It held two days of pub-
lic hearings on this subject. The NSA was established by a secret admin-
istrative order in 1952; this was the first time its director had testified in
public before members of the Senate. One topic examined was Project
MINARET. It ran from 1967 to 1973. Under Project MINARET the NSA
monitored the cables and telephone calls of more than 1,600 Americans.
Its initial focus was the anti–Vietnam War movement and allied domes-
tic protesters. Soon, however, the “watch list” expanded as the CIA, FBI,
Defense Intelligence Agency, and Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs provided additional names. 
A second topic examined was Operation SHAMROCK. It ran from
1947 to 1975. Under Operation SHAMROCK the NSA secretly obtained
copies of cables sent by Americans through RCA, Western Union, and
ITT. In neither undertaking did the CIA obtain a judicial warrant. The
public disclosure of these two programs sharply divided the committee.
One faction, led by Senator John Tower, argued that public disclosure was
unacceptable because it provided information to the enemy on the espi-
onage capabilities and operation of the intelligence community. The other
faction, led by Church, argued that the public release of this information
was necessary in order to pass legislation to prevent its recurrence. The
following document is part of the record of the Church Committee hear-
ings on Project MINARET. Exhibits 1 and 2 are planning documents.
Evidence of Domestic Spying
169

The National Security Agency and Fourth Amendment Rights
Exhibit 1
[October 20, 1967]
FM Yarborough ACSI DA Washington
TO Carter Dir of NSA
1.
As you know, the Department of the Army is, and expects to
be for sometime to come, involved in the civil disturbances
taking place within the CONUS. With respect to this
involvement, my counterintelligence staff is tasked with
keeping the DA staff apprised of the counterintelligence
matters pertaining to such disturbances, including
involvement of individuals and organizations. Concerning
the anti-Vietnam demonstration of 21–22 October 1967, the
Department of the Army has been designated as the
executive agency to support civilian authorities with regard
to this activity.
2.
I am particularly interested in determining whether or not
there is evidence of any foreign action to develop or control
these anit-Vietnam [sic] and other domestic demonstrations.
Realizing, of course, that this is the “big” question, I
nevertheless feel that we should make every effort to obtain
the answer. Since your agency is a major US intelligence
collector, I would appreciate any information on a continuing
basis covering the following:
A.
Indications that foreign governments or individuals and
organizations acting as agents of foreign governments
are controlling or attempting to control or influence the
activities of US “peace” groups and “black power”
organizations.
B.
Identities of foreign agencies eerting [sic] control or
influence on US organizations.
C.
Identities of individuals and orgainzations [sic] in US in
contact with agents of foreign governments.
D.
Instructions or advice being given to US groups by
agents of foreign governments.
Exhibit 2
Date: 01 Jul 69
Charter for Sensitive SIGINT Operation MINARET (C)
1.
MINARET (C) is established for the purpose of providing more
restrictive control and security of sensitive information
derived from communications as processed which contain (a)
information on foreign governments, organizations or
170
Documents

individuals who are attempting to influence, coordinate or
control U.S. organizations or individuals who may foment
civil disturbances or otherwise undermine the national
security of the U.S. (b) information on U.S. organizations or
individuals who are engaged in activities which may result in
civil disturbances or otherwise subvert the national security
of the U.S. An equally important aspect of MINARET will be to
restrict the knowledge that such information is being
collected and processed by the National Security Agency.
2.
MINARET specifically includes communications concerning
individuals or organizations involved in civil disturbances,
anti-war movements/demonstrations and military deserters
involved in anti-war movements.
3.
MINARET information will not be serialized, but will be
identified for reference purposes by an assigned date/time.
Information will be classified TOP SECRET, stamped
“Background Use Only” and addressed to named recipients.
Further, although MINARET will be handled as SIGINT and
distributed to SIGINT recipients, it will not be identified with
the National Security Agency.
Project SGPOINTER/HGLINGUAL: Mail Openings
The CIA’s mail-opening program ran from 1953 until 1973. During
that time it handled 28,322,796 letters in the New York Post Office. The
CIA is prohibited from operating in the United States. James Angleton
was able to establish the mail-opening program by arguing that mail
openings were necessary to support its foreign operations. The Federal
Bureau of Investigation did not find out about the operation until 1958
when it sought to begin a similar operation and was told by the Post
Office that the CIA was already conducting such an operation. Church
condemned the operation as a clear example of how the CIA saw itself
as living outside the law and beyond the law. Former Director of
Central Intelligence Richard Helms testified that the operation had pro-
vided valuable intelligence on Mexican terrorists being trained in
North Korea and Americans being trained as guerrillas in Algeria. Two
former postmasters defended the programs and an official in the CIA’s
inspector general’s office asserted that since the Russians intercepted
and opened mail coming in and out of the Soviet Union, the CIA was
justified in doing so. This document provides an overview of the mail-
opening program.
Evidence of Domestic Spying
171

Mail Opening
EXHIBIT 1
Inspector General’s Survey of the Office of Security
Annex II
Project SGPOINTER/HGLINGUAL
1.
This project is a sensitive mail intercept program started by
the Office of Security in 1952 in response to a request from
the SR Division. Under the original project, named SGPOINTER,
representatives of the Office of Security obtained access to
mail to and from the USSR and copied the names of the
addressees and addressors. In 1955 the DD/P transferred the
responsibilities in his area for this program from SR Division
to the CI Staff, the program was gradually expanded, and its
name was changed to HGLINGUAL. Since then the program has
included not only copying information from the exteriors of
envelopes, but also opening and copying selected items.
2.
The activity cannot be called a “project” in the usual sense,
because it was never processed through the approval system
and has no separate funds. The various components involved
have been carrying out their responsibilities as a part of their
normal staff functions. Specific DD/P approval was obtained
for certain budgetary practices in 1956 and for the
establishment of a TSD lab in 1960, but the normal
programming procedures have not been followed for the
project as a whole. However, the DCI, the DD/P, and the
DD/S have been aware of the project since its inception and
their approvals may thus be inferred.
3.
The mechanics of the project can be summarized as follows.
Mail to and from the USSR and other countries is processed
through the branch post office at LaGuardia Airport in New
York City. The postal authorities agreed to a screening of mail
by Agency representatives at this central point, and office
space has been established there for three Agency officers and
one representative of the postal service. As mail is received it
is screened by the Agency team and the exteriors of the
envelopes are photographed on the site. The volume being
photographed at the time for the inspection was
approximately 1,800 items per day. From this total the
Agency team selects approximately 60 items a day which are
set aside and covertly removed from the post office at the end
of the day. These are carried to the Manhattan Field Office
(MFO) and during the evening they are steamed open,
reproduced and then resealed. The letters are replaced in the
172
Documents

mails the following morning. The films are forwarded to the
Office of Security at headquarters and thence to the CI Staff,
where dissemination is controlled.
6.
The principal guidance furnished to the interception team is
the “watch list” of names compiled by the CI Staff. Names
may be submitted by the SR Division, the FBI, the CI Staff, or
the Office of Security. The list is revised quarterly to remove
names no longer of interest, and it ranges between 300 or 400
names. The list itself is not taken to the LaGuardia Airport
post office, and the three team members have to memorize it.
Headquarters has compared the actual watch list intercepts
with the photographs of all exteriors, and there has not yet
been a case of a watch list item having been missed by
interceptors. Of the total items opened, about one-third are
on the watch list and the others are selected at random. Over
the years, however, the interceptors have developed a sixth
sense or intuition, and many of the names on the watch list
were placed there as a result of interest created by the
random openings. A limited amount of guidance is given in
specific area or topical requirements, but this is not very
satisfactory. The interception team has to rely largely on its
own judgment in the selection of two-thirds of the openings,
and it should have more first-hand knowledge of the
objectives and plans of operational components which levy
the requirements. Information is now filtered through several
echelons and is more or less sterile (that is, it cannot be traced
to any one individual making the request for an intercept and
as such, no paper trail of responsibility for ordering a mail
opening exists) by the time it is received in New York.
14.
There is no coordinated procedure for processing information
received through the program; each component has its own
system. The Office of Security indexes selected portions of the
information in its Security Records Division. The CI Staff
indexes the opened mail as well as a large percentage of the
photographed exteriors. The SR Division maintains its own
file system, and the information sent to [the] SR Division by
the CI Staff is frequently indexed by the Records Integration
Division while it is in transit. The FBI is one of the largest
customers and it is assumed that it also indexes the material
it receives. The same material could thus be recorded in
several indices, but there is no assurance that specific items
would be caught in ordinary name traces. 
The CI Staff uses its IBM index cards to make fan-folds
which are distributed monthly, quarterly, and semi-annually
on a need-to-know basis.
Evidence of Domestic Spying
173

15.
The general security of the project has always been
maintained at a very high level. When intelligence
information is disseminated the source is concealed and no
action can be taken until a collateral source is found.
174
Documents

6
Chronology
1765
Sons of Liberty formed, a.k.a Liberty Boys. Widely
considered to be the ancestor of all American intelli-
gence services. It was created as a reaction to the
Stamp Act, which was a revenue bill passed by the
British Parliament in 1765. It was the first direct tax
imposed on the American colonies and was to raise
funds for the defense of the colonies. It produced out-
cries of opposition from colonial authorities because
of the lack of colonial representation in Parliament.
1775
Continental Congress created the Committee of Secret
Correspondence. It was the first American govern-
ment organization formally charged with collecting
foreign intelligence.
1790
American secret foreign intelligence activities received
official endorsement when Congress appropriated
funds to pay people for advancing American interests
abroad. This set up the President’s Contingent Fund
for Foreign Intercourse, known informally as the Secret
Service Fund. The executive branch could send agents
overseas for various tasks, including intelligence gath-
ering and covert operations.
1861
Allen Pinkerton offered his services as a spy for
General George McClellan.
175

1882
U.S. Navy established the Office of Intelligence within
its Bureau of Navigation. Later it became the Office of
Naval Intelligence (ONI). It had two functions. One
was to gather information about foreign navies; the
other was to acquire new technology from abroad to
build the new America navy.
1885
War Department created the Military Information
Division as part of the army’s Adjunct General’s
Office.
1908
Bureau of Investigation established by Attorney
General Charles J. Bonaparte on orders from President
Theodore Roosevelt. Its purpose was to combat
German espionage and sabotage within the United
States. It later became the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation.
1909
Secret Intelligence Service is established in Great
Britain.
1924
J. Edgar Hoover named to head the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Hoover had gained prominence work-
ing with Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer investi-
gating anarchists and communists.
1941
Office of the Coordinator of Information (COI) estab-
lished by presidential order. It was headed by William
J. Donovan.
Richard Sorge, a Russian spy in Tokyo who posed as a
German, was captured by the Japanese. He was exe-
cuted in 1944.
1942
Organization of Strategic Services (OSS) established,
replacing the COI. Its White Propaganda unit was
split off and established as a separate, independent
agency, the Office of War Information. By a presiden-
tial order the remainder of the COI was placed under
the command of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and renamed
the OSS.
176
Chronology

Thirty-three members of a Nazi spy ring headed by
Frederick Duquesne are sentenced to a total of more
than 300 years in jail. The key witness against them
was William Sebold, who was recruited by the spy
ring and who worked as a double agent.
1943
Project VENONA began. It allowed the United States to
intercept and decipher diplomatic exchanges between
Moscow and various Soviet embassies. It was com-
promised by William Weisband, an army cipher clerk.
VENONA ended in 1980.
1945
President Truman dissolved the OSS by presidential
order.
1946
President Truman issued a presidential directive cre-
ating the Central Intelligence Group (CIG). The CIG
had no personnel or budget of its own but drew on the
resources of the Departments of State, Navy, and War.
The CIG was placed under the overall guidance of a
Director of Central Intelligence (DCI).
1947
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) created by 1947
National Security Act.
1950
Klaus Fuchs was convicted of spying for the Soviet
Union and providing them with information about
the atomic bomb. He was sentenced to fourteen years’
imprisonment.
1951
Russian spies Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, who
penetrated British intelligence, fled to the Soviet Union.
The Mossad was established in Israel.
1952
A presidential directive created the National Security
Agency.
1953
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, Soviet spies, were exe-
cuted for stealing nuclear weapons information.
1954
KGB was established in the Soviet Union.
Chronology
177

1955
Operation GOLD was begun. It was a Berlin tunnel
used to tap phone lines used by Soviet intelligence. It
was compromised by a British intelligence officer.
1957
Colonel Rudolf Abel was convicted of spying for the
Soviet Union against the United States. The key wit-
ness against him was KGB Lieutenant Colonel Reino
Hayhanen, who defected to the United States in 1957.
In 1962 Abel was exchanged for U-2 pilot Francis Gary
Powers.
1960
U-2 spy plane piloted by Francis Gary Powers was
shot down over the Soviet Union. United States denied
spying, then was forced to admit the truth when
Powers was brought forward by Soviet authorities.
1961
Anatoliy Golitsyn, a KGB officer, defected to the
United States. He would later provide information
about a CIA penetration. He served as a confidant for
James Angleton, who headed the CIA’s counterintelli-
gence operation and was obsessed with finding the
Soviet mole.
1963
Oleg Penkovsky was executed for spying for the
United States. He had begun passing documents to
the United States in 1961. Over a sixteen-month
period he provided more than 5,000 documents deal-
ing with Soviet missiles. He was arrested in 1962.
Kim Philby fled to the Soviet Union. Along with Guy
Burgess and Donald Maclean he formed part of a
Soviet spy ring that infiltrated British intelligence. He
began spying in 1933 and was uncovered in 1951.
Philby was allowed to resign from SIS (the Secret
Intelligence Service) in 1951 when Burgess and
Maclean fled to the Soviet Union.
1964
American officials discover forty eavesdropping
devices in the U.S. embassy in Moscow.
1970s
Operation IVY BELLS took place. It was a joint navy-
NSA project that tapped undersea Soviet communica-
178
Chronology

tion cables in the Sea of Okhotsk. It was compromised
in 1980 by Ronald Pelton.
1978
A secret tunnel under the U.S. embassy in Moscow is
discovered containing eavesdropping technology.
1979
Operation TAW, a CIA project that tapped a top secret
communications center outside Moscow, was compro-
mised by Edward Lee Howard.
1980s
Operation ABSORB was conducted, in which the CIA
placed nuclear warhead detection equipment on a
cargo container in a train crossing the Soviet Union.
Aldrich Ames compromised this operation.
1980
CIA agent David Barnett pleaded guilty to spying for
the Soviet Union while based in Indonesia between
1976 and 1979. He was the first CIA agent convicted of
espionage. Barnett exposed thirty U.S. agents during
his spy career.
Soviet Union finds eavesdropping equipment in a
Washington apartment complex used by their officials.
1984
Navy intelligence analyst Samuel Loring Morison
arrested and charged with passing classified recon-
naissance satellite photographs of a Soviet naval ship-
yard to Janes’ Defence Weekly. He was sentenced to two
years in prison.
American officials find listening devices in typewrit-
ers used since 1962 in the U.S. embassy in Moscow.
1985
Retired navy chief John Walker, his brother, navy retiree
Arthur Walker, and his son, navy seaman Michael,
along with Jerry Whitworth, were arrested for spying
for the Soviet Union. John Walker had been passing
cryptographic information to the Soviet Union for
more than seventeen years. He was given two concur-
rent life sentences. Arthur was given one life sentence.
Michael was sentenced to twenty-five years in prison.
Jerry Whitworth was sentenced to 365 years.
Chronology
179

1985
Former CIA clerk Sharon Scrange, yet still employed
(cont.)
by the CIA, who was stationed in Ghana, gave infor-
mation about CIA methods and the names of CIA
agents to her Ghanaian lover. Some informants were
killed. Scrange received a five-year prison sentence;
her lover received twenty years. Both were immedi-
ately exchanged for some Ghanaians who allegedly
worked for the United States.
Suspected spy and former CIA employee Edward Lee
Howard eluded FBI surveillance in New Mexico and
fled to Moscow. The CIA had suspected Howard of
engaging in espionage and had allowed him to retire,
but did not tell the FBI. Howard was charged with
passing information to the Soviets that allowed them
to arrest U.S. sources and to expel U.S. intelligence
personnel from the embassy in Moscow.
Jonathan Jay Pollard, a civilian navy intelligence ana-
lyst, and his wife, Anne, were arrested for spying for
Israel. Pollard received a life sentence; Anne received
five years. Four Israeli coconspirators were not
indicted.
Former CIA employee Larry Wu-tai Chin was con-
victed of having passed documents to China for thirty
years.
Former NSA employee Ronald Pelton was arrested for
passing exceptionally sensitive information to the
Soviet Union dealing with American communications
intercepts. He received a life sentence in prison.
Vitaly Yurchenko, security officer for all Soviet oper-
ations in North America, defected to the United
States. Yurchenko defected in August and provided
the CIA with a wealth of information about Soviet
penetrations. The case took a bizarre twist when in
November Yurchenko defected back to the Soviet
Union, claiming he had been drugged and kidnapped
by the CIA.
180
Chronology

Listening devices are discovered in the pillars, beams,
and floors of the new U.S. embassy in Moscow.
1986
Marine Sergeant Clayton Lonetree surrenders to the
CIA station chief in Vienna because of lost information.
He was convicted of thirteen counts of espionage,
committed while he had been stationed in Moscow. He
received a twenty-five-year prison sentence.
1988
Douglas Tsou, an American, was arrested for spying
for Taiwan.
1989
Foreign Service Officer Felix Bloch was suspended by
the State Department after being captured on a video
monitor passing information to a Soviet agent in Paris.
1991
The KGB presented the United States with blueprints
showing where listening devices were placed in the
U.S. embassy. The KGB gave the United States this
information because the Cold War was over and this
was part of an attempt at moving U.S.-Soviet relations
into a new era that would be characterized by less
conflict.
1994
CIA counterintelligence officer Aldrich Ames and his
wife, Rosario, pleaded guilty to charges of spying for
the Soviet Union. His was considered the most dam-
aging spy case in U.S. history. Ames spied between
1985 and 1994. His information was linked to the
deaths of at least nine agents.
1996
CIA official Harold Nicholson was arrested by the FBI
and charged with spying for the Soviet Union. At the
time of his arrest he was carrying rolls of exposed film
containing secret and top secret information. In 1997
he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to twenty-three
years in prison.
1997
FBI agent Earl Pitts was charged with espionage for
the Soviet Union. The FBI was tipped off to Pitts by a
double agent. Pitts pleaded guilty and was sentenced
to twenty-seven years.
Chronology
181

1998
David Boone, an army signals analyst for the National
Security Agency, was arrested for spying for the Soviet
Union between 1988 and 1991. He was sentenced to
twenty-four years and four months in prison.
1999
Wen Ho Lee was accused of spying for China while
working as a physicist at Los Alamos. The govern-
ment’s case was compromised by revelations that FBI
agents had lied and accusations that Lee was targeted
because he was Chinese. Lee pleaded guilty to one
count of mishandling information, and the other fifty-
eight counts were dropped.
2000
Retired Army Reserve Colonel George Trofimoff was
accused of spying for the Soviet Union and Russia for
more than twenty-five years. In 2001 he was sen-
tenced to life in prison without parole.
Mariano Faget, a senior immigration official based in
Miami, was charged with spying for Cuba. In 2001 he
received a five-year sentence.
2001
Philip (Robert) Hanssen was arrested for spying for
the Soviet Union after he was videotaped leaving a
package of classified documents to be picked up by
his Russian handlers. He began spying in 1979 and
turned over 6,000 pages of documents to the Soviets.
In 2002 he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
A navy surveillance plane collided with a Chinese
military jet over international airspace. The plane and
crew land in China. The Chinese pilot died and the
American crew was returned to the United States.
The USA PATRIOT Act is passed following the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon.
2002
Ana Belan Montes, a senior Cuban analyst for the
Defense Intelligence Agency, pleaded guilty to spying
for Cuba for more than sixteen years.
182
Chronology

Brian Regan, a retied air force master sergeant, was
charged with trying to spy for Iraq, Libya, and China.
In 2003 he received a life sentence.
The United States expelled a United Nations–based
Iraqi diplomat on charges that he was spying on the
United States.
In response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks
on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, a
Department of Homeland Security was established.
2003
Katrina Leung is arrested as a Chinese spy. A longtime
fund-raiser for the Republican Party in California, she
acted as a double agent. The FBI paid her to provide
false information to China when she was actually a
Chinese agent. The FBI stated that every Chinese
counterintelligence case since 1991 may have been
compromised.
Chronology
183


7
Print and Nonprint
Resources
Books
Adams, James. The New Spies: Exploring the Frontiers of Espi-
onage. London: Hutchinson, 1994. 380p.
Adams presents an overview of the challenges facing intelligence
agencies in the post–Cold War era. It is not intended to serve as a
text or a comprehensive handbook on espionage. Rather, Adams
seeks to highlight key issues that he feels are central to the
broader question of the future of intelligence agencies and espi-
onage. Adams writes as a sympathetic observer and supporter of
the intelligence community but is fearful that intelligence organi-
zations will remain wedded to the status quo and fail to adapt to
the changing global environment. Country-focused discussions
cover the United States, Great Britain, and Russia. Thematic chap-
ters examine economic espionage, terrorism, weapons of mass
destruction, and drugs. Readers will find interesting the extended
discussion of the espionage problem as it relates to the Irish
Republican Army. Adams concludes with chapters on intelligence
reforms.
Andrew, Christopher. Her Majesty’s Secret Service: The Making
of the British Intelligence Community. New York: Penguin, 1987.
619p.
185

The principal focus of this work is on pre–Cold War British intel-
ligence. The emergence of the British military and naval intelli-
gence services is recorded along with the creation of MI-5 and SIS,
the two civilian intelligence services that roughly parallel the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence
Agency. For those especially interested in espionage it provides a
wealth of information about the development of British coun-
terespionage activities and the evolution of its code breaking capa-
bilities. Relatively little attention is given to British intelligence’s
post–World War II struggle to cope with the Kim Philby affair.
Bamford, William. Body of Secrets: Anatomy of the Ultra-Secret
National Security Agency. New York: Anchor, 2002. 763p.
Bamford begins his history of the signals intercepts with the clos-
ing days of World War II. He rapidly moves through the 1950s
and to the early 1960s and the Cuban missile crisis. From there he
begins to recount the National Security Agency’s contributions to
containing communism by building an electronic wall around the
Soviet Union and its allies. Included are detailed accounts of two
highly controversial attacks on the American intelligence plat-
forms: the USS Liberty by Israel and the USS Pueblo by North
Korea, as well as the role of signals intelligence in the Vietnam
War. Bamford’s history of the National Security Agency is espe-
cially valuable for its highly readable account of its electronic
eavesdropping and computer information processing capabili-
ties. This edition contains an afterword written following the
attacks of September 11, 2001. In it Bamford concludes that the
National Security Agency must undergo a metamorphosis,
changing both its culture and technology to meet the new
national security challenges facing the United States.
Barron, John. Breaking the Ring: The Bizarre Case of the Walker
Family Spy Ring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987. 244p.
John Walker is described by many as the greatest spy ever
recruited by the KGB. This book details the activities of the
Walker spy ring, with particular attention being given to the espi-
onage of John Walker and Jerry Whitworth. The account details
both the information stolen and the tradecraft used to steal the
information and pass it along to the Soviets. The efforts of the FBI
to capture the Walker spy ring are also presented in great detail,
revealing both the strengths and weaknesses of its counterespi-
186
Print and Nonprint Resources

onage capabilities. Barron intermixes his historical narrative with
commentary concerning the long-term impact of Walker’s espi-
onage on U.S. national security.
Barron, John. KGB: The Secret Work of Soviet Secret Agents. New
York: Bantam, 1974. 623p.
From one perspective the KGB is no different from other intelli-
gence organizations in that it engages in intelligence analysis,
covert action, and espionage. Viewed from another perspective
the KGB is unique in that it was a key force that the Communist
Party relied upon to rule over the Soviet Union. This book pro-
vides insight into both sides of the KGB. It contains chapters on
espionage and spying as well as an appendix that details how to
recruit Americans abroad and a detailed listing of Soviet citizens
stationed abroad engaging in clandestine operations. Taken as a
whole, Barron’s account provides an excellent base from which to
understand Cold War Soviet espionage activities against the
United States.
Bennett, Richard. Espionage: An Encyclopedia of Spies and
Secrets. London: Virgin, 2002. 371p.
This book presents an alphabetical listing of spies, spy organiza-
tions, and terms. It is historical and comparative in focus. Bennett
not only covers espionage but also other aspects of intelligence
such as covert action and assassinations. Especially valuable is his
coverage of the history and structure of foreign intelligence
organizations. More than fifty countries are covered, ranging in
size from Switzerland, the Vatican, and Albania to the superpow-
ers. There is a section of photographs in the center of the book.
The book also contains an index and brief summary bibliography.
Blitzer, Wolf. Territory of Lies: The Exclusive Story of Jonathan Jay
Pollard: The American Who Spied on His Country for Israel and
How He Was Betrayed. New York: Harper and Row, 1989. 336p.
The author, who works for the Jerusalem Post and CNN, bases
much of his account on exclusive interviews with Pollard while
Pollard was in prison. He presents a straightforward account of
Pollard’s life as a spy and of his detection and capture. Central to
Blitzer’s account is the gradual and deliberate corruption of
Pollard by his Israeli handlers. One of the strengths of this book
is the insight it provides into the workings and outlook of Israeli
Books
187

intelligence. In the concluding chapter the author seeks to answer
several of the more troubling questions raised by the Pollard case.
Burrows, William. Deep Black: Space Espionage and National
Security. New York: Random House, 1986. 401p.
Where many accounts of espionage focus on individual stories,
Burrows centers his account of espionage in the Cold War com-
petition between the United States and Soviet Union. Three areas
are identified in which space espionage plays an important role in
national security: providing details on the enemy’s weapons sys-
tems, virtually eliminating the possibility of surprise attack, and
supporting arms control. The author begins his history with the
American Civil War and how artists were sent aloft in tethered
balloons to construct pictures of the evolving battlefields. He then
moves through World War I and World War II and the develop-
ment of the SR-71 (Blackbird) and U-2 spy planes. As the title sug-
gests, however, the bulk of his account is with the development
and operation of spy satellites. Although most of the book deals
with American space espionage, it also presents information on
Soviet space espionage.
Calvocoressi, Peter. Top Secret Ultra. New York: Ballantine, 1980.
149p.
This slim volume presents an insider’s account of how British
intelligence was able to break German codes and ciphers during
World War II. Enigma was the name the Germans gave to their
cipher machine. This machine took every letter of a message and
transformed it into another letter. The task facing the British was
to determine what the logic or rules were by which this transpo-
sition occurred. ULTRA was the code name given to the intelligence
the British obtained by breaking Enigma. World War II battles in
which ULTRA proved invaluable are chronicled in the book. In the
final chapter the author also briefly touches upon some of the
cryptoanalytic successes of the Germans during the war.
Dulles, Allen. The Craft of Intelligence. New York: Harper and
Row, 1963. 277p.
Written by one of the founding figures in American intelligence,
this work remains a classic and is still cited in contemporary stud-
ies of intelligence. Dulles provides a historical overview of the
development of intelligence in the United States and discusses
188
Print and Nonprint Resources

the various dimensions of intelligence work, including espionage
and counterintelligence. Dulles also addresses the questions of
the role of intelligence in a free society and its place in the Cold
War. Particularly valuable is the insight it provides on the day-to-
day, on-the-street life of an agent.
Felix, Christopher. A Short Course in the Secret War. 4th ed.
Lanham, MD: Madison, 2001. 351p.
A widely popular and readable account of intelligence operations
written by a former practitioner. The book is divided into two
parts. Part I presents an overview of the different aspects of intel-
ligence: analysis, espionage, counterespionage, and covert action.
Part II presents an account of the author’s personal involvement
in intelligence operations in Soviet-occupied Hungary in 1946
and 1947. Together the two parts provide an excellent introduc-
tion to espionage and associated intelligence activities. This edi-
tion has been updated to include an afterword with the author’s
reflections on Kim Philby and the fate of Raoul Wallenberg, the
Swedish diplomat and businessman who saved some 100,000
Hungarian Jews from death at the hands of Nazi Germany.
Fiakla, John. War by Other Means: Economic Espionage in
America. New York: Norton, 1997. 242p.
This book is about more than economic espionage, although sev-
eral of the chapters do address this issue. There are excellent
accounts of Russian, Chinese, and French economic espionage
against the United States and a chapter on the post–Soviet Union
KGB. Much of the book, however, is more accurately described as
an account of the shadier side of international economic competi-
tion. There are chapters on international money laundering, Japa-
nese and Chinese predatory trade policies designed to acquire
American technology, and efforts to keep American firms out of
foreign markets. Emerging from these chapters is a theme of
unpreparedness and naïveté on the part of American government
officials and business leaders. Fiakla concludes by presenting a
set of recommendations for fighting back and winning this eco-
nomic war.
Fishel, Edwin C. The Secret War for the Union: The Untold Story
of Military Intelligence in the Civil War. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1996. 752p.
Books
189

This is the first major work to examine the American Civil War
from the perspective of intelligence. By doing so, Fishel is able to
address a number of myths and popular folktales that have
grown up around Civil War spies and spy catchers. He is able to
restore some people’s reputations and call into question the
accomplishments of other individuals. Fishel examines all aspects
of intelligence, from cavalry reconnaissance to classical spying to
interrogating deserters and prisoners of war. He gives special
attention to the bureaucratic nature of intelligence work and
argues that in this area the North had an advantage over the
South.
Gannon, James. Stealing Secrets, Telling Lies: How Spies and
Codebreakers Helped Shape the Twentieth Century. Washington,
DC: Brassey’s, 2001. 324p.
Gannon presents eight stories that detail significant code break-
ing successes and eight classic cases of espionage. Substantively
the focus is on World War I, World War II, and the Cold War. The
author mixes accounts of famous spies and code breakers with
lesser-known cases. For example, the actions of well-known spies
Richard Sorge, Donald Maclean, and Klaus Fuchs are chronicled
along with the less publicized efforts of Takeo Yoshikawa, a
Japanese naval intelligence officer assigned to gather intelligence
on Pearl Harbor, and Ryszard Kuklinski, a CIA mole in Poland
during the 1970s. Gannon takes similar pains to highlight the con-
tributions of code breakers who are virtually unknown to
Americans, such as Maria Rejewski, a Polish mathematician who
broke the Enigma system seven years before the more famous
Alan Turing did so.
Godson, Roy, ed. Intelligence Requirements for the 1980s:
Counterintelligence. Washington, DC: National Strategy Infor-
mation Center, 1980. 339p.
This book is part of a multivolume series published in the 1980s
on the state of American intelligence. Other volumes cover such
topics as intelligence analysis, clandestine collection, covert
action, and domestic intelligence. Each book consists of a series of
highly readable papers presented by academics and intelligence
professionals, along with the transcripts of discussions of those
papers. Topics covered in this volume include terrorism, Soviet
intelligence activities in the United States, national technical
190
Print and Nonprint Resources

means of verification, how to build a counterintelligence capabil-
ity, and legal issues involved in counterintelligence operations.
Havill, Adrian. The Spy Who Stayed Out in the Cold: The Secret
Life of FBI Double Agent Robert Hanssen. New York: St. Martin’s,
2001. 262p.
Described by the author as the first inside account of the Philip
(Robert) Hanssen spy case, this book presents an overview of
Hanssen’s life and attempts to decipher the motivations behind
his espionage for the Soviet Union. Considerable attention is
given to his conservative Catholic religious beliefs and how they
influenced his behavior. A distinguishing feature of the book is
the extensive reproduction of Robert Hanssen’s letters to his
Soviet handlers. It also contains an excellent bibliography of pop-
ular works on espionage.
Herman, Michael. Intelligence Power in Peace and War.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 414p.
Herman served twenty-five years in British intelligence and then
went on to a career in academics. His account is both scholarly and
readable. It is directed at a general audience rather than specialists.
This is more than a book about espionage, although ample refer-
ences to espionage, human intelligence gathering, and counteres-
pionage are found here. In this book Herman combines a review of
the literature on intelligence with personal experience and reflec-
tion. Topics covered include the evolution of intelligence; its com-
ponent parts; and the effects of intelligence, accuracy, evaluation,
and management. Distinguishing features include a discussion of
intelligence in the 1990s and attention to the structure and opera-
tion of foreign intelligence organizations. It contains an excellent
bibliographic guide to the scholarly literature on intelligence.
Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. Rev.
ed. New York: Macmillan, 1996. 1182p.
The author asserts that code breaking is the most important form
of secret intelligence because it produces more trustworthy infor-
mation than do spies. This book presents a comprehensive his-
torical overview of espionage, beginning with hieroglyphics and
ending with computers. Kahn’s account is particularly valuable
because of his ability to introduce the basic elements of cryptol-
ogy in a clear and concise fashion. This information is presented
Books
191

both in stand-alone chapters and interspersed in the historical
narrative. In addition to shedding light on the American experi-
ence with cryptology, attention is also given to the code breaking
efforts of the British and Russians. This volume is an updating of
the original 1967 edition.
Kalugin, Oleg. The First Directorate. New York: St. Martin’s,
1994. 375p.
For thirty-two years, Oleg Kalugin served in the KGB, rising to
the rank of major general and the position of chief of counterin-
telligence. His unit was responsible for recruiting spies within the
CIA and penetrating the Italian and French intelligence services.
His career in espionage began in New York in 1959 and ended in
1990 when, after several years in bureaucratic exile and now dis-
enchanted with communism, Kalugin publicly exposed the inner
workings of the KGB. He has excellent chapters on Kim Philby
and on the structure, operation, and internal politics of the Soviet
counterespionage bureaucracy. Kalugin is not a defector in the
classic sense of the term, because he has spoken out after his
retirement. He has been tried and convicted in absentia in Russia
for his public revelations.
Knightly, Phillip. The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying
in the Twentieth Century. New York: Penguin, 1988. 436p.
The author presents a historical and interpretive overview of
espionage activities in the twentieth century. Much of the atten-
tion is given to the Kim Philby affair and to presenting the
author’s interpretation of the motivations of such Soviet defectors
as Oleg Penkovsky and Anatoliy Golitsyn. The treatment is more
in depth on the British experience than it is on the American expe-
rience. The book contains information on the evolution and activ-
ities of the KGB as well as on CIA covert action. The concluding
chapter takes up the issue of intelligence reform in the United
States during the Carter administration.
Mahoney, M. H. Women in Espionage: A Biographical Directory.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1993. 253p.
This encyclopedia presents a survey of the most important
women spies. The author consulted experts in clandestine opera-
tions in compiling the volume. Selections were based on the
extent to which these women made major contributions to some
192
Print and Nonprint Resources

aspect of the spy game. The contributions made by women to the
study of intelligence has historically been undervalued, and these
biographies provide an important corrective effort to this situa-
tion. Selections are presented from across time periods and across
countries. A bibliography and index are included.
Martin, David. Wilderness of Mirrors. New York: Ballantine,
1980. 233p.
This book chronicles the careers of the two most prominent spy
catchers in the American national security establishment: James
Angleton and William Harvey. The phrase “wilderness of mirrors”
refers to the distorting effect that the constant obsession with
deception and misinformation can have on one’s ability to con-
struct a coherent view of the world one lives in. With everything
suspect, there is little left to believe in, and conspiracy theories
proliferate. Martin’s account of their efforts to catch Soviet spies
during the Cold War provides a detailed account of their person-
alities and the internal workings of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Melton, H. Keith. The Ultimate Spy Book. New York: DK
Publishers, 1996. 176p.
A coffee table–type reference volume, this book presents a brief,
engaging, and illustrated overview of espionage throughout his-
tory. Detailed coverage begins with the period surrounding
World War I. The treatment of topics is extensive but brief; each
topic is discussed in about two pages. There is an emphasis on
photographs of key individuals and the tradecraft of intelligence.
Vignettes are presented in boxed sections. Attention is given both
to human and technological espionage.
Odom, William. Fixing Intelligence: For a More Secure America.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003. 230p.
The author is a former director of the National Security Agency.
In this book he updates and expands upon the findings and con-
clusions of a study group he chaired in the late 1990s that pro-
duced a volume on intelligence reform for the National Institute
for Public Policy in light of the events of September 11, 2001.
Odom has separate chapters covering military intelligence, sig-
nals intelligence, imagery intelligence, human intelligence, and
counterintelligence. He is particularly interested in managerial
and structural problems. Odom notes in this regard that the major
Books
193

problem confronting discussions of intelligence reform is the lack
of a commonly understood and accepted doctrine for intelligence
organization and management. For example, he notes that coun-
terintelligence is the most arcane, organizationally fragmented,
and politically sensitive intelligence activity. Odom’s conclusions
are clearly stated and provide a solid perspective from which to
address the contemporary debate over intelligence reform. He
includes references to important intelligence reform studies and a
helpful appendix on organizational organizations and processes.
O’Toole, G. T. A. The Encyclopedia of American Intelligence and
Espionage. New York: Facts on File, 1988. 539p.
This volume provides an excellent source of information about
individuals and organizations involved in intelligence through-
out American history. A particular strength of the book is its
attention to what might be described as second-order individuals
within the contemporary period, individuals who appear in treat-
ments of intelligence during the Cold War and Vietnam but whose
biographies are not found elsewhere. The coverage extends be-
yond espionage to other aspects of intelligence. It contains an
index and an extensive bibliography.
Peebles, Curtis. The Corona Project: America’s First Spy
Satellites. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1997. 351p.
The author, an internationally known aerospace historian, has
written a readable and thorough account of the Corona reconnais-
sance satellite program. Corona 1 was launched February 28, 1959;
Corona 145 was launched on May 25, 1972. Initially marked by a
series of failures, Corona revolutionized U.S. national security pol-
icy. Its photos allowed American officials to accurately count the
number of Soviet nuclear forces, thereby reducing fears of a sur-
prise attack and permitting the United States to enter into arms
control negotiations. Viewed in a broader context, Peebles asserts
that the Corona project serves as a study in government-military-
industry relations. The book contains an excellent appendix that
lists significant data from all 145 Corona flights.
Petersen, Neal. American Intelligence, 1775–1990: A Bibliographic
Guide. Claremont, CA: Regena, 1992. 406p. 
A volume that advanced students of intelligence will find useful.
It is a thorough bibliographic guide organized by subject matter
194
Print and Nonprint Resources

but containing no commentary regarding the nature of the works.
The first chapter presents an overview of intelligence, The next
ten chapters cover the history of American intelligence in chrono-
logical fashion. The last two chapters deal with technology issues
and the emerging agenda of intelligence. No specific entries are
listed under espionage or spying, but relevant material can be
found here.
Raviv, Dan, and Yossi Melman. Every Spy a Prince: The Complete
History of Israel’s Intelligence Community. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1990. 466p.
Widely considered one of the most authoritative accounts written
on the inner workings of Israel’s intelligence community, this
book provides information on all three major branches of Israeli
intelligence: the Mossad, which is responsible for foreign opera-
tions; AMAN, which is responsible for gathering military intelli-
gence; and Shin Beth, which is responsible for internal security.
Written in the aftermath of the Pollard affair, the book puts for-
ward a generally supportive and positive history of Israeli intelli-
gence while acknowledging the existence of problems.
Richelson, Jeffrey. Foreign Intelligence Organizations. Cam-
bridge, MA: Ballinger, 1988. 330p.
Richelson is a prolific writer on intelligence; he has written sev-
eral accounts of the U.S. intelligence community. His strength as
an author is in presenting detailed organizational histories and
discussing technology-related issues. This book is one of the few
that examine non-U.S. intelligence organizations in detail. For
each country Richelson discusses the origins of the intelligence
organizations, reviews their structure and operation, and pro-
vides highlights. Where it is relevant he also include a discussion
of liaisons with U.S. and other intelligence organizations. The
countries covered are Great Britain, Canada, Italy, West Germany,
France, Israel, Japan, and China.
Riebling, Mark. Wedge: From Pearl Harbor to 9/11: How the
Secret War between the FBI and CIA Has Endangered National
Security. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2002. 592p.
This is a reprint and updating of the book Riebling published in
1995. In it he examines what he sees as he pattern of cooperation,
or more accurately noncooperation, between the FBI and CIA on
Books
195

intelligence matters. Riebling examines the Ames and Hanssen
cases and shows how this lack of trust and information sharing
slowed down the efforts to apprehend these spies. In this edition
he extends his analysis to the events leading up to 9/11. Rieb-
ling’s concern for the rivalry and competitive nature of the rela-
tionship between the members of the intelligence community is
also frequently commented upon in studies of intelligence analy-
sis and estimates.
Romerstein, Herbert, and Eric Breindel. The VENONA Secrets:
Exposing Soviet Espionage and America’s Traitors. Washington,
DC: Regnery, 2000. 608p.
Written by two former staff members of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence, the goal of this book is to cor-
rect what the authors describe as the conventional wisdom that
members of the American Communist Party were left-wing
heretics rather than disloyal conspirators engaged in espionage
for the Soviet Union. Particular attention is given to the Rosen-
berg, Bentley, Chambers, and Soble spy rings. In the course of
presenting this information the book seeks to establish that Soviet
espionage activities in the United States were far more extensive
than the public realizes. VENONA was the code name given to the
program begun in 1943 that broke Soviet codes and allowed
American officials to read Soviet communications. The cables
intercepted were sent between 1940 and 1948. It is believed that
the Soviets were informed by spies in 1944 that their codes had
been broken. The United States began releasing VENONA inter-
cepts in 1995.
Seth, Ronald. Encyclopedia of Espionage. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, 1972. 718p.
This volume presents an extensive discussion of espionage-related
topics presented in alphabetical order by a prolific writer on intel-
ligence matters. Each entry is followed by one or two bibliographic
entries. The coverage of topics is global in scope and addresses
both historical eras and the contemporary period. The coverage of
topics is uneven, however. Some entries are brief and provide an
overview of the subject, but others are quite lengthy and tend to
focus on one episode in a spy’s life or on one event. The discussion
is detailed but needs to be supplemented by contextual material for
the novice reader to understand its significance.
196
Print and Nonprint Resources

Shannon, Elaine, and Ann Blackman. The Spy Next Door: The
Extraordinary Secret Life of Robert Philip Hanssen, the Most
Damaging FBI Agent in U.S. History. Boston: Little, Brown, 2002.
247p.
The authors conducted more than 150 interviews in piecing
together this history of Hanssen’s career as a spy. Neither Hans-
sen, who is not permitted to give interviews until his debriefing
by the government is complete, his lawyers, nor family members
granted interviews to the authors. In their view only the espi-
onage activities engaged in by Aldrich Ames and John Walker
caused more damage to American national security. The account
stresses Hanssen’s actions more than the belated effort by the FBI
to identify him as a spy. Shannon and Blackman attribute Hans-
sen’s spying in large part to emotional wounds suffered much
earlier in his life and not simply to money.
Shaw, Mark. Miscarriage of Justice: The Jonathan Pollard Story.
St. Paul, MN: Paragon, 2001. 265p.
The Jonathan Jay Pollard spy case has generated more commen-
tary than any recent case of espionage against the United States.
In part this is because he spied for an ally (Israel) and because
Israel seemed to abandon him once he was captured. It is also
because of the severe sentence Pollard received. The book exam-
ines Pollard’s activities as a spy as well as the domestic and inter-
national politics surrounding efforts to secure a pardon for him.
This sympathetic account argues that Pollard has been treated
improperly by the U.S. legal system and that his Fifth Amend-
ment rights were violated. In presenting his argument Shaw
draws comparisons with the case of Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish
French military official convicted of spying in the late 1800s, and
the case of Theodore Hall, a scientist at Los Alamos, who gave
information about the atomic bomb to the Soviet Union.
Smith, Richard. OSS: The Secret History of America’s First Intel-
ligence Agency. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.
458p.
Relying heavily upon interviews with OSS (Office of Strategic
Services) veterans, Smith has authored a compelling history of
this first American intelligence agency. The book was written at
the height of public suspicions of the CIA, and one of Smith’s
Books
197

goals is to help readers address the paradox inherent in intelli-
gence work that requires it to serve the national interest yet
engage in actions that are morally and ethically questionable. Of
particular concern to Smith are loosely made claims condemning
the CIA or championing it as the defender of the national interest.
OSS exploits against Germany and Japan are recorded in the
book, and attention is given to William Donovan, the founder of
the OSS.
Stafford, David. The Silent Game: The Real World of Imaginary
Spies. Rev. ed. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1991. 257p.
This unique book explores the world of imaginary spies and spy
writers. It is a history of spy fiction. The author presents a com-
pelling narrative that links the lives of these writers to the spies
they create. Among those whose works receive attention are John
Buchan, Compton Mackenzie, Somerset Maugham, Ian Fleming,
and Graham Greene. All of these individuals had real-life careers
in intelligence. A central theme of Stafford’s work is that although
these spies wrote about spying, their primary purpose was not to
document the world of intelligence. Instead, these authors used
intelligence as a vehicle for addressing broader themes such as
war, international crises, and imperial decline.
Stevenson, William. A Man Called Intrepid.
New York:
Ballantine, 1976. 541p.
One of the most successful espionage and intelligence operations
run during World War II was conducted by the British in the
United States. Sir William Stephenson was Intrepid. Working out
of New York City under the cover of British Security Coordina-
tion, Stephenson was the primary channel by which British intel-
ligence was given to the United States. Stephenson also served as
a key confidant of William Donovan, who headed the Office of
Strategic Services (OSS), and he used his influence to help shape
American thinking on what type of intelligence organization the
United States needed.
Stober, Dan, and Ian Hoffman. Convenient Spy: Wen Ho Lee and
the Politics of Nuclear Espionage. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 2001. 384p.
Wen Ho Lee was a Chinese-American working at the Los Alamos
labs who was arrested for spying. Plea bargains resulted in virtu-
198
Print and Nonprint Resources

ally all charges against him being dropped, as the government’s
case was riddled with problems. This book is as much about the
attempt to prosecute Lee as it is about his alleged spying. The
authors conclude that Lee’s explanations for his activities, “back-
ing up his computer files on tape,” is undercut by critical facts. At
the same time they acknowledge that all of the alternative theo-
ries, including the suggestion that he was spying for China or
Taiwan, are inadequate. With regard to the overall politics of the
Lee case, the authors conclude that it demonstrated too much of
a willingness on the part of the government to sacrifice freedoms
in the futile search for a spy.
Vise, David A. The Bureau and the Mole: The Unmasking of
Robert Philip Hanssen, the Most Dangerous Double Agent in FBI
History. New York: Grove Press, 2002. 285p.
Vise’s account of the Hanssen spy case is notable for its inclusion
of many pieces of original correspondence between Hanssen and
his Russian handlers, e-mails, and other correspondence authored
by Hanssen. Vise attributes Hanssen’s espionage both to the pur-
suit of money and an emotional response to his treatment by the
FBI, which he viewed as a corrupt father figure. In the epilogue
he notes that every time he was passed over for promotion, Hans-
sen responded by “attempting grand, daring feats of espionage.”
Vise’s account of the Hanssen case also gives considerable atten-
tion to the actions of FBI Director Louis Freeh and his clashes with
President Bill Clinton’s White House over how to proceed on the
Hanssen case.
Wise, David. Nightmover: How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the
KGB for $4.6 Million. New York: HarperCollins, 1995. 356p.
Wise, a prolific author of works on intelligence, details the espi-
onage activities of Aldrich Ames and his arrest. The book begins
with Ames’s capture and then traces his career backward. Wise
also gives attention to the CIA and FBI efforts to find the mole in
its midst. This account provides vivid insight into the highly
bureaucratic and compartmentalized nature of intelligence
organizations and the impact this has on counterintelligence
work. In presenting Ames’s story, the author provides detailed
information about the process by which potential spies are iden-
tified and recruited, along with the techniques used to pass infor-
mation along.
Books
199

Wise, David. Spy: The Inside Story of How the FBI’s Robert
Hanssen Betrayed America. New York: Random House, 2002.
320p.
Wise has written widely on intelligence matters over his career,
including the Invisible Government (1964) and the Politics of Lying
(1973). What distinguishes Wise’s account of the Hanssen spy
affair is this placement of the case within a more historical context.
Wise notes that the FBI’s problems with foreign spies in their
midst can be traced as far back as 1962. The flawed efforts to
uncover these spies are recounted. Of particular merit is Wise’s
discussion of how a CIA agent was wrongly identified as the spy
in this case. In his account of Hanssen’s behavior, Wise shares with
other authors an emphasis on Hanssen’s unstable personality.
Wright, Peter. Spy Catcher: The Candid Autobiography of a
Senior Intelligence Officer. New York: Viking, 1987. 392p.
Peter Wright retired in 1976 after working for two decades in
British intelligence. He was an officer in MI-5, which is roughly
equivalent to the FBI and is charged with counterespionage in the
name of protecting British state secrets from foreign spies and
preventing domestic subversion and sabotage. His account pro-
vides insight into the sharing of information between Western
intelligence organizations. It also provides a firsthand account of
British efforts to deal with Soviet penetrations of its intelligence
organizations.
Journal Articles
Berkowitz, Bruce, and Allan E. Goodman. “Why Spy—And
How—In the 1990s?” Orbis 36 (1992): 269–281.
Written shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, this article
is important because it makes an early post–Cold War case for the
continued importance of intelligence and intelligence agencies.
Where later accounts would stress the growing importance of eco-
nomic espionage to national security, Berkowitz and Goodman
make the case for the continued need for military-oriented intelli-
gence. They also present an agenda for intelligence reform that
includes liberating the intelligence budget from the Defense
Department, enhancing the power of the Director of Central
Intelligence, and improving relations between the users and pro-
200
Print and Nonprint Resources

ducers of intelligence. This article does not directly address espi-
onage in the post–Cold War era but does provide an important
reference point for understanding the larger debate over intelli-
gence reform of which the future of espionage is a major part.
Clarke, Duncan. “Israel’s Economic Espionage in the United
States.” Journal of Palestine Studies 27 (1998) 4: 20–36.
Relying heavily upon American government documents and
newspaper accounts, Clarke describes the scope of Israeli eco-
nomic espionage in the United States. He attributes four motives
to Israel in this matter: strengthening its industrial base, selling
information for profit, trading information with other states, and
confidence that it will not be punished and that its espionage
efforts will not affect U.S.-Israel strategic relations. Although
Israel is not the only state to engage in economic espionage in the
United States, it is seen as being the most effective. Examples
given include espionage directed at gaining state-of-the-art opti-
cal equipment for aerial surveillance, blueprints for the F-16
fighter, and nuclear-grade weapons uranium. The article con-
cludes with a discussion of the reasons for the lax response to evi-
dence of Israeli economic espionage. Again, although the circum-
stances are unique, that tepid U.S. response is seen as being
commonplace.
Demarest, Geoffrey. “Espionage in International Law.” Denver
Journal of International Law and Policy 24 (1996): 321–348.
The author notes that intelligence gathering, including espionage,
is a well-established and accepted practice in world politics. At
the same time it is widely acknowledged that spying as an activ-
ity is illegal, and spies can be punished. In this work Demarest
explores the dual nature of espionage. He correctly notes that to
the extent that international law has addressed espionage, it has
done so in a wartime context. The conventional approach is to
treat peacetime espionage as an issue of domestic law. Going back
to the writing of Hugo Grotius and moving forward to the 1977
Geneva Protocols, Demarest traces the manner in which spying
and spies are treated in international law. The Francis Gary
Powers U-2 incident is discussed in some depth as an example of
peacetime spying. Of particular concern to Demarest is the peace-
time tendency to focus on trying to control the target of espionage
or the cover used rather than the act of espionage.
Journal Articles
201

Fraumann, Edwin. “Economic Espionage: Security Missions
Redefined.” Public Administration Review 57 (1997): 303–309.
Increasingly, espionage organizations are directing their energies
to obtaining economic, scientific, and technological intelligence.
The author notes that the United States is particularly vulnerable
to economic espionage because American firms and research cen-
ters rely heavily upon computer systems and electronic networks
to process and store information. Asserting that more than fifty
states engage in economic espionage, Fraumann presents an
overview of intrusive and nonintrusive methods used to obtain
economic intelligence. After giving thumbnail sketches of eco-
nomic espionage activities by various states, he divides states into
three categories of threat depending upon their technical capabil-
ities and their level of expertise. The greatest danger is posed by
those possessing both: France, Japan, Germany, China, and Israel.
The second half of the article presents an overview of the intelli-
gence organizations attempting to stop economic espionage in
the United States and of the federal statutes relating to economic
espionage.
Hitz, Frederick. “Unleashing the Rogue Elephant: September 11
and Letting the CIA Be the CIA.” Harvard Journal of Law and
Public Policy 25 (2002): 756–781.
Hitz served as inspector general of the CIA from 1990 to 1998. His
well-reasoned and balanced article examines the question of
whether or not the CIA and other intelligence agencies have been
unwisely constrained from pursuing terrorist targets by Cold
War–era reforms. Of particular importance to the conduct of espi-
onage today are calls for loosening restraints on employing “dirty
assets” for intelligence gathering and covert action purposes and
removing impediments to using journalists, academics, and clergy
as covers for intelligence gathering operations. Hitz examines
these issues along with the prohibition on assassination and giv-
ing the CIA domestic law enforcement powers. With regard to the
first issue he notes that to some degree the issue is misleading
because by definition spies are liars, lawbreakers, and traitors.
This work is especially valuable because it presents a discussion
of key congressional actions, including the USA PATRIOT Act,
and executive branch proclamations that govern the actions of the
intelligence community.
202
Print and Nonprint Resources

Johnson, Loch. “Spies, September/October 2000.” Foreign Policy
120 (2002): 18–28.
In this article Johnson examines a series of questions that are per-
tinent to making a judgment about the relevance of espionage to
national security in the post–Cold War era. He asks whether spy-
ing is a Cold War anachronism and concludes that believing it to
be so is just wishful thinking. He then notes that with the end of
the Cold War we Americans need to look more closely at the
points of convergence and divergence in national interest
between intelligence agencies. No longer can we assume that an
enemy of our enemy is a friend. Johnson examines the issue of
economic espionage and finds that although it is of increased
importance today, it may be premature to see it as more important
than traditional military intelligence concerns. He finds that tech-
nology has made spying both easier and harder and that although
open intelligence has become more plentiful, there is still a need
for the classic spy. Finally, Johnson concludes that democracy and
espionage are not incompatible.
King, Robert. “Treason and Traitors: Ethical Implications of
Espionage.” Society 35 (1998): 329–339.
This article begins with the provocative observation that where
once espionage was universally treated as the most despicable
crime, in some quarters it has come to be seen as a “forgivable”
offense and one made understandable by circumstances. King
rightly notes that treason is one of the most fascinating intellec-
tual and ethical issues ever debated. What is treason? Why do
people betray their country? When is treason justified? King
observes that there never has been a clear answer as to when trea-
son is wrong and when it is not. In developing his argument the
author examines fictional and real-world cases of espionage and
treason ranging from Aldrich Ames, who spied for the Soviet
Union against the United States, to Count Claus von Stauffen-
berg, who tried to kill Adolph Hitler. The bulk of his account
focuses on the actions of Donald Maclean, Guy Burgess, and Kim
Philby, who spied for the Soviet Union against Great Britain. King
concludes that they should be viewed with scorn and not pity.
Journal Articles
203

Government Documents
United States House of Representatives, Permanent Select Com-
mittee on Intelligence. November 30, 1994. Report of Investiga-
tion: The Aldrich Ames Espionage Case. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office. 33p.
This is the unclassified summary of the CIA inspector general’s
report. It contains an executive summary and organizes informa-
tion according to a series of questions. They include the follow-
ing. “What was Ames’s career history?” “What were the strengths
and weaknesses of Ames’s strategy?” “Was the counterespionage
investigation coordinated properly with the FBI?” “Was the mole
hunt properly managed?”
United States Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence. Novem-
ber 1, 1994. An Assessment of the Aldrich Ames Espionage Case
and Its Implications for U.S. Intelligence. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office. 136p.
This report is broken down into three parts. Part One presents a
factual summary of the Ames case. It is organized around a
chronology of his career prior to engaging in espionage and after
beginning to do so. Part Two contains the conclusions and rec-
ommendations of the Senate Intelligence Committee. Part Three
is an appendix that contains CIA documents and the transcript of
an interview Chairman Dennis DeConcini had with Ames. Their
conversation is particularly revealing of Ames’s thinking, the
conduct of espionage operations, and the day-to-day workings of
the intelligence community.
Electronic Sources
Canadian Security Intelligence Service
http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca
This is the site of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service.
Every year since 1991 it has issued a public report regarding its
activities. Counterintelligence is a frequent topic of these reports.
The 2001 report contains a discussion on economic intelligence,
transnational criminal activity, proliferation, and information
204
Print and Nonprint Resources

operations. The Canadian site is valuable for those interested in
comparative espionage and provides an interesting counterex-
ample to the United States’s experience and practice of intelli-
gence work.
Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency
http://www.odci.gov/csi/studies.html
The Center for the Study of Intelligence publishes a declassified
journal, Studies in Intelligence. This site gives electronic access to
the journal. There is an index of declassified articles going back to
1992. Several of the articles deal with espionage.
Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency
http://www.cia.gov/csi/
This site also links to the Center for the Study of Intelligence. It
provides a listing of publications on various intelligence topics.
Among those involving espionage are one on VENONA that details
Soviet espionage in the United States from 1939 to 1957 and one
on CORONA that provides a historical overview of the United
States’s first satellite program.
Federal Bureau of Investigation
http://www.fbi.gov/libref.htm
This links to the library and reference page of the FBI. One of the
links is to famous espionage cases. Included are case studies of
Robert Hanssen, Aldrich Ames, the atomic spies, Nazi spying in
the United States, and espionage in the defense industry.
Federation of Atomic Scientists
http://www.fas.org/siteindx.html
This links to the Intelligence Resource Program of the Federation
of Atomic Scientists. It is a selection of official and unofficial
resources on the structure, operation, and functions of intelli-
gence organizations. Specific links include terrorism, worldwide
intelligence agencies, imagery, intelligence operations, and offi-
cial documents.
International Spy Museum
http://www.spymuseum.org/index.asp
Electronic Sources
205

This links to the International Spy Museum, located at 800 F
Street NW in Washington, D.C. Its mission is to educate the pub-
lic about spying in such a way as to foster an understanding of
the contribution that espionage has made to current and past
events. The focus is on human espionage. In addition to provid-
ing engaging and interactive exhibits, the International Spy
Museum is developing an extensive outreach program that will
help schoolteachers develop lesson plans and acquire resources
that can be used to enhance their classroom teaching.
National Security Agency
http://www.nsa.gov
This is the homepage of the National Security Agency. It provides
links to several topics related to espionage. There are links to the
National Cryptologic Museum, the history of cryptology, and
World War II cryptology.
National Security Archive
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv
The National Security Archive is maintained at George Washing-
ton University. It is an independent nongovernmental research
institute and library that collects and publishes declassified doc-
uments acquired through the Freedom of Information Act. One of
its efforts is a U.S. Intelligence Policy Document Project under the
direction of Jeffrey Richelson. This site contains information on
the National Reconnaissance Office, the National Security Agency,
and U.S. satellite imagery.
United States Central Intelligence Agency
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/pubs.html
This site contains links to a number of useful CIA publications on
intelligence and espionage. In particular there are links to articles
on intelligence in the War of Independence, African-American
contributions to Union intelligence during the Civil War, the
Office of Strategic Services, and a lengthy listing of books and
articles on intelligence.
206
Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
agent
This term has two different meanings. When used to refer to the
FBI, an agent is a professional law enforcement official. When it is used in
the context of CIA clandestine operations, an agent is the person recruited
by the CIA to engage in spying; it does not refer to the CIA official.
analytical intelligence
Analyzed information becomes intelligence
only after it has been analyzed, subjected to systematic examination, and
evaluated. Analytical intelligence may take several forms including basic
intelligence, current intelligence, and estimative intelligence.
basic intelligence
Factual and fundamental intelligence about another
state. It is relatively unchanging and constitutes a type of encyclopedic
background picture that can be built upon by intelligence analysts.
cipher
A system of secret writing that utilizes a prearranged scheme to
prevent its detection and comprehension by the uninitiated.
clandestine collection
The secret collection of intelligence. It is con-
trasted with the overt collection of intelligence, whereby intelligence is
collected through publicly available means.
codes
Symbols that have a predetermined meaning and are used for
secrecy in transmitting a message.
collection
The acquisition of information in any manner. Information
may be collected through direct observation, through liaison with official
agencies, through public sources, or through clandestine means.
counterespionage
More broadly, this is often referred to as counterin-
telligence. Two tasks are involved: first, the protection of one’s own
secrets; second, the neutralization and apprehension of spies who are
employed by foreign powers.
counterintelligence
This is an overarching category of activity that
includes counterespionage. Counterintelligence is intelligence gathered
to thwart espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or assassina-
tion conducted by a hostile foreign power or group.
207

covert action
Clandestine activity designed to effect a situation in
another country. The key to success is that the identity of the sponsoring
country or organization is not revealed. Covert action is different from
clandestine collection, which seeks to acquire information but not to
influence events in the target state.
cryptanalysis
The science of translating secret messages into plain text. It
may operate either deductively or inductively. In the former type the analy-
sis hinges on the detection of patterns that allow analysts to move from
recurring combinations to more unique ones. Inductive analysis is based on
hunches to possible words in the message that produce leads to the mean-
ing of the message. Cryptanalysis generally is treated as an applied science,
whereas cryptography is abstract and theoretical in nature.
cryptography
The abstract science of secret writing. Mathematical
equations are often used for establishing its basic parameters and trans-
lation rules.
current intelligence
A category of analytical intelligence that stresses
up-to-date information that is of immediate interest to policymakers.
damage assessment
An evaluation of the impact of a compromise in
security that results in the loss of secret information. The assessment
includes both a judgment regarding the benefits gained by an adversary
and the impact on one’s own collection capabilities, and ways to prevent
its recurrence.
dead drops
A method of exchanging intelligence, instructions, and
money between a spy and his or her handler. Dead drops are exchanges
that do not involve actual physical contact between the two persons
involved. Rather, a location is chosen for the exchange and a signal used
to indicate that material has been put in place to be picked up. Dead
drops are seen as the safest way of making an exchange.
defector
An individual in the employ of a foreign government who is
either induced to come over to one’s own side or does so voluntarily.
dirty tricks
A catchall phrase used to describe activities undertaken as
part of a covert action plan. Dirty tricks are designed to disrupt a target’s
ability to perform some important function. Espionage is important in
the use of dirty tricks because it may provide information about a tar-
get’s vulnerabilities.
disinformation
False information that is deliberately provided to an
adversary in order to confuse him or her. This is different from noise,
which is random information that the adversary picks up and which
makes analysis difficult. Once a spy has been discovered, intelligence
organizations may use the spy to transmit disinformation back to the
adversary. One of the major challenges facing intelligence organizations
is to determine what pieces of information provided to them by defectors
are valid and which ones constitute disinformation.
208
Glossary

economic espionage
Espionage directed at acquiring foreign economic
intelligence. It targets both governments and private businesses. Of
interest are such items as production methods, financial and taxation sys-
tems, research and development projects, dual use technologies, and
government contracts.
espionage
Also referred to as spying, this is the secret collection of
information. Often referred to today under the heading of clandestine
collection. It may be carried out either through technical means or by
agents who infiltrate key organizations in order to acquire documents,
photographs, or other material of value.
handler
This refers to the intelligence official who manages a spy. The
handler is the spy’s point of contact with the intelligence organization he
or she is working for.
information
Also referred to as raw intelligence. It is unanalyzed data
that have been collected but have not yet been evaluated for their relia-
bility, validity, and meaning.
intelligence
Evaluated information. Until information has been
assessed for its reliability and validity and then evaluated for its signifi-
cance it remains raw data. One of the major fallacies of intelligence is that
facts are self-interpreting or that they “speak for themselves.”
intelligence community
Those national security bureaucracies in the
United States that are involved in the collection, analysis, and dissemi-
nation of intelligence. The most prominent members of the intelligence
community include the CIA, National Security Agency, Defense
Intelligence Agency, FBI, and Bureau of Intelligence and Research within
the State Department. One of the major problems facing the U.S. intelli-
gence community is the effective coordination of action by two or more
agencies; each of these organizations has its own bureaucratic culture
and set of values as well as a unique sense of mission and purpose.
intelligence cycle
The functional stages by which information is
acquired, turned into intelligence, and made available to policymakers.
Typically the steps involved are described as tasking, collection, process-
ing and evaluation, reporting, and feedback.
mole
A spy who has been secretly placed within an adversary’s intelli-
gence service or other important national security organization. The
mole may be quiet or inactive for a long period of time before becoming
active and providing intelligence.
noise
In gathering information, intelligence agencies must distinguish
between signals and noise. Signals are valid indicators of an adversary’s
intentions or capabilities. Noise is the clutter of irrelevant background
information that surrounds any activity. It can be seen as similar to the
static one encounters in trying to tune in a distant radio station.
Glossary
209

open source information
Information may be collected from a variety
of sources. Open source information refers to information that is
obtained from public sources. Its collection requires no deception or espi-
onage. Open sources include the Internet, newspapers, journals,
speeches, and government documents. Clandestine collection is the
other broadly defined means of collecting information.
polygraph test
This is commonly referred to as a lie detector test. It is
used to establish the truthfulness, loyalty, and reliability of an individual.
Polygraph tests are not used uniformly throughout the national security
bureaucracies, and when they are used, successful spies are known to
have passed polygraph tests. Many consider the most useful way to look
at a polygraph is as a deterrent to spying rather than a device than can
catch spies.
secret information
A security designation given to information, which,
if disclosed, could reasonably be expected to cause serious harm to
national security.
signals intelligence
Often referred to as SIGINT. Signals intelligence is
intelligence derived from signals intercepts coming from communica-
tions intelligence, electronic intelligence, and foreign instrumentation
signals intelligence, regardless of how it is transmitted.
spy ring
A group of spies who are organized around a central individ-
ual or who work closely with one another in obtaining secret informa-
tion.
strategic intelligence
A category of analytical intelligence that focuses
on information related to an adversary’s strategic forces. Typically, this
involves forces with a nuclear capability. Strategic intelligence encom-
passes information about both weapons systems and military doctrine.
surveillance
The process of shadowing, observing, and monitoring the
actions of an individual who is suspected of being engaged in espionage.
Surveillance may take place through human or technical means.
tasking
The first stage in the intelligence cycle. Tasking is the process
by which intelligence needs are identified.
technological espionage
This form of espionage involves the collection
of information through scientific and technical means such as by moni-
toring or intercepting foreign commercial or military communications,
satellite transmissions, and weapons telemetry. It is contrasted with
human espionage or spying.
walk-in
A spy who volunteers his or her services to an adversary’s
intelligence organization. This is the opposite of a spy who is singled out
and recruited by an intelligence organization.
210
Glossary

Church Committee and, 166,
168–170
Hoover and, 122
Nixon and, 127
APL. See American Protective
League
Arab linguists, difficulty in
finding, 40
Arab-Israeli War (1973), 84, 94
Armey, Richard, 70
Army, U.S., 35, 125
Arnold, Benedict, 2–3, 108–109
Ashcroft, John, 149
Ashley, James, 110
Asia, OSS kept out of, 10
Australia, 97–98
Aviation
agents dropped into Soviet
Union, 31–32
Predator drone aircraft, 37
spy plane downed over China
(2001), 36–37, 182
spy plane downed over Russia
(1960). See Powers, Francis
Gary
U-2 reconnaissance flights, 13,
32, 115
Background checks, 89
Baker, Lafayette, 5–6, 109–110
Barnett, David, 179
Basic intelligence, defined, 207
Bay of Pigs invasion, 116
Beauregard, P. G. T., 118
Beer, Israel, 83
Beria, Lavrenty, 91
Berle, Adolf, 111
211
Index
Abel, Rudolf, 103–104, 134, 178
ABSORB, Operation, 179
Abwehr, 77
Acheson, Dean, 125
Adams, John, 4
Afghanistan, 37
Agee, Jerry, 86
Agent, defined, 207. See also Spies
Alien and Sedition Acts (1798), 4
All-Russian Extraordinary
Commission for Combating
Counterrevolution,
Speculation, and Sabotage
(CHEKA), 76, 91, 116
Allende, Salvador, 167
AMAN, 84, 195
American Protective League
(APL), 8
American Revolution, 1–3,
108–109, 118–119, 175
Ames, Aldrich, 24–29, 105–106, 181
obstacles to detecting, 39, 58
projects compromised by, 179
protection of, 53
Ames, Nancy, 26
Analytical intelligence, defined,
207
Anarchist groups. See Radical
organizations
Andre, John, 3, 109
Angleton, James, 14, 106–107, 154,
178
Church Committee and, 166
and controversy within the CIA,
17–18
Antiwar protest groups
CHAOS, Operation, and, 17, 107

Canaris, Wilhelm, 77
Carter, Jimmy, 134
Castro, Fidel, 116
Center for the Study of
Intelligence, 205
Central Institute for Intelligence
and Special Duties. See
Mossad
Central Intelligence Agency. See
CIA
Central Intelligence Group (CIG),
106, 147, 177
Chambers, Whittaker, 15, 16,
110–112, 120, 121, 127
CHAOS, Operation, 17, 107
CHEKA. See All-Russian
Extraordinary Commission
for Combating
Counterrevolution,
Speculation, and Sabotage
Chief Intelligence Directorate
(GRU), 92–93, 95
Chile, 167
Chin, Larry Wu-tai, 89–90, 180
China, 32, 182, 183
economic espionage by, 60–61
espionage in ancient China, 76
intelligence organizations in,
88
Nixon and, 49–50, 90, 127
in post–Cold War era, 59, 60
spies for, 35–36, 89–90, 183
spy plane downed over (2001),
36–37, 182
Church, Benjamin, 3
Church Committee, 38, 107, 112,
166–173
CIA cooperation with, 64
Hoover and, 124
Church, Frank, 38, 112. See also
Church Committee
Chuvakhin, Sergei, 26
CIA
Angleton and, 53, 106–107
Bush (George H. W.) and, 64
CHAOS, Operation, 17
and control of espionage, 64–65
212
Index
Berlin, 31–32
Berlin Wall, tunnel beneath, 115,
178
Berzin, Yan, 93
Black Chamber, 11, 142
Black Panthers, 17, 123
Blackmail, 17, 45–46, 79, 123
Bloch, Emanuel, 136
Bloch, Felix, 19, 181
Blunt, Anthony, 82, 130, 131
Bonaparte, Charles, 10, 176
Bonneville, Benjamin, 4
Boone, David, 34–35, 182
Booth, John Wilkes, 109
Border patrol, 69
Bosnia, 120
Bowser, Mary Elizabeth, 140
Boyce, Christopher, 14
Boyd, Belle, 109
Brazil, 36, 61
Buchanan, James, 118
Bull Run, First Battle of, 6, 118
Bureau of Investigation, 176. See
also FBI
Bureau of Scientific Relations. See
LEKEM
Burgess, Guy, 80, 81, 130, 131, 177,
178
Burgoyne, John, 2
Bush, George H. W., 64
Bush, George W.
expulsion of Iraqi diplomat, 35
and Hanssen case, 21
and Homeland Security, 68–69,
135, 149–153
and Ridge, 135
and September 11 investigation,
38
and spy plane downed over
China, 36–37
and USA PATRIOT Act, 67–70
Cabinet Noir, 76
Calhoun, John C., 117–118
Canada, 60, 195
Canadian Security Intelligence
Service, 204–205

Clinton, Bill
CI-21, 37
export of encryption software,
37
Hamilton and, 120
Tenet and, 138
Clinton, Henry, 3, 108
Coast Guard, 69
Cobb, Lucy, 110
Code Compilation Company, 142
Codes and code breaking
cipher machines, 21–22, 141
definitions, 207
early British intelligence
organizations and, 78
World War II and, 11–12
Zimmermann Telegram, 8–9, 78
See also Yardley, Herbert
Cohen, Eli, 83
Cohen, Roy, 136
COI. See Coordinator of
Information
COINTELPRO. See
Counterintelligence Program
Colby, William, 64, 107
Cold War, 13–40
defensive espionage, 13–29
offensive espionage, 30–33
technology during, 13–14
See also Soviet Union
Collection
defined, 207
as part of intelligence cycle, 52
Committee of Secret
Correspondence, 175
Committee of State Security. See
KGB
Committees of Safety, 3
Communists
Chambers and, 110–111
Hoover and, 17, 123
McCarthy and, 14–15, 124–125
Nixon and, 127
spies recruited within the party,
33
Contingent Fund for Foreign
Intercourse, 175
Index
213
counterintelligence operations,
17–18
covert action vs. espionage, 114
creation of, 13
and Department of Homeland
Security, 71
division of labor with FBI, 66
Dulles and, 114–116
ethics and, 64. See also Church
Committee
failure to share information
with FBI, 39, 153–156
founding document, 146–149
friction with FBI, 13, 57, 154,
195–196
intelligence analysis crippled by
internal suspicions, 17–18, 53
investigations into activities of.
See Church Committee
mail opening, 167–173
organization of, 56
penetration by Chinese spies,
89–90
penetration by Soviet spies,
26–29, 34, 105–106, 179
precursors to, 9, 106, 147
president’s daily briefing by, 54
September 11 and, 38–40
Tenet and, 138–139
CIG. See Central Intelligence
Group
Cipher Bureau, 141–142
Cipher, defined, 207. See also
Codes and code breaking
Cipher machines, 21–22, 141
CI-21. See Counterintelligence for
the Twenty-First Century
Civil liberties, 68, 70, 149. See also
Church Committee; Palmer
Raids
Civil War, 5–7
Baker and, 109–110
Confederate spies, 109, 117–118
Union spies, 132–133, 140, 175
Clark, John, 2
Clark, William, 4
Clergy, CIA use of, 64

Intelligence
Dead drop site, defined, 19, 208
Death penalty, 20, 136–137
Decyphering Branch, 78
Defector, defined, 208
Defectors from the Soviet Union,
92. See also Golitsyn, Anatoliy;
Gouzenko, Igor; Hayhanen,
Reino; Krivitsky, Walter;
Nosenko, Yuri; Yurchenko,
Vitaly
Defense Airborne Reconnaissance
Office, 56
Defense Intelligence Agency, 56
Delaware River crossing, 2
Department of Defense, 56
Department of Energy, 56
Department of Homeland
Security, 68–69, 71, 151–153,
183
Depot of Military Knowledge, 78
Détente, 127
DGI. See Directorate of General
Intelligence
Dillinger, John, 123
Director of Central Intelligence
(DCI), 13, 177
Directorate of General Intelligence
(DGI), 97
Dirty tricks, defined, 208
Disinformation, defined, 208
Domestic spying, 17, 68, 166–173.
See also Church Committee;
Immigrants; Radical
organizations
Donovan, James B., 104
Donovan, William “Wild Bill,”
112–114
COI and, 9, 144–145, 176
Stephenson and, 10, 123,
137–138
Draft evasion, 8
Drug smugglers, 59
Dulles, Allen, 11, 114–116
Dulles, John, 114
Dupuy, Rosario Casas, 26, 27, 29,
181
214
Index
Coordination of
Counterintelligence Activities
(Title 50, Section 402), 152–156
Coordinator of Information (COI),
9, 113, 144–145, 176
Corona project, 194
Corson, William, 7–8
Council on Foreign Relations, 115
Counterespionage, 45–47
background checks, 89
contradictory nature of, 46–47
defined, 207
intelligence cycle and, 53
jurisdiction over, 65–66
as police work vs. intelligence
work, 65
radical organizations and, 65–66
Counterfeit currency, 7
Counterintelligence, defined, 207
Counterintelligence for the
Twenty-First Century (CI-21),
37
Counterintelligence Program
(COINTELPRO), 17, 123
Covert action
defined, 208
distinguished from espionage,
114
Crime, international, 59
Crossley, George. See Chambers,
Whittaker
Cryptanalysis, defined, 208. See
also Codes and code breaking
Cryptography, defined, 208
Cuba, 35, 97, 182
Cuban Missile crisis, 94, 96, 128,
129
Culper Net, 2
Currency, counterfeit, 7
Current intelligence, defined, 208
Customs Service, 69
Dalton gang, 133
Damage assessment, defined, 208
Dasch, George John, 12
Davis, Jefferson, 5, 110, 140
DCI. See Director of Central

counterespionage and, 65
creation of, 10–11, 176
and Department of Homeland
Security, 71
division of labor with CIA, 66
failure to share information
with CIA, 39, 153–156
friction with CIA, 13, 57, 154,
195–196
Hoover and, 8, 10, 17, 122–124
move to enlist private citizens
in espionage, 70
OSS and, 10
penetration by Chinese spies,
35–36, 183
penetration by Soviet spies,
18–21, 34, 120
responsibilities of, 56
Rosenberg case and, 15
September 11 and, 38–40, 126
World War II and, 12
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
See FBI
Federal Emergency Management
Agency, 69
Federation of Atomic Scientists,
205
Fenians, 80
Fictional spies, 198
Filatov, Anatoli, 30
Fisher, William. See Abel, Rudolf
Ford, Gerald, 167
Foreign Broadcast Information
Service, 56
Fouche, Joseph, 76
Fourth Amendment, 168–170
France
Brazilian bribe, 36, 61
early intelligence organizations,
76
economic espionage by, 60–61
friendly spying and, 36
Israel and, 84
OSS and, 10
Franklin, Benjamin, 3
Fraud, 7
Frederick II of Prussia, 77
Index
215
Duquesne, Frederick Joubert, 12,
177
Dzershinsky, Felix, 76, 116–117
Eberstadt Report, 147
Economic espionage, 60–62
defined, 209
Economic Espionage Act of 1996,
164–166
Egypt, 83–84
Eisenhower, Dwight
Church and, 112
Francis Gary Powers incident,
13, 134
McCarthy and, 125
Rosenbergs and, 136
Elizabeth I, 76
Ellis, C. H. “Dick,” 98
Embassy, Soviet, 18, 19
Embassy, U.S. (in Moscow), 178,
179, 181
Espionage
control of, 62–65
defined, 209
history of. See History of
espionage in the U.S.
intelligence cycle, 52–55
wartime vs. peacetime, 48–49
See also Counterespionage;
Economic espionage;
Intelligence; Intelligence
organizations; International
politics; Spies
Ethics, 64–65, 203
Exchange of spies. See Spy
exchanges
Executive branch. See Presidency
Executive Order 9835, 157–159
Executive Order 13228, 149–151
Extremist groups. See Radical
organizations
Faget, Mariano, 35, 182
FBI
Ames case and, 28–29
Church Committee and, 124,
167

War of 1812 and, 5
World War I and, 8–9
World War II and, 9–10, 12, 77
See also MI-5; MI-6; Philby,
Harold “Kim”; Secret
Intelligence Service
Greenglass, David, 15–16, 136
Greenhow, Robert, 118
Greenhow, Rose O’Neal, 5, 6,
117–118, 132–133
GRU. See Chief Intelligence
Directorate
Gulf War (first), 37
Hale, Nathan, 2, 118–119, 157
Hamilton, Alexander, 4
Hamilton, Lee, 38, 119–120
Handler, defined, 209
Hanssen, Philip (Robert), 18–21,
120, 182
obstacles to detecting, 39
protection of, 53
Harvey, William, 193
Hayhanen, Reino, 104, 178
Helms, Richard, 170
Herzog, Chaim, 83
Hirsh, Seymour, 166
Hiss, Alger, 110, 111, 120–121
evidence of guilt, 16
perjury conviction, 15
SIGINT intercepts and, 14
History of espionage in the U.S.,
1–43
American Revolution, 1–3
chronology, 175–183
Civil War, 5–7
Cold War defensive espionage,
13–29
Cold War offensive espionage,
30–33
early Republic, 4–5
Mexican War, 5
post–Cold War period, 34–37
post–September 11, 38–40
War of 1812, 4–5
World War I and interwar years,
7–9
216
Index
Friendly spying, 36, 84–87, 133.
See also Economic espionage
Fuchs, Klaus, 117, 123, 177
evidence of guilt, 15–16
GRU and, 93
SIGINT intercepts and, 14
Future Imagery Architecture
program, 39
Gage, Thomas, 3
Gates, Horatio, 2
GCHQ. See Government
Communications
Headquarters
Gehlen, Richard, 98
Germany
economic espionage by, 60
intelligence organizations in, 77
invasion of Soviet Union, 49–50
in post–Cold War era, 59
World War I and, 8–9
World War II and, 12
Germany (West), 98, 195
Ghana, 180
Gilmore, James, III, 39
Globalization, 61–62
Gold, Harry, 15–16, 136
GOLD, Operation, 178. See also
Tunnel beneath Berlin Wall
Goldfus, Emil. See Abel, Rudolf
Goldman, Emma, 122
Golitsyn, Anatoliy, 17–18, 82,
106–107, 131, 178
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 91
Gouzenko, Igor, 81
Government Communications
Headquarters (GCHQ), 78–79
GPU. See State Political
Administration
Great Britain, 11
American Revolution and, 2–3,
108–109
creation of OSS and, 9–10
economic espionage by, 60
intelligence organizations in,
78–80
Soviet spies in, 93, 130–132

feedback stage, 54
finished intelligence presented
to policymakers, 54
as instrument of deception by
target state, 51, 208
“intelligence to please,” 6
“noise” in, 50–51, 209
obstacles to interpretation,
50–51
open vs. secret information, 52
processing and evaluation of,
52–53
tasking, 52
See also Signals intelligence
Intelligence community, defined,
209
Intelligence cycle, defined, 209
Intelligence organizations, 55–58
arrest of spies vs. obtaining
information about security
breaches, 65, 86
and control of espionage, 62–65
and Department of Homeland
Security, 71
division of labor among, 66
ethics and, 64–65, 203. See also
Church Committee
friction between, 13, 57, 71, 154,
195–196
internal value system of, 57–58
and nonstate actors, 59
in other countries. See specific
countries
and post–Cold War era, 58–60
International law, 48–49, 201
International politics, 13, 47–51,
201
International Spy Museum,
205–206
International Workers of the
World, 8
Interrepublican Security Service,
91
Iran-Contra scandal, 120
Iraq, 35, 37, 99, 183
Irish Special Branch, 80
Israel, 133
Index
217
World War II, 9–12
See also specific wars
Hollis, Roger, 82, 97
Homeland Security. See
Department of Homeland
Security; Office of Homeland
Security
Hoover, J. Edgar, 8, 10, 122–124,
154
OSS kept out of Latin America
by, 10, 123
Palmer and, 128
Philby and, 131
radical organizations and, 17
spy catching and, 14
Stephenson and, 137
House Un-American Activities
Committee, 16–17, 111, 121,
123, 127
Howard, Edward Lee, 26–28, 57,
178, 180
Howe, William, 2, 3, 119
Human rights. See Civil liberties
Hunt, Edward, 31
Hussein, Saddam, 99
Huston, Charles, 167
Huston Plan, 167
Ideology, as motivation for spies,
17, 46
Illegal activities of the intelligence
community. See Church
Committee
Immigrants, 4, 65, 70, 128
Immigration Act of 1917, 128
Immigration and Naturalization
Service, 69
India, 60, 97, 98
Information, defined, 209
Intelligence
analysis and production, 53–54
collection of, 52
counterespionage and, 53
definitions, 207–210
disinformation, 208
distinction between information
and intelligence, 52

KGB and, 91
Killian Committee, 13
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 123
Kissinger, Henry, 38, 119, 126
Knowlton, Thomas, 119
Knowlton’s Rangers, 119
Knox, Frank, 113
Kobel, Fritz, 11
Koch, Hans Joachim, 79
Konoplev, Vladimir, 92
Korean War, 89, 125
Krivitsky, Walter, 81
Krotov, Boris, 131
Ku Klux Klan, 7, 123
Kuklinski, Ryszard, 190
Labor organizations. See Radical
organizations
Lacrosse satellites, 37
Land fraud, 7
Latin America, OSS kept out of,
10, 123
Law of Return, 86
Laws, 156–166
governing economic espionage,
164–166
governing espionage, 159–164
international law, 48–49
loyalty programs, 157–159
Lee, Andrew, 14
Lee, Robert E., 6
Lee, Wen Ho, 37, 182, 198–199
Leftist organizations. See Radical
organizations
Legal treatment of spies, 159–164
death penalty, 20, 136–137
international law, 48–49
plea bargains, 20
spies arrested vs. spies left in
place, 65, 86
statute of limitations, 121
See also Spy exchanges; specific
spies
LEKEM, 84, 85
Lenin, Vladimir, 76, 114
Leung, Katrina, 35–36, 183
Lewis, Meriwether, 4
218
Index
economic espionage by, 60–61
inability to use “plausible
denial” in Pollard case, 63
intelligence organizations in,
82–84, 177
Soviet spies in, 83
spies in the Middle East, 83–84
spies in the U.S., 84–87, 133
types of information targeted
by, 61
Italy, 195
IVY BELLS, Operation, 178–179
James brothers, 133
Japan
and code breaking, 11–12, 142
economic espionage by, 60–61
intelligence organizations in,
77–78
Pearl Harbor, 49–50
in post–Cold War era, 59
Soviet spies in, 93–94
Jefferson, Thomas, 4
Johnson, Andrew, 109–110
Johnson, Lyndon, 107
Joint Chiefs of Staff, 10, 113, 145,
176
Jordan, Thomas, 118
Kalugin, Oleg, 192
Kappe, Walter, 12
Kaufman, Julius, 136
Kayotis, Andrew. See Abel, Rudolf
Keane, Thomas, 38, 119
Kelly, Brian, 20
Kempei Tai, 77
Kennedy, John F., 116
Keyhole satellites, 37, 39
KGB, 30, 91–93
creation of, 177
Hanssen and, 17
See also Soviet Union
KH-11. See Keyhole satellites
Khrushchev, Nikita
de-Stalinization speech, 33, 115
Francis Gary Powers incident,
13, 134

Midway, Battle of, 11
Military Information Division,
176
Military Intelligence Division
(post–World War I), 8
Military Intelligence Section
(World War I), 7
Military Order of June 13, 1942,
145–146
MINARET, Project, 168–170
Ministry of State Security (MSS),
88
Miralles, Juan de, 3
Mitchell, George, 38, 119
Mole, defined, 209
Money, as motivation for spies,
17, 46
Montes, Ana Belan, 35, 182
Morison, Samuel Loring, 179
Mossad, 83–84, 85, 177, 195
Motorin, Sergey, 19, 26
MSS. See Ministry of State
Security
Mueller, Robert, III, 39, 126
Mundt, Karl, 127
Napoleon I, 76
National Detective Bureau, 109
National Intelligence Council
(NIC), 99
National Photographic
Interpretation Center, 56
National Reconnaissance Office
(NRO), 13, 56
National Security Act of 1947,
146–149, 177
National Security Agency (NSA),
14, 56
creation of, 177
domestic spying on antiwar
protesters, 168–170
penetration by Soviet spies, 27,
34–35, 182
precursors to, 14
VENONA, Project, 14, 135
National Security Archive, 206
Navy, U.S., 21–24, 140–141, 176
Index
219
Liberal view of world politics,
47–48
Libya, 35, 99–100, 183
Lie-detector tests. See Polygraph
tests
Lincoln, Abraham, 5, 132
Litzi, Alice, 130
Lonetree, Clayton, 181
Lonsdale, Gordon, 129
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Manhattan Project, 14, 15–16,
93, 136
Wen Ho Lee case, 37, 182,
198–199
Louis XIII, 76
Lutz, Wolfgang, 83–84
MacArthur, Douglas, 10
Maclean, Donald, 81–82, 130, 131,
177, 178
MAGIC, 11
Mail opening, 167–173
“Major B.,” 30
Manhattan Project, 14, 15–16, 93,
136. See also Fuchs, Klaus;
Gold, Harry; Greenglass,
David; Rosenberg, Julius and
Ethel
Mao Zedong, 88
Marshall, George, 125
Martynov, Valery, 19, 26
Mary, Queen of Scots, 76
Mata Hari, 77
McCarthy, Joseph, 14–15, 110,
124–125
McClellan, George, 5, 6, 132, 175
McCone, John, 166, 167
McKinley, William, 7
Media, CIA use of, 64
Meeropol, Robert and Michael,
137
Menzhinsky, Vyacheslav, 117
Mexican War, 5
Mexico, 8–9, 60
MI-5, 79, 131, 186
MI-6, 79, 131
MI-8, 141

Palmer Raids, 122, 128
PATRIOT Act. See USA PATRIOT
Act
Pearl Harbor, 49–50
Pelton, Ronald, 27, 180
Penkovsky, Oleg, 30, 94–97,
128–130, 157, 178
GRU and, 93
SIS and, 79
People’s Commissariat for
Internal Affairs (NKVD), 91
Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations of Government
Operations, 15
Philby, Harold “Kim,” 80–82,
130–132, 178
Angleton and, 106
obstacles to detecting, 58
Philip II, King of Spain, 76
Pinkerton, Allan, 5, 6–7, 118,
132–133, 175
Pinkerton Detective Service, 5,
118, 132
Pirates, 5
Pitts, Earl, 34, 181
“Plausible denial,” 63
Plea bargains, 20
Politics. See International politics
Pollard, Anne, 86–87, 133, 180
Pollard, Jonathan Jay, 63, 84–87,
133, 180
Polyakov, Dimitri, 18, 26
Polygraph tests
defined, 210
passed by spies, 27, 28, 89
Popov, Pyotor, 93, 107
Portugal, 10
Post–Cold War era, 34–37, 58–60
Powell, Colin, 135
Powers, Francis Gary, 133–134,
178
Abel exchanged for, 104
diplomatic fallout caused by
incident, 13
Dulles and, 115
Penkovsky and, 95
Predator drone aircraft, 37
220
Index
Nazi Party, 77, 93, 177
NIC. See National Intelligence
Council
Nicholson, Harold, 34, 181
Nimitz, Chester, 11
Nixon, Richard, 126–127
China and, 49–50, 90, 127
Hiss investigation and, 111, 121,
127
NKVD. See People’s Commissariat
for Internal Affairs
Noise, defined, 209
North Korea, 32, 99
Nosenko, Yuri, 107
NRO. See National
Reconnaissance Office
NSA. See National Security
Agency
Nye Committee, 121
Office of Homeland Security, 69,
135, 149–151
Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI),
176
Office of Strategic Services (OSS),
9–11
Angleton and, 106
branches of, 10, 145
creation of, 9–10, 112–113, 123,
137–138, 176
disbanded, 13, 145
founding document, 145–146
Stephenson and, 137–138
Ogorodnik, Alexsandr, 30–31
OGPU. See United State Political
Administration
Okhrana, 76, 90
ONI. See Office of Naval
Intelligence
Open source information, defined,
210
Oshchenko, Viktor, 92
OSS. See Office of Strategic
Services
Palmer, A. Mitchell, 8, 122,
127–128

Rockefeller, Nelson, 167
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 110
COI and, 144–145
Hoover and, 123
Joint Chiefs of Staff and, 10
OSS and, 9, 113, 145–146
Palmer and, 128
Roosevelt, Theodore, 10–11
Rosenberg, Julius and Ethel, 123,
135–137, 157, 177
evidence for guilt, 15–16
Maclean and, 81
SIGINT intercepts and, 14
Russia, post-Soviet collapse,
60–61. See also Post–Cold War
era
Russia, prerevolutionary, 76, 90
SAD. See Social Affairs
Department
Satellites
Chinese satellites, 88
and Francis Gary Powers
incident, 13
Future Imagery Architecture
program, 39
India’s weapons testing and, 36
Rhyolite program, 14
Russian satellites, 94
war preparations and, 37
Saudi Arabia, 62
Scott, Hugh, 7
Scott, Winfield, 109
Scrange, Sharon, 180
SD. See Sicherheitsdienst
Sebold, William, 12, 177
Secret information, defined, 210
Secret Intelligence Branch (SI), 10
Secret Intelligence Service (SIS),
53, 79, 80–82, 176, 186
Secret Service, 109
Security Service. See MI-5
Senate Select Committee to Study
Governmental Operations
with Respect to Intelligence
Activities. See Church
Committee
Index
221
Presidency
Church Committee and, 167
CIA and, 138–139
Contingent Fund for Foreign
Intercourse, 175
and control of espionage, 62–63
daily intelligence briefing, 54
“plausible denial,” 63
president protected by Secret
Service, 7
Presidential Order of July 11,
1941, 144–145
Prime, Geoffrey, 79
Progressive movement, 10
Prussia, 77
Radical organizations, 8
CIA and, 17
counterespionage and, 65–66,
70
Great Britain and, 79–80
Hoover and, 17, 122–123
McCarthy and, 14–15
Palmer and, 128
Smith Act and, 123
See also Domestic spying
Railroads, 132, 133
Reagan, Ronald, l, 87
Realist view of world politics,
47–48
Reconnaissance. See Aviation;
National Reconnaissance
Office; Satellites
Recruitment of spies, 17, 32–33,
45–46
Red Scare (1919–1920), 8, 128
Redl, Alfred, 46
Regan, Brian, 35, 183
Reilly, Sidney, 117
Revere Gang, 2
Revolutionary War. See American
Revolution
Rhyolite program, 14
Richelieu, Cardinal, 76
Richmond Underground, 140
Ridge, Thomas, 69, 135, 149, 152
Robinson, Aubrey, 87

organizations and, 97–98
CIA’s counterintelligence and,
17–18
collapse of, 92
counterespionage by, 33
defectors from, 92. See also
specific defectors
early intelligence organizations,
76–77, 90–91, 116
German invasion of, 49–50
intelligence organizations in,
90–94
mail opening, 170–173
Manhattan Project and, 15
in post–Cold War era, 58–59
SIGINT intercepts, 14
Soviet spies in Great Britain,
80–82, 93, 117, 130–132
Soviet spies in Israel, 83
Soviet spies in Japan, 93
Soviet spies in the U.S., 18–29,
135–137, 179
spy satellites, 94
U-2 reconnaissance flights over.
See U-2 reconnaissance flights
See also KGB
Spain, 3, 10, 11, 130
Spanish Civil War, 80
Special Branch (subdepartment of
the Crime Department of the
Metropolitan Police), 79–80
Special Operations Executive
(SOE), 77
Spies
difficulty of recruiting spies to
counter terrorism, 39–40
ethics and, 203
fiction and, 198
left in place vs. arrest of, 65, 86
legal treatment of. See Legal
treatment of spies
motivations of, 45–46
polygraph tests passed by, 27,
28, 89
protection of, 53
recruitment of, 17, 32–33, 45–46
walk-ins vs. recruits, 17
222
Index
September 11, 2001, 66–72
aftermath of, 38–40
FBI and, 126
investigation following, 38,
119–120
See also Department of
Homeland Security; Office of
Homeland Security; Ridge,
Thomas; USA PATRIOT Act
SGPOINTER/HGLINGUAL, Project,
170–173
SHABAK. See Shin Beth
SHAI. See Sherut Yedioth
SHAMROCK, Operation, 168
Shelby, Richard, 38
Sherut Yedioth (SHAI), 82
Shin Beth (SHABAK), 82–83, 195
Shippen, Margaret, 108
SI. See Secret Intelligence Branch
Sicherheitsdienst (SD), 77
SIGINT. See Signals intelligence
Signals Intelligence Service, 14
Signals intelligence (SIGINT), 14
Chinese, 88
defined, 210
embassies and, 18, 19, 178, 179,
181
Israeli, 84
SIS. See Secret Intelligence Service
Six Day War, 84
Smith Act, 123
Smith, James, 36
Smith, Walter, 115
Sobell, Morton, 15–16
Social Affairs Department (SAD),
88
SOE. See Special Operations
Executive
Solon, Avraham, 83
Somalia, 120
Sons of Liberty, 175
Sorge, Richard, 93–94, 176
South Korea, 60–61
Soviet Union
American spies in, 30–33, 92,
128–130
Australian intelligence

Title 18 of the U.S. Code
(excerpts), 159–164
Tokko, 77–78
Tolkachev, A. G., 31
Tower, John, 167, 168
Trade secrets. See Economic
espionage
Transportation Security
Administration, 69
Treasury Department, 7, 56, 109
Tretyakov, Sergei, 21
Triple agents, 130
Trofimoff, George, 35, 182
Truman, Harry S., 110
CIA and, 114, 115, 147, 177
OSS and, 177
Rosenbergs and, 136
Tsou, Douglas, 36, 181
Tunnels
beneath Berlin Wall, 115, 178
beneath Soviet embassy, 18, 19
Turkey, 10
U-2 reconnaissance flights, 13, 32,
115. See also Powers, Francis
Gary
ULTRA, 12, 188
Uncertainty, role in world politics,
48
United States Political
Administration (OGPU), 116
USA PATRIOT Act, 67–70, 182,
202
Van Deman, Ralph H., 7–8, 11,
139–140, 141
Van Lew, Elizabeth, 5, 140
Vassall, John, 79
VENONA, Project, 14, 135, 177, 196
Vietnam War, 112, 127. See also
Antiwar protest groups
Volkov, Konstantin, 81, 131
Vonsiatsky, Count Anastase
Andreievitch, 12
Walker, Arthur, 21, 23, 179
Walker, Barbara, 24
Index
223
Spy catchers. See
Counterespionage
Spy exchanges, 84, 96, 104, 129,
134, 178, 180
Spy ring, defined, 210
State Department, 56
State Political Administration
(GPU), 91, 116
Stella, Aviem, 85
Stephenson, William, 10, 113, 123,
137–138, 198
Stettinus, Edward, 121
Stimson, Henry, 11, 63, 142
Strategic intelligence, defined, 210
Strategic Services Unit, 106
Sun Tzu, 76
Surveillance, defined, 210
Sweden, 10, 11
Switzerland, 10
Syria, 83, 99
Taiwan, 36, 60–61, 181
Tallmadge, Benjamin, 2
Tasking
defined, 210
as part of intelligence cycle, 52
TAW, Operation, 179
Taylor, Zachary, 5
Teapot Dome oil scandal, 7
Technological espionage, defined,
210
Teller, Edward, 93
Tenet, George, 38, 138–139
Terrorism, 66–72
difficulty of recruiting spies to
counter, 39–40, 60
Israel and, 83
in post–Cold War era, 59
USA PATRIOT Act, 67–70, 182,
202
use of private citizens in
espionage, 70
See also Department of
Homeland Security; Office of
Homeland Security
Third Directorate, 90
TIPS, Operation, 70

World War II, 9–12, 77
Hoover and, 123
Manhattan Project, 14, 15–16,
93, 136. See also Fuchs, Klaus;
Gold, Harry; Greenglass,
David; Rosenberg, Julius and
Ethel
role of surprise in, 49–50
See also Office of Strategic
Services
Wright, Peter, 200
Wynne, Greville, 95–96, 129
Yardley, Herbert, 11, 141–142
Yeltsin, Boris, 92
Yoshikawa, Takeo, 190
Yurchenko, Vitaly, 26–27, 180
Zelle, Margaretha, 77
Zimmermann Telegram, 8–9, 78
224
Index
Walker, Johnny, 21–24, 51, 53,
140–141, 179, 187
Walker, Laura, 24
Walker, Michael, 21, 23, 141, 179
Walk-ins, defined, 17, 210
Wallenberg, Raoul, 189
Walsingham, Francis, 76, 78
War of 1812, 4–5
Ware Group, 110, 111
Warfare, and international law,
48–49
Washington, George, 2, 119
Weapons tests, 14, 36
Weinberger, Caspar, 87
Weisband, William, 81, 177
White Propaganda unit, 176
Whitworth, Jerry, 21, 23, 141, 179
Wilson, Woodrow, 9, 127–128
World politics. See International
politics
World War I, 7–9, 77, 78, 139, 141

About the Author
Glenn Hastedt received his Ph.D. in political science from
Indiana University. He is professor of political science and head
of the Department of Political Science at James Madison Univer-
sity. He conducts research on U.S. foreign policy with an empha-
sis on intelligence policy issues. Among his publications are
American Foreign Policy: Past, Present, Future, (fifth edition; 2003);
Controlling Intelligence (1991); and, with Kay Knickrehm, Inter-
national Politics in a Changing World (2003).
225

