
Essentials of  
Anatomy & Physiology
Second Edition
Kenneth S. Saladin
Georgia College
Robin K. McFarland
Cabrillo College
Digital Authors
Christina A. Gan
Highline Community College
Heather N. Cushman
Tacoma Community College

ESSENTIALS OF ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY, 2ND EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by McGraw-Hill Education. 
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2014. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, 
or broadcast for distance learning.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LMN 21 20 19 18 17 16
ISBN 978-0-07-296554-4
MHID 0-07-296554-1
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Marty Lange
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Betsy Whalen
Managing Director: Lynn Breithaupt
Brand Manager: Chloe Bouxsein
Director, Product Development: Rose Koos
Product Developer: Fran Simon
Marketing Managers: James F. Connely/Kelly Brown
Market Development Manager: Kristine Rellihan
Director of Digital Content: Michael Koot, PhD
Digital Product Analyst: John S. Theobald
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Linda Avenarius
Program Manager: Angela R. FitzPatrick
Content Project Managers: Vicki Krug/Christina Nelson
Buyer: Laura M. Fuller
Design: David Hash
Content Licensing Specialists: Lori Hancock/Lorraine Buczek
Cover Image: ©Tanya Constantine/Blend Images/Getty Images
Design Icons: (stethoscope): © Nathan Blaney/Getty Images RF; (rock climbing): © Image Source RF; (tent): © Carson
Ganci/Design Pics RF
Compositor: MPS Limited
Printer: LSC Communications
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Saladin, Kenneth S., author. | McFarland, Robin, author. | Gan, 
  Christina A., author. | Cushman, Heather N., author.
Title: Essentials of anatomy & physiology / Kenneth S. Saladin, Georgia 
  College & State University, Robin K. McFarland, Cabrillo College ;
digital
  authors, Christina A. Gan, Highline Community College, Heather N.
Cushman,
  Tacoma Community College.
Other titles: Essentials of anatomy and physiology
Description: Second edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2018]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016052225 | ISBN 9780072965544 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Human physiology—Textbooks. | Human anatomy—Textbooks.
Classification: LCC QP34.5 .S232 2018 | DDC 612—dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016052225
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does not indicate 
an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of 
the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

Brief Contents
About the Authors  iv
Table of Contents  v
Taking Anatomy & Physiology to New Heights  x
Making Anatomy & Physiology Intriguing and Inspiring  xii
Acknowledgments  xxi
PART 1
Organization of the Body
	
1	
The Study of Anatomy and Physiology  1
	 2	
Life, Matter, and Energy  31
	 3	
The Cellular Level of Organization  61
	 4	
Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization  95
PART 2
Support and Movement
	 5	
The Integumentary System  127
	 6	
The Skeletal System  146
	 7	
The Muscular System  201
PART 3
Internal Coordination
	 8	
The Nervous System I: Nerve Cells, the Spinal Cord, 
and Reflexes  252
	 9	
The Nervous System II: The Brain, Cranial Nerves,  
and Autonomic Nervous System  285
	 10	
The Sense Organs  324
	 11	
The Endocrine System  360
PART 4
Circulation and Defense
	 12	
The Circulatory System I: Blood  388
	 13	
The Circulatory System II: The Heart and  
Blood Vessels  414
	 14	
The Lymphatic System and Immunity  466
PART 5
Intake and Output
	 15	
The Respiratory System  499
	 16	
The Urinary System  525
	 17	
The Digestive System  558
	 18	
Nutrition and Metabolism  596
PART 6
Human Life Cycle
	 19	
The Reproductive System  628
	 20	
Human Development and Aging  672
Appendix A: Answer Keys  A-1
Appendix B: Health Science Careers  A-8
Appendix C: Symbols, Weights, and Measures  A-11
Appendix D: Biomedical Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes  A-13
Appendix E: Periodic Table of the Elements  A-17
Glossary  G-1
Index  I-1
	
iii

About the Authors
KENNETH S. SALADIN is a Professor of Biology at Georgia College in Milledgeville, Georgia, where he 
has taught since 1977. Ken teaches human anatomy and physiology, introductory medical physiology, histology, 
animal behavior, and natural history of the Gala´pagos Islands. He has also previously taught introductory biology, 
general zoology, sociobiology, parasitology, and biomedical etymology. Ken is a member of the Human Anatomy 
and Physiology Society, American Physiological Society, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, and 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. He is the author of the best-selling textbooks Anatomy & 
Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function and Human Anatomy. Ken and his wife Diane have two adult 
­children.
ROBIN MCFARLAND has taught anatomy and physiology at Cabrillo College in Aptos, California, since 
1998. She earned a Ph.D. in physical (biological) anthropology from the University of Washington, where she 
studied the relationship between body fat and reproduction in primates. Robin subsequently conducted research 
on comparative ape anatomy with colleagues at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Robin is a member of 
the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society, a member of the American Association of Anatomists, and a par-
ticipant in the Physiology Education Community of Practice (PECOP) sponsored by the American Physiological 
Society. She was a contributing author to Human Anatomy, second edition, by Ken Saladin. She and her husband 
Jeff have two children, Reid and Madeleine. Robin enjoys hiking and climbing mountains.
Dedicated to everyone who's ever danced in the rain .—K.S.S.
This book is dedicated to my students, who inspire and delight me.—R.K.M.
The authors would enjoy hearing from colleagues and students alike who use this book and may wish to offer 
suggestions for our next edition, or encouragement to continue doing certain things the way we have. Such 
­feedback is invaluable for improving a textbook, and the authors will endeavor to answer all correspondence.
© Tim Vacula
CHRISTINA A. GAN, digital coauthor for Connect, has been teaching anatomy and physiology, microbiol-
ogy, and general biology at Highline Community College in Des Moines, Washington, since 1994. Before that, 
she taught at Rogue Community College in Medford, Oregon, for 6 years. She earned her M.A. in biology from 
Humboldt State University, researching the genetic variation of mitochondrial DNA in various salmonid species, 
and is a member of the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society. When she is not in the classroom or developing 
digital media, she is climbing, mountaineering, skiing, kayaking, sailing, cycling, and mountain biking through-
out the Pacific Northwest.
© Chris Gan/Yuen Lui 
Studios
HEATHER N. CUSHMAN, digital coauthor for Connect, teaches anatomy and physiology at Tacoma 
Community College in Tacoma, Washington, and is a member of the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society. 
She received her Ph.D. in Neuroscience from the University of Minnesota in 2002, and completed a postdoctoral 
fellowship at the Vollum Institute at Oregon Health & Science University in Portland, Oregon, where she studied 
sensory transduction and the cellular and molecular mechanisms of muscle pain. She currently resides in Tacoma, 
Washington, and enjoys climbing, camping, and hiking with her husband Ken and their daughter Annika. 
© JC Penney Portraits/
Lifetouch Portrait  
Studios, Inc.
Kenneth S. Saladin, Ph.D.
Georgia College, Milledgeville, Georgia
ken.saladin@gcsu.edu
Robin K. McFarland, Ph.D.
Cabrillo College, Aptos, California
romcfarl@cabrillo.edu
Courtesy of Robin 
McFarland
iv	

Table of Contents
Chapter 2
Life, Matter, and Energy   31
2.1	
Atoms, Ions, and Molecules   32
2.2	
Water, Acids, and Bases   38
2.3	
Organic Compounds   41
Perspectives on Health   52
2.4	
Energy and Chemical Reactions   54
Career Spotlight: Medical Technologist   57
Study Guide   58
Chapter 3
The Cellular Level of Organization   61
3.1	
The General Structure of Cells   62
3.2	
The Cell Surface   64
3.3	
The Cell Interior   76
3.4	
The Life Cycle of Cells   85
Perspectives on Health   90
Career Spotlight: Cytotechnologist   91
Study Guide   92
Chapter 4
Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization   95
4.1	
The Study of Tissues   96
4.2	
Epithelial Tissue   99
4.3	
Connective Tissue   106
4.4	
Nervous and Muscular Tissues—The Excitable Tissues   114
Perspectives on Health   117
4.5	
Glands and Membranes   118
4.6	
Tissue Growth, Development, Repair, and Death   121
Career Spotlight: Histotechnician   123
Study Guide   124
About the Authors  iv
Table of Contents  v
Taking Anatomy & Physiology to New Heights  x
Making Anatomy & Physiology Intriguing and Inspiring  xii
Acknowledgments  xxi
PART 1
Organization of the Body
Chapter 1
The Study of Anatomy and Physiology   1
1.1	
Anatomy—The Structural Basis of Human Function  2
1.2	
Physiology—Dynamic Processes in the Living Body  8
Perspectives on Health  9
1.3	
The Human Body Plan  13
1.4	
The Language of Medicine  24
Career Spotlight: Radiologic Technologist  27
Study Guide  28
© Eye of Science/Science Source
	
v

PART 2
Support and Movement
Chapter 7
The Muscular System   201
7.1	
Muscular Tissue and Cells   202
7.2	
Physiology of Skeletal Muscle   210
7.3	
Cardiac and Smooth Muscle   219
7.4	
Anatomy of the Muscular System   222
Perspectives on Health   224
Aging of the Muscular System   247
Career Spotlight: Massage Therapist   247
Connective Issues   248
Study Guide   249
PART 3
Internal Coordination
Chapter 5
The Integumentary System   127
5.1	
The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue   128
Perspectives on Health   134
5.2	
Accessory Organs   136
Aging of the Integumentary System   141
Career Spotlight: Dermatology Nurse   141
Connective Issues   142
Study Guide   143
Chapter 6
The Skeletal System   146
6.1	
Skeletal Structure and Function   147
6.2	
Bone Development and Metabolism   153
Perspectives on Health   157
6.3	
The Axial Skeleton   158
6.4	
The Appendicular Skeleton   175
6.5	
Joints   184
Aging of the Skeletal System   196
Career Spotlight: Orthopedic Nurse   196
Connective Issues   197
Study Guide   198
Chapter 8
The Nervous System I: Nerve Cells, the Spinal Cord, 
and Reflexes   252
8.1	
Cells and Tissues of the Nervous System   253
8.2	
The Physiology of Neurons   261
Perspectives on Health   269
© Eye of Science/Science Source
© Sciepro/Science Photo Library/Getty Images RF
vi	

8.3	
The Spinal Cord, Spinal Nerves, and Reflexes   270
Career Spotlight: Occupational Therapist   281
Study Guide   282
Chapter 9
The Nervous System II: The Brain, Cranial Nerves, and 
Autonomic Nervous System   285
9.1	
Overview of the Brain   286
9.2	
Principal Divisions of the Brain   293
9.3	
Multiregional Brain Functions   300
9.4	
The Cranial Nerves   307
9.5	
The Autonomic Nervous System   309
Perspectives on Health   317
Aging of the Nervous System   318
Career Spotlight: Electroneurodiagnostic Technologist   319
Connective Issues   320
Study Guide   321
Chapter 10
The Sense Organs   324
10.1	
Receptors and Sensations   325
10.2	 The General Senses   328
10.3	 The Chemical Senses—Taste and Smell   331
10.4	 The Ear—Equilibrium and Hearing   335
10.5	 The Eye and Vision   344
Perspectives on Health   355
Aging of the Sense Organs   356
Career Spotlight: Optician   356
Study Guide   357
Chapter 11
The Endocrine System   360
11.1	
Overview of the Endocrine System   361
11.2	
Endocrine Physiology   364
11.3	
The Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland   367
11.4	
Other Endocrine Glands and Tissues   373
Perspectives on Health   381
11.5	
Stress Physiology   382
Aging of the Endocrine System   383
Career Spotlight: Diabetes Educator   383
Connective Issues   384
Study Guide   385
PART 4
Circulation and Defense
Chapter 12
The Circulatory System I: Blood   388
12.1	
Introduction   389
12.2	 Erythrocytes   393
12.3	 Leukocytes   399
Perspectives on Health   403
12.4	 Platelets   405
Career Spotlight: Phlebotomist   409
Connective Issues   410
Study Guide   411
Chapter 13
The Circulatory System II: The Heart and  
Blood Vessels   414
13.1	
Overview of the Cardiovascular System   415
13.2	 Gross Anatomy of the Heart   418
Perspectives on Health   424
13.3	 Physiology of the Heart   425
13.4	 General Anatomy of Blood Vessels   433
13.5	 Physiology of Circulation   438
13.6	 Circulatory Routes and Blood Vessels   444
Aging of the Circulatory System   460
Career Spotlight: Electrocardiographic Technician   461
Connective Issues   462
Study Guide   463
© Dr. Yorgos Nikas/Science Source
	
vii

Chapter 14
The Lymphatic System and Immunity   466
14.1	
The Lymphatic System   467
14.2	 Innate Immunity   476
14.3	 Features of Adaptive Immunity   482
14.4	 Cellular and Humoral Immunity   487
Perspectives on Health   493
Aging of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems   494
Career Spotlight: Public Health Nurse   494
Connective Issues   495
Study Guide   496
PART 5
Intake and Output
Chapter 16
The Urinary System   525
16.1	
Functions of the Urinary System   526
16.2	 Anatomy of the Kidney   528
16.3	 Glomerular Filtration   534
16.4	 Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion   539
16.5	 Water Conservation   541
Perspectives on Health   543
16.6	 Urine Storage and Elimination   544
16.7	 Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Balance   548
Aging of the Urinary System   553
Career Spotlight: Dialysis Technician   553
Connective Issues   554
Study Guide   555
Chapter 17
The Digestive System   558
17.1	
Overview of the Digestive System   559
17.2	 The Mouth Through Esophagus   563
17.3	
The Stomach   567
Perspectives on Health   574
17.4	
The Liver, Gallbladder, and Pancreas   574
17.5	 The Small Intestine   579
17.6	
Chemical Digestion and Absorption   583
17.7	
The Large Intestine   587
Aging of the Digestive System   591
Career Spotlight: Dental Hygienist   591
Connective Issues   592
Study Guide   593
Chapter 18
Nutrition and Metabolism   596
18.1	
Nutrition   597
Perspectives on Health   605
18.2	 Carbohydrate Metabolism   606
18.3	 Lipid and Protein Metabolism   610
18.4	 Metabolic States and Metabolic Rate   614
18.5	 Energy Balance and Appetite Regulation   617
18.6	 Body Heat and Thermoregulation   620
Career Spotlight: Dietitian   624
Study Guide   625
Chapter 15
The Respiratory System   499
15.1	
Functions and Anatomy of the Respiratory System   500
15.2	 Pulmonary Ventilation   510
Perspectives on Health   515
15.3	 Gas Exchange and Transport   516
Aging of the Respiratory System   520
Career Spotlight: Respiratory Therapist   520
Connective Issues   521
Study Guide   522
© Susumu Nishinaga/Science Source
viii	

PART 6
Human Life Cycle
Chapter 20
Human Development and Aging   672
20.1	 Fertilization and Preembryonic Development   673
20.2	 The Embryonic and Fetal Stages   680
Perspectives on Health   690
20.3	 The Neonate   691
20.4	 Aging, Senescence, and Death   696
Career Spotlight: Genetic Counselor   700
Study Guide   701
Appendix A: Answer Keys   A-1
Appendix B: Health Science Careers   A-8
Appendix C: Symbols, Weights, and Measures   A-11
Appendix D: Biomedical Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes   A-13
Appendix E: Periodic Table of the Elements   A-17
Glossary   G-1
Index   I-1
Chapter 19
The Reproductive System   628
19.1	
Essentials of Sexual Reproduction   629
19.2	 The Male Reproductive System   630
19.3	 The Female Reproductive System   638
19.4	 The Production and Union of Sex Cells   646
Perspectives on Health   660
19.5	 Pregnancy, Childbirth, and Lactation   661
Aging of the Reproductive System   667
Career Spotlight: Midwife   667
Connective Issues   668
Study Guide   669
© David M. Phillips/Science Source
	
ix

Taking Anatomy & Physiology  
	
to New Heights
Audience
Essentials of Anatomy & Physiology, second edition, is intended 
for students in associate degree, certification, and career-training 
programs; students in high-school advanced placement classes; 
students who are seeking a general education science class; and 
those who may not have set foot in a college classroom for many 
years. The prose and vocabulary in Essentials of Anatomy & 
Physiology are appropriate to serve this broad spectrum of readers. 
Keeping in mind that many students are interested in ­exploring 
medical professions, a “Career Spotlight” feature has been included 
in every chapter, and references to further career information are 
found in appendix B. 
What’s New in the Second 
Edition?
The new edition of Essentials of Anatomy & Physiology by 
Saladin and McFarland has been significantly updated. A hall-
mark of the first edition, according to both students and review-
ers, is the exceptionally clear writing. In this new edition, the 
authors have analyzed explanations to ensure accessibility for 
readers who do not have an extensive scientific background. In 
addition, numerous scientific updates, new photographs and 
illustrations, and enhanced pedagogical features are included. 
Updated Science
The second edition presents the following updated or new scien-
tific information:
∙	 New guidelines on trans fats (chapter 2)
∙	 Expanded roles for vitamin D (chapter 5)
∙	 Expanded role of astrocytes, including their vasomotor role 
(chapter 8)
∙	 Spinal cord injuries and paralysis (chapter 8)
∙	 Oxidative stress and Alzheimer disease (chapter 8)
∙	 Water and oleogustus as primary taste sensations (­chapter 10)
∙	 Replacement of nonspecific resistance with innate immunity 
(chapter 14)
∙	 Meanings of immunity and immune system (chapter 14)
∙	 Expanded discussions of cellular and humoral immunity 
(chapter 14)
∙	 Updates on polio and HIV (chapter 14)
∙	 Updated view of female urinary sphincter (chapter 16)
∙	 Hepcidin and iron metabolism (chapter 17)
∙	 Gut microbiota (chapter 17)
∙	 Updates on papillomavirus, genital warts, and cervical cancer 
(chapter 19)
Keeping pace with changing terminology, the new edition 
has updated terms to agree with the latest Gray’s Anatomy and 
the Terminologia Anatomica and to delete little-used synonyms 
and obsolete eponyms.
Enhanced Content
This new edition updates and enhances anatomical and physiological 
concepts:
∙	 Pseudopods as a cell surface feature (chapter 3)
∙	 Proteasomes (chapter 3)
∙	 Vitamin D synthesis and functions (chapter 5)
∙	 Steps of muscle excitation, contraction, and relaxation 
(­chapter 7)
∙	 New terminology of muscle attachments (chapter 7)
∙	 Action potential steps (chapter 8)
∙	 Congestive heart failure (chapter 13)
∙	 Benefits of exercise on the aging cardiovascular system 
(chapter 13)
∙	 Cellular and humoral immunity (chapter 14)
∙	 Pressure changes during inspiration and expiration (­chapter 15)
∙	 Structure and function of the male prepuce (chapter 19)
x	

New Photographs
∙	 Figure 1.1: new brain scans
∙	 Figure 3.12: fluorescent micrograph of cytoskeleton
∙	 Figure 4.12: squamous cells from the mucosa of the vagina
∙	 Figure 6.3: bone marrow histology
∙	 Figure 10.20: SEM of human rods and cones
∙	 Figure 11.13: histology of ovarian follicle
∙	 Figure 12.3: TEM of erythrocytes in a capillary
∙	 Figure 12.8: color TEM of an eosinophil
∙	 Figure 13.5: polymer cast of coronary circulation
∙	 Figure 14.8: cadaver abdomen showing position of spleen
∙	 Figure 19.2: electron micrograph of seminiferous tubule
∙	 Figure 19.8: malignant Pap smear
∙	 Figure 20.7: embryonic and fetal developmental stages
New and Enhanced Art 
∙	 Figure 1.4: negative feedback in response to drop in 
blood pressure
∙	 Figure 3.6: pseudopods
∙	 Figure 3.9: mechanism of osmosis
∙	 Figure 6.25: surface anatomy of the clavicle
∙	 Figure 7.5: organization and size principle of motor units
∙	 Figure 9.7: functions of the five cerebral lobes
∙	 Figure 10.7: pediatric versus adult auditory tubes
∙	 Figure 13.4: cross-sectional shapes and relationships of 
heart ventricles
∙	 Figure 14.17: stages of cellular immunity
∙	 Figure 18.6: environmental temperatures versus core and 
shell body temperatures
New Pegagogy
In each chapter “Study Guide,” students are asked to analyze 10 
false statements and to correct them, in contrast to the first 
­edition, where they were prompted to distinguish between 5 true 
and 5 false statements.
Many of the “Apply What You Know” questions have been 
revised to further elicit critical thinking. 
	
xi

Sarcoplasm
Sarcolemma
Openings into 
transverse tubules
Sarcoplasmic 
reticulum
Mitochondria
Myoﬁbrils
Myoﬁlaments
A band
I band
Z disc
Nucleus
Terminal cisterns
Transverse tubule
Muscle
ﬁber
Rootlets
Posterior root 
Posterior root
ganglion
Anterior
root 
Spinal
nerve
Epineurium
Fascicle
Blood 
vessels
Myelin
Perineurium 
Endoneurium 
Unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers
Myelinated nerve ﬁbers
(a)
(b)
Fascicle
Blood
vessel
Perineurium
Nerve ﬁber and
myelin sheath
Epineurium
Making Anatomy & Physiology  
	
Intriguing and Inspiring
Essentials of Anatomy & Physiology crafts the facts of A&P into 
art and prose in a way that makes the book exciting and reward-
ing to read. 
Captivating Art and 
Photography
A&P is a highly visual subject; beautiful illustrations pique 
the curiosity and desire to learn. Essentials of Anatomy & 
Physiology’s illustrations set a new standard in the A&P 
Essentials market, where many students regard themselves 
as visual learners.
Cognitive Skill Building
Essentials of Anatomy & 
Physiology asks questions that 
not only test memory, but also 
exercise and expand the 
student’s thinking skills at 
multiple levels of Bloom’s 
Taxonomy of Learning 
Outcomes. Within Connect™ 
there is also the opportunity 
to assess student 
understanding of the Learning 
Outcomes by leveraging 
question filters that allow 
the curation of custom 
assignments and efficient 
reporting for administrative 
assessment purposes.
xii	

Assess Your Learning 
Outcomes
The parallel “Assess Your Learning 
Outcomes” at the end of each chapter 
imparts a comprehensive overview of the 
key points in the chapter, and requires 
the student to reexamine the text to get 
information, rather than simply handing it 
to them. 
Before You Go On/
Apply What You Know
Intermediate aids such as “Before You Go 
On” and “Apply What You Know” provide 
an easy means for meeting the requirements 
of an outcome-driven curriculum and also 
work to encourage active learning over 
passive reading.
Expected Learning 
Outcomes
This book provides a ready-made course 
outline of course objectives and means of 
assessment with its “Expected Learning 
Outcomes” presented at the start of each 
chapter section.
	
xiii

Stimulating Prose
Far more than “just the facts,” Essentials of 
Anatomy & Physiology’s narrative style weaves 
the facts into an engaging story of human form 
and function. Vivid analogies that captivate the 
imagination make complex concepts easy to 
understand.
Figure Legend Questions
Thought questions in many figure legends encourage students to think 
analytically about the art, not merely view it. These questions are also 
great for in-class discussion.
Building Vocabulary
The plethora of medical terms in A&P is one of 
a student’s most daunting challenges. Chapter 1 
teaches core principles of how to break words 
down into familiar roots, prefixes, and suffixes, 
making medical terminology less intimidating 
while teaching the importance of precision in 
spelling (ilium/ileum, malleus/malleolus).
∙	 An end-of-book “Glossary” provides clear 
definitions of the most important or frequent-
ly used terms, and “Appendix D: Biomedical 
Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes” defines 
nearly 400 Greek and Latin roots, which 
make up about 90% of today’s medical terms.
∙	 Footnoted word origins show how new terms 
are composed of familiar word roots.
∙	 Pronunciation guides that appear throughout chapters make 
it easier to pronounce key terms, and make these words more 
likely to be remembered and understood.
Making Anatomy & Physiology  
	
Intriguing and Inspiring
xiv	

Study Guide
The “Study Guide” at the end of each chapter 
provides an overview of key points, as well as 
a variety of self-testing question formats, for 
students who wish to have a study guide for 
their next exam. A student who masters these 
study guides should do well on an exam.
Multiple Question Types
∙	 “Testing Your Recall” questions check for 
simple memory of terms and facts. 
∙	 The false assertions in “What’s Wrong 
with These Statements?” require students 
to analyze the validity of ideas and to ex-
plain or rephrase each false statement.
∙	 “Testing Your Comprehension” questions 
necessitate insight and application to clini-
cal and other scenarios.
	
xv

Making Anatomy & Physiology  
	
Intriguing and Inspiring
Tying It All Together
Base Camp
∙	 “Base Camp” lists key concepts from ­earlier 
chapters that a student should know before 
embarking on the new one, and effectively 
ties all chapters together into an integrated 
whole.
Connective Issues
∙	 No organ system functions in isolation. The 
“Connective Issues” tool shows how every organ 
system affects all other body systems, and gen-
erates a more holistic understanding of human 
function.
xvi	

Career Spotlight
∙	 “Career Spotlight” features provide a relevant career idea 
in every chapter with basic information on ­educational 
requirements and entry into a career, and expand student 
awareness of opportunities in ­allied health professions. 
“Appendix B” refers students to ­online sources of further 
information about 20 career fields and a list of 83 more 
health-care career ideas.
Clinical Application
∙	 “Clinical Application” essays apply 
basic science to interesting issues of 
health and disease.
Perspectives on Health
∙	 “Perspectives on Health” essays make basic science 
­relevant to the student’s interest in health and disease.
Aging of Body Systems
∙	 “Aging of [Body Systems]” is a section within each 
systems chapter that describes how each organ system 
changes over time, especially in old age. This discussion 
expands anatomical and physiological understanding be-
yond the prime of life, and is highly relevant to patient 
treatment, since older patients constitute most of the 
health-care market.
	
xvii

Required=Results
Mobile
Connect Insight® 
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-kind 
visual analytics dashboard—now available for both 
instructors and students—that provides at-a-glance 
information regarding student performance, which is 
immediately actionable. By presenting assignment, assessment, 
and topical performance results together with a time metric 
that is easily visible for aggregate or individual results, Connect 
Insight gives the user the ability to take a just-in-time approach 
to teaching and learning, which was never before available. 
Connect Insight presents data that empowers students and 
helps instructors improve class performance in a way that is 
efficient and effective.
73% of instructors who use 
Connect require it; instructor 
satisfaction increases by 28% 
when Connect is required.
Students can view  
their results for any 
Connect course.
Analytics
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students 
and instructors flexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere 
access to all components of the Connect platform.
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 
 Using Connect improves passing rates 
by 12.7% and retention by 19.8%.
McGraw-Hill Connect®  
 
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform 
that is proven to deliver better results for 
students and instructors. 
Connect empowers students by continually 
adapting to deliver precisely what they 
need, when they need it, and how they need 
it, so your class time is more engaging and 
effective.

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more efficiently, SmartBook contains 
the same content within the print book, but 
actively tailors that content to the needs of the 
individual. SmartBook’s adaptive technology 
provides precise, personalized instruction on 
what the student should do next, guiding the 
student to master and remember key concepts, 
targeting gaps in knowledge and offering 
customized feedback, and driving the student 
toward comprehension and retention of the 
subject matter. Available on smartphones and 
tablets, SmartBook puts learning at the student’s 
fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 5.7 billion questions have 
been answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com
©Getty Images/iStockphoto

50% of the country’s students 
are not ready for A&P
LearnSmart® Prep can help!
Improve preparation for the course 
and increase student success with 
the only adaptive Prep tool available 
for students today. Areas of  
individual weaknesses are identified 
in order to help students improve 
their understanding of core course 
areas needed to succeed.
Virtual dissection
Prep for A&P
Physiology 
supplements
Students seek lab time that 
fits their busy schedules. 
Anatomy & Physiology 
REVEALED 3.2, our Virtual 
Dissection tool, allows  
them practice anytime, 
anywhere. Now featuring 
enhanced physiology 
with Concept Overview 
Interactives and 3D 
animations!
Bringing to life complex processes 
is a challenge. Ph.I.L.S. 4.0 is 
the perfect way to reinforce key 
physiology concepts with powerful 
lab experiments. Tools like Concept 
Overview Interactives, Ph.I.L.S., 
and world-class animations make it 
easier than ever.
Since 2009, our adaptive programs in A&P have hosted 900,000 unique users who have answered 
more than 800 million probes, giving us the only data-driven solutions to help your students get 
from their first college-level course to program readiness.

Acknowledgments
I gratefully acknowledge the team at McGraw-Hill who have pro-
vided excellent ideas and unfailing encouragement t.hroughout this 
project. I am immensely grateful to my coauthor Ken Saladin for a 
rewarding collaboration and firm friendship. I appreciate my col-
leagues in the biology department at Cabrillo College who inspire 
me every day with their dedication to student success. Finally, I 
wish to thank my husband Jeff and my children Reid and 
Madeleine for their support and patience.
Robin McFarland
My heartfelt appreciation goes to our team at McGraw-Hill who 
have provided such friendship, collegiality, and support over my 
20-year history in textbooks; to Robin for adding this new dimen-
sion and stimulating collaboration to my writing career; to my 
colleagues at Georgia College for an atmosphere that supports 
and rewards such work; and to Diane for her steadfast love and 
encouragement. 
Ken Saladin
In this edition, we are very pleased to have been able to incorporate real student data points and input, derived from thousands of our 
LearnSmart users, to help guide our revision. LearnSmart “heat maps” provided a quick visual snapshot of usage of portions of the text 
and the relative difficulty students experienced in mastering the content. With these data points, we were able to hone not only our text 
content but also the LearnSmart probes.
∙	 If the data indicated that the subject covered was more difficult than other parts of the book, as evidenced by a high proportion of stu-
dents responding incorrectly, we substantively revised or reorganized the content to be as clear and illustrative as possible.
∙	 In some sections, the data showed that a smaller percentage of the students had difficulty learning the material. In those cases, we 
revised the text to provide a clearer presentation by rewriting the section, providing additional examples to strengthen student problem-
solving skills, designing new text art or figures to assist visual learners, and so on.
∙	 In other cases, one or more of the LearnSmart probes for a section was not as clear as it might be or did not appropriately reflect the 
content. In these cases, the probe— rather than the text—was edited.
Following is an example of one of the heat maps from chapter 8 that was particularly useful in guiding our revisions. The highlighted 
sections indicate the various levels of difficulty students experienced in learning the material. This evidence informed all of the revisions 
described in the “What’s New in the Second Edition?” section of this preface.
	
xxi

Our grateful thanks are extended to these reviewers, who read early drafts of these chapters and provided instructive comments to help 
shape the content within these pages. 
Smruti A. Desai, Lone Star College–CyFair
Maria Florez, Lone Star College–CyFair
Leontine M. Lowery, Delaware Technical Community College–Dover
Elizabeth A. May, Illinois Central College
Jeanine L. Page, Lock Haven University
Krista Rompolski, Drexel University
Melvin F. Simoyi, Heritage University
xxii	

PART 1  Organization of the Body
Chapter Outline
1.1 Anatomy—The Structural Basis of Human 
­Function
• The Anatomical Sciences
• Examination of the Body
• Techniques of Medical Imaging
• Anatomical Variation
1.2 Physiology—Dynamic Processes in the 
­Living Body
• The Physiological Sciences
• Essential Life Functions
• Homeostasis and Feedback
• Physiological Variation
1.3 The Human Body Plan
• Levels of Human Structure
• Anatomical Position
• Anatomical Planes
• Major Body Regions
• Body Cavities and Membranes
• Organ Systems
1.4 The Language of Medicine
• Analyzing Medical Terms
• Singular and Plural Forms
• Directional Terminology
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 1.1: Men in the Oven
• Clinical Application 1.2: Peritonitis
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Radiologic Technologist
• Study Guide
Chapter
1
The Study of 
Anatomy and 
Physiology
A full-body image 
made by magnetic 
resonance imaging 
(MRI). MRI is one 
of several ways of 
viewing the interior 
of the body without 
surgery.
© Science Photo Library/
Getty Images
Module 1: Body Orientation
	
1

N
o branch of science hits as close to home as the science of our 
own bodies. We’re grateful for the dependability of our hearts, 
we’re awed by the capabilities of joints and muscles displayed by 
­Olympic athletes, and we ponder with philosophers the ancient mysteries 
of mind and emotion. We want to know how our body works, and when 
it malfunctions, we want to know what’s happening and what we can do 
about it. In recent decades, scientists have revealed a wealth of informa-
tion about our bodies, but fascination with the science of the body is 
nothing new. Ancient texts and medical illustrations attest to humanity’s 
timeless drive to know and heal the body and mind. 
This book introduces the essentials of human structure and function. 
It will give you a deeper understanding of the healthy body, as well as 
accurate, up-to-date insights into disease processes. The disciplines of 
anatomy and physiology are fundamental to health-care professionals, 
as well as to those who study human performance, fitness, and nutrition. 
Beyond that, however, the study of anatomy and physiology provides a 
deeply satisfying sense of self-understanding.
In this chapter, we introduce the disciplines of anatomy and ­physiology. 
We discuss criteria that define life and consider a core concept called 
homeostasis, a vital process necessary for maintaining life. We look at the 
body’s general structural plan and levels of organization. Finally, because 
one of the greatest challenges to beginning students is to master vocabu-
lary associated with anatomy and physiology, we end the chapter with 
tools to help you effectively learn and use the language of the body.
1.1
 Anatomy—The Structural Basis of 
­Human Function
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define anatomy and physiology;
b.	describe some of the subfields of human anatomy;
c.	explain the importance of dissection;
d.	describe some methods of examining a living patient;
e.	discuss the principles and applications of some medical imaging 
methods; and
f.	discuss the significance of variations in human anatomy.
2      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Anatomy is the study of the structure of the body, with an emphasis on how it relates 
to function. Physiology is the study of dynamic processes in the living body. The 
two disciplines are very much intertwined, and both are necessary to understand the 
totality of the body. 
The Anatomical Sciences
There are many approaches to the study of human anatomy, both in research for the 
purposes of discovery and understanding, and in clinical settings for diagnosis and 
treatment. Gross anatomy is structure visible to the naked eye, either by surface obser-
vation or dissection. Ultimately, though, body functions result from individual cells. 
To see those, we usually take tissue samples, thinly slice and stain them, and observe 
them under the microscope. This approach is called histology.1 ­Histopathology is 
the microscopic examination of tissues for signs of disease.
Surface anatomy is the external structure of the body, and is especially important 
in conducting a physical examination of a patient. Systemic anatomy is the study of 
one organ system at a time; this is the approach taken by introductory textbooks such 
as this one. Regional anatomy is the study of multiple organ systems at the same time 
in a given region of the body, such as the head or chest. Medical schools and anatomi-
cal atlases typically teach anatomy from this perspective, because it is more logical to 
dissect all structures of the head and neck, the chest, or a limb, than to try to dissect 
the entire digestive system, then the cardiovascular system, and so forth. Dissecting 
one system almost inevitably destroys organs of other systems that stand in the way.
Apply What You Know
Do you think that a surgeon thinks more in terms of systemic anatomy or regional 
anatomy? Explain your answer.
You can study human anatomy from an atlas; yet, as fascinating and valuable as 
anatomy atlases are, they teach almost nothing but the locations, appearances, and 
names of structures. This book is much different; it deals with what biologists call 
functional morphology2—not simply describing structures but also analyzing how 
they function.
Functional morphology draws heavily on comparative anatomy, the study of 
more than one species. Such comparisons reveal similarities and differences, high-
light evolutionary trends, and clarify structure–function relationships. Often, human 
structure makes sense only when we compare it to the structure of other animals. 
The human pelvis, for example, has a unique bowl-shaped configuration that can be 
best understood by comparison with animals such as a chimpanzee, whose pelvis is 
adapted to walking on four legs rather than two.
Examination of the Body
The simplest method of examining the body is inspection of surface structure, such as 
physicians perform during a physical examination. A deeper understanding depends 
on dissection3—the careful cutting and separation of tissues to reveal their relation-
ships. The word anatomy4 literally means “cutting apart,” and dissection was called 
“anatomizing” until the nineteenth century. The dissection of a dead human body, 
or cadaver,5 was crucial historically for accurately mapping the human body, and 
remains an essential part of the training of many health-science students.
1histo = tissue; logy = study of 
2morpho = form; logy = study of 
3dis = apart; sect = cut 
4ana = apart; tom = cut 
5cadere = to fall or die
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      3  

(a) X-ray (radiograph)
(b) Cerebral angiogram
Dissection, of course, is not the method of choice when examining a living 
patient! Some additional methods of clinical examination include the following.
∙	 Palpation6 is feeling structures with the fingertips, such as palpating a swollen 
lymph node or taking a pulse.
∙	 Auscultation7 (AWS-cul-TAY-shun) is listening to the natural sounds made 
by the body, such as heart and lung sounds.
∙	 Percussion is tapping on the body and listening to the sound for signs of ab-
normalities such as pockets of fluid or air.
∙	 Medical imaging includes methods of viewing the inside of the body without 
surgery. Anatomy learned in this way is called radiologic anatomy, and those 
who use radiologic methods for clinical purposes include radiologists and 
radiologic technologists (see Career Spotlight at end of chapter).
Techniques of Medical Imaging
It was once common to diagnose disorders through exploratory surgery—opening 
the body and taking a look inside to see what was wrong and what could be done 
about it. Any breach of the body cavities is risky, however, and most exploratory 
surgery has been replaced by imaging techniques that allow physicians to see inside 
the body without cutting. These methods are called noninvasive if they involve no 
penetration of the skin or body orifices. Invasive techniques may entail inserting 
ultrasound probes into the esophagus, vagina, or rectum to get closer to the organ 
to be imaged, or injecting substances into the bloodstream or body passages to 
enhance image clarity.
Anatomy students today must be acquainted with the basic methods of imaging 
and their advantages and limitations. Many images in this book have been produced 
by the following techniques. Most of these methods produce black and white images; 
those in the book are colorized to enhance detail or for esthetic appeal.
Radiography (fig. 1.1a, b) is the process of photographing internal structures 
with X-rays, a form of high-energy radiation. The term X-ray also applies to a pho-
tograph (radiograph) made by this method. X-rays are absorbed by dense structures 
Figure 1.1 Radiologic Images of the 
Head. (a) An X-ray (radiograph) of the head. 
(b) A colorized cerebral angiogram, made by 
injecting a substance opaque to X-rays into 
the circulation and then taking an X-ray of 
the head to visualize the blood vessels. (c) A 
CT scan of the head at the level of the eyes. 
(d) An MRI scan of the head at the level of the 
eyes. The optic nerves appear in red and the 
muscles that move the eyes in green. (e) A PET 
scan of the brain of an unmedicated schizo-
phrenic patient. Red areas indicate regions of 
high metabolic rate. In this patient, the visual 
center of the brain (at bottom of photo) was es-
pecially active.
a: © U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone Images/Getty Images b: © Zephyr/ 
Science Source c: © Miriam Maslo/Science Source  
d: © UHB Trust/Getty Images e: © ISM/Phototake
•	 Why is a PET scan considered invasive 
whereas MRI is noninvasive?
6palp = touch, feel 
7auscult = listen
4      PART 1  Organization of the Body

(d) Magnetic resonance image (MRI)
(e) Positron emission tomographic 
 
(PET) scan
such as bone, teeth, and tumors, which produce a lighter image than soft tissues. 
Radiography is commonly used in dentistry; mammography; diagnosis of fractures; 
and examination of the digestive, respiratory, and urinary tracts. Some disadvan-
tages of radiography are that images of overlapping organs can be confusing; slight 
differences in tissue density are not detected well; and, although the risk of harm is 
very low, X-rays can potentially cause mutations and cancer.
Computed tomography8 (the CT scan) (fig. 1.1c) is a more sophisticated 
application of X-rays. The patient is moved through a ring-shaped machine that 
emits low-intensity X-rays on one side and receives them with a detector on the 
opposite side. A computer analyzes signals from the detector and produces an 
image of a “slice” of the body about as thin as a coin. CT scanning has the advan-
tage of imaging thin sections of the body, so there is little organ overlap and 
the image is much sharper than a conventional X-ray. CT scanning is useful for 
identifying tumors, aneurysms, cerebral hemorrhages, kidney stones, and other 
abnormalities.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (fig. 1.1d) is even better than CT for 
visualizing soft tissues. The patient lies in either a tube or an open-sided scanner 
with a powerful electromagnet. Hydrogen atoms in the patient’s tissues alternately 
align themselves with this magnetic field and with a radio-frequency field turned on 
and off by the technologist. These changes in hydrogen alignment generate signals 
that are analyzed by computer to produce an anatomical image. MRI can “see” 
clearly through the skull and spine to produce images of the nervous tissue within, 
and it is better than CT for distinguishing between soft tissues such as the white and 
gray matter of the brain. It has some disadvantages, however, such as the claustro-
phobic feeling some patients experience in the scanner, and long exposure times 
that prevent sharp images being made of the constantly moving stomach and intes-
tines. Functional MRI (fMRI) is a form of MRI that visualizes moment-to-moment 
changes in tissue physiology; fMRI scans of the brain, for example, show shifting 
patterns of activity as the brain applies itself to a specific task. This method has been 
very useful in clarifying which parts of the brain are involved in emotions, thought, 
language, sensation, and movement.
(c) Computed tomographic (CT) scan
8tomo = section, cut, slice; graphy = recording process
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      5  

Positron emission tomography (the PET scan) (fig. 1.1e) is used to assess 
the metabolic state of a tissue and to distinguish which areas are most active. It uses 
an injection of radioactively labeled glucose to highlight which tissues are most 
actively consuming energy at the moment of the scan. In cardiology, for example, 
PET scans can show the extent of tissue death from a heart attack. Since damaged 
tissue consumes little or no glucose, it appears dark. PET scans are widely used to 
diagnose cancer and evaluate tumor status. The PET scan is an example of nuclear 
medicine—the use of radioisotopes to treat disease or to form diagnostic images of 
the body.
Sonography9 (fig. 1.2) uses a handheld device placed firmly against the skin; 
it emits high-frequency ultrasound and receives signals reflected back from inter-
nal organs. Sonography avoids the harmful effects of X-rays, and the equipment is 
relatively inexpensive and portable. It also is very useful for imaging motion, such 
as operation of the heart valves, ejection of blood from the heart, and fetal move-
ments. It is the method of choice in obstetrics, where the image (sonogram) can 
be used to locate the placenta and evaluate fetal age, position, and development. 
Echocardiography is the sonographic examination of the beating heart. The primary 
disadvantages of sonography are that it does not produce a very sharp image and it 
cannot penetrate bone.
Anatomical Variation
A quick look around any classroom is enough to show that no two humans 
look exactly alike; on close inspection, even identical twins exhibit differences. 
Anatomy atlases and textbooks can easily give you the impression that every-
one’s internal anatomy is the same, but this simply is not true. Someone who 
thinks that all human bodies are the same internally would be a very confused 
medical student or an incompetent surgeon. Books such as this one teach only 
the most common structural patterns—the anatomy seen 
in approximately 70% or more of people.
Some people completely lack certain organs. For 
example, most of us have a palmaris longus muscle in the 
forearm and a plantaris muscle in the leg, but not every-
one does. Most of us have one spleen, but some people 
have two. Most have two kidneys, but some have only one. 
Most kidneys are supplied by a single renal artery and 
drained by one ureter, but in some people a single kidney 
has two renal arteries or ureters. Figure 1.3 shows some 
common variations in human anatomy, and Perspectives 
on Health (in  section 1.2) describes a particularly dra-
matic variation.
Figure 1.2 Sonography. (a) Producing a sonogram for an expectant 
family. (b) Three-dimensional sonogram of a fetus at 32 weeks of gestation.
a: © Alexander Tsiaras/Science Source b: © Ken Saladin
•	 Why is this procedure safer than radiography for fetal assessment?
(a)
(b)
9sono = sound; graphy = recording process 
6      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Figure 1.3 Variations in Human Anatomy. Not all humans have the usual “­textbook structure.”
Variations in branches of the aorta
Typical pattern
Typical pattern
Pelvic kidney
Horseshoe kidney
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	What is the difference between gross anatomy and 
­histology?
2.	In a routine physical examination, a physician may inspect 
you by palpation and auscultation. What is the difference 
between these procedures?
3.	What are the advantages of CT over sonography? Conversely, 
what are the advantages of sonography over CT?
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      7  

1.2
 Physiology—Dynamic Processes  
in the Living Body
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify some subdisciplines of physiology;
b.	describe the characteristics that define an organism as alive;
c.	define homeostasis, explain its significance, and discuss how it is 
maintained by negative feedback;
d.	discuss positive feedback and its effects on the body; and
e.	discuss the significance of variation in human physiology.
Physiology10 is the study of the body’s life processes. The term comes from ­Aristotle, 
who believed in both supernatural and natural causes of human disease. He called 
the supernatural causes theologi and natural causes physiologi. For ­centuries, 
­physicians were called “doctors of physick.”
The Physiological Sciences
Physiology uses the methods of experimental science to determine how the 
body functions. It has many subdisciplines such as neurophysiology (physi-
ology of the nervous system), endocrinology (physiology of hormones), and 
pathophysiology (mechanisms of disease). Partly because of limitations on 
experimentation with humans, much of what we know about bodily function 
has been gained through comparative physiology, the study of how different 
species have solved problems of life such as water balance, respiration, and 
reproduction. Comparative physiology is also the basis for the development 
of most new medications and procedures. For example, a new drug is tested 
for safety in laboratory mammals such as rats before it proceeds to trials with 
human subjects.
Essential Life Functions
Whereas anatomy views the body as a set of interconnected structures, physiology 
views it as a set of interconnected processes. Collectively, we call these processes 
life. But what exactly is life? Why do we consider a growing child to be alive, but 
not a growing crystal? Is abortion the taking of a human life? If so, what about 
a contraceptive foam that kills only sperm? As a patient is dying, at what point 
does it become ethical to disconnect life-support equipment and remove organs 
for donation? (See Perspectives on Health that follows.) If these organs are alive, 
as they must be to be useful to someone else, then why isn’t the donor considered 
alive? Such questions have no easy answers, but they demand a concept of what 
life is—a concept that may differ with one’s biological, medical, religious, or legal 
perspective.
10physio = nature; logy = study of
8      PART 1  Organization of the Body

From a biological viewpoint, life is not a single property. It is a collection of 
qualities that help to distinguish living from nonliving things:
∙	 Organization. Living things exhibit a far higher level of organization than the 
nonliving world around them. They expend a great deal of energy to maintain 
order, and disease and death result from a breakdown in this order.
∙	 Cells. Living matter is always compartmentalized into one or more cells.
∙	 Metabolism.11 Living things take in molecules from the environment and 
chemically change them into molecules that form their own structures, con-
trol their physiology, or provide energy. Metabolism is the sum of all this 
internal chemical change. There is a constant turnover of molecules in the 
11metabol = change; ism = process
PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
T
wo particularly striking examples of anatomical variation are 
situs (SITE-us) perversus and situs inversus. In situs perver-
sus, an organ occupies an atypical locality; for example, a kidney 
may be located low in the pelvic cavity instead of high in the ab-
dominal cavity (see fig. 1.3), or a parathyroid gland may be found 
in the root of the tongue instead of on the posterior surface of the 
thyroid gland.
In most people, the heart tilts toward the left, the spleen and 
sigmoid colon are on the left, and the gallbladder and appendix 
are on the right. But in situs inversus, occurring in about 1 out of 
8,000 people, the organs of the thoracic and abdominal cavities are 
reversed between right and left. Selective right–left reversal of the 
heart is called dextrocardia. Conditions such as dextrocardia can 
cause serious medical problems. Complete situs inversus, however, 
usually causes no functional problems because all of the viscera, 
though reversed, maintain their normal relationships to each other.
D e f i n i n g  t h e  E n d  o f  L i f e
E
arlier in this chapter we saw that life is a difficult property to 
define. That being the case, so is defining the end of life—and 
yet we’re often forced to make decisions on that issue. How do 
we decide when to “let go” of a terminally ill loved one, perhaps to 
disconnect life-support equipment?
There is no easily defined instant of biological death. Some 
organs function for an hour or longer after the heart stops ­beating. 
During this time, even if a person is declared legally dead, living 
organs may be removed for transplantation. For legal purposes, 
death was once defined as the loss of a spontaneous heartbeat and 
respiration. Now that cardiopulmonary functions can be restarted 
and artificially maintained for years, this criterion is less useful. Clin-
ical death is now widely defined in terms of brain death—a lack of 
any detectable electrical activity in the brain, including the brain-
stem, accompanied by coma, lack of unassisted respiration, and 
lack of brainstem reflexes (such as pupillary, blinking, or coughing 
reflexes). A judgment of death is generally accepted only upon 
finding a complete lack of brain activity for a period ranging from 
2 to 24 hours, depending on state laws. The permanent lack of 
cerebral activity is called a persistent vegetative state. Controversy 
has lingered, however, over the question of whether death of the 
entire brain (including the brainstem) should be required as a crite-
rion of clinical death, or whether death may be declared upon lack 
of activity in only the cerebrum (the upper level of the brain that 
houses consciousness, sensation, and thought).
Medical educators, ethicists, philosophers, and theolo-
gians struggle continually with the difficulty of defining life and 
the moment of its cessation. The demand for organs for trans-
plant pressures physicians to make delicate decisions as to 
when the life of the whole person is irretrievable, yet individual 
organs are still in sufficiently healthy condition to be useful to a 
recipient. Theologians, on the other hand, may wish for moral 
certainty that death has overtaken the whole person, and may 
see the “culture of organ donation” as incompatible with reli-
gious values.
S i t u s  I n v e r s u s  a n d  O t h e r  
U n u s u a l  A n a t o m y
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      9  

body; ­although you sense a continuity of personality and experience from 
your childhood to the present, nearly every molecule of your body has been 
replaced within the past year.
∙	 Growth. Some nonliving things grow, but not in the way your body does. 
When a saturated sugar solution evaporates, crystals grow from it, but not 
through a change in the composition of the sugar. They merely add more sugar 
molecules from the solution to the crystal surface. The growth of the body, by 
contrast, occurs through metabolic change; for the most part, the body is not 
composed of the molecules one eats, but of molecules made by chemically 
altering the food.
∙	 Development. Development is any change in form or function over the life-
time of the organism. It includes not only growth but also differentiation—the 
transformation of cells and tissues with no specialized function to ones that 
are committed to a particular task. For example, a single embryonic, unspe-
cialized tissue called mesoderm differentiates into muscle, bone, cartilage, 
and blood.
∙	 Excitability. The ability to sense and react to stimuli (changes in their envi-
ronment) is called excitability or irritability. It occurs at all levels from the 
cell to the entire body, and it characterizes all living things from bacteria to 
humans. Excitability is especially obvious in animals because of nerve and 
muscle cells that exhibit high sensitivity to stimuli, rapid transmission of in-
formation, and quick reactions.
∙	 Homeostasis.12 Although the environment around an organism changes, 
the organism maintains relatively stable internal conditions—for exam-
ple, a stable temperature, blood pressure, and body weight. This internal 
stability, called homeostasis, is discussed in greater depth in the next 
section.
∙	 Reproduction. Living organisms produce copies of themselves, thus passing 
their genes on to new, younger “containers”—their offspring.
∙	 Evolution. All living species exhibit genetic change from generation 
to generation, and therefore evolve. This occurs because new variations 
are inevitably introduced by mutations (changes in the genes), and envi-
ronmental conditions favor some variations over others, thus perpetuat-
ing some genes and eliminating others. Evolution simply means genetic 
change in the population over time. Unlike the other characteristics of 
life, evolution is a characteristic seen only in the population as a whole. 
No single individual evolves over the course of its life. Evolution, how-
ever, holds the explanation for why human structure and function are 
as they are. Evolutionary medicine is a science that interprets human 
disease and dysfunction in the context of the biological history of the 
species.
Homeostasis and Feedback
Of the foregoing properties of life, the one most frequently addressed in this book 
is homeostasis (ho-me-oh-STAY-sis)—the ability to maintain internal stability. 
Homeostatic mechanisms stabilize such variables as body temperature, blood pres-
sure, body weight, electrolyte balance, and pH.
12homeo = the same; stasis = stability
10      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Homeostasis has been one of the most enlightening concepts in physiology. 
The term was introduced by American physiologist Walter Cannon in his book 
The Wisdom of the Body (1932), but the concept that the body maintains internal 
stability was around long before that. Physiology centers around mechanisms that 
maintain this stability, and the loss of homeostatic control usually leads to ill-
ness or death. Pathophysiology is essentially the study of unstable conditions that 
result when our homeostatic controls go awry.
Negative Feedback and Stability
The fundamental mechanism that maintains homeostasis is ­negative 
­feedback—a process in which the body senses a change and activates mecha-
nisms that negate (reverse) it. Negative feedback does not produce absolute con-
stancy in the body, but maintains physiological values within a narrow range of 
a certain set point—an average value such as 37°C (98.6°F) for body tempera-
ture. Conditions fluctuate slightly around the set point. Thus, negative feedback 
is said to maintain a dynamic equilibrium—not a total lack of change, but a 
state of ever-changing balance within limits. Variables regulated by negative 
feedback mechanisms include blood pressure, blood glucose (sugar), and many 
others. By maintaining physiological equilibrium, negative feedback is the key 
mechanism for maintaining health.
Let’s consider blood pressure regulation as an example of negative feed-
back. When you first rise from bed in the morning, gravity causes some of your 
blood to drain away from your head and upper torso, resulting in falling blood 
pressure in this region (fig. 1.4). The resulting imbalance in homeostasis is 
detected by sensory nerve endings called baroreceptors in large arteries near 
the heart. The baroreceptors transmit nerve signals to the brain, where we 
have a cardiac center that regulates the heart rate. The cardiac center 
responds by sending nerve signals to the heart, which speed it up. 
The faster heart rate raises the blood pressure and restores normal 
homeostasis. In elderly people, this feedback loop is sometimes 
insufficiently responsive, and they may feel dizzy as they rise 
from a reclining position. The drop in blood pressure may 
result in decreased blood to the brain and this sometimes 
causes fainting.
This correction of blood pressure illustrates three 
common, although not universal, components of a feed-
back loop: a receptor, an integrating center, and an 
­effector. The ­receptor is a structure that senses a change 
in the body, such as the baroreceptors that monitor blood 
pressure. The integrating (control) center, such as the 
cardiac center of the brain, processes this information, 
relates it to other available information (for example, com-
paring what the blood pressure is with what it should be), 
and “makes a decision” about what the appropriate response 
should be. The ­effector is the cell or organ that carries out 
the final corrective action. In the blood pressure example, it is 
the heart. The response, such as the restoration of normal blood 
pressure, is then sensed by the receptor, and the feedback loop is 
complete.
Blood drains from
upper body, creating
homeostatic imbalance
Baroreceptors above
heart respond to drop
in blood pressure
Baroreceptors send signals
to cardiac center of the brain
Blood pressure rises
to normal; homeostasis
is restored
Person rises 
from bed
Cardiac center
accelerates heartbeat
Figure 1.4 Negative Feedback in Response to Drop in Blood Pressure.
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      11  

Head of fetus
pushes against cervix
2 
3 
4 
1 
Oxytocin stimulates
uterine contractions
and pushes fetus
toward cervix
Nerve impulses
from cervix 
transmitted
to brain
Brain stimulates
pituitary gland to
secrete oxytocin
Positive Feedback and Rapid Change
Positive feedback is a self-amplifying cycle in which a physiological change 
leads to even greater change in the same direction, rather than producing the self-­
corrective effects of negative feedback. Positive feedback is sometimes a normal 
way of producing rapid change. During childbirth, for example, the head of the fetus 
pushes against a woman’s cervix (the neck of the uterus) and stimulates its nerve 
endings (fig. 1.5). Nerve signals travel to the brain, which in turn stimulates the 
pituitary gland to secrete the hormone oxytocin. Oxytocin travels in the blood and 
stimulates the uterus to contract. This pushes the fetus downward, stimulating the 
cervix still more and causing the positive feedback loop to be repeated. Labor con-
tractions therefore become more and more intense until the fetus is expelled. 
Other cases of beneficial positive feedback occur in blood clotting, pro-
tein digestion, and the generation of nerve signals.
More often, however, positive feedback is a harmful or even 
life-threatening process. This is because its self-amplifying 
nature can quickly change the internal state of the body to 
something far from its homeostatic set point. Consider a 
high fever, for example. A fever triggered by infection 
is beneficial up to a point, but if the body tempera-
ture rises much above 42°C (108°F), it may create 
a dangerous positive feedback loop: The high tem-
perature raises the metabolic rate, which makes the 
body produce heat faster than it can get rid of it. 
Thus, temperature rises still further, increasing the 
metabolic rate and heat production still more. This 
“vicious circle” becomes fatal at approximately 
45°C (113°F). Positive feedback loops often create 
dangerously out-of-control situations that require 
emergency medical treatment.
Clinical Application 1.1
MEN IN THE OVEN
English physician Charles Blagden (1748–1820) staged a rather theatrical 
demonstration of homeostasis long before Cannon coined the word. In 1775, 
Blagden spent 45 minutes in a chamber heated to 127°C (260°F)—along with 
a steak, a dog, and some research associates. Being dead and unable to main-
tain homeostasis, the steak was cooked. But being alive and capable of evapo-
rative cooling, the dog panted, the men sweated, and all of them survived. 
History does not record whether the men ate the steak in celebration or shared 
it with the dog.
Figure 1.5 Positive Feedback in Childbirth. Repeti-
tion of this cycle of events has a self-amplifying effect, 
­intensifying labor contractions until the infant is born. 
This is one case in which positive feedback has a ben-
eficial outcome.
•	 Could childbirth as a whole be considered a nega-
tive feedback event? Discuss.
12      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Apply What You Know
In a heart attack, the death of cardiac muscle reduces the heart’s pumping 
­effectiveness. Thus, blood flow throughout the body slows down. This leads to 
widespread blood clotting. Blood clots block the flow of blood to the cardiac 
muscle, so the muscle is less nourished and still more of it dies. Is this positive 
feedback, negative feedback, or neither? Explain.
Physiological Variation
Earlier we considered the clinical importance of variations in human anatomy, but 
physiology is even more variable. Physiological variables differ with sex, age, weight, 
diet, degree of physical activity, and environment, among other things. If an introduc-
tory textbook states a typical human heart rate, blood pressure, red blood cell count, 
or body temperature, it is generally assumed that such values are for a healthy young 
adult unless otherwise stated. Health-care professionals take sex and age into account 
when they perform medical assessments and determine drug dosages, for example. 
Failure to do so can lead to medical mistakes such as overmedication of the elderly 
or medicating women on the basis of research that was done on men.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4.	What is the difference between growth and 
­development?
5.	Explain why positive feedback is likely to cause a loss 
of ­homeostasis, and why negative feedback can restore 
­homeostasis.
6.	Why is it better to define homeostasis as a dynamic 
­equilibrium than to define it as a state of internal constancy?
1.3
 The Human Body Plan
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the levels of human complexity in order from the whole 
­organism down to atoms;
b.	define or demonstrate the anatomical position and explain its 
importance in descriptive anatomy;
c.	define the three major anatomical planes of the body;
d.	identify the major anatomical regions of the body;
e.	describe the body’s cavities and the membranes that line 
them; and
f.	name the 11 organ systems, their principal organs, and their 
­functions.
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      13  

This section gives a broad overview of the structural organization of the human 
body, providing a vocabulary and a context for the study of specific regions and 
organ systems in the chapters to follow. We also preview the major organs and func-
tions of the body’s 11 organ systems.
Levels of Human Structure
The human body is made of innumerable small components organized into 
levels ranging from gross anatomy to atoms and molecules. Consider for a 
moment this analogy: The English language, like the human body, is very 
complex, yet an endless array of ideas can be conveyed with a limited number 
of words. All words in the English language are, in turn, composed of vari-
ous combinations of just 26 letters. Between an essay and the alphabet are 
successively simpler levels of organization: paragraphs, sentences, words, 
and syllables. Humans have an analogous hierarchy of complexity (fig. 1.6), 
as follows:
The organism is composed of organ systems,
organ systems are composed of organs,
organs are composed of tissues,
tissues are composed of cells,
cells are composed (in part) of organelles,
organelles are composed of molecules, and
molecules are composed of atoms.
The organism is a single, complete individual.
An organ system is a group of organs that carry out a 
basic function such as circulation, respiration, or digestion. The 
human body has 11 organ systems, defined and illustrated later 
in this chapter. Usually, the organs of a system are physically 
interconnected, such as the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, 
and large intestine that form the digestive system.
An organ is a structure composed of two or more tissue 
types that work together to carry out a particular function. Organs 
have definite anatomical boundaries and are visibly distinguish-
able from adjacent structures. They include not only what peo-
ple traditionally think of as the “internal organs,” such as the 
heart and kidneys, but less obvious examples such as the skin, 
muscles, and bones. Most familiar organs are within the domain 
of gross anatomy. However, there are organs within organs—
the large organs visible to the naked eye contain smaller organs, 
some of which are visible only with the microscope. The skin, 
for example, is the body’s largest organ. Included within it are 
thousands of smaller organs: hair follicles, nails, sweat glands, 
nerves, and blood vessels.
A tissue is a mass of similar cells and cell products that forms 
a discrete region of an organ and performs a specific function. 
The body is composed of only four primary classes of tissue—­
epithelial, connective, nervous, and muscular tissues. Histology, 
the study of tissues, is the subject of chapter 4.
Cells are the smallest units of an organism that carry out all 
the basic functions of life; nothing simpler than a cell is consid-
ered alive. A cell is a microscopic compartment enclosed in a film 
called the plasma membrane. It usually contains one nucleus and 
a variety of other organelles. Cytology, the study of cells, is the 
subject of chapter 3.
Organism
Organ system
Organ
Tissue
Cell
Organelle 
Macromolecule  
Molecule
Atom  
Figure 1.6 The Structural Hierarchy 
of the Human Body.
14      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Organelles13 are microscopic structures that carry out a cell’s 
individual functions. Examples include nuclei, mitochondria, cen-
trioles, and lysosomes.
Organelles and other cellular components are composed of 
molecules.  A molecule is a particle composed of at least two 
atoms. Atoms and molecules are described in chapter 2. 
Anatomical Position
In describing the human body, anatomists assume that it is 
in anatomical position (fig. 1.7)—that of a person standing 
upright with the feet flat on the floor, arms at the sides, and 
the palms and face directed toward the observer. Without such 
a frame of reference, to say that a structure such as the sternum, 
thymus, or aorta is “above the heart” would be vague, since it 
would depend on whether the subject was standing, lying face 
down (prone), or lying face up (supine). From the perspective 
of anatomical position, however, we can describe the thymus as 
superior to the heart, the sternum as anterior (ventral) to it, and 
the aorta as posterior (dorsal) to it. These descriptions remain 
valid regardless of the subject’s position.
Unless stated otherwise, assume that all anatomical descrip-
tions refer to anatomical position. Bear in mind that if a subject 
is facing you in anatomical position, the subject’s left will be on 
your right and vice versa. In most anatomical illustrations, for 
example, the appendix appears on the left side of the page, though 
it is located on the right side of the abdomen.
Anatomical Planes
Many views of the body are based on real or imaginary 
“slices” called sections or planes. Section implies an actual 
cut or slice to reveal internal anatomy, whereas plane implies 
an imaginary flat surface passing through the body. The three 
major anatomical planes are sagittal, frontal, and transverse 
(fig. 1.7).
A sagittal14 plane (SADJ-ih-tul) extends vertically and divides the body or 
an organ into right and left portions. The median (midsagittal) plane passes 
through the midline of the body and divides it into equal right and left halves. 
Other planes parallel to this but off center are called parasagittal15 planes and 
divide the body into unequal right and left portions. The head and pelvic organs 
are commonly illustrated on the median plane (fig. 1.8a).
A frontal (coronal16) plane also extends vertically, but it is perpendicular 
to the sagittal plane and divides the body into anterior (front) and posterior 
(back) portions. A frontal section of the head, for example, would divide it into 
one portion bearing the face and another bearing the back of the head. Contents 
of the thoracic and abdominal cavities are commonly shown in frontal section 
(fig. 1.8b).
Frontal
plane
Transverse
plane
Sagittal
plane
Figure 1.7 Anatomical Position and Planes of Reference.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Joe DeGrandis, photographer
13elle = little 
14sagitta = arrow 
15para = next to 
16corona = crown; al = like
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      15  

Axial region
Appendicular 
region
Key
A transverse (horizontal) plane passes across the body or an organ perpen-
dicular to its long axis; therefore, it divides the body or organ into superior (upper) 
and inferior (lower) portions. Many CT and MRI scans are transverse sections 
(fig. 1.8c; see also fig. 1.1c–e).
Major Body Regions
Knowledge of the external anatomy and landmarks of the body is important in 
performing a physical examination, reporting patient complaints, and many other 
clinical procedures. The body is divided into two major regions called the axial and 
appendicular regions, each with many smaller regions (fig. 1.9).
The axial region forms the central axis of the body—that is, everything but 
the limbs. It consists of the head, neck (cervical17 region), and trunk. The trunk is 
further divided into the thoracic region above the diaphragm and the abdominal 
and pelvic regions below it.
One way of referring to the locations of abdominopelvic structures is to 
divide the region into quadrants. Two perpendicular lines intersecting at the umbi-
licus (navel) divide the area into a right upper quadrant (RUQ), right lower 
­quadrant (RLQ), left upper quadrant (LUQ), and left lower quadrant (LLQ) 
(fig. 1.10a, b). The quadrant scheme is often used to describe the site of an abdomi-
nal pain or abnormality.
The abdomen also can be divided into nine regions defined by four lines that 
intersect like a tic-tac-toe grid (fig. 1.10c, d). Each vertical line is called a midcla-
vicular line because it passes through the midpoint of the clavicle (collarbone). 
The upper horizontal line is called the subcostal18 line because it connects the 
inferior borders of the lowest costal cartilages (cartilage connecting the tenth 
rib on each side to the inferior end of the sternum). The lower horizontal 
line is called the intertubercular19 line because it passes from left to right 
between the tubercles (anterior superior spines) of the pelvis—two points 
of bone located about where the front pockets open on most pants. The 
three lateral regions of this grid on each side, from upper to lower, are the 
hypochondriac,20 lumbar, and inguinal21 (iliac) regions. The three median 
regions from upper to lower are the epigastric,22 umbilical, and hypogastric 
(pubic) regions.
Figure 1.9 The Axial and Appendicular  
Regions.
17cervic = neck 
18sub = below; cost = rib 
19inter = between; tubercul = little swelling 
20hypo = below; chondr = cartilage 
21inguin = groin 
22epi = above, over; gastr = stomach
Figure 1.8 Sections of the Body 
in the Three Primary ­Anatomical 
Planes. (a) Sagittal section of the 
­pelvic region. (b) Frontal section of the 
­thoracic region. (c)  Transverse section 
of the head at the level of the eyes.
(b) Frontal section
(a) Sagittal section
(c) Transverse section
16      PART 1  Organization of the Body

The appendicular  region (AP-en-DIC-you-lur) of the body consists 
of the upper and lower limbs (also called appendages or extremities). The 
upper limb includes the arm (brachial region) (BRAY-kee-ul), forearm 
(­antebrachial23 region) (AN-teh-BRAY-kee-ul), wrist (carpal region), hand, 
and fingers (digits). The lower limb includes the thigh (femoral region), leg 
(crural region), ankle (tarsal region), foot, and toes (digits). In strict anatomi-
cal terms, arm refers only to that part of the upper limb between the shoulder 
Figure 1.10 Quadrants and Regions of the 
­Abdomen. (a) External division into four ­quadrants. 
(b) Internal anatomy correlated with the four 
­quadrants. (c) External division into nine regions. 
(d)  Internal anatomy correlated with the nine re-
gions. 
 
Right
upper
quadrant
Quadrants
Regions
Left
upper
quadrant
Right
lower
quadrant
Left
lower
quadrant
(a)
(b)
Stomach
10th rib
Anterior
superior 
spine
Subcostal line
Hypochondriac
region
Intertubercular
line
Inguinal region
Midclavicular
line
Epigastric
region
Umbilical
region
Hypogastric
region
Lumbar
region
10th rib
Large
intestine
Small
intestine
Urinary
bladder
Liver
Gallbladder
Urethra
(c)
(d)
23ante = fore, before; brachi = arm
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      17  

and elbow. Leg refers only to that part of the lower limb between the knee and 
ankle. ­Figure 1.11 identifies several smaller body regions commonly referred to 
in medical records and literature.
A segment of a limb is a region between one joint and the next. The arm, 
for example, is the segment between the shoulder and elbow joints, and the 
forearm is the segment between the elbow and wrist joints. Slightly flexing 
your fingers, you can easily see that your thumb has two segments (proximal 
and distal—terms defined in table 1.3), whereas the other four digits have three 
segments (proximal, middle, and distal). The segment concept is especially 
useful in describing the locations of bones and muscles and the movements of 
the joints.
Body Cavities and Membranes
The axial region of the body contains a few major cavities containing the “inter-
nal organs” or viscera (VISS-er-uh) (singular, viscus24) (table 1.1). These cavities 
are lined by thin serous membranes, which secrete a lubricating film of moisture 
(a) Anterior (ventral)  
Upper limb:
Axillary r. (armpit)
Brachial r. (arm)
Cubital r. (elbow)
Antebrachial r.
(forearm)
Carpal r. (wrist)
Palmar r. (palm)
Acromial r. 
(shoulder)
(b) Posterior (dorsal)
Nuchal r.
(back of neck)
Interscapular r.
Scapular r.
Vertebral r.
Lumbar r.
Sacral r.
Gluteal r. 
(buttock)
Dorsum
of hand
Perineal r.
Popliteal r.
Calcaneal r.
(heel)
Lower limb:
   Femoral r. (thigh)
   Tarsal r. (ankle)
   Patellar r. (knee)
   Coxal r. (hip)
Pedal r. (foot):
   Dorsum
 
   Plantar surface
   (sole)
Cephalic r. (head)
Facial r. (face)
Cervical r. (neck)
Umbilical r.
Abdominal r.
Inguinal r. (groin)
Thoracic r. (chest):
   Sternal r.
   Pectoral r.
Hypogastric r.:
  Mons pubis
   Crural r. (leg)
Figure 1.11 External Body Regions  
(r. = region). 
 
24viscus = body organ
18      PART 1  Organization of the Body

­similar to blood serum (hence the name serous). These membranes are distinct from 
the mucous membranes that line the digestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive 
tracts—passages open to the exterior. Serous and mucous membranes are further 
described in chapter 4.
The cranial cavity (CRAY-nee-ul) is enclosed by the skull and contains the 
brain. The vertebral canal, continuous with the cranial cavity, is a space about 
as wide as your finger that passes down the vertebral column (spine) (fig. 1.12a). 
Both of these cavities are lined by three membranes called meninges (meh-NIN-
jeez). Among other functions, they protect the delicate nervous tissue from the 
hard protective bone that encloses it. The meninges are discussed in more detail in 
chapter 9.
A muscular sheet, the diaphragm, separates the thoracic cavity above it from 
the abdominopelvic  cavity below. The thoracic cavity is additionally divided 
into right, left, and median portions by a partition called the ­mediastinum25 
(­ME-dee-ah-STY-num) (fig. 1.12b). The mediastinum contains all the thoracic 
viscera except for the lungs, including the esophagus, trachea, and the heart and 
major blood vessels attached to it. The heart is enveloped by a two-layered serous 
membrane called the pericardium.26 The anatomy of the pericardium and its rela-
tionship with the heart are further described in chapter 13. The right and left sides 
of the thoracic cavity contain the lungs, which are each enfolded in another two-
layered serous membrane, the pleura27 (PLOOR-uh) (plural, pleurae). The anat-
omy of the pleurae and their relationship with the lungs are detailed in chapter 15.
The abdominopelvic cavity can be subdivided into the abdominal cavity 
and pelvic cavity, although the two form one continuous space; they are not 
separated by a wall the way the abdominal and thoracic cavities are separated 
by the diaphragm. The dividing line between them is the margin of the pelvic 
inlet (see fig. 6.30a in section 6.4). The abdominal cavity contains most of the 
digestive organs as well as the spleen, kidneys, and ureters. The pelvic cavity is 
markedly narrower and its lower end tilts posteriorly (fig. 1.12a). It contains the 
lowermost portion of the large intestine, the urinary bladder and urethra, and the 
reproductive organs.
25mediastinum = in the middle 
26peri = around; cardi = heart 
27pleur = rib, side
Table 1.1  Body Cavities and Membranes
Name of Cavity
Principal Viscera
Serous Membranes
Cranial Cavity
Brain
Meninges
Vertebral Canal
Spinal cord
Meninges
Thoracic Cavity
Pleural cavities (2)
Lungs
Pleurae
Pericardial cavity
Heart
Pericardium
Abdominopelvic Cavity
Abdominal cavity
Digestive organs,  
spleen, kidneys
Peritoneum
Pelvic cavity
Bladder, rectum,  
reproductive organs
Peritoneum
Cranial 
cavity
Vertebral 
canal
Thoracic cavity
Diaphragm
Abdominal cavity
Abdominopelvic cavity:
Pelvic cavity
Mediastinum
Diaphragm
Pleural cavity
Pericardial cavity
Thoracic cavity:
Abdominal cavity
Pelvic cavity
(a) Left lateral view
(b) Anterior view
Figure 1.12 The Major Body Cavities. 
 
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      19  

The abdominopelvic cavity is lined by a two-layered serous membrane 
called the peritoneum28 (PERR-ih-toe-NEE-um). The outer layer, lining the 
abdominal wall, is called the parietal peritoneum. Along the posterior midline 
of the abdominal wall, it turns inward and becomes another layer, the visceral 
peritoneum, suspending certain abdominal viscera from the body wall and 
covering their outer surfaces (fig. 1.13). The space between the parietal and 
visceral peritoneum is called the peritoneal cavity. The visceral peritoneum 
is also called a mesentery29 (MESS-en-tare-ee) at points where it forms a 
Anterior
(a)
(b)
Posterior
2nd lumbar 
vertebra
Fat
Kidney
Parietal peritoneum
Inferior 
vena cava
Liver 
Back 
muscles
Spinal 
cord
Renal vein 
and artery
Aorta 
Peritoneal cavity 
Mesentery
Small intestine
Visceral 
peritoneum (serosa)
Mesentery
Parietal peritoneum
Mesentery
Liver
Stomach
Large intestine
Urinary bladder
Peritoneal cavity
Rectum
Visceral 
peritoneum
Small intestine
Serosa
Greater omentum 
Diaphragm
Pancreas
Lesser
omentum
Duodenum
28peri = around; tone = stretched 
29mes = in the middle; enter = intestine
Figure 1.13 The Peritoneal Cavity and Retro-
peritoneal Organs. (a) Cross section at the upper 
abdominal level shown in the figure on the right. 
The gray space is the peritoneal cavity (with most 
organs omitted), enclosed in peritoneum (the thin 
blue line). Note that the peritoneum forms the outer 
layer (serosa) of some viscera. Viscera toward the 
top of the figure (kidneys, inferior vena cava, aorta) 
are in the abdominal cavity but not in the peritoneal 
cavity; they are retroperitoneal. The intestine and 
liver are intraperitoneal. (b) Left lateral view showing 
abdominal viscera suspended by mesenteries from 
the body wall. 
 
20      PART 1  Organization of the Body

membranous curtain suspending and anchoring the viscera (fig. 1.14), and 
a serosa (seer-OH-sa) at points where it enfolds and covers the 
outer surfaces of organs such as the stomach and small intes-
tine. These relationships of the peritoneum, serosa, and 
peritoneal cavity with the abdominal digestive organs 
are detailed in chapter 17.
Some organs of the abdominal cavity lie against 
the posterior body wall and are covered by perito-
neum only on the side facing the peritoneal cavity. 
They are said to have a retroperitoneal30 position. 
Examples include the kidneys, aorta, and inferior 
vena cava as shown in figure 1.13a and the duode-
num and pancreas as shown in figure 1.13b. Organs 
that are encircled by peritoneum and suspended 
from the posterior body wall by mesenteries, such 
as the loops of small intestine shown in those figures, 
are intraperitoneal.31
Organ Systems
The human body has 11 organ systems (fig. 1.15) and an immune system, which is 
better described as a population of cells that inhabit multiple organs rather than as 
an organ system. These ­systems are classified in the following list by their principal 
functions, but this is an unavoidably flawed classification. Some organs belong to 
two or more systems—for example, the male urethra is part of both the urinary and 
reproductive systems; the pharynx is part of the respiratory and digestive systems; 
and the mammary glands can be considered part of the integumentary and female 
reproductive systems.
30retro = behind 
31intra = within
Figure 1.14 Mesen-
tery. This is a translucent 
serous membrane as-
sociated with the small 
intestine and other ab-
dominal organs. Mes-
enteries contain blood 
vessels, lymphatic ves-
sels, and nerves supply-
ing the viscera.
© MedicImage/Getty Images
Clinical Application 1.2
PERITONITIS
Peritonitis is inflammation of the peritoneum. It is a critical, life-­
threatening condition necessitating prompt treatment. The most serious 
cause of peritonitis is a perforation in the digestive tract, such as an ab-
dominal bullet wound or a ruptured appendix. Digestive juices cause im-
mediate chemical inflammation of the peritoneum, followed by microbial 
inflammation as intestinal bacteria invade the body cavity. Anything that 
perforates the abdominal wall can also lead to peritonitis, such as abdomi-
nal trauma or surgery. So, too, can free blood in the abdominal cavity, 
as from a ruptured aneurysm (a weak point in a blood vessel) or ectopic 
pregnancy (implantation of an embryo anywhere other than the uterus); 
blood itself is a chemical irritant to the peritoneum. Peritonitis tends to 
shift fluid from the circulation into the abdominal cavity. Death can fol-
low within a few days from severe electrolyte imbalance, respiratory dis-
tress, kidney failure, and a widespread blood clotting called disseminated 
intravascular coagulation.
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      21  

Figure 1.15 The Human Organ Systems.
Integumentary system
Lymphatic system
Respiratory system
Urinary system
Principal organs: 
Skin, hair, nails, 
cutaneous glands 
Principal functions: 
Protection, water retention, 
thermoregulation, vitamin 
D synthesis, cutaneous 
sensation, nonverbal 
communication
Muscular system
Principal organs: 
Skeletal muscles
Principal functions: 
Movement, stability,
communication, control
of body openings, heat
production
Principal organs:
Lymph nodes,
lymphatic vessels, 
thymus, spleen, tonsils
Principal functions: 
Recovery of excess 
tissue ﬂuid, detection of 
pathogens, production 
of immune cells, defense 
against disease
Principal organs: 
Nose, pharynx, larynx,
trachea, bronchi, lungs
Principal functions: 
Absorption of oxygen, 
discharge of carbon 
dioxide, acid–base 
balance, speech
Principal organs: 
Kidneys, ureters, urinary
bladder, urethra
Principal functions: 
Elimination of wastes;
regulation of blood 
volume and pressure; 
stimulation of red blood 
cell formation; control 
of ﬂuid, electrolyte,
and acid−base balance; 
detoxiﬁcation
Skeletal system
Principal organs: 
Bones, cartilages,
ligaments
Principal functions: 
Support, movement,
protective enclosure of
viscera, blood formation,
mineral storage, 
electrolyte and acid–base
balance
22      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Endocrine system
Circulatory system
Digestive system
Male reproductive system
Female reproductive system
Principal organs: 
Pituitary gland,
pineal gland, thyroid gland,
parathyroid glands, thymus,
adrenal glands, pancreas,
testes, ovaries
Principal functions: 
Hormone production;
internal chemical 
communication and 
coordination
Principal organs: 
Heart, blood vessels
Principal functions: 
Distribution of nutrients,
oxygen, wastes, 
hormones, electrolytes, 
heat, immune cells, 
and antibodies; 
ﬂuid, electrolyte, and 
acid−base balance
Principal organs: 
Teeth, tongue, salivary
glands, esophagus, 
stomach, small and large 
intestines, liver, gallbladder, 
pancreas
Principal functions: 
Nutrient breakdown and
absorption. Liver functions
include metabolism of
carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins, vitamins, and
minerals; synthesis of
plasma proteins; disposal
of drugs, toxins, and 
hormones; and cleansing
of blood
Principal organs: 
Testes, epididymides,
spermatic ducts, seminal
vesicles, prostate gland,
bulbourethral glands,
penis
Principal functions: 
Production and delivery
of sperm; secretion of
sex hormones
Principal organs: 
Ovaries, uterine tubes,
uterus, vagina, mammary
glands
Principal functions: 
Production of eggs; site
of fertilization and fetal
development; fetal 
nourishment; birth;
lactation; secretion of
sex hormones
Nervous system
Principal organs: 
Brain, spinal cord, nerves,
ganglia
Principal functions: 
Rapid internal 
communication, 
coordination,
motor control, 
and sensation
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      23  

The human organ systems
Systems of protection, support, and movement
Integumentary system
Skeletal system
Muscular system
Systems of internal communication and integration
Nervous system
Endocrine system
Systems of fluid transport
Circulatory system
Lymphatic system
Systems of intake and output
Respiratory system
Urinary system
Digestive system
Systems of reproduction
Male reproductive system
Female reproductive system
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
7.	 Rearrange the following alphabetical list in order 
from the largest, most complex components of the body to 
the smallest, simplest ones: cells, molecules, organelles, 
organs, organ systems, tissues.
8.	Examine figures 1.1 and 1.13 and identify whether each figure 
shows the body on a frontal, sagittal, or transverse plane.
9.	Identify each of the following regions as belonging to the 
upper limb, lower limb, or axial region of the body: cubital, 
pectoral, gluteal, antebrachial, calcaneal, patellar, nuchal, 
hypogastric, and hypochondriac.
10.	Name the body cavity in which each of the following viscera 
are found: spinal cord, liver, lung, spleen, heart, pancreas, 
gallbladder, and kidney.
1.4  The Language of Medicine
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain why precision is important in the use of medical terms;
b.	demonstrate how to break medical terms into their roots, pre-
fixes, and suffixes;
c.	identify the relationships between singular and plural forms of a 
medical term; and
d.	define directional terms for the locations of anatomical structures 
relative to each other.
24      PART 1  Organization of the Body

One of the greatest challenges faced by students of anatomy and physiology is 
the vocabulary. In this book, you will encounter such Latin terms as corpus callo-
sum (a brain structure) and extensor carpi radialis longus (a forearm muscle). You 
may wonder why structures aren’t called by more common names that everyone can 
understand, and how you will ever remember such formidable terms. This section 
will give you some answers to these questions and some useful tips on mastering 
anatomical terminology.
It is of greatest importance to use medical terms precisely. It may seem trivial 
if you misspell trapezius as trapezium, but in doing so, you would be changing 
the name of a back muscle to the name of a wrist bone. A “little” error such as 
misspelling malleus as malleolus changes the name of a middle-ear bone to the 
name of a protuberance of the ankle. A difference of only one letter distinguishes 
gustation (the sense of taste) from gestation (pregnancy). The health professions 
demand the utmost attention to detail and precision. People’s well-being may 
depend on it, and indeed many patients die simply because of written and oral 
miscommunication among hospital staff. The habit of precision must be culti-
vated early.
Apply What You Know
A student means to write about part of the small intestine called the ileum, but 
misspells it ilium. In complaining about the points lost, the student says, “I was 
only one letter off!” The instructor says, “But you changed the entire meaning of 
the word.” With the help of a dictionary, explain the instructor’s reasoning.
Analyzing Medical Terms
There is a simple trick to becoming more comfortable with the technical lan-
guage of medicine. Those who, at first, find scientific terms confusing and dif-
ficult to pronounce, spell, and remember often feel more confident once they 
realize the logic of how such terms are composed. A term such as hyponatremia 
is less forbidding once we recognize that it is composed of three common word 
elements: hypo- (below normal), natr- (sodium), and -emia (blood condition). 
Thus, hyponatremia is a deficiency of sodium in the blood. Those three word 
elements appear over and over in many other medical terms: hypothermia, natri-
uretic, anemia, and so on. Once you learn the meanings of hypo-, natri-, and 
-emia, you already have the tools to at least partially understand hundreds of 
other biomedical terms.
Scientific terms are typically composed of one or more of the following 
­elements:
∙	 At least one root (stem) that bears the core meaning of the word. In car-
diology, for example, the root is cardi- (heart). Many words have two or 
more roots. In adipocyte, the roots are adip- (fat) and -cyte (cell). Word 
roots are often linked through an o or other vowel to make the word more 
pronounceable.
∙	 A prefix may be present at the beginning of a word to modify its core meaning. 
For example, gastric (pertaining to the stomach or to the belly of a muscle) 
takes on a variety of new meanings when prefixes are added to it: epigas-
tric (above the stomach), hypogastric (below the stomach), and endogastric 
(within the stomach).
∙	 A suffix may be added to the end of a word to modify its core meaning. For 
example, microscope, microscopy, microscopic, and microscopist have differ-
ent meanings because of their suffixes alone.
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      25  

Consider another word, gastroenterology, a branch of medicine dealing with 
the stomach and small intestine. It breaks down into
gastro/entero/logy:
gastro = “stomach,”
entero = “small intestine,” and
logy = “the study of.”
“Dissecting” words in this way and paying attention to the word-origin footnotes 
throughout this book can help make you more comfortable with the language of anat-
omy. Breaking a word down and knowing the meaning of its elements make it far eas-
ier to pronounce it, spell it, and remember its definition. In appendix D, you will find 
a lexicon of the word roots, prefixes, and suffixes most frequently used in this book.
Singular and Plural Forms
A point of confusion for many beginning students is how to recognize the plural forms 
of medical terms. Few people would fail to recognize that ovaries is the plural of 
ovary, but the connection is harder to make in other cases: for example, the plural of 
cortex is cortices (COR-ti-sees), and the plural of corpus is corpora. Table 1.2 will 
help you make the connection between common singular and plural noun ­terminals.
Directional Terminology
In “navigating” the human body and describing the locations of structures, 
­anatomists use a set of standard directional terms (table 1.3). You will need to be 
very familiar with these in order to understand anatomical descriptions later in this 
book. The terms assume that the body is in anatomical position.
Intermediate directions are often indicated by combinations of these terms. For 
example, a structure that is superomedial to another is above and medial to it; the 
bridge of the nose is superomedial to the flare of the nostrils.
Because of the bipedal (two-legged), upright stance of humans, some direc-
tional terms have different meanings for humans than they do for other animals. 
Anterior, for example, denotes the region of the body that leads the way in normal 
Table 1.2  Singular and Plural Forms of 
Some Noun Terminals
Singular 
Ending
Plural 
Ending
Examples
-a
-ae
pleura, pleurae
-ax
-aces
thorax, thoraces
-en
-ina
lumen, lumina
-ex
-ices
cortex, cortices
-is
-es
testis, testes
-is
-ides
epididymis, epididymides
-ix
-ices
appendix, appendices
-ma
-mata
carcinoma, carcinomata
-on
-a
ganglion, ganglia
-um
-a
septum, septa
-us
-era
viscus, viscera
-us
-i
villus, villi
-us
-ora
corpus, corpora
-x
-ges
phalanx, phalanges
-y
-ies
ovary, ovaries
-yx
-yces
calyx, calyces
Table 1.3  Directional Terms in Human Anatomy 
Term
Meaning
Examples of Usage
Ventral
Toward the front* or belly
The aorta is ventral to the vertebral 
­column.
Dorsal
Toward the back or spine
The vertebral column is dorsal to the 
aorta.
Anterior
Toward the ventral side*
The sternum is anterior to the heart.
Posterior
Toward the dorsal side*
The esophagus is posterior to the tra-
chea.
Superior
Above
The heart is superior to the diaphragm.
Inferior
Below
The liver is inferior to the diaphragm.
Medial
Toward the midsagittal plane
The heart is medial to the lungs.
Lateral
Away from the midsagittal 
plane
The eyes are lateral to the nose.
Proximal
Closer to the point of 
­attachment or origin
The elbow is proximal to the wrist.
Distal
Farther from the point of 
attachment or origin
The fingernails are at the distal ends of 
the fingers.
Superficial
Closer to the body surface
The skin is superficial to the muscles.
Deep
Farther from the body surface
The bones are deep to the muscles.
* In humans only; definition differs for other animals.
26      PART 1  Organization of the Body

locomotion. For a four-legged animal such as a cat, this is the head; for a human, 
however, it is the front of the chest and abdomen. Thus, anterior has the same mean-
ing as ventral for a human but not for a cat. Posterior denotes the region of the body 
that comes last in normal locomotion—the tail end of a cat but the dorsal side of a 
human. These differences must be kept in mind when dissecting other animals for 
comparison to human anatomy.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A radiologic technologist is a person who produces medical images for the 
purposes of diagnosing and treating illnesses and injuries, or who administers 
radiation therapy. (The profession is not to be confused with radiologic techni-
cian—one who sets up, maintains, and repairs radiologic equipment.) Radio-
logic technologists work closely with radiologists—physicians who interpret 
the images, make diagnoses, and prescribe courses of treatment. Programs in 
radiologic technology range from a 2-year associate degree to bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees. The training of a radiologic technologist is a mixture of med-
ical and physical sciences, including anatomy, physiology, genetics, ­pathology, 
chemistry, general and nuclear physics, medical terminology, patient examina-
tion and positioning, radiologic instrumentation, and medical imaging sciences. Writing, speech, and figure drawing also provide 
useful experience; one must also have good analytical thinking skills, attention to detail, compassion, and patience. Entry into 
the profession requires passing a board examination; earning certification, although optional, is a further step that enhances 
one’s career mobility. Many employers prefer to hire only certified radiologic technologists. Career-long continuing education 
courses are necessary to keep one’s certification current. Specialties in radiologic technology include radiography (X-ray tech-
nology), mammography, sonography, fluoroscopy, CT, MRI, PET, nuclear medicine, medical dosimetry, and bone densitometry. 
Some radiologic technologists go into clinical administration or radiologic education, or work for equipment manufacturers. See 
appendix B for additional career information.
R a d i o l o g i c  Te c h n o l o g i s t
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
11.	Following the example given for gastroenterology, 
break each of the following words down into their roots, 
prefixes, and suffixes: electrocardiography, brachiocephalic, 
hyperkalemia, substernal, periodontal.
12.	Write the plural form of each of the following terms: stoma, 
lacuna, nucleus, epithelium, diagnosis. Write the singular form of 
each of the following: larynges, carpi, ampullae, matrices, ova.
13.	Examine figure 1.11 and use the proper directional term from 
table 1.3 to describe (a) the location of the axillary region 
­relative to the cubital region; (b) the location of the sacral 
region relative to the lumbar region; (c) the location of the 
sacral region relative to the hypogastric region; and (d) the 
location of the umbilical region relative to the lumbar region.
© ERproductions Ltd/Blend Images RF
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      27  

Study Guide
28      PART 1  Organization of the Body
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
1.1   Anatomy—The Structural Basis  
of Human Function 
	 1.	 The distinction between gross anatomy and histology, and the 
relationship of histology to histopathology
	 2.	 How surface anatomy, systemic anatomy, regional anatomy, 
and functional morphology differ in their perspectives
	 3.	 Why the study of other animal species is important for under-
standing human functional morphology
	 4.	 Distinctions between dissection, palpation, auscultation, per-
cussion, and medical imaging as methods of studying human 
structure
	 5.	 How each of the following methods of medical imaging is 
performed, and why one might be chosen over the others for 
specific purposes: radiography, computed tomography (CT), 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET), and sonography
	 6.	 Examples of individual anatomical variation and why such 
variations are important in the practice of medicine
1.2   Physiology—Dynamic  Processes  
in the Living Body
	 1.	 The meaning of physiology, and the importance of studying the 
physiology of other species for understanding humans
	 2.	 The properties that define something as alive and the difficulty 
of defining life or the moment of death
	 3.	 The meaning of homeostasis, the role of negative feedback 
loops in maintaining homeostasis, and the contrast between the 
set point and a dynamic equilibrium
	 4.	 Examples of negative feedback and homeostasis
	 5.	 The fundamental components seen in many negative feedback 
loops
	 6.	 How positive feedback differs from negative feedback, and 
examples of beneficial and harmful effects of positive feedback
	 7.	 Why it is clinically important to be aware of individual physi-
ological variation
1.3   The Human Body Plan 
	 1.	 The eight levels of structural complexity from organism to 
atoms, and the definitions of such levels as organ, tissue, cell, 
organelle, and others
	 2.	 The definition of anatomical position, and why anatomical 
position is such an important frame of reference
	 3.	 Definition of the three principal anatomical planes of the 
­human body
	 4.	 Components of the axial and appendicular regions of the 
­human body
	 5.	 Landmarks that define the four quadrants of the abdomen; 
names of the quadrants; and some organs that lie within each 
quadrant
	 6.	 Landmarks that divide the abdomen into nine regions; names 
of those regions; and some organs that lie within each
	 7.	 Terminology of the surface regions of human anatomy
	 8.	 Meaning of the segments of an appendage, and examples
	 9.	 Differences between the serous and mucous membranes of the 
body and examples of locations
	10.	 The principal body cavities; names of the membranes that line 
them; and the most important viscera found in each
	11.	 The meanings of parietal and visceral peritoneum
	12.	 The location, appearance, and function of the mesenteries, 
and how the mesenteries are related to the peritoneum and the 
serosa of the viscera
	13.	 The distinction between intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal 
organs, and some examples of each
	14.	 The 11 organ systems of the human body, functions of each 
system, and principal organs of each
1.4   The Language of Medicine 
	 1.	 Examples of why precision is important in anatomical termi-
nology, and why spelling errors can be more significant than 
they may seem
	 2.	 How to break down biomedical terms into roots, prefixes, and 
suffixes, and why it is helpful to make a habit of seeing termi-
nology in this way
	 3.	 Relationships between the singular and plural forms of the 
same biomedical nouns
	 4.	 The distinctions between dorsal and ventral; anterior and pos-
terior; superior and inferior; medial and lateral; proximal and 
distal; and superficial and deep
	 5.	 Why anterior and posterior, dorsal and ventral have different 
meanings for a human than for a cat

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Structure that can be observed with the naked eye is called
a.	 gross anatomy.
b.	 histology.
c.	 ultrastructure.
d.	 comparative anatomy.
e.	 cytology.
	 2.	 The method of medical imaging that exposes a person to radio 
waves is
a.	 a PET scan.
b.	 an MRI scan.
c.	 radiology.
d.	 sonography.
e.	 a CT scan.
	 3.	 The tarsal region is 
 to the popliteal region.
a.	 dorsal
b.	 distal
c.	 superior
d.	 proximal
e.	 appendicular
	 4.	 Which of the following regions is not part of the upper limb?
a.	 palmar
b.	 antebrachial
c.	 cubital
d.	 carpal
e.	 popliteal
	 5.	 Which of the following is not an organ system?
a.	 muscular system
b.	 endocrine system
c.	 immune system
d.	 lymphatic system
e.	 integumentary system
	 6.	 In which area do you think pain from the gallbladder would 
be felt?
a.	 the right upper quadrant
b.	 the umbilical region
c.	 the hypogastric region
d.	 the left hypochondriac region
e.	 the left lower quadrant
	 7.	 Why is the stomach considered to be an organ?
a.	 It is part of the digestive system.
b.	 It has a specific, complex physiological function.
c.	 It is composed of two or more tissues.
d.	 It consists of a mass of similar cells that form a specific 
secretion.
e.	 It is physically interconnected with other organs.
	 8.	 The lining of the abdominal cavity is
a.	 a mucous membrane.
b.	 the peritoneum.
c.	 the meninges.
d.	 the pleura.
e.	 the serosa.
	 9.	 The word root patho- means
a.	 doctor.
b.	 medicine.
c.	 organ.
d.	 health.
e.	 disease.
	10.	 The prefix epi- means
a.	 next to.
b.	 below.
c.	 above.
d.	 within.
e.	 behind.
	11.	 When a doctor presses on the abdomen to feel the size and 
texture of the liver, he or she is using a technique of physical 
examination called 
.
	12.	 A method of medical imaging that uses X-rays and a ­computer to 
generate an image of a thin slice of the body is called 
.
	13.	 Most physiological mechanisms serve the purpose of 
, 
maintaining a stable internal environment in the body.
	14.	 A/an 
 is the simplest body structure to be composed of two 
or more types of tissue.
	15.	 The carpal region is more commonly known as the 
, 
and the tarsal region is more commonly known as the 
.
	16.	 In standard directional terms, the sternal region is 
 to 
the pectoral region.
	17.	 The layer of peritoneum facing the body wall is called the 
 layer, and the layer on the surface of an internal 
organ is called the 
 layer.
	18.	 Homeostasis is maintained by a cycle of events called a 
, in which the body senses a change and activates 
mechanisms to minimize or reverse it.
	19.	 The directional terms of human anatomy assume that a person 
is in 
, which means standing upright with the feet 
together and the palms, face, and eyes forward.
	20.	 The elbow is said to be 
 to the wrist because it is 
closer to the upper limb’s point of origin (the shoulder).
Answers in Appendix A
CHAPTER 1   The Study of Anatomy and Physiology      29  

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each  of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 It is possible to see both eyes in a median section of the head.
	 2.	 The diaphragm is ventral to the lungs.
	 3.	 A PET scan is a noninvasive method of medical imaging.
	 4.	 The pleural and pericardial cavities are lined by mucous mem-
branes.
	 5.	 Abnormal skin color or dryness is one piece of information 
that could be obtained by auscultation.
	 6.	 A CT scan is a simpler and safer way than sonography to 
monitor fetal development.
	 7.	 Histopathology is a subdiscipline of gross anatomy.
	 8.	 Negative feedback is more often harmful than beneficial to the 
body.
	 9.	 There are more cells than organelles in the human body.
	10.	 The pericardial sac is an internal lining of the heart.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Identify which anatomical plane—sagittal, frontal, or trans-
verse—is the only one that could not show (a) both the cere-
brum and tongue, (b) both eyes, (c) both the hypogastric and 
gluteal regions, (d) both the sternum and vertebral column, and 
(e) both the heart and uterus.
	 2.	 Name one structure or anatomical feature that could be found 
in each of the following locations relative to the ribs: medial, 
lateral, superior, inferior, deep, superficial, posterior, and 
­anterior. Try not to use the same example twice.
	 3.	 For each of the following nonbiological processes, state 
whether you think it is analogous to physiological positive 
feedback, negative feedback, or neither of these, and justify 
each answer: (a) the cruise control of a car maintaining a preset 
highway speed; (b) a flushed toilet tank refilling to its original 
resting level; (c) a magnifying glass focusing the sun’s rays and 
catching a piece of paper on fire; (d) a house fire in which heat 
from the flames ignites adjacent flammable material until, if 
unchecked, the whole house is consumed; (e) the increasingly 
loud howl of a loudspeaker as a band is setting up the sound 
stage for a concert and gets a microphone too close to the 
speaker.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
30      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Chapter Outline
2.1 Atoms, Ions, and Molecules
• Chemical Elements 
• Atomic Structure 
• Isotopes and Radioactivity 
• Ions, Electrolytes, and Free Radicals 
• Molecules and Chemical Bonds 
2.2 Water, Acids, and Bases
• Water 
• Acids, Bases, and pH 
2.3 Organic Compounds
• Carbohydrates 
• Lipids 
• Proteins 
• Nucleic Acids (DNA and RNA) 
• Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) 
2.4 Energy and Chemical Reactions
• Forms of Energy 
• Classes of Chemical Reactions 
• Metabolism, Oxidation, and Reduction 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 2.1: pH and Drug Action
• Clinical Application 2.2: Trans Fats and  
Cardiovascular Health
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Medical Technologist
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter 
2
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from chapter 1.
• The concept of metabolism (see “Essential Life 
Functions”  in section 1.2)
• “Levels of Human Structure”  in section 1.3 
Life, Matter, and 
Energy
Urea crystals seen with a polarizing microscope. Urea, a product of protein 
metabolism, is the principal organic waste product of urine.  
© Eye of Science/Science Source
Module 2: Cells & Chemistry
	
31

W
hy is too much sodium or cholesterol harmful? Why does an 
iron deficiency cause anemia and a calcium deficiency weaken 
the bones? How can a pH imbalance make some drugs less effective? 
Why do some pregnant women suffer convulsions after several days of 
vomiting? How can radiation cause cancer as well as cure it?
None of these questions can be answered, nor would the rest of this 
book be intelligible, without understanding the chemistry of life. A 
little knowledge of chemistry can help you choose a healthy diet, use 
­medications more wisely, evaluate health fads and avoid frauds, and 
understand medical treatments and procedures. Thus, we begin our study 
of the human body with basic chemistry, the simplest level of the body’s 
structural organization.
2.1
 Atoms, Ions, and Molecules
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	recognize elements of the human body from their chemical  
symbols;
b.	distinguish between chemical elements and compounds;
c.	state the functions of minerals in the body;
d.	explain the basis for radioactivity and the uses and hazards of 
ionizing radiation;
e.	distinguish between ions, electrolytes, and free radicals; and
f.	 define the types of chemical bonds.
Chemical Elements
A chemical element is the simplest form of matter to have unique chemical proper-
ties. Water, for example, has unique properties, but it can be broken down into two 
elements, hydrogen and oxygen, each with unique properties of their own. If we 
break them down any further, however, we find that hydrogen and oxygen are made 
of protons, neutrons, and electrons—none of which are unique. A proton of gold is 
identical to a proton of oxygen. Therefore, the elements hydrogen and oxygen are 
the simplest unique components of water.
There are 91 naturally occurring elements on earth, 24 of which play 
normal roles in humans. Table 2.1 groups these 24 according to their abundance 
in the body. Six of them account for 98.5% of the body’s weight: oxygen, 
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium, and phosphorus. The next 0.8% consists 
of another 6 elements: sulfur, potassium, sodium, chlorine, magnesium, and 
iron. The remaining 12 total only 0.7% of body weight; thus, these are known 
as trace elements. Despite their minute quantities, trace elements play vital 
32      PART 1  Organization of the Body

roles in physiology. Iodine, for example, is an essential component of thyroid 
hormone. Other elements without natural physiological roles can contaminate 
the body and severely disrupt its functions, as in heavy metal poisoning with 
lead or mercury.
The elements are represented by one- or two-letter symbols, usually based on 
their English names: C for carbon, Mg for magnesium, Cl for chlorine, and so forth. 
A few symbols are based on Latin names, such as K for potassium (kalium), Na 
for sodium (natrium), and Fe for iron (ferrum). The periodic table of the elements 
(appendix E) summarizes information on all the natural chemical elements and their 
relative importance in human physiology.
Several elements are classified as minerals—substances extracted from the 
soil by plants and passed up the food chain to humans and other organisms. Min-
erals constitute about 4% of the human body by weight. Nearly three-quarters 
of this is Ca and P; the rest is mainly Cl, Mg, K, Na, and S. Minerals contribute 
significantly to body structure. The bones and teeth consist partly of crystals 
of Ca, P, Mg, F, and sulfate ions. To name but a few additional examples of the 
biological roles of minerals, sulfur is a component of many proteins; phosphorus 
is a major component of DNA and cell membranes; and iron is a component of 
hemoglobin.
Atomic Structure
Each chemical element is composed of a unique type of atom. At the center 
of an atom is the nucleus, composed of positively charged protons (p+) and 
uncharged neutrons (n0). The nucleus is orbited by electrons (e−), tiny particles 
with a single negative charge and very low mass (fig. 2.1). A person who weighs 
Table 2.1  Elements of the Human Body
Name
Symbol
Percentage of  
Body Weight
Major Elements (Total 98.5%)
Oxygen
O
65.0
Carbon
C
  18.0
Hydrogen
H
  10.0
Nitrogen
N
     3.0
Calcium
Ca
    1.5
Phosphorus
P
    1.0
Lesser Elements (Total 0.8%)
Sulfur
S
     0.25
Potassium
K
     0.20
Sodium
Na
    0.15
Chlorine
Cl
    0.15
Magnesium
Mg
        0.05
Iron
Fe
        0.006
Trace Elements (Total 0.7%)
Chromium
Cr
Molybdenum
Mo
Cobalt
Co
Selenium
Se
Copper
Cu
Silicon
Si
Fluorine
F
Tin
Sn
Iodine
I
Vanadium
V
Manganese
Mn
Zinc
Zn
First
energy
level
Carbon (C) 6p+, 6e-, 6n0
Atomic number = 6
Atomic mass 
= 12
Sodium (Na) 11p+, 11e-, 12n0
Atomic number = 11
Atomic mass 
= 23
Third
energy
level
= Proton (p+)
Key
= Neutron (n0)
= Electron (e–)
Figure 2.1 Two Representative Elements.   
 
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      33  

64 kg (140 lb) contains less than 24 g (1 oz) of electrons, yet this hardly means 
that we can ignore them. They determine the chemical properties of an atom, 
governing chemical reactions and formation of molecules. Typically, an atom is 
electrically neutral, with equal  numbers of protons and neutrons that cancel out 
each other’s charges.
Electrons swarm about the nucleus in concentric regions called energy levels 
(electron shells). Those of the outermost shell, called valence electrons, determine 
the chemical bonding properties of an atom. 
Isotopes and Radioactivity
Not every atom of an element is identical; all elements have two or more varieties 
called isotopes,1 which differ from each other only in number of neutrons. Most 
hydrogen atoms, for example, have a nucleus composed of only one proton; this 
isotope is symbolized 1H. Hydrogen has two other isotopes: deuterium (2H) with 
one proton and one neutron, and tritium (3H) with one proton and two neutrons. 
Over 99% of carbon atoms have a nucleus of six protons and six neutrons, and are 
called carbon-12 (12C), but a small percentage of carbon atoms are 13C, with seven 
neutrons, and 14C, with eight.
Many isotopes are unstable and decay (break down) to more stable isotopes by 
giving off radiation. This process of decay is called radioactivity, and unstable 
isotopes are therefore called radioisotopes. Every element has at least one 
radioisotope.
Radioactivity is one form of ionizing radiation (ultraviolet radiation 
and X-rays are others). Ionizing radiation can be very damaging to tis-
sues and is capable of causing cancer, birth defects, or in high doses, 
immediate death. In controlled, targeted doses, however, it is useful 
for such purposes as radiography, PET scans, and cancer therapy 
(radiotherapy).
Ions, Electrolytes, and Free Radicals
Ions are charged particles with unequal numbers of protons and 
electrons. Elements with one to three valence electrons tend to 
give them up, and those with four to seven electrons tend to gain 
more. If an atom of the first kind is exposed to an atom of the sec-
ond, electrons may transfer from one to the other and turn both of 
them into ions. This process is called ionization. The particle that 
gains electrons acquires a surplus negative charge and is called an 
anion (AN-eye-on). The one that loses electrons is left with an 
excess positive charge (from a surplus of protons) and is called a 
cation (­CAT-eye-on).
Consider, for example, what happens when sodium and 
chlorine meet (fig. 2.2). Sodium has a total of 11 electrons: 2 in 
its first (inner) shell, 8 in the second, and 1 in the third (valence) 
shell. If it gives up the electron in the third shell, its second shell 
becomes the valence shell and has a stable configuration of 8 
electrons. Chlorine has 7 electrons in its valence shell (17 in all). 
If it can gain one more electron, it can fill the third shell with 8 
electrons and become stable. Sodium and chlorine seem “made 
for each other”—one needs to lose an electron and the other needs 
to gain one. This is just what they do. When an electron transfers 
from sodium to chlorine, sodium is left with 11 ­protons but only 
Figure 2.2 Ionization. A sodium atom donates 
an electron to a chlorine atom. This electron trans-
fer converts the atoms to a positive sodium ion (Na+) 
and a negative chloride ion (Cl–). Attraction of these 
two oppositely charged ions to each other then con-
stitutes an ionic bond.
11 protons
12 neutrons
11 electrons
Sodium
atom (Na)
17 protons
18 neutrons
17 electrons
Chlorine
atom (Cl)
Transfer of an electron from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom
1 
11 protons
12 neutrons
10 electrons
Sodium
ion (Na+)
17 protons
18 neutrons
18 electrons
Chloride
ion (Cl–)
The charged sodium ion (Na+) and chloride ion (Cl–) that result
2 
+
–
Sodium chloride
1 iso = same; top = place (same position in the periodic table)
34      PART 1  Organization of the Body

10 electrons; thus, it has a positive charge, and we symbolize the sodium ion 
Na+. Chlorine is changed to the chloride ion with a surplus negative charge, 
symbolized Cl–. Ions are not always single atoms that have become charged; 
some are groups of atoms—phosphate (PO4
3–) and bicarbonate (HCO3
–) ions, 
for example.
Ions with opposite charges are strongly attracted to each other. They often unite 
in ionic bonds, described shortly, and they tend to follow each other through the 
body. Thus, when Na+ is excreted in the urine, Cl– tends to follow it. The attraction 
of cations and anions to each other is important in maintaining the excitability of 
muscle and nerve cells, as we shall see in later chapters.
Electrolytes are salts that ionize in water and form solutions capable of con-
ducting electricity (table 2.2). Electrolytes are important for their chemical reactiv-
ity (as when calcium phosphate becomes incorporated into bone), osmotic effects 
(influence on water content and distribution in the body), and electrical effects 
(which are essential to nerve and muscle function). Electrolyte balance is one of the 
most important considerations in patient care. Electrolyte imbalances, discussed in 
chapter 16, have effects ranging from muscle cramps and brittle bones to coma and 
cardiac arrest.
Free radicals are chemical particles with an odd number of electrons. For 
example, oxygen normally exists as a stable molecule composed of two oxygen 
atoms, O2, but if an additional electron is added, it becomes a free radical called 
the superoxide anion, symbolized O2
−∙. The dot on the right symbolizes the odd 
electron.
Free radicals are produced continuously by normal metabolic reactions in 
cells (such as the ATP-producing reactions in mitochondria), and by external 
agents such as ionizing radiation, cigarette smoke, and some chemicals (for 
example, the food preservatives called nitrites). Free radicals are unstable and 
short-lived. They combine quickly with molecules such as fats, proteins, and 
DNA, converting them into free radicals and triggering chain reactions that 
destroy still more molecules. The swath of molecular destruction caused by 
free radicals is implicated in numerous diseases, including myocardial infarc-
tion (the death of heart tissue), spinal cord death in spinal injuries, Alzheimer 
disease, and cancer. One theory of aging is that it results in part from lifelong 
cellular damage by free radicals.
Because free radicals are so common and destructive, the body has multiple 
mechanisms for counteracting them. Antioxidants neutralize free radicals and limit 
their destruction. Some antioxidants are produced naturally by our own bodies as a 
defense against the inevitable production of free radicals. Others are found in fruits 
and vegetables, including selenium, vitamin E (α-tocopherol), vitamin C (ascorbic 
acid), and carotenoids (such as β-carotene). Dietary deficiencies of antioxidants are 
associated with increased incidence of heart attacks, sterility, muscular dystrophy, 
and other disorders. 
Table 2.2  Major Electrolytes and the Ions Released  
by Their Dissociation 
Electrolyte
Cations
Anions
Calcium chloride (CaCl)
→
Ca2+
2 Cl–
Disodium phosphate (Na2HPO4)
→
2 Na+
HPO4
2–
Magnesium chloride (MgCl2)
→
Mg2+
2 Cl–
Potassium chloride (KCl)
→
K+
Cl–
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3)
→
Na+
HCO3
–
Sodium chloride (NaCl)
→
Na+
Cl–
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      35  

Molecules and Chemical Bonds
Molecules are chemical particles composed of two or more atoms united by a cova-
lent chemical bond (the sharing of electrons). The atoms may be identical, as in 
nitrogen (N2), or different, as in glucose (C6H12O6). Molecules composed of two 
or more different elements are called compounds. For example, oxygen (O2) and 
carbon dioxide (CO2) are both molecules because both consist of at least two atoms, 
but only CO2 is a compound.
Molecules are represented by molecular formulae that list each element only 
once and show how many atoms of each are present. Molecules with identical for-
mulae but different arrangements of their atoms are called isomers2 of each other. 
For example, both ethanol (grain alcohol) and ethyl ether (once used as an anesthetic) 
have the molecular formula C2H6O, but they are certainly not interchangeable! To 
show the difference between them, we use structural formulae that show the location 
of each atom, or condensed structural formulae that show all the elements on one 
line but in groups reflecting the unique structural formula of each isomer (fig. 2.3).
A molecule is held together, and molecules are attracted to each other, by forces 
called chemical bonds. The three bonds of greatest physiological interest are ionic 
bonds, covalent bonds, and hydrogen bonds.
An ionic bond is the attraction of a cation to an anion. Sodium and chloride 
ions (Na+ and Cl–), for example, are attracted to each other and form the compound 
sodium chloride (NaCl), common table salt. Ionic bonds are weak and easily dis-
sociate (break up) in the presence of something more attractive, such as water. The 
ionic bonds of NaCl break down easily as salt dissolves in water, because both Na+ 
and Cl– are more attracted to water molecules than they are to each other.
Apply What You Know
Do you think ionic bonds are common in the human body? Why or why not?
Covalent bonds form by the sharing of electrons. For example, two ­hydrogen 
atoms share valence electrons to form a hydrogen molecule, H2 (fig.  2.4a). 
The  two  electrons, one donated by each atom, swarm around both nuclei in a 
Structural
formulae
Condensed
structural
formulae
Molecular
formulae
CH3CH2OH
C2H6O
Ethanol
Ethyl ether
CH3OCH3
C2H6O
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
OH
H
C
O
C
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 2.3  Structural Isomers, Ethanol and 
Ethyl Ether. The molecular formulae are identi-
cal, but the structures and chemical properties are 
­different.
Hydrogen atom
Oxygen atom
Oxygen atom
Carbon atom
p+
Hydrogen atom
Hydrogen molecule (H2)
p+
p+
p+
+
H
H
Carbon dioxide molecule (CO2)
C
O
O
6p+
6n0
8p+
8n0
8p+
8n0
p+
p+
p+
p+
6p+
6n0
8p+
8n0
8p+
8n0
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4 Covalent Bonding. (a) Two hydro-
gen atoms share a single pair of electrons to form 
a hydrogen molecule. (b) A carbon dioxide mol-
ecule, in which a carbon atom shares two pairs of 
electrons with each oxygen atom, forming double 
covalent bonds.
2 iso = same; mers = parts
36      PART 1  Organization of the Body

dumbbell-shaped cloud. A single covalent bond, the sharing of a single 
pair of ­electrons, is symbolized by a single line between atomic symbols, 
for example H—H. A double covalent bond, the sharing of two pairs of 
electrons, is symbolized by two lines — for example, in carbon dioxide, 
O   C   O, where each oxygen shares two electrons with the central 
carbon (fig. 2.4b).
When shared electrons spend approximately equal time 
around each nucleus, they form a nonpolar covalent bond  
(fig. 2.5a), the strongest of all chemical bonds. Carbon atoms 
bond to each other with nonpolar covalent bonds. If shared elec-
trons spend significantly more time orbiting one nucleus than 
they do the other, they lend their negative charge to the region 
where they spend the most time, and they form a polar covalent 
bond (fig. 2.5b). For example, in water, H—O—H, the electrons 
are more attracted to the oxygen nucleus and orbit it more than 
they do the hydrogen. This makes the oxygen slightly negative 
(symbolized δ–) and the hydrogen slightly positive (δ+).
A hydrogen bond is a weak attraction between a slightly 
positive hydrogen atom (Hδ+) in one molecule and a slightly nega-
tive oxygen (Oδ–) or nitrogen (Nδ–) in another. Water molecules are 
weakly attracted to each other by hydrogen bonds (fig. 2.6). Hydrogen 
bonds also form between different regions of the same molecule, espe-
cially in very large molecules such as proteins and DNA that can bend 
back on themselves. Hydrogen bonding causes such molecules to fold or coil 
Nonpolar covalent
C      C bond
Polar covalent
O      H bond
δ−
δ+
(a)
(b)
C
OO
HH
CC
Figure 2.5 Nonpolar and Polar Covalent 
Bonds.  (a) A nonpolar covalent bond between two 
carbon atoms, formed by electrons that spend an 
equal amount of time around each nucleus, as rep-
resented by the symmetric blue cloud. (b) A polar 
covalent bond, in which electrons orbit one nucleus 
significantly more than the other, as represented 
by the asymmetric cloud. This results in a slight 
negative charge (δ–) in the region where the elec-
trons spend most of their time, and a slight positive 
charge (δ+) at the other pole.
Water molecule
Hydrogen bond
Covalent bond
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ–
δ–
δ–
δ–
δ–
OO
OO
OO
HH
HH
HH
HH
HH
HH
HH
HH
OO
HH
OO
HH
Figure 2.6 Hydrogen Bonding of Water.  The polar covalent bonds 
of water molecules enable each oxygen to form a hydrogen bond with a 
hydrogen of a neighboring molecule. Thus, the water molecules are weakly 
attracted to each other.
•	 Why would a liquid without hydrogen bonding (such as liquid nitrogen) 
have a lower boiling point than water?
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      37  

Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	Consider iron (Fe), hydrogen gas (H2   ), and ammonia 
(NH3   ). Which of these is/are atoms? Which of them is/are 
molecules? Which of them is/are compounds? Explain.
2.	Where do free radicals come from? What harm do they do? 
What protections do we have against free radicals?
3.	How does an ionic bond differ from a covalent bond?
4.	What is a hydrogen bond? Why do hydrogen bonds depend 
on the existence of polar covalent bonds? What role do  
hydrogen bonds play in the three-dimensional structure of 
large molecules?
Table 2.3  Types of Chemical Bonds 
 
Bond Type
Definition and Characteristics
Ionic Bond
Relatively weak attraction between an anion and a cation. 
Easily disrupted in water, as when salts dissolve.
Covalent Bond
Sharing of one or more pairs of electrons between nuclei.
Single covalent
Sharing of one electron pair.
Double covalent
Sharing of two electron pairs. Often occurs between carbon 
atoms, between carbon and oxygen, and between carbon and 
nitrogen.
Nonpolar covalent
Covalent bond in which electrons are equally attracted to both 
nuclei. May be single or double. Strongest type of chemical 
bond.
Polar covalent
Covalent bond in which electrons are more attracted to one 
nucleus than to the other, resulting in slightly positive and 
negative regions in one molecule. May be single or double.
Hydrogen Bond
Weak attraction between polarized molecules or between 
polarized regions of the same molecule. Important in the 
three-dimensional folding and coiling of large molecules. 
Weakest of all bonds; easily disrupted by temperature and pH 
changes.
2.2  Water, Acids, and Bases
Expected Learning Outcomes 
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the biologically important properties of water;
b.	define acid and base; and
c. interpret the pH scale.
into precise three-dimensional shapes. ­Hydrogen bonds are represented by dot-
ted or broken lines between atoms: —C   O···H—N—.
Table 2.3 summarizes the types of chemical bonds.
38      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Water
We all know that we need water to live, but why? Our bodies are 50% to 75% 
water, depending on age, sex, body fat, and other factors—but again, why? Why not 
some other liquid, or less water? Its structure, simple as it is, has profound biologi-
cal effects. Water is a polar molecule, as discussed previously. The slight negative 
charge on the oxygen and a slight positive charge on each hydrogen explain why. 
Because of this polarity, water molecules are attracted to each other by hydrogen 
bonds. This gives water a set of properties that account for its ability to support life:
∙	 Water is nature’s most versatile solvent. More substances (solutes) dissolve 
in water than in any other liquid. Thus, it is the ideal medium for the chemical 
reactions that must occur in the body, and it is ideally suited for transporting 
substances from place to place, as in the bloodstream. Substances that dissolve 
in water, such as sugars and salts, are said to be hydrophilic3 (HY-dro-FILL-
ic); the relatively few that do not, such as fats, are hydrophobic4 (HY-dro-
FOE-bic).
∙	 Water has the quality of adhesion, the tendency to cling to surfaces such as 
tissue membranes. This makes it a good lubricant in such places as the joints 
and the pericardial sac around the heart; it reduces friction as surfaces rub 
against each other during joint movement and the heartbeat.
∙	 Water also exhibits cohesion, an attraction of its molecules to each other. Its 
hydrogen bonds make water molecules cling together like little magnets. This 
is why water forms puddles and hangs from a faucet in drops, and it accounts 
for the next property of water.
∙	 The cohesion of water gives it relatively great thermal stability, or resis-
tance to temperature changes. To increase in temperature, the molecules of a 
substance must move around more rapidly. The cohesion of water molecules 
inhibits their movement, so water can absorb a given amount of heat without 
changing temperature (molecular motion) as much. Water thus helps to stabi-
lize the body temperature and serves as a very effective coolant. When water 
evaporates, it carries a large amount of heat with it—an effect that is very ap-
parent when you are sweaty and stand in front of a fan. Indeed, the base unit 
of heat is defined in reference to water: one calorie5 (cal) is the amount of 
heat that raises the temperature of 1 g of water 1°C. One thousand calories is 
a kilocalorie (kcal), also known as 1 dietary Calorie (with a capital C).
∙	 The chemical reactivity of water is its ability to participate in chemical re-
actions. Not only does water ionize many other chemicals such as acids and 
salts, but water itself ionizes into hydrogen and hydroxide ions, H+ and OH–. 
These ions can be incorporated into other molecules, or released from them, in 
the course of chemical reactions such as hydrolysis and dehydration synthesis, 
described later in this chapter.
Apply What You Know
Liquid nitrogen, N2, is commonly used for frozen storage of blood, sperm, 
­bacterial and tissue cultures, and other biological specimens. It boils at –196°C, 
in contrast to distilled water, which boils at +100°C. Predict what type of covalent 
bond—polar or nonpolar—liquid nitrogen has. State the reason for your predic-
tion and then explain how that relates to the boiling point of liquid nitrogen being 
almost 300° lower than that of water.
3 hydro = water; philic = loving, attracted to 
4 hydro = water; phobic = fearing, avoiding 
5 calor = heat
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      39  

Body fluids are complex mixtures of water and other chemicals. Much of 
our physiology is aimed at maintaining the proper amount of dissolved matter 
in the body fluids because deviations can have profound effects, with conse-
quences as severe as seizures, cardiac arrest, and death. It is often important to 
know the concentration of a solution—how much solute is present in a given 
volume of water. Solute  concentrations are commonly measured in body fluids 
such as blood and urine, as  well as in intravenous fluids and other liquids given to 
patients. There are several ways of expressing  concentration, suitable for different 
purposes. Appendix C defines and explains the most commonly used measures of 
concentration: weight per volume, percentage, molarity, osmolarity, milliequiva-
lents per liter, and pH.
Acids, Bases, and pH
Most people have some sense of what acids and bases are. Advertisements speak 
of excess stomach acid and pH-balanced shampoo. We know that drain cleaner (a 
strong base) and battery acid can cause serious chemical burns. But what exactly do 
acid and base mean, and how can they be quantified?
An acid is any proton donor, a molecule that releases a proton (H+) in water. 
A base is a proton acceptor. Since hydroxide ions (OH–) accept H+, many bases are 
substances that release hydroxide ions—sodium hydroxide (NaOH), for example. A 
base doesn’t have to be a hydroxide donor, however. Ammonia (NH3) is also a base. 
It doesn’t release hydroxide ions, but it readily accepts hydrogen ions to become the 
ammonium ion (NH4
+).
Acidity is expressed in terms of pH, a measure derived from the concentration 
of H+ (see appendix C). The pH scale (fig. 2.7) was invented in 1909 by Danish 
biochemist and brewer So¨ren So¨rensen to measure the acidity of beer. The scale 
extends from 0.0 to 14.0. A solution with a pH of 7.0 is neutral; solutions with pH 
below 7 are acidic; and solutions with pH above 7 are basic (alkaline). The lower 
the pH value, the more hydrogen ions a solution has and the more acidic it is. Each 
step of the scale represents a 10-fold change in H+ concentration. For example, a 
solution of pH 5.0 has 10 times the H+ concentration as one with a pH of 6.0; a pH 
of 4.0 represents 100 times the H+ concentration at 6.0.
Slight disturbances of pH can seriously disrupt physiological functions and 
alter drug actions (see Clinical Application 2.1), so it is important that the body 
carefully controls its pH. Blood, for example, normally has a pH ranging from 
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
14
Neutral
Oven cleaner, lye
(13.4)
Household
ammonia
(10.5–11.0)
Household
bleach
(9.5)
Egg white
(8.0)
Pure water
(7.0)
Lemon
juice
(2.3)
Wine,
vinegar
(2.4–3.5)
Bananas,
tomatoes
(4.7)
Bread,
black
coﬀee
(5.0)
Milk
(6.3–6.6)
Gastric juice
(0.9–3.0)
1 M 
hydrochloric
acid (0)
1 M sodium
hydroxide
(14)
           
          
     Inc
reasin
gly b
asic 
       
   Inc
reasin
gly aci
dic 
Figure 2.7 The pH Scale. The pH is shown 
within the colored bar.
40      PART 1  Organization of the Body

7.35 to 7.45. Deviations from this range cause tremors, fainting, paralysis, or even 
death. Chemical solutions that resist changes in pH are called buffers. Buffers and 
pH regulation are considered in detail in chapter 16.
Clinical Application 2.1
pH AND DRUG ACTION
The pH of our body fluids has a direct bearing on how we react to drugs. De-
pending on pH, drugs such as aspirin, phenobarbital, and penicillin can exist 
in charged (ionized) or uncharged forms. Whether a drug is charged or not can 
determine whether it will pass through cell membranes. When aspirin is in the 
acidic environment of the stomach, for example, it is uncharged and passes 
easily through the stomach lining into the bloodstream. Here it encounters a 
basic pH, whereupon it ionizes. In this state, it is unable to pass back through 
the membrane, so it accumulates in the blood. This effect, called ion trapping 
or pH partitioning, can be controlled to help clear poisons from the body. The 
pH of the urine, for example, can be clinically manipulated so that poisons 
become trapped there and are more rapidly excreted from the body.
Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
5.	What is meant by the terms hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic?
6.	What physical property of water makes it resistant to 
temperature changes? What specific type of chemical bond is 
responsible for that physical property?
7.	 Why is it important to understand various measures of  
concentration of body fluids and clinical solutions?
8.	Define acid and base, and state what ranges of pH values 
are considered acidic and basic.
2.3   Organic Compounds
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	distinguish between organic and inorganic compounds, and 
define biochemistry;
b.	describe the structural properties that distinguish carbohydrates, 
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids from each other;
c.	describe or define the subclasses of each of those categories of 
biomolecules;
d.	discuss the roles that each of these categories of molecules play 
in the body;
e.	explain how enzymes function; and
f. describe the structure, production, and function of ATP.
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      41  

Carbon is a uniquely suitable element to 
serve as the basis for a broad variety of 
biological molecules. Carbon atoms can 
bond with each other and form long chains, 
branched molecules, and rings. They also 
bind readily to hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, 
sulfur, and other elements. Compounds of 
carbon are called organic compounds, 
distinguishing them from the inorganic 
­compounds, such as water, that we have 
considered up to this point. The study 
of organic compounds is called organic 
­chemistry, and the subdiscipline of this 
that relates such compounds to the pro-
cesses of life is called biochemistry. 
Biochemists classify the larger organic molecules of life into four main cat-
egories: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Some of these mole-
cules attain enormous sizes and are called macromolecules. Most macromolecules 
are polymers6—molecules made of a repetitive series of identical or similar sub-
units called monomers. Starch, for example, is a polymer of about 3,000 ­glucose 
monomers.
Living cells use a process called dehydration synthesis to join monomers 
together to form polymers (fig. 2.8a). They remove a hydrogen (—H) from one 
monomer and a hydroxyl group (—OH) from another, producing water as a by-
product. The two monomers become joined by a covalent bond. This is repeated for 
each monomer added to the chain.
The opposite of dehydration synthesis is hydrolysis7 (fig. 2.8b). In hydrolysis, 
a water molecule ionizes into OH– and H+. The cell breaks a covalent bond linking 
one monomer to another and adds the H+ to one monomer and the OH– to the other 
one. All chemical digestion consists of hydrolysis reactions.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates8 include sugars, starch, and glycogen. They all consist of carbon 
and a 2:1 ratio of hydrogen to oxygen; their very name, carbo + hydrate, loosely 
means “carbon plus water.” For example, glucose (blood sugar) has the formula 
C6H12O6—essentially six carbons and six waters. Carbohydrates are hydrophilic—
they readily absorb or mix with water. The names of individual carbohydrates are 
often built on the word root sacchar- or the suffix -ose, both of which mean “sugar” 
or “sweet.”
Monosaccharides
The simplest carbohydrates are called monosaccharides9 (MON-oh-SAC-uh-
rides), or simple sugars. The three of primary importance are glucose, fructose, 
and galactose, all with the molecular formula C6H12O6; they are isomers of each 
other. We obtain these sugars mainly by digesting more complex carbohydrates, but 
many processed foods contain large amounts of high-fructose corn syrup. Glucose 
(fig. 2.9a) is commonly called blood sugar.
Figure 2.8 Synthesis and Hydrolysis Reac-
tions. (a) In dehydration synthesis, a hydrogen 
atom is removed from one monomer and a hydroxyl 
group is removed from another. These combine 
to form water as a by-product. The monomers be-
come joined by a covalent bond. Repetition of this 
process can produce long molecular chains such 
as polymers. (b) In hydrolysis, a covalent bond be-
tween two monomers is broken. Water donates a 
hydrogen atom to one monomer and a hydroxyl 
group to the other. Polymers such as starch are di-
gested in this manner.
Monomer 1
Monomer 2
OH
HO
OH
HO
OH 
_ 
+
O
Monomer 1
Monomer 2
O
(a) Dehydration synthesis
(b) Hydrolysis
H+
OH 
_ 
+
H+
H2O
H2O
6 poly = many; mer = part 
7 hydro = water; lysis = splitting apart 
8 carbo = carbon; hydr = water 
9 mono = one; sacchar = sugar
42      PART 1  Organization of the Body

10 glyco = sugar; gen = producing
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
(a) Glucose
(b) Sucrose
H
H
CH2OH
H
H
H
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
(c) Glycogen
CH2OH
O
O
O
CH2OH
O
O
CH2OH
O
O
CH2
O
O
CH2OH
O
O
O
CH2OH
O
O
Disaccharides
Disaccharides are sugars composed of two monosaccharides bonded to each other. 
The most important ones are sucrose (made of glucose + fructose), lactose (glucose 
+ galactose), and maltose (glucose + glucose). Sucrose (fig. 2.9b) is common table 
sugar, lactose is milk sugar, and maltose is mainly a product of starch digestion, but 
is present in a few foods such as malt beverages and germinating grains.
Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides (POL-ee-SAC-uh-rides) are polymers of glucose. The 
most important of these are glycogen, starch, and cellulose. Glycogen10 is an  
energy-storage polysaccharide made by the liver, muscles, uterus, and a few 
other organs. It is a long branched polymer (fig. 2.9c). The liver stores gly-
cogen after a meal, when the blood glucose level is high, and then breaks it 
down between meals to maintain blood glucose levels when there is no food 
intake. Muscle stores glycogen for its own energy needs, and the uterus uses it 
in pregnancy to nourish the embryo. Starch is the corresponding energy-storage 
polysaccharide of plants. It is the only significant digestible polysaccharide in 
the human diet. Cellulose is a structural polysaccharide of plants, and is the 
most abundant organic compound on earth. It is the principal component of 
wood, cotton, and paper. Cellulose is indigestible to us, so we derive no energy 
or nutrition from it; yet it is important as dietary fiber (bulk or roughage). It 
swells with water in the digestive tract and promotes movement of other materi-
als through the intestines.
Carbohydrates are, above all, a source of energy that can be quickly mobilized, 
but they have other functions as well (table 2.4). They are often covalently bonded 
to lipids and proteins to form components of mucus, tissue gel, cell membranes, the 
tough matrix of cartilage, the lubricating fluid in joints, and the gelatinous filler in 
the eyeball.
Figure 2.9 Carbohydrate Structures. (a) ­Glucose 
(blood sugar), our most abundant monosaccharide. 
(b) Sucrose (table or cane sugar), a disaccharide, com-
posed of glucose and fructose (the tan sugar). (c) Gly-
cogen, a polysaccharide, composed of long branched 
chains of glucose. Each angle in the rings represents a 
carbon atom except the one where oxygen is shown. 
This is a conventional way of representing carbon in 
the structural formulae of organic compounds.
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      43  

Lipids
Lipids include triglycerides (fats and oils), phospholipids, steroids (such as choles-
terol, estrogen, and testosterone), and others (table 2.5). They are hydrophobic (it is 
well known that oil and water do not mix, for example). Like carbohydrates, lipids 
are usually composed only of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but they have a higher 
ratio of hydrogen to oxygen. A fat called tristearin (tri-STEE-uh-rin), for example, 
has the molecular formula C57H110O6—more than 18 hydrogens per oxygen. Lipids 
are less oxidized than carbohydrates, and thus have more calories per gram. Beyond 
these criteria, it is difficult to generalize about lipids; they are much more variable 
in structure than the other macromolecules we are considering.
Triglycerides and Fatty Acids
Triglycerides (try-GLISS-ur-ides) are commonly called fats if they are solid at 
room temperature and oils if they are liquid. A triglyceride is built by dehydration 
synthesis reactions linking a three-carbon molecule called glycerol with three long 
zigzag carbon chains called fatty acids (fig. 2.10). Fatty acids and the fats made 
from them are classified as saturated or unsaturated. A saturated fatty acid has as 
much hydrogen as it can carry, such as the palmitic and stearic acids in the figure. 
Carbon atoms are limited to forming four covalent bonds, and in saturated fatty 
acids, no more hydrogen could be added without exceeding that four-bond limit; 
Table 2.4  Carbohydrate Functions
Type
Function
Monosaccharides
Glucose
Blood sugar—energy source for most cells
Galactose
Converted to glucose and metabolized
Fructose
Fruit sugar—converted to glucose and metabolized
Disaccharides
Sucrose
Cane sugar—digested to glucose and fructose
Lactose
Milk sugar—digested to glucose and galactose; important in infant 
nutrition
Maltose
Malt sugar—product of starch digestion, further digested to glucose
Polysaccharides
Cellulose
Structural polysaccharide of plants; dietary fiber
Starch
Energy storage in plant cells; dietary source of energy for humans
Glycogen
Energy storage in animal cells (liver, muscle, uterus)
Table 2.5  Some Lipid Functions
Type
Function
Triglycerides
Energy storage; thermal insulation; filling space; binding organs 
together; cushioning organs
Fatty acids
Precursor of triglycerides; source of energy
Phospholipids
Major component of cell membranes
Cholesterol
Component of cell membranes; precursor of other steroids
Steroid hormones
Chemical messengers between cells
Bile acids
Steroids that aid in fat digestion and nutrient absorption
44      PART 1  Organization of the Body

that is, the molecule is “saturated” with hydrogen. In unsaturated fatty acids, 
such as the linoleic acid shown, some carbon atoms are joined by double covalent  
(C   C) bonds. Each of these could potentially share one pair of electrons with 
another hydrogen atom instead of the adjacent carbon, so hydrogen could be added 
to this molecule. Polyunsaturated fatty acids are those with many C    C bonds. A 
saturated fat is a triglyceride made with all saturated fatty acids; an unsaturated or 
polyunsaturated fat has at least one unsaturated fatty acid. Saturated fats and trans 
fats are major contributors to cardiovascular disease (see Clinical Application 2.2).
The primary function of triglycerides is energy storage, but when concentrated 
in adipose (fat) tissue, they also provide thermal insulation and act as a shock-
absorbing cushion for vital organs.
Figure 2.10 Fatty Acid and Triglyceride (Fat) 
Structure. (a) Glycerol and three fatty acids, the 
building blocks of a triglyceride. (b) The triglyceride 
formed by dehydration synthesis, with a glycerol 
“backbone” and three fatty acid “tails.” This triglyc-
eride is shown with two saturated fatty acids and 
one unsaturated fatty acid.
H2O
H
C
C
C
H
Glycerol
(a)
(b)
3   H2O
Unsaturated fat
+
+
H
OH
H
OH
H
OH
C
C
O
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
O
O
H
C
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
H
C
O
O
O
C
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
Stearic acid (saturated) 
CH3(CH2)16COOH
H
C
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
O
HO
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
Linoleic acid (unsaturated)
CH3(CH2)4CH     CHCH2CH     CH(CH2)7COOH
H
C
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
O
HO
H     H     H     H     H     H     H                    H                     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
Palmitic acid (saturated) 
CH3(CH2)14COOH
C
C
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
O
HO
H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H     H
C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C     C
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      45  

Phospholipids
Phospholipids are similar to triglycerides except that in place of one fatty acid, they 
have a phosphate group that, in turn, is linked to another organic group (fig. 2.12). 
The glycerol and phosphate-containing group constitute a hydrophilic “head,” 
and the two fatty acids constitute hydrophobic zigzag “tails” of the molecule. 
Together, the head and two tails of a phospholipid give it a shape like a clothespin. A 
phospholipid is said to be amphipathic11 (AM-fih-PATH-ic)—part of it is attracted 
to water and part of it is repelled. The most important function of phospholipids is 
to serve as the structural foundation of cell membranes. (See chapter 3, where the 
significance of this amphipathic property will be more fully explained.)
Steroids
Steroids are lipids with 17 of their carbon atoms arranged in four rings (fig. 2.13). 
Cholesterol is the “parent” steroid from which the others are synthesized. ­Others 
include cortisol, progesterone, estrogen, testosterone, and bile acids (table 2.5). 
These differ from each other in the location of C
C bonds within the rings and in 
the functional groups attached to the rings.
Clinical Application 2.2
TRANS FATS AND CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
There has been a great deal of public interest lately in trans fats and 
cardiovascular health, with some U.S. states even regulating or ban-
ning the use of trans fats in restaurants. What, then, are trans fats 
and why have they gotten such a bad reputation?
A trans fat is a triglyceride containing one or more trans-fatty 
acids. Ordinarily, when a fatty acid has a C
C double bond, the 
bond creates a “kink” in the chain (fig. 2.11a). These molecules 
are called cis-fatty acids. The kinks prevent triglyceride molecules 
from packing too closely together, making them liquid (oily) at 
room temperature. In the early 1900s, the food industry developed a 
way to modify these into trans-fatty acids. These have straight fatty 
acid chains (fig. 2.11b) that allow the triglycerides to pack closely 
together, making them solid at room temperature. Crisco vegetable 
shortening was the first commercial product composed of trans fats. 
Trans fats are much easier to work with in making pie crusts, bis-
cuits, and other baked goods. They have been used abundantly in 
snack foods, baked goods, fast foods such as french fries, and many 
other foods. Trans fats constitute about 30% of the fat in shortening, 
but only 4% of the animal fat in butter.
The disadvantage of trans fats is that they resist digestion, re-
main in circulation longer, and have more tendency to deposit in the 
arteries than saturated fats and cis fats do. Therefore, they raise the 
risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). From 1980 to 1994, medi-
cal scientists tracked a cohort of 80,082 female nurses (the Nurses’ 
Health Study II) and, among other things, correlated their incidence 
of CHD with their self-reported diets. They concluded that for every 
2% increase in calories from trans fats in place of carbohydrate cal-
ories, the women had a 93% higher risk of CHD. In 2015, the U.S. 
Food and  Drug Administration (FDA) banned artificial trans fats 
from the food supply, giving manufacturers until 2018 to remove 
them from their products.
Figure 2.11 Cis- and Trans-Fatty Acids. Each exam-
ple is unsaturated at the C     C double bond in red. (a) In 
a cis-fatty acid, the bonds angle in the same direction. (b) 
In a trans-fatty acid, the bonds on opposite sides of the  
C   C bond angle in opposite directions, like bicycle ped-
als (arrows). The straight chains of trans-fatty acids allow 
fat molecules to pack together more tightly, thus to remain 
solid (greasy) at room temperature.
O
O
(b) A trans-fatty acid (elaidic acid)
(a) A cis-fatty acid (oleic acid)
OH
OH
11 amphi = both; pathic = feeling
46      PART 1  Organization of the Body

The average adult contains over 200 g (half a pound) of cholesterol, of which 
about 85% is synthesized in one’s own body and 15% comes from animal products 
in the diet. (Plants contain insignificant traces of cholesterol.) Cholesterol has a bad 
reputation as a factor in cardiovascular disease, and it is true that hereditary and 
dietary factors can elevate blood cholesterol to dangerously high levels. Neverthe-
less, cholesterol is a natural product of the body and we  must remember that if we 
did not have cholesterol, we also would not have certain  stress hormones, sex hor-
mones, or other vital products derived from it.
Proteins
The word protein is derived from the Greek word proteios, “of first importance.” 
Proteins are the most versatile molecules in the body, and many discussions in this 
book will draw on your understanding of protein structure and behavior. Table 2.6 
summarizes several of their very diverse functions.
Figure 2.12 Phospholipid Structure. (a) A 
space-filling model that gives some idea of the 
­actual shape of the molecule. (b) A simplified repre-
sentation of a phospholipid used in diagrams of cell 
membranes.
Nitrogen-
containing
group
(choline)
Phosphate
group
Glycerol
Hydrophilic region (head)
Hydrophobic region (tails)
Fatty acid
tails
(a)
(b)
Carbon
Hydrogen
Nitrogen
Oxygen
Phosphorus
Key
HO
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Figure 2.13  Cholesterol.  All steroids have this 
basic four-ringed structure, with variations in the 
side groups and locations of double bonds within 
the rings.
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      47  

Table 2.6 Protein Functions
Function
Examples
Structure
Keratin is a tough protein that strengthens nails, hair, and the skin surface. Collagen is a structural foundation of the bones, 
cartilage, teeth, and deeper layer (dermis) of the skin.
Communication
Some hormones and other cell-to-cell signals are proteins, as are the receptors to which the signal molecules bind in the  
receiving cell.
Membrane transport
Some proteins form channels in cell membranes that govern what can pass through the membrane and when. Others act as 
carriers that briefly bind to solute particles and move them to the other side of the membrane. Among other roles, membrane 
transport proteins turn nerve and muscle activity on and off.
Catalysis
Most metabolic pathways of the body are controlled by enzymes, which are globular proteins that function as biological catalysts.
Recognition and 
protection
Cell surface proteins function in immune recognition; antibodies attack and neutralize toxins and organisms that invade the body; 
clotting proteins seal broken blood vessels and reduce blood loss.
Movement
Proteins are the basis for all movement, ranging from transport of molecules and organelles from place to place within a cell to 
the contractions of muscles and beating of cilia. Some proteins are called molecular motors for their ability to repeatedly change 
shape and produce movement.
Cell adhesion
Proteins bind cells to each other and to the extracellular material, prevent tissues from falling apart, enable sperm to bind to an 
egg and fertilize it, and enable immune cells to bind to enemy cells such as microbes and cancer cells.
Figure 2.14 Amino Acids and Peptide Bond-
ing. (a) Two representative amino acids. Note that 
they differ only in the R group, shaded in pink. (b) 
The joining of two amino acids by a peptide bond, 
forming a dipeptide. Side groups R1 and R2 could be 
the groups indicated in pink in part (a), among other 
possibilities.
Tyrosine
(a)
Arginine
CH2
OH
H
N
C
C
H
O
OH
H
(CH2)3
NH
NH2
NH2+
H
N
C
C
C
H
O
OH
H
H
H
(b)
Amino acid 1
Peptide bond
A dipeptide
Amino acid 2
O
+
+
OH
H
R1
N
C
C
H
H
O
OH
H
R2
N
C
C
H
H
O
H
R1
N
C
C
O
OH
H
R2
H
N
C
C
H2O
A protein is a polymer of amino acids. An amino acid is a small organic 
molecule with a central carbon, an amino group (—NH2), and a carboxyl group 
(—COOH) (fig. 2.14a). There are 20 amino acids employed in protein structure, 
differing from each other in a third functional group, generically symbolized R, 
attached to the central carbon (like the R1 and R2 in the figure). R groups can range 
from a single hydrogen atom to chains  and rings of carbon and other atoms.
Amino acids can be linked together by dehydration synthesis reactions to 
form peptides (a dipeptide for a chain of two amino acids, tripeptide for a chain 
of three, and so forth) (fig. 2.14b). The link formed between the C   O of one 
48      PART 1  Organization of the Body

(c)
Beta chain
Beta
chain
Heme
groups
Alpha chain
Alpha
chain
(b)
(a)
amino acid and —NH of the next is called a peptide bond. Chains larger than 10 
or 15 amino acids are called polypeptides, and most authorities regard proteins as 
any polypeptides of 50 or more amino acids. Some hormones are small peptides, 
such as the one that causes labor contractions, oxytocin. Some others, such as 
growth hormone, are large polypeptides.
You could think of a protein as loosely analogous to a bead necklace with 
20 different-colored beads corresponding to the 20 amino acids from which pro-
teins may be made. Proteins differ from one another in which amino acids occur 
and in what order—their amino acid sequence. This sequence is specified by the 
genetic code in one’s DNA.
Some proteins can function only when a non–amino acid component is bound 
to them. Hemoglobin, for example, requires an iron-containing ring called a heme 
group (fig. 2.15b), without which it cannot transport oxygen; this is one reason 
you must have iron in your diet. Many proteins must have zinc, magnesium, or 
other ions bound to them in order to function.
Protein Shapes
As a protein is assembled, interactions between the amino acids and water, and 
between one amino acid and another, cause the chain to coil and fold into com-
plex three-dimensional shapes. One of the most common shapes is a springlike 
alpha helix (fig. 2.15a), which is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between the amino 
acids of the chain. On a larger scale, proteins commonly have globular or  fibrous 
forms. Globular proteins are folded into rounded compact masses like a wadded ball 
of yarn. This is especially characteristic of proteins such as antibodies, enzymes, 
hormones, and hemoglobin (fig. 2.15b) — compact proteins that dissolve and move 
Figure 2.15 Protein Shapes. (a) A protein composed of four regions of alpha helix 
connected by short nonhelical regions. (b) Hemoglobin, the red blood pigment. This is 
a compact globular protein composed of two identical alpha chains and two identical 
beta chains, all four of which are alpha helices. Each chain possesses a nonprotein 
oxygen-carrying heme group. (c) Collagen, a fibrous protein, forming much of the 
substance of bones, tendons, ligaments, and dermis of the skin. This is composed of 
three alpha helices intertwined into a long ropy triple helix.
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      49  

around freely in the body fluids. Ropelike fibrous forms (fig. 2.15c) are seen in pro-
teins that provide structural strength to tissues, such as the collagen that makes up 
tendons, ligaments, the dermis of the skin, and part of the bone tissue. The shapes 
of globular and fibrous proteins are often stabilized by disulfide bridges—links 
between two proteins, or between two parts of the same protein, through two sulfur 
atoms. These bridges are symbolized —S—S— in some of the art in this book.
The three-dimensional shape (conformation) of a protein is critical to its func-
tion. Two of the most important properties of proteins are their ability to bind and 
release other chemicals and their ability to change shape. Conformation changes 
can be triggered by such influences as electrical changes on a cell membrane or the 
binding of a hormone to a protein. Subtle, reversible changes in conformation are 
important to processes such as enzyme function, muscle contraction, nerve signal-
ing, and the opening and closing of pores in cell membranes. 
Enzymes
Enzymes are proteins that function as biological catalysts; a catalyst is any ­substance 
that enables a chemical reaction to go faster or at lower temperature but that is not 
consumed by that reaction. As catalysts, enzymes permit biochemical reactions to 
occur rapidly at normal body temperatures.
Enzymes were initially given such arbitrary names as pepsin and trypsin. The 
modern system of naming enzymes, however, is more uniform and informative. It 
identifies the substance the enzyme acts upon, called its substrate; it sometimes refers 
to the enzyme’s action; and it adds the suffix -ase. Thus, amylase digests starch (amyl- 
= starch) and carbonic anhydrase removes water (anhydr-) from ­carbonic acid.
An enzyme has surface pockets called active sites that bind specific substrates. 
A substrate fits its active site somewhat like a key fitting a lock. Just as no other key 
will fit a given lock, no other substrates will fit a given enzyme. An enzyme that 
acts on glucose, for example, will not act on the similar sugar fructose. Once a sub-
strate is bound, the enzyme chemically changes it to one or more reaction products, 
releases the products, and is then available to act on another molecule of the same 
substrate (fig. 2.16). Since enzymes are not consumed by the reactions they catalyze, 
one enzyme molecule can convert millions of substrate molecules—and at astonish-
ing speeds. A single molecule of carbonic anhydrase, for example, breaks carbonic 
acid (H2CO3) down to H2O and CO2 at a rate of 36 million molecules per minute.
Figure 2.16 The Three Steps of an Enzymatic 
Reaction. One or more substrate molecules bind 
to the enzyme’s active sites. The substrates and 
enzyme form a temporary enzyme–substrate com-
plex and the substrates react chemically with each 
other. The enzyme releases the reaction products 
and is available to catalyze the same reaction again. 
1 
2 
3 
Sucrase (enzyme)
Enzyme and 
substrate
Sucrose (substrate)
Enzyme–substrate 
complex
Enzyme 
and reaction 
products
Glucose
Fructose
O
O
Active site
C
NH2
N
NH
C
CH
C
H
N
N
C
Adenine (A)
Purines
C
O
N
NH
C
CH
C
N
HN
C
NH2
Guanine (G)
H
C
NH2
C
N
H
C
HC
N
O
Cytosine (C)
Uracil (U)
C
O
C
O
CH
HN
CH
N
H
C
N
H
C
C
HC
CH3
NH
O
O
Thymine (T)
Pyrimidines
(b)
H
HC
N
C
N
NH2
N
C
C
CH
N
H
CH2
O
HO
O
OH
P
H
OH
H
H
O
Adenine
Phosphate
Deoxyribose
(a)
Figure 2.17 Nucleotides and Nitrogenous Bases.  (a) The structure of a nucleo-
tide found in DNA and RNA. (b) The five nitrogenous bases found in DNA and RNA 
nucleotides. DNA has the bases A, T, C, and G. In RNA, U takes the place of T.
50      PART 1  Organization of the Body

(a)
(b)
(c)
T
A
A
T
G
C
G
G
C
C
Sugar–phosphate
backbone
Sugar–phosphate
backbone
G
A
C
T
A
T
A
T
G
C
Hydrogen 
bond
Factors that change the shape of an enzyme—notably temperature and pH—
can alter or destroy the ability of the enzyme to bind its substrate. They disrupt the 
weak forces that hold the enzyme in its proper conformation, essentially changing 
the shape of the “lock” so that the “key” no longer fits. Enzymes vary in optimum 
pH according to where in the body they normally function. For example, a diges-
tive enzyme that works in the mouth functions best at a neutral pH of 7, whereas 
one that works in the more acidic environment of the stomach functions best at a 
pH around 2. Our internal body temperature is nearly the same everywhere, how-
ever, and all human enzymes function best at a temperature of about 37° to 40°C.
When a change in temperature or pH is great enough, it  can change the shape 
of a protein so much that it destroys  its function. This is called denaturation.This 
applies to enzymes as well as other proteins. For example, when you  cook an egg 
and the albumen (egg white) turns from clear to opaque, it is  because the albumen 
is denatured by the heat. Denaturation is sometimes  reversible, but more often it 
permanently destroys protein function.
Nucleic Acids (DNA and RNA)
Nucleic acids are organic polymers that serve as the cell’s genetic machinery—
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which resides in the nucleus (hence the term 
nucleic) and contains the individual’s genes, and a few forms of ribonucleic acid 
(RNA), which carry out the “orders” given by the DNA. Both of these are com-
posed of monomers called nucleotides.
A nucleotide consists of a monosaccharide, a phosphate group, and a 
nitrogenous base, which is a single or double ring of carbon and nitrogen 
atoms (fig. 2.17a). There are five nitrogenous bases. Three of them have a single 
carbon–nitrogen ring and are named cytosine (C), thymine (T), and uracil (U). 
The other two have double rings and are named adenine (A) and guanine (G) 
(fig. 2.17b).
DNA consists of two nucleotide chains twined together in a double helix, 
shaped like a twisted ladder (fig. 2.18). It is the body’s largest polymer, a chain 
of typically 100 million to 1 billion nucleotides. The “backbone” of each helix, 
like the vertical rails of a ladder, consists of phosphate groups alternating with a 
sugar called deoxyribose. The rungs of the ladder are pairs of nitrogenous bases. 
Wherever one chain has an A, the one across from it has a T; where one has C, the 
other has G. Determination of the base sequence of one strand by the sequence 
on the other is called the law of complementary base pairing. A–T and C–G are 
called the base pairs of DNA. Note that a single-ringed base is always paired with 
a double-ringed one, giving the DNA molecule a uniform diameter throughout. 
DNA directs the synthesis of proteins by means of its smaller cousins, the 
ribonucleic acids. There are three types of RNA involved in carrying out the cell’s 
genetic instructions and making protein. All of them differ from DNA in that they 
are much smaller; they are composed of just one nucleotide chain rather than two 
chains twined around each other; and they employ the sugar ribose instead of deoxy-
ribose and contain uracil in place of thymine. DNA normally stays in the nucleus, 
giving orders from there, whereas RNA functions mainly in the cytoplasm, carrying 
out the instructions encoded in the DNA. The actions of DNA and RNA in protein 
synthesis and cell division will be described in the next chapter.
Figure 2.18 DNA Structure. (a) A space-filling molecular model of DNA giving 
some impression of its actual geometry. (b) The “twisted ladder” structure of DNA. 
The two sugar–phosphate backbones (blue) twine around each other to form the 
double helix (lower half of figure), and the nitrogenous bases (colored bars) face each 
other in the center. (c) A small segment of DNA showing backbones of   alternating 
deoxyribose (green) and phosphate (yellow), and the complementary pairing of the 
nitrogenous bases. 
 
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      51  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
nabolic steroids are compounds related to testosterone that 
are used to promote tissue growth and repair. They were first 
developed in the 1950s to treat anemia, breast cancer, osteoporo-
sis, and some muscle diseases. By the 1960s, athletes were using 
them to stimulate muscle growth, accelerate the repair of tissues 
damaged in training or competition, and accentuate the aggres-
siveness needed in such sports as football and boxing.
The doses used by athletes, however, are 10 to 1,000 times 
higher than those prescribed for medical purposes. At such con-
centrations, anabolic steroids raise cholesterol levels and thus pro-
mote coronary artery disease, heart and kidney failure, and stroke. 
Deteriorating blood circulation often causes gangrene and has 
necessitated many limb amputations among steroid abusers. Liver 
disease, immune suppression, behavioral disorders, atrophy of the 
testes, impotence, and overgrowth of the male breasts (gyneco-
mastia) are other common effects. In women, anabolic steroids 
tend to cause atrophy of the breasts and uterus; menstrual irregu-
larity; and overgrowth of facial hair, body hair, and the clitoris.
Because of these severe effects, anabolic steroid use for per-
formance enhancement is condemned by the American Medical 
Association, American College of Sports Medicine, International 
Olympic Committee, National Football League, and National Col-
legiate Athletic Association.
C o l l a g e n  D i s e a s e s
T
he fibrous protein collagen is the most abundant protein in the 
body and gives strength to tendons, ligaments, bone, and car-
tilage. Defects in collagen synthesis therefore cause a wide range 
of disorders collectively called collagen diseases or collagenopa-
thies. Humans have about 28 types of collagen subject to more 
than 1,000 mutations that can affect its chemical structure (amino 
acid sequence) or the quantity synthesized. Such defects can have 
severe effects on the many tissues and organs that depend on 
collagen for strength—tendons, ligaments, bones, blood vessels, 
eyes, and viscera.
Ehlers–Danlos12 syndrome (EDS), for example, has six main 
types that vary in effect from mild to life-threatening. Its most 
common signs are loose ligaments and hyperextensible joints 
that look like one is “double-jointed” to an extreme degree, and 
highly elastic skin that can stretch several centimeters but is very 
fragile. The skin bruises easily and even minor trauma can cause 
wide, gaping wounds. It is very difficult for surgeons to success-
fully suture the skin of such patients, since the sutures tear out 
so easily. Depending on the mutational type, people with EDS 
can also show spinal deformation, frequent hip dislocations, 
fragile eyeballs, extreme muscle weakness, and fragile blood 
vessels that may spontaneously rupture. Virtuoso violinist Nic-
colò Paganini (1782–1840) wrote compositions that many other 
accomplished violinists find nearly impossible to play because 
they require such extraordinarily wide finger placements. It is 
thought that Paganini was able to play such pieces because of 
EDS, exceptionally long fingers, and the associated hypermobil-
ity of his finger and wrist joints.
Another collagen disease is osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), or 
brittle bone disease. The colloquial name comes from the fact that 
collagen-deficient bones fracture very easily. Infants with the most 
severe forms of OI often die before, during, or shortly after birth, 
and are born with severely deformed limbs and multiple fractures 
from birth trauma. Various forms of OI can be characterized by 
fragile and misplaced teeth, spinal deformity, short stature, barrel 
chest, and hearing loss. The white capsule of the eyeball often is 
so thin that internal blood vessels show through and the “whites 
of the eyes” have a blue-gray to purple tint. Many persons with 
OI, however, can enjoy a normal life span and high professional 
achievement. Among them, British actor, playwright, and novelist 
Nabil Shaban (1953–) has made a fascinating documentary, “The 
Strangest Viking” (see YouTube), about speculation that the dwarf-
ish but fearsome Viking known as Ivar the Boneless had OI.
Both EDS and OI appear in infancy and early childhood and 
are sufficiently rare that they are often unrecognized or misdiag-
nosed. There is an added tragedy stemming from the frequent 
bruising of EDS and bone fractures of OI: Parents have been 
falsely accused of child abuse and taken before child protective 
agencies and family court before being exonerated by a correct 
medical diagnosis.
A n a b o l i c  S t e r o i d s
12 Edvard Ehlers (1863–1937), Danish dermatologist; Henri-Alexandre 
Danlos (1844–1912), French dermatologist
52      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP)
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a nucleotide built from the nitrogenous base 
adenine, the sugar ribose, and three phosphate groups (fig. 2.19). It functions as 
the body’s most important energy-transfer molecule. It briefly stores energy gained 
from reactions such as glucose oxidation, and releases it within seconds for physi-
ological work such as synthesis reactions, muscle contraction, and pumping ions 
through cell membranes.
The second and third phosphate groups of ATP are attached to the rest of the 
molecule by high-energy covalent bonds traditionally indicated by a wavy line 
(P~O) in the structural formula. Since phosphate groups are negatively charged, 
they repel each other. It requires a high-energy bond to overcome that repulsive 
force and hold them together—especially to add the third phosphate group to a chain 
that already has two negatively charged phosphates. Most energy transfers to and 
from ATP involve adding or removing that third phosphate.
When ATP breaks down, it loses one phosphate group as inorganic phosphate 
(Pi). The remainder of the molecule becomes adenosine diphosphate (ADP). Most 
of the energy given off is lost as heat, a major contributor to body temperature. A 
small but life-sustaining fraction of the energy, however, is used to do many kinds 
of work in the body.
Figure 2.19 Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP). 
ATP transfers energy from one chemical reaction 
to another. The transferable energy is carried in the 
last two P~O covalent bonds, indicated by wavy 
lines.
C
NH2
N
N
N
H
Adenosine
Adenine
Ribose
Triphosphate
N
CH
HC
C
C
H
H
H
OH
O
OH
CH2
–O
P
O
–O
O
–O
O
–O
O
P
O
O
P
ATP  +  H2O  ⟶  ADP  +  Pi  +  Energy 
Heat
Work
→
→
ATP is a short-lived molecule, usually consumed within 60 seconds of its for-
mation. The entire amount of ATP in the body would support life for less than 1 
minute if it were not continually replenished. At a moderate rate of physical activity, 
a full day’s supply of ATP would weigh twice as much as you do. Even if you never 
got out of bed, you would need about 45 kg (99 lb) of ATP to stay alive for a day. 
The reason cyanide is so lethal is that it halts ATP synthesis.
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      53  

Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
  9.	Which reaction—dehydration synthesis or 
­hydrolysis—converts a polymer to its monomers? Which 
one converts monomers to a polymer? Explain your 
answer.
10.	What is the chemical name of blood sugar? What carbohy-
drate is polymerized to form starch and glycogen?
11.	What is the main chemical similarity between carbohy-
drates and lipids? What are the main differences between 
them?
12.	Explain the statement, All proteins are polypeptides but not 
all polypeptides are proteins.
13.	Use the lock-and-key analogy to explain why exces-
sively acidic body fluids (acidosis) could destroy enzyme 
function.
14.	How does ATP change structure in the process of releasing 
energy?
2.4  Energy and Chemical Reactions
Expected Learning Outcomes 
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	understand how chemical reactions are symbolized by chemical 
equations;
b.	list and define the fundamental types of chemical reactions;
c.	define metabolism and its two subdivisions; and
d.	define oxidation and reduction and relate these to changes in 
the energy content of a molecule.
The essence of life is chemical reactions and energy transfers—in short, ­metabolism. 
We conclude this chapter by examining the basic types of chemical reactions and 
how they relate to metabolism and energy transfer.
Forms of Energy
Energy is the capacity to do work—to move matter or change its structure. Biologi-
cal work is as diverse as digesting starch, moving chemicals through a cell mem-
brane, building a protein, circulating blood, or running a marathon. Energy has two 
principle forms—potential and kinetic.
Potential energy is stored energy, energy that is not doing work at the moment 
but that has the potential to be released and do work. The energy stored in chemical 
54      PART 1  Organization of the Body

bonds, such as the calories in a candy bar, is potential energy. So is energy that exists 
by virtue of the position of matter—for example, the energy stored in a flashlight 
battery or in water backed up behind a dam, which has the potential to flow through 
a turbine and generate electricity.
Kinetic energy is the energy of motion or change—for example, the electrical 
current produced when you turn on a flashlight, the energy of sodium ions flowing 
through the membrane of a nerve cell, the energy of muscle contraction, and the 
heat generated by exercising muscles.
Energy is routinely converted from one form to another, often through chemi-
cal reactions. In muscle contraction, for example, the chemical (potential) energy 
of ATP is released by chemical reactions that produce muscular motion and heat. 
Some energy is lost as heat in every chemical reaction, and then is no longer avail-
able to do useful work.
Classes of Chemical Reactions
A chemical reaction is a process in which a covalent or ionic bond is formed or 
broken. The course of a chemical reaction is symbolized by a chemical equation, 
which typically shows the reactants on the left, the products on the right, and an 
arrow pointing from the reactants to the products. For example, consider the reac-
tion that turns wine sour when it is exposed to air for several days:
CH3CH2OH  +  O2  ⟶  CH3COOH  +  H2O.
Ethanol    Oxygen      Acetic acid     Water
Ethanol and oxygen are the reactants, and acetic acid and water are the products. 
Not all reactions are shown with the arrow pointing from left to right. In com-
plex biochemical equations, reaction chains are often written vertically or even 
in circles.
Chemical reactions can be classified as decomposition or synthesis reactions. 
In decomposition reactions, a large molecule breaks down into two or more smaller 
ones; symbolically, AB → A + B. When you eat a potato, for example, digestive 
enzymes decompose its starch into thousands of glucose molecules (fig. 2.20a), and 
most cells further decompose glucose to water and carbon dioxide. One molecule of 
starch ultimately yields about 36,000 molecules of H2O and CO2.
Synthesis reactions are the opposite—two or more small molecules combine 
to form a larger one; symbolically, A + B → AB (fig. 2.20b). When the body syn-
thesizes proteins, for example, it typically combines 50 or more amino acids into 
one protein molecule (fig. 2.20b).
Reversible reactions can go in either direction under different circumstances 
and are represented with paired or double-headed arrows. For example, carbon 
dioxide combines with water to produce carbonic acid, which in turn decomposes 
into bicarbonate ions and hydrogen ions. In conditions of H+ excess, however, this 
reaction can  go backward (right to left), breaking carbonic acid down into water 
and carbon  dioxide.
CO2  +  H2O  ⇋  H2CO3  ⇋  HCO3-  +  H+
	
Carbon    Water    Carbonic  Bicarbonate  Hydrogen 
	
dioxide              acid        ion        ion
This carbonic acid  reaction appears in this book more often than any other, espe-
cially where we discuss respiratory, urinary, and digestive physiology.
In the absence of upsetting influences, reversible reactions exist in a state of 
equilibrium, in which the ratio of products to reactants is stable. The carbonic 
acid reaction, for example, normally maintains a 20:1 ratio of bicarbonate ions to 
carbonic acid molecules. This equilibrium can be upset, however, by a surplus of 
hydrogen ions, which drive the reaction to the left, or adding carbon dioxide and 
driving it to the right.
Figure 2.20 Decomposition and Synthesis 
Reactions. (a) In a decomposition reaction, large 
molecules are broken down into simpler ones. (b) In 
a synthesis reaction, smaller molecules are joined to 
form larger ones.
Amino acids
Protein 
molecule
Starch molecule
Glucose molecules
(a) Decomposition reaction
(b) Synthesis reaction
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      55  

Metabolism, Oxidation, and Reduction
Metabolism has two divisions—catabolism and anabolism. Catabolism13 (ca-TAB-
oh-lizm) consists of energy-releasing decomposition reactions. Such reactions break 
covalent bonds, produce smaller molecules from larger ones, and release energy 
that can be used for other physiological work. Energy-releasing reactions are called 
exergonic14 reactions. If you break down energy-storage molecules (fats and carbo-
hydrates) to run a race, you get hot. The heat signifies that exergonic reactions are 
occurring. The earlier-described decomposition of ATP to ADP + Pi is an example 
of catabolism.
Anabolism15 (ah-NAB-oh-lizm) consists of energy-storing synthesis reactions, 
such as the production of protein or fat. Reactions that require an energy input, such 
as these, are called endergonic16 reactions. Anabolism is driven by the energy that 
catabolism releases, so endergonic and exergonic processes, anabolism and catabo-
lism, are inseparably linked.
Oxidation is any chemical reaction in which a molecule gives up electrons 
and releases energy. A molecule is oxidized by this process, and whatever mol-
ecule takes the electrons from it is an oxidizing agent (electron acceptor). The 
term oxidation stems from the fact that the electron acceptor is often oxygen. 
The rusting of iron, for example, is a slow oxidation process in which oxygen 
is added to iron to form iron oxide (Fe2O3). Many oxidation reactions, however, 
do not involve oxygen at all. For example, when yeast ferments glucose to 
alcohol, no oxygen is required; indeed, the alcohol contains less oxygen than 
the sugar originally did, but it is more oxidized and contains less energy than 
the sugar:
C6H12O6  ⟶  2 CH3CH2OH  +  2 CO2
Glucose          Ethanol    Carbon dioxide
Reduction is a chemical reaction in which a molecule gains electrons and 
energy. When a molecule accepts electrons, it is said to be reduced; a molecule 
that donates electrons to another is therefore called a reducing agent (electron 
donor). The oxidation of one molecule is always accompanied by the reduction 
of another.
Table 2.7 summarizes the variety of energy-transfer chemical reactions in 
the body.
Table 2.7  Energy-Transfer Reactions in the Human Body
Exergonic Reactions
Reactions in which there is a net release of energy. The products have less total energy than the reactants did.
Oxidation
An exergonic reaction in which electrons are removed from a reactant. The product is then said to be oxidized.
Decomposition
A reaction such as digestion or ATP hydrolysis, in which larger molecules are broken down into smaller ones.
Catabolism
The sum of all decomposition reactions in the body.
Endergonic Reactions
Reactions in which there is a net input of energy. The products have more total energy than the reactants did.
Reduction
An endergonic reaction in which electrons are donated to a reactant. The product is then said to be reduced.
Synthesis
A reaction such as protein and glycogen synthesis, in which two or more smaller molecules are combined into a larger one.
Anabolism
The sum of all synthesis reactions in the body.
13 cata = down, to break down 
14 ex, exo = out; erg = work 
15 ana = up, to build up 
16 end = in; erg = work
56      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
15.	Other than the examples already given in this 
chapter, give an example of potential energy and how it 
might be transformed to kinetic energy.
16.	Distinguish between a decomposition reaction and a 
synthesis reaction, and state one role played by each type in 
the human body.
17.	 Define metabolism, catabolism, and anabolism.
18.	What does oxidation mean? What does reduction mean? 
Which of them is endergonic and which is exergonic?
19.	Suppose you eat a hamburger and your body digests the 
starch of the bun to glucose and digests the protein and fat 
to amino acids and fatty acids. Identify which of the following 
terms pertain to these digestive processes—catabolism, 
reduction, oxidation, anabolism, endergonic, exergonic.
Apply What You Know
When sodium chloride is formed, an electron transfers from a sodium atom to a 
chlorine atom (see fig. 2.2). Therefore, which element—sodium or chlorine—is 
oxidized? Which one is reduced? Explain your answers.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A medical technologist (MT), is one who performs diagnostic tests on body 
fluids and tissue specimens to provide patient information to physicians and 
other clinicians. MTs work in hospital laboratories, doctors’ offices, indepen-
dent diagnostic laboratories, and the biotechnology industry. They work with 
such specimens as blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, pericardial fluid, and bone 
marrow. Using microscopic examination, analytical instruments, and other 
methods, they perform blood counts, liver function tests, urinalysis, comprehensive metabolic panels, blood and tissue typing, 
coagulation panels, lipid profiles, bacteriological cultures, and other assays. Most MTs are generalists, but in large institutions 
they may specialize in such areas as immunology, hematology, or cytogenetics.
Education usually consists of a 4-year undergraduate program that leads to a bachelor’s degree in medical technology. 
Typically, it is a “3 + 1” program with 3 years of classroom instruction and 1 year of clinical rotation; the latter consists of hands-
on training in various laboratory departments. Such programs are taught in universities and hospitals. There are multiple na-
tional certifying organizations (the American Society for Clinical Pathology and others), but states have their own certification 
requirements and some states require a state license in addition to the  national one. Graduate education is available for career 
advancement.
For links to further information on medical technology programs and careers, see appendix B.
M e d i c a l  Te c h n o l o g i s t
© Will & Deni McIntyre/Science Source
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      57  

Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
2.1  Atoms, Ions, and Molecules 
	 1.	 The definition of a chemical element, and the most common 
elements in the human body
	 2.	 The significance of minerals in human structure and function
	 3.	 How protons, neutrons, and electrons are arranged in the 
structure of an atom, and the special significance of valence 
electrons
	 4.	 How chemical isotopes differ from each other, the relationship 
of radioactivity to certain isotopes, and the medical uses and 
risks of ionizing radiation
	 5.	 The differences between an atom and an ion and between a 
cation and an anion
	 6.	 The definition of electrolytes, their physiological roles, and the 
most significant electrolytes in human physiology
	 7.	 The definition of free radicals, their relevance to human physi-
ology, and antioxidants as protection from free radical damage
	 8.	 Distinctions between atoms, molecules, and compounds
	 9.	 How isomers resemble and differ from each other
	10.	 Three types of chemical bonds and the differences between 
them
	11.	 Why polar covalent bonds are necessary for the existence of 
hydrogen bonds, and the role of hydrogen bonds in molecular 
structure
2.2  Water, Acids, and Bases 
	 1.	 The properties of water that make it so important to life, and 
how these arise from the polarity of its covalent bonds
	 2.	 The concepts of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances
	 3.	 How calorie is defined in relation to water
	 4.	 The meanings of acid and base
	 5.	 The pH scale and how acidity and alkalinity are related to their 
respective numerical ranges on the scale
	 6.	 Why it is important that pH be maintained within a relatively 
narrow range in the body
2.3   Organic Compounds 
	 1.	 The definitions of molecules, inorganic molecules, and bio-
chemistry
	 2.	 The meanings of monomer and polymer, how they relate to 
each other, and the roles of dehydration synthesis and hydroly-
sis in converting one to the other
	 3.	 The defining characteristics and functions of carbohydrates
	 4.	 The most relevant monosaccharides, disaccharides, and  
polysaccharides, and their dietary sources and functions
	 5.	 The defining characteristics and functions of lipids
	 6.	 The distinction between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids
	 7.	 The structure of triglycerides and phospholipids; the similarity 
and difference between the two; and their respective functions
	 8.	 The structure and functions of steroids
	 9.	 The characteristics that   all amino acids have in common, and 
how amino acids differ from each other
	10.	 The relationships between amino acids, peptides, polypeptides, 
and proteins
	11.	 The various three-dimensional shapes that proteins assume 
after their amino acid sequence is assembled
	12.	 How the shape of a protein is related to its function and to 
denaturation
	13.	 What enzymes are and their universal role in cellular function
	14.	 The lock-and-key analogy for enzyme–substrate interaction
	15.	 The reason enzymes are so sensitive to variations in tempera-
ture and pH
	16.	 The characteristics that nucleotides have in common and how 
nucleotides differ from each other
	17.	 The double-helix structure and complementary base pairing of 
DNA
	18.	 How RNA differs structurally and functionally from DNA
	19.	 Three major components of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and 
what role ATP plays in cellular metabolism
2.4  Energy and Chemical Reactions 
	 1.	 The definition of energy and the distinction between potential 
and kinetic energy
	 2.	 How chemical reactions are represented; the meanings of 
reactant and product
	 3.	 Reversible reactions and chemical equilibrium
	 4.	 The difference between catabolism and anabolism, and an 
example of each
	 5.	 The essence of oxidation and reduction, how they relate to 
catabolism and anabolism, and how they affect the energy 
content of a molecule
Study Guide
58      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 A substance that ________ is considered to be a chemical 
compound.
a.	 contains at least two different elements
b.	 contains at least two atoms
c.	 has covalent bonds
d.	 has any type of chemical bond
e.	 has a stable valence shell
	 2.	 An ionic bond is formed when
a.	 two anions meet.
b.	 two cations meet.
c.	 an anion interacts with a cation.
d.	 electrons are unequally shared between nuclei.
e.	 electrons transfer completely from one atom to another.
	 3.	 The ionization of a sodium atom to produce Na+ is an 
­example of
a.	 oxidation.
b.	 reduction.
c.	 catabolism.
d.	 anabolism.
e.	 decomposition.
	 4.	 The weakest chemical bonds, easily disrupted by temperature 
and pH changes, are
a.	 polar covalent bonds.
b.	 nonpolar covalent bonds.
c.	 hydrogen bonds.
d.	 ionic bonds.
e.	 disulfide bonds.
	 5.	 A substance capable of dissolving freely in water is
a.	 hydrophilic.
b.	 hydrophobic.
c.	 hydrolyzed.
d.	 hydrated.
e.	 amphipathic.
	 6.	 A carboxyl group is symbolized
a.	 —OH.
b.	 —NH2.
c.	 —CH3.
d.	 —CH2OH.
e.	 —COOH.
	 7.	 The only polysaccharide synthesized in the human body is
a.	 cellulose.
b.	 glycogen.
c.	 cholesterol.
d.	 starch.
e.	 triglyceride.
	 8.	 Disulfide bonds are sometimes important in stabilizing the 
three-dimensional shape of
a.	 the DNA double helix.
b.	 polysaccharides.
c.	 proteins.
d.	 steroids.
e.	 phospholipids.
	 9.	 Which of the following functions is more characteristic of 
carbohydrates than of proteins?
a.	 contraction
b.	 energy storage
c.	 catalyzing reactions
d.	 immune defense
e.	 intercellular communication
	10.	 The feature that most distinguishes a lipid from a carbohydrate 
is that a lipid has
a.	 more phosphate.
b.	 more sulfur.
c.	 a lower ratio of carbon to oxygen.
d.	 a lower ratio of oxygen to hydrogen.
e.	 a greater molecular weight.
	11.	 When an atom gives up an electron and acquires a positive 
charge, it becomes a/an ________.
	12.	 Dietary antioxidants are important because they neutralize 
________.
	13.	 Any substance that increases the rate of a reaction without 
being consumed by it is a/an ________. In the human body,  
________ serve this function.
	14.	 All the synthesis reactions in the body form a division of me-
tabolism called ________.
	15.	 A chemical reaction that produces water as a by-product is 
called ________.
	16.	 The suffix ________ denotes a sugar, whereas the suffix 
________ ­denotes an enzyme.
	17.	 The amphipathic lipids of cell membranes are called 
________.
	18.	 ________ is a nucleotide highly important in transferring 
energy from one chemical reaction pathway to another.
	19.	 Metabolic reactions that break down large molecules into 
smaller ones and release energy are called ________.
	20.	 A substance acted upon and changed by an enzyme is called 
the enzyme’s ________.
Answers in Appendix A
CHAPTER 2   Life, Matter, and Energy      59  

60      PART 1  Organization of the Body
What’s Wrong with These  
Statements?
	Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 The monomers of a polysaccharide are called amino acids.
	 2.	 Water molecules cling together because they are nonpolar.
	 3.	 ATP provides better long-term storage of energy than triglycer-
ides do.
	 4.	 Polar covalent bonds are   stronger than nonpolar covalent 
bonds because of the stronger attraction of a   pair of shared 
electrons to one nucleus than to the other.
	 5.	 Peptide bonds link glucose   molecules into long polymers 
such as starch and glycogen.
	 6.	 A saturated fat is defined as a fat to which no more carbon can 
be added.
	 7.	 Catabolism is an energy-storing oxidation process   that 
combines small, low-energy molecules into large, high-energy 
molecules.
	 8.	 Cellulose is an important source of dietary calories.
	 9.	 Two isomers have identical chemical properties because their 
chemical behavior depends on the number and types of atoms 
present, not on how the atoms are arranged.
	10.	 A solution of pH 8 has 10 times the hydrogen ion concentra-
tion of a solution with pH 7.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 How would the important life-sustaining properties of water 
change if it had nonpolar covalent bonds instead of polar cova-
lent? Explain.
	 2.	 In one form of radioactive decay, a neutron breaks down into a 
proton and electron and emits a gamma ray. Is this an ender-
gonic or exergonic reaction, or neither? Is it an anabolic or 
catabolic reaction, or neither? Explain both answers.
	 3.	 Some metabolic conditions such as diabetes mellitus cause 
disturbances in the acid–base balance of the body, which give 
the body fluids an abnormally low pH. Explain how this could 
affect the ability of enzymes to control biochemical reactions 
in the body.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions:  
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.

Chapter Outline
3.1 The General Structure of Cells
• Cell Components 
• Cell Sizes 
3.2 The Cell Surface
• The Plasma Membrane 
• The Glycocalyx 
• Cell Surface Extensions 
• Cell Junctions 
• Transport Through Cellular Membranes 
3.3 The Cell Interior
• The Cytoskeleton 
• Inclusions 
• Organelles 
• Protein Synthesis 
3.4 The Life Cycle of Cells
• The Cell Cycle 
• Mitosis 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 3.1: When Desmosomes Fail
• Clinical Application 3.2: Calcium Channel ­Blockers
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Cytotechnologist
• Study Guide
Chapter
3
The Cellular Level 
of Organization
Dividing cancer cells from an adenocarcinoma. 
Adenocarcinoma is a tumor arising from glands in the 
mucous membrane of an organ such as the lung.
© Eye of Science/Science Source
Module 2: Cells & Chemistry
B A S E  C A M P
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• “Levels of Human Structure” in section 1.3 
• “Phosphoilipids” in section 2.3
• Protein structure and function (“Proteins” in 
section 2.3)
• “Nucleic Acids (DNA and RNA)” in section 2.3
• “Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP)” in section 2.3
	
61

3.1
 The General Structure of Cells
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	outline and define the major structural components of a cell;
b.	name the fluids inside and outside a cell; and
c.	state the size range of human cells and explain why cell size 
is limited.
T
he most important revolution in the history of medicine was 
the realization that all bodily functions result from cellular activity. 
By extension, nearly every disorder of the body is now recognized as 
stemming from a dysfunction at the cellular level. New technology and 
methods of study have dramatically deepened our understanding of the 
inner workings of cells. This has paved the way for new perspectives on 
the structure and function of the human body and mechanisms of disease, 
and have led to more informed and effective strategies of therapy. Our 
study of cell structure and function in this chapter lays the foundation for 
understanding the rest of this book.
Cytology,1 the study of cellular structure and function, got its start in the seventeenth 
century when inventors Robert Hooke (1635–1703) and Antony van Leeuwenhoek 
(1632–1723) crafted microscopes adequate for seeing individual cells. Cytology 
made little further progress, however, until improved optics and tissue-staining tech-
niques were developed in the nineteenth century. Even then, the material between 
the nucleus and cell surface was thought to be little more than a gelatinous mixture 
of chemicals and vaguely defined particles. When the first biologically useful elec-
tron microscopes were developed in the mid-twentieth century, their vastly superior 
magnification and resolution showed cells to be crowded with a maze of passages, 
compartments, and fibers. Figure 3.1 depicts a very generalized cell. In reality, there 
are about 200 kinds of cells in the human body, with a variety of shapes, sizes, and 
functions.
Cell Components
The major components of a cell are as follows:
Plasma membrane
Cytoplasm
Cytoskeleton
Organelles
Inclusions
Cytosol
1cyto = cell; logy = study of
62      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Apical cell surface
Microﬁlaments
Secretory vesicle
undergoing
exocytosis
Golgi vesicles
Golgi complex
Lateral cell surface
Intermediate ﬁlament
Lysosome
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Microtubule
Plasma membranes
Basement
membrane
Basal cell surface
Free ribosomes
Mitochondrion
Nucleolus
Nuclear
envelope
Nucleus
Intercellular 
space
Centrosome
Centrioles
Secretory vesicle
Desmosome
Fat droplet
Hemidesmosome
Terminal web
Microvillus
2cyto = cell; plasm = formed, molded
Figure 3.1 Structure of a Generalized Cell. The 
cytoplasm is usually more crowded with ­organelles 
than is shown here. The organelles are not all drawn 
to the same scale. Components of the cytoskeleton 
are shown in greater detail in figure 3.12. 
The plasma membrane (cell membrane) forms a cell’s surface boundary. The 
cell’s largest organelle is typically the nucleus. The material between the plasma 
membrane and the nucleus is the cytoplasm.2 It contains the cytoskeleton, a sup-
portive framework of protein filaments and tubules; an abundance of organelles, 
diverse structures that perform various metabolic tasks for the cell; and inclusions, 
which are accumulated cell products such as lipids and pigments or internalized for-
eign matter such as dust and bacteria. The cytoskeleton, organelles, and inclusions 
are embedded in a clear gel called the cytosol.
The cytosol is also called intracellular fluid (ICF). All body fluids not con-
tained in the cells are collectively called the extracellular fluid (ECF). The ECF 
located between the cells is also called tissue fluid. Extracellular fluids also include 
blood plasma, lymph, cerebrospinal fluid, and others.
Cell Sizes
The most useful unit of measurement for designating cell sizes is the 
­micrometer  (µm)—one-millionth (10–6) of a meter, one-thousandth (10–3) of a 
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      63  

­millimeter. The smallest objects most people can see with the naked eye are about 
100 µm, which is about one-quarter the size of the period at the end of this sentence. 
A few human cells fall within this range, such as egg cells and some fat cells, but 
most human cells are about 10 to 15 µm wide. The longest human cells are nerve 
cells (sometimes over a meter long) and muscle cells (up to 30 cm long), but these 
are usually too slender to be seen with the naked eye. With a good light microscope, 
one can see objects as small as 0.5 µm. Objects smaller than that generally require 
an electron microscope.
For a variety of reasons, cells cannot attain unlimited size. If a cell grew exces-
sively large, it would rupture like an overfilled water balloon. Also, molecules could 
not diffuse from place to place fast enough to support its metabolism. The time 
required for diffusion is proportional to the square of distance, so if cell diameter 
doubled, the travel time for molecules within the cell would increase fourfold. For 
example, if it took 10 seconds for a molecule to diffuse from the surface to the 
center of a cell with a 10 µm radius, then we increased this cell to a radius of 1 mm, 
it would take 278 hours to reach the center—far too slow to support the cell’s life 
activities. Having organs composed of many small cells instead of fewer large ones 
has another advantage: The death of one or a few cells is of less consequence to the 
structure and function of the whole organ.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	Which term refers to all the cell contents between the 
plasma membrane and nucleus: cytosol, cytoplasm, 
tissue fluid, or extracellular fluid?
2.	About how big would a cell have to be for you to see it 
­without a microscope? Are any cells actually this big? If so, 
which ones?
3.	Explain why cells cannot grow to an indefinitely large size.
3.2
 The Cell Surface
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify the components of the plasma membrane and state their 
functions;
b.	describe the composition, appearance, and functions of the 
­glycocalyx that coats each cell;
c.	describe the structure and functions of microvilli, cilia, flagella, 
and pseudopods;
d.	name the different types of junctions that connect cells to each 
other, and describe their functions; and
e.	explain the processes for moving material through cellular 
­membranes.
64      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Carbohydrate 
chains
Extracellular 
face of
membrane
Intracellular 
face of 
membrane
Glycolipid
Cholesterol
Extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)
Integral
protein
Channel
Glycoprotein
Proteins of 
cytoskeleton
Intracellular ﬂuid (ICF)
Peripheral
protein
Peripheral 
protein
Phospholipid 
bilayer
A great deal of physiology takes place at the cell surface—for example, the 
binding of signal molecules such as hormones, the stimulation of cellular activity, 
the attachment of cells to each other, and the transport of materials into and out of 
cells. This, then, is where we begin our study of cellular structure and function. Like 
an explorer discovering a new island, we will examine the interior of the cell only 
after we have investigated its boundary.
The Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane defines the boundary of a cell and governs its interac-
tions with other cells. It controls the passage of materials into and out of the 
cell and maintains differences in chemical composition between the ECF and 
ICF. Several organelles are enclosed in membranes that are structurally similar 
to the plasma membrane, but the term plasma membrane refers exclusively to 
the cell surface.
Membrane Lipids
The plasma membrane is an oily, two-layered lipid film with proteins embed-
ded in it (fig. 3.2). About 75% of the lipid molecules are phospholipids. In 
chapter 2, we saw that phospholipids are amphipathic—they have a hydrophilic 
phosphate head and two hydrophobic fatty acid tails. The heads face the water 
on both the inside and outside of the cell, thus forming a sandwichlike phos-
pholipid bilayer. The tails form the middle of the sandwich, as far away from 
the surrounding water as possible. The phospholipids are not stationary but 
highly fluid—drifting laterally from place to place, spinning on their axes, and 
flexing their tails.
Figure 3.2 The Plasma Membrane. Review 
the relationship between the yellow phospholipid 
symbols here and the phospholipid structure in 
­figure 2.12. 
•	 Why do all the phospholipid heads face 
the ECF and ICF and not the middle of the 
membrane?
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      65  

About 20% of the lipid molecules are cholesterol, which affects membrane 
fluidity. If there is too much cholesterol, it inhibits the action of enzymes and other 
proteins in the membrane; too little, and plasma membranes become excessively 
fragile. This is one of ­several reasons why cholesterol, in spite of its undeservedly 
bad reputation in health science, is indispensable to human survival.
The remaining 5% of the lipids are glycolipids—phospholipids with short car-
bohydrate chains bound to the extracellular surface. 
Membrane Proteins
The types of proteins associated with the plasma membrane vary considerably from 
cell to cell, in contrast to the lipid portion, which has the same basic composition 
regardless of cell type. Proteins give membranes specific abilities and contribute 
greatly to the functional differences between cell types. Some proteins adhere only 
to the inner surface of the plasma membrane whereas others penetrate all the way 
through. Most of the latter are glycoproteins, which, like glycolipids, have carbo-
hydrate chains attached to them. Many of them are channel proteins, which have 
pores that selectively allow certain solutes to enter or leave the cell; some of these 
channel proteins act as gates that open or close to allow material to pass through 
only at specific times (fig. 3.3). Gates are important in the timing of the heart’s 
pacemaker, conduction of nerve signals, and contraction of muscles. Other pro-
teins actively bind to chemicals in the ECF or ICF, such as glucose, amino acids, 
and inorganic ions, and transport them through the membrane. Some membrane 
proteins act as receptors for hormones and other chemical messengers from other 
cells. Still others are enzymes that carry out chemical reactions at the cell surface, 
adhesion molecules that bind cells together in a tissue, and cell-identity markers that 
enable the immune system to distinguish our own cells from invaders that should be 
attacked. The functions of membrane proteins are highly diverse and are among the 
most interesting aspects of cell physiology. 
Chemical
messenger
Breakdown
products
Solutes
CAM of 
another cell
Receptor
A receptor that 
binds to chemical 
messengers such 
as hormones sent 
by other cells
Enzyme
An enzyme that 
breaks down 
a chemical 
messenger and 
terminates its
eﬀect 
Channel
A channel protein
that is constantly
open and allows
solutes to pass
into and out of
the cell
Gated channel
A gate that opens
and closes to allow
solutes through
only at certain
times
Cell-identity marker
A glycoprotein 
acting as a cell-
identity marker 
distinguishing the 
body’s own cells 
from foreign cells
Cell-adhesion 
molecule (CAM)
A cell-adhesion 
molecule (CAM) 
that binds one 
cell to another
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Figure 3.3 Some Functions of 
Membrane Proteins.
66      PART 1  Organization of the Body

The Glycocalyx
All cells are covered with a fuzzy carbohydrate coat called the glycocalyx3 (GLY-
co-CAY-licks) (fig. 3.4). It consists of short chains of sugars belonging to the gly-
colipids and glycoproteins. Essentially, every one of our cells is “sugar-coated.” 
The glycocalyx has multiple functions. It includes the cell-adhesion molecules 
previously mentioned. It also cushions the plasma membrane and protects it from 
physical and chemical injury, somewhat like the styrofoam “peanuts” in a ship-
ping carton. It functions in cell identity and thus in the body’s ability to ­distinguish 
its own healthy cells from diseased cells, invading organisms, and transplanted 
tissues. Human blood types and transfusion compatibility are determined by the 
glycocalyx.
Cell Surface Extensions
Most cells have surface extensions of one or more types called microvilli, cilia, 
flagella, and pseudopods. These aid in absorption, movement, sensory processes, 
and phagocytosis.
Microvilli
Microvilli4 (MY-cro-VIL-eye; singular, microvillus) are extensions of the 
plasma membrane, about 1 to 2 µm long, that serve primarily to increase its 
surface area (fig. 3.4). They are best developed in cells specialized for absorp-
tion, such as the epithelial cells of the small intestine and kidney tubules. 
Microvilli give a cell up to 40 times more absorptive surface area. On cells of 
the taste buds and inner ear, they are well developed but less numerous, and 
instead of absorptive functions, they serve sensory roles such as detecting 
food chemicals or sound.
Cilia
Cilia5 (SIL-ee-uh; singular, cilium) are hairlike processes about 7 to 10 µm long. 
They are supported by a core of microtubules that, in cross section, looks a bit like 
a Ferris wheel. Each pair of microtubules is equipped with little motor proteins that 
produce the beating motion of the cilium. Figure 3.5 shows this arrangement and 
contrasts the size of cilia with that of microvilli. 
Cells of the respiratory tract and uterine (fallopian) tubes typically have about 
50 to 200 cilia each (fig. 3.5a). They beat in waves that sweep across the surface of 
an epithelium. In the respiratory tract, they move mucus from the lungs and trachea 
up to the throat, where it is swallowed. In the uterine tubes, they move an egg or 
embryo toward the uterus, like people in a stadium passing a beach ball overhead 
from hand to hand.
Nearly every cell of the body also has a nonmotile, usually solitary primary 
cilium, apparently serving as the cell’s “antenna” for monitoring nearby conditions. 
The light-absorbing parts of the retinal cells in the eye are elaborately modified 
primary cilia; in the inner ear, they play a role in the senses of motion and balance; 
and in kidney tubules, they are thought to monitor fluid flow. Odor molecules bind 
to nonmotile cilia on the sensory cells of the nose.
Figure 3.4 The Glycocalyx and Brush ­Border. 
The microvilli are anchored by protein filaments, 
which occupy the core of each microvillus and proj-
ect into the cytoplasm. The glycocalyx is composed 
of short carbohydrate chains (oligosaccharides) 
bound to the membrane phospholipids and proteins.
© Don W. Fawcett/Science Source
•	 Name an organ of the body from which this cell 
might have come. Explain your answer.
1.0 μm
Glycocalyx
Protein
ﬁlaments
Microvillus
3glyco = sugar; calyx = cup, vessel 
4micro = small; villi = hairs 
5cilia = hairs
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      67  

Cilia
Microvilli
Cilia
Microvilli
Central
microtubule
Peripheral
microtubules
(a)
(b)
10 μm
0.15 μm
Motor
protein
Flagella
A flagellum6 (fla-JEL-um) resembles a long solitary cilium. The only functional 
flagellum in humans is the whiplike tail of a sperm cell, measuring about 50 µm 
long (see fig. 19.13). It has a core of microtubules like a cilium, but it is stiffened 
by a sheath of filaments in a space between those and the plasma membrane. Sperm 
use the tail to crawl like a snake up the mucous membrane of the uterus and uterine 
tubes in their quest to find an egg.
Figure 3.5 The Structure of Cilia. (a) Epithelium of the uterine (fallopian) tube (SEM). The short, mucus-secreting cells between the ciliated 
cells show bumpy microvilli on their surfaces. (b) Cross section of a few cilia and microvilli (TEM). Note the relative sizes of cilia and microvilli.
a: © SPL/Science Source b: © Don Fawcett/Science Source
6flagellum = whip
68      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Apply What You Know
Kartagener syndrome is a hereditary disease in which cilia and flagella lack 
the motor protein and therefore cannot move. How do you think Karta-
gener syndrome will affect a man’s ability to father a child? How might it 
affect his respiratory health? Would it affect a woman’s fertility? Explain 
your answers.
Pseudopods
Pseudopods7  are cytoplasm-filled extensions of the cell ranging from fila-
mentous to blunt fingerlike processes (fig. 3.6). They change shape continu-
ally; some form anew as the cell surface bubbles outward and cytoplasm flows 
into it, usually at the leading end of a moving cell, while others at the “tail” 
end are retracted into the cell. Some white blood cells use pseudopods to crawl 
about in the tissues, and when they encounter a bacterium or other foreign 
particle, they reach out with pseudopods to surround and engulf it. Tissue 
cells called macrophages snare bacteria with thin filamentous pseudopods and 
“reel them in” to be digested by the cell. Like little janitors, macrophages and 
white blood cells keep our tissues cleaned up and defend us against bacteria 
and other invaders.
Cell Junctions
In complex multicellular organisms, no cell is independent of the others. Pro-
teins at the cell surface form cell junctions that link cells together and attach 
them to the extracellular material. Such attachments enable cells to grow and 
divide normally, resist stress, and communicate with each other. The three prin-
cipal types of junctions between cells are tight junctions, desmosomes, and gap 
­junctions (fig. 3.7).
A tight junction completely encircles an epithelial cell near its 
upper end and joins it securely to adjacent cells, somewhat like the 
plastic harness on a six-pack of soda cans. The junctions are formed by 
the fusion of the plasma membranes of neighboring cells, and seal off 
the ­intercellular space. Substances are restricted from passing between 
the epithelial cells, but rather must pass through them, ensuring that the 
epithelial cells chemically process materials that travel across. In the 
stomach and intestines, for example, tight junctions prevent digestive 
juices from leaking between epithelial cells and digesting the underlying 
tissue, and they help prevent bacteria from invading the tissues. In some 
cases, however (such as the kidneys and small intestine), these “tight” 
junctions can be quite leaky and allow appreciable movement of water 
and solutes between cells.
A desmosome8 (DEZ-mo-some) is a patch of interlocking proteins 
that holds cells together at a specific point somewhat like a snap on a 
pair of jeans. Desmosomes keep cells from pulling apart and thus enable 
7pseudo = false; pod = foot 
8desmo = band, bond, ligament; som = body 
Figure 3.6 Pseudopods. (a) Amoeba, a freshwa-
ter organism that crawls and captures food by means of 
pseudopods. (b) A neutrophil (white blood cell) that uses 
pseudopods for locomotion and capturing bacteria. (c) A 
macrophage extending slender pseudopods to snare and 
“reel in” bacteria.
Pseudopods
(a)
(b)
(c)
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      69  

a ­tissue to resist mechanical stress. Desmosomes are common in 
such tissues as the epidermis and cardiac muscle. Without them, 
your skin would peel off when you rubbed it, a swallow of food 
would scrape away the lining of your esophagus, and a heartbeat 
would pull your cardiac muscle cells apart.
Apply What You Know
Why wouldn’t desmosomes be suitable as the sole type of intercel-
lular junctions between epithelial cells of the stomach?
A gap junction is formed by a ring of six proteins arranged some-
what like the segments of an orange, surrounding a water-filled chan-
nel. Ions, glucose, amino acids, and other small solutes can diffuse 
through the channel directly from the cytoplasm of one cell into the 
next. In the human embryo, nutrients pass from cell to cell through gap 
junctions until the circulatory system forms and takes over the role of 
nutrient distribution. In cardiac muscle, gap junctions allow electrical 
excitation to pass directly from cell to cell so that the cells contract in 
near unison.
Transport Through Cellular Membranes
The human body is compartmentalized by various cellular 
­membranes—the epithelia (sheets of cells) that line the blood ves-
sels, digestive and respiratory tracts, and other surfaces; the plasma 
membranes that form the outer boundaries of all cells; and intra-
cellular membranes of the various organelles detailed later. These 
membranes cannot be impenetrable, like brick walls, but must 
allow chemicals to pass through. Otherwise nutrients and oxygen 
could never leave the bloodstream to serve the tissues, cells could 
not take up needed substances or get rid of wastes, and organ-
elles could not exchange materials with the rest of the cytoplasm. 
These membranes are all selectively permeable, allowing some 
­substances to pass through while holding back others. Here we 
examine nine methods by which materials move through the body’s 
various membranes.
9pemphigus = blistering; vulgaris = common
Basement membrane
Tight
junction
Cytoskeletal
proteins
Desmosome
Gap
junction
Figure 3.7 Cell Junctions.
•	 Which type of junction allows materials to pass 
directly from cell to cell?
Clinical Application 3.1
WHEN DESMOSOMES FAIL
We often get our best insights into the importance of a structure from the 
dysfunctions that occur when it breaks down. Desmosomes are destroyed in 
a disease called pemphigus vulgaris9 (PEM-fih-gus vul-GAIR-iss), in which 
the immune system launches a misguided attack on the desmosome proteins, 
especially in the skin. The resulting breakdown of desmosomes between the 
cells leads to widespread blistering of the skin and oral mucosa, loss of tissue 
fluid, and sometimes death. The condition can be controlled with drugs that 
suppress the immune system, but such drugs compromise the body’s ability to 
fight off infections.
70      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Filtration
Filtration is a process in which a physical pressure drives fluid 
through a selectively permeable barrier that holds large parti-
cles back and allows water and small particles to pass through. 
An everyday example is the process of brewing coffee, where 
water pressure (weight of the water) drives water and dissolved 
matter through the paper filter while holding the coffee grounds 
back. The most important example in the human body is blood 
pressure driving water and small solutes through gaps in the 
walls of the capillaries, while holding blood cells and large 
molecules such as proteins in the bloodstream. Filtration is the 
mechanism by which salts, nutrients, and other blood solutes 
are delivered to the cells of surrounding tissues, and how the 
kidneys selectively filter wastes from the blood.
Simple Diffusion
Simple diffusion (fig. 3.8a) is the net movement of par-
ticles from a place of high concentration to a place of low 
­concentration—in other words, down a concentration gradient. 
This is how ­oxygen and steroid hormones enter cells and carbon 
dioxide leaves them, for example. The cell doesn’t expend energy 
to achieve this; all molecules are in spontaneous random motion, 
and this alone provides the energy for their diffusion through 
space. Molecules can diffuse through both living membranes 
(the plasma membrane) and nonliving ones (such as dialysis 
tubing and ­cellophane) if the membrane has large enough gaps 
or pores. Nonpolar solutes such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, 
and hydrophobic substances such as steroids, diffuse through the 
lipid regions of the plasma membrane; hydrophilic solutes such 
as salts, however, can diffuse only through the water-filled pro-
tein channels of the membrane.
Osmosis
Osmosis10 (oz-MO-sis) is the net movement of water through 
a selectively permeable membrane from the side where there 
is a relatively low concentration of solutes (the “more watery” 
side) to the side where there is a higher solute concentra-
tion (the “less watery” side) (fig. 3.9). The reason it occurs 
is that when water molecules move to the high-solute side, 
they tend to loosely cling to the solute molecules. Becoming 
less mobile, they are not as able to break free and cross back 
to the low-solute side; there are more water molecules on the 
low-solute side free to pass through the membrane than there 
are on the high-solute side. Thus, if the fluids on two sides 
of a cell membrane differ in the concentration of dissolved 
matter (and these solutes cannot penetrate the membrane), 
water tends to move by osmosis from the more dilute to the 
less dilute side. Osmosis plays a key role in many aspects of 
homeostasis. For example, blood capillaries absorb fluid from 
the tissues by osmosis, thereby removing metabolic wastes 
from the tissues and preventing them from swelling.
10osm = push, thrust; osis = condition, process
(a) Simple diﬀusion
Lipid-soluble solutes
diﬀuse through 
membrane 
phospholipid.
Water-soluble solutes
diﬀuse through
channel proteins.
Low
concentration
High
concentration
Solute moves
down its
concentration
gradient.
High
concentration
Solute binds to 
receptor site on 
transport protein.
Protein releases
solute on other side
of membrane.
Protein
changes
shape.
Solute moves
down its
concentration
gradient.
(b) Facilitated diﬀusion
Low
concentration
Solute moves
up its
concentration
gradient.
(c) Active transport
Low
concentration
High
concentration
Protein breaks down
ATP.  Pi binds 
to protein and 
induces shape
change.
Solute binds
to receptor 
site on
transport
protein.
Protein releases 
solute to other
side of membrane 
and releases Pi.
Receptor site
ATP
ADP
Pi
Pi
Figure 3.8 Some Modes of Membrane Transport. 
 
•	 Which of these processes can also occur in synthetic membranes 
such as cellophane or dialysis tubing?
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      71  

Osmotic balance is crucial to the survival and function of living cells. If a cell 
is in balance with the surrounding fluid, it gains and loses water at equal rates and 
maintains a stable volume and internal pressure. If there is an osmotic imbalance, 
however, the cell may shrivel and die from loss of water or swell with excess water 
and potentially burst. Either of these can be fatal to the person, as seen in the many 
cases of people who have died of dehydration or, conversely, because they lost water 
and electrolytes through urine and sweat and tried to replace their losses by drinking 
large volumes of plain water.
The ability of a solution to affect intracellular pressure and volume is called 
tonicity. It is determined by the concentration of solutes, inside the cell and out, that 
cannot pass through the plasma membrane (­nonpermeating solutes) but drive the 
cell’s gain or loss of water. If the intracellular and ­extracellular fluids (ICF and ECF) 
have the same tonicity, they are said to be isotonic11 with each other. In an isotonic 
solution, cells gain and lose water at equal rates and cell volume remains constant 
(fig. 3.10b). The saline ­sometimes given to patients in intravenous fluid therapy, 
0.9% sodium ­chloride (NaCl), is isotonic saline. But if the ECF has a higher concen-
tration of nonpermeating solutes than the ICF, such as 2% NaCl, it is hypertonic12 
to the cells and can cause cellular damage and death by drawing water out of them 
(fig. 3.10c). However, hypertonic intravenous fluid is sometimes given deliberately 
to patients for such purposes as reducing swelling of the brain (cerebral edema) 
by drawing excess water out of the cells. If the ECF has a lower concentration of 
nonpermeating solutes than the ICF, it is ­hypotonic13 to the cells and causes cellular 
swelling and potentially ruptures them (fig. 3.10a).
Apply What You Know
In dehydration, the relative solute concentration of the extracellular fluid (ECF) 
increases. How does this affect the volume (sizes) of cells? Explain.
Figure 3.9 Osmosis. The dashed line repre-
sents a selectively permeable membrane dividing 
the chamber in half. The large particles on side B 
represent any solute, such as protein, too large to 
pass through the membrane. The small particles are 
water molecules. Water passes predominantly from 
side A to side B and aggregates around the solute 
particles. This inhibits the water from moving back to 
side A. Fluid level rises in side B and falls in side A.
Side B
Side A
30 minutes later
Start
Solute
Water
Figure 3.10 Effects of Tonicity on Red Blood Cells (RBCs). (a) An RBC in a hypotonic medium, such as distilled water, absorbs more 
water from the medium than it loses to it and therefore swells and may rupture. (b) An RBC in an isotonic medium gains and loses water at equal 
rates and therefore maintains its normal shape and volume. (c) An RBC in a hypertonic medium loses more water than it gains and therefore 
shrivels. Cells in situations (a) and (c) are likely to die.
a–c: © David M. Phillips/Science Source
11iso = equal; ton = tension 
12hyper = more;  ton = tension 
13hypo = less; ton = tension
(a) Hypotonic
(b) Isotonic
(c) Hypertonic
72      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Facilitated Diffusion
The next two processes, facilitated diffusion and active transport, are called carrier-
mediated transport because they employ carrier proteins in the plasma membrane. 
Facilitated14 diffusion (see fig. 3.8b) is the movement of a solute through a cel-
lular membrane, down its concentration gradient, with the aid of a carrier. It does 
not involve any ATP (energy) expenditure by the cell. The carrier binds a particle 
on the side of a membrane where the solute is more concentrated, then releases it 
on the side where it is less concentrated. The carrier transports solutes that other-
wise couldn’t pass through the membrane or would pass less efficiently. One use 
of ­facilitated diffusion is to absorb the sugars and amino acids from digested food.
Active Transport
Active transport (see fig. 3.8c) is a process that employs a carrier protein and uses 
energy from ATP to move a solute through the membrane up its concentration 
gradient—that is, from the side where it is less concentrated to the side where it 
is already more concentrated. Active transport requires ATP because moving par-
ticles up a gradient requires an energy input, like getting a wagon to roll uphill. If a 
cell stops producing ATP, owing to cell death or poisoning, active transport ceases 
immediately.
An especially important active-transport process is the sodium–potassium 
(Na+–K+) pump. Sodium is normally much more concentrated in the ECF than 
in the ICF, and potassium is more so in the ICF. Yet cells continually pump more 
Na+ out and more K+ into the cell. The Na+–K+ pump binds three sodium ions from 
the ICF and ejects them from the cell, then binds two potassium ions from the ECF 
and releases these into the cell. It repeats the process over and over, using one ATP 
molecule for each cycle. The Na+–K+ pump plays roles in controlling cell volume 
(water follows Na+ by osmosis); generating body heat (ATP consumption releases 
heat); maintaining the electrical excitability of your nerves, muscles, and heart; and 
providing energy for other transport pumps to draw upon in moving such solutes as 
glucose through the plasma membrane. About half of the calories that you “burn” 
every day are used just to operate your Na+–K+ pumps.
Vesicular Transport
All of the processes discussed up to this point move molecules or ions individually 
through the plasma membrane. In vesicular transport, however, cells move larger 
14facil = easy
Clinical Application 3.2
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Membrane channels may seem only an abstract concept until we see how they 
relate to disease and drug design. For example, drugs called calcium channel 
blockers are often used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). How do they 
work? The walls of the arteries contain smooth muscle that constricts to narrow 
the vessels and raise blood pressure, or relaxes to let them widen and reduce 
blood pressure. Excessive, widespread vasoconstriction (vessel narrowing) can 
cause hypertension, so one approach to the treatment of hypertension is to in-
hibit vasoconstriction. In order to constrict, smooth muscle cells open calcium 
channels in the plasma membrane. The inflow of calcium activates the proteins 
of muscle contraction. Calcium channel blockers act, as their name says, by pre-
venting calcium channels from opening and thereby preventing constriction.
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      73  

(d) Exocytosis
(c) Receptor-mediated endocytosis
(b) Pinocytosis
(a) Phagocytosis
Pseudopod
Bacteria
Phagosome
Nucleus
Pinocytotic vesicle
Vesicle
Receptor
Solute
Cell product
Secretory
vesicle
particles or droplets of fluid through the membrane in bubblelike vesicles. Like 
active transport, all forms of vesicular transport require ATP. Figure 3.11 illustrates 
the principal modes of vesicular transport.
All vesicular processes that bring matter into a cell are called ­endocytosis15 
(EN-doe-sy-TOE-sis). There are three forms of endocytosis: phagocytosis, pinocy-
tosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
In phagocytosis16 (FAG-oh-sy-TOE-sis), or “cell eating,” a cell reaches out 
with its pseudopods and surrounds a particle such as a bacterium or a bit of cell 
debris. It engulfs the particle and enzymatically degrades it (fig. 3.11a). Phagocy-
tosis is carried out especially by white blood cells and macrophages. Some 
macrophages consume as much as 25% of their own volume in material per 
hour, thus living up to their name17 and playing a vital role in cleaning 
up the tissues.
Figure 3.11 Modes of Vesicular Transport. 
(a) Phagocytosis. A white blood cell engulfing bac-
teria with its pseudopods. (b) Pinocytosis. A cell 
imbibing droplets of extracellular fluid. (c) Receptor-­
mediated endocytosis. The Ys in the plasma mem-
brane represent membrane receptors. The recep-
tors bind a solute in the extracellular fluid, then 
cluster together. The membrane caves in at that 
point until a vesicle pinches off into the cytoplasm 
bearing the receptors and bound solute. (d) Exocy-
tosis. A cell releasing a secretion or waste product. 
 
15endo = into; cyt = cell; osis = process 
16phago = eating; cyt = cell; osis = process 
17macro = big; phage = eater
74      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Pinocytosis18 (PIN-oh-sy-TOE-sis), or “cell drinking,” occurs in all human 
cells. In this process, dimples form in the plasma membrane and progressively cave 
in until they pinch off as vesicles containing droplets of extracellular fluid (ECF) 
(fig. 3.11b). One use of pinocytosis is seen in kidney tubule cells; they use this 
method to reclaim the small amount of protein that filters out of the blood, thus 
preventing protein from being lost in the urine.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis (fig. 3.11c) is more selective. It enables a cell 
to take in specific molecules from the ECF with a minimum of unnecessary fluid. 
Chemical messengers in the ECF bind to specific receptor proteins on the plasma 
membrane. The receptors then cluster together and the membrane sinks in at this 
point, creating a pit. The pit soon pinches off to form a vesicle in the cytoplasm. One 
use of receptor-mediated endocytosis is the absorption of insulin from the blood. 
Hepatitis, polio, and AIDS viruses “trick” cells into admitting them by receptor-
mediated endocytosis.
Exocytosis19 (fig. 3.11d) is the process of discharging material from a cell 
by vesicular transport. It is used, for example, by digestive glands to secrete 
enzymes, by breast cells to secrete milk, and by sperm cells to release enzymes 
for penetrating an egg. It resembles endocytosis in reverse. A secretory vesicle 
in the cell migrates to the surface and fuses with the plasma membrane. A pore 
opens up that releases the product from the cell, and the empty vesicle usually 
becomes part of the plasma membrane. In addition to releasing cell products, 
exocytosis is the cell’s way of replacing the bits of membrane removed by 
endocytosis.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4.	What property of phospholipid molecules causes 
them to organize themselves into a bilayer?
5.	Which of these is important in determining blood 
­transfusion compatibility: cell-adhesion molecules, 
­me­mbrane ­carriers, membrane cholesterol, the 
­glycocalyx, or ­microvilli? Explain.
6.	Compare and contrast microvilli and cilia in terms of their 
structure, function, and general location.
7.	 Which type of cell junction best serves to keep food from 
scraping away the lining of your oral cavity? Which type 
enables a cardiac muscle cell to electrically stimulate the 
neighboring cell? Which type best serves to keep your 
­digestive enzymes from eroding the tissues beneath 
your ­intestinal lining?
8.	What membrane transport processes get all the neces-
sary energy from the spontaneous movement of mol-
ecules? What ones require ATP as a source of energy? 
Which processes are carrier-mediated? Which ones 
are not?
18pino = drinking; cyt = cell; osis = process 
19exo = out of; cyt = cell; osis = process
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      75  

3.3  The Cell Interior
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the cytoskeleton, its three components, and its 
­functions;
b.	give some examples of cell inclusions and explain how ­inclusions 
differ from organelles;
c.	list the main organelles of a cell and explain their functions; and
d.	describe how cells synthesize, process, package, and secrete 
proteins.
We now probe more deeply into the cell to study the structures in the cyto-
plasm. These are classified into three groups—cytoskeleton, inclusions, and 
organelles—all embedded in the clear, gelatinous cytosol. If we think of a cell 
as being like an office building, the cytoskeleton would be the steel beams and 
girders that hold it up and define its shape and size; the plasma membrane and 
its channels would be the building’s exterior walls and doors; and organelles 
would be the interior rooms that divide the building into compartments with 
different functions.
The Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a network of protein filaments and tubules. It often forms 
a very dense supportive web in the cytoplasm (fig. 3.12). It structurally sup-
ports a cell, determines its shape, organizes its contents, and—going beyond 
our office building analogy—transports substances within the cell and con-
tributes to movements of the cell as a whole. It is connected to proteins of 
the plasma membrane and they in turn are connected to proteins external to 
the cell, so there is a strong structural continuity from the cytoplasm to the 
extracellular material.
The cytoskeleton is composed of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and 
microtubules. Microfilaments are about 6 nanometers (nm) thick and are made of 
the protein actin. They form a dense fibrous mesh called the terminal web on the 
internal side of the plasma membrane. The oily plasma membrane is spread out 
over the terminal web like butter on a slice of bread. It is thought that the membrane 
would break up into little droplets without this support. Actin is also the supportive 
protein in the cores of the microvilli (see fig. 3.4) and plays a role in muscle contrac-
tion and other cell movements.
Intermediate filaments (8–10 nm in diameter) are thicker and stiffer than 
microfilaments. They contribute to the strength of the desmosomes and include 
the tough protein keratin that fills the cells of the epidermis and gives strength to 
the skin.
Microtubules (25 nm in diameter) are hollow cylinders of protein. They hold 
organelles in place, form bundles that maintain cell shape and rigidity, and act some-
what like monorails to guide organelles and molecules to specific destinations in a 
cell. They form the cores of cilia and flagella as well as the centrioles and mitotic 
spindle involved in cell division (described later).
76      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Microvilli
Microﬁlaments
Secretory
vesicle in
transport
Desmosome
Intermediate
ﬁlaments
Centrosome
Microtubule
undergoing
disassembly
Mitochondrion
Terminal web
Lysosome
Microtubule
Nucleus
Microtubule
in the process
of assembly
Intermediate
ﬁlaments
(a)
(b)
Basement
membrane
Motor protein
Figure 3.12 The Cytoskeleton. (a) Artist’s conception of the cytoskeleton. 
Most organelles are omitted in order to emphasize the cytoskeletal filaments and 
­microtubules. (b) Cells with their cytoskeleton selectively labeled with a fluorescent 
dye. These show that the cytoskeleton is actually far denser than shown in part (a).
b: © Dr. Torsten Wittmann/Science Source
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      77  

If you think of intermediate filaments as being like stiff uncooked spaghetti, 
you could, by comparison, think of microfilaments as being like fine angel-hair 
pasta and microtubules as being like tubular penne pasta.
Inclusions
Inclusions are of two kinds: stored cellular products such as pigments, fat glob-
ules, and glycogen granules; and foreign bodies such as viruses, bacteria, and dust 
particles or other debris phagocytized by a cell. Inclusions are never enclosed in 
a membrane, and unlike the organelles and cytoskeleton, they are not essential to 
cell survival.
Organelles
Organelles (literally “little organs”) are to the cell what organs are to the body—
metabolically active structures that play individual roles in the survival of the whole 
(see fig. 3.1). A cell may have 10 billion protein molecules, some of which are 
potent enzymes with the potential to destroy the cell if they’re not contained and 
isolated from other cellular components. You can imagine the enormous problem of 
keeping track of all this material, directing molecules to the correct destinations, and 
maintaining order against the incessant tendency toward disorder. Cells maintain 
order partly by compartmentalizing their contents in organelles. Figure 3.13 shows 
the most important ones.
The Nucleus
The nucleus (fig. 3.13a) is the largest organelle and usually the only one visible with 
the light microscope. Most cells have only one nucleus, but there are exceptions. 
Mature red blood cells have none, whereas some cells have dozens of nuclei, such 
as skeletal muscle cells and certain bone-dissolving cells.
The nucleus is surrounded by a nuclear envelope consisting of two paral-
lel membranes. The envelope is perforated with nuclear pores formed by a ring-
shaped complex of proteins. These proteins regulate molecular traffic into and out 
of the nucleus and bind the two membranes together.
The nucleus contains the chromosomes20—threadlike bodies of DNA and 
protein—and is therefore the genetic control center of cellular activity. In non-
dividing cells, they are in the form of very fine filaments broadly dispersed 
throughout the nucleus, visible only with the electron microscope. Collectively, 
this material is called chromatin (CRO-muh-tin). The nucleus also usually 
exhibits one or more dense masses called nucleoli (singular, nucleolus), where 
subunits of the ribosomes (described shortly) are made before they are trans-
ported out to the cytoplasm.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The term endoplasmic reticulum (ER) literally means “little network within the 
cytoplasm.” The ER is a system of interconnected channels called ­cisternae21 
(­sis-TUR-nee) enclosed by a membrane (fig. 3.13b). In areas called rough 
endoplasmic reticulum, the cisternae are flat, parallel, and covered with ribo-
somes, which give it its rough or granular appearance. The rough ER is continu-
ous with the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope, and adjacent ­cisternae 
20chromo = color; some = body 
21cistern = reservoir
78      PART 1  Organization of the Body

(a) Nucleus
(b) Endoplasmic reticulum
(c) Golgi complex
(e) Mitochondrion
Nucleolus
Nuclear
envelope
Nuclear 
pore
Cisterna
Golgi vesicle
Crista
Matrix
Protein link
Longitudinal view
Protein
crystal
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Cisternae
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Microtubules
(a) Nucleus
(b) Endoplasmic reticulum
(c) Golgi complex
(d) Lysosomes
(e) Mitochondrion
(f) Centrioles
Cisterna
Golgi vesicle
Cristae
Cross section
Protein link
Longitudinal view
Protein
crystal
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Microtubules
Figure 3.13 Major Organelles. 
 
•	 Which of these six organelles directly participate in protein synthesis and secretion?
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      79  

are ­connected by transverse bridges. In areas called smooth endoplasmic 
­reticulum, the membrane lacks ribosomes, the cisternae are more tubular in 
shape, and they branch more extensively. The cisternae of the smooth ER are 
continuous with those of the rough ER, so the two are functionally different 
parts of the same network.
The endoplasmic reticulum synthesizes steroids and other lipids, detoxifies 
alcohol and other drugs, and manufactures the cell’s internal and surface mem-
branes. The rough ER produces the phospholipids and proteins of the plasma 
membrane. It also synthesizes proteins that are destined to be secreted from the 
cell or packaged in organelles called lysosomes. Rough ER is most abundant 
in cells that synthesize large amounts of protein, such as the cells that produce 
digestive enzymes and antibodies.
Most cells have only scanty smooth ER, but it is relatively abundant in 
cells that engage extensively in detoxification, such as liver and kidney cells. 
Long-term abuse of alcohol, barbiturates, and other drugs leads to tolerance 
partly because the smooth ER proliferates and detoxifies the drugs more 
quickly. Smooth ER is also abundant in cells that synthesize steroid hormones, 
for example in the testes and ovaries. Skeletal and cardiac muscle contain 
extensive networks of smooth ER, which store calcium ions when the muscle 
is at rest. Upon stimulation, the smooth ER releases calcium to trigger muscle 
contraction.
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are small granules of protein and ribonucleic acid (RNA); they 
are produced in the nucleus, but most of them are then exported into the cyto-
plasm and function there. Ribosomes “read” coded genetic messages from 
the nucleus and assemble amino acids into proteins specified by the code. 
Many ribosomes are attached to the surface of the nuclear envelope and the 
rough ER, and make proteins that will either be packaged in lysosomes or, as 
in digestive enzymes, secreted from the cell. Others lie free in the cytoplasm 
and make enzymes and other proteins for internal use by the cell. Some occur 
also within the nucleus and mitochondria, making proteins for internal use by 
those organelles.
Golgi Complex
The Golgi22 complex (GOAL-jee) is a small cluster of cisternae that synthesize 
­carbohydrates and put the finishing touches on protein and glycoprotein synthesis 
(fig. 3.13c). The complex resembles a stack of pita bread. Typically, it consists of 
about six cisternae, slightly separated from each other, each of them a flattened, 
slightly curved sac with swollen edges.
The edges of the Golgi cisternae pinch off membranous sacs called Golgi 
­vesicles, like the waxy globules that break away from the main mass in a 
lava lamp. These are filled with newly synthesized protein. Some of them 
become lysosomes, the organelles described shortly. Some migrate to the 
plasma membrane and fuse with it, contributing fresh protein and phospho-
lipid to the membrane. Still others become secretory vesicles that store a cell 
product, such as breast milk, mucus, or digestive enzymes, for later release by 
­exocytosis.
22Camillo Golgi (1843–1926), Italian histologist
80      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Proteasomes
The foregoing organelles synthesize proteins for cellular use, but it is also 
important to be able to dispose of proteins that have completed their task. For 
this, the cell has tiny organelles called proteasomes, which are cylinders of 
protein-degrading enzymes (not illustrated). Old proteins that are destined for 
destruction are transported to proteasomes and threaded through the core of 
the organelle, where they are broken down into free amino acids that the cell 
can recycle.
Lysosomes
A lysosome23 (LY-so-some) (fig. 3.13d) is a package of enzymes enclosed in a 
membrane. These enzymes break down proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, 
phospholipids, and other substances. When white blood cells called neutrophils 
phagocytize bacteria, a lysosome releases enzymes to digest and destroy the 
microbes. Lysosomes also digest worn-out mitochondria and other organelles 
and contribute enzymes that carry out a sort of “cell suicide” called apoptosis 
(­AP-oh-TOE-sis) or programmed cell death (see “Tissue Shrinkage and Death” in 
section 4.6).
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes (not illustrated) resemble lysosomes, but contain different enzymes 
and are not produced by the Golgi complex. They are especially abundant in liver 
and kidney cells. Their primary function is to break down fatty acids into two-­
carbon molecules that can be used as an energy source for ATP synthesis. They also 
neutralize free radicals, detoxify alcohol and other drugs, and kill bacteria. They 
are named for the hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) they produce in the course of these 
reactions.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria24 (MY-toe-CON-dree-uh) (singular, mitochondrion) are 
organelles specialized for ATP synthesis. They have a variety of shapes: 
spheroid, rod-shaped, bean-shaped, or threadlike (fig. 3.13e), and they are 
surprisingly mobile, squirming about like organisms in their own right. Like 
the nucleus, a mitochondrion is surrounded by a double membrane. The inner 
membrane usually has folds called cristae25 (CRIS-tee), which project like 
shelves across the organelle. Cristae bear the enzymes that produce most of 
the ATP. The space between cristae, called the mitochondrial matrix, con-
tains enzymes, ribosomes, and small DNA molecules called mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA).
Mitochondria evolved from free-living bacteria that were internalized by 
another primitive cell, became permanent residents, and eventually became 
indispensable to the life of the host cell. Mitochondrial DNA is a circular 
molecule that resembles bacterial DNA more than it does the linear DNA of 
the cell nucleus. We hear a lot these days about mtDNA in the news and even 
23lyso = loosen, dissolve; some = body 
24mito = thread; chondr = grain 
25crista = crest
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      81  

in television crime dramas, as it is often used to link a suspect to crime-scene 
evidence. Mutations in mtDNA are responsible for some muscle, heart, and 
eye diseases. 
Centrioles
A centriole (SEN-tree-ole) is a short cylindrical assembly of microtubules 
(fig. 3.13f). Near the nucleus, most cells have a small, clear patch of cytoplasm called 
the centrosome26 containing a pair of centrioles (see fig. 3.1). These ­centrioles play 
a role in cell division described later. 
Protein Synthesis
One of the most significant activities of a cell is to produce proteins, and we are 
now in a position to understand how several of the organelles interact to do this. The 
proteins of a cell can be for internal structural use, such as proteins of the cytoskel-
eton and cellular membranes; they include enzymes that control the cell’s internal 
metabolism; and in many cases they are secreted from the cell to serve elsewhere, 
as in the case of digestive enzymes, antibodies, and some hormones such as insulin 
and growth hormone.
To understand protein synthesis, it may help to start with the big picture. DNA 
in the nucleus contains codes (genes) for how to construct the needed proteins. Syn-
thesis begins with making a small copy of a gene, called messenger RNA (mRNA). 
This usually migrates into the cytoplasm, where ribosomes read the code and 
assemble amino acids in the right order to make that protein. The step from DNA to 
mRNA is called transcription, and the step from mRNA to protein is called transla-
tion. The details of these two steps follow.
Transcription
Protein synthesis begins with transcription in the cell’s nucleus (fig. 3.14, 
panel  1 ). At the site of a particular gene, an enzyme unzips the double helix of 
DNA and exposes the gene’s nitrogenous bases. Another enzyme reads these bases 
(panel 2 ) and creates a parallel molecule of messenger RNA (mRNA), which is 
more or less a mirror image of the gene. Where the enzyme finds a thymine (T) 
on the DNA, it adds the complementary base adenine (A) to the mRNA. Where 
it finds a guanine (G) on the DNA, it adds cytosine (C) to the mRNA. Where it 
finds adenine, however, it adds uracil (U) to the mRNA; remember from “Nucleic 
Acids (DNA and RNA)” in section 2.3 that RNA does not contain any thymine, 
but substitutes uracil for this base. Therefore, if the enzyme had read a DNA base 
sequence of TACCGTCCA, it would produce a complementary mRNA sequence 
of AUGGCAGGU. A typical mRNA is several hundred bases long and some 
are up to 10,000.
The mRNA is “edited” in the nucleus to remove some noncoding seg-
ments. The coding segments are spliced together to make a mature, coding 
mRNA molecule, which is then usually exported from the nucleus, through a 
nuclear pore, into the cytoplasm. (Some remains in the nucleus and is trans-
lated there.)
Translation
The next step of protein synthesis is translation (fig. 3.14, panel 3 ). This is where 
ribosomes enter the story. They are composed of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and 
enzymes, forming a complex that can read the mRNA and translate its code into the 
amino acid sequence of a protein. 
26centro = central; some = body
82      PART 1  Organization of the Body

2
3
4
1 An enzyme (not shown) uncoils the DNA double helix at the site of the relevant 
gene, exposing bases of the coding strand.
Transcription. A second enzyme reads bases of the coding strand, draws RNA 
nucleotides from a free nucleotide pool, and assembles these in order speciﬁed 
by the gene to make mRNA.
Translation. A two-part ribosome binds to the mRNA and moves along it, 
reading its codons. tRNA binds free amino acids and delivers them to the 
ribosome. The ribosome assembles the amino acids in order speciﬁed by the 
genetic code in the codons. After delivering its amino acid, the free tRNA 
leaves the ribosome to repeat the process.
Gene
Codons
Coding
strand
DNA
DNA
Enzyme
Free 
nucleotide pool
Growing
protein
Free 
tRNA pool
Free amino
acid pool
Ribosome
Amino
acid
Transport
vesicle
Ribosome
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
To Golgi
complex
mRNA
tRNA
The ribosome spools the new protein into the cisterna of the rough ER, where it 
may be further processed and packaged in transport vesicles. Transport 
vesicles take it to the Golgi complex for further processing.
A
A
A
T
T T
T
C C
C C
C
A
C
G
G
G
G
A
A
A
T
T T
T
C C
C C
C
G
G
G
C
A
U
U
U
A
A A
A
G G
G G
C
U
U
U
U
A
A A
A
A
G G
G G
G
C
C C
Figure 3.14 Protein Synthesis. 
 
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      83  

The genetic code is in the form of codons—three-base segments of mRNA. 
There are 64 of these, most of which stand for a particular amino acid to be inserted 
into a protein. For example, the sequence AUG represents methionine, GCA repre-
sents alanine, and GGU represents glycine. 
Each time the ribosome reads a particular codon, it binds a smaller RNA 
­molecule called transfer RNA (tRNA) with a complementary base series called 
an anticodon. For example, if the ribosome reads GGU on the mRNA, it binds a 
tRNA with anticodon CCA. Each tRNA brings a particular amino acid with it, 
which the enzymes in the ribosome add to the growing protein chain. The ribo-
some then reads the next codon, adds the next amino acid, and so on. When it 
reaches a special base sequence called a stop codon, like the period at the end 
of a sentence, the protein is finished. The ribosome releases the new protein and 
detaches from the mRNA.
Protein Processing and Secretion
Several organelles are involved in producing, packaging, and secreting pro-
teins (fig. 3.14, panel 4 ). If a protein is destined to be packaged in a lyso-
some or secreted from the cell, the ribosome–mRNA complex “docks” on the 
surface of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the protein reels into the ER 
cisterna as it is assembled. In the rough ER, enzymes cut certain amino acid 
segments from the protein, splice other segments together, and perform other 
alterations.
The altered protein is then shuffled into transport vesicles—bubblelike organ-
elles that bud off the ER and carry the protein to the nearest cisterna of the Golgi 
complex (fig. 3.15). The Golgi complex sorts these proteins and passes them along 
from one cisterna to the next. It may further cut and splice them or add other com-
ponents such as carbohydrate chains. The Golgi complex finally buds off Golgi 
vesicles, which can remain in the cell as lysosomes or release products from the cell 
by exocytosis, as described earlier.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
  9.	Which cytoskeletal component gives support to the 
plasma membrane? Which component can be compared to 
a monorail on which intracellular materials can travel from 
place to place in the cytoplasm? Which type lends toughness 
to your skin surface?
10.	Which two organelles are surrounded by a double 
­membrane? Which of these has shelflike infoldings 
of the ­inner membrane? What is the purpose of that 
­organelle?
 11.	A red blood cell (RBC) escapes from the circulation into the 
tissues, where a macrophage finds it and phagocytizes 
it. What is that RBC to the macrophage at this point—an 
organelle, an inclusion, or neither? What is the basis for 
your ­decision?
12.	Name three organelles involved in protein synthesis and 
­describe their respective roles. Explain the difference 
­between transcription and translation and state where 
in the cell each of these occurs.
84      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Nucleus
Rough ER
Golgi
complex
Lysosome
Ribosomes
Protein formed by 
ribosomes on rough ER.
3
4
5
6
Clathrin-coated
transport vesicle
Protein packaged into transport 
vesicle, which buds from ER.
Transport vesicles fuse into clusters that 
unload protein into Golgi complex.
Golgi complex modiﬁes 
protein structure.
Golgi vesicle containing 
ﬁnished protein is formed.
Secretory vesicles 
release protein by 
exocytosis.
1
2
Figure 3.15 Organelles of Protein Synthesis and Secretion. The steps in ­protein synthesis and secretion are numbered 1  through 6 .
3.4  The Life Cycle of Cells
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the stages of a cell’s life cycle and list the events that 
define each stage; and
b.	name the stages of mitosis and describe what occurs in each.
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      85  

Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
G2
Second gap phase
Growth and preparation 
for mitosis
G1
First gap phase
Growth and normal 
metabolic roles
S
Synthesis phase
DNA replication
In
te
rp
ha
se
Mit
oti
c (
M) 
ph
as
e
The Cell Cycle
A basic principle of cell biology is that all cells arise from existing cells, both in an 
evolutionary sense, reaching across billions of years to the earliest cell, and in our 
lifetimes, when we grow from a single-celled fertilized egg to a fetus, infant, and 
adult. Most cells have a finite life span, during which they must accurately dupli-
cate their DNA and separate the copies into two daughter cells. The life cycle of a 
cell extends from one division to the next. This cell cycle is divided into four main 
phases: G1, S, G2, and M (fig. 3.16).
The first gap (G1) phase is an interval between cell division (the “birth” of 
two new cells from a parent cell) and DNA replication. During this time, a new cell 
synthesizes proteins, grows, and carries out its preordained tasks for the body, such 
as secreting enzymes if it’s a digestive gland cell. Cells in G1 also begin to replicate 
their centrioles in preparation for the next division, and they accumulate the materi-
als needed in the next phase to replicate their DNA.
The synthesis (S) phase is a period in which a cell replicates its DNA, 
doubling it in preparation for the upcoming cell division. Remember the law 
of complementary base pairing in DNA (see “Nucleic Acids [DNA and 
RNA]” in section 2.3). If you knew that one strand of the double helix had a 
base sequence ATCGCA, you could predict from this law that the one across 
from it must read TAGCGT. This predictability also enables a cell to pro-
duce duplicate copies of its DNA. In the S phase, each DNA molecule in the 
nucleus “unzips” at several places along its length, separating the double helix 
into two strands (fig. 3.17, panel 1 ). At each of these sites, an enzyme called 
DNA polymerase (green in panel 2 ) reads the base sequence on one strand 
and assembles nucleotides in the right order to make a complementary strand. 
At each replication site, two of these enzymes work simultaneously, moving 
along their DNA strands in opposite directions. The end result of this process 
going on in numerous places at once on the 46 chromosomes is that, by the end 
of the S phase, the cell has two complete sets of identical DNA molecules. 
Each DNA molecule is composed of one strand from the old DNA and 
one that has been newly made by the polymerase (panel 3 ). Each 
chromosome, at that point, has two identical DNA molecules, 
which are available to be divided up between daughter cells 
at the next cell division.
The second gap (G2) phase is a relatively brief inter-
val between DNA replication and cell division. In G2, a cell 
finishes replicating its centrioles and synthesizes enzymes 
that control cell division.
The mitotic (M) phase is the period in which 
a cell undergoes mitosis—it replicates its nucleus 
and divides its DNA into two identical sets (one 
per nucleus). At the end of the M phase, the cell 
undergoes cytokinesis27  (SY-toe-kih-NEE-sis)—it 
pinches in half to form two genetically identical 
daughter cells. The details of this phase are con-
sidered in the next section. Phases G1, S, and G2 are 
collectively called interphase—the time between 
cell divisions.
The length of the cell cycle varies greatly from 
one cell type to another. Cultured connective tissue 
cells called fibroblasts divide about once a day and 
spend about 18 to 24 hours in interphase and 1 to 2 hours 
in mitosis. Stomach and skin cells divide rapidly, bone and 
cartilage cells slowly, and skeletal muscle and nerve cells not 
Figure 3.16 The Cell Cycle.
27cyto = cell; kinesis = action, motion
86      PART 1  Organization of the Body

at all. Some cells leave the cell cycle and stand by without dividing for days, 
years, or the rest of one’s life. The balance between cells that are actively 
cycling and those on standby is an important factor in determining the num-
ber of cells in the body. An inability to stop cycling and go on standby is 
characteristic of cancer cells (see Perspectives on Health at the end of this 
chapter).
Mitosis
Cells divide by two mechanisms called mitosis and meiosis. Meiosis is 
restricted to one purpose, the production of eggs and sperm, and is therefore 
treated in chapter 19 on reproduction. Mitosis serves all the other functions 
of cell division: the development of a fertilized egg (one cell) into an indi-
vidual composed of some 40 trillion cells; continued growth of all the organs 
after birth; the replacement of cells that die; and the repair of damaged tissues. 
Four phases of mitosis are recognizable—prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and 
­telophase (fig. 3.18).
In prophase,28 the chromosomes coil into short, dense rods that are easier to 
distribute to daughter cells than the long, delicate chromatin of interphase. At this 
stage, a chromosome consists of two genetically identical bodies called ­chromatids, 
joined together at a pinched spot called the centromere (fig. 3.19). There are 
2 
3 
1 
G
C
A
T
G
C
A
T
Enzyme unzipping DNA
DNA polymerase
Free 
nucleotide pool
New strand
Old strand
Old DNA
New DNA
28pro = first
Figure 3.17 DNA Replication.    1       Enzyme 
­unzips DNA.  2       DNA polymerase assembles 
nucleotides to make a complementary strand. 
3      The process ­results in two identical DNA 
­molecules. 
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      87  

1
2
3
4
Chromosomes condense
and nuclear envelope
breaks down. Spindle
ﬁbers grow from centrioles.
Centrioles migrate to
opposite poles of cell.
1
2
3
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Chromosomes lie along 
midline of cell. Some 
spindle ﬁbers attach to 
centromeres and others 
to the plasma membrane.
Centromeres divide in two. 
Spindle ﬁbers pull sister 
chromatids to opposite poles 
of cell. Each pole (future 
daughter cell) now has an 
identical set of genes.  
Chromosomes gather 
at each pole of cell. 
Chromatin decondenses.
New nuclear envelope 
appears at each pole. 
New nucleoli appear 
in each nucleus. 
Mitotic spindle 
vanishes.
Chromatids
Centriole
Spindle ﬁbers
Nuclear envelope
re-forming
Nucleolus
Chromatin
Cleavage furrow
Daughter
cells in
interphase
4
Figure 3.18 Mitosis. The photographs show mitosis in whitefish eggs, where 
­chromosomes are relatively easy to observe. The drawings show a hypothetical cell 
with only two chromosome pairs. In humans, there are 23 pairs. 
(1–4): © Ed Reschke
88      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Centromere
Sister
chromatids
(b)
(a)
46 chromosomes, two chromatids per chromosome, and one mol-
ecule of DNA in each chromatid—or 92 DNA molecules in all. 
The nuclear envelope disintegrates during prophase and releases 
the chromosomes into the cytosol. The centrioles begin to sprout 
elongated microtubules called spindle fibers, which push the 
centrioles apart as they grow. Eventually, one pair of centrioles 
comes to lie at each pole of the cell. Microtubules grow toward 
the chromosomes and attach to the centromeres. The spindle 
fibers then tug the chromosomes back and forth until they line up 
along the midline of the cell.
In metaphase,29  the chromosomes are aligned on the cell 
equator, oscillating slightly and awaiting a signal that stimulates 
the next step, anaphase. The spindle fibers now form a lemon-
shaped array called the mitotic spindle, with long microtubules 
reaching out from each centriole to the chromosomes, and shorter 
microtubules anchoring the assembly to the inside of the plasma 
membrane at each end of the cell.
Anaphase30 begins with activation of an enzyme that splits 
each centromere in two, separating the sister chromatids from each 
other. Each chromatid is now regarded as a separate, single-stranded 
daughter chromosome. One daughter chromosome migrates to each pole of the cell, 
with its centromere leading the way and the arms trailing behind. Since the two 
chromatids of a chromosome are genetically identical, and since each daughter cell 
receives one chromatid from each chromosome, the daughter cells of mitosis are 
genetically identical. Almost every cell of your body is genetically identical (with a 
few exceptions such as eggs, sperm, and certain immune cells).
In telophase,31 the chromatids cluster on each side of the cell. The rough ER 
produces a new nuclear envelope around each cluster, and the chromatids begin to 
uncoil and return to the thinly dispersed chromatin form. The mitotic spindle breaks 
up and vanishes.
Telophase is the end of mitosis proper (nuclear division), but overlaps with 
cytokinesis, division of the cytoplasm. Cytokinesis starts with a crease called the 
cleavage furrow around the equator of the cell, and the cell eventually pinches in 
two. Interphase has now begun for these new cells; the life cycle begins anew.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
13.	Identify the stage of the cell cycle where each of the 
following occurs: (a) DNA replication, (b) onset of centriole 
replication, (c) conclusion of centriole replication, (d) separa-
tion of the two sets of DNA into separate nuclei, and (e) split-
ting of the cytoplasm into two separate cells.
14.	Identify the stage of mitosis in which each of the following 
occurs: (a) double-stranded chromosomes align on the cell 
equator awaiting a signal to split in two, (b) ­chromosomes coil 
and thicken and their chromatids become visible, (c) the cen-
tromeres split and the chromatids separate, (d) new nuclear 
envelopes form around each chromosome set.
Figure 3.19 Chromosomes. (a) Drawing of a 
metaphase chromosome. (b) Scanning electron 
­micrograph.
b: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
•	 What are the chromatids composed of besides 
DNA?
29meta = next in a series 
30ana = apart 
31telo = end, final
CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      89  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
O
f all things that can go wrong with cellular function, cancer 
is probably the most dreaded. It’s typically the first thing that 
comes to mind when one is found to have a tumor, or neoplasm.32 The 
next question to arise in a worried patient’s mind is often, Is it benign 
or malignant? If a tumor is benign33 (be-NINE), this means the cellular 
mass is surrounded by a fibrous capsule, the cells can’t freely break 
loose and spread to other sites in the body, and the tumor is rela-
tively slow-growing. Even some benign tumors can be deadly, but 
most can be surgically removed, producing full recovery.
A malignant34  tumor is fast-growing, lacks a capsule, and 
has cells capable of breaking free and spreading to other organs 
(metastasizing35). The word cancer refers only to malignant tumors. 
Cancer was named by Hippocrates, who compared the distended 
veins in some breast tumors to the outstretched legs of a crab.36
Most cancer is caused by mutations (changes in DNA or chro-
mosome structure), which can be induced by chemicals, viruses, or 
radiation, or simply occur through errors in DNA replication during 
the cell cycle. Agents that cause mutation are called mutagens,37 and 
those that induce cancer are also called carcinogens.38  Cancer 
stems from mutations mainly in two gene families, the oncogenes 
and tumor-suppressor genes. Oncogenes39  are mutated genes 
that promote the secretion of excessive growth factors (chemicals 
that stimulate cell division) or excessive sensitivity of target cells to 
growth factors. Tumor-suppressor (TS) genes inhibit the develop-
ment of cancer by opposing oncogenes, promoting DNA repair, and 
other means. Some cancers result from the inability of mutated TS 
genes to perform this protective function. Oncogenes are like an 
accelerator to the cell cycle, while TS genes are like a brake. With 
either a “stuck accelerator” or “faulty brakes,” cells divide at a rate 
exceeding cell death, thus amassing to form a tumor.
Untreated cancer is almost always fatal. Tumors destroy healthy 
tissue; they can grow to block major blood vessels or respiratory 
airways; they can damage blood vessels and cause hemorrhaging; 
they can compress and kill brain tissue; and they tend to drain the 
body of nutrients and energy as they hungrily consume a dispro-
portionate share of the body’s oxygen and nutrients. Treatments for 
cancer include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
C a n c e r
G e n o m i c  M e d i c i n e
G
enomic medicine is the application of our knowledge of the 
genome—one individual’s complete set of genes—to the 
­prediction, diagnosis, and treatment of disease. It is relevant to 
disorders as diverse as cancer, Alzheimer disease, schizophrenia, 
obesity, and even a person’s susceptibility to nonhereditary diseas-
es such as AIDS and tuberculosis.
The technology of gene sequencing has improved to such 
an extent that a person’s entire genome can now be sequenced 
for no more than $1,000. Why would we want to? Because know-
ing one’s genome could dramatically change clinical care. It may 
allow clinicians to forecast a person’s risk of disease and to pre-
dict its course; mutations in a single gene can affect the severity 
of such diseases as hemophilia, muscular dystrophy, cancer, and 
cystic fibrosis. Genomics should also allow for earlier detection of 
diseases and for earlier, more effective clinical intervention. Drugs 
that are safe for most people can have serious side effects in oth-
ers, owing to genetic variations in drug metabolism. Genomics may 
therefore provide a basis for choosing the safest or most effective 
drug and for adjusting dosages for different patients on the basis of 
their genetic makeup. Genomics is also playing a new role in drug 
design; pharmacogenetics is the science of examining the effects 
of genetic variation on drug action.
Knowing the sites of disease-producing mutations expands 
the potential for gene-substitution therapy. This is a procedure in 
which cells are removed from a patient with a genetic disorder, 
supplied with a normal gene in place of the defective one, and rein-
troduced to the body. The hope is that these genetically modified 
cells will proliferate and provide the patient with a gene product 
that he or she was lacking—perhaps insulin for a patient with dia-
betes or a blood-clotting factor for a patient with hemophilia. Early 
attempts at gene therapy were marred by some tragic setbacks 
but, although scientists still face great technical difficulties, recent 
successes show promise for the future of gene therapy.
Although genomics is in its infancy, it has generated high 
hopes that the twenty-first century may be an era of personal-
ized medicine, with treatments tailored to the genetic constitu-
tion of the individual. Yet genomic medicine is introducing new 
problems in medical ethics and law. Should your genome be a 
private matter between you and your physician? Or should an 
insurance company be entitled to know your genome before 
issuing health or life insurance to you, so it can know your 
risk of contracting a catastrophic illness, adjust the cost of 
your ­coverage, or even deny coverage? Should a prospective 
employer have the right to know your genome before offering 
employment? These are areas in which biology, politics, and law 
converge to shape public policy.
32neo = new; plasm = growth, formation 
33benign = mild, gentle 
34mal = bad, evil 
35meta = beyond; stas = being stationary 
36cancer = crab 
37muta = change; gen = to produce 
38carcino = cancer; gen = to produce 
39onco = tumor

CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      91  
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A cytotechnologist is a person who examines tissue specimens for signs of 
cancer and other diseases. Cytotechnologists work under the supervision of 
pathologists in hospitals, clinics, commercial diagnostic laboratories, universi-
ties, and public health agencies. Using automated tissue preparation, micros-
copy, computer-assisted screening, and other techniques, a cytotechnologist 
scans a slide; marks areas of cellular abnormality such as changes in cell 
size, shape, color, or nuclear volume; and refers abnormal specimens to the 
­pathologist for diagnosis. The tissue specimens studied by cytotechnologists 
include Pap smears and biopsies of breast, lymph node, liver, thyroid, lung, 
and many other tissues. To become a cytotechnologist, one must first earn 
a baccalaureate degree with coursework in biology, chemistry, and mathematics or statistics; attend a 1- to 2-year program 
in cytotechnology training at a university or hospital; and pass a board certification exam. The advanced training includes 
tissue-preparation techniques, microscopy, cytochemistry, anatomy and physiology, histology, immunology, and other sub-
jects. Sophisticated molecular diagnostic methods also are a fast-growing area of cytotechnology education and practice. See 
­appendix B for further career information.
C y t o t e c h n o l o g i s t
© Rich Legg/Getty Images RF

Study Guide
92      PART 1  Organization of the Body
Assess Your Learning  
Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
3.1
  The General Structure of Cells 
1.	 Fundamental components of a cell
2.	 Intracellular and extracellular fluids
3.	 The typical size range of human cells and what factors limit 
cell size
3.2  The Cell Surface 
1.	 Molecular components and organization of the plasma 
­membrane
2.	 Varieties and functions of the plasma membrane proteins
3.	 The composition, location, and functions of a cell’s glycocalyx
4.	 Structural and functional distinctions between microvilli, 
cilia, flagella, and pseudopods
5.	 Structural distinctions and respective advantages of three 
types of cell junctions—tight junctions, desmosomes, and 
gap junctions
6.	 The eight modes of transport through a plasma membrane 
and how they differ with respect to the use of carrier proteins, 
direction of movement of the transported substances, and 
demand for ATP
3.3  The Cell Interior 
1.	 Components and functions of the cytoskeleton
2.	 Types of cell inclusions and how inclusions differ from 
­organelles
3.	 What organelles have in common and how they differ, as a 
class, from other cellular components
4.	 Structure of the nucleus, particularly of its nuclear envelope, 
chromatin, and nucleoli
5.	 Two forms of endoplasmic reticulum, their spatial relationship, 
their structural similarities and differences, and their functional 
differences
6.	 The composition, appearance, locations, and function of 
­ribosomes
7.	 Structure of the Golgi complex and its role in the synthesis, 
packaging, and secretion of cell products
8.	 Similarities and differences between lysosomes and peroxi-
somes in structure, contents, and functions
9.	 Structure, function, and evolutionary origin of mitochondria, 
and the significance of mitochondrial DNA
10.	 Structure, locations, and functions of centrioles
11.	 The processes of genetic transcription and translation, 
­including the roles of mRNA, rRNA, and tRNA
12.	 How the amino acid sequence of a protein is represented by 
the  codons of mRNA
13.	 How proteins are processed and secreted after their assembly 
on a ribosome
3.4  The Life Cycle of Cells 
1.	 Four phases of the cell cycle and the main events in each phase
2.	 How DNA is replicated in preparation for mitosis
3.	 Functions of mitosis
4.	 Four stages of mitosis; changes in chromosome structure and 
distribution that occur in each stage; and the role of centrioles 
and the mitotic spindle
5.	 The mechanism and result of cytokinesis
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 The clear, structureless gel in a cell is its
a.	 nucleoplasm.
b.	 endoplasm.
c.	 cytoplasm.
d.	 neoplasm.
e.	 cytosol.
	 2.	 New nuclei form and a cell begins to pinch in two during
a.	 prophase.
b.	 metaphase.
c.	 interphase.
d.	 telophase.
e.	 anaphase.
	 3.	 The amount of 
 in a plasma membrane affects 
its ­fluidity.
a.	 phospholipid
b.	 cholesterol
c.	 glycolipid
d.	 glycoprotein
e.	 integral protein
	 4.	 Cells specialized for absorption of matter from the ­extracellular 
fluid are likely to show an abundance of
a.	 lysosomes.
b.	 microvilli.

CHAPTER 3   The Cellular Level of Organization      93  
c.	 mitochondria.
d.	 secretory vesicles.
e.	 ribosomes.
	 5.	 A 
 serves as a mechanical linkage between adjacent 
cells but does not obstruct the movement of materials through 
the space between cells.
a.	 glycocalyx
b.	 phospholipid bilayer
c.	 tight junction
d.	 gap junction
e.	 desmosome
	 6.	 The word root phago- means
a.	 eating.
b.	 drinking.
c.	 emitting fluid.
d.	 intracellular.
e.	 extracellular.
	 7.	 The amount of DNA in a cell doubles during
a.	 prophase.
b.	 metaphase.
c.	 anaphase.
d.	 the S phase.
e.	 the G2 phase.
	 8.	 Fusion of a secretory vesicle with the plasma membrane and 
release of the vesicle’s contents is
a.	 exocytosis.
b.	 receptor-mediated endocytosis.
c.	 active transport.
d.	 pinocytosis.
e.	 phagocytosis.
	 9.	 Most cellular membranes are made by
a.	 the nucleus.
b.	 the cytoskeleton.
c.	 enzymes in the peroxisomes.
d.	 the endoplasmic reticulum.
e.	 replication of existing membranes.
	10.	 Which of the following is/are not involved in protein synthesis?
a.	 ribosomes
b.	 centrioles
c.	 mRNA
d.	 rough endoplasmic reticulum
e.	 codons
	11.	 Most human cells are 10 to 15 
 wide.
	12.	 When a hormone cannot enter a cell, it binds to a 
 at 
the cell surface.
	13.	
 are channels in the plasma membrane that open or 
close in response to various stimuli.
	14.	 Cells are somewhat protected from mechanical trauma by a 
spongy carbohydrate surface coat called the 
.
	15.	 The separation of chromatids from each other marks the 
 stage of mitosis.
	16.	 The majority of molecules that compose the plasma membrane 
are 
.
	17.	 Two human organelles that are surrounded by a double 
­membrane are the 
 and 
.
	18.	 Liver cells can detoxify alcohol with two organelles, the 
 and 
.
	19.	 A macrophage would use the process of 
 to engulf a 
dying tissue cell.
	20.	 To crawl about in the body’s tissues or engulf foreign matter, a 
macrophage would use structures called its 
.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 A cell specialized for absorption would be expected to have a 
high density of cilia on its surface.
	 2.	 DNA replication occurs during mitosis.
	 3.	 A cell can release its secretory products by exocytosis, phago-
cytosis, or pinocytosis.
	 4.	 In the plasma membrane, the phosphate heads of the phospho-
lipid molecules cluster together in the middle of the membrane 
and the fatty acid tails are pointed toward the ICF and ECF.
	 5.	 Cells of the digestive glands store enzymes in their lysosomes 
and release them into the digestive tract when needed to digest 
food.
	 6.	 As a carrier-mediated transport process, facilitated diffusion 
requires ATP.
	 7.	 Osmosis is a type of active transport involving water.
	 8.	 White blood cells can move about in the tissues by means of 
either cilia or pseudopods.
	 9.	 Desmosomes enable solutes to pass from cell to cell.
	10.	 Ribosomes and proteasomes play similar roles in the synthesis 
of proteins.
Answers in Appendix A

94      PART 1  Organization of the Body
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Breast milk contains both sugar (lactose) and proteins (albumin 
and casein). Identify which organelles of the mammary gland 
cells are involved in synthesizing and secreting these compo-
nents, and describe the structural pathway from synthesis to 
release from the cell.
	 2.	 A person with lactose intolerance cannot digest lactose, so 
instead of being absorbed by the small intestine, this sugar 
passes undigested into the large intestine. Here, it causes 
­diarrhea among other signs. Which of the membrane ­transport 
­processes do you think is most directly involved in the 
­diarrhea? On that basis, explain why the diarrhea occurs.
	 3.	 Consider a cardiac muscle cell, an enzyme-producing pancreatic 
cell, a phagocytic white blood cell, and a hormone-secreting 
cell of the ovary. Which of these would you expect to show the 
greatest number of lysosomes? Mitochondria? Rough endoplas-
mic reticulum? Smooth endoplasmic reticulum? Explain each 
answer.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.

Chapter Outline
4.1 The Study of Tissues
• The Primary Tissue Classes 
• Interpreting Tissue Sections 
• Cell Shapes 
4.2 Epithelial Tissue
• Simple Epithelia 
• Stratified Epithelia 
4.3 Connective Tissue
• Overview 
• Fibrous Connective Tissue 
• Adipose Tissue 
• Supportive Connective Tissue 
• Blood 
4.4 Nervous and Muscular Tissue—The Excitable 
Tissues
• Nervous Tissue 
• Muscular Tissue 
4.5 Glands and Membranes
• Glands 
• Membranes 
4.6 Tissue Growth, Development, Repair,  
and Death
• Tissue Growth 
• Tissue Repair 
• Tissue Shrinkage and Death 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 4.1: Marfan Syndrome— 
A Connective Tissue Disease
• Clinical Application 4.2: Keloids
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Histotechnician
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
4
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• “Levels of Human Structure” in section 1.3 
• “Body Cavities and Membranes” in section 1.3
• Cilia and microvilli (see “Cell Surface Extensions” 
in section 3.2)
• Secretory vesicles and exocytosis (see “Vesicular 
Transport” in section 3.2)
Histology— 
The Tissue Level 
of Organization
Cilia on a cell of the 
uterine (fallopian) 
tube. The synchronized 
beating of such cilia 
serves to move an egg 
or embryo toward the 
uterus.
© Steve Gschmeissner/ 
Science Source
Module 3: Tissues
	
95

W
ith its 50 trillion cells and thousands of organs, the human 
body may seem to be a structure of forbidding complexity. 
Fortunately for our health, longevity, and self-understanding, the bi-
ologists of past generations were not discouraged by this, but discov-
ered patterns that make it more understandable. For example, these 
trillions of cells belong to only 200 types or so, and are organized into 
tissues that fall into just four broad categories—epithelial, connective, 
nervous, and muscular.
An organ is a structure with discrete boundaries that is composed of 
two or more of the main tissue types (usually all four). Organs derive 
their function not from their cells alone but from how the cells are orga-
nized into tissues. This chapter describes the structural and functional 
characteristics of the major human tissues, and later chapters describe the 
histological organization of the respective organ systems.
4.1
 The Study of Tissues
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	name the four primary classes of adult tissues;
b.	visualize the three-dimensional shape of a structure from a  
two-dimensional tissue section; and
c.	interpret descriptive terms for various shapes of cells.
The Primary Tissue Classes
Histology1 is the study of tissues and how they are arranged into organs. A tissue 
is a group of similar cells and cell products that arise from the same region of an 
embryo and work together to perform a specific structural or physiological role in 
an organ. The four primary tissues—epithelial, connective, nervous, and muscular 
(table 4.1)—differ from each other in the types and functions of their cells, the char-
acteristics of the matrix that surrounds the cells, and the relative amount of space 
occupied by cells versus matrix.
The matrix (extracellular material) is nonliving matter secreted by the tis-
sue cells. It is composed of fibrous proteins and, usually, a clear gel variously 
known as ground substance or extracellular fluid (ECF). In summary, a tissue 
is composed of cells and matrix, and the matrix is composed of fibers and ground 
substance.
1histo = tissue; logy = study of
96      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Interpreting Tissue Sections
Students of anatomy and physiology often study histological sections—tissues that 
have been cut into very thin slices, generally one or two cells thick, then mounted on 
microscope slides and dyed with various stains. These stains lend contrast to such 
structures as cell nuclei, cytoplasm, and extracellular fibers, but one must remember 
that these colors are entirely artificial; they do not represent the natural colors of the 
organs.
A tissue section shows a three-dimensional object as a two-dimensional image. 
You must keep this in mind and try to translate the microscopic image into a mental 
image of the whole structure, like trying to imagine what a whole loaf of bread 
looks like if you had seen only a few slices. Like the boiled egg and elbow macaroni 
in ­figure 4.1, an object may look quite different when it is cut at various levels, or 
Table 4.1  The Four Primary Tissue Classes
Type
Definition
Representative Locations
Epithelial
Tissue composed of layers of 
closely spaced cells; covers organ 
surfaces, forms glands, and serves 
for ­protection, secretion, and 
absorption
Epidermis, lining of digestive tract, 
liver, and other glands
Connective
Tissue with usually more matrix 
than cell volume; often specialized 
to support, bind, and protect 
organs
Tendons, ligaments, cartilage, fat, 
bone, blood
Nervous
Tissue containing excitable cells 
­specialized for rapid transmission 
of information to other cells
Brain, spinal cord, nerves
Muscular
Tissue composed of elongated, 
excitable cells specialized for 
­contraction and movement
Skeletal muscles; heart; walls of 
­uterus, bladder, intestines, and 
other internal organs
Figure 4.1 Three-Dimensional Interpretation 
of Two-Dimensional Images. (a) A boiled egg. 
Note that grazing sections (upper left and right) 
would miss the yolk, just as a tissue section may 
miss the nucleus of a cell and create an illusion that 
the cell did not have one. (b) Elbow macaroni, which 
resembles many curved ducts and tubules. A sec-
tion far from the bend would give the impression 
of two separate tubules; a section near the bend 
would show two interconnected lumina (interior 
spaces); and a section still farther down could miss 
the lumen completely. (c) A coiled gland in three di-
mensions and as it would look in a vertical tissue 
section.
(a)
(b)
(c)
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      97  

planes of section. A coiled tube, such as a gland of the uterus (fig. 4.1c), is often 
broken up into multiple portions since it meanders in and out of the plane of section. 
With experience, however, one recognizes that the separated pieces are parts of a 
single tube winding its way to the organ surface.
Apply What You Know
How would a cylindrical blood vessel look in two dimensions if cut lengthwise 
(a longitudinal section); if cut perpendicular to this (a cross section); and if cut on 
a slant between these two (an oblique section)?
Cell Shapes
Descriptions of organ and tissue structure often refer to the shapes of the cells by the 
following terms (fig. 4.2):
∙	 Squamous2 (SKWAY-mus)—a thin, flat, scaly shape. Squamous cells line the 
esophagus and form the surface layer (epidermis) of the skin.
∙	 Cuboidal—squarish and about equal in height and width. Good examples are 
found in the kidney tubules and liver.
∙	 Columnar—distinctly taller than wide, such as the inner lining cells of the 
stomach and intestines.
∙	 Polygonal3—having irregular, angular shapes with four, five, or more sides. 
Squamous, cuboidal, and columnar cells often look polygonal when viewed 
from above rather than from the side.
Figure 4.2 Terminology of Cell Shapes.
Discoidal
Stellate
Squamous
Polygonal
Cuboidal
Columnar
Spheroidal
Fusiform
Fibrous
2squam = scale; ous = characterized by 
3poly = many; gon = angles
98      PART 1  Organization of the Body

∙	 Spheroidal to ovoid—round to oval, as in egg cells and white blood cells.
∙	 Fusiform4 (FEW-zih-form)—elongated, with a thick middle and tapered 
ends, as in smooth muscle cells.
∙	 Fibrous—long, slender, and threadlike, as in skeletal muscle cells.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	Classify each of the following into one of the four 
­primary tissue classes: the epidermis, fat, the spinal cord, 
most heart tissue, bones, tendons, blood, and the inner lining 
of the stomach.
2.	What are tissues composed of in addition to cells?
3.	What is the term for a thin, stained slice of tissue mounted on 
a microscope slide?
4.2
 Epithelial Tissue
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the properties that distinguish epithelium from other 
tissue classes;
b.	list and classify eight types of epithelium, distinguish them from 
each other, and state where each type can be found in the body;
c.	discuss how the structure of each type of epithelium relates to 
its function; and
d.	recognize epithelial types from specimens or photographs.
4fusi = spindle; form = shape 
5epi = upon; theli = nipple, female
Epithelial tissue, or epithelium,5 consists of a flat sheet of closely spaced cells, 
one or more cells thick, like bricks in a wall. The upper surface is usually exposed 
to the environment; to an internal space of a body cavity; or to the lumen, or 
internal space, of a hollow organ. Epithelium covers the body surface, lines body 
cavities, forms the external and internal linings of many organs, and constitutes 
most gland tissue. Epithelia contain no blood vessels, but they almost always lie 
on a layer of loose connective tissue and depend on its blood vessels for nourish-
ment and waste removal.
Between an epithelium and the underlying connective tissue is a layer called the 
basement membrane, composed mainly of protein. It anchors the epithelium to the 
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      99  

connective tissue, regulates the exchange of materials between the epithelium and 
the underlying tissues, and binds growth factors from below that regulate epithelial 
development and maintenance.
The cell surface attached to the basement membrane is called the basal 
­surface; the upper surface, opposite from this, is the apical surface; and the 
lateral surfaces between these two form the sides of the cell. You could com-
pare these to the floor, roof, and walls of a house, respectively. These surfaces 
often differ in their functions (such as absorption, secretion, attachment, or 
intercellular communication) and therefore differ in the components of their 
plasma membranes. Epithelial cells often have cilia, microvilli, or both on their 
apical surface.
Epithelia are classified into two broad categories—simple and stratified—
with four types in each category. In a simple epithelium, every cell touches the 
basement membrane, whereas in a stratified epithelium, some cells rest on top of 
other cells (like a multistory apartment building) and do not extend to the base-
ment membrane (fig. 4.3).
Simple Epithelia
A simple epithelium has only one layer of cells. Three types of simple epithe-
lia are named for the shapes of their cells: simple squamous (thin scaly cells), 
simple cuboidal (squarish or rounded cells), and simple columnar (tall narrow 
cells). In the fourth type, pseudostratified columnar, not all cells reach the free 
surface; the shorter cells are covered over by the taller ones, but all of them reach 
the basement membrane—much like trees in a forest that reach different heights 
but are all anchored in the soil below. Simple columnar and pseudostratified 
epithelia often produce protective mucous coatings. The mucus is secreted by 
wineglass-shaped goblet cells. Table 4.2 (figs. 4.4 to 4.7) illustrates and sum-
marizes the structural and functional differences between the four types of sim-
ple epithelium. The magnifications given in these tables, such as ×400, are the 
­magnifications at which the tissue would show this level of detail if you were at 
the microscope; they are not the magnifications attained by enlarging the images 
to the size presented on the page.
Squamous
Cuboidal
Columnar
Simple
(a) Classes of
     epithelium
(b) Cell 
     shapes
Pseudostratiﬁed
columnar
Stratiﬁed
Figure 4.3 Epithelial Types and Cell Shapes. 
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is a special 
type of simple epithelium that gives a false impres-
sion of multiple cell layers. 
 
100      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Table 4.2  Simple Epithelia
Simple Squamous Epithelium
Simple Cuboidal Epithelium
Squamous epithelial cells
Basement membrane
Nuclei of smooth muscle
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4 Simple Squamous Epithelium on the External 
Surface of the Small Intestine (×400). 
 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Lumen of kidney tubule
Cuboidal epithelial cells
Basement membrane
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5 Simple Cuboidal Epithelium in the Kidney ­Tubules 
(×400). 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Single layer of thin cells, shaped like fried eggs 
with a bulge where the nucleus is located; nucleus somewhat flattened in 
the plane of the cell, like an egg yolk; cytoplasm may be so thin it is hard 
to see in tissue sections; in surface view, cells have angular contours and 
nuclei appear round
Representative locations: Air sacs (alveoli) of lungs; glomerular capsules 
of kidneys; some kidney tubules; inner lining (endothelium) of heart and 
blood vessels; serous membranes of stomach, intestines, and some other 
viscera; surface layer (mesothelium) of pleurae, pericardium, peritoneum, 
and mesenteries
Functions: Allows rapid diffusion or transport of substances through 
­membranes; secretes lubricating serous fluid
Microscopic appearance: Single layer of squarish or rounded cells; in 
glands, cells often pyramidal and arranged like segments of an orange 
around a central space; spherical, centrally placed nuclei; often with a 
brush border of microvilli in some kidney tubules; ciliated in bronchioles 
of lung
Representative locations: Liver, thyroid, mammary, salivary, and other 
glands; many gland ducts; most kidney tubules; bronchioles
Functions: Absorption and secretion; production of protective mucous 
coat; movement of respiratory mucus
(continued on next page)
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      101  

Table 4.2  Simple Epithelia (continued)
Simple Columnar Epithelium
Pseudostratified Columnar Epithelium
Connective
tissue
Basement
membrane
Nuclei
Goblet
cell
(b)
(a)
Columnar
cells
Brush border
(microvilli)
Figure 4.6 Simple Columnar Epithelium on the Internal 
­Surface (Mucosa) of the Small Intestine (×400). 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
Cilia
Basal cells
Goblet cell
(b)
(a)
Basement membrane
Figure 4.7 Ciliated Pseudostratified Columnar Epithelium in 
the Mucosa of the Trachea (×400). 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Single layer of tall, narrow cells; oval or 
­sausage-shaped nuclei, vertically oriented, usually in basal half of cell; 
­apical portion of cell often shows secretory vesicles visible with TEM; 
often shows a brush border of microvilli; ciliated in some organs; may 
­possess goblet cells
Representative locations: Inner lining of stomach, intestines, gallbladder, 
uterus, and uterine tubes; some kidney tubules
Functions: Absorption and secretion; movement of egg and embryo in 
uterine tube; secretion of mucus
Microscopic appearance: Looks multilayered; some cells do not reach free 
surface but all cells reach basement membrane; nuclei at several levels in 
deeper half of epithelium; often with goblet cells; often ciliated
Representative locations: Respiratory tract from nasal cavity to bronchi; 
portions of male reproductive tract
Functions: Secretes and propels respiratory mucus; absorbs excess fluid 
from parts of the male reproductive tract
102      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Stratified Epithelia
Stratified epithelia range from 2 cell layers to 20 or more. Three of the stratified epi-
thelia are named for the shapes of their surface cells: stratified squamous, stratified 
cuboidal, and stratified columnar epithelia. The deeper cells may be of a different 
shape than the surface cells. The fourth type, transitional ­epithelium, was named 
when it was thought to represent a transitional stage between stratified squamous 
and stratified columnar epithelium. This is now known to be untrue, but the name 
has persisted. Stratified columnar epithelium is rare (occurring in short transitional 
zones where one epithelium type grades into another) and we will not consider it any 
further. The other three types are illustrated and ­summarized in table 4.3.
The most widespread epithelium in the body is stratified squamous epithelium, 
which deserves further discussion. Its deepest cells are cuboidal to columnar and 
undergo continual mitosis. Their daughter cells push toward the surface and become 
flatter (more squamous, or scaly) as they migrate farther upward, until they finally 
die and flake off (fig. 4.12). Their separation from the surface is called exfoliation;6 
the study of exfoliated cells is called exfoliate cytology—for example, in a Pap smear 
(see fig. 19.8).
There are two kinds of stratified squamous epithelia—keratinized and nonkera-
tinized. A keratinized7 epithelium, found in the epidermis, is covered with a layer 
of compact, dead squamous cells. These cells are packed with the durable protein 
keratin and coated with a water repellent. The skin surface is therefore relatively 
dry, it retards water loss from the body, and it resists penetration by disease organ-
isms. The tongue, oral mucosa, esophagus, vagina, and a few other internal surfaces 
are covered with the nonkeratinized type, which lacks the surface layer of dead 
cells. This type provides a surface that is, again, abrasion-resistant, but also moist 
and slippery. These characteristics are well suited to resist stress produced by the 
chewing and swallowing of food and by sexual intercourse and childbirth.
Transitional epithelium, limited  to the urinary tract, has a unique role. Urine is 
acidic and hypertonic,  therefore potentially harmful to tissues. Transitional epithe-
lium has specialized,  bulging umbrella cells at the surface  that protect the deeper 
cells from these effects. Not surprisingly,  transitional epithelium is thickest in the 
one place where urine lingers the  longest—the urinary bladder (fig. 4.11).
Table 4.3 (figs. 4.8 to 4.11) illustrates and summarizes the characteristics of the 
most common types of stratified epithelium.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4.	Distinguish between simple and stratified ­epithelia, 
and explain why pseudostratified columnar epithelium 
­belongs in the former category even though it may appear 
to be stratified.
5.	Explain how to distinguish a stratified squamous epithelium 
from a transitional epithelium.
6.	What function do keratinized and nonkeratinized stratified 
squamous epithelia have in common? What is the structural 
difference between these two? How is this structural differ-
ence related to a functional difference between them?
7.	 How do the epithelia of the esophagus and stomach differ? 
How does this relate to their respective functions?
6ex = out of, from; foli = leaf; ation = process (to strip away leaves) 
7kerat = horn (named for animal horns)
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      103  

Table 4.3  Stratified Epithelia
Stratified Squamous Epithelium—Keratinized
Stratified Squamous Epithelium—Nonkeratinized
Dead
squamous cells
Living
epithelial cells
Connective tissue
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.8 Keratinized Stratified Squamous Epithelium on 
the Sole of the Foot (×400).  
 
a: © Ed Reschke
Living 
epithelial cells
Connective tissue
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.9 Nonkeratinized Stratified Squamous Epithelium 
in the Mucosa of the Vagina (×400). 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
Microscopic appearance: Multiple cell layers with cells becoming 
­increasingly flat and scaly toward surface; surface covered with a layer 
of compact dead cells without nuclei; basal cells may be cuboidal to 
columnar
Representative locations: Epidermis; palms and soles are especially 
­heavily keratinized
Functions: Resists abrasion; retards water loss through skin; resists 
­penetration by pathogenic organisms
Microscopic appearance: Same as keratinized epithelium but without 
the surface layer of dead cells
Representative locations: Tongue, oral mucosa, esophagus, anal canal, 
vagina
Functions: Resists abrasion and penetration by pathogenic organisms 
while providing a moist slippery surface
104      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Table 4.3  Stratified Epithelia (continued)
Stratified Cuboidal Epithelium
Transitional Epithelium
Epithelium
Connective tissue
Cuboidal cells
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.10 Stratified Cuboidal Epithelium in the Duct of a 
Sweat Gland (×400). 
a: © L.V. Bergman
Connective 
tissue
(b)
(a)
Basement
membrane
Binucleate
epithelial cell
Figure 4.11 Transitional Epithelium in the Kidney (×400).   
a: © Johnny R. Howze
Microscopic appearance: Two or more layers of cells; surface cells 
­squarish or rounded
Representative locations: Sweat gland ducts; egg-producing vesicles 
(­follicles) of ovaries; sperm-producing ducts (seminiferous tubules) of 
­testes
Functions: Contributes to sweat secretion; secretes ovarian hormones; 
produces sperm
Microscopic appearance: Somewhat resembles stratified squamous 
­epithelium, but surface cells are rounded, not flattened, and often bulge 
above surface; typically five or six cells thick when relaxed, two or three 
cells thick when stretched; cells may be flatter and thinner when epithelium 
is stretched (as in a distended bladder); some cells have two nuclei
Representative locations: Limited to urinary tract—part of kidney, ureter, 
bladder, part of urethra
Functions: Stretches to allow filling of urinary tract; protects deeper cells 
and tissues from damage by acidic and hypertonic urine
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      105  

4.3  Connective Tissue
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the properties that most connective tissues have in 
common;
b.	discuss the types of cells found in fibrous connective tissue;
c.	explain what the matrix of a connective tissue is and describe its 
components;
d.	list 10 types of connective tissue, describe their cellular compo-
nents and matrix, and explain what distinguishes them from each 
other; and
e.	visually recognize each type from specimens or photographs.
Figure 4.12 Exfoliation of Squamous Cells 
from the Mucosa of the Vagina.
© David M. Phillips/Science Source
•	 What are some other places in the body where 
you would expect to find similar exfoliation?
Overview
Connective tissue serves in most cases to bind organs to each other (for example, the 
way a tendon connects a muscle to a bone) or to support and protect organs. The vol-
ume of the extracellular matrix is greater than the volume occupied by its cells. Most 
of the cells are not in direct contact with each other, but are separated by extracellular 
material. Most connective tissue is richly supplied with blood vessels. This is the most 
abundant, widely distributed, and histologically variable of the four primary tissues.
The functions of connective tissue include the following:
∙	 Binding of organs. Tendons bind muscle to bone, ligaments bind one bone to 
another, and fat holds the kidneys and eyes in place.
∙	 Support. Bones support the body, and cartilage supports the ears, nose, tra-
chea, and bronchi.
∙	 Physical protection. Bones protect delicate organs such as the brain, lungs, and 
heart; fat and fibrous capsules around the kidneys and eyes cushion these organs.
∙	 Immune protection. Connective tissue cells attack foreign invaders.
106      PART 1  Organization of the Body

∙	 Movement. Bones provide the lever system for body movement, cartilages are 
involved in movement of the vocal cords, and cartilages on bone surfaces ease 
joint movements.
∙	 Storage. Fat is the body’s major energy reserve; bone is a reservoir of calcium 
and phosphorus that can be drawn upon when needed.
∙	 Heat production. Brown fat generates heat in infants and children.
∙	 Transport. Blood transports gases, nutrients, wastes, hormones, and blood cells.
Fibrous Connective Tissue
The most diverse connective tissues are in a class called fibrous connective tissue 
(or connective tissue proper). Nearly all connective tissues contain fibers, but they 
are especially conspicuous in this class. Its most common fiber type is composed 
of collagen,8 the body’s most abundant protein. Collagenous (col-LADJ-eh-nus) 
fibers are tough, flexible, and resist stretching. They compose such animal products 
as gelatin, leather, and glue. Tendons, ligaments, and the deep layer of the skin 
(dermis) are made mainly of collagen, but less visible collagen fibers pervade the 
matrix of cartilage and bone. In fresh tissue, collagenous fibers have a glistening 
white appearance, as seen in tendons and some cuts of meat (fig. 4.13).
Thin, glycoprotein-coated collagen fibers called reticular9 fibers form the 
matrix of a fibrous connective tissue called reticular tissue, which provides a 
spongelike framework for such organs as the spleen and lymph nodes. Elastic fibers 
are composed of a stretchy protein called elastin. These fibers are thinner than col-
lagenous fibers, and they branch and rejoin. Elastic fibers account for the ability of 
the skin, lungs, and arteries to spring back after they are stretched.
The dominant cells of fibrous connective tissue are fibroblasts10—large cells 
that often taper at the ends and show slender, wispy branches. They produce the 
fibers and ground substance that form the matrix. Also common in fibrous con-
nective tissues are large phagocytic cells called macrophages,11 which engulf and 
destroy bacteria, other foreign particles, and dead or dying cells of our own body. 
Leukocytes,12 or white blood cells (WBCs), spend most of their time in the fibrous 
connective tissues, crawling about and providing various forms of defense against 
bacteria, toxins, and other foreign agents. Fat cells, or adipocytes, also appear in 
isolation or in small clusters in fibrous connective tissue, although when they domi-
nate an area, the tissue is called adipose tissue.
The cells and fibers of connective tissue are embedded in ground substance. 
This material has little to no microscopic structure of its own, but is a fairly uniform 
material that ranges from a fluid or gel in some connective tissues to the rubbery tex-
ture of cartilage and stony texture of bone. Its texture results primarily from large pro-
tein–carbohydrate complexes and the water they absorb and retain, although in bone, 
calcium phosphate and other minerals harden the matrix. The ground substance of a 
fibrous connective tissue absorbs compressive forces and, like the styrofoam packing 
in a shipping carton, protects the more delicate cells from mechanical injury.
Fibrous connective tissue is divided into two broad categories according to the 
relative abundance of fiber: loose and dense. In loose connective tissue, the fibers 
are widely spaced, running in apparently random directions; the cells tend to be 
widely separated; and there is an abundance of ground substance, which looks like 
empty space in routine tissue specimens. These characteristics are especially con-
spicuous in areolar13 tissue (AIR-ee-OH-lur) (fig. 4.14). In dense ­connective ­tissue, 
most of the space is occupied by closely packed fibers. Tables 4.4 and 4.5 (figs. 4.14 
to 4.17) summarize the types of loose and dense fibrous connective tissues.
8colla = glue; gen = producing 
9ret = network; icul = little 
10fibro = fiber; blast = producing 
11macro = big; phage = eater 
12leuko = white; cyte = cell 
13areola = little space 
Figure 4.13 Tendons of the Hand. The white 
glistening appearance results from the collagen 
of which tendons are composed. The braceletlike 
band across the wrist is also composed of collagen.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer
Tendons
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      107  

Table 4.4  Loose Connective Tissues
Areolar Tissue
Reticular Tissue
Elastic
ﬁbers
Collagenous
ﬁbers
(b)
(a)
Fibroblasts
Ground
substance
Figure 4.14 Areolar Tissue in a Spread of the  
Mesentery (×400). 
 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
(b)
(a)
Reticular
ﬁbers
Lymphocytes
Figure 4.15 Reticular Tissue of the Spleen (×400). 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Al Telser, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Loose, random-looking arrangement of 
­predominantly collagenous and elastic fibers; scattered cells of various 
types; abundant ground substance; numerous blood vessels
Representative locations: Underlying nearly all epithelia; surrounding 
blood vessels, esophagus, and trachea; fascia between muscles; mesen-
teries; visceral layers of pericardium and pleura
Functions: Loosely binds epithelia to deeper tissues; allows passage of 
nerves and blood vessels through other tissues; provides an arena for 
immune defense; and its blood vessels provide nutrients and waste 
removal for overlying epithelia
Microscopic appearance: Loose network of reticular fibers, reticular cells, 
and fibroblasts, infiltrated with numerous lymphocytes and other blood 
cells
Representative locations: Lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, bone marrow
Functions: Supportive stroma (framework) for lymphatic organs
108      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Table 4.5  Dense Connective Tissues
Dense Regular Connective Tissue
Dense Iregular Connective Tissue
(b)
(a)
Fibroblast nuclei
Ground substance
Collagen ﬁbers
Figure 4.16 Dense Regular Connective Tissue of a  
Tendon (×400). 
 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
(b)
(a)
Fibroblast
nuclei
Gland
ducts
Bundles of
collagen ﬁbers
Ground
substance
Figure 4.17 Dense Irregular Connective Tissue in the Dermis 
of the Skin (×400). 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Usually has the form of densely packed, parallel, 
often wavy collagen fibers; slender fibroblast nuclei compressed between 
collagen bundles; few cells other than fibroblasts; scanty ground substance; 
few blood vessels; has the form of parallel wavy sheets of elastic tissue 
in arteries
Representative locations: Tendons, ligaments, vocal cords, arteries
Functions: Ligaments tightly bind bones together, stabilize joints, determine 
their range of motion, and resist stress; tendons attach muscle to bone and 
transfer muscular tension to bones; parallel arrangement of fibers is an 
adaptation to forces acting in a single consistent direction, as when a tendon 
pulls a bone; stretches and recoils in arteries to accommodate surges in 
blood pressure and relieve pressure on smaller downstream vessels
Microscopic appearance: Densely packed collagen fibers running in 
seemingly random directions; scanty open space (ground substance); few 
visible cells; long fibers in the tissue appear as short, chopped-up pieces 
in thin histological sections, as in photo
Representative locations: Deeper portion of dermis of skin; capsules 
around viscera such as liver, kidney, spleen; fibrous sheaths around 
­cartilages, bones, and nerves
Functions: Durable, hard to tear; variable orientation of fibers withstands 
stresses applied in unpredictable directions
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      109  

Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue, or fat, is connective tissue in which adipocytes are the dominant 
cell type (table 4.6, fig. 4.18). Adipocytes are rounded  cells occupied mainly by 
a globule of triglyceride (also called fat, in the chemical sense), surrounded by a 
thin  rim of cytoplasm. The nucleus is pushed up against the inside of the plasma  
membrane. In tissue sections, the fat is often dissolved by the preservation process  
and the remainder of the cell is somewhat collapsed and wrinkled, like a  deflating 
beach ball. Adipocytes are tightly packed and the narrow spaces between them are 
occupied by areolar tissue, reticular tissue, and blood capillaries. 
Adipose tissue serves primarily as an energy reservoir. Stored triglycerides are 
constantly synthesized or hydrolyzed depending on the amount of energy that is con-
sumed  or used. Amounts of adipose tissue vary—women have more adipose tissue 
Clinical Application 4.1
MARFAN SYNDROME—A CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE
Serious anatomical and functional abnormalities can result from hereditary 
errors in the structure of connective tissue proteins. Marfan14 syndrome, for 
example, results from the mutation of a gene on chromosome 15 that codes for 
a glycoprotein called fibrillin, the structural scaffold for elastic fibers. Clini-
cal signs of Marfan syndrome include unusually tall stature, long limbs and 
spidery fingers, abnormal spinal curvature, and a protruding “pigeon breast.” 
Some other signs include hyperextensible joints, hernias of the groin, and vi-
sual problems resulting from abnormally long eyeballs and deformed lenses. 
More seriously, victims exhibit a weakening of the heart valves and arterial 
walls. The aorta, where blood pressure is the highest, is sometimes enormous-
ly dilated close to the heart, and may suddenly rupture. Marfan syndrome is 
present in about 1 out of 20,000 live births, and most victims die by their mid-
30s. Abraham Lincoln’s tall, gangly physique and spindly fingers led some 
authorities to believe that he had Marfan syndrome; however, the evidence is 
inconclusive. A number of star athletes have died at a young age of Marfan 
syndrome, including Olympic volleyball champion Flo Hyman, who died of a 
ruptured aorta during a game in Japan in 1986, at the age of 31.
14Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan (1858–1942), French physician
Table 4.6  Adipose Tissue
(b)
(a)
Lipid in
adipocyte
Adipocyte
nuclei
Blood
vessel
Figure 4.18 Adipose Tissue of the Breast (×100). 
 
a: McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Dominated 
by adipocytes—large, empty-looking 
cells with thin margins; tissue sec-
tions often very pale because of scar-
city of stained cytoplasm; adipocytes 
­shrunken; nucleus pressed against 
plasma membrane; blood vessels 
often ­present
Representative locations: 
Subcutaneous fat beneath skin; 
breast; heart surface; mesenteries; 
­surrounding organs such as kidneys 
and eyes
Functions: Energy storage; thermal 
insulation; protective cushion for some 
organs; filling space, shaping body; 
heat production by brown fat
110      PART 1  Organization of the Body

than men  relative to body weight distributed especially in breasts and hips, a  differ-
ence that can be attributed to the increased energetic demands of  reproduction. Active 
individuals have less fat stored in adipose tissue than  those who are sedentary. Obesity 
is an overabundance of adipose tissue. Excess  calories result in enlargement of adi-
pose tissue stores due to growth of  existing adipocytes, not by adipocyte multiplica-
tion. In obese individuals, adipocytes may be twice as large as those in individuals of  
average body weight. In addition to energy storage, adipose tissue provides  thermal 
insulation and anchors and cushions such organs as the eyeballs and  kidneys.
Most adipose tissue is a type called white fat. Until recently, only fetuses, 
infants, and children were thought to also have a heat-generating tissue called brown 
fat, which accounts for up to 6% of an infant’s weight. Brown fat gets its color from 
an unusual abundance of mitochondria. When brown fat breaks down its triglyc-
erides, it releases energy only as heat, and does not produce ATP. Recently, it was 
discovered that adults have varying amounts of brown fat. 
Supportive Connective Tissue
Cartilage and bone are less flexible than other connective tissues and thus provide 
physical support for various organs and the body as a whole.
Cartilage
Cartilage is a supportive connective tissue with a rubbery matrix. In meat, we know 
it as gristle. Cartilage gives shape to the external ear, the tip of the nose, and the 
larynx (voice box)—the most easily palpated cartilages in the body. The cells of 
cartilage are called called chondrocytes15 (CON-dro-sites). They secrete the matrix 
and surround themselves with it until they become trapped in little cavities called 
lacunae16 (la-CUE-nee). Chondrocytes often occur in little clusters called cell nests, 
descended from the same mother cell. Cartilage is free of blood capillaries, so its 
nutrition and waste removal depend on diffusion through the stiff matrix. Because 
this is such a slow process, chondrocytes have low rates of metabolism and cell 
division, and injured cartilage heals slowly. The matrix contains collagen fibers that 
range in thickness from invisibly fine to conspicuously coarse. Differences in the 
fibers provide a basis for classifying cartilage into three types: hyaline17 cartilage 
(HY-uh-lin), elastic cartilage, and fibrocartilage (table 4.7, figs. 4.19 to 4.21). The 
first two types are usually covered with a sheath of dense irregular connective tissue 
called the perichondrium18 (PERR-ih-CON-dree-um).
Bone
Bone, or osseous tissue, is a connective tissue with a hard, calcified matrix. Most 
tissue sections presented for study are of a type called compact (dense) bone, 
an opaque white tissue of the skeletal surface (table 4.8, fig. 4.22). This tissue is 
arranged in microscopic cylinders that surround central canals, which run longitu-
dinally through the shafts of long bones such as the femur. Blood vessels and nerves 
travel through the central canals. The bone matrix is deposited in concentric layers 
called lamellae around each central canal; in cross sections, these look like the lay-
ers of an onion slice. Bone cells, called osteocytes,19 occupy lacunae between these 
layers. The structure of compact bone will be examined in further detail in chapter 6.
At the organ level, a bone such as the humerus or femur consists of an outer 
shell of compact bone enclosing a more porous type of osseous tissue called spongy 
bone. Bone marrow occupies the interior spaces of the spongy bone and the hol-
low shafts of the long bones. The bone as a whole is covered with a tough fibrous 
­periosteum (PERR-ee-OSS-tee-um) similar to the perichondrium of cartilage.
15chondro = cartilage, gristle; cyte = cell 
16lacuna = lake, cavity 
17hyal = glass 
18peri = around; chondri = cartilage, gristle 
19osteo = bone; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      111  

Table 4.7  Cartilage
Hyaline Cartilage
Elastic Cartilage
Fibrocartilage
(b)
(a)
Chondrocytes
Perichondrium
Matrix
Lacunae
Cell nest
Figure 4.19 Hyaline Cartilage of the 
Fetal Skeleton (×400). 
 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
(b)
(a)
Perichondrium
Elastic ﬁbers
Chondrocytes
Lacunae
Figure 4.20 Elastic Cartilage of the 
External Ear (×1,000). 
 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
(b)
(a)
Collagen ﬁbers
Chondrocytes
Figure 4.21 Fibrocartilage of an 
­Intervertebral Disc (×400). 
 
a: © Dr. Alvin Telser
Microscopic appearance: Clear, glassy matrix, 
often stained light blue or pink in tissue sections; 
fine, dispersed collagen fibers, not usually visi-
ble; chondrocytes and lacunae often grouped in 
cell nests; usually covered by perichondrium
Representative locations: Forms a thin articular 
cartilage, lacking perichondrium, over the ends 
of bones at movable joints; costal cartilages 
attach ends of the ribs to the breastbone; forms 
supportive rings and plates around trachea and 
bronchi; forms a boxlike enclosure around the 
larynx; forms most of the fetal skeleton
Functions: Eases joint movements; holds airway 
open during respiration; moves vocal cords 
­during speech; a precursor of bone in the fetal 
skeleton and growth zones of the long bones of 
children
Microscopic appearance: Elastic fibers form 
weblike mesh amid lacunae; always covered by 
perichondrium
Representative locations: External ear; epiglottis
Functions: Provides flexible, elastic support; 
gives shape to the ear
Microscopic appearance: Coarse, parallel bun-
dles of collagen fibers similar to those of tendon; 
rows of chondrocytes in lacunae between 
­collagen bundles; never has a perichondrium
Representative locations: Pubic symphysis 
(anterior joint between two halves of pelvic 
­girdle); intervertebral discs that separate bones 
of vertebral column; menisci, or pads of shock-
absorbing cartilage, in knee joint; at points 
where tendons insert on bones near articular 
hyaline cartilage
Functions: Resists compression and absorbs 
shock in some joints; often a transitional tissue 
between dense connective tissue and hyaline 
cartilage (for example, at some tendon–bone 
junctions)
112      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Blood
Blood (table 4.9, fig. 4.23) is a liquid connective tissue that travels through tubu-
lar blood vessels. Its primary function is to transport cells and dissolved matter 
such as oxygen and nutrients from place to place. Blood consists of a ground 
substance called plasma, and cells and cell fragments collectively called formed 
elements. The formed elements are of three kinds: (1) Red blood cells (RBCs), 
or ­erythrocytes20 (eh-RITH-ro-sites), transport oxygen. (2) White blood cells 
(WBCs), or leukocytes, combat infections and other foreign or unwanted agents. 
(3) Platelets function in blood clotting and blood vessel repair and maintenance. All 
of these are described in more detail in chapter 12.
Table 4.8  Compact Bone
(b)
(a)
Concentric 
lamellae of osteon
Central canal
Lacunae
Canaliculi
Osteon
Figure 4.22 Compact Bone (×100). 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance (­compact 
bone): Calcified matrix arranged in 
­concentric lamellae around central 
canals; osteocytes occupy ­lacunae 
between adjacent lamellae; ­lacunae 
interconnected by delicate canaliculi
Representative locations: Skeleton
Functions: Physical support of body; 
leverage for muscle action; protective 
enclosure of viscera; reservoir of 
­calcium and phosphorus
Table 4.9  Blood
(b)
(a)
Monocyte
Erythrocytes
Lymphocyte
Neutrophils
Platelets
Figure 4.23 Blood Smear (×1,000). 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
Microscopic appearance: Erythrocytes 
(RBCs) appear as pale pink discs with 
light centers and no nuclei; leukocytes 
(WBCs) are slightly larger, are much 
fewer, and have variously shaped nuclei, 
usually stained violet; platelets are cell 
fragments with no nuclei, about one-
quarter the diameter of erythrocytes
Representative locations: Contained in 
heart and blood vessels; WBCs also 
occupy loose connective tissues
Functions: Transports gases, nutrients, 
wastes, chemical signals, and heat 
throughout body; provides defensive 
leukocytes; contains clotting agents to 
minimize bleeding; platelets secrete 
growth factors that promote tissue 
maintenance and repair
20erythro = red; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      113  

Apply What You Know
Connective tissues usually consist of more extracellular material than cell ­volume. 
Which connective tissues are exceptions to this generalization?
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
8.	What features do most or all connective tissues have 
in common to set this class apart from others?
9.	List the cell and fiber types found in fibrous connective 
­tissues and state their functional differences.
10.	How does the matrix of bone differ from that of areolar tissue? 
Explain how the differences relate to the tissue functions.
11.	What is areolar tissue? How can it be distinguished from any 
other kind of connective tissue?
12.	Describe some similarities, differences, and functional 
­relationships between hyaline cartilage and bone.
13.	What are the three basic classes of formed elements in 
blood, and what are their respective functions?
4.4  Nervous and Muscular Tissue— 
The Excitable Tissues
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain what distinguishes excitable tissues from other tissues;
b.	name the cell types that compose nervous tissue;
c.	identify the major parts of a nerve cell;
d.	visually recognize nervous tissue from specimens or 
­photographs;
e.	name the three kinds of muscular tissue and describe the 
­differences between them; and
f.	identify types of muscular tissue from specimens or  
­photographs.
Excitability is a characteristic of all living cells, but it is developed to its highest 
degree in nervous and muscular tissue, which are therefore described as excitable 
tissues. The basis for their excitation is an electrical charge on the plasma mem-
brane. Nervous and muscular tissues exhibit quick electrical responses when stimu-
lated. Nerve cells respond to stimulation by rapidly transmitting signals to other 
cells. Muscle cells respond by developing tension, often shortening and pulling on 
other tissues.
114      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Nervous Tissue
Nervous tissue (table 4.10, fig. 4.24) consists of neurons (NOOR-ons), or nerve 
cells, and a much greater number of supporting cells called glial cells (GLEE-ul), 
which protect and assist the neurons. Neurons are specialized to detect stimuli, 
respond quickly, and transmit information rapidly to other cells. A typical neuron 
has a prominent cell body that houses the nucleus; several short filamentous pro-
cesses called dendrites that receive signals and transmit messages to the cell body; 
and one long process, the axon or nerve fiber, that sends outgoing signals to other 
cells. Variations in the structure of neurons and nervous tissue are described in 
chapters 8 and 9.
Muscular Tissue
Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells that are specialized to contract and 
exert a force on other tissues and organs. Not only do movements of the body as a 
whole depend on muscle, but so do such processes as digestion, waste elimination, 
breathing, speech, facial expression, and blood circulation. There are three types 
of muscle—skeletal, cardiac, and smooth (table 4.11, figs. 4.25 to 4.27). Skeletal 
and cardiac muscle exhibit fine, transverse, light and dark bands called striations21 
(stry-AY-shuns), resulting from the internal arrangement of the proteins involved in 
their contraction; thus, they are called striated muscle. The contractile proteins are 
less uniformly arranged in smooth muscle, which therefore lacks striations. Skeletal 
muscle is usually under voluntary control, and is thus called voluntary muscle. 
Cardiac and smooth muscle are called involuntary muscle because we usually can-
not consciously control their contractions.
Most smooth muscle is found in the walls of hollow organs such as the stom-
ach, intestines, uterus, and urinary bladder, where it is also called visceral muscle. 
The cells of skeletal muscle are commonly called muscle fibers because of their 
extraordinarily long, slender shape, whereas the shorter cells of cardiac and smooth 
muscle are often called myocytes.22 Skeletal muscle fibers are further discussed in 
chapter 7 and cardiac myocytes in chapter 13.
Table 4.10  Nervous Tissue 
(b)
(a)
Dendrites
Neurosoma
Axon
Nuclei of
glial cells
Figure 4.24 A Neuron and Glial Cells of the Spinal Cord (×400). 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
Microscopic appearance: Most ­nervous 
tissue sections or smears show a few 
large neurons, usually with rounded 
or stellate cell bodies and fibrous 
­processes (axon and dendrites) 
­extending from the somas; neurons 
are surrounded by a greater number 
of much smaller glial cells
Representative locations: Brain, spinal 
cord, nerves, ganglia
Function: Internal communication
21striat = striped 
22myo = muscle; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      115  

Table 4.11  Muscular Tissue 
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
Smooth Muscle
Striations
Muscle ﬁber
(b)
(a)
Nuclei
Figure 4.25 Skeletal Muscle  
(×400). 
 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
(b)
(a)
Glycogen
Striations
Intercalated discs
Figure 4.26 Cardiac Muscle  
(×400). 
 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
Muscle cells
Nuclei
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.27 Smooth Muscle of the 
Intestinal Wall (×1,000). 
 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
Microscopic appearance: Long, threadlike, 
unbranched muscle fibers, with relatively parallel 
appearance in longitudinal tissue sections; 
­striations; each cell with multiple nuclei lying 
near the plasma membrane
Representative locations: Skeletal muscles, 
mostly attached to bones but also in the tongue, 
esophagus, and voluntary sphincters23 (circular 
muscles) of the eyelids, urethra, and anus
Functions: Body movements, facial expression, 
posture, breathing, speech, swallowing, control 
of urination and defecation, and assistance in 
childbirth; often under voluntary control
Microscopic appearance: Short branched cells 
with a less parallel appearance in tissue ­sections; 
striations; thicker dark bands called intercalated24 
discs, containing mechanical and electrical junc-
tions, where cells meet end to end; usually one 
nucleus per cell, centrally located and often sur-
rounded by a light zone of glycogen
Representative locations: Heart only
Functions: Pumping of blood; under involuntary 
control 
Microscopic appearance: Short fusiform 
­myocytes overlapping each other; nonstriated; 
one nucleus per cell, centrally located
Representative locations: Usually found as 
sheets of tissue in walls of viscera; also in iris 
and associated with hair follicles; involuntary 
sphincters of urethra and anus
Functions: Swallowing; contractions of stomach 
and intestines; retention and expulsion of feces 
and urine; labor contractions; control of blood 
pressure and flow; control of respiratory airflow; 
control of pupillary diameter; erection of hairs; 
under involuntary control
23sphinc = squeeze, bind tightly 
24inter = between; calated = inserted
116      PART 1  Organization of the Body

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
T
issue repair is not only a natural process but also a lively 
area of medical research. Tissue engineering is the produc-
tion of tissues and organs in the laboratory for implantation into 
the human body. The ultimate goal is to restore, maintain, or im-
prove  damaged tissue or whole organs. In the future, scientists 
hope to be able to transplant organs that have been grown in 
the laboratory into people who have  suffered from heart attacks, 
liver failure, or kidney disease, for example. The process begins 
with building a scaffold (supportive framework) that is essentially 
an artificial extracellular matrix.  Scientists use materials rang-
ing from collagen to biodegradable polyester, sometimes in the 
shape of a desired organ such as a blood vessel or ear. The scaf-
fold is seeded with human cells and put in a “bioreactor” to grow. 
The bioreactor supplies nutrients, oxygen, and growth factors. 
When a lab-grown tissue reaches a certain point, it is implanted 
into the patient.
Growing a complex organ is  tremendously challenging, 
and scientists have not yet achieved anything as sophisticated 
as a complete, functioning lab-grown heart, but components 
such as valves, coronary arteries, patches of cardiac tissue, 
and whole heart chambers have been developed. Researchers 
have grown liver, bone, cartilage, tendon, and intestinal tissue 
in the laboratory. Scientists at the University of Massachusetts 
and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology grew a “human” 
outer ear on the back of a mouse. They seeded a polymer 
scaffold with human cartilage cells and grew it on an immuno-
deficient mouse unable to reject the human tissue. They see 
potential in growing ears and noses for cosmetic treatment 
of children with birth defects or who have suffered disfiguring 
injuries from accidents or animal bites. In 2006, scientists at 
Children’s Hospital in Boston reported that seven patients from 
ages 4 to 19 were living with tissue-engineered urinary blad-
ders. These had been engineered almost entirely from cells 
harvested elsewhere in the body to replace bladders that had 
been defective. More recently, bioengineered tracheas have 
been transplanted into  patients who suffered from a variety of 
conditions, including cancer. 
T h e  S t e m - C e l l  C o n t r o v e r s y
O
ne of the most controversial scientific and religious issues 
in the last several years revolves around histology—stem-
cell research. Stem cells are immature cells with the ability to 
­differentiate into one or more types of mature, specialized tis-
sues. Adult stem (AS) cells exist in most of the body’s tissues, 
where they multiply and replace older cells that are lost to 
damage or normal cellular turnover. Embryonic stem (ES) cells 
compose human embryos up to about 150 cells. There is hope 
that stem cells can be manipulated to replace a broad range 
of tissues, such as cardiac muscle damaged by a heart attack, 
injured spinal cords, brain cells lost to Parkinson and Alzheimer 
diseases, or the insulin-secreting cells needed by people with 
diabetes mellitus.
Embryonic stem cells are less limited than adult stem cells 
in developmental potential; they are called pluripotent because 
they can develop into any type of fetal or adult cell. ES cells are 
often obtained from the excess embryos created in fertility clinics 
when a couple attempts to conceive a child by in vitro fertiliza-
tion (IVF). AS cells, in contrast, are difficult to harvest from mature 
organs and maintain in culture. Furthermore, it remains uncertain 
whether AS cells can be manipulated into producing all cell types 
needed to treat such a broad range of diseases; they have already 
started down a path that limits their developmental versatility. For 
such reasons, ES cells have generated the greatest hope that they 
could be made to grow into new tissues of almost any kind, using 
cells that would otherwise have been discarded and wasted by 
IVF clinics.
However, stem-cell technology has been embroiled in polit-
ical, religious, and ethical debate. Some would argue that since 
the excess embryos of IVF clinics are destined to be destroyed, 
it would seem sensible to use them to save lives and restore 
health. Others argue, however, that potential medical benefits 
cannot justify the destruction of a human embryo, even one 
that consists of scarcely more than 100 cells. Further scientific 
advances, however, are beginning to defuse the controversy 
to some degree. Cell biologists have developed methods to 
make adult stem cells reverse course on their developmental 
paths, going back to a pluripotent state that would enable them 
to go down new roads. In principle, an AS cell that was origi-
nally destined to become smooth muscle, for example, might 
be made to revert to a pluripotent state, then be chemically 
guided down a path leading to nervous tissue for Alzheimer 
patients or persons paralyzed by spinal cord injury. Such modi-
fied adult cells, now called induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, 
have begun to show great promise for both medical benefit and 
reduced ­controversy.
T i s s u e  E n g i n e e r i n g
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      117  

Duct
Acinus
Secretory 
vesicles
Duct
Secretory
acini
Gland
capsule
Arterial blood supply
Blood 
capillaries
Hormone
carried
away in
bloodstream
(a)
(b)
(c)
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
14.	What do nervous and muscular tissue have in 
­common? What is the primary function of each?
15.	What two principal cell types compose nervous tissue, and 
how can they be distinguished from each other?
16.	Name the three kinds of muscular tissue, describe how to 
distinguish them from each other in microscopic appearance, 
and state a location and function for each one.
4.5  Glands and Membranes
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe or define various kinds of glands;
b.	compare modes of glandular secretion; and
c.	describe the structure of mucous and serous membranes.
Glands
A gland is a cell or organ that releases substances for use elsewhere in the body 
or for elimination from the body. Its product is called a secretion if it is useful to 
the body (such as a digestive enzyme or hormone) and an excretion if it is a waste 
product (such as urine or sweat).
Exocrine and Endocrine Glands
Glands are classified as exocrine or endocrine. Exocrine25 glands (EC-so-
crin) release a secretion onto an epithelial surface and usually into the lumen 
of another organ. Typically, the secretion is produced by a group of cells that 
form a microscopic secretory sac called an acinus (ASS-ih-nus) (fig. 4.28a, b). 
One side of the acinus leads into an epithelial duct. These ducts converge until 
one or a few main ducts exit the gland. Enclosing the gland, there is usually 
a fibrous capsule that sets it off from surrounding tissues. Extensions of the 
capsule often subdivide the gland into lobes and smaller compartments, and 
branches of the duct typically travel through these capsular extensions. Some 
examples of exocrine glands are sweat, mammary, and salivary glands, and the 
kidneys and liver.
Endocrine26 glands (EN-doe-crin) have no ducts but, instead, release their prod-
ucts into the bloodstream (fig. 4.28c). Their secretions are called hormones and serve 
as chemical signals to other organs. Some examples of endocrine glands are the pitu-
itary, thyroid, and adrenal glands. Some glands, such as the pancreas, ovaries, and 
Figure 4.28 Exocrine and Endocrine Glands. 
(a) General structure of an exocrine gland. The duct 
branches repeatedly until its finest branches termi-
nate in sacs of secretory cells called acini. (b) ­Detail 
of an exocrine acinus and beginning of a duct. 
(c)  General structure of an endocrine gland. The 
secretions of an endocrine gland (hormones) enter 
blood capillaries in the gland and are carried away 
in the bloodstream.
25exo = out; crin = to separate, secrete 
26endo = in, into; crin = to separate, secrete
118      PART 1  Organization of the Body

liver, have both exocrine and endocrine functions. Endocrine glands are discussed in 
further detail in chapter 11; the rest of this discussion concerns exocrine glands.
Modes of Secretion
Exocrine glands are classified by the nature of their secretions. Serous glands 
(SEER-us) produce thin, watery fluids such as perspiration, milk, tears, and diges-
tive juices. Mucous glands, found in the digestive and respiratory tracts among 
other places, secrete a glycoprotein called mucin (MEW-sin). After it is secreted, 
mucin absorbs water, swells, and forms sticky mucus. (Note that mucus, the secre-
tion, is spelled differently from mucous, the adjective form of the word.) Mixed 
glands, such as the two pairs of salivary glands in the floor of the mouth, contain 
both serous and mucous cells and produce a mixture of secretions.
Exocrine glands are further classified according to how they release their secre-
tions. Most of them are merocrine27 glands (MERR-oh-crin), which release their 
products by means of exocytosis (fig. 4.29a). The product is packaged by the Golgi 
apparatus into vesicles that travel to the cell surface and release it to the exterior. 
These include the tear glands, pancreas, and most other glands. Apocrine28 glands 
produce their products in the cytosol, not in the Golgi complex, and the products are 
released by budding from the apical cell surface with a thin coating of cytoplasm 
and plasma membrane (fig. 4.29b). Mammary glands secrete the sugar and protein 
of milk by the merocrine method, but secrete the milk fat by the apocrine method. 
Sweat glands of the axillary (armpit) region were once thought to use the apocrine 
method as well. They are commonly called apocrine sweat glands even though it is 
now known that they secrete by the ordinary merocrine method.
Holocrine29 glands, in which the gland cells break down entirely and become 
the secretion, are relatively rare (fig. 4.29c). The principal example of these is the 
oil-producing sebaceous (seh-BAY-shus) glands of the skin (see chapter 5). Others 
are found in the margins of the eyelids.
27mero = part; crin = to separate, secrete 
28apo = from, off, away; crin = to separate, secrete 
29holo = whole, entire; crin = to separate, secrete
Figure 4.29 Modes of Exocrine Secretion. 
(a)  Merocrine secretion in a cell of the mammary 
gland, secreting milk sugar (lactose) and proteins 
by exocytosis. (b) Apocrine secretion of fat by a cell 
of the mammary gland. Fat droplets coalesce in the 
cytosol and then bud off from the cell surface with 
a thin coating of cytoplasm and plasma membrane. 
(c) Holocrine secretion by a sebaceous (oil) gland 
of the scalp. In this method, entire gland cells break 
down and become the secretion (sebum).
•	 Which of these glands would require the highest 
rate of mitosis in its secretory cells? Why?
Milk sugar
and protein
Milk fat
Secretion
(sebum)
Gland
capsule
Disintegrating
cells
Intact
basal cells
Mitosis in
basal cells
replaces 
cells that
disintegrate
and die
Plasma
membrane
Cytoplasm
Exocytosis
Secretory
vesicle
Golgi
complex
(a) Merocrine
(b) Apocrine
(c) Holocrine
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      119  

Membranes
Mucous membranes (fig. 4.30a) line tracts of the body that open to the exte-
rior environment: the digestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive tracts. A 
mucous membrane, also called a mucosa, consists of an epithelium (usually 
nonkeratinized stratified squamous, simple columnar, or pseudostratified colum-
nar) overlying a layer of areolar tissue and often a thin layer of smooth muscle. 
Mucous membranes have absorptive, secretory, and protective functions. They 
are often covered with mucus secreted by goblet cells, multicellular mucous 
glands, or both. The mucus traps bacteria and foreign particles, which keeps 
them from invading the tissues and aids in their removal from the body. This is 
an important defense for body passages open to the germ- and debris-laden air. 
The epithelium of a mucous membrane may also include absorptive, ciliated, and 
other types of cells.
Serous membranes (SEER-us) (fig. 4.30b; see also fig. 4.4) line the 
thoracic and abdominal cavities and cover the external surfaces of organs 
such as the stomach and intestines. They include the pleura around each lung, 
the pericardium around the heart, and the peritoneum of the abdominal cav-
ity. They are composed of a simple squamous epithelium resting on a thin 
layer of areolar connective tissue. Serous membranes produce watery serous 
fluid, which arises from the blood and derives its name from the fact that it 
is similar to blood serum in composition. A serous membrane can also be 
called a serosa.
Figure 4.30 Mucous and Serous Membranes. 
(a) A mucous membrane (mucosa) such as the inner 
lining of the trachea. (b) A serous ­membrane (sero-
sa) such as the external lining of the small intestine.
•	 Where are some other places one could find 
each type of membrane?
Mucous coat
Cilia
Basement
membrane
Collagen ﬁbers
Fibroblast
Smooth muscle
Elastic ﬁbers
Blood vessel
Ciliated cells of
pseudostratiﬁed
epithelium
Mucin in 
goblet cell
Epithelium
Connective
tissue
Mucous
membrane
(mucosa)
(a)
(b)
Serous
membrane
(serosa)
Serous ﬂuid
Squamous cells
Smooth muscle
Areolar tissue
120      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
17.	 Distinguish between endocrine and exocrine glands, 
and give an example of each.
18.	Contrast the merocrine and holocrine methods of secretion, 
and name a gland product produced by each method. 
19.	Distinguish between serous and mucous secretions.
20.	Distinguish between serous and mucous membranes, and 
state where each may be found.
4.6   Tissue Growth, Development,  
Repair, and Death
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	name and describe the modes of tissue growth;
b.	distinguish between the ways the body repairs damaged 
­tissues; and
c.	name and describe some modes and causes of tissue shrinkage 
and death.
Tissue Growth
Tissues grow either because their cells increase in number or because the existing 
cells grow larger. Most embryonic and childhood growth involves hyperplasia30 
(HY-pur-PLAY-zhuh), tissue growth through cell multiplication. Skeletal muscles 
and adipose tissue, however, grow through hypertrophy31 (hy-PUR-truh-fee), the 
enlargement of preexisting cells. However “bulked up” and muscular a person 
becomes, or however obese, it is through a growth in the size of muscle or fat cells, 
not an increase in their number. Neoplasia32 (NEE-oh-PLAY-zhuh) is the develop-
ment of a tumor (neoplasm), whether benign or malignant, composed of abnormal, 
nonfunctional tissue.
30hyper = above, beyond; plas = growth 
31hyper = above, beyond; trophy = nourishment 
32neo = new; plas = growth
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      121  

Tissue Repair
Damaged tissues can be repaired in two ways: regeneration or fibrosis. 
Regeneration is the replacement of dead or damaged cells by the same 
type of cells as before, thus restoring normal function to the organ. 
Most skin injuries (cuts, scrapes, and minor burns) heal by regen-
eration. The liver also regenerates remarkably well. Fibrosis is the 
replacement of damaged tissue with scar tissue, composed mainly of 
collagen produced by fibroblasts. Scar tissue helps to hold an organ 
together, but it does not restore normal function. Examples include the 
healing of severe cuts and burns, the healing of muscle injuries, scars left 
in the cardiac muscle by earlier heart attacks, and scarring of the lungs in 
tuberculosis.
Tissue Shrinkage and Death
The shrinkage of a tissue through a loss in cell size or number is called atrophy33 
(AT-ro-fee). It can result from lack of use of an organ, as when muscles shrink from 
lack of exercise, or from simple aging.
Necrosis34 (neh-CRO-sis) is the pathological death of tissue due to trauma, 
toxins, infection, and so forth. One form of necrosis is infarction, the sudden 
death of tissue that occurs when its blood supply is cut off—for example, the 
myocardial infarction (MI) of a heart attack and the cerebral infarction of a 
stroke. Another form of necrosis is gangrene, a more slowly developing necrosis 
usually resulting from an insufficient blood supply and often involving infection 
of the tissue. A bed sore (decubitus ulcer) is a form of gangrene that occurs 
when immobilized persons, such as those confined to a hospital bed or wheel-
chair, are unable to move and continual pressure on the skin cuts off blood flow 
to an area. They are especially common in  the hips, sacral region, and ankles, 
where bone lies close to the surface and tissues between the skin and  bone are 
easily compressed.
Apoptosis35 (AP-oh-TOE-sis), or programmed cell death, is the normal “pre-
arranged” death of cells that have completed their function and best serve the body 
by dying and getting out of the way. Enzymes released by the cell’s own lysosomes 
degrade its DNA and proteins. The dying cell bubbles and shrinks and is quickly 
Clinical Application 4.2
KELOIDS
In some people, healing skin wounds exhibit excessive fibrosis and pro-
duce raised, shiny scars called keloids (fig. 4.31). Keloids extend beyond 
the boundaries of the original wound, and if they are surgically removed, 
they tend to return or even worsen. Keloids may result from the exces-
sive secretion of a fibroblast-stimulating growth factor by macrophages 
and platelets. They occur most often on the upper trunk and earlobes and 
in dark-skinned adults. Some people practice scarification—scratching or 
cutting the skin in patterns to induce keloid formation as a way of decorat-
ing the body.
Figure 4.31 A Keloid.
© Jere Mammino, DO
33a = without; troph = nourishment 
34necr = death; osis = process 
35apo = away; ptosis = falling
122      PART 1  Organization of the Body

phagocytized and disposed of by a macrophage. Among other functions, apoptosis 
disposes of unneeded tissue in embryonic development. For example, the foot and 
hand of a fetus start as paddlelike structures. Separation of the fingers and toes 
occurs by apoptosis of cells that form the initial webs between them. Apoptosis 
also shrinks the uterus after a woman gives birth. The uterus typically weighs about 
900 g at the end of full-term pregnancy, and shrinks by apoptosis to about 60 g 
within 5 or 6 weeks after birth.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
21.	Tissues can grow through an increase in cell size 
or cell number. What are the respective terms for these 
two kinds of growth?
22.	Explain the difference between infarction and gangrene.
23.	Distinguish between atrophy, necrosis, and apoptosis, and 
describe a circumstance under which each of these forms 
of tissue loss may occur.
24.	Distinguish between regeneration and fibrosis. Which 
­process restores normal cellular function? What good is 
the other process if it does not restore function?
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Histotechnicians prepare tissues by sectioning, staining, and 
other methods to produce specimens like those in the photo-
graphs in this chapter. Most histotechnicians work in hospitals, 
clinics, and diagnostic laboratories, preparing specimens to be 
examined by a pathologist or cytotechnologist for evidence of 
disease. A career in this field requires a knowledge of biology 
and chemistry. Good manual dexterity and hand–eye coordina-
tion are needed for work with delicate and tiny specimens and 
sophisticated laboratory equipment. A histotechnician often 
must work quickly (but carefully), because a surgical team may 
be waiting in an operating room for biopsy results that depend 
on the skills of the histotechnician and pathologist team. Histo-
technicians are also highly valued team members in industrial 
research, veterinary medicine, and forensics laboratories.
To become a histotechnician requires at least an associate 
degree and training in a hospital or histotechnician program. With a bachelor’s degree and further training, one can ­become 
a histotechnologist, with responsibility for more advanced techniques and more potential for administrative authority. See 
­appendix B for further information.
H i s t o t e c h n i c i a n
© Leca/Science Source
CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      123  

Study Guide
124      PART 1  Organization of the Body
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
4.1  The Study of Tissues 
1.	 The scope of histology
2.	 The definition of tissue and the four primary types of tissues
3.	 Three basic components of a tissue
4.	 How tissues are prepared for microscopic study, and how 
the sectioning of tissues relates to one’s three-dimensional 
­interpretation of their microscopic appearance
5.	 Terms that describe common cell shapes
4.2  Epithelial Tissue 
1.	 Characteristics of epithelium as a class
2.	 Where epithelial tissue is found
3.	 What separates an epithelium from adjacent tissues
4.	 Terminology of the three surfaces of epithelial cells
5.	 The distinction between simple and stratified epithelia
6.	 Four kinds of simple epithelium, defining characteristics of 
each, where each type can be found, and functional advantages 
of the various types
7.	 Four kinds of stratified epithelium, defining characteristics of 
each, where each type can be found, and functional advantages 
of the various types
8.	 Structural and functional differences between keratinized and 
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, and where each 
can be found
4.3  Connective Tissue 
1.	 Characteristics of connective tissue as a class
2.	 Functions of connective tissues
3.	 Three principal components of fibrous connective tissue
4.	 Cell and fiber types commonly seen in fibrous connective 
­tissues, and the function of each
5.	 Variations in the ground substance of fibrous connective tissue
6.	 Types of loose connective tissue, the differences between them, 
and examples of their locations
7.	 Types of dense connective tissue, the differences between 
them, and examples of their locations
8.	 Structure and functions of adipose tissue, and the functional 
distinction between the two types of adipose tissue
9.	 Structure of cartilage, its three types, and their differences in 
composition and location
10.	 Structure of compact bone and its relationship with spongy 
bone, bone marrow, and periosteum
11.	 Components and functions of the blood
4.4  Nervous and Muscular Tissue— 
The Excitable Tissues 
1.	 Why nervous and muscular tissues are considered to be 
“­excitable” tissues
2.	 Two types of cells that compose nervous tissue, and the 
­difference between them
3.	 The basic structure of a neuron
4.	 Three types of muscular tissue, where they are found, and how 
they differ in structure and function
4.5  Glands and Membranes 
1.	 The difference between a secretion and an excretion
2.	 Differences between endocrine and exocrine glands; examples 
of each
3.	 Differences between serous, mucous, and mixed glands; 
­examples of each
4.	 Differences between merocrine, holocrine, and apocrine modes 
of secretion; examples of each
5.	 Differences between mucous and serous membranes; examples 
of each
4.6  Tissue Growth, Development, Repair, 
and Death 
1.	 Differences between hyperplasia, hypertrophy, and neoplasia, 
and which of them is pathological
2.	 Two modes of tissue repair and how they differ
3.	 Tissue atrophy and its causes
4.	 Types of tissue necrosis, and how necrosis differs from apoptosis
5.	 Some normal developmental functions of apoptosis

CHAPTER 4   Histology—The Tissue Level of Organization      125  
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Transitional epithelium is found in
a.	 the urinary system.
b.	 the respiratory system.
c.	 the digestive system.
d.	 the reproductive system.
e.	 all of the above.
	 2.	 The external surface of the stomach is covered by
a.	 a mucous membrane.
b.	 a serous membrane.
c.	 the pleura.
d.	 smooth muscle.
e.	 a basement membrane.
	 3.	 Which of these is the most widespread type of epithelium?
a.	 simple cuboidal
b.	 simple columnar
c.	 pseudostratified columnar
d.	 stratified squamous
e.	 stratified cuboidal
	 4.	 A seminiferous tubule of the testis is lined with 
 
­epithelium.
a.	 simple cuboidal
b.	 pseudostratified columnar
c.	 stratified squamous
d.	 transitional
e.	 stratified cuboidal
	 5.	 Which of these cells is specialized to engulf and destroy 
­foreign matter?
a.	 an erythrocyte
b.	 a fibroblast
c.	 a macrophage
d.	 an adipocyte
e.	 a myocyte
	 6.	 Tendons are composed of
a.	 areolar tissue.
b.	 skeletal muscle.
c.	 reticular tissue.
d.	 dense irregular connective tissue.
e.	 dense regular connective tissue.
	 7.	 The collagen of areolar tissue is produced by
a.	 macrophages.
b.	 fibroblasts.
c.	 lymphocytes.
d.	 leukocytes.
e.	 chondrocytes.
	 8.	 Energy storage is a function of
a.	 adipose tissue.
b.	 areolar tissue.
c.	 muscular tissue.
d.	 stratified squamous epithelium.
e.	 fibrocartilage.
	 9.	 The shape of the external ear is due to
a.	 skeletal muscle.
b.	 elastic cartilage.
c.	 fibrocartilage.
d.	 articular cartilage.
e.	 hyaline cartilage.
	10.	 Any gland that releases its product by exocytosis is called
a.	 a mucous gland.
b.	 a holocrine gland.
c.	 a merocrine gland.
d.	 a serous gland.
e.	 an apocrine gland.
	11.	 Any form of pathological tissue death is called 
.
	12.	 The peritoneum has a 
 type of epithelium.
	13.	 Osteocytes and chondrocytes occupy little cavities called 
.
	14.	 Bones are covered with a fibrous sheath called the  
.
	15.	 Tendons and ligaments are made mainly of the protein 
.
	16.	 Most of the cells in nervous tissue are called 
.
	17.	 An epithelium rests on a layer called the 
 between its 
deepest cells and the underlying connective tissue.
	18.	 Fibers and ground substance make up the 
 of a 
­connective tissue.
	19.	 A 
 gland is one in which the secretion forms by 
­complete breakdown of the gland cells.
	20.	 Any epithelium in which every cell touches the basement 
membrane is called a 
 epithelium.
Answers in Appendix A

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the  following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 The esophagus is protected from abrasion by a keratinized 
stratified squamous epithelium.
	 2.	 Mucus-secreting goblet  cells can be found in both simple and 
stratified epithelia.
	 3.	 Skeletal muscle is defined  by the fact that it is all attached 
to bones.
	 4.	 Fibers are part of the ground substance of a connective tissue.
	 5.	 In all connective tissues, the matrix occupies more space than 
the cells do.
	 6.	 Adipocytes are limited to adipose tissue.
	 7.	 A single exocrine gland can be either serous or mucous but 
not both.
	 8.	 Weight lifting creates new  muscle tissue by the process of 
neoplasia (neo means “new”).
	 9.	 Nerve cells are the only electrically  excitable cells in the body.
	10.	 The tissue degeneration that occurs in gangrene is an example 
of programmed cell death, or apoptosis.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 A woman in labor is often told to push. In doing so, is she con-
sciously contracting her uterus to expel the baby? Justify your 
answer based on the muscular composition of the uterus and 
what you know about that muscle type.
	 2.	 One major tenet of biology is the cell theory, which states in 
part that all bodily structure and function are based on cells. 
The structural properties of bone, cartilage, and tendons, how-
ever, are due more to their extracellular material than to their 
cells. Is this an exception to the cell theory? Why or why not?
	 3.	 The epithelium of the respiratory tract is mostly of the pseu-
dostratified columnar ciliated type, but in the alveoli—the 
tiny air sacs where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged 
between the blood and inhaled air—the epithelium is simple 
squamous. Explain the functional significance of this histologi-
cal difference. That is, why don’t the alveoli have the same 
kind of epithelium as the rest of the respiratory tract?
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
126      PART 1  Organization of the Body

Chapter Outline
5.1 The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
• Functions 
• Structure 
5.2 Accessory Organs
• Hair 
• Nails 
• Cutaneous Glands 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 5.1: Transdermal Absorption
• Clinical Application 5.2: The Epidermis and 
­Vitamin D
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Integumentary System
• Career Spotlight: Dermatology Nurse
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
5
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Desmosomes (see “Cell Junctions” in section 3.2) 
• Stratified squamous epithelium (see table 4.3). 
• Collagen (see “Fibrous Connective Tissue” in 
section 4.3) 
• Areolar tissue (see table 4.4) 
• Dense irregular connective tissue (see table 4.5) 
• Merocrine, apocrine, and holocrine glands (see 
“Gland Types” in section 4.5) 
The Integumentary 
System
A human hair with a few loose squamous epidermal cells clinging to it. The overlapping 
scales of the hair surface help prevent hairs from being pulled easily from the scalp.
© Eye of Science/Science Source
Module 4: Integumentary
PART 2  Support and Movement
	
127

T
he integumentary1 system consists of the skin (integument), 
hair, nails, and cutaneous glands. We pay more attention to this 
organ system than to any other. It is, after all, the most visible one, 
and its appearance strongly affects our social interactions. Few people 
venture out of the house without first looking in a mirror to see if 
their skin and hair are presentable. Aside from esthetics, inspection 
of the skin, hair, and nails is a significant part of a physical examina-
tion. The integumentary system can provide clues not only to its own 
health but also to deeper disorders such as liver cancer, anemia, lung 
disease, nutritional deficiencies, hormonal imbalances, and heart 
failure. Also, care of the integumentary system is an important part of 
a total plan of patient care, since it strongly affects a person’s self-
image and sense of well-being.
5.1
 The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the functions of the skin;
b.	name the cell types of the epidermis and identify their functions;
c.	name and describe the layers of the epidermis and dermis;
d.	explain what accounts for various normal and pathological skin 
colors; and
e.	name the various physical markings of the skin.
The skin is a membrane that covers the external surface of the body. It is composed 
of two principal layers: a superficial epithelium called the epidermis and a deeper 
connective tissue layer called the dermis (fig. 5.1). Between the skin and muscles is 
a looser connective tissue layer called the hypodermis. This isn’t part of the skin, but 
is customarily studied in conjunction with it.
Functions
The foremost role of the skin is protection, but its functions are much more diverse 
than commonly supposed.
∙	 Resistance to trauma and infection. The skin bears the brunt of most physi-
cal injuries to the body, but it resists and recovers from trauma better than 
other organs do. The epidermal cells are packed with a tough protein called 
1integument = covering
128      PART 2  Support and Movement

keratin and linked by strong desmosomes. Few infectious organisms can pen-
etrate the intact skin. Bacteria and fungi live on the surface in moderate num-
bers, but their populations are kept in check by the relative dryness of the skin 
and by a protective acidic film.
∙	 Water retention. The skin prevents the body from losing excess water, as 
well as from absorbing too much of it when you are swimming or bathing. 
In spite of this, however, we lose about 400 mL of water per day through 
the skin even in the absence of sweating, and potentially much more when 
we sweat.
∙	 Vitamin D synthesis. Epidermal cells carry out the first step in ­synthesizing 
vitamin D, which is needed for bone development and maintenance (see 
­Clinical Application 5.2).
∙	 Sensation. The skin is the body’s largest sense organ. It is equipped with a 
variety of nerve endings that react to heat, cold, touch, texture, pressure, vibra-
tion, and injury. The skin senses and nerve endings are more fully described in 
section 10.2.
∙	 Thermoregulation. The skin plays a key role in stabilizing body temperature 
by regulating heat exchange with the environment. It does this by increasing 
or reducing blood flow close to the body surface and by sweating in response 
to overheating, as detailed in section 18.6.
∙	 Nonverbal communication. The skin is an important means of communi-
cation. We possess numerous small facial muscles that act on the dermis to 
produce subtle and varied expressions.
Sensory 
nerve ﬁbers
Apocrine sweat gland
Piloerector muscle
Lamellar (pacinian) 
corpuscle (pressure receptor)
Hair bulb
Motor nerve ﬁbers
Cutaneous blood
vessels
Hypodermis
(subcutaneous fat)
Epidermis
Merocrine sweat 
gland
Hair receptor
Dermal papilla
Blood capillaries
Tactile corpuscle
(touch receptor)
Hair follicle
Sebaceous gland
Hairs
Sweat pores
Dermis
Figure 5.1 Structure of the Skin and ­Accessory 
Organs. The upper left corner of the epidermis is 
peeled up to show the dermal–epidermal boundary. 
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      129  

Structure
The skin (fig. 5.2) is the body’s largest organ. In adults, it covers up to 2 m2 of body 
surface and accounts for about 15% of the body weight. Most of the skin is 1 to 2 mm 
thick—comparable to the cover of a hardcover book—but it ranges from 0.5 mm on 
the eyelids to 6 mm between the shoulder blades. The difference is due mainly to 
variation in the thickness of the dermis. Epidermal variation is discussed later.
The Epidermis
The epidermis2 is a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium as many as 30 or 
40 cells thick in places, composed of the following types of cells (fig. 5.2):
∙	 Keratinocytes (keh-RAT-ih-no-sites) are the great majority of epidermal 
cells. They begin as rounded to cuboidal cells in the deepest layer and, toward 
the surface, become progressively flatter and packed with the tough protein 
keratin.
∙	 Dendritic cells, scattered among the keratinocytes, probe the epidermis for 
foreign matter such as toxins and infections and alert the immune system 
when there is need to defend the body against invaders. 
∙	 Melanocytes of the deepest layer of the epidermis produce the dark pigment 
melanin, which protects the deeper tissues from the harmful effects of the 
ultraviolet rays in sunlight. 
∙	 Tactile cells, also in the basal layer of the epidermis, play a role in the sense 
of touch. 
∙	 Stem cells of the basal layer continually divide and produce new keratinocytes 
to replace those that die and flake off the skin surface. 
The epidermis lacks blood vessels, but the deepest cells receive nourishment 
from blood vessels in the underlying dermis. As cells move toward the skin surface 
and away from the blood supply, they die. 
Dermal blood 
vessels
Tactile cell
Melanocyte
Dead keratinocytes
Exfoliating 
keratinocytes
Living keratinocytes
Dendritic cell
Stem cell
Dermis
Stratum lucidum
Stratum basale
Stratum granulosum
Stratum spinosum
Stratum corneum
Sweat pore
Tactile nerve ﬁber
Dermal papilla
Sweat duct
Figure 5.2 Layers and Cell Types of the 
­Epidermis. Compare this to the photograph in 
­figure 4.8. 
2epi = above, upon; derm = skin
130      PART 2  Support and Movement

The epidermis is composed of four to five layers. From the deepest layer to the 
surface, these are as follows:
	 1.	 Stratum basale (bah-SAIL-ee). This is a deep, single layer of stem cells, 
keratinocytes, melanocytes, and tactile cells. 
	 2.	 Stratum spinosum. This level consists of many layers of large keratinocytes 
interspersed with dendritic cells. As keratinocytes are pushed upward by di-
viding cells below, they cease dividing and synthesize keratin. Keratin ac-
cumulation causes the cells to flatten and assume a squamous shape.
	 3.	 Stratum granulosum. This consists of three to five layers of flat keratino-
cytes with coarse, dark-staining granules. Keratin filaments in these cells 
clump together into thick, tough bundles that produce a barrier to water. This 
is one reason the skin inhibits water loss from the body. The cells die here as 
the protein barrier cuts them off from nutrients from below.
	 4.	 Stratum lucidum. This is present only in the thick epidermis of the palms 
and soles. It is a thin, clear (lucid) layer of dead cells with no nuclei or other 
visible internal structure.
	 5.	 Stratum corneum. This consists of up to 30 layers of dead, keratin-packed 
keratinocytes that give the skin much of its toughness. It is thickest in the 
palms and soles (palmar and plantar regions), enabling this skin to withstand 
the mechanical stresses to which those areas are subjected. The dead cells 
exfoliate (flake off) from the surface as dander at a rate compensated by the 
production of new cells in the stratum basale. A keratinocyte usually lives 30 
to 40 days from its “birth” in the stratum basale to its exfoliation from the 
stratum corneum.
The Dermis
The dermis ranges from 0.2 mm thick in the eyelids to 4 mm thick in the palms 
and soles and 5 or 6 mm thick between the shoulders. It consists mainly of collagen 
but also contains elastic and reticular fibers and the usual cells of fibrous connec-
tive tissue (see section 4.3). It is well supplied with blood vessels, sweat glands, 
sebaceous glands, and nerve endings. The hair and nails are rooted in the dermis. 
In the face, skeletal muscles attach to dermal collagen fibers and produce expres-
sions such as a smile or a wrinkle of the forehead. By moving the lips, they also 
aid in speech.
Clinical Application 5.1
TRANSDERMAL ABSORPTION
The ability of the skin to absorb chemicals makes it possible to administer 
several medicines as ointments or lotions, or by means of adhesive patches that 
release the medicine steadily through a membrane. For example, inflammation 
can be treated with hydrocortisone ointment, nitroglycerine patches are used 
to relieve heart pain, nicotine patches are used to help overcome tobacco ad-
diction, and other medicated patches are used to control high blood pressure 
and motion sickness.
Unfortunately, the skin can also be a route for absorption of poisons. 
These include toxins from poison ivy and other plants; metals such as mercury, 
arsenic, and lead; and solvents such as acetone (nail polish remover), paint 
thinner, and pesticides. Some of these can cause brain damage, liver failure, or 
kidney failure, which is good reason for using protective gloves when handling 
such substances.
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      131  

The boundary between the epidermis and dermis is histologically conspicu-
ous and usually wavy. The upward waves are fingerlike extensions of dermis called 
dermal papillae.3 They interlock with the epidermis like corrugated cardboard, an 
arrangement that resists slippage of the epidermis across the dermis and gives the 
skin more resistance to stress. The whorls and loops of fingerprints are produced by 
the projecting dermal papillae. If you look closely at the back of your hand, you will 
see delicate furrows that divide the skin into tiny rectangular to rhomboidal areas. 
The dermal papillae produce the raised areas between the furrows. 
These papillae contain an abundance of blood capillaries, the sole source of 
nourishment to the bloodless epidermis. If these blood vessels are damaged by such 
causes as friction from tight shoes, a severe sunburn, or a scald, serous fluid can 
seep out of the bloodstream and accumulate as a blister, separating the dermis from 
the epidermis along this boundary.
Apply What You Know
Would you expect to find more prominent dermal papillae in the palms or the 
forehead? Explain your answer.
The dermis is divided into two layers with only a vague boundary between 
them. The papillary4 layer (PAP-ih-lerr-ee) is a thin zone of areolar tissue directly 
beneath the epidermis, filling and underlying the dermal papillae. The loose tis-
sue of this layer allows leukocytes to move around easily and attack bacteria or 
other invaders introduced through breaks in the skin. The deeper reticular5 layer is 
about four-fifths of the dermis. It consists of dense irregular connective tissue (see 
fig. 4.17), composed mainly of thick bundles of collagen but also containing elas-
tic fibers, fibroblasts, and small clusters of adipocytes. This is a very tough layer; 
leather is composed of the reticular layer of animal hides. Sweat glands, nail roots, 
and hair follicles are embedded in this layer. 
The Hypodermis
The dermis blends into the underlying hypodermis6 (subcutaneous tissue), which 
typically exhibits looser connective tissue and more adipose tissue (subcutaneous 
fat). The hypodermis binds the skin to the muscles or other underlying tissues. Sub-
cutaneous fat pads the body, serves as an energy reservoir, and provides thermal 
insulation. About 50% of one’s body fat is in the hypodermis. It averages about 8% 
thicker in women than in men and differs in distribution between the sexes.
Skin Color
The most significant factor in skin color is the brown to black melanin.7 Melano-
cytes synthesize melanin but transfer it to the keratinocytes, where it accumulates. 
The dark cells seen in tissue sections are melanized keratinocytes, not melanocytes 
(fig. 5.3). People of different skin colors have essentially the same number of mela-
nocytes, but in dark skin, the melanocytes produce greater quantities of melanin, 
the melanin granules in the keratinocytes are more spread out than tightly clumped, 
and the melanin breaks down relatively slowly. Thus, melanized cells may be seen 
throughout the stratum basale and stratum spinosum. In light skin, the melanin is 
less abundant, the granules are more tightly clumped in the keratinocytes so they 
3papilla = little nipple 
4ary = pertaining to, characterized by 
5reticul = little network 
6hypo = below; derm = skin 
7melano = black
132      PART 2  Support and Movement

impart less color to the cells, and it breaks down more rapidly. Melanin is a bar-
rier to ultraviolet (UV) radiation, which otherwise has the potential to cause DNA 
damage (mutations) and skin cancer. UV rays can also destroy folate, a B vitamin 
necessary for normal cell division, fertility, and fetal development. For protection 
from such effects, melanocytes accelerate their production of melanin in response 
to ultraviolet rays—hence the suntanning effect—and keratinocytes concentrate 
it on the “sunny side” of the nucleus, like a protective parasol over the DNA. A 
suntan fades as melanin is degraded in older keratinocytes and as the keratino-
cytes migrate to the surface and exfoliate. Local concentrations of melanin produce 
freckles and moles.
Apply What You Know
Skin cancer is relatively rare in people with dark skin. Other than possible 
­differences in behavior, such as intentional suntanning, what could be the 
­reason for this?
Other factors in skin color are hemoglobin and carotene. Hemoglobin, the red 
pigment of blood, imparts reddish to pink hues to the skin as blood vessels show 
through the white of the dermal collagen. Carotene8 is a yellow pigment acquired 
from egg yolks and yellow and orange vegetables. It can become concentrated 
to various degrees in the stratum corneum and subcutaneous fat. It is often most 
conspicuous in skin with the thickest stratum corneum, such as on the heel and in 
“corns” or calluses of the feet.
The skin may also exhibit abnormal colors of diagnostic value. Cyanosis9 is 
blueness of the skin resulting from oxygen deficiency in the blood, as in cases of 
drowning, emphysema and some other lung diseases, and reduced dermal blood 
flow in cold weather. Erythema10 (ERR-ih-THEE-muh) is abnormal redness of the 
skin, as in sunburn, exercise, hot weather, and embarrassment. A hematoma11 is 
a bruise, a mass of clotted blood showing through the skin. Its causes range from 
8carot = carrot 
9cyan = blue; osis = condition 
10eryth = red; em = blood 
11hemat = blood; oma = mass
Figure 5.3 Variations in Skin Pigmentation. 
(a) The stratum basale shows heavy deposits of 
melanin in dark skin. (b) Light skin shows little to no 
visible melanin.
a: (top): © Tom & Dee Ann McCarthy/Corbis (bottom): © McGraw-
Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer b: (top): © Creatas/
PunchStock RF (bottom): © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, 
photographer
•	 Which of the five types of epidermal cells are 
the melanized cells in part (a)?
Stratum corneum
Epidermis
Melanized cells
of stratum basale
Dermis
(a) Dark skin
(b) Light skin
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      133  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
T
he integument is our most visible and vulnerable organ sys-
tem, exposed to trauma, infection, radiation, and injurious 
chemicals. Consequently, the integumentary system needs and 
receives more medical attention than any other organ system. The 
study and clinical treatment of this system is called dermatology.12
S k i n  C a n c e r
T
he stage for skin cancer is set when UV radiation causes muta-
tions in the DNA of epidermal cells. There are three forms of skin 
cancer, differing in the cells in which they originate. Basal cell carci-
noma13 begins in the stratum basale and eventually invades the der-
mis. It is the most common but least dangerous form of skin cancer, 
because it seldom metastasizes. Squamous cell carcinoma arises 
in the stratum spinosum. The chance of recovery is good with early 
detection and surgical removal, but if neglected, it can metastasize 
to lymph nodes and can be lethal. Basal and squamous cell car-
cinomas produce similar lesions with raised edges and a concave 
center (fig. 5.4a). Melanoma (fig. 5.4b) is the rarest form of skin can-
cer (5% of cases) but also the most deadly, because it metastasizes 
quickly. It usually arises from melanocytes of a preexisting mole. A 
useful guideline for recognizing melanoma is the American Cancer 
Society’s ABCD rule: A for asymmetry (one side of the lesion looks 
different from the other), B for border (the contour is not uniform 
but wavy or scalloped), C for color (often a mixture of brown, black, 
tan, and sometimes red and blue), and D for diameter (greater than 
6 mm, about the diameter of a standard pencil eraser).
B u r n s
B
urns can be caused by fires, kitchen spills, excessively hot bath 
water, electrical shock, strong acids and bases, sunlight, and 
other forms of radiation. First-degree burns, such as most sunburns, 
damage only the epidermis. They are marked by redness, slight 
edema (swelling), and pain, but soon heal and seldom leave scars. 
Second-degree burns involve the entire epidermis and part of the 
dermis. They may be red, tan, or white, and are blistered and very 
painful. They may take up to several months to heal, and sometimes 
leave scars. Some sunburns and many scalds are second degree. 
First- and second-degree burns are also called partial-thickness 
burns because they don’t penetrate all the way through the skin. 
Third-degree (full-thickness) burns, a leading cause of accidental 
Figure 5.4 Skin Cancer. (a) Basal cell carcinoma. The lesions of 
squamous cell carcinoma look similar to this. (b) Melanoma, showing 
the typical border irregularity, asymmetry, and discoloration.
a: © NAS Medical/Alamy b: © James Stevenson/SPL/Science Source
•	 Which of these two cancers is the more common? Which is the 
more dangerous?
(a) Basal cell carcinoma
(b) Melanoma
death, destroy the epidermis and all of the dermis. Since nothing is left 
of the dermis in the burned area, the skin can regenerate only from the 
unburned edges. These burns often require skin grafts and typically 
result in scarring or severe disfigurement. The most urgent concerns in 
treating burn patients are fluid replacement and infection control, since 
a severe burn destroys the barrier to fluid loss and invading microbes.
12dermato = skin; logy = study of 
13carcin = cancer; oma = tumor
134      PART 2  Support and Movement

trauma to platelet deficiencies, anticoagulant drugs, and hemophilia. Pallor is a 
temporary pale or ashen color that occurs when there is so little cutaneous blood 
flow that skin color is dominated by the white dermal collagen. It can result from 
emotional stress, circulatory shock, cold temperatures, or severe anemia. Albinism14 
is a hereditary lack of pigmentation in the skin, hair, and eyes owing to an inability 
to synthesize melanin. It is characterized by milky white hair and skin and blue-gray 
eyes. Jaundice15 is yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes. It occurs in various 
liver diseases, such as cancer, hepatitis, and cirrhosis, and in some blood diseases 
with a rapid rate of erythrocyte breakdown.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	To what besides pathogenic organisms does the skin 
present a barrier?
2.	Describe two ways in which the skin helps to regulate body 
temperature.
3.	Name the five kinds of epidermal cells and state their 
­functions.
4.	List the five layers of epidermis from deep to superficial. 
What are the distinctive features of each?
5.	What are the two layers of the dermis? What type of tissue 
composes each layer?
6.	Name the pigments responsible for normal skin colors, and 
explain how certain conditions can produce pathological 
discoloration of the skin.
14alb = white; ism = state, condition 
15jaun = yellow
Clinical Application 5.2
THE EPIDERMIS AND VITAMIN D 
Earlier in this section, we considered some harmful effects of excessive 
UV radiation on the body. Moderate UV absorption by the skin, how-
ever, is necessary for the synthesis of vitamin D, a hormone needed for 
absorption of dietary calcium. Vitamin D has long been known to be im-
portant for skeletal health. Recent studies have shown that it also plays 
roles in cancer prevention, immunity, diabetes, and cardiovascular health. 
Epidermal keratinocytes carry out the first step in its synthesis, using 
the energy of UV radiation to convert a molecule derived from choles-
terol to a precursor of vitamin D. The liver and kidneys then convert this 
to calcitriol,the most active form of vitamin D. Inadequate exposure to 
sunlight can lead to bone deformities such as childhood rickets and adult 
osteomalacia (“soft bones”). People of tropical or high-mountain ances-
try tend to have dark skin, an adaptation for protection from excess UV. 
In contrast, people of more northern and southern ancestry tend to have 
lighter skin that reflects an ancestral adaptation to ensure adequate UV 
absorption and vitamin D synthesis.
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      135  

5.2  Accessory Organs
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the histology of a hair and its follicle;
b.	explain how a hair grows;
c.	discuss the purposes served by various kinds of hair;
d.	describe the structure and function of nails;
e.	name two types of sweat glands, and describe the structure and 
function of each; and
f.	 describe the location, structure, and function of other glands of 
the skin.
The hair, nails, and cutaneous glands are accessory organs (appendages) of the 
skin. All of them originate in the epidermis of the embryo, but penetrate deeply into 
the dermis or even the hypodermis of mature skin.
Hair
A hair is a slender filament of keratinized cells that grows from a hair follicle. 
The hair follicle is a diagonal tube of epithelium and connective tissue that pen-
etrates from the skin surface deeply into the dermis or even the hypodermis. Hair 
and nails are made of a stronger, harder keratin than the keratin of the epider-
mis. Hair occurs almost everywhere except the lips, nipples, parts of the genitals, 
palms and soles, and lateral surfaces of the fingers and toes. The density of hairs 
in a given area does not differ much from one person to another or even between 
the sexes. Differences in apparent hairiness are due mainly to differences in hair 
texture and pigmentation.
Structure of the Hair and Follicle
The portion of a hair visible above the skin surface is called its shaft. The portion 
below the surface, within the follicle, is the root. At the lower end of the root is a 
swelling called the bulb (fig. 5.5a, b). Except near the bulb, all the hair tissue is 
dead. A bit of vascular connective tissue called the dermal papilla grows into the 
bulb and provides the hair with its sole source of nutrition. Just above this is the hair 
matrix, the exclusive site of cellular mitosis and hair growth.
The surface layer of a hair, called the cuticle, is composed of thin scaly cells 
that overlap each other like roof shingles (see this chapter’s opening photo). Each 
scaly cell locks into another cell that points in the opposite direction, an arrange-
ment that resists pulling the hair out of its follicle when you brush your hair, for 
example. Beneath the cuticle is the cortex, which makes up most of the bulk of 
the hair. It is composed of several layers of elongated keratinized cells. The thick-
est hairs, such as the eyebrows and lashes, have a central core called the medulla, 
composed of loosely arranged cells and air spaces. The medulla is lacking from thin 
scalp and body hairs. In cross section, straight hair is relatively round, whereas curly 
or kinky hair is flatter, from ovoid to ribbonlike in shape.
The hair follicle has a root sheath composed of a layer of epithelium (an exten-
sion of the epidermis) alongside the hair and a layer of condensed dermal connec-
tive tissue around the epithelial layer. Nerve fibers called hair receptors coil around 
136      PART 2  Support and Movement

the follicle and respond to hair movements, as when an ant crawls across your arm. 
Also associated with each hair follicle is a smooth muscle called a piloerector16 
(pilomotor) muscle. It contracts in response to stimuli such as cold, fear, and touch, 
pulling the follicle into a more vertical position and making the hair stand upright.
Hair color derives from different types and proportions of melanin. Black and 
brown hair are colored by a form of melanin called eumelanin. Another, sulfur-rich 
melanin called pheomelanin causes various shades of blond in moderate amounts, 
and orange to red hair if more abundant. Gray and white hair result from a combina-
tion of air in the medulla and scanty pigment in the cortex.
Hair Growth
Hair grows by mitosis of cells in the hair matrix. Hair and follicle cells together 
are pushed toward the skin surface as the cells below them multiply. The hair cells 
become progressively keratinized and die as they are pushed upward, away from the 
blood supply in the dermal papilla. A typical scalp hair in a young adult grows for 
6 to 8 years at a rate of about 1 mm per 3 days (10–18 cm/year). It then stops grow-
ing and the follicle atrophies over a period of 2 or 3 weeks. Finally, the hair enters 
a resting phase 1 to 3 months long, during which it may fall out on its own or be 
pushed out by a new hair growing beneath it in the same follicle. We typically lose 
50 to 100 scalp hairs per day.
Functions of Hair
In comparison to other mammals, the relative hairlessness of humans is so unusual 
that it raises the question, Why do we have any hair at all? Except on the scalp, it 
is too sparse to have the heat-retaining function that it serves in other mammals. 
Figure 5.5 Structure of a Hair and Its Follicle. 
(a) Anatomy of the follicle and associated structures. 
(b) Light micrograph of the base of a hair follicle. 
 b: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
•	 In light of your knowledge of hair, discuss the 
validity of an advertising claim that a shampoo 
will “nourish your hair.” Where and how does a 
hair get its sole nourishment?
Connective
tissue
root sheath
Epithelial root
sheath
Hair cortex
Hair medulla
Hair root
Piloerector
muscle
Hair bulb
Sebaceous
gland
Hair shaft
Hair receptor
Dermal
papilla
Blood
capillaries
in dermal
papilla
Apocrine
sweat gland
(a)
Hair matrix
(b)
0.5  mm
16pilo = hair
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      137  

Free 
edge
Cuticle
Nail plate
Nail 
body
Nail 
fold
Nail groove
Free
edge
Nail
body
Cuticle
Nail fold
Nail bed
Nail
root
Nail matrix
Figure 5.6 Anatomy of a Fingernail. 
Scalp hair does, however, help to retain heat in an area where there is an abundant 
flow of warm blood just under the cranium, but little to no insulating fat. It also 
protects the scalp from sunburn and skin cancer. Beard, pubic, and axillary hair 
begin growing at puberty and visually advertise sexual maturity. They also absorb 
aromatic secretions of specialized scent glands in these areas, discussed shortly. 
Hair on the trunk and limbs is largely vestigial (an evolutionary remnant of hair 
that was more functional in our prehuman ancestors), but still serves a sensory 
role: Stimulation of the hair receptors alerts one to parasites such as ticks and 
fleas crawling on the skin. The eyebrows accentuate facial expressions produced 
by muscles that move the skin between and above the eyes. They may also help 
to reduce the glare of sunlight and keep sweat and debris out of the eyes. Finally, 
stout protective guard hairs (vibrissae) block foreign particles from the nostrils, 
auditory canals, and eyes. The eyelashes and blink reflex shield the eyes from 
debris, and the eyelashes reduce drying of the eye by disrupting air currents near 
the eye surface.
Nails
Fingernails and toenails are clear, hard derivatives of the stratum corneum. They 
are composed of very thin dead cells, densely packed together and filled with 
parallel fibers of hard keratin. Flat nails allow for more fleshy and sensitive fin-
gertips than other mammals have, while they also serve as strong keratinized 
“tools” that can be used for digging, grooming, picking apart food, and other 
manipulations.
The anatomical features of a nail are shown in figure 5.6. The nail plate 
is the visible portion covering the fingertip; the nail bed is the epidermis 
underlying most of the plate; the nail fold is a thickening of the skin around 
the margins of the plate; and the free edge is the part of the plate that 
extends beyond the nail bed at the tip of the finger. The nail matrix is a 
growth zone concealed beneath the skin at the proximal edge of the nail. 
The nail grows by mitosis in the nail matrix, adding new cells to the 
plate. Fingernails grow at a rate of about 1 mm per week and toenails 
somewhat more slowly.
The appearance of the fingernails can be a vital clue to such patho-
logical conditions as diseases of the heart, lungs, and liver; diabetes; 
poisoning; and other disorders. Such conditions can cause abnormal 
­fingernail coloration, markings, surface texture, and shape.
Cutaneous Glands
The skin has five types of glands: merocrine sweat glands, apocrine 
sweat glands, sebaceous glands, ceruminous glands, and mammary 
glands (fig. 5.7). The two types of sweat glands are also collectively 
called sudoriferous glands (SOO-dor-IF-er-us). Mammary glands are 
discussed in chapter 19.
Sweat Glands
Most sweat glands are a type called merocrine17 sweat glands. These 
are widespread in the skin and produce watery perspiration that serves 
to cool the body. Each begins with a twisted coil in the dermis or 
hypodermis and an undulating duct that ascends to a sweat pore on the 
skin surface. Sweat begins as a filtrate of the blood plasma produced 
17mero = part; crin = to separate
138      PART 2  Support and Movement

(c) Sebaceous gland
Gland
(a) Apocrine gland
Hair follicle
(b) Merocrine gland
Secretory cells
Myoepithelial
cells
Lumen
Secretory
cells
Lumen
Figure 5.7 Cutaneous Glands. (a) Apocrine sweat glands have a large lumen and a duct that conveys their 
aromatic secretion into a hair follicle. (b) Merocrine sweat glands have a relatively narrow lumen and a duct that 
opens by way of a pore on the skin surface. (c) Sebaceous glands have cells that break down in entirety to form 
an oily secretion that is released into the hair follicle.
a–c: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
18dia = through; phoresis = carrying 
19apo = away from; crin = to separate
deep in the gland, and is modified by cells of the gland duct. Sweat is about 
99% water; it contains potassium, sodium, chloride, ammonia, urea, and lactic 
acid, and it has a pH ranging from 4 to 6. Each day, these glands secrete about 
500 mL of insensible perspiration, which doesn’t produce noticeable wetness of 
the skin. Under conditions of exercise or heat, however, one may lose as much 
as a liter of perspiration per hour. Sweating with visible wetness of the skin 
is called diaphoresis18 (DY-uh-for-EE-sis). Sweating, however, is not the only 
way the skin loses water. A significant amount is lost by water simply diffusing 
between the keratinocytes and evaporating from the skin surface—a process 
called ­cutaneous transpiration. 
Apocrine19 sweat glands occur in the groin, anal region, axilla, areola, 
and male beard area, although they are sparse or absent from some Asian eth-
nic groups. Their ducts lead into hair follicles rather than directly to the skin 
surface. The apocrine name comes from an earlier misunderstanding about 
their method of secretion; it is now known that they produce sweat in the 
same way that merocrine glands do—by exocytosis. The secretory part of an 
apocrine gland, however, stores up secretion and has a much larger lumen than 
that of a merocrine gland, so these glands have continued to be referred to as 
apocrine glands to distinguish them from the merocrine type. Apocrine sweat 
contains more fatty acids than merocrine sweat, making it thicker and more 
cloudy.
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      139  

Apocrine sweat glands are scent glands that respond especially to stress and sex-
ual stimulation. They do not develop until puberty, and they apparently correspond 
to the scent glands that develop in other mammals when they attain sexual maturity. 
In women, they enlarge and shrink in phase with the menstrual cycle. Fresh apocrine 
sweat is considered attractive or arousing in some cultures, where it is as much a part 
of courtship as artificial perfume is to other people. Like other mammalian scent 
glands, human apocrine glands produce pheromones—chemicals that influence the 
physiology or behavior of other members of the species. The pubic and axillary hair 
probably serve to retain the secretion and prevent it from evaporating too quickly, so 
it can accumulate and exercise a stronger pheromonal effect.
Sebaceous Glands
Sebaceous20 glands (see-BAY-shus) produce an oily secretion called sebum (SEE-
bum). They are flask-shaped, with short ducts that usually open into a hair follicle. 
These are holocrine glands whose secretion is formed by the breakdown of entire 
gland cells (see fig. 4.29c). Sebum keeps the skin and hair from becoming dry, 
brittle, and cracked. The sheen of well-brushed hair is due to sebum distributed by 
the hairbrush.
Ceruminous Glands
Ceruminous glands (seh-ROO-mih-nus) are found only in the auditory (ear) canal, 
where their secretion combines with sebum and dead epidermal cells to form ear-
wax, or cerumen.21 They are simple, coiled, tubular glands with ducts leading to the 
skin surface. Cerumen keeps the eardrum pliable, waterproofs the auditory canal, 
and has a bactericidal effect.
No organ system operates in isolation from the others; indeed, every system 
affects every other system in ways great and small. Beginning with this chapter, 
every chapter that introduces an organ system for the first time has a Connective 
Issues feature to underscore the functional connections between that system and the 
others. These features should be studied for deeper appreciation of the human body 
as an integrated whole.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
7.	 Name and define the three regions of a hair from 
its base to its tip, and the three layers of a thick hair seen in 
cross section.
8.	State the functions of the hair papilla, hair receptors, and 
piloerector.
9.	State a reasonable theory for the functions of hair of the 
­eyebrows, eyelashes, scalp, nostrils, and axilla.
10.	Define or describe the nail plate, nail fold, and nail matrix.
11.	How do merocrine and apocrine sweat glands differ in 
­structure and function?
12.	What other type of gland is associated with hair follicles? 
How does its mode of secretion differ from that of sweat 
glands?
20seb = fat, tallow; aceous = possessing 
21cer = wax
140      PART 2  Support and Movement

Aging of the Integumentary System
Aging is especially noticeable in the integumentary system, and 
nearly all people have concerns or complaints about it as they age. 
The hair turns grayer and thinner. The skin and hair become drier 
because of atrophy of the sebaceous glands. The loss of collagen 
and elastin from the dermis makes the skin thinner, translucent, and 
looser. Aged skin also has fewer blood vessels than younger skin, 
and those that remain are more fragile. Consequently, aged skin 
bruises more easily; the skin can become reddened as broken ves-
sels leak into the connective tissue; and poorer circulation results 
in slower healing of skin injuries. The density of cutaneous nerve 
­endings declines by two-thirds from the age of 20 to the age of 
80. The skin is consequently less sensitive to touch, ­pressure, and 
injurious stimuli. Dendritic cells of the skin also decline in ­number, 
leaving the skin more susceptible to recurring infections.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A dermatology nurse is an Advanced Practice nurse, or 
Clinical Nurse Specialist, with a master’s or doctoral de-
gree. Dermatology nurses specialize in skin and wound 
care; assist dermatologists in the medical, surgical, and 
cosmetic treatment of the skin; and assist in treating con-
ditions as diverse as psoriasis, burns, skin cancer, skin 
grafts, and gunshot wounds. Entry into the field of derma-
tology nursing requires a bachelor’s degree and licensure as a registered nurse (RN). With 2 years of experience in dermatology 
nursing as an RN, one may sit for a board exam to become a dermatology nurse certified (DNC) or a dermatology certified nurse 
practitioner (DCNP). See appendix B for further details on careers in dermatology nursing.
D e r m a t o l o g y  N u r s e
The atrophy of cutaneous blood vessels, sweat glands, and 
subcutaneous fat makes it more difficult to regulate body tempera-
ture in old age. Older people are more vulnerable to hypothermia 
in cold weather and heatstroke in hot weather. Heat waves and 
cold spells take an especially heavy toll among elderly poor peo-
ple, who suffer from a combination of reduced homeostasis and 
inadequate housing.
In addition to all these normal aspects of growing older, the 
skin also suffers photoaging—degenerative changes from a life-
time of exposure to UV radiation. This accounts for more than 90% 
of the integumentary changes that people find medically troubling 
or cosmetically disagreeable: age spots, wrinkling, yellowing and 
mottling of the skin, and skin cancer. All of these affect the face, 
hands, and arms more than areas of the body that receive less 
­exposure to the sun.
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      141  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Skeletal System
The role of the skin in vitamin 
D ­synthesis promotes calcium 
­absorption needed for bone 
growth and maintenance.
Muscular System
Vitamin D synthesis promotes absorption 
of calcium needed for muscle contraction; 
skin dissipates heat generated by muscles.
Nervous System
Sensory impulses from the skin are 
­transmitted to the nervous system.
Endocrine System
Vitamin D acts as a hormone.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Dendritic cells detect foreign substances 
and alert the immune system.
Respiratory System
Nasal hairs filter particles that 
might otherwise be inhaled.
Circulatory System
Dermal vasoconstriction diverts blood 
from the skin to other organs; the 
skin prevents loss of fluid from the 
­cardiovascular system.
Reproductive System
Cutaneous receptors respond to 
sexual stimuli; mammary glands 
produce milk to nourish infants; 
apocrine glands produce scents with 
subtle sexual functions.
Digestive System
Vitamin D promotes calcium ab-
sorption by the small intestine.
Urinary System
The sweat glands comple-
ment the urinary system by 
excreting salts and some 
nitrogenous wastes.
All Systems
The integumentary system serves all other systems 
by providing a physical barrier to environmental 
hazards and minimizing water loss from the body.
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Andrew Syred/Getty Images
142

Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
5.1  The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue 
1.	 The organs that constitute the integumentary system
2.	 Six functions of the skin
3.	 The two layers of skin proper and the layer of tissue 
­immediately beneath the skin
4.	 The relative thickness and one other structural specializa-
tion of the epidermis in the palms and soles
5.	 Five types of cells in the epidermis, their locations, and 
the function of each
6.	 Five layers of the epidermis, characteristics of each one, 
and which one is missing from thin skin
7.	 The life history of a keratinocyte from its birth at the 
base of the epidermis to its death and exfoliation from the 
­epidermal surface; the relationship between these events, 
the toughness of the epidermis, and the epidermal role as 
a water barrier
8.	 Composition and layers of the dermis; dermal papillae 
and their significance
9.	 The difference between the hypodermis and dermis; functions 
of the hypodermis; and an alternative name for the hypodermis 
in regions where it is mostly adipose tissue
10.	 The pigments that account for the normal variation in skin 
colors; names of six pathological changes in skin color and 
what accounts for each
5.2  Accessory Organs 
1.	 Structures that are considered to be the accessory organs of 
the integumentary system
2.	 Definitions of hair and hair follicle
3.	 How the keratin of hair differs from that of the epidermis
4.	 The distribution of body hair and relatively hairless 
regions of the skin
5.	 Three regions of a hair from base to tip; the sites of hair 
nutrition, cell division, and growth
6.	 Three zones of a hair seen in a cross section, and how 
cross-sectional shape relates to the texture of hair
7.	 The chemical basis for brown, black, blond, red, gray, and 
white hair
8.	 Structure of a hair follicle and its associated nerve ending 
and muscle
9.	 The process and duration of hair growth
10.	 Functional interpretations of scalp, beard, pubic, axillary, 
eyebrow, trunk, eyelash, and nasal hairs
11.	 Structure of a nail and nail bed
12.	 Some functions of the nails and the advantage of the flat nails 
of humans over the claws of other mammals
13.	 Similarities and differences in structure, function, and 
­locations of merocrine and apocrine sweat glands
14.	 How sweat is produced, what it contains, and how diaphoresis 
differs from insensible perspiration
15.	 How sebaceous glands differ from sweat glands in location, 
structure, mode of secretion, and function
16.	 The location and function of ceruminous glands and 
­composition of cerumen
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Cells of the 
 are keratinized and dead.
a.	 papillary layer
b.	 stratum spinosum
c.	 stratum basale
d.	 stratum corneum
e.	 stratum granulosum
	 2.	 The outermost layer of a hair is called
a.	 the medulla.
b.	 the cuticle.
c.	 the root sheath.
d.	 the papilla.
e.	 the cortex.
	 3.	 Which of the following skin conditions or appearances would 
most likely result from liver failure?
a.	 pallor
b.	 erythema
c.	 cyanosis
d.	 jaundice
e.	 melanization
	 4.	 Which of the following has/have the thickest epidermis?
a.	 the palms
b.	 the region between the shoulder blades
c.	 the elbows and knees
d.	 the chest
e.	 the cheeks
Study Guide
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      143  

	 5.	 The integumentary system includes all of the following except
a.	 the epidermis.
b.	 the nails.
c.	 the sweat glands.
d.	 the dermis.
e.	 the hypodermis.
	 6.	 The thickest living layer of the epidermis is
a.	 the stratum basale.
b.	 the stratum spinosum.
c.	 the stratum granulosum.
d.	 the stratum lucidum.
e.	 the stratum corneum.
	 7.	 Which of the following is a scent gland?
a.	 a holocrine gland
b.	 a sebaceous gland
c.	 an apocrine gland
d.	 a ceruminous gland
e.	 a merocrine gland
	 8.	
 are skin cells with a sensory role.
a.	 Tactile cells
b.	 Dendritic cells
c.	 Stem cells
d.	 Melanocytes
e.	 Keratinocytes
	 9.	 The function of epidermal dendritic cells is
a.	 immune defense.
b.	 protection from UV radiation.
c.	 water retention.
d.	 the sense of touch.
e.	 mitotic replacement of dead keratinocytes.
	10.	 Red hair gets its color primarily from
a.	 eumelanin.
b.	 keratin.
c.	 hemoglobin.
d.	 collagen.
e.	 pheomelanin.
	11.	
 is sweating without noticeable wetness of the  
skin.
	12.	 A muscle that causes a hair to stand erect is called a/an 
.
	13.	 Two common word roots that refer to the skin in medical 
­terminology are 
 and 
.
	14.	 Blueness of the skin due to low oxygen concentration in the 
blood is called 
.
	15.	 Upward projections of the dermis along the dermal–epidermal 
boundary are called 
.
	16.	 Cerumen is more commonly known as 
.
	17.	 The holocrine glands that secrete into a hair follicle are  
called 
.
	18.	 The most abundant protein of the epidermis is 
, while 
the most abundant protein of the dermis is 
.
	19.	 The epidermis, liver, and kidneys work together to 
­syn­thesize 
, which promotes absorption of 
­dietary calcium.
	20.	 Epidermal melanin is produced by melanocytes but 
­accumulates in the 
.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Secretion of the oil of the skin and hair is called exfoliation.
	 2.	 The term integumentary system means only the skin, but 
­integument refers also to the hair, nails, and cutaneous glands.
	 3.	 The dermis is composed mainly of keratin.
	 4.	 Vitamin D is synthesized by certain cutaneous glands.
	 5.	 Cells of the stratum granulosum multiply rapidly to produce 
the thick stratum corneum of the skin surface.
	 6.	 Hair growth results from the mitosis of cells throughout the 
root, but as these cells emerge from the follicle and are exposed 
to air, they die and become the hair shaft.
	 7.	 The three layers of the skin are the epidermis, dermis, and 
hypodermis.
	 8.	 People of African descent have a much higher density of epider-
mal melanocytes than do people of northern European descent.
	 9.	 Pallor indicates a genetic lack of melanin.
	10.	 Apocrine scent glands serve mainly to help cool the body.
Answers in Appendix A
144      PART 2  Support and Movement

Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Many organs of the body contain numerous smaller organs, 
perhaps even thousands. Describe an example of this in the 
integumentary system.
	 2.	 Explain how the two histological layers of the dermis reflect 
two different functions of the dermis.
	 3.	 Why is it important for the epidermis to be effective, but not 
too effective, in screening out UV radiation?
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
CHAPTER 5   The Integumentary System      145  

The Skeletal 
­System
B A S E  C A M P
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Terminology of body planes and anatomical 
directions (see “Anatomical Position” and 
“Anatomical Planes” in section 1.3)
• Histology of hyaline cartilage (see fig. 4.19  
in table 4.7)
Chapter
6
Colorized X-ray of a human knee prosthesis. The durable bonding of such artificial 
joints with natural bone has been a major achievement of biomedical engineering.
© Dr. P. Marazzi/Science Source
Module 5: Skeletal System
Chapter Outline
6.1 Skeletal Structure and Function
• Functions of the Skeletal System
• Osseous (Bone) Tissue 
• Gross Anatomy of Bones 
6.2 Bone Development and Metabolism
• Ossification 
• Growth and Remodeling 
• Mineral Homeostasis 
6.3 The Axial Skeleton
• The Skull 
• The Vertebral Column 
• The Thoracic Cage 
6.4 The Appendicular Skeleton
• The Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limb 
• The Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limb 
6.5 Joints
• Classification 
• Movement 
• Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 6.1: Bone Tumors
• Clinical Application 6.2: Knee Injuries and 
Arthroscopic Surgery
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Skeletal System 
• Career Spotlight: Orthopedic Nurse 
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide 
146	

6.1
 Skeletal Structure and Function
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify the organs and tissues that compose the skeletal system;
b.	describe several functions of the skeletal system;
c.	define terms for the gross anatomy of bones;
d.	distinguish the two types of bone marrow; and
e.	identify features of the microscopic anatomy of bone, includ-
ing the two types of bone tissue, four types of bone cells, and 
­components of the noncellular matrix.
I
n art and history, nothing has symbolized death more than a skull 
or skeleton.1 Bones and teeth are the most durable remains of a once-
living body and the most vivid reminder of the impermanence of life. The 
clean dry bones presented for laboratory study indeed suggest that the 
skeleton is nonliving—an inert scaffold for the body, like the steel girders 
of a building. Seeing it in such a sanitized form makes it easy to forget 
that the living skeleton is made of dynamic tissues, full of cells—that it 
continually remodels itself and interacts physiologically with all of the 
other organ systems of the body. The skeleton is permeated with nerves 
and blood vessels, which attests to its sensitivity and metabolic activity. 
Indeed, if the skeleton were nonliving, a fractured bone would never heal.
This chapter concerns a family of biomedical sciences related to 
the skeleton—osteology,2 the study of bones; arthrology,3 the study of 
joints; and kinesiology,4 the study of musculoskeletal movement.
The skeletal system is composed of bones, cartilage, and ligaments joined tightly to 
form a strong, flexible framework for the body. Cartilage is the forerunner of most 
bones in embryonic development, it forms a growth zone in the bones of children, 
and it covers many joint surfaces in the mature skeleton. Ligaments are collagenous 
bands that hold bones together at the joints. Tendons are structurally similar to liga-
ments but attach muscle to bone. The skeletal system also includes bone marrow, 
the soft bloody or fatty material enclosed in the bones.
Functions of the Skeletal System
The principal functions of the skeletal system are as follows:
∙	 Support. Bones of the limbs and vertebral column support the body; the 
­mandible and maxilla support the teeth; and some viscera are supported by 
nearby bones.
1skelet = dried up	
3arthro = joint; logy = study of 
2osteo = bone; logy = study of	
4kinesio = movement; logy = study of
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      147  

Figure 6.1 Two Types of Osseous Tissue. 
In this frontal section of the femur, we can see the 
dense white shell of compact bone on the surface, 
enclosing more porous spongy bone.
© B Christopher/Alamy
•	 In this dried specimen, the spongy bone 
­appears full of air spaces. What would occupy 
that space in a living bone?
Osteogenic cell
Osteoblast
Osteocyte
Osteocyte
Stem cells
Osteoclast
Fusion
Periosteum
Ruﬄed border
Pit
(a) Osteocyte development
(b) Osteoclast development
Osseous
tissue
Osteoclast
Rough
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Nucleus
Nuclei
Mitochondrion
Secretory
vesicles
Lysosomes
∙	 Protection. Bones enclose and protect the brain, spinal cord, lungs, 
heart, and pelvic viscera.
∙	 Movement. Bones provide attachment and leverage for the muscular 
system, allowing for such actions as limb movement and ventilation of 
the lungs.
∙	 Blood formation. Red bone marrow is the major producer of blood cells.
∙	 Storage. The skeleton is the body’s main reservoir of calcium and 
phosphorus, among other minerals. It stores these when they are avail-
able in ample quantity and releases them when they are needed for other 
functions. The fatty bone marrow present in many bones also serves as 
one of the body’s reserves of stored fuel.
Spongy bone
Compact bone
5os, osse, oste = bone 
6osteo = bone; genic = producing
Osseous (Bone) Tissue
The hard, calcified tissue of a bone is called osseous5 tissue. It exists in two forms: 
compact (dense) bone, which is solidly filled with opaque matrix, and spongy bone, 
which is a porous lattice honeycombed with spaces. Spongy bone is always found in 
the interior of a bone, covered with compact bone of the surface (fig. 6.1).
Bone Cells
Osseous tissue consists of cells and matrix, like any other connective tissue, and the 
matrix consists of fibers and ground substance. There are four kinds of bone cells 
(fig. 6.2):
	 1.	 Osteogenic6 cells occur on the bone surface, beneath the fibrous con-
nective tissue membrane that covers a bone. They are stem cells that 
Figure 6.2 Bone Cells and Their Develop-
ment. (a) Osteogenic cells give rise to osteoblasts, 
which deposit matrix around themselves and trans-
form into osteocytes. (b) Osteoclasts form by the 
­fusion of bone marrow stem cells.
•	 Why do osteoblasts have more rough endo-
plasmic reticulum than osteogenic cells do?
148      PART 2  Support and Movement

give rise to osteoblasts. They are the only bone cells capable of dividing 
and making more bone cells.
	 2.	 Osteoblasts7 develop from osteogenic cells and lie in a single layer on the 
bone surface, somewhat resembling a cuboidal epithelium. Their roles are 
to synthesize the organic matter of bone and deposit matrix. In keeping with 
this, they exhibit an abundance of mitochondria and rough endoplasmic 
­reticulum.
	 3.	 Osteocytes are mature bone cells—former osteoblasts that have ­become 
trapped in the matrix they deposited. They reside in cavities called 
­lacunae8 (la-CUE-nee), which are connected to each other by slender 
channels called canaliculi9 (CAN-uh-LIC-you-lye). Each osteocyte has 
delicate cytoplasmic processes that reach into the canaliculi to meet 
those of neighboring osteocytes. Osteocytes pass nutrients, wastes, and 
chemical signals to each other through gap junctions at the tips of their 
cytoplasmic processes.
	 4.	 Osteoclasts10 are bone-dissolving cells that develop from a separate line 
of bone marrow stem cells. They are exceptionally large (up to 150 µm 
in diameter), have multiple nuclei, and lie on the bone surface like osteo-
blasts. On the side facing the bone, an osteoclast has an unusual comb-
like row of infoldings of the plasma membrane, called the ruffled border. 
Along this surface, the cell secretes hydrochloric acid and enzymes to 
dissolve osseous tissue. Osteoclasts often lie in pits that they have eroded 
into the bone surface.
Bone Matrix
The matrix of osseous tissue is the stony matter that surrounds the osteocytes and 
lacunae. About one-third of it by weight is organic matter, mainly collagen and 
other proteins. Two-thirds of it is inorganic, mainly calcium phosphate with lesser 
amounts of other minerals.
The collagen and minerals form a composite material that gives bones a 
combination of flexibility and strength. The minerals resist compression (bone 
crumbling or sagging when weight is applied). Without them, the bones would 
be rubbery and could not support one’s body. This is seen to some degree in the 
mineral-deficient, easily deformed bones of childhood rickets and the similar 
adult disease, osteomalacia (“soft bones”). Collagen, on the other hand, gives 
bones the ability to resist tension so the bone can bend slightly without snap-
ping. When you run, for example, each time your body weight comes down on 
one leg, the long bones in that leg bend slightly. Without collagen, the bones 
would be so brittle they would simply crack or shatter in such everyday actions 
as lifting weights and running (see “Collagen Diseases” in Perspectives on 
Health, section 2.3).
Spongy and Compact Bone
Spongy (cancellous) bone (fig. 6.3a, b) consists of a porous lattice of slender rods 
and plates called trabeculae11 (tra-BEC-you-lee). Although calcified and hard, it 
is permeated by tiny spaces that give it a spongelike appearance. These spaces are 
filled with bone marrow and small blood vessels. Spongy bone is well designed to 
impart strength to a bone without adding too much weight. 
7osteo = bone; blast = form, produce 
8lac = lake, hollow place; una = little 
9canal = canal, channel; icul = little 
10osteo = bone; clast = destroy, break down 
11trabe = plate; cul = little
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      149  

Lacunae
Canaliculi
Central
canal
20 μm
Lamella
Periosteum
Collagen
ﬁbers
Osteon
Lacuna
Central 
canal
Concentric 
lamellae
Nerve
Blood vessel
(a)
Spongy
bone
Trabeculae
(c)
(b)
Bone marrow
Trabecula
Figure 6.3 Histology of Osseous Tissue. (a) The three-­
dimensional structure of compact bone. (b) Microscopic appear-
ance of decalcified spongy bone. (c) Microscopic appearance 
of a cross section of an osteon of dried compact bone. 
b: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source; c: © Custom Medical Stock Photo/
Newscom
•	 Which type of bone, spongy or compact, has more ­surface 
area exposed to osteoclast action? Where do you think 
the most bone tissue would be lost if the osteoclasts were 
overactive?
Compact (dense) bone (fig. 6.3a, c) forms the outer shell that surrounds 
the spongy bone. It prevents the bone marrow from seeping out and provides 
solid attachment surfaces for muscles, tendons, and ligaments. At the surfaces 
of a bone, it is organized in parallel layers like plywood, laid down by the sur-
face osteoblasts. Deeper in the bone, most of it is organized in cylindrical units 
of structure called osteons. In cross sections, they look like onion slices—­
layers called lamellae arranged concentrically around a central canal, which 
contains small blood vessels and nerves. The osteocytes occupy lacunae 
between the lamellae.
150      PART 2  Support and Movement

Blood vessels enter a bone through minute pores in the surface and lead to the 
central canals. The wall of a central canal looks as if it was pierced with innumerable 
pinholes. The innermost osteocytes receive nutrients from the bloodstream by way 
of these pores and pass them along to more remote osteocytes through the network 
of canaliculi. Wastes travel in the other ­direction, toward the central canal, to be 
removed by the bloodstream. 
Gross Anatomy of Bones
Most bones of the limbs are long bones specialized for leverage and move-
ment. Figure 6.4 shows the anatomy of one example, the femur. The elongated 
midsection is called the shaft or diaphysis12 (dy-AF-ih-sis), and each expanded 
(a) Living
(b) Dried
Articular 
cartilage
Red bone 
marrow
Epiphyseal
line
Epiphyseal
line
Marrow cavity
Yellow bone marrow
Periosteum
Site of endosteum
Compact bone
Spongy bone
Articular
cartilage
Epiphysis
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Figure 6.4 General Anatomy of a Long Bone. 
The femur is shown as an example.
12dia = across; physis = growth; originally named for a ridge on the shaft of the tibia 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      151  

Suture
Outer compact
bone
Spongy bone
Trabeculae
Inner compact
bone
end is called a head or epiphysis13 (eh-PIF-ih-sis). The shaft pro-
vides leverage whereas the heads are enlarged to strengthen a joint 
and provide added surface area for the attachment of ­tendons and 
ligaments. The ends where two bones meet are covered with a thin 
layer of hyaline cartilage called the articular cartilage, which eases 
joint movements. Each head and nearby region of the shaft is filled 
with spongy bone. Bone marrow occupies the ­medullary cavity 
(MED-you-lerr-ee) of the shaft and the spaces in the spongy bone of 
the head. Epiphyseal lines of an adult bone mark the ­former growth 
zones of the child’s bone.
Flat bones (fig. 6.5) act as protective armorlike plates covering 
delicate organs beneath, such as the sternum anterior to the heart and 
the cranial bones enclosing the brain. Some furnish broad attachment 
surfaces for muscles, as in the case of the scapula (shoulder blade) 
and hip bone. In flat bones, two layers of compact bone enclose a 
middle layer of spongy bone like a sandwich.
Some bones fit the description of neither long nor flat bones and 
are sometimes called short and irregular bones (such as wrist bones and 
vertebrae, respectively).
Externally, a bone is covered with a fibrous sheath called the 
­periosteum14 (see fig. 6.3a). Collagen fibers of the periosteum pen-
etrate into the bone itself and are also continuous with the ­tendons 
that bind muscle to bone. The periosteum thus provides strong 
attachment and continuity from muscle to tendon to bone. There is 
no periosteum over the articular cartilage. The internal surface of a 
bone is lined with endosteum,15 a thin layer of reticular connective 
tissue separating the bone from the bone marrow. 
There are two types of bone marrow—red and yellow. Red bone 
marrow, which serves to produce blood cells and platelets, fills nearly 
every bone of a child’s skeleton, but has a more limited distribution 
in adults (fig. 6.6). It is an organ in itself, consisting of a soft but very 
structured network of delicate blood vessels surrounded by reticular 
­tissue and islands of blood-forming cells. As we mature, much of the 
red bone marrow is gradually replaced by fatty yellow bone marrow, 
like the fat seen at the center of a ham bone. Yellow marrow dominates 
the long limb bones of the adult.
Apply What You Know
Predict at least two functional problems that would result if a mutation caused 
someone’s bones to fail to develop the outer shell of compact bone.
13epi = upon, above; physis = growth 
14peri = around; oste = bone 
15endo = within; oste = bone
Figure 6.6 Distribution of Red and Yellow Bone Marrow. In an adult, red 
bone marrow occupies the marrow cavities of the axial skeleton and proximal 
heads of the humerus and femur. Yellow bone marrow occurs in the long bones of 
the limbs.
Figure 6.5 General Anatomy of a Flat Bone. 
The example here is the ­parietal bone from the top 
of the skull. 
152      PART 2  Support and Movement

16intra = within; membran = membrane
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	State three components of the skeleton other than 
bones and three functions of the skeleton other than 
­support and movement.
2.	Name the four types of cells in bone tissue and state their 
functions.
3.	Compare the roles of the collagen and minerals in bone ­tissue.
4.	Describe the differences between compact and spongy 
bone, and their spatial relationship to each other.
5.	Sketch or describe one osteon, including its central canal, 
lamellae, lacunae, and canaliculi.
6.	Sketch or describe a long bone, including its shaft and heads, 
and indicate where its articular cartilages, periosteum, and 
endosteum are located.
7.	State the differences in location, composition, and function of 
red and yellow bone marrow.
6.2  Bone Development and Metabolism
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the two processes of bone formation from embryonic 
tissues;
b.	describe how bones are remodeled throughout life; and
c.	identify hormones and other factors that govern bone deposi-
tion, bone resorption, and calcium balance.
Ossification
The formation of bone is called ossification (OSS-ih-fih-CAY-shun). There are two 
methods of ossification—intramembranous and endochondral. 
Intramembranous Ossification
Intramembranous16 ossification (IN-tra-MEM-bruh-nus) produces the flat bones 
of the skull. It begins with a sheet of soft embryonic connective tissue—the “mem-
brane” for which the process is named. Embryonic cells deposit collagen fibers in 
this matrix, turning it into osteoid tissue (prebone). Mineral salts are then depos-
ited on the collagen to harden the tissue. This creates the thin calcified plates, or 
trabeculae, typical of spongy bone. As calcification continues, the spaces in this 
network diminish and become infused with blood vessels and bone marrow. In the 
meantime, the inner and outer surfaces of cranial bones are calcified, producing the 
sandwichlike arrangement of compact bone on the surface and spongy bone in the 
middle. When a baby is born, there are still gaps (fontanels) between the cranial 
bones composed of soft fibrous membrane that has not yet calcified.
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      153  

Hyaline 
cartilage
Perichondrium
Primary
ossiﬁcation
center
Bony collar
Periosteum
Enlarging
chondrocytes
Secondary
ossiﬁcation
center
Primary 
marrow
cavity
Secondary
ossiﬁcation
center
Secondary
marrow cavity
Diaphysis
Epiphysis
Blood 
vessel
Epiphyseal
plate
Cartilage
Articular 
cartilage
Spongy 
bone
Epiphyseal 
line
Marrow 
cavity
Compact bone
Periosteum
Formation of 
primary
ossiﬁcation center, 
bony collar, and 
periosteum
2
Early cartilage model
1
Vascular invasion,
formation of primary
marrow cavity, and 
appearance of 
secondary 
ossiﬁcation center
3
Bone at birth, with
enlarged primary 
marrow cavity and 
appearance of 
secondary marrow 
cavity in one epiphysis
4
Bone of child, with 
epiphyseal plate at 
distal end
5
Adult bone with a
single marrow
cavity and closed
epiphyseal plate
6
Figure 6.7 Endochondral Ossification. The 
metacarpal bones of the hand exhibit a relatively 
uncomplicated case of endochondral ossification. 
Many other bones have two or more epiphyseal 
plates.
Endochondral Ossification
Endochondral17 ossification (EN-doe-CON-drul) produces most of the bones 
of the body. This process begins with a hyaline cartilage “model” in the approxi-
mate shape of the bone to come. The cartilage is then broken down and replaced 
by bone. Many bones have complex shapes with several centers of ossification, 
so we illustrate this in ­figure 6.7 with one of the anatomically simplest bones—a 
metacarpal bone from the palm of the fetal hand. Correlate the following steps 
with the figure as you read the story.
	 1	 The forerunner of the future bone is a body of hyaline cartilage that approxi-
mates its shape. It is covered with a fibrous perichondrium.
	 2	 In a primary ossification center near the middle of this cartilage, chondro-
cytes begin to inflate and die, while the thin walls between them calcify. 
Meanwhile, osteoblasts of the perichondrium deposit a thin layer of bone 
around the cartilage model, forming a collar that reinforces the shaft of the 
future bone. The fibrous sheath around this collar is then considered to be 
periosteum. It thickens and grows toward the ends of the bone.
	 3	 Blood vessels grow inward from the periosteum and invade the ossification 
center. Stem cells arrive with this blood, differentiate into osteoclasts, and 
digest calcified tissue in the shaft, hollowing it out and creating the primary 
marrow (medullary) cavity. Other arriving stem cells become osteogenic 
cells, then osteoblasts, and deposit layers of bone lining the cavity, thicken-
ing the shaft. About this time, a secondary ossification center develops at 
one end of the bone, resembling the primary ossification center in the center.
	 4	 By the time of a child’s birth, the secondary ossification center has hollowed 
out a secondary marrow cavity at that end, and another ossification center 
has begun to appear at the other end of the bone.
	 5	 Throughout childhood and adolescence, the primary and secondary marrow 
cavities are separated by a wall called the epiphyseal plate (EP-ih-FIZ-ee-ul).  
It consists of a middle layer of hyaline cartilage bordered on each side by a 
17endo = within; chondr = cartilage
154      PART 2  Support and Movement

zone of transition from cartilage to bone. The plate functions as a growth 
zone enabling the individual to grow in limb length and height.
	 6	 By the late teens to early twenties, the reserve cartilage in the epiphyseal 
plate is depleted and the primary and secondary marrow cavities unite into a 
single medullary cavity. The bones can grow no longer, and one attains his or 
her maximum adult height. The only remnant of the original cartilage model 
is the articular cartilage that covers the joint surfaces of the bone.
Growth and Remodeling
Bones continue to grow and remodel themselves throughout life, changing size and 
shape to accommodate the changing forces applied to the skeleton. For example, in 
children the limbs become longer; the curvature of the cranium changes to accom-
modate a growing brain; and many bones develop bumps, spines, and ridges as a 
child begins to walk and the muscles exert tension on the bones. Tension on the 
skeleton stimulates an increase in bone mass. On average, therefore, the bones of 
athletes and people engaged in heavy manual labor have greater mass than the bones 
of sedentary people. In tennis players, the bones of the racket arm and the clavicle 
on that side are often more robust than those of the other arm.
Throughout childhood, limb bones elongate as the epiphyseal plates thicken 
(by the multiplication and enlargement of chondrocytes) and ossify. In children, the 
epiphyseal plate appears on X-rays as a transparent line across the end of a bone, 
creating the appearance of a gap separating the epiphysis from the diaphysis. In 
the late teens to late twenties—at different ages in different bones—the epiphyseal 
plates are said to “close” as the gaps fill in with bone. Fusion of the plates prevents 
further growth and the person has attained full stature.
Throughout life, bones also thicken and change shape by the addition of new 
matrix to the bone surface. Mature bone is limited to this type of growth. As in the 
earlier-described intramembranous ossification, surface osteoblasts deposit osteoid 
tissue, calcify it, and become trapped in it as osteocytes. This tissue is laid down in 
layers parallel to the surface, not in cylindrical osteons like the tissue deeper in the 
bone. While deposition occurs at the outer surface of a bone, osteoclasts dissolve 
bone on the inner surface and thus enlarge the medullary cavity. 
 
Mineral Homeostasis
Even after a bone is fully formed, it remains a metabolically active organ with many 
roles to play. Not only is it involved in its own maintenance, growth, and remodel-
ing, but it also exerts a profound influence on the rest of the body by exchang-
ing minerals with the extracellular fluid. The skeleton is the body’s primary reser-
voir of calcium and phosphate. These minerals are used for much more than bone 
structure, and can be withdrawn from bone when needed elsewhere. Phosphate is a 
component of DNA, RNA, ATP, phospholipids, and other compounds. Calcium is 
involved in muscle contraction, blood clotting, exocytosis, nervous communication, 
and cellular responses to hormones, among other processes.
Mineral deposition is a crystallization process in which osteoblasts extract cal-
cium, phosphate, and other ions from the blood and deposit them in the osseous 
tissue. Resorption is a process in which the osteoclasts dissolve bone, releasing 
minerals into the blood and making them available for other uses. There is a critical 
balance between bone deposition and resorption. If one process outpaces the other, 
or if both of them occur too rapidly, various bone deformities and other develop-
mental abnormalities occur, some of them quite grotesque and crippling.
The concentration of calcium in the blood and tissue fluid must be regulated within 
narrow limits. A calcium deficiency, or hypocalcemia18 (HY-po-cal-SEE-me-uh),  
causes dysfunctions ranging from muscle tremors to tetanus—inability of the muscle 
to relax. One can suffocate from tetanus in the larynx (laryngospasm). A calcium 
excess, or hypercalcemia,19 depresses nervous, muscular, and cardiac function.
18hypo = below normal; calc = calcium; emia = blood condition 
19hyper = above normal; calc = calcium; emia = blood condition
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      155  

Calcium homeostasis is regulated mainly by two hormones: calcitriol and para-
thyroid hormone, both of which raise blood calcium levels. Calcitriol is the most 
active form of vitamin D. It raises blood calcium by promoting calcium absorption 
from digested food, reducing urinary loss of calcium, and stimulating osteoclasts to 
release calcium from the bones to the blood. Even though it promotes bone resorp-
tion, it is also necessary for bone deposition because without its effects on the kid-
neys and small intestine, blood calcium levels are too low for normal deposition.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is secreted by the parathyroid glands, which 
adhere to the posterior surface of the thyroid. The parathyroids respond to a drop 
in blood calcium level by secreting PTH. PTH then stimulates bone resorption by 
osteoclasts, promotes calcium reabsorption by the kidneys, and promotes calcitriol 
synthesis. All of these effects raise blood calcium levels.
Many other hormones, growth factors, and vitamins affect osseous tissue in 
complex ways that are still not well understood. Calcitonin from the thyroid gland 
plays a role in bone metabolism in children and possibly pregnant women. Growth 
hormone, estrogen, and testosterone promote ossification and bone growth, espe-
cially in adolescence. Bone deposition is also promoted by thyroid hormone, insu-
lin, and at least 12 growth factors that are produced in the bone itself and stimulate 
nearby bone cells. Not only vitamin D but also vitamins A and C are needed for 
bone deposition and repair.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
8.	Concisely describe the process that accounts for the 
sandwichlike, three-layered structure of a cranial 
bone.
9.	Explain how a cartilage model is replaced by osseous tissue 
to form a long bone such as the humerus. Explain how this 
process accounts for the medullary cavity, articular cartilage, 
and epiphyseal plate of a bone.
10.	Explain why fully developed bones must still be remodeled, 
and how such remodeling is achieved.
11.	Describe the effects of calcitriol, parathyroid hormone, and 
other hormones and vitamins on bone and calcium metabolism.
Clinical Application 6.1
BONE TUMORS
The skeletal system is subject to a variety of benign and malignant tumors. 
­Osteochondroma is a benign tumor of bone and cartilage, often forming 
­outgrowths called bone spurs at the ends of the long bones. Osteoma is a benign 
tumor occurring especially in the flat bones of the skull, sometimes growing into 
the orbits or sinuses. Osteosarcoma is far more serious. This is the most common 
and deadly form of bone cancer. It occurs most often in boys and young men, and 
arises especially in the tibia, femur, and humerus. In about 10% of cases, it metas-
tasizes to the lungs and other organs. Untreated metastatic osteosarcoma is usu-
ally fatal within a year. Chondrosarcoma is a slow-growing malignant tumor of 
hyaline cartilage. Because of the lack of blood flow to cartilage, it is ­unresponsive 
to chemotherapy and must be removed surgically.
156      PART 2  Support and Movement

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
mong the most familiar disorders of the skeletal system are 
fractures, osteoporosis, and arthritis. Others are briefly de-
scribed in Clinical Applications 6.1 and 6.2.
F r a c t u r e s
M
any of us have broken a bone at one time or another. Per-
haps surprisingly, the most commonly broken bone is the 
clavicle, because it is so close to the surface and because people 
often reach out with their arms to break a fall or brace themselves 
against an impact. When a fracture results from an unusual stress 
on a bone, such as a fall or auto accident, it is called a stress 
­fracture. When a bone has been weakened by some other condi-
tion, such as bone cancer or osteoporosis, and it fractures under a 
stress that a healthy bone would withstand, it is called a pathologi-
cal fracture. Any fracture that breaks through the skin is called an 
open fracture; if it does not break the skin, it is a closed fracture.
When a bone fractures, it bleeds and the blood clot (frac-
ture hematoma) soon becomes infiltrated with fibroblasts, macro-
phages, osteoclasts, and osteogenic cells, which clean up the tissue 
fragments and begin the repair process. Deposition of collagen and 
fibrocartilage turns the hematoma into a soft callus. In 4 to 6 weeks, 
osteoblasts deposit calcified tissue, a hard callus, around the soft 
callus to splint the broken bone pieces together. It is especially 
important during this time that the bone be immobilized by trac-
tion or casting to prevent reinjury. The hard callus persists for 3 to 4 
months. During this time, osteoclasts dissolve and remove remain-
ing fragments of broken bone while osteoblasts build spongy bone 
to bridge the gap between the broken ends. This spongy bone then 
fills in by intramembranous ossification to solidify the repair.
Clinically, most fractures are set by closed reduction, which 
requires no surgery but uses a cast to immobilize the healing bones. 
More serious fractures may require open reduction, in which bone 
pieces are surgically exposed and joined by plates, screws, or pins.
20osteo = bone; porosis = a state of being porous
O s t e o p o r o s i s
O
steoporosis20 is the most common of all bone diseases. It is a 
loss of bone tissue (especially spongy bone) to the point that the 
bones become unusually porous and brittle. It is usually associated 
with aging, with postmenopausal white women being at greatest risk; 
however, it can occur in either sex and at any age. Loss of bone mass 
is a significant problem among astronauts, who may spend time in 
microgravity conditions with too little bone-sustaining stress on the 
skeleton. Osteoporosis compromises a person’s physical activity 
and presents a high risk of disabling bone fractures, often leading to 
death among the elderly. Fractures of the wrist and hip are common, 
as are crushing compression fractures of the vertebrae. Vertebral 
fractures commonly result in such spinal deformities as kyphosis (see 
“The Vertebral Column” in section 6.3). The fracture of osteoporotic 
bones can result from stresses as slight as sitting down too quickly 
or supporting the body on one’s wrists when rising from an armchair.
After menopause, women are especially at risk because the 
ovaries cease to secrete estrogen, which normally stimulates bone 
deposition. Other risk factors include smoking, insufficient exer-
cise, inadequate calcium and protein intake, vitamin C deficiency, 
and diabetes mellitus.
A r t h r i t i s
G
radually declining bone density can be a silent, insidious men-
ace to one’s health, but a more noticeable effect of aging is the 
degenerative joint disease called osteoarthritis (OA). Nicknamed 
“wear-and-tear arthritis,” OA sets in as the synovial joints contain 
less lubricating synovial fluid and the articular cartilages soften and 
degenerate. As the cartilages become roughened by wear, joint 
movements may be accompanied by crunching or crackling sounds 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      157  

6.3  The Axial Skeleton
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define terms for the surface features and markings of bones;
b.	name and define the two basic subdivisions of the skeleton;
c.	name and describe the cavities within the skull;
d.	identify each of the skull bones, name their features, and name 
some of the main sutures that join them;
e.	describe the general features of the vertebral column, general 
structure of a vertebra and intervertebral disc, and regional dif-
ferences between the vertebrae; and
f.	 describe the anatomy of the ribs and sternum, regional differ-
ences between the ribs, and the articulation of the ribs with the 
vertebral column and sternum.
called crepitus. As OA progresses, exposed bone surfaces tend to 
develop spurs that grow into the joint cavity, restrict movement, and 
cause pain—especially in the fingers, spine, hips, and knees. About 
85% of people over age 70 experience some degree of OA. It is 
seldom crippling, but in extreme cases it can immobilize the hip.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is less common but more often crip-
pling. It results from an autoimmune attack against the joint tissues. 
It begins when a misguided antibody called rheumatoid factor 
attacks the synovial membranes. Inflammatory cells accumulate in 
the joint and produce enzymes that degrade the articular cartilage. 
As the cartilage degenerates, the joint begins to ossify. The bones 
sometimes become solidly fused and immobilized, a condition 
called ankylosis (fig. 6.8). Rheumatoid arthritis is named for the fact 
that symptoms tend to flare up and subside periodically.21 It affects 
more women than men, and because it often begins between the 
ages of 30 and 40, it can cause decades of pain and disability. 
There is no cure; it is possible only to slow its progression with 
anti-inflammatory drugs and physical therapy.
A hereditary arthritis more common in men is gouty arthritis. 
Gout is the accumulation of uric acid crystals in the joints, espe-
cially of the great toe. Uric acid irritates the articular cartilage and 
synovial membrane, causing swelling, tissue generation, and 
sometimes joint fusion.
Rheumatism is a broad term for any pain in the supportive 
and locomotor organs, including muscles, tendons, ligaments, and 
bones. It includes arthritis, bursitis, gout, and many other condi-
tions. Physicians who specialize in the rheumatic diseases are 
called rheumatologists.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.8 Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA). (a) A severe case with 
ankylosis of the joints. (b) Colorized X-ray of hands with RA.
a: © John Watney/Science Source; b: © CNRI/SPL/Science Source 
21rheumat = tending to change

Sinuses
Crest
Foramen
Foramen
Fossae
Head
Tubercle
Crest
Tuberosity
Line
Head
Trochanters
Fossae
(a) Skull (lateral view)
Epicondyles
Condyles
Spine
Spine
Condyle
Process
Process
(b) Scapula (posterior view)
(c) Femur 
      (posterior view)
(d) Humerus 
      (anterior view)
Table 6.1  Bone Markings
Term
Description and Example
Canal
A tubular passage or tunnel in a bone (auditory canal of the ear)
Condyle
A rounded knob (occipital condyles of the skull)
Crest
A narrow ridge (iliac crest of the hip bone)
Epicondyle
A flare superior to a condyle (medial epicondyle of the femur)
Facet
A smooth joint surface that is flat or only slightly concave or convex 
(­articular facets of the vertebrae)
Fissure
A slit through a bone (orbital fissures behind the eye)
Foramen
A hole through a bone, usually round (foramen magnum of the skull)
Fossa
A shallow, broad, or elongated basin (infraspinous fossa of the scapula)
Process
Any bony prominence (mastoid process of the skull)
Sinus
A cavity within a bone (frontal sinus of the skull)
Spine
A sharp, slender, or narrow process (spine of the scapula)
Tubercle
A small, rounded process (greater tubercle of the humerus)
Tuberosity
A rough surface (tibial tuberosity of the tibia)
Figure 6.9 Bone Markings. Most of these features 
also occur on many other bones of the body.
We turn our attention now to the anatomy of the individual bones that make up 
the adult skeleton. Descriptions of these bones include a variety of ridges, spines, 
bumps, depressions, holes, and joint surfaces, collectively called bone markings. It 
is important to know the names of these features because later descriptions of joints, 
muscle attachments, and the routes traveled by nerves and blood vessels are based 
on this terminology. The most common of these features are defined in table 6.1, 
and several are illustrated in figure 6.9. Other terms specific to one or a few bones 
are introduced when those bones are described. A few bone and joint features not 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      159  

discussed in the text are labeled in the art for context and comparison to other books 
you may consult.
There are 109 differently named bones of the skeleton but many of these are 
paired (left and right), so an adult skeleton typically has 206 individual bones. 
These are divided into two regions, axial and appendicular (fig. 6.10). (1) The axial 
­skeleton forms the central supporting axis of the body and comprises 80 bones, 
including the skull, vertebral column, ribs, and sternum. (2) The appendicular 
skeleton comprises the remaining 126 bones—those of the upper limb and pectoral 
girdle, and of the lower limb and pelvic girdle.
Skull
Frontal bone
Pectoral 
girdle
Clavicle
Maxilla
Parietal bone
Mandible
Occipital bone
Mandible
Humerus
Femur
Tibia
Fibula
Ulna
Radius
Scapula
Clavicle
Scapula
Vertebral column
Hip bone
Sacrum
Patella
Metacarpal 
bones
Carpus
Tarsus
Thoracic
cage
Pelvis
Sternum
Ribs
Costal cartilages
Phalanges
Metatarsal bones 
Phalanges 
Coccyx
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
Figure 6.10 The Adult Skeleton. The appendic-
ular skeleton is colored green, and the rest is axial 
skeleton. 
•	 The appendicular skeleton is not entirely ­within 
the appendicular region of the body (see fig. 1.9 ). 
Explain.
160      PART 2  Support and Movement

Frontal
sinus
Ethmoid
sinus
Maxillary
sinus
Sphenoid
sinus
The Skull
The skull is the most complex part of the skeleton, a reflec-
tion of its multiple tasks including air and water intake, hous-
ing the brain and special sense organs, transmitting nerves that 
connect the brain to the rest of the body, providing scaffolding 
for facial expressions, vocalization, and movement. As shown 
in figure 6.11 and the six figures thereafter, it consists of one 
freely movable bone, the mandible, and 21 relatively immobile 
bones connected by sutures (SOO-chers)—joints that appear as 
seams on the skull surface. Most bones of the skull are perforated 
by ­foramina (singular, foramen)—holes that allow passage for 
nerves and blood vessels to go to and from the brain.
The skull contains several prominent cavities—the ­cranial 
cavity, which encloses the brain; the orbits (eye sockets); the 
nasal cavity; the oral (buccal) cavity; the middle- and ­inner-ear 
cavities; and paranasal sinuses, air-filled spaces connected to the 
nasal cavity and named for the bones in which they occur—the 
frontal, sphenoid, ethmoid, and maxillary sinuses (fig. 6.12).
The Cranial Bones
Eight bones of the skull are called cranial bones and the other 14 are 
called facial bones. The cranial bones form the ­cranium.22 They 
are distinguished by being in direct contact with the fibrous mem-
branes, the meninges, that enclose the brain. They are as follows:
1 frontal bone
1 occipital bone
2 parietal bones
1 sphenoid bone
2 temporal bones
1 ethmoid bone
The Frontal Bone
The frontal bone is the broad bone that forms the forehead, the roof of the orbit, 
and the anterior one-third of the roof of the cranial cavity (figs. 6.13 and 6.14b; also 
see fig. 6.11). It has a thick ridge in the region of the eyebrows and it contains the 
­frontal sinus.
The Parietal Bones
The right and left parietal bones (pa-RY-eh-tul) 
form most of the cranial roof and part of its walls 
(figs.  6.13 and 6.15). They extend from the 
­coronal23 suture, which separates them from 
the  frontal bone anteriorly, to the lambdoid24 
suture (LAM-doyd), which separates them 
from the occipital bone posteriorly. A median 
­sagittal suture separates the right and left 
­parietal bones from each other.
The Occipital Bone
The occipital bone (oc-SIP-ih-tul) forms the 
rear of the skull and much of its base (figs. 6.13 
and 6.14). Its most conspicuous ­feature is a 
Figure 6.11 The Skull, Anterior View. 
Figure 6.12 The Paranasal Sinuses.
Ethmoid b.
Frontal b.
Mandible
Maxilla
Nasal b.
Key
Parietal b.
Sphenoid b.
Temporal b.
Vomer
Zygomatic b.
Frontal 
bone
Vomer
Mandible
Sphenoid 
bone
Ethmoid 
bone
Middle 
nasal
concha
Nasal 
bone
Zygomatic 
bone
Maxilla
Temporal 
bone
Parietal 
bone
Inferior 
nasal
concha
22crani = helmet 
23corona = crown 
24Shaped like the Greek letter lambda (λ)
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      161  

Parietal bone
Frontal bone
Lambdoid suture
Sphenoid bone
Temporal bone
Zygomatic process
External acoustic meatus
Mandible
Coronal suture
Ethmoid bone
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Occipital bone
Condylar process
Coronoid process
Styloid process
Mastoid process
(a) Right lateral view
Coronal suture
Frontal bone
Sphenoid sinus
Frontal sinus
Crista galli
Parietal bone
Temporal bone
Jugular foramen
Mandibular ramus
Styloid process
Lambdoid suture
Sella turcica
Occipital bone
Vomer
Palatine bone
Maxilla
Mandible
Nasal bone
Ethmoid bone
(b) Median section
Ethmoid b.
Frontal b.
Lacrimal b.
Mandible
Maxilla
Nasal b.
Occipital b.
Parietal b.
Sphenoid b.
Temporal b.
Vomer
Zygomatic b.
Key
Figure 6.13 The Skull, Lateral Surface and Median Section. 
•	 List all bones that articulate with the temporal bone.
162      PART 2  Support and Movement

Zygomatic bone
Lambdoid suture
Foramen magnum
Jugular foramen
Carotid canal
Maxilla
Palatine bone
Sphenoid bone
Zygomatic arch
Mandibular fossa
Styloid process
External acoustic meatus
Mastoid process
Temporal bone
Occipital bone
(a) Inferior view
Occipital condyle
Vomer
Posterior nasal aperture
Maxilla
Palatine b.
Occipital b.
Parietal b.
Sphenoid b.
Temporal b.
Vomer
Zygomatic b.
Key
Ethmoid b.
Occipital b.
Frontal b.
Parietal b.
Sphenoid b.
Temporal b.
Key
(b) Internal view of cranial ﬂoor
Crista galli
Sphenoid bone
Temporal bone
Parietal bone
Occipital bone
Sella turcica
Frontal bone
Optic foramen 
Foramen magnum
Figure 6.14 The Base of the Skull. (a) Inferior 
view. (b) Internal view of the cranial floor. 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      163  

large opening, the foramen magnum,25 which admits the spinal cord to the 
­cranial cavity. On each side of the foramen magnum is a smooth knob, the 
occipital ­condyle (CON-dile), where the skull rests on the vertebral column.
The Temporal Bones
The temporal bones are the largest bones on the lateral surface of the cranium 
(fig. 6.13). They form the region around the ears (the temples) and part of the 
lower wall and floor of the cranial cavity. They derive their name from the 
fact that people often develop their first gray hairs on the temples with the 
passage of time.26 They are more complex than the preceding bones, with the 
following major features.
∙  The external acoustic meatus (me-AY-tus), or auditory (ear) canal.
∙  The zygomatic process, a spine that sweeps outward from the temple to 
form part of the zygomatic arch. The zygomatic bone in the middle and 
the ­zygomatic process of the maxilla anteriorly complete the arch.
∙  The mastoid process, a blunt downward growth that you can palpate as a 
prominent lump behind your earlobe.
∙  The styloid process, a deeper, more slender and pointed process that 
­provides attachment for a muscle of the throat.
∙  The mandibular fossa, a depression on the inferior surface where the 
­mandible articulates with the cranium, forming the jaw joint (fig. 6.14a).
Also visible on the inferior surface of each temporal bone are two foramina, 
the carotid canal and jugular foramen. These are passages for the internal carotid 
artery and internal jugular vein, respectively, which supply blood to the brain and 
drain blood from it. Within the cranial cavity, the temporal bone forms a prominent 
diagonal ridge that contains the middle- and inner-ear cavities, which house the 
organs of hearing and balance (fig. 6.14b).
The Sphenoid Bone
The sphenoid27 bone (SFEE-noyd) (figs. 6.13 and 6.14) has a complex shape 
with a thick median body and outstretched wings, which give the bone as a 
whole a ragged mothlike shape. The body contains a pair of sphenoid sinuses 
and has a saddlelike structure named the sella turcica28 (SEL-la TUR-sih-ca), 
which houses the pituitary gland. The wings form part of the lateral surface of 
the cranium anterior to the temporal bone and part of the wall of the orbit. Each 
wing exhibits an optic canal, which permits passage of the optic nerve from the 
eye, and a gash, the superior orbital fissure (fig. 6.16), which allows passage of 
nerves that supply the muscles of eye movement. On its inferior side, the sphe-
noid exhibits a pair of posterior nasal apertures, where the nasal cavity opens 
into the throat.
The Ethmoid Bone 
The ethmoid29 bone (ETH-moyd) is located between the orbits and forms the roof 
of the nasal cavity. It is honeycombed with air cells that collectively constitute the 
ethmoid sinus. A vertical plate of the ethmoid forms the superior part of the nasal 
Frontal bone
Coronal suture
Sagittal suture
Parietal bone
Lambdoid suture
Occipital bone
Posterior
Anterior
Figure 6.15 The Calvaria (Skullcap), Superior 
View. 
25foramen = hole; magnum = large 
26tempor = time 
27sphen = wedge; oid = resembling 
28sella = saddle; turcica = Turkish 
29ethmo = sieve, strainer; oid = resembling
164      PART 2  Support and Movement

septum, which divides the nasal cavity into right and left spaces called the nasal 
fossae (FOSS-ee) (fig. 6.13b). Three curled, scroll-like nasal conchae30 (CON-kee) 
project into each fossa from the lateral wall (see fig. 15.2). The superior and middle 
conchae are extensions of the ethmoid bone. The inferior concha is a separate bone 
discussed later. Within the cranial cavity, one can see only a small superior part of 
the ethmoid bone (fig. 6.14b)—a median ridge called the crista galli31 (GAL-eye), 
flanked by a pair of porous plates that allow passage for the nerves of smell.
The Facial Bones
The 14 facial bones shape the face and support internal structures of the oral and 
nasal cavities, but have no contact with the meninges or brain. They are as follows:
2 maxillae
2 nasal bones
2 palatine bones
2 inferior nasal conchae
2 zygomatic bones
1 vomer
2 lacrimal bones
1 mandible
The Maxillae
The two maxillae (mac-SILL-ee) form the upper jaw and support its teeth 
(see figs. 6.11 and 6.13). Even though the teeth are preserved with the skull, they 
are not bones. They are discussed in chapter 17. Each maxilla extends upward to 
form the floor and medial wall of the orbit. Within the orbit, it exhibits a gash, 
the inferior orbital fissure (fig. 6.16), which is a passage for blood vessels and 
sensory nerves from the face. Behind the teeth, the maxillae turn inward as a shelf 
that forms about four-fifths of the hard palate, the anterior part of the roof of the 
mouth (fig. 6.14a).
30conchae = conchs (large marine snails) 
31crista = crest; galli = of a rooster
Frontal bone
Lacrimal bone
Optic canal
Sphenoid bone
Zygomatic bone
Superior orbital 
ﬁssure
Inferior orbital 
ﬁssure
Maxilla
Ethmoid b.
Frontal b.
Lacrimal b.
Maxilla
Sphenoid b.
Temporal b.
Zygomatic b.
Key
Figure 6.16 The Orbital (Eye) Region. 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      165  

The Palatine Bones
Two small palatine bones form the posterior one-fifth of the hard palate, part of 
the wall of the nasal cavity, and part of the floor of the orbit (see fig. 6.14a). They 
are L-shaped, but this is apparent only if you see them dissected free of the rest of 
the skull.
The Zygomatic Bones
The zygomatic32 bones form the angles of the cheeks inferolateral to the eyes, and 
part of the lateral wall of each orbit (see fig. 6.11). Each zygomatic bone has an 
inverted T shape. The prominent zygomatic arch (“cheekbone”) that flares from 
each side of the skull is formed by the union of the zygomatic bone, temporal bone, 
and maxilla (see fig. 6.14a).
The Lacrimal Bones
The tiny lacrimal33 bones (LACK-rih-mul) form part of the medial wall of each 
orbit (fig. 6.16). Each houses a membranous sac that collects tears from the eyes and 
drains them into the nasal cavity.
The Nasal Bones
These small rectangular bones form the bridge of the nose and support cartilages 
that shape the lower portion of the nose (see figs. 6.11 and 6.13). The nasal bones 
are often fractured by blows to the nose.
The Inferior Nasal Conchae
The three conchae of the nasal cavity were mentioned earlier. The superior and 
middle conchae are parts of the ethmoid bone. The inferior nasal concha, the larg-
est of the three, is a separate bone (see fig. 6.11; see also fig. 15.2).
The Vomer
The vomer forms the lower part of the nasal septum and joins the perpendicular 
plate of the ethmoid bone, which forms the upper part. The name vomer literally 
means “plowshare,” which refers to the resemblance of this bone to the blade of a 
plow (see fig. 6.13b).
The Mandible
The mandible is the lower jaw (see figs. 6.11 and 6.13); it supports the lower 
teeth, provides attachment for muscles of mastication, and forms a hinge joint with 
the temporal bone. The horizontal portion, carrying the teeth, is the body and the 
posterior part that rises to meet the floor of the cranium is the ramus (RAY-mus). 
The body and ramus meet at a corner called the angle. The ramus is divided by a 
U-shaped notch at its superior end into an anterior blade, the ­coronoid ­process, 
and the posterior condylar process (CON-dih-lur). The condylar process is capped 
by a knob, the mandibular condyle, which meets the temporal bone to form the 
hinge of the jaw, called the temporomandibular joint  (TMJ). The  ­coronoid 
­process and angle are important attachment points for chewing ­muscles discussed 
in chapter 7. 
32zygo = to join, unite 
33lacrim = tear, to cry
166      PART 2  Support and Movement

Bones Associated with the Skull
Seven bones are closely associated with the skull but not considered part of it. These 
are the three auditory ossicles34 in each middle ear (see chapter 10) and the hyoid35 
bone beneath the chin. The hyoid serves for the attachment of muscles that control the 
mandible, tongue, and larynx; the larynx is suspended from the hyoid by a ligament.
The Infant Skull
You probably know that a newborn baby (neonate) has “soft spots” in the skull. 
These are called fontanels (“little fountains”), and represent places where the intra-
membranous ossification of the cranial bones is not yet complete at birth. There 
are two on the superior midline of the cranium—the anterior fontanel, which is 
the largest and easiest to palpate, and the posterior fontanel—and there are two 
small fontanels on each lateral aspect of the skull, the sphenoid and mastoid 
­fontanels (fig. 6.17). Being born before the fontanels fuse allows the fetal cranium 
to deform harmlessly as the head squeezes through the tight birth canal. The head of 
the neonate sometimes looks temporarily misshapen as a result, but soon assumes 
a normal shape. The fontanels fill in with bone as the infant ages—the anterior 
­fontanel last of all, finally fusing as late as 18 to 24 months of age.
Parietal bone
Coronal
suture
Sphenoid
fontanel
Lambdoid
suture
Squamous
suture
Temporal bone
Mastoid fontanel
Occipital bone
Frontal
bone
Maxilla
Zygomatic
bone
Nasal
bone
Sphenoid 
bone
Mandible
Frontal bone
Anterior fontanel
Sagittal suture
Parietal
bone
Posterior fontanel
(a) Superior view
(b) Lateral view
Figure 6.17 The Infant Skull at Birth. (a) Supe-
rior view showing anterior and posterior fontanels. 
(b) Lateral view showing mastoid and sphenoid 
­fontanels. 
34os = bone; icle = little 
35hy = the letter U; oid = resembling
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      167  

The Vertebral Column
The vertebral column (spine) physically supports the skull and trunk; protects 
the spinal cord; absorbs stresses produced by walking, running, and lifting; and 
provides attachment for the limbs, thoracic cage, and postural muscles. Although 
commonly called the backbone, it is not a single bone but a flexible chain of 
33  ­vertebrae and 23 cartilaginous intervertebral discs (fig. 6.18). The adult 
­vertebral column ­averages about 71 cm (28 in.) long, with the discs accounting for 
about one-quarter of this.
The vertebrae are divided into five groups, usually numbering 7 cervical verte-
brae in the neck, 12 thoracic vertebrae in the chest, 5 lumbar vertebrae in the lower 
back, 5 sacral vertebrae at the base of the spine, and 4 tiny coccygeal vertebrae. In 
adults, the sacral and coccygeal vertebrae are fused together into single bones, the 
sacrum and coccyx; the other three groups of vertebrae remain separate bones. To 
help remember that the first three groups are 7, 12, and 5 in number, think of a typi-
cal workday: Go to work at 7, get off for lunch at 12, and go home at 5.
The vertebral column is C-shaped at birth. Beyond the age of 3 years, it is 
slightly S-shaped, with four bends called the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and ­pelvic 
curvatures (fig. 6.19a). This shape makes sustained bipedal walking possible 
because the trunk of the body does not lean forward, as it does in primates such as 
a chimpanzee. The head is balanced over the body’s center of gravity, and the eyes 
are directed straight forward. 
Cervical vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Atlas (C1)
Axis (C2)
 C7
Lumbar vertebrae
Sacrum
Coccyx
Coccyx
Anterior view
Posterior view
 T1
 T12
 L1
 L5
 S1
 S5
Figure 6.18 The Vertebral Column. 
168      PART 2  Support and Movement

Three common abnormalities of the spinal curvatures are shown in fig. 6.19b. 
Scoliosis, a lateral curvature, results from a developmental abnormality of the 
spine. Kyphosis, an exaggerated thoracic curvature (“hunchback”), can result from 
­osteoporosis in the elderly or excessive weight-lifting exercises in adolescents. 
­Lordosis, an exaggerated lumbar curvature (“swayback”), commonly occurs in 
­obesity and late pregnancy as one leans backward to compensate for the added 
abdominal weight.
General Structure of a Vertebra
A representative vertebra and intervertebral disc are shown in figure 6.20. The 
most obvious feature of a vertebra is the body (centrum). This is the weight-
bearing portion. Its rough superior and inferior surfaces provide firm attach-
ment to the intervertebral discs. Posterior to the body is an opening called the 
vertebral foramen, enclosed in a vertebral arch. The arch consists of a pair 
of flat plates called laminae supported on a pair of pillars called pedicles. 
Collectively, these foramina form the vertebral canal, a passage for the spi-
nal cord. Extending from the apex of the arch, a projection called the spinous 
process is directed toward the rear and downward. You can see and palpate 
the spinous processes as a row of bumps along the spine of a living person. 
A pair of transverse processes extend laterally from the arch. The spinous 
and transverse processes provide attachment for ligaments of the spine and 
muscles of the back.
Apply What You Know
The lower we look on the vertebral column, the larger the vertebral bodies and 
intervertebral discs are. What is the functional significance of this?
Figure 6.19 Adult Spinal Curvatures. (a) Nor-
mal curvatures. (b) Common abnormalities. Scoliosis 
often results from a developmental abnormality of 
the spine. Kyphosis most often results from osteo-
porosis. Lordosis commonly occurs in pregnancy 
and obesity.
Cervical curvature
Thoracic curvature
Lumbar curvature
Pelvic curvature
C7
T1
T12
L1
S1
L5
C1
Kyphosis
Key
         Normal
Lordosis
Scoliosis
(a)
(b)
Pathological
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      169  

Two superior articular processes project upward from one vertebra and 
meet a similar pair of inferior articular processes that project downward from 
the one above (see fig. 6.22b, c). Each process has a flat surface (facet) facing that 
of the adjacent vertebra. These processes restrict twisting of the vertebral column. 
Where two vertebrae meet, they exhibit a lateral gap between them called the 
­intervertebral foramen. This allows passage for spinal nerves emerging from 
the spinal cord.
Regional Characteristics of the Vertebrae
The vertebrae differ from one region of the vertebral column to another, as 
follows.
Cervical vertebrae (C1–C7) are the smallest and lightest. The first two 
(C1 and C2) have unique structures that allow for head movements (fig. 6.21). 
Vertebra C1 is called the atlas because it supports the head in a manner remi-
niscent of the giant of Greek mythology who carried the heavens on his shoul-
ders. It is little more than a delicate ring surrounding a large vertebral fora-
men. On the upper surface is a pair of concave superior articular facets that 
meet the occipital condyles of the skull. When you nod your head “yes,” the 
occipital condyles rock back and forth on these facets. Vertebra C2, the axis, 
allows rotation of the head as in gesturing “no.” Its most distinctive feature is 
a prominent knob called the dens36 (pronounced “denz”), which projects into 
the vertebral foramen of C1. C2 is the first vertebra that exhibits a spinous 
process.
In vertebrae C2 to C6, the spinous process is forked—a feature not seen in C7 
or any lower vertebrae (fig. 6.22a). All seven cervical vertebrae have a prominent 
36dens = tooth
Figure 6.20 A Representative Vertebra and Intervertebral 
Disc, Superior Views. (a) A typical vertebra. (b) An intervertebral 
disc, oriented the same way as the vertebral body in part (a) for 
comparison. (c) A herniated disc, showing compression of the 
­spinal nerve roots by the nucleus pulposus oozing from the disc.
Superior articular 
facet
Spinous process
Lamina
Transverse
process
Pedicle
Body
Nucleus pulposus
Anulus ﬁbrosus
Vertebral foramen
Vertebral 
arch
(a) 2nd lumbar vertebra (L2)
Anterior
Posterior
(b) Intervertebral disc
(c) Herniated disc
Spinal nerve
roots
Crack in 
anulus ﬁbrosus
Spinal nerve
Anulus ﬁbrosus
Nucleus pulposus
Herniation of
nucleus pulposus
170      PART 2  Support and Movement

Figure 6.21 The Atlas and Axis, Vertebrae C1 and C2. (a) The atlas, C1, which directly supports the skull. (b) The axis, C2, which inserts 
into the vertebral foramen of the atlas. (c) Articulation of the two vertebrae and rotation of the atlas. This movement turns the head from side to 
side, as in gesturing “no.” Note the ligament holding the dens of the axis in place. 
 
•	 What serious consequence could result from the rupture of the transverse ligament in an automobile accident?
Anterior arch
Superior articular 
facet
Transverse 
foramen
Transverse foramen
Transverse process
Inferior articular process
Spinous process
Lamina
(b) Axis
Posterior arch
Posterior tubercle
Dens
Superior articular facet
Body
Pedicle
Vertebral
foramen
Dens
Axis of rotation
Atlas
Axis
(a) Atlas
(c) Atlantoaxial joint
Transverse foramen
Transverse process
Transverse
process
Superior costal facet
Inferior costal facet
Body
Body
Spinous process
Lamina
Spinous 
process
Inferior articular 
facet
Inferior articular facet
Transverse
costal facet
Spinous process
Spinous process
Inferior articular 
process
Superior articular 
process
Superior 
articular facet
Superior articular facet
(a) Cervical vertebrae
(b) Thoracic vertebra,
lateral view
(c) Lumbar vertebra, lateral view
Superior view
Lateral view
Figure 6.22 Typical Cervical, Thoracic, and 
Lumbar Vertebrae. Superior views of thoracic and 
lumbar vertebrae look like figure 6.20a. 
•	 What features unique to cervical vertebrae are 
shown in the superior view of part (a)?
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      171  

round transverse foramen in each transverse process, another feature not found in 
any other class of vertebrae. These foramina provide passage for the vertebral arter-
ies, which supply blood to the brain, and vertebral veins, which drain blood from 
superficial structures of the head and neck.
Thoracic vertebrae (T1–T12) are those that support the ribs (fig. 6.22b). 
They have relatively pointed spinous processes that angle sharply downward, and 
they exhibit small smooth depressions for attachment of the ribs. These depres-
sions include slightly concave spots called costal37 facets on the body of each 
vertebra and a transverse costal facet at the ends of each transverse process of 
vertebrae T1 to T10 (lacking on T11–T12). Most ribs insert into the gaps between 
adjacent thoracic vertebrae, so each vertebra contributes one-half of the articular 
surface. Vertebrae T1 and T10 to T12, however, have complete costal facets on 
the bodies; the corresponding ribs articulate on the vertebral bodies instead of 
between vertebrae.
Lumbar vertebrae (L1–L5) have a thick, stout body and a blunt, squarish 
spinous process (fig. 6.22c). For the most part, their superior articular processes 
face medially (like the palms of your hands about to clap), and the inferior processes 
face laterally, toward the superior processes of the next vertebra. This arrangement 
enables the lumbar region of the spine to resist twisting. Exceptions to this orienta-
tion of the articular facets are seen at the joints between vertebrae T12 and L1, and 
between L5 and the sacrum.
Sacral vertebrae (S1–S5) begin to fuse around age 16, and by age 26 
they are fully fused into a bony plate, the sacrum38 (SAY-krum) (fig. 6.23). 
The sacrum forms the posterior wall of the pelvic cavity. It was named for its 
prominence as the largest and most durable bone of the vertebral column. It 
has four pairs of large sacral foramina on the anterior and posterior ­surfaces, 
for emergence of spinal nerves to the pelvic organs and lower limbs. The ante-
rior surface of the sacrum is relatively smooth and concave and has four trans-
verse lines that indicate where the five vertebrae have fused. The posterior 
surface is very rough. The spinous processes of the vertebrae fuse into a pos-
terior ridge called the median sacral crest, and the transverse processes into a 
Anterior sacral
foramina
Superior articular
process
Transverse lines
Median
sacral crest
Coccyx
Coccyx
Posterior sacral
foramina
Sacral canal
Lateral sacral
crest
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5 
Co1 
Co2 
Co3 
Co4 
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
37costa = rib; al = pertaining to 
38sacr = great, prominent
Figure 6.23 The Sacrum and Coccyx. 
 
172      PART 2  Support and Movement

less prominent lateral sacral crest on each side. A sacral canal runs through 
the sacrum and contains spinal nerve roots.
Coccygeal vertebrae (coc-SIDJ-ee-ul) (Co1–Co4) fuse by the age of 20 
to 30 into a single small triangular bone, the coccyx (COC-six) (fig. 6.23). The 
Roman anatomist Claudius Galen (c. 130–c. 200) named it this because he 
thought it resembled the beak of a cuckoo.39 The coccyx provides attachment 
for muscles of the pelvic floor. It is a vestige of the bones that, in other mam-
mals, continue as the vertebrae of the tail; hence it is colloquially known as our 
“tailbone.”
Intervertebral Discs
An intervertebral disc is a pad consisting of an inner gelatinous nucleus ­pulposus 
surrounded by a ring of fibrocartilage, the anulus fibrosus (see fig. 6.20b). The 
discs bind adjacent vertebrae together, enhance spinal flexibility, support the 
weight of the body, and absorb shock. Under stress—for example, when you lift 
a heavy weight—the discs bulge laterally. Excessive stress can cause a herniated 
disc—a condition in which the anulus fibrosus cracks and the nucleus pulposus 
oozes out. The extruded gel may put painful pressure on the spinal cord or a spinal 
nerve (fig. 6.20c).
The Thoracic Cage
The thoracic cage (fig. 6.24) consists of the thoracic vertebrae, sternum, and ribs. 
It encloses the heart and lungs and provides attachment for the pectoral girdle and 
upper limbs. The ribs protect not only the thoracic organs but also the spleen, most 
39coccyx = cuckoo
Clavicle
Scapula
Suprasternal notch
Clavicular notch
Manubrium
Angle
Body
Xiphoid process
Costal cartilages
Costal margin
True ribs (1–7)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
T12
T1
L1
False ribs (8–12)
Floating ribs
(11–12)
Sternum:
Pectoral girdle:
Figure 6.24 The Thoracic Cage and Pectoral 
Girdle, Anterior View. 
 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      173  

of the liver, and to some extent the kidneys. The thoracic cage is rhythmically 
expanded by the respiratory muscles to create a vacuum that draws air into the lungs.
Sternum
The sternum (breastbone) is a bony plate anterior to the heart. It consists of three 
parts: a short superior manubrium40 (ma-NOO-bree-um) with a shape resembling 
the knot in a necktie; an elongated swordlike body; and at the inferior end, a small, 
daggerlike xiphoid41 process (ZIF-oyd or ZY-foyd).  The first pair of ribs articulates 
with the manubrium; the second pair articulates at the junction of the manubrium and 
body; and the next eight pairs articulate with the body only. The clavicles (collarbones) 
articulate with clavicular notches on the superolateral corners of the manubrium.
Ribs
There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each attaches posteriorly to the vertebral column, and all 
but the last two arch around the flank of the chest and attach by way of a cartilagi-
nous strip, the costal cartilage, to the sternum. Most of the ribs are curved, flattened 
blades, squared off at the distal ends where the costal cartilages begin, and with the 
broad surfaces of the blades oriented vertically. Rib 1, however, is a horizontal plate, 
and ribs 11 and 12 are pointed at the distal ends.
Ribs 1 to 7 are called true ribs because each has its own costal cartilage. Ribs 8 
to 10 attach to the costal cartilage of rib 7, and ribs 11 and 12 have no costal carti-
lages at all. Ribs 8 to 12 are therefore called false ribs, and ribs 11 and 12 are also 
called floating ribs for lack of any connection to the sternum. The first 10 ribs 
articulate with the vertebrae at two points: the vertebral bodies and the transverse 
costal facets. Ribs 11 and 12 articulate with the vertebral bodies only. Thoracic ver-
tebrae T11 and T12 therefore have no transverse costal facets.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	Explain the distinction between cranial and facial 
bones; name six examples of each and locate them 
on the skull.
13.	Prepare a list of all boldfaced key terms in the foregoing de-
scriptions of the skull bones and try to identify each of those 
features on unlabeled models or illustrations of the skull.
14.	Prepare a list of all boldfaced key terms in the foregoing 
descriptions of the sternum, ribs, and vertebrae and try 
to identify each of those features on unlabeled models or 
­illustrations of the skeleton.
15.	Summarize the features you would look for to identify a single 
isolated vertebra as cervical, thoracic, or lumbar.
16.	What part of the sternum articulates with the clavicles? What 
parts articulate with the ribs? What part articulates with no 
other bones except for another part of the sternum?
17.	 Explain the distinction between true, false, and floating ribs. 
State which ribs, by number, belong in each category.
40manubrium = handle 
41xipho = sword; oid = resembling
174      PART 2  Support and Movement

6.4  The Appendicular Skeleton
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the bones of the pectoral girdle and upper limb, and 
major features of individual bones; and
b.	do the same for the bones of the pelvic girdle and lower limb.
42clav = hammer, club; icle = little
The appendicular skeleton consists of bones of the upper and lower 
limbs and the pectoral and pelvic girdles that attach the limbs to the 
axial skeleton. Injuries to the appendicular skeleton are common in 
the elderly, athletes, and as a result of recreational activities such as 
cycling, skateboarding, and skiing. They are quite disabling because 
we depend so much on the limbs for mobility and manipulating objects.
The Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limb
The pectoral girdle (shoulder girdle) supports the arm. It consists 
of a clavicle and a scapula on each side of the body.
The Clavicle
The clavicle,42 or collar bone (fig. 6.25), is a slightly S-shaped bone 
easily seen and palpated on the upper thorax. Its superior surface is 
relatively rounded and smooth and its inferior surface flatter and slightly rough. The 
medial sternal end has a rounded, hammerlike head that articulates with the manu-
brium of the sternum. The lateral acromial end is markedly flattened and articu-
lates with the acromion of the scapula. The clavicles brace the shoulders; without 
them, the pectoralis major muscles would pull the shoulders forward and medially.
The Scapula
The scapula, or shoulder blade (fig. 6.26), is a triangular plate that overlies ribs 
2 to 7 on the upper back. The triangle is bounded by superior, medial, and lateral 
Acromial
end
Sternal
end
(a) Superior view
(b) Inferior view
Acromial
end
Sternal
end
Figure 6.25 The Right Clavicle (Collarbone). 
 
Figure 6.26 The Right Scapula. 
 
Acromion
Coracoid
process
Glenoid
cavity
Subscapular
fossa
Lateral
border
Spine
Medial 
border
Supraspinous
fossa
Infraspinous
fossa
Superior border
Acromion
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      175  

borders; its broad anterior surface, called the subscapular fossa, is slightly concave 
and relatively featureless. The posterior surface has a prominent transverse ridge 
called the spine, a deep indentation superior to the spine called the supraspinous 
fossa, and a broad surface inferior to it called the infraspinous fossa.43 The fossae 
are occupied mainly by muscles of the rotator cuff, which are concerned with move-
ments of the arm (see fig. 7.18).
The most complex part of the scapula is the region of the shoulder, where it 
has three main features: (1) The acromion44 (ah-CRO-me-on), a platelike exten-
sion of the scapular spine, forms the apex of the shoulder. It articulates with the 
clavicle and is the sole point through which the arm and scapula attach to the 
axial skeleton. (2) The coracoid45 process (COR-uh-coyd), shaped like a bent 
finger, provides attachment for the biceps brachii of the arm. (3) The glenoid46 
cavity (GLEN-oyd) is a shallow socket that articulates with the rounded head of 
the humerus.
The Humerus
There are 30 bones in each of the upper limbs: the humerus in the arm proper, the 
radius and ulna in the forearm, 8 carpal bones in the wrist, and 5 metacarpal bones 
and 14 phalanges in the hand.
Greater
tubercle
Greater
tubercle
Lesser
tubercle
Intertubercular
sulcus
Deltoid
tuberosity
Deltoid
tuberosity
Radial
fossa
Coronoid
fossa
Olecranon
fossa
Lateral
epicondyle
Capitulum
Lateral
epicondyle
Head
Trochlea
Medial 
epicondyle
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
Figure 6.27 The Right Humerus. 
43supra = above; infra = below 
44acr = extremity, point; omi = shoulder 
45corac = crow; oid = resembling 
46glen = pit, socket
176      PART 2  Support and Movement

The humerus is the only bone of the brachial region, from shoulder to 
elbow, and is the largest bone of the upper limb. It has a hemispherical head 
that inserts into the glenoid cavity of the scapula (fig. 6.27). Lateral to the head 
are two muscle attachments called the greater and lesser tubercles, with a 
groove, the intertubercular sulcus, between them that accommodates a tendon 
of the biceps brachii muscle. The shaft has a rough area called the deltoid 
tuberosity on its lateral surface. This is the insertion for the deltoid muscle of 
the shoulder.
The distal end of the humerus has two smooth condyles—the capitulum47 
(­ca-PIT-you-lum) on the lateral side and the pulleylike trochlea48 (TROCK-lee-
uh) on the medial side. Immediately proximal to these condyles, the humerus 
flares to form two bony processes, the lateral and medial epicondyles, which 
are easily palpated at the widest point of your elbow. The distal end also shows 
three deep pits or fossae. The olecranon fossa (oh-LEC-ruh-non) on the pos-
terior side accommodates the ulna when the elbow is extended. On the ante-
rior surface, a medial pit called the coronoid fossa and a lateral pit called the 
radial fossa accommodate the heads of the ulna and radius, respectively, when 
the elbow is flexed.
The Radius
The radius extends from elbow to wrist on the lateral side of the forearm, ending 
just proximal to the base of the thumb (fig. 6.28). Its proximal head is a distinctive 
disc that rotates freely on the capitulum of the humerus when the palm is turned 
47capit = head; ulum = little 
48troch = wheel, pulley
Olecranon
Olecranon
Radial notch
Head of
radius
Head of radius
Styloid 
process
Radial
tuberosity
Styloid
process
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
Styloid process
Head of ulna
Articular facets
Interosseous
membrane
Ulna
Radius
Coronoid process
Trochlear notch
Figure 6.28 The Right Radius and Ulna. 
 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      177  

forward and back. Just distal to the head is a process called the radial tuberosity, 
an attachment for the tendon of the biceps brachii muscle. The flared distal end of 
the radius articulates with three of the carpal bones, and has a small point called the 
styloid process that can be palpated on the lateral side of the wrist.
The Ulna
The ulna49 is the medial bone of the forearm (fig. 6.28). Its proximal end (at the 
elbow) has a wrenchlike shape, with a deep C-shaped trochlear notch that wraps 
around the trochlea of the humerus. The posterior wall of the notch is formed by a 
prominent bony point called the olecranon. If you rest with your chin in your hands 
and your elbows on a table, it is the olecranon that contacts the table. The anterior 
wall of the notch is formed by a less prominent coronoid process. Medially, the 
radial notch accommodates the edge of the head of the radius and allows it to rotate 
as happens when you turn your palm upward. The distal end of the ulna flares into 
a small head and a pointed styloid process similar to that of the radius. It can be 
palpated on the medial side of the wrist.
A fibrous sheet called the interosseous50 membrane (IN-tur-OSS-ee-us) 
loosely joins the radius and ulna along the length of their shafts. If you stand and 
lean forward and support your weight with your hands on a table, about 80% of the 
force is borne by the radius. The interosseous membrane pulls the ulna upward and 
transfers some of this force through the ulna to the humerus, thus distributing your 
weight more evenly across the elbow joint. Such weight distribution is also impor-
tant in four-legged animals.
The Carpal Bones
The carpal bones in the base of the hand are arranged in two rows of four bones 
each (fig. 6.29). They allow movements of the hand from side to side and anterior 
to posterior. The carpal bones of the proximal row, starting at the lateral (thumb) 
side, are the scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum (tri-QUEE-trum), and pisiform (PY-
sih-form). Translating from the Latin, these words loosely mean “boat-,” “moon-,” 
“triangle-,” and “pea-shaped,” respectively. The bones of the distal row, again start-
ing on the lateral side, are the trapezium,51 trapezoid, capitate,52 and hamate.53 
The hamate can be recognized by a prominent hook, or hamulus, on the palmar side.
The Metacarpal Bones
The metacarpal bones54 occupy the palmar region. They are numbered I through V 
with metacarpal I at the base of the thumb and metacarpal V at the base of the little 
finger (fig. 6.29). On a skeleton, the metacarpals look like extensions of the fingers, 
so the fingers seem much longer than they really are. Each is divided into a base, 
body, and head; the heads form the knuckles of a clenched fist.
The Phalanges
The phalanges (fah-LAN-jeez) are the bones of the fingers; the singular is 
phalanx (FAY-lanks). They are identified by roman numerals correspond-
ing to the numbering of the metacarpals, preceded by proximal, middle, and 
49ulna = elbow 
50inter = between; osse = bones 
51trapez = table, grinding surface 
52capit = head; ate = possessing 
53ham = hook; ate = possessing 
54meta = beyond; carp = wrist
178      PART 2  Support and Movement

­distal. Digits II through IV have three bones, called the proximal, middle, and 
distal phalanges. Most people with wedding rings, for example, wear them 
encircling the left proximal phalanx IV. The thumb has only two phalanges, 
proximal and distal (fig. 6.29). Like the metacarpals, each phalanx has a base, 
body, and head.
The Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limb
The adult pelvic55 girdle is composed of three bones: the right and left hip bones 
and the sacrum (fig. 6.30a). The sacrum has already been described, since it is part 
of the vertebral column. Posteriorly, the hip bones are joined to the sacrum at the 
sacroiliac joints; anteriorly, they are joined to each other at the pubic symphysis just 
superior to the genitalia. 
The pelvic girdle plus the associated muscles and ligaments constitute the 
bowl-like pelvis, which has two regions. The broad superior region between the 
flare of the hips is the greater (false) pelvis; it forms the wall of the lower abdomi-
nal cavity and contains mainly the lower intestines. A somewhat round opening 
called the pelvic inlet leads into a narrower inferior space called the lesser (true) 
pelvis, which forms the wall of the pelvic cavity and contains mainly the rectum; 
the urinary bladder; and in women, the uterus. The edge of the pelvic inlet is called 
the pelvic brim. The lower opening of the lesser pelvis is called the pelvic outlet. 
The inlet and outlet refer to the passage of an infant during birth, as it descends into 
and through the lesser pelvis.
The pelvis is the most sexually dimorphic part of the skeleton—that is, the one 
whose anatomy most differs between the sexes. The average male pelvis is more 
robust (heavier and thicker) than the female’s owing to the forces exerted on the 
bone by stronger muscles. The female pelvis is adapted to the needs of pregnancy 
55pelv = basin, bowl 
I
II
III
IV
V
Metacarpal
bones
Carpal
bones
(a) Anterior view
Distal phalanx II
Middle phalanx II
Proximal phalanx II
Head
Body
Base
Hamulus of hamate
Hamate
Pisiform
Triquetrum
Lunate
Capitate
Trapezium
Trapezoid
First
metacarpal
Proximal
phalanx I
Body
Distal
phalanx I
Head
Scaphoid
Base
Phalanges
Sesamoid bone
(b) X-ray of adult hand
Carpal
bones
Distal row
Proximal row
Key to carpal bones
Figure 6.29 The Right Hand. (a) Anterior 
view with carpal bones color-coded to distinguish 
the proximal and distal rows. (b) X-ray of an adult 
hand. Sesamoid bones are small “extra” bones that 
often develop within tendons after birth. The pisi-
form bone and patella (kneecap) are also sesamoid 
bones. 
b: © NHS Trust/Tony Stone Images/Getty Images
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      179  

and childbirth. It is wider and shallower and has a larger, rounder pelvic inlet and 
outlet for passage of the infant. These and other features are used to determine the 
sex of skeletal remains.
The Hip Bone
The hip bone is also known as the os coxae56 (oss COC-see) or coxal bone. It 
forms by the fusion of three childhood bones called the ilium (ILL-ee-um), ischium 
Iliac
fossa
Ilium
Ischium
Coccyx
Pubis
(a)
Pubic symphysis
Interpubic
disc
Pelvic inlet
Sacroiliac joint
Base of
sacrum
Iliac
crest
Obturator
foramen
Greater sciatic notch
Acetabulum
Ischial tuberosity
(b)
Ischium
Lesser sciatic notch
Ilium
Iliac crest
Pubis
Obturator
foramen
Ilium
Ischium
Pubis
Key
56os = bone; coxae = of the hip
Figure 6.30 The Pelvic Girdle. (a) Anterosupe-
rior view. The pelvic girdle consists of the two hip 
bones and the sacrum. (b) The right hip bone, lateral 
view. The three childhood bones that fuse to form 
the adult hip bone are identified by color. 
 
180      PART 2  Support and Movement

(­ISS-kee-um), and pubis (PEW-biss), identified by color in figure 6.30b. The largest 
of these is the ilium57 (ILL-ee-um). If you rest your hand on your hip, you are support-
ing it on the upper margin of the ilium, called the iliac crest. A prominent feature of 
the posterior margin of the ilium is the deep greater sciatic notch (sy-AT-ic), through 
which the sciatic nerve passes on its way down the posterior side of the thigh. The 
posterolateral surface of the ilium is relatively rough because it serves for attachment 
of several muscles of the buttocks and thighs. The anteromedial surface, by contrast, is 
the smooth, slightly concave iliac fossa, covered by the broad iliacus muscle.
The ischium forms the lower posterior portion of the hip bone. It is a 
roughly C-shaped bone that contributes most of the posterior wall of the ace-
tabulum. Its lowermost part is the thick, rough-surfaced ischial tuberosity, 
which you are probably sitting on as you read this. It can be palpated by sitting 
on your fingers.
The pubis (pubic bone) is the most anterior portion of the hip bone. It 
contributes the anterior part of the acetabulum. The pubic symphysis58 is the 
point where the anterior bodies of the two pubic bones are joined. It consists 
of a median pad of fibrocartilage called the interpubic disc and the adjacent 
region of bone on each side. The ischium and pubis encircle the obturator59 
foramen, a large round-to-triangular hole below the acetabulum, closed in life 
by a ligamentous sheet. Laterally, the most prominent feature of the hip bone 
is the acetabulum60 (ASS-eh-TAB-you-lum), a deep socket for the head of the 
femur. As you can see from the color coding in the figure, the ilium, ischium, 
and pubis meet here and each contributes roughly 
one-third of this socket.
The number and arrangement of bones in the 
lower limb are similar to those of the upper limb, and 
again number 30 bones per limb: the femur in the 
thigh, the patella (kneecap), the tibia and fibula in the 
leg proper, 7 tarsal bones in the ankle, and 5 metatar-
sal bones and 14 phalanges in the foot. The bones of 
the lower limb, unlike those of the upper, are adapted 
for weight bearing and locomotion, and are therefore 
shaped and articulated differently, as we shall see. 
The Femur
The femur (FEE-mur) is the body’s longest and 
strongest bone, measuring about one-quarter of one’s 
height (fig. 6.31). It has a hemispherical head that 
inserts into the acetabulum. Distal to the head is a 
constricted neck and two massive, rough processes 
of the upper femur called the greater and lesser 
­trochanters (tro-CAN-turs); these are attachments 
for the powerful muscles of the hip. The anterior 
surface of the shaft is smooth and rounded, but the 
posterior surface is marked by a strongly developed 
ridge, the linea aspera, an attachment for strong 
adductor muscles of the thigh. The distal end of the 
femur flares into medial and lateral epicondyles, 
which serve as sites of muscle and ligament attach-
ment and which can be palpated at the widest point 
57ilium = flank, loin 
58sym = together; physis = growth 
59obtur = to close, stop up; ator = that which 
60acetabulum = vinegar cup
Greater
trochanter
Lateral
epicondyle
Patellar
surface
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
Lateral 
epicondyle
Lateral 
condyle
Linea 
aspera
Greater 
trochanter
Head
Neck
Lesser 
trochanter
Shaft
Medial
epicondyle
Medial condyle
Base of 
patella
Articular 
facets
Apex of
patella
Figure 6.31 The Right Femur and Patella. 
 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      181  

of the knee. Distal to these are two smooth wheel-like surfaces of the knee joint, the 
medial and lateral condyles. On the anterior side of the femur, a smooth medial 
depression called the patellar ­surface accommodates the patella.
The Patella
The patella,61 (kneecap) is a roughly triangular bone that develops within the quad-
riceps tendon of the knee (fig. 6.31). It is cartilaginous at birth and ossifies between 
3 and 6 years of age. It has a broad superior base, a pointed inferior apex, and a 
pair of shallow articular facets on its posterior surface where it articulates with the 
femur. The patella glides up and down on the patellar surface of the femur when the 
knee is flexed and extended. Because of the way the quadriceps tendon loops over 
the patella, the patella modifies the direction of pull by the large quadriceps femoris 
muscle of the thigh and improves its efficiency in extending the knee. The power of 
a soccer player’s kick thus hinges on this contribution from the patella.
The Tibia
The tibia is the thick, strong bone on the medial side of the leg proper (fig. 6.32). 
(Remember that in anatomical terminology, leg refers only to the crural region 
between the knee and ankle.) The tibia is the only weight-bearing bone of this 
region. Its broad superior head has two fairly flat surfaces, the medial and lateral 
condyles. The condyles of the femur rock on these surfaces when the knee is flexed. 
You can palpate the rough anterior surface of the tibia, the tibial tuberosity, just 
below your patella. This is where the patellar ligament inserts and the quadriceps 
muscle of the thigh exerts its pull when it extends the knee, as in kicking a football. 
Distal to this, the shaft has a sharply angular anterior border, which you can eas-
ily palpate in the shin. At the ankle, just above the brim of a standard dress shoe, 
you can palpate a prominent bony knob on each side. These knobs are the medial 
­malleolus62 (MAL-ee-OH-lus) of the tibia and the 
lateral malleolus of the fibula.
The Fibula
The fibula (fig. 6.32) is a slender lateral strut that helps 
to stabilize the ankle. It does not bear any weight. The 
fibula is somewhat thicker and broader at its proximal 
end, the head, than at the distal end. The distal expan-
sion is the lateral malleolus just mentioned. The shafts 
of the tibia and fibula are connected through a flexible 
interosseous membrane similar to that of the forearm.
The Ankle and Foot
The tarsal bones of the ankle are arranged in proximal 
and distal groups somewhat like the carpal bones of 
the wrist (fig. 6.33). Because of the load-bearing role 
of the ankle, however, they are arranged quite differ-
ently from the carpal bones and are thoroughly inte-
grated into the arches of the foot. The proximal group 
includes the calcaneus63 (cal-CAY-nee-us) of the heel; 
the talus, a superior bone that articulates with the tibia; 
and the short wide navicular bone anterior to the talus. 
The distal group forms a row of four bones. Proceeding 
61pat = pan; ella = little 
62malle = hammer; olus = little 
63calc = stone, chalk
Lateral condyle
Head of ﬁbula
Lateral malleolus
Tibia
Fibula
Anterior border
Tibial 
tuberosity
Lateral
malleolus
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterior view
Medial
 malleolus
Interosseous
membrane
Medial
condyle
Figure 6.32 The Right Tibia and Fibula. 
 
182      PART 2  Support and Movement

from medial to lateral, these are the medial, intermediate, and lateral cuneiforms64 
(cue-NEE-ih-forms) and the cuboid. The cuboid is the largest of the four.
The remaining bones of the foot are similar in arrangement and name to those of 
the hand. The metatarsals65 are similar to the metacarpals. They are numbered I to V 
from medial to lateral, metatarsal I being proximal to the great toe. (Roman numeral I 
refers to the largest digit in both the hand and foot—the thumb and the great toe, respec-
tively.) Bones of the toes, like those of the fingers, are called phalanges. The great toe 
contains only two bones, the proximal and distal phalanx I. The other toes each contain 
a proximal, middle, and distal phalanx. Like the metacarpals and phalanges of the hand, 
the metatarsals and phalanges of the foot each have a base, body, and head.
64cunei = wedge; form = in the shape of 
65meta = beyond; tars = ankle
Key border to tarsal bones
Distal group
Proximal group
Distal phalanx I
Proximal phalanx I
Metatarsal
Medial cuneiform
Intermediate cuneiform
Lateral cuneiform
Navicular
Talus
(a) Superior (dorsal) view
(b) Inferior (plantar) view
Tuberosity of calcaneus
Calcaneus
Cuboid
Head
Body
Base
Proximal
phalanx V
Middle
phalanx V
Distal
phalanx V
Phalanges
Metatarsal
bones
Tarsal bones
V
V
IV
IV
III
III
II
II
I
I
(c) Medial view
Trochlear 
surface
Talus
Navicular
Phalanges
Calcaneus
Cuneiforms
Sesamoid bone
Metatarsals
(d) X-ray of right foot, lateral view
Fibula Tibia Talus
Calcaneus
Navicular
Cuneiform
Cuboid
Metatarsal I
Proximal
phalanx I
Figure 6.33 The Right Foot. (a) Superior (dor-
sal) view. (b) Inferior (plantar) view. (c) Medial view. 
(d) X-ray of lateral view. The white arrow represents 
the lateral longitudinal arch. 
d: © Medical Body Scans/Science Source
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      183  

6.5  Joints
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define and describe three major classes of joints, the subclasses 
of each, and examples;
b.	identify the anatomical components seen in most synovial joints;
c.	define and demonstrate the types of movement that occur at 
synovial joints; and
d.	describe the basic anatomy of the shoulder, elbow, hip, and 
knee joints.
Three strong, springy foot arches absorb shock as the body jostles up and down 
during walking and running. The medial longitudinal arch extends from the heel 
to the great toe; the lateral longitudinal arch extends from the heel to the little toe 
(fig. 6.33d); and the transverse arch extends from side to side at the level where 
the metatarsal bones articulate with the distal row of tarsal bones (the cuboid and 
cuneiforms). These arches are held together by short, tough ligaments. Excessive 
weight or repetitious stress can weaken and stretch these ligaments, resulting in the 
condition commonly called fallen arches or flat feet (pes planus66). This condition 
makes it harder to tolerate prolonged standing and walking.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
18.	Prepare a list of all boldfaced key terms in the forego-
ing descriptions of the upper and lower limbs and 
the two limb girdles; try to identify each of those features on 
unlabeled models or illustrations of the skeleton.
19.	What structure is found in the intertubercular groove of the 
humerus? What structure attaches to its deltoid tuberosity? 
What bones articulate with its head, capitulum, and trochlea, 
respectively?
20.	Describe the features you can use to distinguish a radius 
from an ulna, and how you can tell the proximal from the 
distal end of each bone.
21.	How many carpal bones are there? How many tarsal bones? If 
there are 30 bones in both the upper and the lower limb, what 
makes up for the unequal number of carpal and tarsal bones?
22.	Give the anatomical (osteological) name for each of the 
following bony structures that you can palpate on the body 
surface: the apex of the shoulder; the point of the elbow; the 
bumps on each side of the wrist; the bumps on each side of 
the ankle; the heel; and the “ball” of the foot at the base of 
the great toe.
66pes = foot; planus = flat
184      PART 2  Support and Movement

Proximal
phalanx
Articular
cartilages
Joint
capsule
Periosteum
Middle
phalanx
Joint cavity 
containing
synovial ﬂuid
Ligament
Fibrous
capsule
Synovial
membrane
Bone
A joint, or articulation, is any point at which two bones meet, whether or not it is 
movable at that point. Your shoulder, for example, is a very movable joint, whereas 
the skull sutures are immovable joints.
Classification
Joints are classified according to the manner in which the adjacent bones are 
­connected, with corresponding differences in how freely the bones can move. 
There are three major structural categories of joints: fibrous, cartilaginous, and 
synovial.
Fibrous Joints
A fibrous joint, or synarthrosis67 (SIN-ar-THRO-sis), is a point at which adjacent 
bones are bound by collagen fibers that emerge from the matrix of one bone, cross 
the space between them, and penetrate into the matrix of the other. Most of these have 
very little mobility—for example, the skull sutures and the joints that bind a tooth to 
the jaw bone. (The latter is a minor exception to the general definition of a joint given 
above, since a tooth is not a bone.) The radius and ulna, however, are bound to each 
other by a relatively mobile fibrous joint formed by the interosseous membrane along 
their length (see fig. 6.28). It allows for such movements as rotation of the forearm 
from a palm-up to a palm-down position (see fig. 6.41). A similar membrane binds 
the tibia and fibula, but with less mobility than seen in the forearm.
Cartilaginous Joints
A cartilaginous joint, or amphiarthrosis68 (AM-fee-ar-THRO-sis), is a 
point at which two bones are linked by cartilage. Examples include the pubic 
symphysis, where fibrocartilage joins the right and left bones to each other; 
intervertebral discs, where fibrocartilage joins consecutive vertebrae to each 
other; and the attachment of rib 1 to the sternum by a hyaline costal cartilage 
(see fig. 6.24). (Ribs 2 through 10, however, are joined to the sternum by 
synovial joints.) 
Synovial Joints
A synovial joint (sih-NO-vee-ul), or diarthrosis69 (DY-ar-THRO-sis), 
is what usually comes to mind when one thinks of a skeletal joint. 
Synovial joints include the most familiar and movable joints of the 
body, such as the shoulder, elbow, knuckle, hip, and knee joints, 
as well as some less obvious examples among the carpal and 
tarsal bones. Synovial joints are the most structurally complex 
type of joint, and are the most likely to develop uncomfort-
able and crippling dysfunctions. They are therefore the most 
important joints for professionals such as physical and occu-
pational therapists, nurses, fitness trainers, and athletic and 
dance coaches to understand well.
The relative mobility of synovial joints stems partly 
from the fact that the two bones are separated by a narrow 
space, the joint (articular) cavity; the space contains a 
­slippery lubricant called synovial70 fluid (fig. 6.34), similar 
Figure 6.34 Structure of a Simple 
­Synovial Joint. 
 
•	 Why is a meniscus unnecessary in an 
interphalangeal joint?
67syn = together; arthr = joined; osis = condition 
68amphi = on all sides; arthr = joined; osis = condition 
69dia = separate, apart; arthr = joint; osis = condition 
70ovi = egg
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      185  

to raw egg white in ­consistency. The facing bone surfaces are covered with 
articular cartilages up to 2 mm thick. A connective tissue joint (articular) 
capsule encloses the cavity. It consists of a sturdy outer fibrous capsule that 
encloses the entire joint and an inner synovial membrane that secretes the 
fluid and retains it in the joint cavity.
In some synovial joints, especially those subjected to a lot of weight or pres-
sure, fibrocartilage grows inward from the joint capsule and forms a pad between 
the bones. In the jaw, between the distal ends of the radius and ulna, and at both ends 
of the clavicle, the pad crosses the entire joint capsule and is called an articular 
disc. In the knee, two cartilages extend inward from the left and right but do not 
entirely cross the joint. Each is called a meniscus71 because of its crescent shape. 
Such cartilages absorb shock and pressure and improve the fit between the bones, 
guide the bones across each other, and stabilize the joint, reducing the chance of 
dislocation.
Accessory structures associated with a synovial joint include tendons, liga-
ments, and bursae. Tendons are often the most important structures in stabilizing 
a joint. A bursa72 is a fibrous sac filled with synovial fluid, located between adja-
cent muscles, between bone and skin, or where a tendon passes over a bone (see 
fig. 6.43). Bursae cushion muscles, help tendons slide more easily over the joints, 
and sometimes enhance the mechanical effect of a muscle by modifying the direc-
tion in which its tendon pulls. They are especially numerous in the hand, knee, and 
foot. Inflammation of a bursa is called bursitis. It is usually caused by overuse or 
repeated trauma to a joint, and it occurs most commonly in the shoulder. A bunion 
is bursitis of the great toe.
There are six classes of synovial joints, distinguished by patterns of motion 
determined by the shapes of the articulating bone surfaces (fig. 6.35). A bone’s 
movement at a joint can be described with reference to three mutually perpen-
dicular planes in space (x, y, and z). If the bone can move in only one plane, like 
a door on its hinges, the joint is said to be monaxial; if it can move in two planes, 
like the gear shift of a manual transmission, the joint is biaxial; and if three, 
like the shoulder, it is multiaxial. The six synovial joints are described here 
in descending order of mobility: one multiaxial type (ball-and-socket), three 
biaxial types (condylar, saddle, and gliding), and two monaxial types (hinge 
and pivot).
	 1.	 Ball-and-socket joints occur at the shoulder and hip, where one bone has a 
smooth hemispherical head that fits within a cuplike depression (socket) on 
the other. The head of the humerus fits into the glenoid cavity of the scapula, 
and the head of the femur fits into the acetabulum of the hip bone. These are 
the only multiaxial joints of the skeleton.
	 2.	 Condylar (ellipsoid) joints have an oval convex surface on one bone 
that fits into a complementary depression on the next—for example, the 
joints between the phalanges and metacarpal bones at the base of the 
fingers. As biaxial joints, they can move in two planes. To demonstrate 
this, hold your hand with your palm facing you. Make a fist, and these 
joints flex in the sagittal plane. Fan your fingers apart, and they move in 
the frontal plane.
	 3.	 Saddle joints occur at the base of the thumb between the trapezium 
and metacarpal I, and between the clavicle and sternum. Each bone 
has a saddle-shaped surface—concave in one direction (like the front-
to-rear curvature of a horse saddle) and convex in the other (like the 
left-to-right curvature of a saddle). These joints are biaxial. The thumb, 
71men = moon, crescent; iscus = little 
72burs = purse
186      PART 2  Support and Movement

Ball-and-socket joint
(humeroscapular)
Hinge joint
(humeroulnar)
Plane joint
(intercarpal)
Saddle joint
(trapeziometacarpal)
Condylar joint
(metacarpophalangeal)
Head of humerus
Scapula
Carpal bone
Metacarpal bone
Phalanx
Metacarpal
bone
Humerus
Ulna
Carpal bones
Pivot joint
(radioulnar)
Radius
Ulna
for example, moves in a frontal plane when 
you spread your fingers and in a sagittal plane 
when you move it as if to grasp the handle of 
a hammer. The saddle joint is what makes the 
human thumb opposable (able to encircle and 
grasp objects).
	 4.	 At a plane (gliding) joint, the articular surfaces are flat or only slightly con-
cave and convex. Plane joints occur between the wrist and ankle bones. The 
adjacent bones slide over each other and have rather limited movement. Their 
movements are complex but usually biaxial.
	 5.	 At a hinge joint, one bone has a convex surface that fits into a concave de-
pression of the other one. Hinge joints are essentially monaxial—like a door 
hinge, they can move freely in one plane, but they have very little movement 
in any other. Examples include the elbow, knee, and interphalangeal (finger 
and toe) joints.
	 6.	 Pivot joints are monaxial joints in which a bone spins on its longitudinal 
axis. The principal examples are the joints between the first two vertebrae 
(see fig. 6.21) and between the radius and ulna at the elbow. The skull and 
atlas pivot on the axis when you shake your head “no,” and the radius spins 
on its axis when you rotate your forearm.
Figure 6.35 The Six Types of Synovial Joints. 
All six have representatives in the upper limb. Me-
chanical models show the types of motion possible 
at each joint.
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      187  

Joints are not as easy to classify as 
this scheme may make it seem, how-
ever. The jaw (temporomandibular) joint, 
for example, has elements of condylar, 
hinge, and plane joints. Some other joints 
also show aspects of two or more of these 
six types.
Movement
Kinesiology, 
physical 
therapy, 
and 
related fields have a specific vocabulary 
for movements of the synovial joints. 
You will need a command of these terms 
to understand the muscle actions in 
chapter 7.
When one is standing in ­anatomical 
position, each joint is said to be in its zero 
position. Joint movements can be described 
as deviating from the zero position or 
returning to it.
(a)
Extension
Flexion
(b)
Extension
Flexion
Hyperextension
(c)
(d)
Hyperextension
Flexion
Knee
ﬂexion
Extension
Hip
ﬂexion
Flexion, Extension, and Hyperextension
Most acts of flexion, extension, and hyperextension are movements that 
increase or decrease a joint angle in the sagittal plane (fig. 6.36). Flexion 
decreases the joint angle, as in bending the elbow or knee. The meaning of 
flexion is less obvious in the ball-and-socket joints of the shoulder and hip. 
Flexion of the shoulder consists of raising the arm from zero position in a 
sagittal plane, as if to point in front of you or toward the ceiling. Flexion of 
the hip entails raising the thigh, as in placing your foot on the next step when 
ascending stairs.
Extension straightens a joint and generally returns a body part to zero posi-
tion—for example, straightening the elbow or knee to move the arm or thigh 
back to zero position. In stair climbing, you extend both the hip and knee to 
lift your body to the next step. Hyperextension extends a joint beyond zero 
position. For example, raising the back of your hand as if admiring a new ring 
hyperextends the wrist. If you move your arm to a position posterior to the 
shoulder, such as reaching for something in your back pocket, you hyperextend 
your shoulder.
Apply What You Know
Some synovial joints have articular surfaces or ligaments that prevent them from 
being hyperextended. Try hyperextending some of your synovial joints and list a 
few for which this is impossible.
Abduction and Adduction
Abduction73 (ab-DUC-shun) (fig. 6.37) is movement of a body part in the frontal 
plane away from the midline of the body—for example, raising the arm away 
from one side of the body or standing spread-legged. To abduct the fingers is 
Figure 6.36 Flexion and Extension. (a) Flexion 
and extension of the elbow. (b) Flexion, extension, 
and hyperextension of the wrist. (c) Flexion and hy-
perextension of the shoulder. (d) Hip and knee flex-
ion and extension.
a–d: © McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
73ab = away; duc = to carry, lead
188      PART 2  Support and Movement

to spread them apart. Adduction74 (ah-
DUC-shun) is movement toward the 
median plane, returning the body part to 
zero position.
Elevation and Depression
Elevation is movement that raises a body 
part vertically. You elevate your mandi-
ble to bite off a piece of food, and elevate 
your clavicle and scapula when lifting 
a suitcase. The opposite of elevation is 
depression, such as lowering your man-
dible to open the mouth or lowering your 
shoulders.
Protraction and Retraction
Protraction75 is anterior movement of 
a body part on a horizontal plane, and 
retraction76 is posterior movement (fig. 6.38). You protract your shoulders when 
you reach out to hug someone or push open a door. You would retract them to 
stand at military attention. Such exercises as bench presses and push-ups involve 
repeated protraction and retraction of the shoulders. Most of us have some degree 
of overbite, so we protract the mandible to make the edges of the incisors meet 
when biting off a piece of food, then retract it to make the molars meet and grind 
food between them.
Circumduction
Circumduction77 (fig. 6.39) is movement in which one end of an appendage remains 
relatively stationary while the other end makes a circular motion. The appendage 
as a whole thus describes a conical space. For example, if an artist standing at an 
easel reaches out and draws a circle on the canvas, the shoulder remains relatively 
74ad = toward; duc = to carry, lead 
75pro = forward; trac = pull, draw 
76re = back; trac = pull, draw 
77circum = around; duc = to carry, lead
(a) Abduction
(b) Adduction
Figure 6.37 Abduction and Adduction.
a–b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
Figure 6.38 Protraction and Retraction of the Shoulder.
a–b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
Figure 6.39 Circumduction of the Upper 
Limb.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
(a) Protraction
(b) Retraction
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      189  

stationary while the hand makes a circle. The extremity as a whole thus exhibits 
circumduction. A baseball player winding up for the pitch circumducts the arm in a 
more extreme “windmill” fashion.
Rotation
Rotation is a movement in which a bone spins on its longitudinal axis like the 
axle of a bicycle wheel. Figure 6.40 shows limb movements that occur in lateral 
(­external) and medial (internal) rotation of the femur and humerus. Turning the 
head from side to side is called right and left rotation. Powerful right and left rota-
tion at the waist is important in such actions as baseball pitching and golf. Good 
examples of the lateral and medial rotation of the humerus are its movements in the 
forehand and backhand strokes of tennis.
Supination and Pronation
Supination78 (SOO-pih-NAY-shun) is rotation of the forearm so that the palm 
faces forward or upward; in anatomical position, the forearm is supinated and 
the radius and ulna are parallel to each other (fig. 6.41a). Supination is the 
movement you would usually make with the right hand to turn a doorknob 
clockwise or drive a screw into a piece of wood. Pronation79 is rotation of the 
Figure 6.40 Medial and Lateral Rotation. (a) 
Medial (internal) rotation of the humerus and femur. 
(b) Lateral (external) rotation of the same. 
a–b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
(b) Lateral (external) rotation
(a) Medial (internal) rotation
78supin = to lay back 
79pron = to bend forward
190      PART 2  Support and Movement

forearm so that the palm faces toward the rear or downward (fig. 6.41b). 
As an aid to memory, think of it this way: You are prone to stand in 
the most comfortable position, which is with the palm pronated. If you 
were holding a bowl of soup in the palm of your hand, your forearm 
would have to be supinated to avoid spilling it. Supination and prona-
tion should not be confused with supine (lying on one’s back) and prone 
(lying face down).
Opposition and Reposition
Opposition80 is movement of the thumb to approach or touch the ­fingertips 
(hence we say humans have an opposable thumb), and reposition81 is its 
movement back to zero position, parallel to the index finger. Opposition 
enables the hand to grasp objects and is the single most important hand 
­function.
Dorsiflexion and Plantar Flexion
Special names are given to vertical movements at the ankle (fig. 6.42a). 
­Dorsiflexion (DOR-sih-FLEC-shun) is a movement in which the toes are 
raised (as one might do to apply toenail polish). Dorsiflexion occurs in each 
step you take as your foot comes forward. It prevents your toes from scrap-
ing on the ground and results in a heel strike when the foot touches down in 
front of you. Plantar flexion is a movement that points the toes downward, 
as in standing on tiptoe or pressing the gas pedal of a car. This motion also 
produces the toe-off in each step you take, as the heel of the foot behind you 
lifts off the ground before your toes do.
Inversion and Eversion
Inversion82 is a foot movement that tilts the soles medially toward each 
other; eversion83 tilts the soles away from each other (fig. 6.42b, c). 
80op = against; posit = to place 
81re = back; posit = to place 
82in = inward; version = turning 
83e = outward; version = turning
Figure 6.41 Supination and Pronation of the Forearm. Note the way 
these forearm rotations affect the relationship of the radius and ulna.
a–b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
Figure 6.42 Movements 
of the Foot. (a) Dorsiflexion 
and plantar flexion. (b) Inver-
sion. (c) Eversion.
a–c: © McGraw-Hill Education/­
Timothy L. Vacula, photographer
(a) Supination
(b) Pronation
Radius
Ulna
Radius
Ulna
Dorsiﬂexion
Zero
position
(c) Eversion
(b) Inversion
Plantar ﬂexion
(a) Flexion of ankle
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      191  

Deltoid 
muscle
Glenoid labrum
Glenoid labrum
Glenoid cavity
of scapula
Synovial
membrane
Subdeltoid 
bursa
Supraspinatus 
muscle
Clavicle
Acromion
Capsular ligament
Humerus
Acromion
Supraspinatus 
tendon
Subscapularis 
tendon
Biceps brachii 
tendon
Humerus
(a) Anterior view
(b) Frontal section
Clavicle
Coracoid
process
Figure 6.43 The Shoulder Joint. Bursae are 
shown in green. Gray bands not otherwise labeled 
are ligaments. The supraspinatus and subscapularis 
tendons are two tendons of the rotator cuff, a com-
mon site of athletic and workplace injuries. 
 
These ­movements are common in fast sports such as tennis and football, and 
sometimes result in ankle sprains. They are also important in walking across 
uneven surfaces, for example in mountain hiking on a rocky trail. These terms 
also refer to congenital deformities of the feet, which are often corrected by 
orthopedic shoes or braces.
Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
We now examine the gross anatomy of a few representative synovial joints at the 
shoulder, elbow, hip, and knee. These joints most often require medical attention, 
and they have a strong bearing on athletic performance.
The Shoulder
At the shoulder, the head of the humerus inserts into the shallow glenoid cavity of 
the scapula (fig. 6.43). The glenoid cavity is somewhat deeper than it appears on 
a dried skeleton because of a ring of fibrocartilage around its margin. This joint is 
stabilized mainly by a tendon of the biceps brachii muscle, which extends like a 
strap through the groove between the tubercles of the humerus, over the shoulder, 
and to the scapula. Four shoulder muscles at this joint contribute another stabilizing 
complex, the rotator cuff (see fig. 7.18).
This is the most mobile joint of the body, and serves with the elbow to 
position the hand for a given task. Its mobility, however, comes at consider-
able cost to stability. The shallowness of the glenoid cavity and looseness of 
the joint capsule make the shoulder highly subject to dislocation and other 
injuries. 
The Elbow
The elbow is a hinge with three joints (fig. 6.44)—one where the trochlear 
notch of the ulna encircles the trochlea of the humerus, one where the disc-
shaped head of the radius meets the capitulum of the humerus; and one where 
the edge of the radial head meets the ulna. Only the first two joints contribute 
to the elbow hinge, but the last two act in forearm supination and pronation. 
In these actions, the upper discoidal surface of the radial head swivels on 
the capitulum of the humerus, and the edge of the radial head spins like a 
192      PART 2  Support and Movement

tire in a notch of the ulna. A ligament attaches to the 
ulna at both its ends and loops around the neck of the 
radius, holding the radius against the radial notch but 
allowing it to spin freely. On the posterior side of the 
elbow, there is a prominent bursa that eases the move-
ment of tendons over the elbow. This is a common 
site of painful inflammation (bursitis of the elbow, or 
olecranon bursitis) resulting from impact injuries or 
repetitive motions on one’s job or in sports such as 
tennis and golf.
The Hip
At the hip joint, the head of the femur inserts into the 
acetabulum of the hip bone (fig. 6.45). Because the hip 
joints bear much of the body’s weight, they have deep 
sockets and are much more stable than the shoulder 
joint. The depth of the socket is somewhat greater than 
we see on dried bones because of a horseshoe-shaped 
ring of fibrocartilage attached to its rim. The joint is 
enclosed in three strong ligaments that twist when one 
stands, pulling the head of the femur tightly into the 
acetabulum and stabilizing the joint. This is important 
to human bipedalism because it allows one to stand 
with minimal continual muscle exertion at the joint. 
Because of the depth of the acetabulum and tautness 
of these ligaments, hip dislocations are rare. Hip frac-
tures are common in the elderly, however, usually at 
the femoral neck just below the head, and hip replace-
ment is one of the most common procedures of ortho-
pedic surgery.
(a) Medial view
Tendon of biceps
Joint capsule
Tendon of
triceps brachii
Humerus
Olecranon 
bursa
Coronoid process 
Radius
Ulna
(b) Sagittal section
Humerus
Trochlea
Joint capsule
Radius
Olecranon
Articular 
cartilage
Coronoid process
Olecranon 
bursa
Ulna
(a)  Anterior view
Ilium
Femur
Lesser
trochanter
(b)  Lateral view, femoral head retracted from acetabulum
Ligaments
Greater
trochanter
Pubis
Acetabulum
Head of 
femur
Greater 
trochanter
Femur
Ischial 
tuberosity
Figure 6.44 The Elbow Joint. 
 
Figure 6.45 The Hip Joint. (a) The anterior 
view shows the ligaments that stabilze the joint. 
(b) The acetabulum with the femoral head retracted. 
 
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      193  

The Knee
The knee joint is the largest and most complex synovial joint (fig. 6.46). Anteriorly, 
it is partially covered by the patella. The tendon of the quadriceps muscle of the thigh 
extends from the muscle to the patella, and then continues as the patellar ligament 
to the tibial tuberosity below the knee (see fig. 7.20). The lateral and posterior sides 
of the knee joint are enclosed by a fibrous joint capsule. The knee is surrounded by 
about 13 bursae. It is stabilized mainly by the quadriceps tendon in front and the 
tendon of one of the hamstring muscles, the semimembranosus, on the rear of the 
thigh. Developing strength in these muscles therefore reduces the risk of knee injury.
Figure 6.46 The Knee Joint. Bursae are 
shown in green, articular cartilages in light blue, and 
­tendons and ligaments in gray. 
 
Femur
Patellar surface
Lateral 
condyle
Fibula
Tibia
Lateral 
meniscus
(a)  Anterior view
(b)  Posterior view
Medial 
condyle
Posterior
cruciate 
ligament
Anterior cruciate 
ligament
Medial meniscus
Posterior cruciate
ligament
Femur
Fibula
Tibia   
Lateral meniscus   
Lateral condyle
of tibia   
Medial 
meniscus
Lateral meniscus
Articular cartilage
of tibia
Femur
Meniscus
Tibia
Joint cavity
Fat pad
Synovial membrane
Quadriceps
femoris muscle
Quadriceps
femoris tendon
Patellar ligament
Patella
Articular 
cartilage
Joint capsule
(c)  Sagittal section
(d)  Superior view of tibia and menisci
Medial condyle
of tibia
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Synovial 
membrane
Medial condyle
Posterior cruciate 
ligament
Anterior cruciate 
ligament
Patellar ligament
(cut)
Medial meniscus
194      PART 2  Support and Movement

The joint cavity contains two crescent-shaped cartilages called the lateral and 
medial menisci (singular, meniscus) (fig. 6.46d). They absorb pressure from the 
weight of the body and stabilize the knee as described earlier. Deep within the 
joint cavity is a pair of ligaments called the anterior cruciate84 ligament (ACL) 
(CROO-she-ate) and posterior cruciate ligament (PCL). These are called cruciate 
for the fact that they cross each other in the form of an X, and are called anterior 
and posterior for their attachments on the respective surfaces of the tibia. When the 
knee is extended, the ACL is pulled tight and prevents hyperextension. The PCL 
prevents the femur from sliding off the front of the tibia and prevents the tibia from 
being displaced backward. The most common knee injuries, often requiring surgical 
treatment, are to the ACL and menisci (see Clinical Application 6.2).
An important aspect of human bipedalism is the ability to “lock” the knees 
and stand erect without tiring the extensor muscles of the leg. When the knee is 
extended to the fullest degree allowed by the ACL, the femur rotates medially on 
the tibia. This action locks the knee, and in this state all the major knee ligaments 
are twisted and taut. To unlock the knee, a small posterior popliteus muscle rotates 
the femur laterally and untwists the ligaments.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
23.	Explain the distinction between fibrous and cartilagi-
nous joints and give an example of each.
24.	Explain what unique structural features of a synovial joint make 
some of these the most freely movable joints of the body.
25.	Give one example of each of the following synovial joint types: 
ball-and-socket, condyloid, gliding, hinge, pivot, and saddle.
26.	Explain why both the shoulder and hip sockets are deeper in 
living persons than they appear on a dried skeleton.
27.	 What function is served by the cruciate ligaments of the 
knee? What function is served by the menisci?
Clinical Application 6.2
KNEE INJURIES AND ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY
The knee is highly vulnerable to rotational and horizontal stress, especially 
when it is flexed (as in skiing or running) and receives a blow from behind 
or from the side. The most common injuries are to a meniscus or the anterior 
cruciate ligament (ACL). Knee injuries heal slowly because ligaments and 
tendons have a very scanty blood supply and cartilage usually has no blood 
vessels at all. A damaged ACL is often replaced with a tissue graft from the 
patellar ligament or from a hamstring tendon.
The diagnosis and surgical treatment of knee injuries have been greatly 
improved by arthroscopy, a procedure in which a slender viewing instrument 
(arthroscope) and surgical instruments are inserted through small incisions in 
the knee. Shreds of torn menisci can be removed in this way. Arthroscopic sur-
gery produces much less tissue damage than conventional surgery and enables 
patients to recover more quickly.
84cruci = cross; ate = characterized by
CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      195  

C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
An orthopedic nurse is a specialist in the prevention and treatment of mus-
culoskeletal disorders. He or she has achieved RN or LPN certification and 
then completed advanced training in orthopedic nursing. Many achieve 
certification as an orthopedic nurse certified (ONC), orthopedic nurse prac-
titioner (ONP-C), or orthopedic clinical nurse specialist (OCNS-C); some go 
as far as master’s and doctoral degrees. Orthopedic nurses must be skilled 
in such practices as traction, casting, external therapy, continuous passive 
motion therapy, and monitoring of neurological and circulatory status. Their 
work ranges from neonatal to geriatric care, in settings as diverse as hospitals, 
nursing homes, physician outpatient practices, industry, academics, and home health agencies. Another growing career in 
skeletal health is bone densitometrist, a radiologic technologist who specializes in assessment of bone density, especially 
in the evaluation and treatment of ­osteoporosis. See appendix B for links to further information on careers in orthopedic 
nursing and bone densitometry.
O r t h o p e d i c  N u r s e
© ERproductions Ltd/Blend Images/Corbis RF
85osteo = bone; penia = deficiency
Aging of the Skeletal System
Nearly everyone experiences some degree of bone loss, called 
osteopenia,85 with age. It begins as early as the 30s, as osteo-
blasts become less active than osteoclasts and bone deposition 
fails to keep pace with the rate of resorption. The aging of other 
organ systems also contributes to aging of the skeleton. As the 
skin ages, its role in vitamin D synthesis declines by as much 
as 75%, and declining levels of vitamin D mean we absorb less 
calcium from our food. As muscle mass and strength decline, 
the bones are subjected to less stress and are therefore less 
stimulated to deposit osseous tissue. One skeletal condition that 
becomes less common in old age, however, is herniated inter-
vertebral discs. The discs become more fibrous in old age and 
have less nucleus pulposus, so they are less likely to rupture. 
Their degeneration, however, contributes to back pain and stiff-
ness as the vertebral column becomes less supple. The thoracic 
cage also stiffens with age, because the costal cartilages tend 
to ossify. As a consequence, breathing becomes shallower and 
more laborious. 
196      PART 2  Support and Movement

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the SKELETAL SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Bones close to the body surface, 
such as skull bones, support and 
shape the skin.
Muscular System
Bones provide the attachment sites 
for most muscles and furnish lever-
age, by means of which muscles 
exert most of their actions. Muscle 
contraction depends on calcium, 
for which the skeleton is the body’s 
primary reservoir.
Nervous System
The cranium and vertebral column protect the brain 
and spinal cord. Neural function also is strongly af-
fected by the skeleton’s storage and release of calcium.
Endocrine System
Bones protect the endocrine glands of the head, 
chest, and pelvic cavity. Calcium is a necessary 
trigger for hormone secretion, and some hormones 
employ calcium in stimulating their target cells.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The red bone marrow is the origin of all 
immune cells.
Respiratory System
Bones support the respiratory passages 
through the nasal cavity. The ribs protect 
the lungs, and rib movements are crucial to 
pulmonary ventilation.
Circulatory System
The red bone marrow is the ultimate source of all 
blood cells. Calcium is needed for contraction of 
the heart. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts maintain 
blood calcium homeostasis.
Reproductive System
The skeleton provides protective enclo-
sure for some reproductive organs. Pel-
vic anatomy contributes to the difficulty 
and complications of childbirth.
Digestive System
The skeleton provides protective enclosure 
for some of the digestive organs.
Urinary System
The skeleton supports and protects 
organs of the urinary system.
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© iconogenic/Getty 
Images RF
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Getty Images
	
197

Study Guide
198      PART 2  Support and Movement
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
6.1  Skeletal Structure and Function 
1.	 Bones and other components of the skeletal system
2.	 Five functions of the skeletal system
3.	 Differences in location and structure between compact and 
spongy bone
4.	 Four kinds of bone cells, their respective functions, and the 
relationship of osteocytes to the bone matrix and to each other
5.	 The components of the bone matrix and their functional 
significance
6.	 The histology of spongy and compact bone
7.	 Features of the gross anatomy of long and flat bones
8.	 Differences between the two types of bone marrow
6.2  Bone Development and Metabolism 
1.	 The basic difference between intramembranous and 
­endochondral ossification, and examples of bones that 
­develop by each method
2.	 Stages of intramembranous and endochondral ossification; 
how each process accounts for the mature anatomy of a flat 
cranial bone and a long limb bone, respectively
3.	 The mechanisms by which bones grow in length and thickness
4.	 Terms for the addition of minerals to the skeleton and their 
removal from it; the cells that carry out these two processes, 
and how they do it
5.	 Terms for a deficiency and an excess of calcium in the 
blood, and the pathological consequences of such imbalances
6.	 The actions of calcitriol and  parathyroid hormone on the skeleton
7.	 Other hormones and nutrients that affect skeletal ­metabolism
6.3  The Axial Skeleton 
1.	 Meanings and examples of the bone surface markings listed in 
table 6.1
2.	 The usual number of named bones in the adult skeleton, and 
which groups of bones belong to the axial and appendicular 
skeleton
3.	 The cavities of the skull
4.	 The two categories of skull bones, how each category is defined, 
and the category to which any named bone of the skull belongs
5.	 Major features of any of the following cranial bones, including 
the ability to recognize and name these bones and their features 
in illustrations and laboratory materials: the frontal, parietal, 
temporal, occipital, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones
6.	 Major features of any of the following facial bones, including 
the ability to recognize and name these bones and their features 
in illustrations and laboratory materials: the maxillae, mandible, 
vomer, and inferior nasal conchae; and the palatine, zygomatic, 
lacrimal, and nasal bones
7.	 The locations and functions of the auditory ossicles and the 
hyoid bone
8.	 The usual number of vertebrae and intervertebral discs, the five 
groups of vertebrae, and the number of vertebrae in each group
9.	 The four curvatures of the adult spine, their functional signifi-
cance, and the three main pathological deviations from normal
10.	 The general structural features seen in most cervical through 
lumbar vertebrae, and how their structure relates to the 
anatomy of the spinal cord and spinal nerves
11.	 Structural features that distinguish cervical, thoracic, and 
lumbar vertebrae from each other, and how one can identify a 
single isolated vertebra on the basis of these features
12.	 Unique features and names of the first two cervical vertebrae, 
and how their anatomy relates to movements of the head
13.	 Anatomy of the sacrum and coccyx, and how certain features 
of these can be seen as derived from features of the vertebrae 
higher on the spine
14.	 The structure of an intervertebral disc and how it relates to the 
condition known as a herniated disc
15.	 The three components of the thoracic cage
16.	 The three parts of the sternum, all bones that articulate with it, 
and the locations of these articulations
17.	 The distinction between true ribs, false ribs, and floating ribs, 
and which ribs belong to each category
18.	 How the anatomy of ribs 1, 11, and 12 differs from the more 
typical anatomy of ribs 2 through 10
19.	 How the ribs articulate with the vertebrae, and what features 
on the vertebrae mark these points of articulation
6.4  The Appendicular Skeleton 
1.	 The names of the bones that form the pectoral and pelvic girdles
2.	 The shape and function of the clavicle and how one can distin-
guish the lateral from the medial end and superior from inferior 
surface of an isolated clavicle
3.	 Names and locations of the three fossae of the scapula; 
what landmark separates the two posterior fossae; and in gen-
eral terms, what occupies these three fossae in a living person
4.	 Names and structures of the processes and joint cavity at 
the lateral end of the scapula
5.	 Names and locations of the 30 bones of the upper limb
6.	 Major anatomical features of the humerus, radius, and 
ulna, especially at the proximal and distal ends of each bone
7.	 The fibrous membrane between the radius and ulna, and 
its functional significance

CHAPTER 6   The Skeletal ­System      199  
8.	 Names of the four carpal bones of the proximal row, in order 
from lateral to medial, and the same for the four bones of the 
distal row
9.	 Structure of the metacarpal bones and phalanges, and the system 
for giving each of these 19 bones a unique name and number
10.	 Components of the pelvic girdle; the distinction between pelvic 
girdle and pelvis; and differences between the male and female 
pelvis
11.	 Anatomy of the hip bone; the childhood bones that fuse to 
form the adult hip bone; and articulations of the hip bone with 
the sacrum and femur
12.	 Anatomical features of the femur, patella, tibia, and fibula, 
especially at the proximal and distal ends of the long bones
13.	 Names and locations of the tarsal bones, and similarities and 
differences between the tarsal and carpal bones
14.	 The system for naming and numbering the metatarsal bones 
and phalanges of the foot
15.	 The three foot arches and their relationship to human bipedal-
ism and locomotion
6.5  Joints 
1.	 The differences between fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial 
joints; synonyms for each; and examples of where each can 
be found
2.	 The general features of synovial joints and the modifications 
seen in synovial joints that bear unusual weight or pressure
3.	 Comparisons and contrasts between tendons and ligaments
4.	 The structure, function, and location of bursae
5.	 The meanings of monaxial, biaxial, and multiaxial synovial 
joints, and examples of each
6.	 Six kinds of synovial joints, how they differ, and where each 
can be found
7.	 Definitions, examples of, and ability to demonstrate joint flex-
ion, extension, and hyperextension
8.	 The same for abduction and adduction
9.	 The same for elevation and depression
10.	 The same for protraction and retraction
11.	 The same for circumduction
12.	 The same for lateral and medial rotation, and right and 
left ­rotation
13.	 The same for supination and pronation
14.	 The same for opposition and reposition of the thumb
15.	 The same for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the ankle
16.	 The same for inversion and eversion of the foot
17.	 Features of the articular bone surfaces at the shoulder joint; its 
relationship to the rotator cuff; and the advantage and disad-
vantage of its great mobility
18.	 Features of the articular bone surfaces at the elbow joint; how 
they relate to elbow and forearm movements; and the location 
and clinical significance of the olecranon bursa
19.	 Similarities and differences between the hip joint and shoulder 
joint; the role of cartilages in stabilizing these two joints; and 
the effects of standing on the hip joint
20.	 Features of the articular bone surfaces at the knee joint; the 
muscles most responsible for stabilizing the knee joint; and the 
structure, importance, and clinical significance of the menisci 
and cruciate ligaments
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which cells secrete hydrochloric acid, resorb osseous tissue, 
and raise the blood calcium concentration?
a.	 chondrocytes
b.	 osteocytes
c.	 osteogenic cells
d.	 osteoblasts
e.	 osteoclasts
	 2.	 The medullary cavity of an adult bone may contain
a.	 adipose tissue.
b.	 hyaline cartilage.
c.	 periosteum.
d.	 osteocytes.
e.	 articular cartilages.
	 3.	 Which of the following movements are unique to the foot?
a.	 dorsiflexion and inversion
b.	 elevation and depression
c.	 circumduction and rotation
d.	 abduction and adduction
e.	 opposition and reposition
	 4.	 Which of the following joints has anterior and posterior cruci-
ate ligaments?
a.	 the shoulder
b.	 the elbow
c.	 the hip
d.	 the knee
e.	 the ankle
	 5.	 Which of these is the bone of the heel?
a.	 cuboid
b.	 calcaneus
c.	 navicular
d.	 trochlear
e.	 talus
	 6.	
 is secreted in response to a falling blood calcium 
level, and raises the level by promoting osteoclast activity.
a.	 Parathyroid hormone
b.	 Calcitonin
c.	 Growth hormone
d.	 Estrogen
e.	 Calcitriol
	 7.	 A child jumps to the ground from the top of a playground “jungle 
gym.” His leg bones do not shatter mainly because they have
a.	 more osteons than older bone.
b.	 young, resilient osteocytes.
c.	 an abundance of calcium phosphate.
d.	 collagen fibers.
e.	 a strong periosteum.
	 8.	 One long bone meets another at its
a.	 diaphysis.
b.	 epiphyseal plate.
c.	 periosteum.
d.	 metaphysis.
e.	 epiphysis.
	 9.	 The spinal cord passes through the 
 of the vertebrae.
a.	 vertebral foramina
b.	 intervertebral foramina
c.	 transverse foramina
d.	 obturator foramina
e.	 bodies

	10.	 The principal facial bone between the orbit and upper teeth is the
a.	 frontal bone.
b.	 zygomatic bone.
c.	 maxilla.
d.	 mandible.
e.	 parietal bone.
	11.	 The mastoid process and external acoustic meatus are parts of 
the 
 bone.
	12.	 Osteocytes contact each other through channels called 
 in the bone matrix.
	13.	 A tendon joins a muscle to a bone whereas a 
 joins 
one bone to another.
	14.	 The lubricant in the shoulder and hip joints is called 
.
	15.	 As people age they experience 
, a gradual loss of 
bone mass.
	16.	
 are bone cells that secrete collagen and stimulate 
calcium phosphate deposition.
	17.	
 is the science of body movement.
	18.	 The femur is prevented from slipping sideways off the tibia in 
part by a pair of crescent-shaped cartilages called the lateral 
and medial 
.
	19.	 Bones of the skull are joined along lines called 
.
	20.	 A herniated disc occurs when a ring called the 
 cracks.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 There are equal numbers of carpal and tarsal bones.
	 2.	 The growth zone of a child’s long bones is the articular cartilage.
	 3.	 Bones that articulate with the parietal bone include the frontal, 
temporal, occipital, and zygomatic bones.
	 4.	 On a living person, it would be possible to palpate the muscles 
in the subscapular fossa but not those of the supraspinous fossa.
	 5.	 Reaching behind you to take something out of your hip pocket 
involves hyperextension of the elbow.
	 6.	 The bones that enclose the brain develop from fetal cartilage.
	 7.	 Synovial fluid is secreted by the bursae.
	 8.	 In strict anatomical terminology, the words arm and leg both 
refer to regions with only one bone.
	 9.	 Parathyroid hormone is an important stimulus for bone 
­deposition.
	10.	 Climbing a flight of stairs requires strong, alternating adduc-
tion and abduction of the hip joint.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Most osteocytes of an osteon are far removed from blood vessels, 
but are still able to respond to hormones in the blood. Explain 
how it is possible for hormones to reach and stimulate these cells.
	 2.	 How does the regulation of blood calcium concentration exem-
plify negative feedback and homeostasis?
	 3.	 Name the action that would occur at each of the following 
joints in the indicated situation. (For example, the shoulder 
in picking up a suitcase. Answer: elevation.) (a) The arm 
when you raise it to rest your hand on the back of a sofa on 
which you’re sitting. (b) Your neck when you look up at a 
plane in the sky. (c) Your tibia when you turn the toes of one 
foot to touch the heel of the other foot. (d) Your humerus 
when you reach up to scratch the back of your head. (e) A 
bowler’s backswing. (f) A basketball player’s foot as she 
makes a jump shot. (g) Your shoulder when you pull back on 
the oars of a rowboat. (h) Your elbow when lifting a barbell. 
(i) A soccer player’s knee when kicking the ball. (j) Your 
index finger when dialing an old rotary telephone. (k) Your 
thumb when you pick up a tiny bead between your thumb 
and index finger.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
200      PART 2  Support and Movement

Chapter Outline
7.1 Muscular Tissue and Cells
• The Functions of Muscles 
• Skeletal Muscle Fibers 
• The Nerve–Muscle Relationship 
7.2 Physiology of Skeletal Muscle
• Muscle Excitation, Contraction, and 
­Relaxation 
• Whole-Muscle Contraction 
• Muscle Metabolism 
• Muscular Strength and Conditioning 
7.3 Cardiac and Smooth Muscle
• Cardiac Muscle 
• Smooth Muscle 
7.4 Anatomy of the Muscular System
• General Aspects of Muscle Anatomy 
• Muscles of the Face 
• Muscles of Chewing 
• Muscles of Head and Neck Movement 
• Muscles of the Trunk 
• Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and 
­Upper Limb 
• Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limb
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 7.1: Neuromuscular Toxins 
and Paralysis
• Clinical Application 7.2: Rigor Mortis
• Clinical Application 7.3: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome 
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Muscular System 
• Career Spotlight: Massage Therapist 
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
7
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• The functions of membrane proteins, especially 
receptors and ion gates (see “Membrane Proteins” 
in section 3.2)
• Desmosomes and gap junctions (see “Cell 
Junctions” in section 3.2)
• Gross anatomy of the skeleton (see sections 6.3 
and 6.4)
• Terminology of joint movements (see “Movement” 
in section 6.5)
The Muscular 
­System
A colorized frontal MRI scan, showing muscles of the lumbar, pelvic, and 
upper femoral regions. After reading this chapter, return to this photo and 
identify as many muscles as you can.
© Simon Fraser/Science Source
Module 6: Muscular System
	
201

T
he muscular system is one of the few we think about most 
often in our everyday lives. It is, after all, the basis of every 
move we make, every breath we take. Those of us who pursue 
sports or fitness training take pride in our improved muscular 
fitness and endurance. We pursue workout routines to target our 
“lats,” biceps, and “delts,” or dream of having those “washboard 
abs” so often advertised on TV. Whether you’re a college ­athlete, a 
marathon runner, a dancer, or you’re just running around the yard 
with your granddaughter, you’re likely to have felt the ­limitations 
of muscular fatigue. If we get out of shape, and as we grow old, 
we often regret the things we can no longer do as well as we used 
to—shortcomings that come down especially to our muscular, 
cardiovascular, and respiratory health. Even seemingly unrelated 
conditions ranging from diabetes to dementia can arise from or 
be worsened by lack of muscular exercise; muscular fitness has 
profound implications for modern patterns of disease. Many of 
you reading this book may aspire to careers in fitness training, 
coaching, or rehabilitation therapy, and we’re sure you’re al-
ready well aware of how central the muscular system will be to 
your ­profession.
In this chapter, we’ll survey the anatomy and function of the body’s 
major skeletal muscles. We’ll also examine how muscles work, right 
down to the cellular and molecular level, including the factors that 
underlie variations in strength, effects of exercise, and causes of fatigue. 
More briefly, we’ll also compare the properties of skeletal muscle with 
the cardiac muscle of the heart and the smooth muscle of our internal 
organs, which underlie all manner of processes from digestive contrac-
tions to childbirth.
7.1
 Muscular Tissue and Cells
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify diverse functions of muscular tissue;
b.	describe the structure of a skeletal muscle fiber and relate this to 
its function; and
c.	describe the nerve–muscle relationship in skeletal muscle.
202      PART 2  Support and Movement

Nucleus
Muscle ﬁber
Endomysium
Striations
There are three types of muscular tissue: skeletal, cardiac, and smooth, compared in 
table 4.11. The term muscular system refers only to the skeletal muscles, which are 
the primary focus of this chapter. However, we will begin with some characteristics 
that the three types have in common, and look more closely at their differences later 
in the chapter.
The Functions of Muscles
The functions of muscular tissue go well beyond the obvious:
∙	 Movement. This includes externally visible movements of the head, trunk, 
and limbs and less conspicuous actions such as breathing, propelling contents 
through the digestive tract, pumping blood, and the dilation and constriction 
of blood vessels to regulate blood pressure and flow. Muscular movements 
also play important roles in communication: speech, writing, gestures, and 
facial expressions.
∙	 Stability. It is also important that the muscles prevent unwanted move-
ment, as in maintaining posture and holding one bone still while another 
one moves.
∙	 Control of body openings and passages. Ring-shaped sphincter muscles 
around the eyelids and pupils control admission of light to the eye; others 
regulate waste elimination and control the movement of food, bile, and other 
materials through the body.
∙	 Heat generation. Body heat is necessary for enzymes to function and regulate 
one’s metabolism. The skeletal muscles produce up to 30% of our body heat at 
rest and up to 40 times as much during exercise.
∙	 Glycemic control. This means the regulation of blood glucose within nor-
mal limits. The skeletal muscles play a significant role in stabilizing blood 
sugar levels by absorbing a large share of it. In old age, in obesity, and when 
muscles become deconditioned and weakened, people suffer an increased 
risk of diabetes mellitus because of the decline in this glucose-buffering 
function.
Skeletal Muscle Fibers
Skeletal muscle may be defined as voluntary striated muscle 
that is usually attached to one or more bones. It is called 
­voluntary because it is usually subject to conscious con-
trol, and striated because it has alternating light and 
dark transverse bands, or ­striations (fig. 7.1), that 
reflect the overlapping arrangement of the internal 
proteins that enable it to contract. Skeletal mus-
cle cells are perhaps the most internally complex, 
tightly organized of all human cells. In order to 
understand muscle function, one must know how 
the organelles and contractile proteins of a muscle 
fiber are arranged.
Figure 7.1 Skeletal Muscle Fibers (×1,000).
© Ed Reschke
•	 Why are skeletal muscle cells 
called fibers, but cardiac and 
smooth muscle cells are 
not? 
 
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      203  

Structure of the Muscle Fiber
Skeletal muscle cells are called muscle fibers because of their exception-
ally long slender shape: typically about 100 µm (0.1 mm) in diameter and 
3 cm long, but sometimes up to 500 µm thick and 30 cm long. Each muscle 
fiber has multiple nuclei pressed against the inside of the plasma membrane, 
reserving the deeper part of the cell mainly for thick bundles of contractile 
protein (fig. 7.2).
These bundles, called myofibrils, number from several dozen to a thousand 
or more. Packed between them are numerous mitochondria, a network of smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum, deposits of the high-energy carbohydrate glycogen, and a 
red oxygen-binding pigment, myoglobin. 
The plasma membrane, called the sarcolemma,1 has tunnel-like infoldings 
called transverse (T) tubules that penetrate through the fiber and emerge on the 
other side. The function of a T tubule is to carry an electrical current from the sur-
face of the cell to the interior when the cell is stimulated.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum of a muscle fiber is called sarcoplasmic 
reticulum (SR). It forms a web around each myofibril, and alongside the T tubules 
Sarcoplasm
Sarcolemma
Openings into 
transverse tubules
Sarcoplasmic 
reticulum
Mitochondria
Myoﬁbrils
Myoﬁlaments
A band
I band
Z disc
Nucleus
Terminal cisterns
Transverse tubule
Muscle
ﬁber
Figure 7.2 Structure of a Skeletal Muscle 
­Fiber. This is a single cell containing 11 myofibrils 
(9 shown at the left end and 2 cut off at midfiber). 
A few myofilaments are shown projecting from the 
myofibril at the left. Their finer structure is shown in 
figure 7.3.
1sarco = flesh, muscle; lemma = husk
204      PART 2  Support and Movement

it exhibits dilated sacs called terminal cisterns. The SR is a reservoir for calcium 
ions; when the muscle fiber is stimulated, the SR releases a flood of calcium into the 
cytosol to activate the contraction process.
Myofilaments and Striations
Understanding muscle contraction requires a closer look at the myofibrils that pack 
the muscle fiber. Each of these is a bundle of parallel protein microfilaments called 
myofilaments (fig. 7.3). There are two main kinds of myofilaments.
Figure 7.3 Molecular Structure of Thick and 
Thin Filaments. (a) A single myosin molecule 
­consists of two intertwined polypeptides forming a 
filamentous tail and a double globular head. (b) A 
thick filament consists of 200 to 500 myosin mol-
ecules bundled together with the heads projecting 
outward in a helical array. (c) A thin filament consists 
of two intertwined chains of globular actin mole-
cules, smaller filamentous tropomyosin molecules, 
and a calcium-binding protein called troponin asso-
ciated with the tropomyosin. (d) A region of overlap 
between the thick and thin myofilaments.
(a)  Myosin molecule
(b)  Thick ﬁlament
(c)  Thin ﬁlament
(d)  Portion of a sarcomere showing the overlap 
      of thick and thin ﬁlaments
Tail
Thin
ﬁlament
Thick
ﬁlament
Troponin
Head
Actin
Tropomyosin
Myosin head
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      205  

	 1.	 Thick filaments are made of several hundred molecules of a protein called 
myosin. A myosin molecule is shaped like a golf club, with two polypeptides 
intertwined to form a shaftlike tail, and a double globular head projecting 
from it at an angle. A thick filament may be likened to a bundle of 200 to 500 
such “golf clubs,” with their heads directed outward in a helical array around 
the bundle.
	 2.	 Thin filaments, about half as wide as the thick filaments, are composed 
mainly of two intertwined strands of a protein called actin. Each actin is 
like a bead necklace—a string of globular subunits. A thin filament also 
has two proteins called tropomyosin and troponin that act together as a 
molecular “switch” that either allows or prohibits muscle contraction, as 
we shall see.
Myosin and actin are not unique to muscle; they occur in nearly all cells, 
where they function in motility, mitosis, and transport of intracellular materi-
als. In skeletal and cardiac muscle they are especially abundant, however, and 
are organized into a precise array that accounts for the striations of these two 
muscle types. Springy elastic filaments help to hold the myofilaments in proper 
alignment.
The highly regular pattern of myofilament overlap gives striated muscle 
an appearance of dark A bands alternating with lighter I bands (fig. 7.4). 
To help remember which band is which, think “dArk” and “lIght.” Each I 
band consists only of thin filaments. The I band is bisected by a thin dark 
Individual myoﬁbrils
1
2
3
4
5
Sarcomere
Sarcomere
I band
I band
A band
I band
I band
A band
M line
Thick ﬁlament
Thin ﬁlament
Elastic ﬁlament
(a)
(b)
Z disc
Nucleus
Z disc
Z disc
M line
Figure 7.4 Muscle Striations and ­Myofilament 
Overlap. (a) Five myofibrils of a single muscle fiber, 
showing the striations in the relaxed state (electron 
micrograph). (b) The overlapping pattern of thick and 
thin myofilaments that accounts for the ­striations 
seen in part (a). 
a: © Don W. Fawcett/Science Source
•	 Why are A bands darker than I bands in the 
photo?
206      PART 2  Support and Movement

(a)
(b)
line called the Z disc,2 a plaque of protein that anchors the thin filaments. 
The darker A bands are regions in which thick and thin filaments overlap, 
accounting for the denser appearance of these bands. The middle of an A 
band is a little lighter than the rest, however, because the thin filaments do 
not reach that far.
Each segment of a myofibril from one Z disc to the next is called a sarcomere3 
(SAR-co-meer). A muscle shortens because its sarcomeres shorten and pull the Z 
discs closer to each other. 
The Nerve–Muscle Relationship
Skeletal muscle cannot contract unless it is stimulated by a nerve. If its nerve con-
nections are severed or poisoned, a muscle is paralyzed. Thus, muscle contraction 
cannot be understood without first understanding the relationship between nerve 
and muscle cells.
The nerve cells that stimulate skeletal muscles, called motor neurons, 
are located in the brainstem and spinal cord. Their axons, called motor nerve 
fibers, lead to the muscles. At its distal end, each axon branches to multiple 
muscle fibers, but each muscle fiber receives only one nerve fiber (fig. 7.5). 
Each motor neuron stimulates all the muscle fibers of its group to contract 
at once, so one motor neuron and all muscle fibers supplied by it are called 
a motor unit. The muscle fibers of a given motor unit are dispersed through 
the muscle, not all concentrated in one place, so they contribute to a uniform 
contraction rather than producing an ineffective local twitch. Large motor neu-
rons supply a larger number of muscle fibers—and larger sized ones—than 
small motor neurons. Large motor neurons also require a stronger stimulus 
to excite them—and are involved in stronger muscle contractions—than small 
motor neurons.
The point where the end of a nerve fiber meets another cell is called a 
synapse (SIN-aps). When the second cell is a skeletal muscle fiber, the syn-
apse is also called a neuromuscular junction (NMJ) (fig. 7.6). Each branch 
of the nerve fiber ends in a bulbous swelling called an axon terminal, which 
is nestled in a depression on the muscle fiber. The two cells don’t actually 
touch each other but are separated by a tiny gap, the synaptic cleft. A protein 
basal lamina encloses the entire NMJ and isolates it from the surrounding 
tissue fluid.
The axon terminal contains membrane-bounded sacs called synaptic 
vesicles, which contain a signaling chemical called acetylcholine (ACh) 
(ASS-eh-till-CO-leen). ACh is one of many signaling chemicals called neu-
rotransmitters employed by the nervous system; others are introduced in sec-
tion 8.2. When the nerve fiber releases ACh, the ACh diffuses quickly across 
the synaptic cleft and binds to proteins called ACh receptors on the surface 
of the muscle fiber. This binding stimulates the muscle fiber to contract. 
Also found on the muscle fiber and in the synaptic cleft is an enzyme called 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) (ASS-eh-till-CO-lin-ESS-ter-ase). It quickly 
breaks down ACh to stop stimulation of the muscle and allow it to relax. 
Interference with ACh action can weaken or paralyze the muscles (see Clini-
cal Application 7.1).
Figure 7.5 Motor Units. (a) In the anterior horn 
of the spinal cord, some motor neurons (green) 
are small, relatively sensitive, and easily activated. 
­Others (violet) are large, less sensitive, and ­activated 
only when greater muscular strength is needed. 
(b) In the muscle, the muscle fibers of small motor 
units are relatively small (green). Large motor units 
have ­larger and more numerous muscle fibers 
(­violet). Note that the muscle fibers of any given 
­motor unit are ­distributed throughout the muscle 
and commingled with the fibers of other motor units 
(red), not clustered in one place.
2Z = Zwischenscheibe (German) = “between disc” 
3sarco = muscle; mere = part, segment
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      207  

100 μm
(c)
(b)
(a)
Motor nerve ﬁber
Motor nerve ﬁber
Myelin
Basal lamina
Axon 
terminal
Synaptic vesicles
(containing ACh)
Sarcolemma
Junctional folds
ACh receptor
Myoﬁlaments
Nucleus 
Synaptic cleft
Nucleus 
Sarcoplasm
Mitochondria
Figure 7.6 The Neuromuscular Junction. (a) Axon 
terminal where a motor nerve fiber synapses with a mus-
cle fiber. (b) Structure of the boxed area in (a). (c) Photo 
of neuromuscular junctions, with muscle fibers slightly 
teased apart. 
c: © Victor B. Eichler
208      PART 2  Support and Movement

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 Describe some functions of the muscular system 
other than external movements of the body.
2.	Explain, in terms of thick and thin myofilaments, why skeletal 
muscle appears striated under the microscope. Identify the 
bands of a sarcomere and which contractile proteins are in 
each band.
3.	What are the functions of synaptic vesicles, acetylcholine, 
and acetylcholinesterase?
Clinical Application 7.1
NEUROMUSCULAR TOXINS AND PARALYSIS
Some forms of muscle paralysis are caused by toxins that interfere with 
functions at the neuromuscular junction. Some pesticides, for example, 
contain cholinesterase inhibitors, which bind to AChE and prevent it from 
degrading ACh. As a result, ACh lingers in the synapse and overstimu-
lates the muscle, causing spastic paralysis—a state of continual contrac-
tion. This can suffocate a person if the laryngeal muscles contract spas-
modically and close the airway, or if the respiratory muscles cannot relax 
and allow free breathing. Tetanus (lockjaw) is a form of spastic paralysis 
caused by a bacterial toxin. The toxin acts in the spinal cord to cause 
overstimulation of the motor neurons, producing unwanted muscle con-
tractions.
Flaccid paralysis is a state in which the muscles are limp and cannot 
contract. Curare (cue-RAH-ree), a poison extracted from certain plants 
in South America, binds to the ACh receptors but fails to stimulate the 
muscle. ACh is prevented from acting, and muscles can’t contract. Some 
tribal people use blowgun darts dipped in curare to hunt animals. Medi-
cally, curare has been used to treat muscle spasms in some neurological 
disorders.
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      209  

7.2
 Physiology of Skeletal Muscle
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe how a nerve fiber stimulates a muscle fiber and initiates 
contraction;
b.	explain the mechanisms of contraction and relaxation;
c.	describe and explain twitch, summation, and other aspects of 
muscle behavior;
d.	contrast isometric and isotonic contraction;
e.	describe two ways in which muscle meets the energy demands 
of exercise;
f.	 discuss the factors that cause muscle fatigue and limit 
­endurance;
g.	distinguish between fast and slow types of muscle fibers; and
h.	identify some variables that determine muscular strength.
Muscle Excitation, Contraction, and Relaxation
Movement results from a series of events that begin at the neuromuscular junction 
and continue in the thick and thin filaments within the muscle fiber. We can view 
the cycle of muscle contraction and relaxation as occurring in stages: excitation, 
contraction, and relaxation.
Excitation
Excitation is the process of converting an electrical nerve signal to an electrical sig-
nal in the muscle fiber. Steps 1 to 3 below, numbered to match figure 7.7, constitute 
the excitation process.
	 1	 A nerve signal arrives at the synapse and stimulates synaptic vesicles to re-
lease acetylcholine (ACh) into the synaptic cleft.
	 2	 ACh binds to ACh receptors in the sarcolemma. Each receptor is a gated 
channel that opens in response to ACh. Driven by concentration and 
electrical gradients across the sarcolemma, sodium ions (Na+) quickly 
enter the muscle fiber and potassium ions (K+) exit through these open 
gates.
	 3	 These ion movements electrically excite the sarcolemma and initiate a wave 
of electrical changes called action potentials (discussed in more depth in 
chapter 8). Action potentials spread in all directions away from the neuro-
muscular junction—like ripples spreading out in a pond when you drop a 
stone into it—and pass down into the T tubules. 
The muscle fiber is now excited, but three other events must happen before it can 
start to contract.
Muscle contraction is possible because of rapid, cyclic interactions between the 
myosin and actin of the thick and thin filaments. In a relaxed muscle, regulatory pro-
teins block the myosin from binding to actin. Excitation initiates a chain of events 
that allows the myosin and actin to interact.
210      PART 2  Support and Movement

	 4	 Excitation of a T tubule opens calcium (Ca2+) channels in the adjacent sarco-
plasmic reticulum. Calcium escapes the sarcoplasmic reticulum and floods 
the cytosol of the muscle fiber.
	 5	 Ca2+ binds to the troponin molecules attached to the thin filaments.
	 6	 This induces the associated tropomyosin molecules to shift position, expos-
ing the myosin-binding active sites on the actin. 
Contraction
Contraction is the step in which the muscle fiber develops tension and may 
shorten. (Muscles often “contract,” or develop tension, without shortening, 
as we see later.) It was once thought that a muscle cell contracted because 
its thick or thin filaments became shorter. Now it is understood that these 
Figure 7.7 Excitation of a Muscle Fiber. See text for explana-
tion of numbered steps. 
 
1 
Synaptic knob
Nerve signal
ACh
ACh receptor
K+ out
Na+ in
Ca2+
out
Ca2+
Troponin
Tropomyosin
Thin ﬁlament
Actin
Active site
Sarcolemma
ACh
ACh receptors
Motor neuron
Muscle
excitation
Synaptic
vesicles
T tubule
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      211  

Tropomyosin
Formation of myosin–actin cross-bridge
Power stroke; sliding of thin 
ﬁlament over thick ﬁlament
Binding of new ATP; 
breaking of cross-bridge    
Hydrolysis of ATP to ADP + Pi;
activation and cocking of myosin head
ADP
ATP
Myosin
Cross-bridge:  
     Actin
     Myosin
ADP
Pi
Troponin
Pi
7
8
9
10
Figure 7.8 The Sliding Filament Mech-
anism of Contraction. This is a cycle of 
repetitive events that cause a thin filament 
to slide over a thick filament and generate 
tension in the muscle. See text for explana-
tion of numbered steps. 
 
­filaments do not shorten; they slide across each other (fig. 7.8). The mecha-
nism of contraction is therefore called the sliding filament model.
	 7	 Each myosin head binds an ATP molecule and hydrolyzes it into ADP and 
a phosphate (Pi) group. This causes the head to cock from a flexed position 
(like a bent elbow) to an extended, high-energy position.
	 8	 The cocked myosin head binds to an active site on the thin filament, like 
straightening your elbow to reach out and grasp a rope in your hand. The link 
between a myosin head and actin filament is called a cross-bridge.
212      PART 2  Support and Movement

	 9	 Myosin then releases the ADP and Pi and flexes into its original bent, low-
energy position, tugging the thin filament along with it (like bending your 
elbow and tugging on the rope). This is called the power stroke. The head 
remains bound to actin until it binds to a new ATP.
	 10	 Upon binding more ATP, the myosin head releases the actin. (Many other 
myosin heads retain their hold on the actin while some release it, so the actin 
doesn’t slip back to the starting point.) The head is now prepared to repeat the 
whole process—it will split the ATP, recock (the recovery stroke), attach to 
a new site farther down the thin filament, and produce another power stroke.
This cycle repeats at a rate of about five strokes per second, with each stroke con-
suming one ATP molecule. Hundreds of myosin heads “crawl” along each thin fila-
ment at once, each head taking tiny jerky “steps” but with the net effect being a smooth 
motion, much like the smooth crawling of a millipede resulting from the tiny steps 
taken by hundreds of legs in succession. As the thin filament is pulled along the thick 
filament, it pulls the Z disc along behind it. The cumulative effect is that all the sarco-
meres shorten. Through their linkage to the sarcolemma, they shorten the entire cell.
Figure 7.9 compares the appearance of sarcomeres in relaxed and contracted 
states. Note that in the contracted state, the sarcomere is shorter, but the thick and thin 
filaments are the same length as they are at rest. The sarcomere is shorter not because 
the filaments are shorter, but because the filaments overlap more extensively. 
Relaxation
When its work is done and the nerve stops stimulating it, a muscle fiber relaxes and 
returns to its resting length. This is achieved by the following steps (not illustrated):
	 11	 When nerve signals cease, the axon terminal stops releasing ACh.
	 12	 Acetylcholinesterase breaks down the ACh that is already in the synapse, so 
stimulation of the muscle fiber ceases.
	 13	 The sarcoplasmic reticulum reabsorbs Ca2+, taking it back into storage. This 
is done by active-transport pumps, which require ATP; therefore, ATP is 
required not only for muscle contraction but also for its relaxation.
	 14	 Deprived of Ca2+, the troponin–tropomyosin complex shifts back into the 
resting position shown in figure 7.7 (step 5), where it blocks myosin from 
binding to actin. The muscle fiber thus ceases to produce or maintain tension; 
it relaxes. 
The return of a muscle to its resting length can be achieved by two means. 
One is simply the action of gravity. Suppose, for example, you contract your biceps 
brachii to flex your elbow and raise your hand. When you relax the biceps, grav-
ity alone pulls your forearm downward and stretches the biceps back to its resting 
length. The other means of lengthening a muscle is the action of an antagonistic 
muscle operating at the same joint. Your triceps brachii on the posterior side of your 
arm is an antagonist of the biceps (see figure 7.15). When it contracts, it extends the 
elbow and stretches the biceps.
Muscles normally do not relax to their maximum lengths, however. A low level 
of stimulation from the nervous system keeps even relaxed muscles in a state of 
partial contraction called muscle tone (tonus). By keeping the muscles firm even at 
rest, muscle tone helps to stabilize the joints. It also ensures that the thick and thin 
filaments always overlap enough so that when the muscle is called into action, a suf-
ficient number of myosin heads can bind to actin and initiate contraction.
Apply What You Know
Chapter 2 noted that one of the most important properties of proteins is their ability 
to change shape (conformation) when other chemicals bind to them. Explain the 
relevance of this property to at least two proteins involved in muscle contraction.
(a) Relaxed sarcomere
(b) Fully contracted sarcomere
Figure 7.9 Relaxed and Contracted Sar-
comeres. (a) A relaxed sarcomere, with partially 
overlapping thick and thin filaments and wide I 
bands. This is the state typical of resting muscle 
tone. (b)  Fully contracted sarcomeres. Thick fila-
ments abut the Z discs, and the sarcomeres are not 
­capable of contracting any further.
•	 If you looked at an electron micrograph of 
muscle fibers in the state depicted in part (b), 
which band of the striations would be absent? 
Explain.
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      213  

Whole-Muscle Contraction
Now you know how an individual muscle cell shortens. Our next objective is to 
consider how this relates to the action of the muscle as a whole.
Muscle Twitch and Tetanus
The minimum contraction exhibited by a muscle is called a muscle twitch, a single 
cycle of contraction and relaxation (fig. 7.10a). A twitch is very brief, lasting as little 
as 7 milliseconds (ms) in the fastest muscles and no more than 100 ms (0.1 s) even 
in the slowest ones. It is too brief and too weak to do useful muscular work such 
as move a joint. Useful work depends on summation, or the addition of multiple 
twitches that occurs when multiple nervous stimuli arrive in rapid succession.
When stimuli arrive in quick enough succession, the muscle relaxes only par-
tially between twitches. Each new twitch “rides piggyback” on the previous one 
and generates higher tension (fig. 7.10b). This results in a state of smooth contrac-
tion called incomplete tetanus. The reason for the smoothness of overall muscle 
contraction despite the “flutter” in an individual motor unit is that motor units work 
in shifts; when one motor unit relaxes, another contracts and takes over so that the 
muscle doesn’t lose tension. Complete tetanus, a state of constant spasmodic tension 
with no relaxation at all (fig. 7.10c), is achieved only by artificial high-frequency 
stimulation in the laboratory. Such strong contraction can severely injure muscles, 
tendons, and other soft tissues and is usually prevented in the living body by a spinal 
negative feedback mechanism.
We can see, then, that variation in muscle tension can result from differences 
in the frequency of stimulation by a nerve fiber. Another factor in muscle tension is 
the number of motor units activated at once. If a gentle contraction is needed, as in 
lifting a teacup, the brain and spinal cord activate relatively few motor units in the 
muscle. For a stronger contraction, as in lifting a barbell, the nervous system acti-
vates a greater number of motor units, and activates larger ones (with more muscle 
fibers per motor neuron; see fig. 7.5).
Isometric and Isotonic Contraction
In muscle physiology, “contraction” doesn’t always mean the shortening of a 
­muscle—it may mean only that the muscle is producing tension while an external 
Clinical Application 7.2
RIGOR MORTIS
Rigor mortis4 is the hardening of the muscles and stiffening of the body that 
begins 3 to 4 hours after death. It occurs partly because the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum deteriorates upon death, releasing calcium into the cytosol. Also, 
calcium leaks into the cell from the extracellular fluid through the deterio-
rating sarcolemma. The calcium ions activate myosin–actin cross-bridging. 
Once bound to actin, myosin cannot release it without first binding an ATP 
molecule, and of course ATP is unavailable in a dead body. Thus, the thick 
and thin filaments remain rigidly cross-linked until the myofilaments begin to 
decay. Rigor mortis peaks about 12 hours after death and then diminishes over 
the next 48 to 60 hours.
4rigor = rigidity; mortis = of death
214      PART 2  Support and Movement

resistance causes it to stay the same length or even to become longer. Suppose you 
lift a heavy box of books from a table. When you first contract the muscles of your 
arms, you can feel the tension building in them even though the box is not yet mov-
ing. At this point, your muscles are contracting at a cellular level, but their tension 
is resisted by the weight of the load and the muscle produces no external move-
ment. This phase is called isometric5 contraction—contraction without a change 
in length. Once muscle tension rises enough to move the box of books, the muscle 
begins to shorten while maintaining constant tension. This phase is called isotonic6 
contraction. Isometric and isotonic contraction are both phases of normal muscular 
action. Isometric contraction is also important in muscles that stabilize joints and 
maintain posture.
Isotonic contraction is further divided into two forms: concentric and eccentric. 
In concentric contraction, a muscle shortens as it maintains tension—for example, 
when the biceps brachii contracts and flexes the elbow such as during biceps curls. 
In eccentric contraction, a muscle maintains tension as it lengthens, such as the 
biceps when you lower a weight to the floor but maintain enough control not to 
simply let it drop. When people suffer muscle injuries in weight lifting, it is usually 
during the eccentric phase, because the sarcomeres and connective tissues of the 
muscle are pulling in one direction while the weight is pulling the muscle in the 
opposite direction.
Muscle Metabolism
All muscle contraction depends on ATP; this is the only energy source that myosin can 
use, so no other molecule can serve in its place. The question of providing energy to 
muscles during exercise therefore comes down to alternative ways of providing ATP.
There are two mechanisms for generating ATP: anaerobic fermentation and 
aerobic respiration. Anaerobic fermentation is a pathway in which glucose is ulti-
mately converted to lactate. For each glucose consumed, this pathway produces 
a net yield of 2 ATP. Anaerobic fermentation has the advantage that it does not 
use oxygen. Therefore it is a way for a muscle to produce ATP during times when 
demand is high (in short bursts of exercise) but oxygen cannot be delivered fast 
enough to meet the needs of aerobic respiration. Its disadvantage is that the ATP 
yield is low. The lactate generated by anaerobic fermentation was long thought to be 
a significant factor in muscle fatigue, but recent research has cast doubt on this; the 
bloodstream washes away lactate as fast as it is produced and lactate level does not 
rise in an exercising muscle. Fatigue is due to other causes discussed later.
Figure 7.10 Stimulus Frequency and Muscle 
Tension. (a) Three complete muscle twitches pro-
duced at an unnaturally low stimulus frequency. 
(b) Summation of twitches, and progressively stron-
ger muscle contraction, that occur naturally in the 
body at normal stimulus frequencies. (c) Fusion of 
twitches (complete tetanus) seen at high stimulus 
frequency in the laboratory, but almost never in the 
living body.
5iso = same, uniform; metr = length 
6iso = same, uniform; ton = tension
Muscle twitches
Temporal summation
and incomplete tetanus
Complete (fused) tetanus
Stimuli
Stimuli
Stimuli
Muscle tension
(a) Low stimulus frequency
(b) Physiologicially normal stimulus frequency
(c) Unnaturally high stimulus frequency
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      215  

In the alternative pathway, aerobic respiration, an intermediate product of glu-
cose metabolism called pyruvate is oxidized in the mitochondria to carbon dioxide 
and water. In skeletal muscle, this method yields another 30 ATP molecules for each 
original glucose; thus it is far more efficient than anaerobic fermentation. Its disad-
vantage is that it requires oxygen, so aerobic respiration cannot function adequately 
during periods when exercise is so intense that the respiratory and cardiovascular 
system cannot keep pace with the needs of the muscular system.
Figure 7.11 shows how muscle shifts from one mode of ATP production to 
another over the course of an exercise. In intense but brief exercise such as a 100-
meter dash or a basketball play, muscle uses oxygen from its myoglobin to make 
ATP aerobically. As this ATP is consumed, it breaks down to ADP. The muscle 
fiber converts some of this ADP back to ATP by borrowing a phosphate group, 
either from a phosphate-storage molecule called creatine phosphate, or from other 
ADP molecules. This mechanism, called the phosphagen system, can supply enough 
ATP for about 6 seconds of sprinting or fast swimming, or about 1 minute of brisk 
walking.
When these sources of ATP are exhausted, the muscle gradually shifts to anaer-
obic fermentation (the glycogen–lactate system), which provides enough ATP for 
about 30 to 40 seconds of maximum activity, as in running completely around a 
baseball diamond. In time, a faster heartbeat and faster, deeper respiration catch 
up with the demands of the muscle, providing enough oxygen for it to shift back to 
aerobic respiration. Aerobic respiration usually takes over after about 40 seconds. 
In exercises lasting more than 10 minutes, such as bicycling or marathon running, 
more than 90% of the ATP is produced aerobically.
Fatigue and Endurance
Muscle fatigue is the progressive weakness that results from prolonged use of the 
muscles. This is what sets a limit, for example, on how many chin-ups or bench 
presses a person can perform. Writer’s cramp (not so much a cramp as tiring of 
the muscles) is another example. There are numerous causes of fatigue, including 
depletion of ATP and acetylcholine, increasingly uncontrolled leakage of calcium 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and accumulation of potassium in the extracellular 
fluid, which reduces the excitability of the muscle fiber.
Endurance, or tolerance of prolonged exercise, depends on several factors: a 
muscle’s supply of myoglobin and glycogen; its density of blood capillaries; the 
supply of organic nutrients such as fatty acids and amino acids; the number of mito-
chondria; one’s maximal rate of oxygen uptake (which depends on physical condi-
tioning); and simple willpower and other psychological factors.
Mode of ATP synthesis
Aerobic respiration
using oxygen from
myoglobin
Glycogen–
lactate
system
(anaerobic
fermentation)
Phosphagen
system
Duration of exercise
0
10 seconds
40 seconds
Aerobic
respiration
supported by
cardiopulmonary
function
EPOC
Figure 7.11 Modes of ATP Production 
During Exercise.
216      PART 2  Support and Movement

Recovery Period
When you have just completed a strenuous exercise such as a run, you don’t return 
immediately to your normal physiological state, but experience a recovery period 
in which you continue to breathe more heavily than usual (as well as exhibit an 
elevated heart rate, blood pressure, and so forth). The heavy breathing reflects the 
body’s need for extra oxygen, called excess postexercise oxygen consumption 
(EPOC) (also known by the older, popularized expression oxygen debt). EPOC is 
the difference between the resting rate of oxygen consumption and the elevated rate 
following an exercise. This oxygen serves to replenish the resting levels of ATP and 
creatine phosphate in the muscles; to oxidize and dispose of lactate; to meet the 
elevated overall metabolic demand of the body heated by exercise; and to rebuild 
oxygen levels in the muscle myoglobin, blood hemoglobin, and blood plasma.
Physiological Types of Muscle Fibers
Not all skeletal muscle fibers are metabolically alike or adapted to perform the same 
task. There are two primary fiber types: some that respond slowly but are relatively 
resistant to fatigue, and some that respond more quickly but also fatigue quickly. 
Most muscles are composed of a mixture of the two.
∙	 Slow-twitch fibers exhibit relatively long, slow twitches (up to 100 ms), so 
they aren’t well adapted for quick responses. On the other hand, they are well 
adapted for aerobic respiration and do not fatigue easily. Their aerobic ad-
aptations include abundant mitochondria, myoglobin, and blood capillaries. 
Myoglobin and blood capillaries give the tissue a deep red color, so muscles 
made predominantly of slow-twitch fibers are sometimes called red muscles. 
Examples include postural muscles of the back and a deep calf muscle called 
the soleus.
∙	 Fast-twitch fibers are well adapted for quick responses (twitches as fast as 
7.5 ms), but not for fatigue resistance. They are especially important in sports 
such as basketball that require stop-and-go activity and frequent changes of 
pace. They are rich in enzymes for anaerobic fermentation and for regenerat-
ing ATP from creatine phosphate. Their sarcoplasmic reticulum releases and 
reabsorbs Ca2+ quickly, which partially accounts for their quick, forceful con-
tractions. They have more glycogen but less myoglobin and fewer mitochon-
dria and blood capillaries than slow-twitch fibers, so they are relatively pale. 
Muscles composed predominantly of fast-twitch fibers are sometimes called 
white muscles. Examples include the biceps brachii of the arm, muscles of eye 
movement, and a superficial calf muscle called the gastrocnemius.
People with different types and levels of physical activity differ in the proportion 
of one fiber type to another even in the same muscle. For example, one study of male 
athletes found the quadriceps muscle of the thigh in marathon runners to be 82% 
slow-twitch and 18% fast-twitch fibers, but quite the opposite in sprinters and jump-
ers: 37% slow- and 63% fast-twitch. The ratio of fiber types seems to be genetically 
determined; one person might be a “born sprinter” and another a “born marathoner.” 
One who is born with a genetic predisposition for predominantly slow-twitch fibers 
in the powerful muscles of the thighs might become a world-class marathoner, but be 
unable to cross over to a competitive level of sprinting, and vice versa.
Sometimes two or more muscles act across the same joint and superficially 
seem to have the same function. For example, the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles 
both insert on the heel through the same calcaneal (Achilles) tendon, so they have 
the same action—to lift the heel and raise the body, as in walking, running, and 
jumping. But they’re not redundant. The gastrocnemius is a white muscle adapted 
for quick, powerful movements such as jumping, whereas the soleus is a red mus-
cle that does most of the work in endurance exercises such as running, skiing, and 
climbing.
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      217  

Muscular Strength and Conditioning
Muscular strength depends on a variety of anatomical and physiological factors. We 
have just seen that sustained or repetitive contraction can cause muscle fatigue, a 
gradual loss of strength; muscle strength therefore depends in part on fatigue resis-
tance. Strength is also proportional to the diameter of a muscle at its thickest point 
(such as the bulge at the middle of the biceps brachii), which is why body build-
ing increases strength. There are two types of exercise that improve muscle perfor-
mance.
Resistance exercise, such as weight lifting and chin-ups, is the contraction of 
muscles against a load that resists movement. A goal of weight lifting is to build 
muscle mass. Because muscle fibers are incapable of mitosis, the growth results not 
from an increase in the number of muscle cells but from an increase in the size of 
preexisting cells.
Endurance (aerobic) exercise, such as running and swimming, improves 
fatigue resistance. In slow-twitch fibers, especially, such activities increase glyco-
gen stores, numbers of mitochondria, and density of blood capillaries—all of which 
promote efficient production of ATP. Endurance exercise also increases the oxygen-
transport capacity of the blood and enhances the efficiency of the cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and nervous systems.
Resistance exercise doesn’t significantly improve fatigue resistance, and endur-
ance exercise doesn’t significantly increase muscular strength. Optimal performance 
comes from cross-training, which incorporates elements of both types.
Apply What You Know
Review hyperplasia and hypertrophy in section 4.6. To which of these processes 
would you attribute the growth of a weight lifter’s muscles? Explain.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4.	What is the role of calcium in muscle contraction? 
Where does it come from and what triggers its release from 
that source?
5.	What process makes the thin myofilaments “slide” over the 
thick ones during muscle contraction? What is the role of ATP 
in that process?
6.	Explain why high-frequency stimulation makes a muscle con-
tract with more tension than a single twitch produces.
7.	 Describe what roles isometric and isotonic contraction play 
when you lift a heavy object.
8.	What is the difference between anaerobic fermentation and 
aerobic respiration? Identify a physical activity that would 
depend mainly on each type of ATP production.
9.	Describe some tasks for which slow-twitch fibers are more 
effective than fast-twitch fibers, and vice versa.
10.	Identify the benefits and shortcomings of both resistance and 
endurance exercise.
218      PART 2  Support and Movement

7.3
 Cardiac and Smooth Muscle
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the special functional roles of cardiac and smooth 
muscle; and
b.	explain how the structure of these two forms of muscle accounts 
for their functional properties.
Until now we have been concerned with skeletal muscle. The other two types of 
muscular tissue are cardiac and smooth.
Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle (fig. 7.12) is limited to the heart, where its function is to pump 
blood. Knowing that, we can predict the properties that it must have: (1) It must 
contract with a regular rhythm; (2) the muscle cells of a given heart chamber must 
be well synchronized so the chamber can effectively eject blood; (3) each contrac-
tion must last long enough to expel blood from the chamber; (4) it must function 
in sleep and wakefulness, without fail and without need of conscious attention; and 
Figure 7.12 Cardiac Muscle. (a) Light ­micrograph 
(x400). (b) Structure of an individual ­cardiomyocyte. 
The portion in color is a single cell; adjacent cells 
are shown in gray. Intercalated discs connect cells 
­together end to end through electrical and mechanical 
­junctions. 
a: © Ed Reschke 
Mitochondria
Intercalated
discs
Glycogen
Nucleus
Striated
myoﬁbril
(b)
Striations
Nucleus
Intercalated discs
(a)
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      219  

Epithelium
Mucosa:
Muscular wall
of esophagus
(smooth muscle)
Smooth muscle
(a)
(b)
Nucleus
Myocyte
7‑auto = self
(5) it must be highly resistant to fatigue. These functional properties are keys to 
understanding how cardiac muscle differs structurally and physiologically from 
skeletal muscle.
Cardiac muscle is striated like skeletal muscle, but it is involuntary (it con-
tracts automatically, without requiring one’s conscious control and attention) and 
the heart is autorhythmic7 (it has a self-maintained rhythm of contraction). The 
rhythm is set by a pacemaker in the wall of the upper heart. Although the heart 
receives nerves from the brainstem and spinal cord, they only modify the rate and 
force of the heartbeat; they do not initiate each beat.
Cardiac muscle cells are not long fibers like those of skeletal muscle, but are 
shorter and appear roughly rectangular in tissue sections. They are slightly forked 
or notched at the ends, and each fork links one cell to the next. The linkages, called 
intercalated discs (in-TUR-kuh-LAY-ted) appear in stained tissue sections as dark 
lines thicker than the striations. An intercalated disc has electrical gap junctions that 
allow each cell to directly stimulate its neighbors, and has desmosomes and other 
mechanical junctions that keep the cells from pulling apart when the heart contracts.
Cardiac muscle doesn’t exhibit quick twitches like skeletal muscle; rather, its 
contractions are prolonged for as much as a quarter of a second (250 ms). This 
means that each heart chamber sustains its contraction long enough to effectively 
expel blood.
Cardiac muscle uses aerobic respiration almost exclusively. It is very rich in 
myoglobin and glycogen, and it has especially large mitochondria that fill about 
25% of the cell, compared to smaller mitochondria occupying about 2% of a skeletal 
muscle fiber. Because it makes little use of anaerobic fermentation, cardiac muscle 
is very resistant to fatigue. The skeletal muscles in your hand would quickly tire if 
you squeezed every 0.8 s, but the heart contracts at this rate, and often faster, for a 
lifetime without fatigue.
Chapter 13 explores cardiac muscle in greater depth.
Smooth Muscle
Smooth muscle (fig. 7.13) is involuntary, like 
­cardiac, but it lacks striations; the latter quality 
is the reason it is called smooth. Smooth 
Figure 7.13 Smooth Muscle. (a) Light micro-
graph (×400). (b) Layered arrangement of smooth 
muscle in a cross section of the esophagus. Many 
hollow organs have alternating layers of smooth 
muscle like this. 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
•	 For what purpose does the esophagus require 
such a muscular wall?
220      PART 2  Support and Movement

muscle cells are much shorter than skeletal muscle fibers; have only one nucleus 
located near the middle of the cell; and are fusiform in shape—thick in the middle 
and tapered at the ends. Smooth muscle occurs in the walls of the blood vessels and 
many body-cavity organs (viscera)—such as the respiratory, urinary, digestive, and 
reproductive organs—where it is also called visceral muscle. A slightly different 
form of smooth muscle occurs in the iris of the eye and is associated with the hair 
follicles of the skin.
Some functions of smooth muscle, and its special properties, can be inferred by 
reflecting on organs such as the stomach, urinary bladder, and uterus, whose walls 
are composed primarily of this tissue. Such organs relax and stretch a great deal as 
they fill with food, urine, or a growing fetus. On the other hand, when such organs 
are empty, they don’t collapse into flaccid bags. Their smooth muscle maintains a 
state of contraction called smooth muscle tone, which keeps the walls of the organs 
firm.
Special structural characteristics of smooth muscle cells underlie their 
distinctive functional properties. Thick and thin myofilaments are present, but 
they do not overlap each other with the regularity that produces the striations of 
skeletal and cardiac muscle. Sarcomeres and Z discs are absent. The thin fila-
ments slide over thick filaments during contraction, but instead of pulling on Z 
discs and shortening a sarcomere, they pull on dense plaques of protein scattered 
throughout the cytoplasm and on the inner surface of the sarcolemma. In doing 
so, they cause the myocyte to contract with a twisting motion, like wringing out 
a wet towel.
Smooth muscle contracts in response to nervous stimulation as well as such 
stimuli as stretch (as in a full bladder), hormones (for example, during labor contrac-
tions), and blood levels of CO2, O2, and pH. As in the other muscle types, contrac-
tion is triggered by calcium ions (Ca2+). However, smooth muscle contains very 
little sarcoplasmic reticulum and obtains its calcium from the extracellular fluid by 
way of calcium channels in the sarcolemma. During relaxation, calcium is pumped 
back out of the cell by active transport.
Smooth muscle contracts slowly, with tension peaking about 0.5 second after 
stimulation and then declining over a period of 1 to 2 seconds. Its myosin doesn’t 
always detach from actin immediately; it can remain attached for prolonged periods 
without consuming more ATP. Smooth muscle therefore maintains tension while 
consuming only 1/10 to 1/300 as much ATP as skeletal muscle does; this makes it 
very resistant to fatigue.
Unlike skeletal and cardiac muscle, smooth muscle is fully capable of mito-
sis. Thus, an organ such as the pregnant uterus can grow by adding more muscle 
cells, and injured smooth muscle regenerates much better than the other two 
muscle types.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread 
the preceding section if there are too many you 
don’t know.
 11.	Explain how both cardiac muscle and smooth muscle 
are able to resist fatigue better than skeletal muscle does. 
12.	What are the functions of intercalated discs?
 13.	Explain how smooth muscle can maintain tension while 
­consuming less energy (ATP) than skeletal muscle does. 
Why is this property important to the functions of blood 
­vessels and viscera?
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      221  

7.4
 Anatomy of the Muscular System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the relationship of muscle fibers to connective tissues 
in a muscle;
b.	distinguish between the attachments and belly of a muscle;
c.	explain how muscles act in groups to govern the movements of 
a joint;
d.	interpret some Latin terms commonly used in the names of 
muscles; and
e.	identify or describe the locations and functions of several major 
skeletal muscles of the body.
General Aspects of Muscle Anatomy
The rest of this chapter is concerned with the anatomy of skeletal muscles. Before 
we examine individual muscles, we will survey general features of gross anatomy 
that muscles have in common, the functional relationships of different muscles to 
each other, and principles of naming skeletal muscles.
Connective Tissues and Muscle Attachments
A skeletal muscle is composed of both muscular tissue and fibrous connective tis-
sue (fig. 7.14). Each muscle fiber is enclosed in a thin sleeve of loose connective 
tissue called the endomysium8 (EN-doe-MIZ-ee-um). This tissue slightly separates 
muscle fibers and allows room for blood capillaries and nerve fibers to reach every 
muscle fiber. As an insulator, it also prevents electrical activity in one muscle fiber 
from directly stimulating adjacent fibers.
Muscle fibers are arranged in bundles called fascicles9 (FASS-ih-culs) (the grain 
visible in a cut of meat such as roast beef). Each fascicle is surrounded and set off from 
neighboring ones by a connective tissue sheath called the perimysium,10 thicker than 
the endomysium. The muscle as a whole is surrounded by still another connective tis-
sue layer, the epimysium.11 Adjacent muscles are separated from each other and from 
the skin by fibrous sheets called fasciae (FASH-ee-ee) (singular, fascia).
Some fasciae separate groups of functionally related muscles into muscle 
­compartments. A muscle compartment also contains the nerves and blood vessels 
that supply the muscle group. The tight binding of muscles by these fasciae contrib-
utes to a clinical problem called compartment syndrome, a common athletic injury 
(see Perspectives on Health).
8endo = within; mys = muscle 
9fasc = bundle; icle = little 
10peri = around; mys = muscle 
11epi = upon, above; mys = muscle
222      PART 2  Support and Movement

Skeletal muscle
Perimysium
Endomysium
(a)
Muscle fascicle
Perimysium
Epimysium
Nerve
Blood vessels
Muscle ﬁber
Tendon
Fascia
Muscle ﬁber
Muscle fascicle
(b)
(c)
Endomysium
Perimysium
Muscle ﬁber, c.s.
Fascicle, c.s.
Fascicle, l.s.
Muscle ﬁber, l.s.
Tibia
Subcutaneous fat
Fibula
Intermuscular septa
Artery, veins, and 
nerve
Interosseous 
membrane
Fasciae
Anterior compartment
Lateral compartment
Posterior compartment, deep layer
Posterior compartment, superﬁcial layer
Key 
Posterior
Anterior
Medial
Lateral
Figure 7.14 Muscle–Connective Tissue Relationships. (a) The muscle–
bone attachment. (b) Muscle fascicles in the tongue. Vertical fascicles passing 
between the superior and inferior surfaces of the tongue are seen alternating 
with cross-sectioned horizontal fascicles that pass from the tip to the rear of the 
tongue. A fibrous perimysium can be seen between the fascicles, and endomy-
sium can be seen between the muscle fibers within each fascicle (c.s. = cross 
section; l.s. = longitudinal section). (c) Muscle compartments in the leg. Fibrous 
fasciae separate muscle groups into tight-fitting compartments along with their 
blood vessels and nerves.
b: © Victor Eroschenko 
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      223  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
T
he muscular system suffers fewer disorders than any other 
organ system, but muscle soreness, cramps, and injuries are 
common, and some people suffer muscular dystrophy and other 
serious muscle diseases.
M u s c l e  P a i n
T
he most common form of muscle pain is delayed onset muscle 
soreness (DOMS)—the pain and stiffness commonly felt from 
hours to a day after strenuous muscular work. DOMS is associated 
with microtrauma to the muscles, including disrupted plasma mem-
branes and sarcomere structure. Cramps are painful muscle spasms 
triggered by heavy exercise, extreme cold, dehydration, electrolyte 
loss, low blood glucose, or inadequate blood flow to the muscles.
M u s c l e  I n j u r i e s
E
very year, thousands of athletes from the high school to pro-
fessional levels sustain some type of injury to their muscles, as 
do the increasing numbers of people who have taken up running, 
weight lifting, and other forms of physical conditioning. Long, hard 
running and repetitive kicking (as in soccer and football), for example, 
sometimes result in pulled hamstrings—strained hamstring muscles 
(see fig. 7.21) or tears in the hamstring tendons, often with a hema-
toma (blood clot) in the fascia around the muscles. Shinsplints are 
various injuries producing pain in the crural region, such as inflam-
mation of the tibialis posterior tendon (tendinitis) or periosteum of 
the tibia. Shinsplints commonly result from unaccustomed jogging or 
other vigorous activity of the legs after a period of relative inactivity.
The rotator cuff (see figs. 6.43 and 7.21) is a site of frequent 
injuries among baseball pitchers, bowlers, swimmers, weight 
­lifters, and those who play racquet sports, among other people. 
Injuries here are usually caused by strenuous circumduction of the 
shoulder, shoulder dislocation, or persistent use of the arm in a 
position above horizontal. Such actions can tear the tendons of 
any of the rotator cuff muscles, most often the tendon of the supra-
spinatus. Recurrent inflammation of a rotator cuff tendon can cause 
the tendon to degenerate and eventually rupture in response to 
moderate stress. The injury is not only painful but also makes the 
shoulder joint unstable and subject to dislocation.
Compartment syndrome is a disorder in which overuse, mus-
cle strain, or trauma damages the blood vessels in a muscle com-
partment. Since the fasciae cannot stretch, a blood clot (­contusion) 
or tissue fluid in the compartment compresses the muscles, 
nerves, and vessels. The reduced blood flow can lead to nerve 
destruction within 2 to 4 hours and death of muscular tissue if the 
condition remains untreated for 6 hours or more. While nerves can 
regenerate if blood flow is restored, muscle death is irreversible. 
Depending on its severity, compartment syndrome may be treated 
with immobilization of the limb, rest, or an incision to drain fluid and 
relieve compartment pressure.
M u s c u l a r  D y s t r o p h y
D
uchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), unlike the foregoing 
conditions, is hereditary. It involves progressive replace-
ment of muscular tissue with adipose and fibrous tissue. Most 
cases occur in males and are diagnosed between the ages of 2 
and 10 years. When a child with DMD begins to walk, he may fall 
frequently and have difficulty standing up again. DMD tends to af-
fect the hips first, then the lower limbs, and then progresses to the 
abdominal and spinal muscles. Patients are usually confined to a 
wheelchair by early adolescence and rarely live past the age of 20. 
Genetic screening can determine whether a prospective parent is 
a DMD carrier, and can serve as a basis for determining the risk of 
having a child with DMD.
Most skeletal muscles attach to bones by way of fibrous cords or sheets called 
tendons. Collagen fibers of the tendon continue into the periosteum and bone 
matrix. You can easily palpate tendons at the heel and wrist to feel their texture. In 
some cases, the tendon is a broad sheet called an aponeurosis12 (AP-oh-new-RO-
sis). This term originally referred to the tendon located beneath the scalp, but now it 
also refers to similar tendons associated with certain abdominal, lumbar, hand, and 
foot muscles (see fig. 7.19a).
12apo = upon, above; neuro = nerve
224      PART 2  Support and Movement

Most muscles attach to a different bone at each end, so either the muscle 
or its tendon spans at least one joint. The thick middle region of a muscle 
between its attachments is called the belly of the muscle (fig. 7.15). When 
a muscle contracts, it moves one bone relative to the other. In older litera-
ture, the stationery end of the muscle was called the origin and the moving 
end was called the insertion. Authorities have lately abandoned this terminol-
ogy, however, because the end that moves may differ from one joint action to 
another. For example, the quadriceps femoris arises mainly on the femur and 
connects at its distal end to the tibia just below the knee. If you kick a soccer 
ball, this muscle moves the tibia more than the femur, so the femur would be 
considered its origin and the tibia its insertion. But when you stand up from 
a chair, the tibia remains stationary and the femur moves, so by the foregoing 
principle, we would now have to regard the tibia as the origin and the femur 
as the insertion. 
Coordinated Action of Muscle Groups
The movement produced by a muscle, or its prevention of an unwanted move-
ment, is called its action. Skeletal muscles seldom act alone; instead, they 
function in groups whose combined actions produce the coordinated motion of 
a joint (fig. 7.15). ­Muscles can be classified into four categories according to 
their actions, but it must be stressed that a particular muscle can act in a certain 
way during one joint action and in a different way during other actions of the 
same joint.
	 1.	 The prime mover (agonist) is the muscle that produces most of the force 
during a particular joint action. In flexing the elbow, for example, the prime 
mover is the brachialis, which lies on the anterior side of the humerus deep 
to the biceps brachii.
	 2.	 A synergist13 (SIN-ur-jist) is a muscle that aids the prime mover. The bi-
ceps brachii, for example, works as a synergist in elbow flexion. It is not 
13syn = together; erg = work
Figure 7.15 Synergistic and Antagonistic Mu- 
scle Pairs. The biceps brachii and brachialis mus-
cles are synergists in elbow flexion. The triceps bra-
chii is an antagonist of those two muscles and is the 
prime mover in elbow extension.
•	 Suppose you threw a dart at a dart board. 
Which of these muscles would be the prime 
mover in that action, and which would act as a 
brake or antagonist?
Scapula
Bellies
Radius
Distal attachment
Humerus
Ulna
Distal
attachment
Proximal
attachments
Proximal
attachments
Triceps brachii
Extensors:
Long head 
Lateral head
Flexors:
Biceps brachii
Brachialis
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      225  

as strong as the brachialis. The actions of a prime mover and its synergist 
are not necessarily identical and redundant. A synergist may stabilize 
a joint and restrict unwanted movements, or modify the direction of a 
movement so that the action of the prime mover is more coordinated and 
specific.
	 3.	 An antagonist14 is a muscle that opposes the prime mover. The brachi-
alis and triceps brachii, for example, represent an antagonistic pair of 
muscles that act on opposite sides of the elbow. The brachialis flexes the 
elbow and the triceps extends it. Moreover, when either of these muscles 
contracts, the other one exerts a braking action that moderates the joint 
movement and makes it smoother and better coordinated. For example, if 
you extend your arm to reach out and pick up a cup of tea, your triceps acts 
as the prime mover of elbow extension and your brachialis and biceps act 
as antagonists to slow the extension and stop it at the appropriate point. 
Which member of the group acts as the agonist depends on the motion 
under consideration. In flexion of the elbow, the brachialis is the prime 
mover and the triceps is the antagonist; when the elbow is extended, their 
roles are reversed.
	 4.	 A fixator is a muscle that restricts a bone from moving. To fix a bone 
means to hold it steady, allowing another muscle attached to it to pull 
on something else. For example, if no fixators were involved, contrac-
tion of the biceps brachii would tend not only to flex the elbow but 
also to pull the scapula ­forward. There are fixators (the rhomboids), 
­however, that attach the scapula to the vertebral column and hold it 
firmly in place so that the force of the biceps acts almost entirely on the 
elbow joint.
How Muscles Are Named
The remainder of this chapter is mostly a descriptive inventory of major skel-
etal muscles. Long muscle names such as flexor carpi radialis brevis may seem 
intimidating at first, but they are really more of a help than an obstacle to under-
standing if you gain a little familiarity with the words most commonly used in 
naming muscles. This name means “a short (brevis) flexor of the wrist (carpi) 
that lies alongside the radius (radialis).” Muscles are typically named for such 
characteristics as their action, location, shape, size, orientation, and number of 
heads. Footnotes throughout the following pages will help give you insight into 
the muscle names.
With the growing popularity of weight training, many people know some 
of the skeletal muscles by slang terms—the “glutes,” “abs,” and so forth. 
Table 7.1 relates these common terms to the formal anatomical names of the 
muscles.
In the following pages, we will examine about 55 of the most prominent 
muscles (fig. 7.16). We begin with those of the axial region—the head, neck, 
abdomen, and back. The general location and everyday actions of these mus-
cles will be described first. Table 7.2 then summarizes the muscles with more 
specific information on their attachments and actions. Throughout this series 
of illustrations, muscles discussed in the text are labeled in boldface; a few 
others not discussed are labeled for context and for reference in comparing to 
other books.
Table 7.1  Slang Terms for Major Skeletal  
Muscles
Slang Term
Anatomical Term
Abs
Abdominal obliques, rectus 
abdominis, transverse abdominal
Calf muscles
Gastrocnemius, soleus
Delts
Deltoid
Glutes
Gluteus maximus, medius, and 
minimus
Hamstrings
Biceps femoris, semimembrano-
sus, semitendinosus
Lats
Latissimus dorsi
Pecs
Pectoralis major
Quads
Quadriceps femoris
Six-pack
Rectus abdominis
14ant = against; agonist = competitor
226      PART 2  Support and Movement

Frontalis
Orbicularis oculi
Masseter
Orbicularis oris 
Trapezius
External abdominal
oblique
Pronator quadratus
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Adductor longus
Rectus abdominis
Serratus anterior
Sternocleidomastoid 
Deltoid
Pectoralis major
Biceps brachii
Brachioradialis
Sartorius
Rectus femoris
Fibularis longus
Tibialis anterior
Zygomaticus major
Vastus lateralis
Gracilis
Vastus intermedius
Adductors
Supinator
Flexor digitorum
profundus
Transverse abdominal
Brachialis
Coracobrachialis
Flexor carpi radialis
(a)  Anterior view
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Pectoralis minor
Internal abdominal
oblique
Superﬁcial        Deep
Figure 7.16 The Muscular System. 
Each figure shows superficial muscles 
on the anatomical right and deeper 
muscles on the left. 
227

Semispinalis capitis
Levator scapulae
Rhomboids
Infraspinatus
Erector spinae
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Serratus anterior
Supraspinatus
Splenius capitis
Gluteus minimus
Lateral rotators
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
External abdominal
oblique
Iliotibial tract
Teres minor
Triceps brachii
Gluteus maximus
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Calcaneal tendon
(b)  Posterior view
Sternocleidomastoid 
Infraspinatus
Fibularis longus
Flexor digitorum longus
Flexor hallucis longus
Tibialis posterior
Teres major
Adductor 
magnus
Iliotibial tract
Biceps femoris
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
Gluteus medius
Extensor carpi ulnaris
Extensor digitorum
Deep       Superﬁcial
Gracilis
External abdominal oblique
Figure 7.16 (Continued)
228	

Muscles of the Face
One of the most striking contrasts between a human face and that of a rat, horse, 
or dog, for example, is the variety and subtlety of human facial expression. This is 
made possible by a complex array of small muscles that insert in the dermis and 
tense the skin when they contract. These muscles produce effects as diverse as a 
smile, a scowl, a frown, and a wink. They add subtle shades of meaning to our spo-
ken words and are enormously important in nonverbal communication.
Frontalis (frun-TAY-lis) (fig. 7.17a). The frontalis is a muscle of the forehead 
that extends from a tendon beneath the scalp to the skin beneath the eyebrows. It 
expressively elevates the eyebrows and wrinkles the skin of the forehead.
Orbicularis oculi15 (or-BIC-you-LERR-is OC-you-lye) (fig. 7.17a). This is a cir-
cular muscle (sphincter) located in and beyond the eyelid. Arising largely from the lac-
rimal bone and adjacent regions, it inserts in both eyelids and serves to blink and close 
the eyes. Blinking promotes the flow of tears and their drainage into the nasal cavity.
Orbicularis oris16 (or-BIC-you-LERR-is OR-is) (fig. 7.17a). This is an array 
of small interlacing muscles located in the lips, encircling the mouth. It closes the 
lips (but not the jaw) and, with harder contraction, protrudes them as in kissing. It 
is important in speech.
Zygomaticus17 (ZY-go-MAT-ih-cus) (fig. 7.17a). Several muscles converge on 
the lips and make the mouth the most expressive part of the face. The zygomaticus 
major and minor arise on the zygomatic bone and end on the orbicularis oris at the cor-
ner of the mouth. They draw the corner of the mouth laterally and upward as in smiling 
and laughing. Other muscles that elevate the upper lip include the levator anguli oris 
at the corners of the mouth and the levator labii superioris along the middle of the lip.
Depressor anguli oris18 (de-PRESS-ur ANG-you-lye OR-is) (fig. 7.17a). This 
muscle extends from the mandible to the corner of the mouth. It draws the corner 
of the mouth laterally and downward in opening the mouth and in sad or frowning 
expressions.
Buccinator19 (BUCK-sin-AY-tur) (fig. 7.17a). This muscle constitutes the fleshy 
mass of the cheek. It arises from the mandible and maxilla and ends deep in the 
mucous membranes of the cheeks and lips. It has multiple functions in airflow, drink-
ing, and chewing. It is used in drinking through a straw, nursing by infants, blowing 
out air or spitting out liquid, playing a wind instrument, helping to control airflow in 
speech, and pushing and retaining food between the teeth during chewing. When one 
closes the mouth, the buccinator retracts the cheek to protect it from being bitten.
Muscles of Chewing
There are four paired muscles of mastication: the temporalis, masseter, and medial and 
lateral pterygoids. Collectively, they have four actions on the mandible: elevation, to 
bite; protraction, a forward movement of the mandible to align the incisors for biting; 
retraction, to draw the mandible posteriorly and align the molars for chewing; and lat-
eral and medial excursion, left–right movements that grind food between the molars.
Temporalis20 (TEM-po-RAY-liss) (fig. 7.17a). This is a broad fan-shaped 
muscle on the side of the cranium. It originates on faint ridges along the side of the 
frontal, parietal, and occipital bones. It converges toward the zygomatic arch, passes 
behind (medial to) it, and ends on the coronoid process of the mandible. Its main 
action is to elevate and retract the mandible.
15orb = circle; ocul = eye 
16orb = circle; oris = of the mouth 
17refers to the zygomatic arch 
18depressor = that which lowers; angul = corner, angle 
19bucc = cheek 
20temporalis = of the temporal region of the head
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      229  

Masseter21 (ma-SEE-tur) (fig. 7.17a). The masseter is shorter and superficial 
to the temporalis, arising from the zygomatic arch and inserting laterally on the 
angle of the mandible. It is a thick muscle easily palpated at the rear of your cheek. It 
is a synergist of the temporalis in elevating the mandible, but it also produces some 
degree of protraction and excursion.
Pterygoids22 (TERR-ih-goyds) (fig. 7.17b). The lateral and medial ptery-
goid muscles arise from the pterygoid plates of the sphenoid bone on the inferior 
Figure 7.17 Muscles of Facial Expression 
and Chewing. (a) Right lateral view of the head. 
(b) A view into the skull from behind, showing the 
relationship of the pterygoid muscles to the sphe-
noid bone and mandible. 
•	 Why are the pterygoids better able than the 
temporalis to produce the side-to-side action 
of grinding food between the molars?
Temporalis
Frontalis (cut)
Orbicularis oculi
Orbicularis oris
Sternocleidomastoid
Masseter
Zygomatic arch
Levator labii superioris
Zygomaticus minor
Zygomaticus major
Depressor anguli oris
Buccinator
Levator scapulae
(a) Lateral view
(b) Posterior view
Medial pterygoid muscle
Pterygoid plates of sphenoid bone
Interior of oral cavity
Lateral pterygoid muscle
21masset = chew 
22pteryg = wing; oid = shaped
230      PART 2  Support and Movement

­surface of the cranium. They pass obliquely to the inner (medial) surface of the 
mandible. They elevate and protract the mandible and move it from side to side 
for grinding food.
Muscles of Head and Neck Movement
Muscles that move the head arise from the vertebral column, thoracic cage, and pec-
toral girdle and insert on the cranial bones. The principal flexors of the neck are the 
sternocleidomastoids, which converge like a V toward the sternum. The principal 
extensors are the trapezius, splenius capitis, and semispinalis capitis, located on the 
rear of the neck.
Sternocleidomastoid23 (STIR-no-CLY-do-MAST-oyd) (figs. 7.16a, 7.17a). 
This is the prime mover of neck flexion. It originates on the sternum and medial 
half of the clavicle and ends on the mastoid process behind the ear. It is a thick, 
cordlike muscle often visible on the side of the neck, especially when one turns 
the head to one side and tips the chin up. It rotates the head to the left or right or 
tilts it upward and toward the opposite side, as in looking over one’s shoulder, 
depending on what other muscles do at the same time. When both sternocleido-
mastoids contract at once, the neck flexes forward, for example, when you look 
down to eat or read.
Trapezius (tra-PEE-zee-us) (fig. 7.16b). This is a vast triangular muscle 
of the neck and upper back; together, the right and left trapezius muscles 
form a trapezoidal shape. The trapezius has a broad origin extending from 
the occipital protuberance—a median bump at the rear of the skull—to ver-
tebra T12. The muscle converges toward the shoulder, where it terminates 
on the spine and acromion of the scapula and the lateral end of the clavicle. 
Either trapezius working alone flexes the neck to one side. When they contract 
together, the trapezius muscles extend the neck, as in looking straight upward. 
The trapezius also has actions on the scapula and arm described later, under 
limb muscles.
Muscles of the Trunk 
 
Here we consider muscles of the abdominal wall as well as back muscles that act 
on the vertebral column. The trunk muscles also include muscles of the pelvic floor 
and muscles of respiration—the intercostal muscles between the ribs and the dia-
phragm between the thoracic and abdominal cavities, which are described in chap-
ter 15. Some prominent muscles seen on the trunk, such as the pectoralis major of 
the mammary region, act on the arm and are therefore considered later as appen-
dicular muscles.
Muscles of the Abdomen 
 
Four pairs of sheetlike muscles reinforce the anterior and lateral abdominal walls. 
They support the intestines and other viscera against the pull of gravity; stabilize the 
vertebral column during heavy lifting; and as abdominal compressors, aid in expel-
ling organ contents during respiration, urination, defecation, vomiting, and child-
birth. They are the rectus abdominis, external and internal abdominal obliques, and 
transverse abdominal muscle.
Unlike the thoracic cavity, the abdominal cavity lacks a protective bony enclo-
sure. However, the fascicles of these three muscle layers run in different directions 
23sterno = sternum; cleido = clavicle; mastoid = mastoid process of skull
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      231  

(horizontally, vertically, and obliquely), lending strength to the abdominal wall 
much like a sheet of plywood, in which wood fibers run in different directions from 
layer to layer. The tendons of the abdominal muscles are aponeuroses. At its inferior 
margin, the aponeurosis of the external oblique forms a strong, cordlike inguinal 
ligament.
Rectus24 abdominis (REC-tus ab-DOM-ih-nis) (fig. 7.16a). This is a 
median muscular strap extending vertically from the pubis to the sternum and 
lower ribs. It flexes the waist, as in bending forward or doing sit-ups; stabi-
lizes the pelvic region during walking; and compresses the abdominal viscera. 
It is separated into four segments by fibrous tendinous intersections that give 
the abdomen a segmented appearance in well-muscled individuals. The rectus 
abdominis is enclosed in a fibrous sleeve called the rectus sheath, and the 
right and left rectus muscles are separated by a median fibrous strip called the 
linea alba.25
Abdominal obliques (fig. 7.16a). The external abdominal oblique is the 
most superficial muscle of the lateral abdominal wall. Its fascicles arise from 
the lower eight ribs, run anteriorly and downward along the lateral abdomen, 
and end on the pubic bone and ilium. Deep to it is the internal abdominal 
oblique. Its fascicles arise from the ilium and from inguinal and lumbar con-
nective tissues and run anteriorly and upward to terminate mainly on the lower 
ribs and their cartilages. These muscles maintain posture; flex and rotate the 
vertebral column, as in twisting at the waist; support the viscera; aid in deep 
breathing and loud vocalizations such as singing and public speaking; and com-
press the abdominal viscera.
Transverse abdominal (fig. 7.16a). This is the deepest of the abdominal 
group. It crosses the abdomen horizontally, like the cummerbund of a tuxedo, and 
acts primarily as an abdominal compressor. It arises largely from the same places as 
the internal abdominal oblique and ends on the abdominal midline from the xiphoid 
process above to the pubis below.
Muscles of the Back 
The most superficial muscles of the back are the trapezius of the upper back and 
latissimus dorsi of the lower back (see fig. 7.16b). These act on the arm and are 
therefore discussed later under the appendicular musculature. The strongest of the 
deeper back muscles is the following.
Erector spinae (eh-RECK-tur SPY-nee) (fig. 7.16b). This is a multipart 
muscle group with cervical, thoracic, and lumbar portions and three parallel, 
vertical columns on each side of the spine. It has complex, extensive attachments 
to the ribs, vertebrae, and iliac crest. It maintains posture, straightens the spine 
after one bends at the waist, and is employed in arching the back; thus, as the 
name implies, it is important in standing and sitting erect. Unilateral contraction 
flexes the waist laterally, and its superior (cervical) portion contributes to rota-
tion of the head.
Table 7.2 summarizes the axial muscles and provides more detail as to 
their attachments and actions. In this table and the next, we use the term muscle 
attachments. However, the first bulleted attachment note for each muscle is the 
one historically called the origin, and the second bullet point for each is the 
insertion. Bear in mind the shortcomings of those terms explained earlier in 
this section.
24rect = straight 
25linea = line; alb = white
232      PART 2  Support and Movement

Table 7.2  Axial Muscles
Name
Attachments
Principal Actions
Facial Muscles
Buccinator (fig. 7.17a)
•  Lateral aspect of maxilla and mandible
•  Orbicularis oris muscle; submucosa of cheek and 
lips
Compresses cheek; pushes food between teeth; 
­creates suction; expels air or liquid from mouth; 
retracts cheek when mouth is closing so it is not 
­bitten
Depressor anguli oris (fig. 7.17a)
•  Mandible
•  Corner of mouth
Draws corner of mouth laterally and downward
Frontalis (fig. 7.17a)
•  Subcutaneous tissue of scalp
•  Subcutaneous tissue of eyebrows
Raises eyebrows; wrinkles forehead
Orbicularis oculi (fig. 7.17a)
•  Lacrimal bone; adjacent regions of frontal bone and 
maxilla; median angle of eyelid
•  Upper and lower eyelids; skin adjacent to orbit
Closes eye; promotes flow of tears
Orbicularis oris (fig. 7.17a)
•  Connective tissue near angle of lips
•  Mucosa of lips
Closes lips; protrudes lips as in kissing; aids in speech
Zygomaticus major and minor  
(fig. 7.17a)
•  Zygomatic bone
•  Superolateral corner of mouth
Draw corner of mouth laterally and upward, as in 
­smiling
Muscles of Chewing
Masseter (fig. 7.17a)
•  Zygomatic arch
•  Lateral surface of mandibular ramus and angle
Elevates and protracts mandible in biting; aids in 
­mandibular excursion (grinding of food)
Pterygoids (fig. 7.17b)
•  Pterygoid plates of sphenoid bone; palatine bone; 
maxilla
•  Medial surface of mandible near angle and 
­mandibular condyle
Protract mandible in biting and produce mandibular 
excursion in chewing
Temporalis (fig. 7.17a)
•  Lateral surface of occipital, temporal, and frontal 
bones
•  Mandible at coronoid process and anterior border 
of ramus
Elevates and retracts mandible; aids in excursion
Muscles of Head–Neck Movement
Sternocleidomastoid (figs. 7.16a, 7.17a)
•  Clavicle and superior margin of sternum
•  Mastoid process of skull
Unilateral contraction rotates head left or right and 
directs gaze over opposite shoulder; bilateral 
­contraction tilts head downward
Trapezius (fig. 7.16b)
•  External occipital protuberance of skull; ligament 
of nuchal region; spinous processes of vertebrae 
C7–T12
•  Clavicle; acromion and spine of scapula
Flexes neck to one side; extends neck (as in looking 
upward). See other functions in table 7.3.
Muscles of the Abdomen
Abdominal obliques  
(external and internal)  
(fig. 7.16a)
•  Ribs 5–12; iliac crest; inguinal and lumbar 
­connective tissues
•  Ribs 10–12; abdominal midline from xiphoid 
­process to pubis
Flexes abdomen in sitting up; rotates trunk at waist; 
compresses abdomen
Rectus abdominis (fig. 7.16a)
•  Pubis
•  Xiphoid process; costal cartilages of lower ribs
Flexes waist in sitting up; stabilizes pelvis in walking; 
compresses abdomen
Transverse abdominal (fig. 7.16a)
•  Iliac crest; costal cartilages; inguinal and lumbar 
connective tissues
•  Abdominal midline from xiphoid process to pubis
Compresses abdomen
Muscles of the Back
Erector spinae (fig. 7.16b)
•  Extensive attachments to ribs, vertebrae, sacrum, 
iliac crest
•  Vertebrae and ribs
Extends vertebral column as in arching back; laterally 
flexes vertebral column
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      233  

Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limb
The rest of this chapter concerns muscles that act on the limbs and limb girdles—
that is, the appendicular skeleton. We begin with muscles that originate on the axial 
skeleton and act on the scapula. Table 7.3 summarizes attachments and actions of 
the appendicular muscles.
Pectoralis minor (PECK-toe-RAY-lis) (fig. 7.16a). This is a deep muscle of 
the mammary region. It arises from ribs 3 through 5 and converges on the cora-
coid process of the scapula. It draws the scapula laterally and forward, protracting 
the shoulder as in reaching out for a door handle. Acting with other muscles, it 
depresses the shoulder, as in reaching down to pick up a suitcase.
Serratus anterior (serr-AY-tus) (fig. 7.16a). This muscle originates on all or 
nearly all of the ribs, wraps around the chest between the rib cage and scapula, and 
ends on the medial border of the scapula. It holds the scapula against the rib cage, 
protracts it, and is the prime mover in forward thrusting, throwing, and pushing; it 
is nicknamed the “boxer’s muscle” for these actions. It also elevates the shoulder, as 
in lifting a suitcase.
Trapezius (tra-PEE-zee-us) (fig. 7.16b). The trapezius was discussed earlier 
for its actions on the head, but it also has important actions on the scapula. Its action 
depends on whether its superior, middle, or inferior portions contract and whether 
it acts alone or with other muscles. It can either elevate or depress the shoulder; it 
retracts the scapula when one draws back the shoulders, as in pulling on a rope; and 
it can stabilize the scapula and shoulder during arm movements. Normal depression 
of the scapula occurs mainly by gravitational pull, but the trapezius and serratus 
anterior can cause faster, more forcible depression, as in swimming, hammering, 
and rowing a boat.
Levator scapulae (leh-VAY-tur SCAP-you-lee) (fig. 7.16b, 7.18a). The levator 
scapulae extends from vertebrae C1 through C4 to the superior angle and medial 
border of the scapula. It works with the superior portion of the trapezius to elevate 
the scapula, for example when you shrug your shoulders, lift a suitcase, or carry a 
Clavicle
Deltoid
Sternum
Pectoralis major
Coracobrachialis
Triceps brachii:
Lateral head
(a)
(b)
Long head
Medial head
Biceps brachii
Brachialis
Brachioradialis
Levator scapulae
Sternocleidomastoid
Supraspinatus
Spine of scapula
Greater tubercle
of humerus
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Teres major
Triceps brachii:
Lateral head
Long head
Latissimus dorsi
Humerus
Figure 7.18 Muscles of the Pectoral, Scapular, 
and Brachial Regions. (a) Anterior view of super-
ficial pectoral and brachial muscles. (b) Posterior 
view of muscles that act on the shoulder and elbow 
joints. (c) Anterior view of scapular and brachial mus-
cles, with rib cage removed to see facing surface of 
scapula behind it. (d) Left lateral view of rotator cuff 
muscles in relation to scapula. The rotator cuff itself 
consists of the tendons of these muscles, and is not 
shown here; some of the tendons are illustrated in 
figure 6.43). 
234      PART 2  Support and Movement

heavy weight on your shoulder. Depending on the action of other muscles, it can 
also flex the neck laterally, retract the scapula and brace the shoulder, or rotate the 
scapula to lower the apex of the shoulder.
Rhomboids (ROM-boyds) (see fig. 7.16b). The rhomboids extend from the 
lower cervical and upper thoracic vertebrae to the medial border of the scapula. 
They retract and elevate the scapula by drawing it toward the spine and, when the 
biceps brachii contracts, the rhomboids fix the scapula so that the biceps flexes the 
elbow. Otherwise the biceps would tend to pull the scapula forward.
Muscles Acting on the Humerus
Nine muscles cross the shoulder joint and insert on the humerus. The first two 
of these, the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi, are considered axial muscles 
because they arise mainly on the axial skeleton. They bear the primary responsibil-
ity for attaching the arm to the trunk. The axilla (armpit) is the depression between 
these two muscles.
Pectoralis major (PECK-toe-RAY-lis) (fig. 7.18a). This is the thick, superfi-
cial, fleshy muscle of the mammary region. It extends mainly from the clavicle and 
sternum to the upper humerus. It adducts the humerus and rotates it medially; flexes 
the shoulder as in reaching out to hug someone; and aids in climbing, pushing, and 
throwing.
Latissimus dorsi26 (la-TISS-ih-mus DOR-sye) (fig. 7.18b). This is a broad 
muscle of the back that extends from vertebrae and fascia of the waist and lower 
back to the humerus in the region of the axilla (armpit). It extends the shoulder as in 
reaching behind you to clasp your hands behind your back; thus, it is an antagonist 
of the pectoralis major. It pulls the body upward in climbing, and produces strong 
downward strokes of the arm as in hammering or swimming; it is sometimes nick-
named the “swimmer’s muscle.”
26latissimus = broadest; dorsi = of the back
(c)
(d)
Acromion 
Scapula
Clavicle
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Subscapularis
Coracoid 
process
Glenoid cavity
Supraspinatus
Rotator cuﬀ (SITS) 
muscles:
Anterior
Posterior
Brachialis
Subscapularis
Coracobrachialis
Pronator teres
Supinator
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      235  

The rest of these are called scapular muscles because they arise from the scap-
ula. The first four provide the tendons that form the rotator cuff of the shoulder (fig. 
7.18d). They are nicknamed the “SITS muscles” after the first letters of their for-
mal names—the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis. 
The subscapularis fills most of the subscapular fossa on the anterior surface of the 
scapula. The other three lie on the posterior surface. The tendons of these muscles 
merge with the joint capsule of the shoulder as they pass en route to the humerus. 
They end on the proximal end of the humerus, forming a partial sleeve around it. 
The rotator cuff reinforces the joint capsule and holds the head of the humerus in the 
glenoid cavity. The rotator cuff, especially the tendon of the supraspinatus, is eas-
ily damaged by strenuous circumduction, as in bowling and baseball pitching (see 
Perspectives on Health earlier in this section).
Supraspinatus (SOO-pra-spy-NAY-tus) (fig. 7.18b). This muscle occupies the 
supraspinous fossa above the scapular spine on the posterior side of the scapula. It 
abducts the humerus and resists downward slippage of the humerus when one is 
carrying weight.
Infraspinatus (IN-fra-spy-NAY-tus) (fig. 7.18b). This muscle occupies most of 
the infraspinous fossa below the scapular spine. It extends and laterally rotates the 
humerus and prevents the humeral head from slipping upward out of the glenoid cavity.
Teres minor (TARE-eez) (fig. 7.18b). This muscle lies on the posterior side 
of the scapula near its inferior border, between the infraspinatus and teres major. It 
adducts and laterally rotates the humerus, and prevents it from slipping out of the 
glenoid cavity when the arm is abducted.
Subscapularis (SUB-SCAP-you-LARE-is) fig. 7.18c). This muscle lies on the 
anterior side of the scapula, filling the subscapular fossa. It medially rotates the 
humerus and otherwise acts similarly to the teres minor.
The following two scapular muscles do not contribute to the rotator cuff but are 
also important in movements of the arm at the shoulder.
Deltoid (DEL-toyd) (fig. 7.18a). This is the thick muscle that caps the shoul-
der; it is a commonly used site for intramuscular drug injections. It is named for its 
triangular shape (after the Greek delta, Δ), having a broad superior base attached 
to the clavicle and upper scapula and an inferior apex converging on a tuberosity of 
the upper lateral humerus. The deltoid acts like three different muscles, contribut-
ing greatly to the shoulder mobility that characterizes humans and other primates 
in contrast to other mammals. Its anterior portion flexes the shoulder, its posterior 
portion extends it, and its lateral portion abducts it. Abduction by the deltoid is 
antagonized by the combined action of the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi.
Teres major (TARE-eez) (fig. 7.18b). The teres major is located at the inferior 
border of the scapula on its posterior side. It extends from the scapula to the shaft of 
the humerus. It medially rotates the humerus and draws it backward, as in the arm-
swinging movement that accompanies walking.
Muscles Acting on the Forearm
The elbow and forearm are capable of four motions: flexion, extension, pronation, 
and supination. Flexion is achieved by the biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachiora-
dialis; extension by the triceps brachii; pronation by the pronator teres and prona-
tor quadratus; and supination by the supinator and biceps brachii.
Biceps brachii27 (BY-seps BRAY-kee-eye) (figs. 7.15, 7.18a). This muscle is 
the bulge on the anterior side of the arm, superficial to the brachialis. It has two 
heads that arise from tendons on the lateral angle of the scapula. Distally, the muscle 
converges near the elbow to a single tendon that ends on the radial tuberosity and 
fascia of the forearm. Despite its conspicuousness and interest to body builders, it is 
27bi = two; ceps = head; brachi = arm. Note that biceps is singular; there is no such word as 
bicep.
236      PART 2  Support and Movement

less powerful than the brachialis and acts as a synergist in flexing the elbow, not the 
prime mover. It also contributes to supination of the forearm.
Brachialis (BRAY-kee-AL-is) (figs. 7.15, 7.18c). This is a deep muscle lying 
along the anterior surface of the lower half of the humerus. It extends from mid-
humerus to the superior end of the ulna and is the prime mover of elbow flexion.
Brachioradialis (BRAY-kee-oh-RAY-dee-AL-is) (fig. 7.18a). This muscle 
flexes the elbow although it is located in the forearm. It is the thick muscular mass 
on the radial (lateral) side of the forearm, near the elbow; it extends from the distal 
end of the humerus to the distal end of the radius. It is much less powerful than the 
biceps and brachialis.
Triceps brachii (TRY-seps BRAY-kee-eye) (figs. 7.15, 7.18b). This is a three-
headed muscle on the posterior side of the humerus. It extends from the scapula and 
humerus to the olecranon of the ulna, and is the prime mover of elbow extension.
Pronators (figs. 7.18c, 7.19b). Pronation of the forearm is achieved by two 
muscles: The pronator teres (PRO-nay-tur TARE-eez), near the elbow, runs 
obliquely from the lower humerus and upper ulna to the middle of the radius. The 
pronator quadratus (kwa-DRAY-tus), a more squarish muscle, connects the ante-
rior surfaces of the radius and ulna just above the wrist. 
Supinator (SOO-pih-NAY-tur) (figs. 7.16a, 7.18c). Supination of the forearm 
is achieved by the biceps brachii, as noted earlier, and the supinator muscle slightly 
distal to the elbow. The supinator extends from the humerus and ulna near the elbow 
to the upper radius.
Muscles Acting on the Wrist and Hand
The hand carries out more subtle and sophisticated movements than any other part of 
the body; the wrist and hand are therefore acted upon by at least 15 muscles in the fore-
arm and 18 muscles in the hand itself. Relatively few of them can be ­considered here.
The bellies of the forearm muscles form its fleshy roundness. Their actions are 
mainly flexion and extension. Flexors are on the anterior side. Their tendons pass 
through the wrist and end mainly on carpal and metacarpal bones and the phalanges. 
Most of these tendons pass under a transverse ligament that crosses the wrist like a 
bracelet, the flexor retinaculum28 (fig. 7.19a). One exception is the palmaris longus 
muscle, which is relatively weak and even absent from some people; its tendon 
passes over the retinaculum. The extensor muscles are on the posterior side of the 
forearm, and their tendons pass under a similar extensor retinaculum on that side 
of the wrist (fig. 7.16b). Although the forearm muscles are numerous and complex, 
most of their names suggest their actions, and from their actions, their approximate 
locations in the forearm can generally be deduced.
Following are three important flexors of the wrist and fingers. All three arise 
primarily from a single shared tendon on the medial epicondyle of the humerus. 
These are especially important to the strength of your grip.
Flexor carpi radialis (FLEX-ur CAR-pye RAY-dee-AL-is) (fig. 7.19a). This 
is a superficial muscle on the radial (lateral) side of the forearm, bordered later-
ally by the brachioradialis and medially by (in most people) the palmaris longus. 
It inserts on metacarpals II and III and flexes the wrist anteriorly and laterally 
(toward the thumb).
Flexor carpi ulnaris (FLEX-ur CAR-pye ul-NAIR-is) (fig. 7.19a). This is a 
superficial muscle on the ulnar (medial) side of the forearm. It inserts on some of 
the wrist bones and metacarpal V, and also flexes the wrist anteriorly and medially 
(toward the little finger).
Flexor digitorum superficialis (FLEX-ur DIDJ-ih-TORE-um SOO-per-
FISH-ee-AY-lis) (fig. 7.19b). This muscle lies deep to the previous two. It has four 
distal tendons leading to the middle phalanges of fingers II through V. Depending 
28retinac = retainer, bracelet; cul = little
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      237  

on the action of other muscles, it flexes the fingers as in making a fist, or flexes just 
the wrist. Beneath it, the flexor digitorum profundus (fig. 7.16a) performs a similar 
action but it attaches to the distal phalanges of the same four fingers and is therefore 
the only muscle that can independently flex the distal segments of those fingers.
A frequent site of discomfort and disability is the carpal tunnel, a tight space 
between the carpal bones and flexor retinaculum. The flexor tendons passing 
through the tunnel are enclosed in tubular bursae called tendon sheaths that enable 
them to slide back and forth quite easily, although this region is very subject to 
injury (see Clinical Application 7.3).
Clinical Application 7.3
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME
Prolonged, repetitive motion of the wrist and fingers can cause tissues in the 
carpal tunnel to become inflamed, swollen, or fibrotic. Since the carpal tun-
nel cannot expand, swelling compresses the median nerve of the wrist, which 
passes through the tunnel with the flexor tendons. This pressure causes tin-
gling and muscular weakness in the palm and lateral side of the hand and pain 
that may spread to the arm and shoulder. This condition, called carpal tunnel 
syndrome, is common among pianists, meat cutters, and others who spend 
long hours making repetitive wrist motions. It is treated with aspirin and other 
anti-inflammatory drugs, immobilization of the wrist, and sometimes surgical 
removal of part or all of the flexor retinaculum to relieve pressure on the nerve.
(a) Superﬁcial ﬂexors
Biceps brachii
Brachialis
Pronator teres
Brachioradialis
Flexor carpi radialis
Palmaris longus
Flexor digitorum
superﬁcialis
Extensor carpi radialis
longus and brevis
Triceps brachii
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Palmar 
aponeurosis
Flexor 
retinaculum
Anterior view
Figure 7.19 Muscles of the Forearm. (a) Ante-
rior view of superficial flexors. (b) Anterior view of 
deeper flexors and pronators. (c) Posterior view of 
superficial extensors. 
238      PART 2  Support and Movement

The extensors on the posterior side of the forearm share a single tendon arising 
from the humerus. We will consider only the four most prominent ones.
Extensor digitorum (ex-TEN-sur DIDJ-ih-TORE-um) (fig. 7.19c). This 
broad, superficial extensor on the midline of the forearm has four distal tendons 
leading to the phalanges of fingers II through V. Its tendons are easily seen 
and palpated on the back of the hand when the fingers are extended and the 
wrist is hyperextended. It extends the wrist and abducts the fingers (spreads 
them apart). The little finger and the index finger also have their own extensors, 
respectively called the extensor digiti minimi and extensor indicis, and there 
are several muscles for thumb movement alone. Loss of the thumb is the most 
disabling of all hand injuries.
Extensor carpi ulnaris (ex-TEN-sur CAR-pye ul-NARE-is) (fig. 7.19c). This 
muscle lies medial to the extensor digitorum (on the ulnar side) and attaches distally 
to the base of metacarpal V. It extends the wrist and flexes it medially, and it can 
hold the wrist straight when the fist is clenched or the hand grips an object.
Extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis (ex-TEN-sur CAR-pye RAY-dee-
AY-lis LAWN-gus and BREV-is) (fig. 7.19c). These muscles lie side by side, lateral 
to the extensor digitorum, and insert on metacarpal bones II and III. Both of them 
extend the wrist and flex it laterally.
Apply What You Know
Andre is a renowned symphony pianist. Explain why his career would result in 
more than average strength in his extensor digitorum and flexor digitorum pro-
fundus muscles.
(b) Intermediate ﬂexor
Flexor
digitorum 
superﬁcialis  
Flexor digitorum 
superﬁcialis tendons  
Flexor digitorum
profundus tendons
Pronator teres
Pronator
quadratus
Extensor carpi
ulnaris
Extensor carpi 
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Extensor digitorum
Brachioradialis
Extensor retinaculum
Triceps brachii
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
Extensor digiti
minimi
Tendons of extensor 
digitorum
(c) Superﬁcial extensors
Posterior view
Anterior view
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      239  

Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and 
Lower Limb
The largest and strongest muscles in the body are 
found in the lower limb. Unlike those of the upper 
limb, they are adapted less for precision than for the 
strength needed to stand, maintain balance, walk, and 
run. Several of them cross and act upon two or more 
joints, such as the hip and knee.
Muscles Acting on the Hip and Femur
There are four principal groups of muscles that 
act on the femur, producing movement at the hip 
joint: anterior muscles that flex the hip; gluteal 
muscles of the buttocks, which extend the hip 
and abduct the thigh; additional abductors on the 
lateral side of the femur; and adductors on the 
medial side. 
Iliopsoas (IL-ee-oh-SO-us) (fig. 7.20). The 
­iliacus (ih-LY-uh-cus) is a broad muscle that fills 
the iliac fossa of the pelvis, and the psoas major 
(SO-us) arises mainly from the lumbar vertebrae; 
they are the principal anterior hip muscles. They 
converge on a single tendon that terminates anteri-
orly on the femur, so they have the same action and 
are often referred to collectively as the iliopsoas. 
Together, these muscles flex the hip as in stair 
climbing and in the forward swing of the leg when 
walking; they flex the trunk if the femur is fixed, 
as in leaning forward in a chair or sitting up in bed; 
and they balance the trunk during sitting.
Gluteal muscles (figs. 7.21). The gluteus 
maximus, medius, and minimus are the muscles of 
the buttocks. They arise from the lateral surfaces 
of the hip bone and sacrum and lead to the greater 
trochanter and upper, lateral femur. The gluteus 
maximus is the largest. It is a hip extensor that 
produces the backswing of the leg in walking; it 
helps you stand straight after bending forward at 
the waist; and it provides most of the lift when you 
climb stairs and most of the thrust in pushing on a 
bicycle pedal. The gluteus medius and minimus 
abduct the femur, for example when moving the feet 
apart to stand in a spread-legged position. They are 
also important in walking; when one leg is lifted 
from the ground, these muscles on the other side 
of the body flex the waist to shift the body weight 
toward the leg still on the ground, and thus prevent 
you from falling over.
Thigh adductors (fig. 7.20). The medial side 
of the thigh has several adductor muscles—the 
adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, pectineus, and ­gracilis. 
Collectively, these muscles begin on the pubis and ischium of the hip bone 
and end along the posterior to medial surfaces of the shaft of the femur, except 
that the gracilis ends medially on the tibia just below the knee. In ­addition 
to adducting the thigh, most of these muscles aid in flexing the hip, and 
Figure 7.20 Anterior Muscles of the Hip and 
Thigh. 
•	 What two joints are acted upon by the rectus 
femoris?
Iliac crest
Iliopsoas:
Iliacus
Psoas major
Anterior superior 
iliac spine
Iliotibial band
Sartorius
Quadriceps femoris:
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Quadriceps 
femoris tendon
Patella
Patellar ligament
Adductor magnus
Gracilis
Adductor longus
Pectineus
Thigh adductors:
L5
Adductor brevis
Tensor fasciae
latae
240      PART 2  Support and Movement

Gluteus minimus
Ischial tuberosity
Adductor magnus
Gracilis
Vastus lateralis
Medial head
Gastrocnemius:
Lateral head
Sacrum 
Gluteus medius 
Gluteus maximus
Iliotibial tract
Popliteal fossa
Hamstring group:
Biceps femoris
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
Gracilis
Coccyx
Iliac crest
Lateral rotators
Figure 7.21 Gluteal, Hamstring, and Lateral 
Rotator Muscles (Posterior View). Each figure 
shows superficial muscles on the anatomical right 
and deeper muscles on the left. 
  
the ­gracilis aids in flexing the knee. You can imagine the importance of the 
adductors in riding a horse.
Thigh rotators and abductors (fig. 7.21). The lateral side of the hip has 
a group of short muscles collectively called the lateral rotators. They arise 
from the hip bone and end, along with the gluteus medius and minimus, on or 
near the greater trochanter of the femur. They rotate the femur laterally, as in 
standing with the toes pointed outward, and like those two gluteal muscles, 
they aid in shifting the body weight and maintaining balance when one is 
walking. Some of them aid the gluteus medius and minimus in abducting the 
thigh.
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      241  

Muscles Acting on the Knee
The fleshiness of the thigh is formed mostly by the four-part quadriceps femoris 
on the anterior side and three muscles, the hamstring group, on the posterior side. 
Also crossing the thigh anteriorly is the sartorius.
Quadriceps femoris (QUAD-rih-seps FEM-oh-ris) (fig. 7.20). This large 
muscle consists of four heads that arise on the ilium and the shaft of the 
femur and converge on a single tendon at the knee. The heads are the rectus 
femoris in the middle; flanked by the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis 
on the lateral and medial sides; and the vastus intermedius, which is located 
between these and deep to the rectus femoris (therefore not illustrated). The 
­quadriceps (patellar) tendon extends from the distal end of this muscle 
group to arch over the knee and enclose the patella; it continues beyond the 
patella as the patellar ligament, ending on the anterior surface of the tibia 
just below the knee. This change in terminology reflects the definition of a 
tendon as connecting muscle to bone (quadriceps to patella) and a ligament as 
connecting bone to bone (patella to tibia). The quadriceps extends the knee, as 
in kicking a football or standing up from a chair, and the rectus femoris helps 
to flex the hip.
Sartorius29 (sar-TORE-ee-us) (fig. 7.20). This straplike muscle is the lon-
gest in the body. It extends from the lateral side of the hip to the medial side 
of the tibia, crossing diagonally over the quadriceps femoris. Nicknamed the 
“tailor’s muscle,” it is employed in crossing the legs and aids in flexing the hip 
and knee.
Hamstrings (fig. 7.21). Hamstrings is a colloquial name for the three major 
muscles on the posterior side of the thigh—the biceps femoris (BY-seps FEM-
oh-ris), semimembranosus (SEM-ee-MEM-bra-NO-sus), and semitendinosus 
(SEM-ee-TEN-dih-NO-sus). They arise mainly from the ischial tuberosity of the 
hip bone and lead to the upper tibia and fibula. The pit at the rear of the knee 
(popliteal fossa) is bordered laterally by the biceps tendon and medially by the 
tendons of the other two. The hamstrings flex the knee, and aided by the gluteus 
maximus, they extend the hip during walking and running. Hamstring injuries 
are common among sprinters, soccer players, and other athletes who rely on 
quick acceleration (see Perspectives on Health earlier in this section). The ham-
strings are important in supporting the body weight. Chronic low-back pain can 
be relieved by exercises to stretch those tendons and strengthen the hamstring 
and abdominal muscles.
Muscles Acting on the Foot
The fleshy mass of the leg proper (below the knee) is formed by a group of crural 
muscles, which act on the ankle and foot.
Anterior group (fig. 7.22a). Two principal muscles on the anterior side 
of the leg are the extensor digitorum longus (ex-TEN-sur DIDJ-ih-TORE-um 
LAWN-gus) and tibialis anterior (TIB-ee-AY-lis). They arise from the anterior 
tibia, fibula, and interosseous membrane between those bones. Their distal ten-
dons pass under two fibrous bands called extensor retinacula on the anterior side 
of the ankle and terminate on the phalanges of toes II to V, metatarsal bone I, and 
the medial cuneiform bone of the tarsal group. These muscles dorsiflex the foot, 
and the first of them extends all of the toes except the great toe, which has its own 
extensor. Dorsiflexion elevates the toes and prevents them from scuffing on the 
ground during walking.
29sartor = tailor
242      PART 2  Support and Movement

Tibialis
anterior
Fibularis
longus
Extensor
digitorum 
longus
Fibularis
brevis
Patella
Patellar
ligament
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Tibia
Extensor 
retinacula
(a)
Gastrocnemius:
Heads of 
gastrocnemius
(cut)
Calcaneal tendon
Calcaneus
Medial head 
Lateral head 
Semitendinosus
tendon 
Semimembranosus
tendon 
Biceps femoris
tendon 
Flexor
digitorum
longus
Soleus
Fibularis
brevis
Fibularis
longus
Gastrocnemius
(cut)
Tendon of
gastrocnemius
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.22 Muscles of the Leg. (a) Superficial 
anterior group. (b) Superficial posterior muscles. 
(c) Gastrocnemius removed to show the deeper 
posterior soleus muscle. 
 
Posterior group (fig. 7.22b, c). The major posterior (calf) muscles are the 
superficial gastrocnemius30 (GAS-trock-NEE-me-us), whose two heads form 
the prominent bulge of the upper calf, and the deeper soleus.31 The gastroc-
nemius arises from the lower femur and knee joint and the soleus from the 
upper fibula and middle tibia. Both of these muscles converge on the same 
tendon, the calcaneal (Achilles) tendon, which inserts on the calcaneus (heel 
bone). Together these muscles are sometimes called the triceps surae32 (TRY-
seps SOOR-ee). They plantar flex the foot, as in standing on tiptoe or jumping. 
Plantar flexion also provides lift and forward thrust in walking. Also aiding in 
plantar flexion are the tibialis posterior, the flexor digitorum longus, and two 
fibularis (FIB-you-LARE-is) muscles (fibularis brevis and fibularis longus) 
(fig. 7.16b).
Like the hand, the foot has 19 small muscles that support the foot arches and 
flex, extend, abduct, and adduct the toes.
Table 7.3 summarizes the appendicular muscles and provides more detailed 
information on their bone attachments.
30gastro = belly; cnem = leg 
31named for its resemblance to a flatfish, the sole 
32tri = three; ceps = head; sura = calf of leg
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      243  

Table 7.3  Appendicular Muscles
Name
Attachments
Action
Muscles Acting on the Scapula
Levator scapulae (fig. 7.16b, 7.18a)
•  Vertebrae C1–C4
•  Medial border and superior angle of scapula
Elevates scapula; tilts apex of shoulder downward; 
braces shoulder; flexes neck laterally
Pectoralis minor (fig. 7.16a)
• Ribs 3–5
• Coracoid process of scapula
Draws scapula laterally and forward around chest; 
lowers apex of shoulder
Rhomboids (fig. 7.16b)
•  Vertebrae C7–T5
•  Medial border of scapula
Retract and elevate scapula; rotate apex of shoulder 
downward; fix scapula during arm movements; 
brace shoulder
Serratus anterior (fig. 7.16a)
•  Most or all ribs
•  Medial border of scapula
Draws scapula laterally and forward around chest; 
raises apex of shoulder; prime mover in forward 
thrusting, throwing, and pushing
Trapezius (fig. 7.16b)
•  External occipital protuberance of skull; ligament of 
nuchal region; spinous processes of vertebrae  
C7–T12
•  Clavicle; acromion and spine of scapula
Different parts of trapezius raise or lower apex of 
shoulder, retract scapula, and stabilize scapula  
during arm movements. See other functions in  
table 7.2.
Rotator Cuff Muscles Acting on the Humerus
Infraspinatus (fig. 7.18b)
•  Infraspinous fossa of scapula
•  Greater tubercle of humerus
Extends and laterally rotates humerus and prevents 
it from sliding upward
Subscapularis (fig. 7.18c)
•  Subscapular fossa of scapula
•  Lesser tubercle of humerus, anterior surface of 
joint capsule
Medially rotates humerus and prevents it from 
­sliding upward
Supraspinatus (fig. 7.18b)
•  Supraspinous fossa of scapula
•  Greater tubercle of humerus
Abducts humerus and resists its downward 
­displacement when carrying heavy weight
Teres minor (fig. 7.18b)
•  Lateral border of scapula
•  Greater tubercle of humerus, posterior surface of 
joint capsule
Adducts and laterally rotates humerus
Other Muscles Acting on the Humerus
Deltoid (fig. 7.18a)
•  Clavicle; spine and acromion of scapula
•  Deltoid tuberosity of humerus
Different parts abduct, flex, and medially rotate 
humerus, and extend and laterally rotate it
Latissimus dorsi (fig. 7.18b)
•  Vertebrae T7–L5; ribs 9 or 10 through 12; iliac crest; 
lumbar connective tissues
•  Floor of intertubercular sulcus of humerus
Extends shoulder; pulls body upward in climbing; 
­produces strong downward thrusts as in hammering 
and swimming; adducts and medially rotates humerus
Pectoralis major (fig. 7.18a)
•  Clavicle, sternum, costal cartilages 1–6
•  Lateral margin of intertubercular sulcus of humerus
Adducts and medially rotates humerus; flexes shoul-
der as in reaching forward; aids in climbing, pushing, 
and throwing
Teres major (fig. 7.18b)
•  Inferior angle of scapula
•  Medial margin of intertubercular sulcus of humerus
Adducts and medially rotates humerus; extends 
shoulder
Muscles Acting on the Forearm
Biceps brachii (fig. 7.15, 7.18a)
•  On and near coracoid process of scapula
•  Radial tuberosity
Strongly supinates forearm; synergizes elbow 
­flexion; secures head of humerus in glenoid cavity
Brachialis (fig. 7.15, 7.18c)
•  Anterior aspect of lower humerus
•  Coronoid process and tuberosity of ulna
Flexes elbow
Brachioradialis (fig. 7.18a)
•  Lateral supracondylar ridge of humerus
•  Distal radius near styloid process
Flexes elbow
Pronator quadratus (fig. 7.19b)
•  Anterior aspect of lower ulna
•  Anterior aspect of lower radius
Pronates forearm
Pronator teres (fig. 7.18c, 7.19b)
•  Near medial epicondyle of humerus; coronoid 
­process of ulna
•  Lateral midshaft of radius
Pronates forearm
Supinator (fig. 7.18c, 7.19b)
•  Lateral epicondyle of humerus; shaft of upper ulna
•  Shaft of upper radius
Supinates forearm
244      PART 2  Support and Movement

Name
Attachments
Action
Triceps brachii (fig. 7.15, 7.18b)
•  Inferior margin of glenoid cavity;  
posterior aspect of humerus
•  Olecranon of ulna
Extends elbow; long head adducts humerus
Flexors Acting on the Wrist and Hand
Flexor carpi radialis (fig. 7.19a)
•  Medial epicondyle of humerus
•  Base of metacarpals II and III
Flexes wrist anteriorly and laterally (radial flexion)
Flexor carpi ulnaris (fig. 7.19a)
•  Medial epicondyle of humerus
•  Pisiform, hamate, and metacarpal V
Flexes wrist anteriorly and medially (ulnar flexion)
Flexor digitorum superficialis (fig. 7.19b)
•  Medial epicondyle of humerus; radius; coronoid 
­process of ulna
•  Middle phalanges II–V
Flexes wrist and knuckles II–V
Extensors Acting on the Wrist and Hand
Extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis  
(fig. 7.19c)
•  Lateral supracondylar ridge and lateral epicodyle of 
humerus, respectively
•  Base of metacarpals II and III,  
respectively
Extend wrist and aid in radial flexion
Extensor carpi ulnaris (fig. 7.19c)
•  Lateral epicondyle of humerus; posterior side of 
ulnar shaft
•  Base of metacarpal V
Extends wrist and aids in ulnar flexion
Extensor digitorum (fig. 7.19c)
•  Lateral epicondyle of humerus
•  Posterior (dorsal) side of phalanges II–V
Extends wrist and fingers II–V
Muscles Acting on the Hip and Femur
Adductor longus and brevis (fig. 7.20)
•  Pubis
•  Posterior shaft of femur
Adduct and medially rotate femur; flex hip
Adductor magnus (fig. 7.20)
•  Ischium and pubis
•  Posterior shaft of femur
Adducts and medially rotates femur; posterior part 
extends hip
Gluteus maximus (fig. 7.21)
•  Posterior surface of ilium, sacrum, and  
coccyx
•  Upper lateral femur
Extends hip joint, important in backswing of stride, 
abducts and laterally rotates femur
Gluteus medius and minimis (fig. 7.21)
•  Posterior surface of ilium
•  Greater trochanter of femur
Abduct and medially rotate femur, maintain balance 
by shifting body weight during walking
Gracilis (fig. 7.20)
•  Pubis and ischium
•  Medial surface of upper tibia
Adducts femur; flexes knee
Iliopsoas (fig. 7.20)
•  Iliac crest and fossa; sacrum; vertebral bodies  
T12–L5
•  Lesser trochanter and adjacent shaft of femur
Flexes hip as in bending at waist or raising thigh
Pectineus (fig. 7.20)
•  Pubis
•  Posterior surface of upper femur
Adducts femur; flexes hip
Muscles Acting on the Knee
Biceps femoris (fig. 7.21)
•  Ischial tuberosity and posterior surface of shaft of 
femur
•  Head of fibula
Flexes knee; extends hip; laterally rotates leg
Quadriceps femoris (fig. 7.20)
•  Ilium; posterior and anterior aspects of shaft of 
femur
•  Tibial tuberosity
Extends knee; flexes hip
Sartorius (fig. 7.20)
•  Anterior superior spine of ilium
•  Medial aspect of tibial tuberosity
Flexes hip and knee; used in crossing legs
Semimembranosus (fig. 7.21)
•  Ischial tuberosity
•  Medial condyle of tibia; lateral condyle of femur
Flexes knee; extends hip
Semitendinosus (fig. 7.21)
•  Ischial tuberosity
•  Medial surface of upper tibia
Same as semimembranosus
(continued on next page)
Table 7.3  Appendicular Muscles (continued)
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      245  

Name
Attachments
Action
Muscles Acting on the Foot
Extensor digitorum longus (fig. 7.22a)
•  Lateral condyle of tibia, shaft of fibula, interosseous 
membrane
•  Middle and distal phalanges II–V
Extends toes II–V; dorsiflexes foot
Fibularis brevis and fibularis longus  
(fig. 7.22c)
•  Shaft of fibula; lateral condyle of tibia
•  Base of metatarsal V; metatarsal I; medial cuneiform
Plantar flex and evert foot; maintain plantar 
­concavity
Flexor digitorum longus  
(figs. 7.16b, 7.22c)
•  Posterior surface of tibial shaft
•  Distal phalanges II–V
Flexes toes II–V; plantar flexes foot
Gastrocnemius (fig. 7.22b)
•  Condyles and popliteal surface of femur; capsule of 
knee joint
•  Calcaneus
Flexes knee; plantar flexes foot
Soleus (fig. 7.22c)
•  Posterior surface of proximal one-fourth of  
fibula and middle one-third of tibia
•  Calcaneus
Plantar flexes foot
Tibialis anterior (fig. 7.22a)
•  Lateral margin of tibia; interosseous membrane
•  Medial cuneiform; metatarsal I
Dorsiflexes and inverts foot
Tibialis posterior (fig. 7.16b)
•  Posterior surface of proximal half of tibia, fibula, and 
interosseous membrane
•  Navicular; medial cuneiform; metatarsals II–IV
Plantar flexes and inverts foot
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
   14.  In what ways does the function of the endomysium  
differ from that of the epimysium of a muscle?
   15.  How does a synergist modify the action of a prime mover? 
How does an antagonist modify it? What role does a  
fixator play?
   16.  Name a muscle employed in each of the following: a wink, 
a kiss, a smile, and a frown.
      17.  Name the three muscle layers of the lateral abdominal 
region from superficial to deep, and describe the actions of 
these muscles.
   18.  Name the muscles of the rotator cuff and describe their  
locations.
    19.  Identify three antagonists of the triceps brachii and describe 
what actions the triceps and these antagonists perform.
 20.  Describe the functions of the gluteal muscles, hamstrings, 
and quadriceps femoris.
  21.  List two muscles and their actions involved in each of the 
following activities: sit-ups, dribbling a basketball, kicking a 
soccer ball, and rising from a chair.
Table 7.3  Appendicular Muscles (continued)
246      PART 2  Support and Movement

Aging of the Muscular System
One of the most common changes in old age is the replacement 
of lean body mass (muscle) with fat, accompanied by loss of mus-
cular strength. Muscular strength and mass peak in the 20s, and 
by the age of 80, most people have only half as much strength 
and endurance. Many people over age 75 cannot lift a 4.5 kg 
(10 lb) weight, making such simple tasks as carrying a bag of gro-
ceries very difficult. Tasks such as buttoning the clothes also take 
more time and effort. The loss of strength is a major contributor 
to falls, fractures, and dependence on others for living assistance. 
Fast-twitch muscle fibers show the earliest and greatest atrophy, 
thus increasing reaction time, slowing the reflexes, and reducing 
coordination.
There are multiple reasons for the loss of strength. Aged muscle 
has fewer myofibrils; more disorganized sarcomeres; smaller mito-
chondria; and reduced amounts of ATP, myoglobin, glycogen, and 
creatine phosphate. Increased adipose and fibrous tissue in the mus-
cles limits their movement and blood circulation. In addition, there are 
fewer motor neurons in the spinal cord, so some muscle atrophy may 
result from reduced innervation. Even the neurons that do remain 
produce less acetylcholine and stimulate the muscles less effectively.
Even though people typically lose muscle mass and function 
as they age, these effects are noticeably less in people who con-
tinue to exercise throughout life. For example, studies show that 
even moderate exercise can help elderly people maintain muscle 
mass and improve balance. Recent research suggests that it also 
increases mental agility and decreases the risk of dementia.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A massage therapist manipulates muscles and other soft tissues by knead-
ing, gliding, and compression in order to promote relaxation; relieve pain; 
stimulate blood and lymph flow; and address issues of stress, anxiety, and 
tension. Massage therapists work with clients as diverse as athletes, people 
with soft-tissue injuries, pregnant women, and children, but most often, sim-
ply with persons seeking relaxation and a sense of wellness. There are more 
than 80 types of massage therapy, such as Swedish massage, deep pres-
sure, and acupressure, and spas often combine massage with hydrotherapy, 
aromatherapy, and other methods. Most massage therapists are employed 
by health spas—a rapidly growing industry—but other work settings include 
fitness centers, sports clinics, retirement homes, rehabilitation centers, colleges, chiropractic offices, hotels, malls, cruise ships, 
and clients’ homes and workplaces. Most states require one to be a Certified Massage Therapist (CMT) or equivalent before 
granting a license to practice. Candidates must complete a training program of usually 500 to 1,000 hours of instruction, entail-
ing both hands-on practice and classroom instruction in anatomy and physiology, kinesiology, first aid, CPR, business practices, 
ethics, and legal issues. One must also pass a licensing examination with both written and demonstration components. See 
appendix B for further information.
M a s s a g e  T h e r a p i s t
© Rolf Hicker/All Canada Photos/Getty Images
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      247  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the MUSCULAR SYSTEM AND OTHER MUSCULAR TISSUES  
Affect Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Superficial muscles support and shape 
the skin; facial muscles act on the skin 
to produce facial expressions.
Skeletal System
Muscles move the bones, stabilize 
the joints, and produce stress that 
stimulates bone ossification and 
remodeling; the shapes of mature 
bones are determined partly by the 
muscular stresses applied to them.
Nervous System
Muscles give expression to thoughts, emotions, 
and motor commands that arise in the central 
nervous system.
Endocrine System
Exercise stimulates the secretion of stress hor-
mones; skeletal muscles protect some endocrine 
organs; muscle mass affects the body’s insulin 
sensitivity.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Muscle contractions promote lymph flow; exercise 
elevates levels of immune cells and antibodies; 
excessive exercise can inhibit immune responses.
Respiratory System
Muscle contractions ventilate the 
lungs; skeletal muscles of the larynx 
and pharynx and smooth muscle of the 
trachea and bronchial tree regulate 
airflow; CO2 generated by exercising 
muscles stimulates heavier breathing.
Circulatory System
Skeletal muscle contractions help to move blood through 
veins; exercise stimulates the growth of new blood vessels; 
cardiac muscle pumps blood, and smooth muscle governs 
blood vessel diameter and blood and flow.
Reproductive System
Muscles contribute to erection and or-
gasm; abdominal and pelvic muscles aid 
in childbirth.
Digestive System
Skeletal muscles enable chewing and 
swallowing and control defecation; 
smooth muscle propels material through 
the digestive tract and also controls def-
ecation; abdominal and lumbar muscles 
protect the lower digestive organs.
Urinary System
Skeletal and smooth muscles control 
urination; muscles of the pelvic floor 
support the bladder.
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© iconogenic/Getty 
Images RF
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Getty Images
248

CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      249  
Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
7.1  Muscular Tissue and Cells 
1.	 Five functions of muscular tissue
2.	 Why skeletal muscle is described as striated and voluntary
3.	 General appearance and typical dimensions of muscle fibers
4.	 Description of the sarcolemma, transverse tubules, 
­sarcoplasmic reticulum, myofibrils, and myofilaments 
and their locations in a muscle fiber
5.	 The roles of glycogen and myoglobin in muscle fibers
6.	 The composition, molecular arrangement, and functions of 
thick and thin myofilaments
7.	 The role of the proteins myosin, actin, tropomyosin, and 
­troponin in muscle fibers
8.	 Structural relationships of the A bands, I bands, Z discs, 
and sarcomeres; how the arrangement of the myofilaments 
­accounts for the A and I bands
9.	 Why the mechanism of contraction is called the sliding 
­filament model 
10.	 Motor neurons and their relationship with skeletal muscle fibers
11.	 What a motor unit is, why it is called that, and the functional 
advantages of a muscle being composed of many motor units
12.	 Structural components of a neuromuscular junction and the 
function of each
13.	 The locations and roles of acetylcholine and acetylcholinesterase
7.2  Physiology of Skeletal Muscle 
1.	 The stages of muscle contraction and relaxation
2.	 How an arriving nerve signal excites a muscle fiber
3.	 Events that link muscle excitation to the onset of contraction
4.	 How a muscle fiber shortens; the roles of myosin, actin, 
­tropomyosin, calcium, troponin, and ATP in this process
5.	 How a muscle relaxes; the roles of acetylcholinesterase, the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum, ATP, and tropomyosin in this process
6.	 Why a single muscle twitch cannot perform useful muscular 
work; the effect of summation of twitches on muscle ­performance
7.	 How muscle tone is maintained and why this is important
8.	 The difference between isometric and isotonic muscle 
­contraction, and how these relate to ordinary muscle ­actions; the 
roles of concentric and eccentric contraction in weight lifting
9.	 The two metabolic pathways for producing the ATP needed for 
muscle contraction, and the advantage and disadvantage of each
10.	 How a muscle shifts from one mode of ATP production to 
another over the course of a prolonged exercise
11.	 Causes of muscle fatigue and variables that improve endurance
12.	 Why a person continues to breathe heavily after the end of a 
strenuous exercise
13.	 How slow- and fast-twitch muscle fibers differ metabolically; 
the advantage and limitation of each; and examples of muscles 
in which each type is abundant
14.	 The cellular effects and respective benefits of resistance and 
endurance exercise
7.3  Cardiac and Smooth Muscle 
1.	 The properties of cardiac muscle that enable it to reliably 
pump blood
2.	 The structure of cardiac muscle cells and how they differ from 
skeletal muscle fibers
3.	 Significance of the prolonged contraction of cardiac ­muscle cells
4.	 The significance of aerobic respiration in cardiac muscle, and 
how this is reflected in the internal structure of the muscle cell
5.	 Locations of smooth muscle
6.	 Similarities and differences between smooth muscle myocytes, 
cardiomyocytes, and skeletal muscle fibers
7.	 Why smooth muscle tone is important in hollow organs
8.	 How smooth muscle tissue differs from skeletal and cardiac 
muscle in its capacity for repair
7.4  Anatomy of the Muscular System 
1.	 The connective tissue components of a skeletal muscle and 
their spatial relationship to the muscle fibers
2.	 Attachments between skeletal muscle and bone; the difference 
between an aponeurosis and other tendons
3.	 The four functional categories of muscles that may be found at 
a joint, and how these four types modify each other’s actions
4.	 Why the Latin names of muscles can be helpful in 
­understanding their locations and functions once one 
­becomes accustomed to them
5.	 The proper anatomical names of several muscles that have 
popular nicknames among body builders
6.	 The locations, attachments, and actions of the following facial 
muscles—the frontalis, orbicularis oculi, orbicularis oris, 
zygomaticus, depressor anguli oris, and buccinator—and some 
ordinary activities in which these muscles are involved
7.	 The same for the following muscles of mastication: temporalis, 
masseter, and pterygoids
8.	 The same for the following muscles of head and neck 
­movement: sternocleidomastoid and trapezius

250      PART 2  Support and Movement
9.	 The same for the following abdominal muscles: rectus 
abdominis, external and internal abdominal obliques, and 
transverse abdominal
10.	 The same for the erector spinae
11.	 The same for the following muscles acting on the scapula: 
pectoralis minor, serratus anterior, trapezius, levator scapulae, 
and rhomboids
12.	 The same for additional muscles that act on the humerus: 
­pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, deltoid, and teres major
13.	 The same for the four rotator cuff muscles: the supraspina-
tus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis; why their 
tendons are called the rotator cuff, and some actions that often 
cause rotator cuff injuries
14.	 The same for the following muscles acting on the elbow or 
forearm: biceps brachii, brachialis, brachioradialis, triceps 
brachii, pronator teres, pronator quadratus, and supinator
15.	 The locations of muscles that move the hand, and why there 
are so many hand muscles
16.	 The locations and functional significance of the flexor 
­retinaculum, extensor retinaculum, and carpal tunnel
17.	 The locations, attachments, and actions of the following 
wrist and finger flexors—flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi 
ulnaris, flexor digitorum superficialis, and flexor digitorum 
­profundus—and some ordinary activities in which these 
muscles are involved
18.	 The same for the following wrist and finger extensors: ­extensor 
digitorum, extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor carpi radialis 
­longus, and extensor carpi radialis brevis
19.	 The same for the two components of the iliopsoas muscle 
complex: the iliacus and psoas major
20.	 The same for the three gluteal muscles: gluteus maximus, 
medius, and minimus
21.	 The same for the adductor and abductor groups of thigh 
muscles, considering each of the two groups collectively
22.	 The same for the four heads of the quadriceps femoris; the 
sartorius; and the three hamstring muscles
23.	 The same for the anterior muscles of the leg: extensor 
­digitorum longus and tibialis anterior
24.	 The same for the posterior muscles of the leg: gastrocnemius, 
soleus, tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, fibularis 
brevis, and fibularis longus
25.	 Location of muscles that act on the foot, and their major functions
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 The relatively light middle portion of the A band of skeletal 
muscle 
a.	 has myosin but no actin.
b.	 is the site of the Z disc.
c.	 is light because of the glycogen stored there.
d.	 has thin myofilaments but no thick myofilaments.
e.	 marks the boundary between one sarcomere and the next.
	 2.	 Before a muscle fiber can contract, ATP must bind to 
a.	 a Z disc.
b.	 the myosin head.
c.	 tropomyosin.
d.	 troponin.
e.	 actin.
	 3.	 ACh receptors are found in
a.	 the synaptic vesicles.
b.	 the terminal cisterns.
c.	 the thick filaments.
d.	 the thin filaments.
e.	 the sarcolemma.
	 4.	 In the activation of muscle contraction, acetylcholine is 
released from 
a.	 the terminal cisterns.
b.	 the sarcolemma.
c.	 synaptic vesicles.
d.	 the synaptic cleft.
e.	 intercalated discs.
	 5.	 Slow-twitch fibers have all of the following except
a.	 an abundance of myoglobin.
b.	 an abundance of glycogen.
c.	 high fatigue resistance.
d.	 a deep red color.
e.	 a high capacity to synthesize ATP aerobically.
	 6.	 Which of these muscles is an extensor of the neck? 
a.	 external oblique
b.	 sternocleidomastoid
c.	 trapezius
d.	 temporalis
e.	 latissimus dorsi
	 7.	 Which of the following muscles does not extend the hip joint?
a.	 quadriceps femoris
b.	 gluteus maximus
c.	 biceps femoris
d.	 semitendinosus
e.	 semimembranosus
	 8.	 Both the gastrocnemius and 
 muscles insert on the 
heel by way of the calcaneal tendon.
a.	 semimembranosus
b.	 flexor digitorum longus
c.	 tibialis anterior 
d.	 soleus
e.	 quadriceps femoris
	 9.	 Which of the following muscles contributes the most to 
smiling?
a.	 levator palpebrae superioris
b.	 orbicularis oris
c.	 zygomaticus minor
d.	 masseter
e.	 mentalis

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
CHAPTER 7   The Muscular ­System      251  
	10.	 Four scapular muscles contribute tendons to the rotator cuff, 
including all of these except
a.	 the supraspinatus.
b.	 the teres minor.
c.	 the subscapularis.
d.	 the levator scapulae.
e.	 the infraspinatus.
	11.	 Thick myofilaments consist mainly of the protein 
.
	12.	 The neurotransmitter that stimulates skeletal muscle is 
.
	13.	 A state of continual partial muscle contraction is called 
.
	14.	 A bundle of muscle fibers surrounded by perimysium and seen 
as the grain in a cut of meat is called a/an 
.
	15.	 Skeletal muscle contraction requires the release of 
ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
	16.	 Cardiac and smooth muscle are called 
 because they 
can contract without nervous stimulation and are usually not 
subject to conscious control.
	17.	 A circular muscle that regulates a body opening or passage is 
called a/an 
.
	18.	 The knee is extended by a four-part muscle called the 
on the anterior side of the thigh.
	19.	 The largest muscle of the back, extending from the midthoracic 
to lumbar region and converging on the humerus, nicknamed 
the swimmer’s muscle, is the 
.
	20.	 The large bulge of the calf, just below the popliteal region, is a 
two-headed muscle called the 
.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Each motor neuron supplies just one muscle fiber.
	 2.	 To initiate muscle contraction, calcium ions must bind to the 
myosin heads.
	 3.	 Slow-twitch fibers fatigue relatively quickly.
	 4.	 Thin filaments get shorter when a muscle contracts.
	 5.	 Of the three muscle types, skeletal muscle has the largest and 
most numerous mitochondria.
	 6.	 The zygomaticus major and minor muscles attach to the zygo-
matic bone and mandible.
	 7.	 To push someone away from you, you would use the trapezius 
more than the serratus anterior.
	 8.	 In isometric contraction, a muscle maintains a constant level of 
tension as it shortens or lengthens.
	 9.	 The zygomaticus major can be considered a synergist of the 
depressor anguli oris.
	10.	 In lifting barbells by flexion of the elbow, the biceps brachii 
muscles provide more power than the brachialis muscles do.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Without ATP, relaxed muscle cannot contract and a contracted 
muscle cannot relax. Explain why.
	 2.	 Consider the relaxed sarcomere in figure 7.9a. Suppose a 
relaxed skeletal muscle were stretched so much that the thick 
filaments barely overlapped with the tips of the thin filaments 
or did not overlap at all. Predict what would happen when a 
motor nerve fiber stimulated such a muscle, and explain why.
	 3.	 Radical mastectomy, once a common treatment for breast 
cancer, involved removal of the pectoralis major along with the 
breast. What functional impairments would result from this? 
What synergists could a physical therapist train a patient to use 
to recover some lost function?

Chapter Outline
8.1 Cells and Tissues of the Nervous System
• Functions and Divisions of the Nervous 
System 
• Neurons (Nerve Cells) 
• Neuroglia (Supporting Cells) 
• The Myelin Sheath 
• Forms of Nervous Tissue 
8.2 The Physiology of Neurons
• Producing a Resting Membrane Potential 
• Generating an Action Potential 
• Conducting a Nerve Signal to Its Destination 
• Transmitting a Nerve Signal to the Next Cell 
• Neural Pools and Circuits—Neurons ­Working 
in Groups 
8.3 The Spinal Cord, Spinal Nerves, and Reflexes
• The Spinal Cord—Functional Anatomy 
• The Spinal Meninges—Protective 
­Membranes 
• Spinal Nerves—Communicating with the 
Rest of the Body 
• Somatic Reflexes 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 8.1: Multiple Sclerosis
• Clinical Application 8.2: Spinal Cord Injury and 
Paralysis
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Occupational Therapist 
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
8
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Plasma membrane structure (see section 3.2)
• Voltage-gated and ligand-gated membrane 
channels (see “Membrane Proteins” in 
section 3.2)
• Anatomy of the vertebral column in relationship 
to the spinal cord (see “The Vertebral Column” in 
section 6.3) 
The Nervous 
­System I
Nerve cells growing in laboratory culture. These were produced in an experiment 
to culture nervous tissue and study neural regeneration for the treatment of spinal 
paralysis.
© Science Source
Module 7: Nervous System
PART 3  Internal Coordination
NERVE CELLS, THE SPINAL CORD, AND REFLEXES
252	

T
he human body is thought to have at least 50 trillion cells. If all 
of them acted independently without regard to what others were 
doing, the result would be physiological chaos and death. Therefore, like 
any other multicellular organism, we must have a means of coordinating 
their activities. Two systems of internal communication serve this role: 
(1) the endocrine system, which uses hormones as intercellular signals 
and is considered in chapter 11; and (2) the nervous system, which uses 
a combination of electrical and chemical signals and is the subject of the 
next three chapters. In this chapter, we will study nerve cells, the spinal 
cord and its nerves, and spinal reflexes. Chapter 9 will survey the brain, 
its associated nerves, and the autonomic nervous system, and chapter 10 
concerns the sense organs.
8.1
 Cells and Tissues of the  
Nervous System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	state three fundamental functions of the nervous system;
b.	define the two major anatomical subdivisions of the nervous 
system;
c.	define three functional categories of neurons;
d.	describe the structure of a generalized neuron and the common 
variations on this structure;
e.	discuss the supporting cells of nervous tissue and their functions;
f.	 discuss the myelin sheath that envelops many nerve fibers, 
including its function and how it is produced; and
g.	distinguish between the gray and white matter of the central 
nervous system.
Functions and Divisions of the Nervous System
The nervous system has three fundamental functions: (1) sensory, the ability to 
respond to stimuli within and around the body, and to generate signals that carry 
information about those stimuli to the spinal cord or brain; (2) integrative, the abil-
ity to receive and process information, store and retrieve it, and make decisions as to 
whether or how to respond to it; and (3) motor, the ability to issue outgoing signals 
to muscle and gland cells to produce a response.
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      253  

The nervous system has two main anatomical subdivisions (fig. 8.1).
 	1.	 The central nervous system (CNS) is composed of the brain and spinal cord 
and is enclosed and protected by bone—the cranium and vertebral column. It 
carries out the integrative functions of the nervous system.
 	2.	 The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is composed of nerves leading to and 
from the CNS. The PNS provides the CNS with pathways of signal input and 
output, connecting it to the body’s sense organs, muscles, and glands. Thus, 
it carries out both the sensory and motor functions.
Both the CNS and PNS have further anatomical and functional subdivisions, 
which we will encounter as we progress through these chapters.
Neurons (Nerve Cells)
The agents of communication in the nervous system are neurons (nerve cells). 
A neuron usually consists of a more or less globular or stellate cell body where 
its nucleus is located, and two or more long fibrous processes that reach out to 
other cells.
Basic Structure of Neurons
Neurons are highly variable in shape, but a good starting point for understanding 
their structure is a spinal motor neuron, a cell that originates in the spinal cord and 
leads to a skeletal muscle—the type of neuron that enables us to move the body 
(fig. 8.2). The control center of the neuron is its neurosoma1 (soma or cell body). 
It contains the nucleus and is therefore the cell’s site of genetic control. It also has 
most of the usual organelles found in other cells: mitochondria, lysosomes, a Golgi 
complex, and an extensive rough endoplasmic reticulum. There are no centrioles, 
however, and for this and other reasons, neurons cannot undergo mitosis. Neurons 
that die are therefore usually irreplaceable; surviving neurons cannot multiply to 
replace those that are lost.
Arising from the soma, there are several thick arms that divide repeatedly 
into fine branches. They are named dendrites2 after their striking similarity to the 
branches and twigs of a leafless tree in winter. They are the “receiving end” of a 
neuron, the primary route by which it receives signals from other neurons. Some 
neurons have only one dendrite, and some have thousands.
On one side of the soma is a conical mound called the axon hillock, which 
gives rise to a long process called the axon (nerve fiber)—the neuron’s output 
pathway for signals that it sends to other cells. An axon is roughly cylindrical and 
relatively unbranched except at its distal end. A neuron never has more than one 
axon, and some neurons in the brain and retina have none. At the distal end, an 
axon usually exhibits a profusion of fine branches, with each twig ending with 
a bulb called the axon terminal. This will be the focus of our attention when we 
consider how a neuron transmits a signal to the next cell across a junction called 
the synapse.
Simplified textbook drawings cannot do justice to the structure of a ­neuron, 
but an analogy may create a useful impression of its dimensions. A typical 
­neuron has a soma from 5 to 135 µm in diameter, whereas the axon is about 1 to 
20 µm in ­diameter and is sometimes more than 1.5 m (5 ft) long, yet too slender 
to see ­without a microscope. If we scale the soma up to the size of a ­tennis ball, 
such an axon would be up to 1.7 km (1 mile) long and a little narrower than a 
­garden hose, and the ­dendrites could densely fill a 30-seat classroom from wall 
Brain
Nerves
Central nervous
system (CNS)
Peripheral nervous
system (PNS)
Spinal
cord
Ganglia
Figure 8.1 The Nervous System.
1soma = body
2dendr = tree, branch; ite = little
254      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Direction of signal
transmission
Nodes of Ranvier
Internode
Axon terminals
Schwann cell
nucleus
Neurilemma
Axon
Myelin sheath
Schwann cell
(c)
(a)
(b)
Dendrites
Neurosoma
Nucleus
Axon
Axon hillock
Figure 8.2 A Representative Neuron. (a) A multipolar 
neuron such as a spinal motor ­neuron. (b) Detail of the myelin 
sheath. The Schwann cells and myelin are explained later in 
this chapter. (c) Photograph of this neuron type. 
 c: © Ed Reschke
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      255  

Dendrites
Dendrites
Axon
Axon
Dendrites
Axon
Unipolar neuron
Multipolar neurons
Bipolar neurons
to wall and ceiling to floor, like an impenetrable briar thicket. Such proportions 
are all the more impressive when we consider that the neuron must assemble 
molecules and organelles in that “tennis ball” soma and deliver them through its 
“mile-long hose” to the end of the axon. Neurons use mobile motor proteins to 
“walk” up and down the axon carrying substances to and from the soma.
Figure 8.3 Variation in Neuron Structure. Upper left frame, 
two multipolar neurons of the brain—a pyramidal cell (left) and a 
Purkinje cell. Upper right frame, two bipolar neurons—a bipolar cell 
of the retina (left) and an olfactory neuron of the nose. Lower left 
frame: a unipolar neuron of the type involved in the senses of touch 
and pain.
Structural and Functional Classes of Neurons
Not all neurons fit the preceding basic description. Neurons are ­classified 
structurally according to the number of processes that arise from the soma 
(fig. 8.3):
	 1.	 Multipolar neurons, like the one just described, have one axon and multiple 
dendrites. This is the most common type and includes most neurons of the 
brain and spinal cord.
	 2.	 Bipolar neurons have one axon and one dendrite. These include sensory neu-
rons of hearing, smell, and vision.
	 3.	 Unipolar neurons have only one process leading away from the soma. 
It  branches like a T a short distance away, with one branch bringing 
signals from sources such as the skin and joints and the other branch 
leading to the spinal cord. The dendrites are the branching sensory tips 
at the end of the former branch, and the rest of the fiber is considered to 
be the axon.
Apply What You Know
The axon of a neuron has a dense cytoskeleton. Considering the functions of a 
cytoskeleton you studied in section 3.3, suggest at least two reasons that this 
cytoskeleton is so necessary to an axon.
256      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Functionally, neurons fit into three basic classes corresponding 
to the sensory, integrative, and motor functions of the nervous system 
(fig. 8.4):
1  		 Sensory (afferent3) neurons are specialized to detect stimuli 
and transmit information about them to the CNS. They lead 
from the eyes, ears, skin, joints, internal organs, and other sourc-
es to the brain or spinal cord. The word afferent refers to the fact 
that signals in these cells travel from relatively remote localities 
in the body toward the CNS.
2 		 Interneurons perform the integrative functions of the 
­nervous ­system—processing, storing, and retrieving infor-
mation and ­“making decisions” about how the body should 
respond to a given stimulus or situation. They are con-
tained entirely within the CNS and are the most abundant 
of all ­neurons.
3 		 Motor (efferent4) neurons are specialized to carry outgoing 
­signals from the CNS to the cells and organs that carry out 
its ­commands. They begin in the CNS and extend to muscle 
and gland cells ­elsewhere. The word efferent refers to the 
fact that these cells carry nerve signals away from the CNS.
Most sensory neurons are unipolar or bipolar; interneurons and 
motor neurons are generally multipolar.
Neuroglia (Supporting Cells)
Although neurons carry out the communicative function of the nervous system, 
they are outnumbered at least 10 to 1 by supporting cells called ­neuroglia5 
­(noor-OG-lee-uh), or glial cells (GLEE-ul). These cells perform various 
­protective and “housekeeping” functions for the nervous system and aid the 
neurons in their functions. There are four kinds of glial cells in the central 
­nervous system (fig. 8.5).
	 1.	 Oligodendrocytes6 (OL-ih-go-DEN-dro-sites) are large bulbous cells with 
as many as 15 armlike processes, giving them an appearance somewhat like 
an octopus. Each arm reaches out to a nearby nerve fiber and spirals around 
it to form a layer of insulation called the myelin sheath, which we’ll examine 
later.
	 2.	 Ependymal7 cells (ep-EN-dih-mul) are cuboidal cells that line 
the  ­internal, fluid-filled cavities of the brain and spinal cord. They 
­produce a liquid called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that fills these cav-
ities and  bathes the CNS surface. They have cilia on their surfaces 
that help to circulate the CSF. Functions of the CSF are discussed in 
­section 9.1.
	 3.	 Microglia are small phagocytic cells that wander through the CNS tissue 
searching out and destroying tissue debris, infectious microorganisms, and 
other foreign matter. They become concentrated in areas damaged by infec-
tion, trauma, or stroke.
Figure 8.4 Functional Classes of Neurons. 
All neurons can be classified as sensory, motor, 
or ­interneurons based on their location and the 
­direction of signal conduction.
1
2
Interneurons 
are conﬁned 
to the CNS.
Sensory (aﬀerent) 
neurons conduct 
signals from receptors 
to the CNS.
3
Motor (eﬀerent) 
neurons conduct 
signals from the CNS 
to eﬀectors such as 
muscles and glands. 
Peripheral nervous system
Central nervous system
3af, from ad = toward; fer = to carry
4ef, from ex = out; fer = to carry
5glia = glue 
6oligo = a few; dendro = branches; cyte = cell
7ep = above, upper; endym = garment, wrap 
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      257  

	 4.	 Astrocytes,8 the most abundant glial cells in the CNS, constitute over 90% 
of the brain tissue in some areas. They have the most diverse roles of all 
glial cells. They form a supportive framework for CNS tissue; they issue 
perivascular feet that contact blood vessels and stimulate them to form a 
seal called the blood–brain barrier, described in section 9.1; they moni-
tor brain activity and signal local blood vessels to dilate or constrict, thus 
adjusting blood flow to the local needs of the tissue; they secrete nerve 
growth factors to promote neuron growth and synapse formation; they sta-
bilize the chemical environment of the CNS; they convert blood glucose 
to lactate, which then nourishes the neurons; and they form scar tissue in 
damaged regions of the CNS.
Two more glial cell types occur in the peripheral nervous system.
	 1.	 Satellite cells surround the cell bodies of peripheral neurons. They insulate 
them electrically and regulate their chemical environment.
	 2.	 Schwann9 cells (pronounced “shwon”) wrap around nerve fibers of the PNS, 
enclosing each in a sleeve called the neurilemma10 (NOOR-ih-LEM-ah). In 
most cases, a Schwann cell also spirals repeatedly around the nerve fiber, 
depositing layer after layer of its own membrane between the neurilemma 
and axon. This wrapping constitutes the myelin sheath of a peripheral nerve 
fiber. That is, Schwann cells perform for the PNS what oligodendrocytes do 
for the CNS.
Schwann cells are also necessary for the regeneration and healing of damaged 
nerve fibers. Since they are absent from the CNS and oligodendrocytes cannot 
perform this regenerative role, damaged fibers in the CNS are lost forever. Being 
enclosed in bone, however, nervous tissue of the CNS is injured far less frequently 
than nerves of the PNS.
Ependymal cell
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid
Neurons
Astrocyte  
Perivascular feet  
Microglia
Oligodendrocyte
Capillary
Myelinated axon
Myelin (cut)
Figure 8.5 Neuroglia of the Central Nervous 
System.
•	 What cells in the peripheral nervous system 
perform the same function as the oligodendro-
cytes seen in this figure?
8astro = starlike; cyte = cell
9Theodor Schwann (1810–82), German histologist
10neuri = nerve; lemma = sheath, husk
258      PART 3  Internal Coordination

The Myelin Sheath
The myelin sheath (MY-eh-lin) bears closer examination because it is so 
important in signal conduction by nerve fibers. It is formed by oligodendro-
cytes in the brain and spinal cord and Schwann cells in the peripheral nerves 
(fig. 8.6). It is composed of layer upon layer of the plasma membrane of those 
cells, wrapped around the nerve fiber and insulating it from the surrounding 
tissue fluid, like electrical tape around a wire. In the CNS, each oligodendro-
cyte reaches out to several nearby nerve fibers and contributes a myelin sheath 
to each of them. In the PNS, one Schwann cell wraps around only one nerve 
fiber.
In both cases, a nerve fiber is much longer than the reach of a single glial cell, 
so it requires many Schwann cells or oligodendrocytes to myelinate one nerve 
fiber. Consequently, the myelin sheath is segmented. The gaps between segments 
Figure 8.6 Myelination. (a) A Schwann cell of 
the PNS, wrapping repeatedly around an axon to 
form the multilayered myelin sheath. The myelin 
spirals outward away from the axon as it is laid 
down. The outermost coil of the Schwann cell 
­constitutes the neurilemma. (b) An ­oligodendrocyte 
of the CNS wrapping around the axons of multiple 
neurons. Here, the myelin spirals inward toward 
the axon as it is laid down. (c) A myelinated axon 
(top) and unmyelinated axon (bottom) (electron 
­micrograph). 
 c: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dr. Dennis Emery, Iowa State University, 
photographer
Axon
(a)
(b)
(c)
Myelin sheath 
Schwann
cell
Nucleus
Neurilemma
Nerve ﬁber
Myelin
Myelinated
axon
Unmyelinated
axon
Schwann cells
Endoneurium
Oligodendrocyte
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      259  

are called nodes of Ranvier12 (RON-vee-AY), and the myelin-covered segments 
are called internodes (see fig. 8.2). The internodes are about 0.2 to 1.0 mm long. 
The relevance of nodes and internodes to nerve signal conduction will become 
apparent later in this chapter.
Forms of Nervous Tissue
In the central nervous system, we find two fundamental types of nervous tis-
sue called white and gray matter. White matter consists of bundles of nerve 
fibers called tracts that travel up and down the spinal cord, between one 
region of the brain and another, or between brain and cord. Many fibers of 
these tracts are myelinated; myelin gives the white matter a glistening, pearly 
white color. All fibers in one tract have a similar origin, destination, and func-
tion. We’ll take a closer look at tracts of the spinal cord in this chapter and 
tracts of the brain in chapter 9. There are no nerves in the brain or spinal cord. 
The body’s bundles of nerve fibers are called nerves in the PNS and tracts in 
the CNS.
Gray matter is where the neurosomas, dendrites, and synapses are 
located. There is relatively little myelin here, so this tissue has a duller color in 
fresh nervous tissue. It is the information-processing part of the CNS, whereas 
the white matter is more like a telephone cable—a bundle of “wires” (nerve 
fibers) carrying signals from place to place but not processing signals along 
the way.
In the spinal cord, white matter forms the surface tissue and the gray 
matter forms the inner core. In the brain, by contrast, white matter forms 
most of the deep tissue, whereas gray matter forms a surface layer as well 
as a few deep masses embedded in the white matter. In the CNS, these deep 
gray matter masses surrounded by white matter are called nuclei (not to be 
confused with cell nuclei). A given nucleus of CNS gray matter typically has 
a specific function such as regulating your respiratory rhythm or controlling 
your appetite.
Clinical Application 8.1
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Multiple sclerosis11 (MS) is a degenerative disorder of the myelin sheath. 
It is widely thought to be caused by an autoimmune reaction triggered 
by a virus in genetically susceptible individuals. It is characterized by 
deterioration of the oligodendrocytes and myelin sheaths of the CNS, 
especially in individuals between the ages of 20 and 40. MS is named for 
the hardened scar tissue that replaces the myelin. This degeneration and 
scarring disrupts nerve conduction, with effects that depend on what 
part of the CNS is involved—double vision, blindness, speech defects, 
neurosis, tremors, or numbness, for example. Patients experience vari-
able cycles of milder and worse symptoms until they eventually become 
bedridden. As yet there is no cure, but there is conflicting evidence of 
how much it shortens a person’s life expectancy, if at all. Some MS 
victims die within 1 year of diagnosis, but many live with it for 25 or 
30 years.
11 scler = hard, tough; osis = condition 
12  L. A. Ranvier (1835–19‑22), French histologist and pathologist
260      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 Which nervous system function pertains to 
­information input to the CNS? Which function 
­pertains to its output to muscles and glands? What are the 
terms for the input and output neurons that correspond to 
these two functions?
2.	Distinguish between the central and peripheral nervous 
­systems and identify the components of each.
3.	Make a sketch of a generalized multipolar neuron and label 
its dendrites, soma, axon, and axon terminals.
4.	What types of neuroglia occur in the central nervous system? 
What are their functions? Name the types in the peripheral 
nervous system and state their functions.
5.	Describe the structure of the myelin sheath found around 
many nerve fibers.
6.	What is the difference between the gray and white matter of 
the central nervous system? Which of these is the seat of the 
CNS’s integrative function?
8.2  The Physiology of Neurons
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain how a neuron maintains a resting potential across its 
plasma membrane;
b.	describe the mechanism behind the voltage changes that occur 
when a neuron is stimulated;
c.	explain how a neuron conducts a signal from the soma to the 
end of its axon;
d.	explain how a neuron transmits information to the next cell; and
e.	describe some simple networks in which neurons work in groups.
Producing a Resting Membrane Potential
Nerve signals are essentially electrical events created by the movement of sodium 
and potassium ions. Every living cell is like a little biological battery. Just as a 
battery has a positive and a negative pole, a cell has a positive charge on the outer 
surface of the plasma membrane and a negative charge on the inner ­surface. In a 
resting, unstimulated neuron, this charge difference is called the ­resting membrane 
potential (RMP). It is a readiness for action, a starting point for generating a nerve 
signal. Thus, to understand how nerve cells communicate, the first thing we must 
address is how neurons produce the RMP; how does the battery get “charged up”?
In a battery, the charge difference results from a difference in the concentra-
tion of electrons at the two poles. In a cell, by contrast, it results from a difference 
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      261  

Figure 8.7 Ionic Basis of the Resting Mem‑
brane Potential. Note that sodium ions are much 
more concentrated in the extracellular fluid (ECF) 
than in the intracellular fluid (ICF), while potassium 
ions are more concentrated in the ICF. Large anions 
unable to penetrate the plasma membrane give the 
cytoplasm a negative charge relative to the ECF. Mil-
liequivalents per liter (mEq/L) is a unit of concentra-
tion that reflects the number of particles per given 
volume of fluid and the electrical charge on each 
particle (see appendix C).
Na+ 145 mEq/L
K+       4 mEq/L
K+   150 mEq/L
Na+   12 mEq/L
Large anions that
cannot escape cell
Na+ 
channel
K+ 
channel
ECF
ICF
Figure 8.8 Excitation of a Neuron by a 
Chemical Stimulus. When the chemical (ligand) 
binds to a receptor on the neuron, the receptor acts 
as a ligand-gated channel that opens and allows Na+ 
to diffuse into the cell. This depolarizes the plasma 
membrane.
in the concentrations of sodium, potassium, and other ions on the two sides of the 
membrane. Sodium ions (Na+) are about 12 times as concentrated on the outside 
of the membrane as on the inside, and potassium ions (K+) are almost 38 times as 
concentrated on the inside (fig. 8.7). In addition, the cell contains larger negative 
ions (anions) such as phosphates, proteins, and nucleic acids that cannot pass out 
through the membrane. All of these inequalities of ion distribution collectively 
make the interior of the cell negatively charged relative to the exterior.
When a battery has such an unequal charge distribution, we say it is charged; 
when a cell membrane does so, we say it is polarized. Electrical charges are mea-
sured in volts (V) or fractions of a volt (millivolts, or mV). For example, an automo-
bile battery typically has a charge of 12 V and a flashlight battery, 1.5 V. The charges 
across a cell membrane are much lower—typically an RMP of about –70 mV in 
neurons. The minus sign indicates the negative internal side of the membrane.
The plasma membrane includes proteins that act as channels for Na+ and K+, 
and the slow constant leakage of these ions through the mem-
brane always threatens to abolish the RMP. However, the sodium–­
potassium (Na+–K+) pump in the membrane continually ejects 
3 Na+ and pumps in 2 K+ for each cycle of the pump. Since it ejects 
three positive charges for every two it brings in, the pump maintains 
the cell’s negative internal charge (see “Active Transport” in sec-
tion 3.2). The Na+–K+ pump requires ATP to do this, and accounts 
for about 70% of the energy requirement of the nervous system.
Generating an Action Potential
Nerve signaling is based on ion channels in the plasma mem-
brane called ligand-gated and voltage-gated channels. A ligand 
is any chemical that binds reversibly to a protein. A ligand-gated 
channel is a membrane protein that opens or closes as a ligand 
binds to it. A voltage-gated channel is one that opens or closes 
in response to changes in membrane potential (see “Membrane 
Proteins” in section 3.2).
The first step in nerve signaling is excitation of a neuron, 
usually at a dendrite. Often, the stimulus is a ligand that binds 
to a channel protein. In response, the channel opens and allows 
sodium ions to flow into the cell like water through a faucet 
that has just been opened (fig. 8.8). Since they are positive 
Ligand
Receptor
Plasma 
membrane 
of dendrite
Dendrites
Soma
Trigger
zone
Axon
Current
Na+
ECF
ICF
262      PART 3  Internal Coordination

ions, the inflowing Na+ cancels some of the internal negative charge and the 
membrane potential drifts from the –70 mV resting voltage toward zero. Such 
a shift to a less negative voltage is called depolarization. Any such voltage 
change occurring near the point of stimulation is called a local potential. 
The Na+ diffuses under the plasma membrane to adjacent regions of the cell, 
changing the voltage there as well. A wave of excitation thereby spreads out 
from the point of stimulation like ripples in a pond. 
A local potential depolarizes a short section of the membrane. If the stim-
ulus is strong enough, the signal will flow all the way to the axon hillock, 
where it may produce an action potential, a more dramatic shift in membrane 
voltage in the axon. A neuron is said to “fire” when it produces an action 
potential. The steps of the action potential follow and are numbered to match 
figure 8.9.
	 1	 Upon stimulation, Na+ enters a neuron and the local potential spreads 
toward the cell’s axon hillock.
 2	 The local potential reaches the axon hillock, a region with a high density 
of voltage-gated channels for sodium and potassium. If the local poten-
tial attains a minimum voltage called threshold, it opens the channels in 
the axon hillock and produces an action potential.
 3	 Sodium ions rush into the cell and neutralize the negative charges near the 
inside of the membrane, causing the membrane voltage to shoot rapidly 
upward. As the voltage passes 0 mV, the Na+ channels start to close, but 
by the time all of them do so, the voltage generally has risen to about 
+35 mV.
	 4	 Voltage-gated potassium channels in the hillock also open, but more 
­slowly. Potassium ions rapidly leave the cell when these gates open. 
The outflow of K+ makes the interior of the cell turn negative again; 
the voltage drops to and slightly beyond the original resting membrane 
­potential. The shift of the voltage back into the negative numbers is 
called repolarization.
Time
–70
Depolarization
Local 
potential
Repolarization
Action 
potential
Resting membrane
potential
Threshold
mV
+35
0
–55
–70
Stimulation of the neuron creates a gradually rising local potential. 
1
If a threshold voltage is reached at the axon hillock, voltage-gated 
Na+ channels open and initiate an action potential.
2
Na+ inﬂow causes a rapidly rising voltage. Na+ channels begin to 
close at 0 mV, but the voltage typically reaches about +35 mV by
the time all of them close.
3
K+ outﬂow causes the voltage to drop back into the negative range, 
slightly overshooting the original resting membrane potential (RMP).
4
1
2
3
4
Figure 8.9 An Action Potential. 
 
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      263  

Conducting a Nerve Signal to Its Destination
We have seen how a nerve signal is initiated; now we examine how it travels 
to its final destination. The action potential is a voltage spike over a lim-
ited area of plasma membrane. However, it triggers another action potential 
in the membrane immediately ahead of it, and that action potential triggers 
another, and so forth. Thus, we get a chain reaction of one action potential 
after another along the length of a nerve fiber. This chain reaction constitutes 
the nerve signal. An illuminating analogy to this is standing up a long row 
of dominoes and pushing the first one over. When that domino falls, it pushes 
over the second, and so forth—and the chain reaction produces a wave of 
energy traveling to the end of the line. No one domino moves to the other end 
of the line; a falling domino is a local event. Similarly, an action potential is a 
local event, but it triggers the next one and, like the row of falling dominoes, 
we get a wave of energy traveling from one end of the axon to the other. That 
traveling wave is the nerve signal (fig. 8.10). Action potentials do not travel; 
nerve signals do.
For a short time after an action potential has occurred, that patch of membrane 
cannot be stimulated to produce another; it is said to be in a refractory period. 
Therefore, a zone of refractory membrane trails behind the nerve signal (the yellow 
zone in the figure). This prevents a nerve signal from backing up and returning to 
the neurosoma. 
An unmyelinated nerve fiber has a high density of voltage-gated Na+ and K+ 
channels along its entire length, so everywhere an action potential occurs, it can 
excite another one immediately ahead of it until the signal arrives at the end of the 
fiber. This type of signal conduction, with action potentials occurring at every point 
along the axon, is called continuous conduction.
Action 
potential 
in progress
Refractory 
membrane
Excitable
membrane
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
Signal
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
Figure 8.10 Continuous Conduction of a 
­Signal in an Unmyelinated Nerve Fiber. Action 
potentials are occurring in areas colored red; note the 
reversal of membrane polarity in those areas. Yellow 
areas are in a refractory period of reduced excitabil-
ity, and green areas of membrane are fully excitable, 
ready to respond. 
  
•	 What prevents a nerve signal from backing up 
and returning to the cell body?
264      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Things are different in a myelinated fiber (fig. 8.11). There are very few 
voltage-gated channels in the myelin-covered internodes—not enough to 
generate an action potential. No action potentials could occur in the inter-
nodes anyway, since myelin insulates the nerve fiber from the surrounding 
extracellular fluid (ECF) and no significant amount of Na+ can get into the 
nerve fiber. At each node of Ranvier, however, the nerve fiber is exposed to 
the ECF, and here is where we find the greatest concentration of ion chan-
nels. This is the only place at which a myelinated fiber can generate action 
potentials.
From one node to the next, the signal travels by a very rapid energy transfer 
from ion to ion, somewhat like the opposing north poles of two magnets pushing 
each other apart. Since action potentials occur only at the nodes, it appears as if the 
nerve signal were jumping from node to node; this mode of conduction is called 
saltatory13 conduction. 
Figure 8.11 Saltatory Conduction of a Signal 
in a Myelinated Nerve Fiber. (a) Sodium inflow 
at a node of Ranvier initiates a force that is quickly 
transferred from ion to ion along the internode to 
the next node, getting weaker with distance. At the 
next node, Na+ ion (charge) density is just sufficient 
to open new voltage-gated channels and repeat 
the process. (b) Action potentials can occur only 
at nodes of Ranvier, so the nerve signal appears to 
jump from node to node. 
+  +
+  +
+  +
+  +
+  +
+  +
Na+ inﬂow at node
generates action potential. 
Positive charge ﬂows rapidly 
along axon and depolarizes
membrane; signal grows 
weaker with distance.
Depolarization of membrane
at next node opens Na+ channels,
triggering new action potential.
+ 
+
–
–
+ 
+
–
–
+ 
+
–
–
+ 
+
–
–
–  –
–  –
–  –
–  –
–  –
–  –
(a)
(b)
Action potential
in progress
Refractory 
membrane
Excitable
membrane
13from saltare = to leap or dance
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      265  

Nerve signals travel as fast as 120 m/s in large myelinated fibers, but no 
more than 2 m/s in unmyelinated ones. This is because the energy transfer 
along the internodes of myelinated fibers is faster than the generation of action 
­potentials at the nodes, and for most of the distance that it travels, a nerve signal 
passes through internodes. It slows down slightly at each node of Ranvier, but 
each node reamplifies the signal back to its original strength. Even if a nerve 
signal travels a meter or more from neurosoma to the end of the axon, it is just 
as strong at the end as it was at the beginning—much like the last domino in a 
line falling just as forcefully as the first one did. Slow fibers are quite adequate 
for such processes as digestive secretion or focusing the eye, whereas large fast 
fibers are important in cases that require quick responses, such as sensory sig-
nals and reflexes.
Transmitting a Nerve Signal to the Next Cell
All good things must come to an end, and so it is with the wave of action poten-
tials; they reach the end of the nerve fiber, where there is a narrow gap between 
it and the next cell. How is the neuron to communicate with the cell across the 
gap? In the early twentieth century, many biologists refused to believe such 
gaps existed. They thought it was like a cut in a wire and would stop the signal 
at that point.
But this is where the chemical part of nervous communication comes in. The 
point where the two cells meet is called a synapse (fig. 8.12). The nerve signal 
Axon of
presynaptic neuron
Postsynaptic
neuron
Postsynaptic neuron
Mitochondria
Synaptic vesicles
containing 
neurotransmitter
Synaptic cleft
Neurotransmitter
receptor
Neurotransmitter
release
Axon terminal
Figure 8.12 The Synapse. The presynaptic neu-
ron is shown releasing a neurotransmitter, which 
binds to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron and 
may excite the latter cell. 
 
266      PART 3  Internal Coordination

arrives at the synapse by way of the presynaptic neuron, and the desirable effect 
is to stimulate the next cell, the postsynaptic neuron. The gap between the two is 
called the synaptic cleft. 
The axon terminal of the presynaptic neuron contains numerous sphe-
roidal organelles called synaptic vesicles loaded with chemicals called 
­neurotransmitters. The arrival of a nerve signal at the end of the presynaptic 
fiber triggers several synaptic vesicles to undergo exocytosis, releasing their 
neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. Neurotransmitter molecules diffuse 
across the cleft and bind to receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic 
neuron.
One such neurotransmitter is acetylcholine (ACh). In the previous 
chapter (see “The Nerve–Muscle Relationship” in section 7.1), we studied 
its binding to receptors on the surface of a muscle fiber. The receptors are 
ligand-gated channels that open in response to ACh and allow Na+ and K+ 
to flow through, producing a local potential in the postsynaptic cell. If local 
potentials in the postsynaptic cell are great enough to depolarize it to its 
threshold, that cell fires and forwards the signal to another cell farther down 
the line.
Each synapse slows down a nerve signal, creating a synaptic delay of 
typically 0.5 ms. Synapses, however, are the points at which the nervous sys-
tem makes all of its decisions. Without them, we would have no memories, no 
ability to determine when another neuron fires or when a gland or muscle cell 
responds—indeed, little or no ability to control the body at all. The decision-
making role of synapses more than compensates for the small price we pay in 
synaptic delay.
Stimulation of the postsynaptic cell is very brief. The ­neurotransmitter in the 
cleft may be chemically broken down by enzymes in the cleft or ­reabsorbed by 
the presynaptic neuron, or it may simply diffuse away from the cleft into the sur-
rounding tissue fluid. A failure to remove the neurotransmitter and stop synaptic 
transmission can result in consequences as severe as muscle spasms, paralysis, 
and suffocation (see Clinical Application 7.1, section 7.1).
Acetylcholine is but one neurotransmitter. More than a hundred others are 
known, including norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, which play key roles 
in mood, alertness, muscular control, glandular secretion, and other functions. The 
importance of dopamine in motor control and Parkinson disease is discussed in 
Perspectives on Health at the end of this section.
Neural Pools and Circuits—Neurons Working  
in Groups
We have so far considered neurons in isolation or in a simple linear series joined by 
synapses. However, neurons actually function in tangled webs of interaction called 
neural pools and circuits. The functional complexity of the nervous system arises 
from the way these neurons interact.
A neural pool is a localized cluster of neurons that collaborate to perform 
a specific physiological function, such as generating the breathing rhythm or 
monitoring body temperature. Neural pools are connected to each other, as are 
neurons within a pool, through varied pathways called neural circuits, much 
like the wiring or circuit boards of electronic devices connect transistors, resis-
tors, capacitors, and other simple components into functionally sophisticated 
products.
One simple type of neural circuit is the diverging circuit (fig. 8.13a), in 
which one or a few neurons produce an output that ultimately branches to mul-
tiple destinations. Such a circuit allows a small group of neurons in the brain, for 
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      267  

Figure 8.13 Neural Circuits. Arrows indicate the 
direction of the nerve signal.
Diverging
Output
Input
Converging
Output
Input
(a)
(b)
example, to issue commands that ultimately reach thousands of muscle fibers to 
produce coordinated body movements. 
Conversely, many neurons work in converging circuits (fig. 8.13b), 
in which multiple input neurons converge on fewer and fewer neurons and, 
ultimately, one or a few output neurons. For example, your sense of bal-
ance—knowing whether your body is tipping and whether you need to take 
any corrective action—depends on input from your eyes, your inner ears, 
and stretch receptors in your neck that monitor the head–neck angle (so you 
know whether your whole body is falling or you’re just cocking your head 
to one side). The neural pool that receives all this input can then integrate it 
and determine whether the brain should issue an output to certain muscles to 
catch your balance. 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t 
know.
7.	 What is the difference between a resting membrane 
potential and an action potential? Explain the role of sodium 
and potassium ions in each of these.
8.	Explain how an unmyelinated nerve fiber conducts a signal 
from the beginning to the end of an axon. How does the 
process differ in a myelinated nerve fiber? Which one is 
faster?
9.	Describe the structure of a synapse.
10.	What is the role of a neurotransmitter in communication from 
one neuron to the next? Name some neurotransmitters.
11.	 What is the difference between a converging circuit and a 
­diverging circuit? Describe at least one bodily process in 
which each of these may be involved.
268      PART 3  Internal Coordination

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
lzheimer and Parkinson diseases are the two most common 
degenerative nervous system disorders. Both are associated 
with neurotransmitter deficiencies.
A l z h e i m e r  D i s e a s e
A
lzheimer14 disease (AD) may begin before the age of 50 with 
signs so slight and ambiguous that early diagnosis is difficult. 
A common early sign is memory loss, especially for recent events. 
A person with AD may ask the same questions repeatedly, show a 
reduced attention span, and become disoriented and lost in previ-
ously familiar places. Family members often feel helpless as they 
watch their loved one’s personality gradually deteriorate beyond 
recognition. The AD patient may become moody, confused, or 
even paranoid, combative, and hallucinatory. Some lose the ability 
to read, write, talk, walk, and eat. Death ensues from complications 
of confinement and immobility, such as pneumonia.
AD affects about 11% of the U.S. population over the age of 
65; the incidence rises to 47% by age 85. It accounts for nearly 
half of all nursing home admissions and is a leading cause of death 
among the elderly. AD claims about 100,000 lives per year in the 
United States.
Diagnosis can be confirmed by autopsy. There is atrophy of 
some of the gyri (folds) of the cerebral cortex and the hippocam-
pus, an important center of memory. Nerve cells exhibit neurofibril-
lary tangles—dense masses of broken and twisted cytoskeleton 
(fig. 8.14). The number of tangles is proportional to the severity of 
the disease. In the intercellular spaces, there are senile plaques 
consisting of aggregations of cells, altered nerve fibers, and a core 
of β-amyloid protein—the breakdown product of a glycoprotein 
of plasma membranes. Oxidative stress (free radical injury) is now 
widely believed to underlie the formation of amyloid protein and 
neurofibrillary tangles, as well as all the other aspects of AD pa-
thology. This has led to interest in whether dietary antioxidants or 
antioxidant therapy can reduce the incidence or progression of AD. 
Intense biomedical research efforts are currently geared 
toward identifying the causes of AD and developing treatment 
strategies. Three genes on chromosomes 1, 14, and 21 have been 
implicated in various forms of early- and late-onset AD. Interest-
ingly, persons with Down syndrome (trisomy 21), who have three 
copies of chromosome 21 instead of the usual two, tend to show 
early-onset Alzheimer disease. But genes don’t tell the whole story. 
Nongenetic (environmental) factors also are involved. Among its 
other benefits, consistent physical exercise seems to decrease the 
risk of developing AD.
As for treatment, there is no cure, but researchers are develop-
ing drugs that focus on β-amyloid and a misfolded tau protein that 
underlies the neurofibrillary tangles. AD patients show deficiencies 
of acetylcholine (ACh) and nerve growth factor (NGF). Some pa-
tients show improvement when treated with NGF or cholinesterase 
inhibitors, but results so far have been modest.
Figure 8.14 Alzheimer Disease (AD). (a) Brain of a person 
who died of AD. Note the shrunken folds of cerebral tissue (gyri) 
and wide gaps (sulci) between them, indicating atrophy of the brain. 
(b) Cerebral tissue from a person with AD. Neurofibrillary ­tangles 
are present within the neurons, and a senile plaque is ­evident in 
the extracellular matrix  
a: © Science Source b: © Simon Fraser/Science Source
Wide sulci
Shrunken
gyri
(a)
Neurons with
neuroﬁbrillary
tangles
(b)
Senile plaque
14 Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915), German neurologist
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      269  

8.3  The Spinal Cord, Spinal Nerves, and 
Reflexes
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the functions of the spinal cord;
b.	name and describe the three protective membranes that 
­envelop the spinal cord;
c.	describe the basic anatomy of nerves and ganglia, and anatomy 
of the spinal nerves in particular;
d.	state the universal characteristics of reflexes and distinguish 
between somatic and visceral reflexes;
e.	identify the basic components of a somatic reflex arc; and
f.	 explain the mechanisms of stretch and withdrawal reflexes.
P a r k i n s o n  D i s e a s e
P
 arkinson15 disease (PD), or parkinsonism,  is a progressive loss 
of motor function beginning in a person’s 50s or 60s. It is due 
to degeneration of dopamine-releasing neurons in a brainstem tis-
sue called the substantia nigra. A gene has been identified for a 
hereditary form of PD, but most cases are nonhereditary and of 
little-known cause.
Dopamine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter that normally 
­prevents excessive activity in motor centers of the brain called the 
basal nuclei. Degeneration of dopamine-releasing neurons leads to 
an excessive ratio of ACh to dopamine, causing hyperactivity of the 
basal nuclei. As a result, a person with PD suffers involuntary muscle 
contractions. These take such forms as shaking of the hands (trem-
or) and compulsive “pill-rolling” motions of the thumb and fingers. In 
­addition, the facial muscles may become rigid and ­produce a star-
ing, expressionless face with a slightly open mouth. The ­patient’s 
range of motion diminishes. He or she takes smaller steps and 
develops a slow, shuffling gait with a forward-bent posture and a 
tendency to fall forward. Speech becomes slurred and handwriting 
becomes cramped and eventually illegible. Tasks such as buttoning 
clothes and preparing food become increasingly laborious.
Patients cannot be expected to recover from PD, but its ­effects 
can be alleviated with drugs and physical therapy. Treatment 
with dopamine is ineffective, but drugs that enhance the action 
of the brain’s self-produced dopamine are of some benefit. The 
­dopamine precursor, levodopa (l-dopa), affords some relief from 
symptoms, but it does not slow progression of the disease and it 
has undesirable side effects on the liver and heart. It is effective for 
only 5 to 10 years of treatment. In severe cases that are unrespon-
sive to medication, certain surgical treatments can help to quell the 
muscle tremors.
15James Parkinson (1755–1824), British physician
The Spinal Cord—Functional Anatomy
The spinal cord (fig. 8.15) is a cylinder of nervous tissue enclosed in the vertebral 
canal. Its functions include:
∙	 Conduction. It contains bundles of nerve fibers that carry sensory signals 
from the lower body up to the brain and motor signals down to the muscles 
and glands below the head.
∙	 Neural integration. Pools of spinal neurons integrate information arriving 
from various sources and execute appropriate output—for example, integrat-
ing stretch receptors from the urinary bladder with information from the ce-
rebrum about the appropriate time and circumstances to urinate, and issuing 
output to the urinary sphincters to either allow or delay urination.
270      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Cervical
spinal
nerves
Thoracic
spinal
nerves
Lumbar
spinal
nerves
Sacral
spinal
nerves
Cervical
enlargement
Dural
sheath
Lumbar
enlargement
Cauda equina
Medullary
cone
(a)
(b)
ner
e
nerrv
Sacr
a
v
spipina
na
na
ner
ner
ner
ne v
Lu
Lu
Lu
Lum
um
um
um
um
um
u
L
spi
spi
spi
spipipiipi
spi
sp
sp
s naa
na
na
n
ner
ner
ne
ne
neer
er
ner
ner
n
v
Vertebra (cut)
Spinal cord
Spinal nerve
rootlets
Spinal nerve
Posterior root 
ganglion
Rib
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Epidural space
v
Cerv
spi
sp
sp
spi
spi
spi
sp
spi
spi
spi
spi
spip n
C7
S5
Col
L5
T12
C1
∙	 Locomotion. Pools of spinal neurons called central pattern generators con-
trol the rhythmic limb movements of locomotion.
∙	 Reflexes. Spinal reflexes play vital roles in posture, motor coordination, and 
protective responses to pain or injury.
The spinal cord extends for about 45 cm (18 in.) from the foramen magnum 
of the skull to the level of the first or second lumbar vertebra, just below the ribs 
(farther in infants and children). It is divided into cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and 
sacral regions. The last of these is named for the fact that its nerves emerge from 
the vertebral canal in the sacral region, not because the spinal cord itself extends 
that far. The cord averages about 1.8 cm wide (comparable to the little finger), but it 
widens slightly at the cervical and lumbar enlargements because of the greater mass 
of neurons here to control the complex movements of the upper and lower limbs. 
At its lower end, the spinal cord tapers to a blunt point, the medullary cone, and 
gives off a bundle of nerves that occupy the vertebral canal from there through the 
sacrum. This bundle somewhat resembles a horse’s tail and is therefore named the 
cauda equina16 (CAW-duh ee-KWY-nuh).
Figure 8.15 The Spinal Cord, Posterior View. 
(a) Overview of spinal cord structure. (b) Detail of the 
spinal cord and associated structures. 
 
16cauda = tail; equin = horse
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      271  

Fat in epidural 
space
Spinous process 
of vertebra
Spinal nerve
Posterior root 
ganglion
Vertebral body
Spinal cord
(a) Spinal cord and vertebra (cervical)
Posterior
Anterior
Gray matter:
White matter:
(b) Spinal cord and meninges (thoracic)
Posterior horn
Lateral column
Gray commissure
Anterior column
Central canal
Posterior column
Anterior root of spinal nerve
Posterior root ganglion
Spinal nerve
Lateral horn
Anterior horn
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater
Meninges:
Dura mater (dural sheath)
Posterior root of spinal nerve
Meninges:
  Dura mater 
  (dural sheath)
  Arachnoid mater
  Pia mater
(c) Lumbar spinal cord 
Apply What You Know
Spinal cord injuries commonly result from fractures of vertebrae C5 to C6 (a 
“­broken neck”), but never from fractures of L3 to L5. Explain these contrasting 
observations in light of the anatomy you have just read.
In cross section, the cord is elliptical in shape and exhibits a central butterfly- 
or H-shaped core of gray matter surrounded by white matter (fig. 8.16). A pair of 
median grooves almost divides the cord in half, but they stop short of a gray matter 
bridge (gray commissure) that connects the right and left halves of the cord. In the 
Figure 8.16 Cross-Sectional Anatomy of 
the Spinal Cord. (a) Relationship to the vertebra, 
­meninges, and spinal nerve. (b) Detail of the spinal 
cord, meninges, and spinal nerves. (c) Cross section 
of the lumbar spinal cord with spinal nerves. 
 
c: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images
272      PART 3  Internal Coordination

middle of the gray commissure, there is often a central canal filled with cerebro-
spinal fluid, but in most regions of the adult spinal cord, the canal is collapsed and 
closed. 
The Spinal Gray Matter
In the gray matter, the two posterior “wings of the butterfly” are called 
the posterior horns. They extend to the surface of the cord and serve as 
receiving points for incoming sensory information. The two anterior wings 
are called the anterior horns. They are wider than the posterior horns and 
extend only partially toward the spinal cord surface. They are the locations 
of the somas of the motor neurons depicted in figure 8.2. The axons of these 
neurons extend to the cord surface and emerge there to become part of a spi-
nal nerve. Between the incoming nerve fibers of the posterior horn and the 
somas of the motor neurons in the anterior horn, there are usually many inter-
neurons ­forming complex networks in the gray matter of the cord, including 
some whose axons cross through the commissure and connect the left and 
right sides of the cord. From the second thoracic to the first lumbar segment 
of the cord, there is also a lateral projection of gray matter called the lateral 
horn, the origin of neurons of the sympathetic nervous system described in 
section 9.5.
The Spinal White Matter
The white matter of the spinal cord consists of bundles of nerve fibers traveling 
up and down the cord, serving as communication pathways between different 
levels of the body. Some of these fibers originate from brain neurons, and oth-
ers from neurons in the gray matter of the cord. These bundles of nerve fibers 
are arranged in three groups on each side of the cord—posterior, lateral, and 
anterior columns.
A functional knowledge of these columns is crucial in understanding spinal 
cord injuries, because often a patient loses specific sensory or motor abilities 
depending on which column, and which of its subdivisions, has been injured. 
Each column is divided into functionally distinct tracts of white matter. Some 
of them are ascending tracts that carry sensory information to higher levels of 
the cord and the brain. Others are descending tracts that carry motor signals 
from the brain down the cord to meet the motor neurons that control muscles 
and glands. 
A peculiar and clinically important point about these spinal tracts is that 
most of them cross over from the left side of the cord or brainstem to the 
right, or vice versa, along the way. Therefore, sensory signals originating 
on the left side of the body are transmitted to the right side of the brain, and 
motor signals originating in the right side of the brain command muscles 
on the left side of the body, and vice versa. Such crossing-over is called 
­decussation.17 It explains why a person who has had a stroke that kills brain 
tissue on one side of the brain experiences paralysis or sensory loss on the 
opposite side of the body.
17decuss = to cross, form an X
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      273  

Clinical Application 8.2
SPINAL CORD INJURY AND PARALYSIS
In the United States, more than 10,000 people per year suffer spinal cord 
injuries resulting in paralysis. Most such cases result from vertebral frac-
tures incurred in automobile and motorcycle accidents, sports, and gunshot 
and stab wounds. Young men from 16 to 30 years old have the highest in-
cidence of paralysis because of their high-risk behaviors; elderly people are 
at increased risk because of falls; and in wartime, many such injuries are 
incurred by combat soldiers and are thus a common issue in the medical care 
of veterans. 
If the spinal cord is completely severed, one loses all sensation and 
motor control at and below the point of injury. A patient initially exhib-
its spinal shock, characterized by flaccid paralysis—muscle slackness 
and inability to contract, along with loss of bladder and bowel control, 
dangerously erratic changes in blood pressure, and other problems. As 
spinal shock subsides and reflexes are regained, the muscles commonly 
exhibit spastic paralysis—exaggerated contraction with an inability to 
relax owing to a lack of inhibitory signals from the brain. Spastic pa-
ralysis commonly progresses to a state of chronic flexion of the hips and 
knees (flexor spasms) to a state in which the limbs are extended and rigid 
(extensor spasms). 
There are three forms of limb paralysis. Paraplegia is paralysis of 
both lower limbs resulting from spinal cord lesions at levels T1 to L1. 
Quadriplegia is paralysis of all four limbs resulting from lesions above 
level C5, such as a “broken neck.” Hemiplegia is paralysis of either 
the right or left side of the body, usually resulting not from spinal cord 
injuries but from a stroke or other brain lesion. Because of the decussa-
tion (crossover) of motor nerve fibers in the brainstem, the hemiplegia 
occurs on the side of the body opposite from the side where the stroke 
occurred.
The Spinal Meninges—Protective Membranes  
 
The brain and spinal cord are covered by three membranes that lie between the 
nervous tissue and bone (fig. 8.16b). They help to protect the delicate nervous tissue 
from abrasion and other trauma. Collectively, they are called meninges (men-IN-
jeez) (singular, meninx). Individually, they are
	 1.	 The dura mater18 (DOOR-uh MAH-tur), a tough collagenous membrane 
about as thick as a rubber kitchen glove. This is the outermost membrane. 
It lies against the inner surface of the bone in the cranial cavity, but in the 
vertebral canal it forms a loose-fitting dural sheath around the spinal cord 
and is separated from the bone by a fat-filled epidural space. Anesthetics are 
often introduced into this space to deaden the pain of childbirth or surgery 
(epidural anesthesia).
18dura = tough; mater = mother, womb
274      PART 3  Internal Coordination

	 2.	 The arachnoid19 mater (ah-RACK-noyd), a delicate middle layer named for 
an appearance suggestive of a spider’s web. It consists of a thin epithelium 
adhering to the inside of the dura and a loose web of fibers extending inward 
to the pia.
	 3.	 The pia20 mater (PEE-uh MAH-tur), the innermost layer, a transparent tissue 
of microscopic thinness that closely follows the surface contours of the brain 
and spinal cord.
Spinal Nerves—Communicating with  
the Rest of the Body
The peripheral nervous system is composed of two kinds of structures: nerves and 
ganglia. A nerve is a bundle of nerve fibers, blood vessels, and connective tissue 
wrappings. It resembles a string that frays into progressively finer branches the far-
ther away from the CNS we look. Nerves have a pearly white color due mainly to 
their fibrous connective tissues.
Each nerve fiber in a nerve is wrapped in a thin layer of loose connective 
tissue called the endoneurium21 (fig. 8.17). In most nerves, the fibers are gath-
ered in bundles called fascicles,22 each wrapped in a sheath of flat, epithelium-
like cells called the perineurium.23 Several fascicles are then bundled together 
and wrapped in an outer, fibrous sleeve called the epineurium24 to compose 
the nerve as a whole. The tough epineurium protects the nerve from stretching 
and injury. Nerves have a high metabolic rate and need a plentiful blood sup-
ply. These three layers of connective tissues ensure that blood vessels can reach 
every nerve fiber. 
If we compare a nerve to a string, then a ganglion25 is like a knot in the 
string—a swelling, usually near one end of the nerve, that contains the cell bodies 
of the peripheral neurons. In some ganglia, the neurons form synaptic contacts 
with each other, and the ganglion is therefore an information-processing center 
in the PNS.
The spinal cord gives off 31 pairs of spinal nerves, emerging with ladderlike 
regularity from the intervertebral foraminae between the vertebrae. They provide a 
means for the cord, and therefore the whole CNS, to communicate with the rest of 
the body. In this section, we take a closer look at these nerves and their relationship 
to spinal cord anatomy.
Each spinal nerve originates from the cord as six to eight nerve rootlets 
emerging from the posterior horn of the cord and a similar number arising from 
the anterior horn (see figs. 8.15 and 8.16). The posterior rootlets converge to 
form a single posterior root of the nerve, which immediately expands into a 
swelling called the posterior root ganglion; it narrows again as it approaches 
the intervertebral foramen. The posterior root is composed of sensory (afferent) 
nerve fibers, carrying signals from sensory nerve endings to the spinal cord. The 
anterior rootlets also converge into a single anterior root, but with no ganglion. 
The anterior root is composed of motor (efferent) nerve fibers, ­carrying signals 
leaving the spinal cord and destined for muscles and glands. The posterior and 
19arachn = spider, spider web; oid = like 
20pia = through mistranslation, now construed as tender, thin, or soft 
21endo = within; neuri = nerve 
22fasc = bundle; icle = little 
23peri = around 
24epi = upon 
25gangli = knot
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      275  

Rootlets
Posterior root 
Posterior root
ganglion
Anterior
root 
Spinal
nerve
Epineurium
Fascicle
Blood 
vessels
Myelin
Perineurium 
Endoneurium 
Unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers
Myelinated nerve ﬁbers
(a)
(b)
Fascicle
Blood
vessel
Perineurium
Nerve ﬁber and
myelin sheath
Epineurium
Figure 8.17 Anatomy of a Nerve. (a) A spinal nerve and its association with the spinal cord. (b) Cross section of a nerve (electron 
­micrograph). Individual nerve fibers show as tiny red dots, each surrounded by a light ring of myelin. 
 
b: ISM/Phototake
anterior roots unite into a single spinal nerve, which then passes through the 
intervertebral foramen.
Nerve roots are shortest in the cervical region and pass almost horizon-
tally to the nearest intervertebral foramen. From infancy to adulthood, how-
ever, the spine grows faster and farther than the spinal cord does, and the 
nerve roots must grow and sweep downward to stay with their corresponding 
intervertebral foramen. Therefore, the roots become progressively longer as 
we descend the cord. The roots from spinal segments L2 to Co1 form the 
cauda equina and emerge from the vertebral canal below the lowest part of 
the spinal cord.
After emerging from the intervertebral foramen, each spinal nerve branches 
into a posterior ramus26 that supplies the skin, muscles, and joints of the back; an 
26ramus = branch
276      PART 3  Internal Coordination

anterior ramus that supplies the anterior and lateral skin and muscles as well as 
the limbs; and a small meningeal branch that reenters the vertebral canal to supply 
the meninges and vertebrae.
The anterior ramus differs from one region of the trunk to another. In the 
thoracic region, it forms an intercostal nerve that travels between the ribs, inner-
vating the intercostal muscles, skin, and abdominal muscles. Everywhere else, 
anterior rami from multiple spinal nerves join each other to form a web of nerves 
called a plexus. There are five of these: a small cervical plexus deep in the neck; 
a large brachial plexus near the shoulder; a lumbar plexus in the lower back; 
and below that, a sacral plexus and finally a tiny coccygeal plexus. The nerves 
that emerge from these plexuses supply the skin, muscles, and other structures 
at their respective regions of the trunk and issue nerves to the limbs. Figure 8.18 
shows a general view of these plexuses, and table 8.1 summarizes the structures 
innervated by each one. 
Cervical nerves (8 pairs)
Cervical enlargement
Vertebra T1
Thoracic nerves (12 pairs)
Vertebra L1
Medullary cone 
Lumbar nerves (5 pairs)
Cauda equina
Sacral nerves (5 pairs)
Coccygeal nerves (1 pair)
T3
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Cervical plexus (C1–C5)
Brachial plexus (C5–T1)
Intercostal nerves (T1–T12)
Lumbar plexus (L1–L4)
Sacral plexus (L4–S4)
Coccygeal plexus 
(S4–Co1)
Vertebra C1 (atlas)
Sciatic nerve
Lumbar enlargement
Figure 8.18 The Spinal Nerve Roots and 
Plexuses, Posterior View. Boldface terms on the 
left identify the five nerve plexuses; boldface terms 
on the right identify the five regional nerve groups.
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      277  

Somatic Reflexes
A reflex may be defined as a quick, involuntary, stereotyped reaction of a gland 
or muscle to stimulation. This definition sums up four important properties: (1) 
Reflexes are quick, usually involving simple neural pathways with relatively few 
interneurons and little synaptic delay. (2) They are involuntary, meaning they occur 
without our intent, often without our awareness, and they are difficult or impossible 
to suppress. (3) They are stereotyped, meaning they occur in essentially the same 
way every time, unlike our more variable voluntary and learned behaviors. (4) They 
require stimulation; they are not spontaneous actions like muscle tics but responses 
to sensory input.
Some reflexes involve cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, or glands, such as accel-
eration of the heartbeat in fear, contraction of the esophagus in swallowing, or the 
secretion of tears in response to irritation of the cornea. These are called visceral 
reflexes and are discussed in section 9.5. Other reflexes involve skeletal muscles, 
such as pulling your hand back from a hot stove or the knee-jerk reflex so often 
evoked in a medical examination. These are called somatic reflexes and are the type 
we’ll discuss here. They are sometimes called spinal reflexes, but this is a mislead-
ing expression because (1) many visceral reflexes also involve the spinal cord, and 
(2) many somatic reflexes are mediated more by the brain than by the spinal cord.
The Reflex Arc
Somatic reflexes usually involve a relatively simple neural pathway called a reflex 
arc. Figure 8.19 illustrates the essential components of an arc:
∙	 A receptor, a sensory nerve ending or simple sense organ in the skin, a mus-
cle, or a tendon.
∙	 An afferent (sensory) nerve fiber, the axon of a unipolar neuron that carries 
signals from the receptor to the spinal cord or brainstem.
∙	 An integrating center, a point of synaptic contact between neurons in the gray 
matter of the spinal cord or brainstem. In most reflex arcs, this involves one 
or more interneurons, but in the simplest arcs, the afferent fiber may ­synapse 
directly with the efferent fiber. These simple arcs allow for quicker but less 
complex or refined responses.
Table 8.1  Structures Innervated by the Spinal Nerve Plexuses 
 
Plexus
Structures Innervated
Cervical plexus
Sensory: Skin of external ear and from ­surrounding 
region of head and neck, underside of chin, and 
shoulder; anterior chest, diaphragm, pleurae, and 
pericardium
Motor: Diaphragm and a few muscles associated 
with larynx and hyoid bone
Brachial plexus
Sensory: Skin, muscles, and joints of shoulder and 
upper limb
Motor: Muscles of upper limb
Lumbar plexus
Sensory: Skin of lower abdominal, gluteal, and 
­genital regions; skin, muscles, and joints of lower 
limb
Motor: Muscles of abdominal and pelvic regions 
and thigh
Sacral and coccygeal plexuses
Sensory: Skin of gluteal and perineal regions; 
­genitals; skin, muscles, and joints of gluteal region 
and lower limb
Motor: Muscles of gluteal and ­perineal regions and 
lower limb
278      PART 3  Internal Coordination

∙	 An efferent (motor) nerve fiber, which carries motor signals to a skeletal 
­muscle.
∙	 An effector, which in this case is the skeletal muscle. In reflexes in general, 
effector means any organ or cell that carries out the final response. 
The Stretch Reflex  
The workings of a reflex arc can be exemplified most simply by considering 
the test so commonly performed in routine medical examinations, the patel-
lar tendon (“knee-jerk”) reflex (fig. 8.19). The doctor taps on the patellar 
ligament just below the kneecap with a rubber reflex hammer. This stretches 
the ligament and its continuation, the quadriceps tendon leading to the quad-
riceps femoris muscle of the thigh. At the junction between the muscle and 
tendon, and less abundantly elsewhere in the muscle, are specialized stretch 
receptors called muscle spindles. The sudden stretch produced by the ham-
mer excites the spindle’s nerve fibers, which conduct signals to the spinal 
cord.
In the cord, these nerve fibers synapse directly with motor neurons. Thus, 
such an arc is called a monosynaptic reflex arc because there is only one synapse 
between the sensory and motor neurons. Those neurons transmit signals immedi-
ately back to the muscle fibers of the quadriceps, which contract abruptly, pulling 
on the tibia and producing the twitch of the knee. By observing the strength of 
the response, a physician can get clues to the health of the nervous system as well 
Figure 8.19 A Representative Reflex Arc. 
The monosynaptic reflex arc of the patellar tendon 
stretch reflex. 
 
Cell body of
sensory neuron
Cell body of
motor neuron
Spinal cord
Synapse in spinal
integrating center
Aﬀerent (sensory)
nerve ﬁber
Eﬀerent (motor)
nerve ﬁber
Eﬀector
(quadriceps
femoris muscle)
Receptor
in muscle
near tendon
Patellar ligament
Tibia
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      279  

2
3
4
6
7
5
1
Stepping on glass stimulates pain 
receptors in foot.
1
Pain signals travel to spinal cord via 
aﬀerent nerve ﬁbers and posterior root. 
2
Aﬀerent neuron excites multiple 
interneurons in spinal cord.
3
Motor nerve ﬁber stimulates hamstrings 
to contract, ﬂexing knee and 
withdrawing foot. 
4
5 Motor neuron to quadriceps is inhibited.
Quadriceps relaxes so it does not oppose 
knee ﬂexion.
6
Signals cross to opposite side of spinal 
cord, extending and stiﬀening the left leg 
to maintain balance. 
7
+
–
+
+
+
+
+
–
Excitatory eﬀect
Posterior
Anterior
Inhibitory eﬀect
as to disorders such as hormone and electrolyte imbalances, diabetes, alcoholism, 
and some infectious diseases.
In order for the quadriceps to produce the knee jerk, the hamstrings must 
be simultaneously inhibited from contracting and fighting the quadriceps. 
This is achieved through a polysynaptic reflex arc in which input from the 
muscle spindle also inhibits the spinal motor neurons that would otherwise 
stimulate the hamstrings. It is called polysynaptic because at least one inter-
neuron and multiple synapses intervene between the afferent and efferent 
neurons. 
Some natural functions of stretch reflexes are to respond to joint movements 
and produce corrections in muscle tension that make our actions better coordi-
nated, to maintain posture, and to prevent your head from tipping forward or your 
jaw from hanging open (unless you are nodding off in class). The vigorous and 
precisely coordinated movements of dance and athletics would be impossible 
without stretch reflexes.
The Flexor Reflex
Another well-known reflex is the flexor (withdrawal) reflex, 
which occurs, for example, when you pull back your hand 
upon ­burning your fingers, or your leg when you’ve stepped 
on something sharp (fig. 8.20). The protective function 
of this reflex requires more than the quick jerk and 
return to normal that we see in the stretch reflex; it 
requires the coordinated action of multiple muscles 
and a more sustained contraction so you don’t put 
your hand or foot right back in harm’s way. The 
flexor reflex also involves a polysynaptic reflex 
arc. Some signals ­follow pathways with relatively 
few ­synapses and thus head out to the muscles rela-
tively quickly. Others follow pathways with more 
synapses and delays, and thus follow a little behind 
the first. Consequently, the muscles receive a more 
prolonged output from the spinal cord and produce 
a more ­sustained contraction. In the case of a leg 
withdrawal as in the figure, note that the knee flex-
ors ­(hamstrings) are excited, whereas the ­extensor 
(quadriceps) is ­inhibited. 
There are other kinds of somatic reflexes that we 
will not explore in detail. For ­example: (1) A crossed-
extension reflex causes you to stiffen one leg when 
you lift the other from the ground, so you don’t fall 
over when withdrawing a limb from pain. (2) An 
intersegmental reflex arc travels up and down the 
spinal cord, from one ­segment to another, to produce 
reactions at a level different from the one where the 
stimulus is received; an example of such a reaction is 
tilting your torso to the left when you raise the right 
leg, in order to keep your ­balance. (3) A tendon reflex 
­inhibits ­excessive ­muscle contractions to prevent the 
rupturing of tendons.
Figure 8.20 The Flexor Reflex. A pain stimulus 
triggers a flexor reflex, which results in contraction 
of flexor muscles of the injured limb and withdrawal 
of the limb from danger. The polysynaptic reflex arc 
produces a more sustained, protective response 
than the quick jerk of the stretch reflex in figure. 8.19
280      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	What are the four regions of the spinal cord? Which 
two of them have enlargements, and why?
13.	At what level of the vertebral column does the adult spinal 
cord end? What exists in the vertebral canal below that point?
14.	Describe the butterfly-shaped components of the spinal gray 
matter and the columns of white matter that surround the 
gray. How do the spinal gray matter and white matter differ in 
function?
15.	From superficial to deep, name and describe the three spinal 
meninges.
16.	What are the fascicles of a nerve? How do they relate to the 
endoneurium, perineurium, and epineurium?
17.	 Describe the roots and rami of a spinal nerve and how these 
relate to the vertebrae.
18.	What are the five basic components of a reflex arc?
19.	How do a stretch reflex and a withdrawal reflex differ in their 
neural circuits and functions?
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
An occupational therapist (OT) is a health-care profession‑
al who assists people who are impaired in various ways 
to restore or sustain the skills needed for independent, 
productive, and satisfying lives. OTs work with a highly 
diverse range of clients—persons with birth defects, spinal 
cord injuries, hip replacements or artificial limbs, stroke, 
visual impairments, alcohol or drug dependence, mental retardation, emotional disturbances, and other ­conditions. The 
objectives of occupational therapy range from the most basic skills—dressing, grooming, bathing, ­cooking, eating—to 
logical reasoning, social poise, computer use, driving a car, strength conditioning, use of adaptive equipment such as 
wheelchairs, caring for a home, advancing one’s education, or holding a job. Many ­occupational ­therapists specialize in 
certain types of disability or in certain age groups, ranging from premature infants to the elderly. OTs work in hospitals, 
outpatient clinics, ­rehabilitation centers, fitness centers, hospices, schools, and clients’ homes.
To qualify for a career in occupational therapy, one must complete a graduate degree and a period of supervised 
fieldwork, and pass a national board exam. Many colleges and universities offer master’s and doctoral programs in OT. 
Prerequisites for admission vary from school to school, but may require biology, anatomy and physiology, kinesiology, 
physics, psychology, sociology, and other courses, as well as volunteer or paid work experience with disabled persons. See 
appendix B for further career information.
O c c u p a t i o n a l  T h e r a p i s t
 © David Grossman/Science Source
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      281  

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
8.1  Cells and Tissues of the  
Nervous ­System 
1.	 The three fundamental functions of the nervous system
2.	 Distinction between the central and peripheral nervous system, 
and the components of each
3.	 The structure of a generalized neuron, and the most common 
variations on that basic structure
4.	 Three functional categories of neurons—sensory neurons, 
interneurons, and motor neurons
5.	 Six kinds of neuroglia, whether each kind is located in the 
CNS or PNS, and the functions performed by each
6.	 Structure and function of the myelin sheath, and how it is pro-
duced in the CNS and PNS
7.	 The distinction between the gray and white matter of 
the CNS
8.2  The Physiology of Neurons 
1.	 What is meant by saying a cell has a resting membrane 
potential and that its plasma membrane is electrically 
polarized
2.	 Distinctions between a resting membrane potential, a local 
potential, and an action potential
3.	 How the resting membrane potential is produced by the 
distribution of cations and anions on the two sides of the 
plasma membrane, and how the Na+–K+ pump maintains 
this potential
4.	 The mechanism by which stimulation of a neuron produces a 
local potential
5.	 The mechanism by which a local potential can lead to an action 
potential; the role of voltage-gated ion channels in producing 
action potentials
6.	 The phases of an action potential and the ion movements that 
account for each
7.	 The difference between an action potential and a nerve 
signal
8.	 The mechanisms of continuous and saltatory conduction and 
how they differ from each other
9.	 Why myelinated nerve fibers conduct signals faster than unmy-
elinated ones
	10.	 The structure of a synapse where neurons meet
	11.	 How a neuron transmits information across a synapse to the 
next cell
	12.	 The definition of neurotransmitter and some examples
	13.	 The significance of neural pools and circuits in information 
processing by the nervous system
	14.	 The distinction between a converging and a diverging circuit 
and some bodily processes that involve each type
8.3  The Spinal Cord, Spinal Nerves,  
and Reflexes 
1.	 Gross anatomy of the spinal cord
2.	 The relationship between the spinal cord and vertebral canal, 
and the contents of the adult vertebral canal below the termina-
tion of the spinal cord
3.	 The shape of the spinal gray matter and the terminology and 
functional significance of its horns
4.	 Three zones of white matter on each side of the spinal cord; 
how it is organized into columns and tracts; and the two funda-
mental types of spinal tracts
5.	 Differences between ascending and descending spinal cord 
tracts, and an example of each
6.	 The meaning of decussation and its significance in the rela-
tionship between CNS function and the sensory and motor 
functions of the body outside of the CNS
7.	 Names, composition, and structural relationships of the three 
meninges of the spinal cord
8.	 Names, composition, and structural relationships of the three 
connective tissues of a nerve, and how these relate to nerve 
fibers and fascicles
9.	 Where ganglia occur, what composes them, and how they 
relate structurally and functionally to nerves
	10.	 Anatomy of a spinal nerve, including its two roots, its rootlets, 
the posterior root ganglion, and its rami, and its spatial rela-
tionship to the spinal cord and vertebrae
	11.	 The five plexuses of spinal nerves, where they are located, and 
the general destinations or origins of nerve fibers that lead to 
or exit from each plexus
	12.	 General properties of a reflex and the distinctions between 
visceral and somatic reflexes
	13.	 Fundamental components of a somatic reflex arc
	14.	 The mechanism of a stretch reflex, the role of muscle 
spindles, and why it is advantageous for stretch reflexes to be 
monosynaptic
	15.	 The mechanism of a flexor reflex and why it is advantageous 
for flexor reflexes to be polysynaptic
	16.	 Some general purposes of crossed-extension, intersegmental, 
and tendon reflexes, and the importance of reciprocal inhibi-
tion in certain reflexes
282      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Myelinated nerve fibers produce action potentials only 
at their
a.	 nodes of Ranvier.
b.	 internodes.
c.	 synapses.
d.	 dendrites.
e.	 terminal arborizations.
	 2.	 The posterior root ganglion next to the spinal cord contains the 
somas of
a.	 efferent neurons.
b.	 interneurons.
c.	 unipolar neurons.
d.	 multipolar neurons.
e.	 motor neurons.
	 3.	 An oligodendrocyte serves CNS nerve fibers in the same way 
that a/an ________ serves PNS nerve fibers.
a.	 schwann cell
b.	 microglia cell
c.	 endoneurium
d.	 ependymal cell
e.	 satellite cell
	 4.	 An action potential begins with
a.	 a flow of K+ out of a neuron.
b.	 a flow of Ca2+ into a neuron.
c.	 the release of a neurotransmitter.
d.	 a flow of Na+ out of a neuron.
e.	 a flow of Na+ into a neuron.
	 5.	 A synaptic vesicle is a storage site for
a.	 calcium ions.
b.	 sodium ions.
c.	 neurotransmitter receptors.
d.	 neurotransmitter.
e.	 acetylcholinesterase.
	 6.	 The spinal cord is divided into all of the following regions 
except
a.	 sacral.
b.	 coccygeal.
c.	 lumbar.
d.	 cervical.
e.	 thoracic.
	 7.	 Neurons that carry sensory information to the spinal cord are 
called
a.	 efferent neurons.
b.	 effluent neurons.
c.	 interneurons.
d.	 affluent neurons.
e.	 afferent neurons.
	 8.	 The nerve fibers that stimulate skeletal muscles below the 
neck arise from neurosomas in
a.	 the posterior horn.
b.	 the anterior horn.
c.	 the lateral horn.
d.	 the posterior root ganglion.
e.	 the brain.
	 9.	 A bundle of nerve fibers within a nerve is called
a.	 the gray matter of the nerve.
b.	 an endoneurium.
c.	 a fascicle.
d.	 the white matter of the nerve.
e.	 a perineurium.
	10.	 Jerking your hand back when you are burned is an example of
a.	 an alarm reflex.
b.	 a stretch reflex.
c.	 decussation.
d.	 a visceral reflex.
e.	 a monosynaptic reflex.
	11.	 The outermost and toughest of the meninges is the ________.
	12.	 The brain and spinal cord compose the ________ nervous 
­system.
	13.	 Stretch reflexes are activated when stretching of a muscle 
­stimulates encapsulated receptors called ________ in the 
muscle tissue.
	14.	 Muscles of the forearm are controlled by nerves arising from 
the ________ plexus.
	15.	 In a myelinated peripheral nerve fiber, the gap between one 
Schwann cell and the next is called a/an ________.
	16.	 The sensory neurons for smell have the ________ shape, 
­meaning they possess only one dendrite and one axon.
	17.	 Neuroglia called ________ cells line the internal cavities of 
the brain and spinal cord and secrete cerebrospinal fluid.
	18.	 A nerve signal is a chain reaction of one ________ after 
­another, analogous to a row of falling dominoes.
	19.	 Neurons communicate with each other by means of chemical 
secretions called ________.
	20.	 The posterior and anterior horns of the spinal cord are com-
posed of a type of nervous tissue called ________.
Answers in Appendix A
CHAPTER 8   The Nervous ­System I      283  

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true. 
	 1.	 Motor signals travel the spinal cord by way of its ascending 
tracts.
	 2.	 The arachnoid mater lies between the pia mater and the nervous 
tissue of the spinal cord.
	 3.	 The outermost layer of a nerve is a fibrous covering called the 
perineurium.
	 4.	 Spinal nerves of the thoracic region form a weblike nerve plexus 
adjacent to the vertebral column.
	 5.	 All somatic reflex arcs pass through the spinal cord.
	 6.	 The nodes of Ranvier speed up signal conduction in ­myelinated 
axons.
	 7.	 A neuron at rest has a positive internal charge relative to the 
charge outside its plasma membrane.
	 8.	 Neuron is another name for nerve fiber.
	 9.	 The myelin sheath of brain and spinal cord neurons is produced 
by Schwann cells.
	10.	 A bipolar neuron has two axons.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 The local anesthetics tetracaine and procaine (Novocain) pre-
vent voltage-gated Na+ channels from opening. Explain why 
this would block the conduction of pain signals in a sensory 
nerve.
	 2.	 Mr. Richards has had a stroke that damaged some of the tissue 
on the left side of his brain and paralyzed his right arm. He 
doesn’t understand why his right arm is paralyzed when the 
neurologist told him the stroke was on the left side of his brain, 
and he feels sure his neurologist is wrong. If you were his 
nurse or physical therapist, how would you explain this to him 
in simple, lay terms?
	 3.	 In a spinal tap, a needle is inserted between two of the lower 
lumbar vertebrae into the vertebral canal in order to withdraw 
a sample of cerebrospinal fluid. From what you know of spinal 
cord anatomy, deduce why it is safer to perform the procedure 
in this region rather than higher on the vertebral column.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere. 
284      PART 3  Internal Coordination

9
Chapter
Chapter Outline
9.1 Overview of the Brain
• Major Landmarks 
• Meninges 
• Gray and White Matter 
• Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid 
• Blood Supply and the Blood–Brain Barrier 
9.2 Principal Divisions of the Brain
• The Brainstem 
• The Cerebellum 
• The Cerebrum 
9.3 Multiregional Brain Functions
• Sensation 
• Cognition 
• Motor Control 
• Language 
• Cerebral Lateralization 
• The Electroencephalogram 
9.4 The Cranial Nerves
9.5 The Autonomic Nervous System
• Visceral Reflexes 
• Neural Pathways 
• Subdivisions of the ANS 
• Neurotransmitters and Receptors 
• Dual Innervation 
• Higher-Level Regulation of the ANS
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 9.1: Meningitis
• Clinical Application 9.2: Aphasia
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Nervous System 
• Career Spotlight: Electroneurodiagnostic 
­Technologist 
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide 
Module 7: Nervous System
The Nervous  
System II
THE BRAIN, CRANIAL NERVES, AND AUTONOMIC  
NERVOUS SYSTEM
B A S E  C A M P
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Anatomy of the cranium in relation to the brain 
and cranial nerves (see “The Skull” in section 6.3)
• Neuroglia in section 8.1
• Meninges of the CNS in section 8.3
• Anatomy of nerves in section 8.3
White matter tracts in the brain visualized using diffusion tensor imaging.
© Pasieka/Science Source
	
285

Major Landmarks
A broad overview of the brain’s gross anatomy will provide important points of ref-
erence as we progress through a more detailed study. The largest, most conspicuous 
part of the brain is the cerebrum (seh-REE-brum or SER-eh-brum), composed of a 
pair of half-globes called the cerebral hemispheres (fig. 9.1). The cerebral surface 
is marked by thick folds called gyri1 (JY-rye; singular, gyrus) separated by shallow 
1gyr = turn, twist
T
he mystique of the brain continues to intrigue modern ­biologists 
and psychologists even as it did the philosophers of antiquity. 
Aristotle thought it was merely a radiator for cooling the blood, but 
Hippocrates correctly surmised that it was the seat of “our pleasures, 
joy, laughter and jests, as well as our sorrows, pains, griefs and tears. 
Through it, in particular, we think, see, hear, and distinguish the 
ugly from the beautiful, the bad from the good, the pleasant from the 
­unpleasant.”
Brain function is strongly associated with what it means to be 
alive and human. With its hundreds of neural pools and trillions of 
synapses, the brain performs sophisticated tasks beyond the present 
understanding of science. Here we can only briefly explore its major 
anatomical features and where in the brain certain key functions 
reside.
We also will explore the connections of the central nervous system to 
the rest of the body through 12 pairs of cranial nerves, which arise from 
the floor of the brain and emerge from the skull; and we’ll examine the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, which regulate many 
of our unconscious bodily processes such as heart rate and digestion.
9.1
 Overview of the Brain
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the major subdivisions and anatomical landmarks of the 
brain;
b.	describe the locations of the gray and white matter of the brain;
c.	name and describe the three meninges that enclose the brain;
d.	describe the system of chambers and channels in the brain and 
the flow of cerebrospinal fluid through this system; and
e.	describe the brain’s blood supply and the selective barrier 
­between the blood and brain tissue.
286      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Precentral gyrus
Lateral sulcus
Pons
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Transverse
cerebral ﬁssure
Frontal lobe
Occipital lobe
Temporal lobe
Cerebellum
Medulla
oblongata
Spinal cord
(c) Lateral view
Parietal lobe
Temporal lobe
Brainstem
Cerebellum
Cerebrum
Spinal cord
Frontal lobe
Anterior
Posterior
Cerebral
hemispheres
Occipital lobe
Central sulcus
Longitudinal ﬁssure
Parietal lobe
Central sulcus
Lateral sulcus
Gyri
(a) Superior view
(b) Lateral view
Figure 9.1 Surface Anatomy of the Brain.  
(a) Superior view of the cerebral hemispheres.  
(b) Left lateral view. (c) The brain of a cadaver.  
c: © McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer
grooves called sulci2 (SUL-sye; singular, sulcus). The left and right hemispheres 
are separated by a very deep groove, the longitudinal fissure. At the bottom of this 
fissure, the hemispheres are connected by a prominent bundle of nerve fibers called 
the corpus callosum3—a conspicuous landmark in the bisected brain (fig. 9.2).
2sulc = furrow, groove 
3corpus = body; call = thick
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      287  

Figure 9.2 Medial Aspect of the Brain.  
(a) Major anatomical landmarks of the medial surface. 
(b) Median section of the cadaver brain. 
b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer 
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Frontal lobe
Corpus callosum
Optic chiasm
Pituitary gland
Temporal lobe
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
oblongata
Central sulcus
Parietal lobe
Parieto–occipital
sulcus
Occipital lobe
Pineal gland
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
(a)
Lateral ventricle
Parieto–occipital
sulcus
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Midbrain
Cerebellum
Fourth ventricle
Pons
Medulla
oblongata
(b)
Choroid plexus
Pineal gland
Occipital lobe
Corpus callosum
288      PART 3  Internal Coordination

The cerebellum4 (SER-eh-BEL-um) is the second-largest part of the brain. It 
lies at the rear of the head beneath the cerebrum. Like the cerebrum, it is composed 
of right and left hemispheres. It is marked by slender gyri, here called folia,5 sepa-
rated by shallow sulci.
The third major part of the brain is the brainstem, the smallest of all and 
yet least dispensable to survival. Strokes and injuries here are more likely to be 
fatal than comparable injuries to the cerebrum or cerebellum. We can liken the 
brain to a mushroom, with the cerebrum being the cap and the brainstem being 
the stalk. At the foramen magnum of the skull, the brainstem connects to the 
spinal cord.
Meninges
Like the spinal cord, the brain is enveloped in three connective tissue membranes, 
the meninges, which lie between the nervous tissue and bone (fig. 9.3). The thick-
est and toughest of these is the dura mater, which lines the inside of the cranium 
and forms a fibrous sac around the brain. It consists of two layers of tissue that are 
separated in some places to form blood-filled spaces called dural sinuses. These are 
veins that collect blood that has circulated through the brain tissue. The dura mater 
folds inward to form a tough fibrous wall between the two cerebral hemispheres, 
another between the two cerebellar hemispheres, and a horizontal shelf between 
the cerebrum and cerebellum. These folds limit potentially injurious movements of 
the brain when the head is jarred. Severe jarring, however, can nevertheless cause 
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and even death, as in auto accidents, football injuries, 
and shaken baby syndrome.
Beneath the dura is an arachnoid mater similar to that of the spinal cord; the 
two membranes are separated in some places by a subdural space. Beneath the 
arachnoid mater, a subarachnoid space separates it from the innermost membrane, 
the pia mater. The pia mater closely follows all the contours of the brain surface, 
and is so thin and transparent that in most places it is visible only with a microscope. 
Delicate filaments extend from the arachnoid mater to the pia mater and suspend  
the brain in its bath of cerebrospinal fluid.
Clinical Application 9.1
MENINGITIS
Meningitis—inflammation of the meninges—is one of the most serious dis-
eases of infancy and childhood. It is caused by a variety of bacterial and 
viral infections of the CNS. These usually invade by way of the nose and 
throat, often following respiratory, throat, or ear infections. Meningitis can 
cause swelling of the brain, cerebral hemorrhaging, and sometimes death 
within mere hours of onset. Signs and symptoms include high fever, stiff 
neck, drowsiness, intense headache, and vomiting. Death can occur so sud-
denly that infants and children with a high fever should receive immediate 
medical attention. Freshman college students show a slightly elevated inci-
dence of meningitis, especially those living in crowded dormitories rather 
than off campus.
4cereb = brain; ellum = little 
5foli = leaf
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      289  

Gray and White Matter
The tissues of the brain are divided into gray and white matter, like those of the 
spinal cord. In the brain, however, most of the gray matter is on the surface, where 
it forms a layer called the cortex of the cerebrum and cerebellum (fig. 9.4c). 
Smaller masses of gray matter called nuclei occur more deeply, surrounded by 
white matter. The gray matter contains the cell bodies, dendrites, and synapses of 
the neurons, so it is the site of all information processing, memory, thought, and 
decision making by the brain. The white matter is composed of tracts (bundles) of 
myelinated nerve fibers connecting one region of the CNS to another. The afore-
mentioned corpus callosum is the largest tract. Tracts get their glistening white 
color from the myelin.
Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid 
 
Sections through the brain reveal four internal chambers called ventricles  
(fig. 9.4)—two lateral ventricles, one in each cerebral hemisphere; a single third 
ventricle in a narrow space between the hemispheres; and a fourth ventricle 
between the cerebellum and brainstem. A small pore connects each lateral ven-
tricle to the third, and a canal through the brainstem connects the third ventricle 
to the fourth. The system then continues into the spinal cord as the central canal. 
These chambers and canals are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which 
Figure 9.3 The Meninges of the Brain. Frontal section of the head. 
•	 In what ways does the dura mater here differ from the dura mater  
enclosing the spinal cord?
Subdural space
Subarachnoid 
space
Dural sinus
Skull
Pia mater
Blood vessel
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Gray matter
Arachnoid granulation
Brain:
White matter
290      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Figure 9.4 Ventricles of the Brain. (a) Right lateral view. (b) Anterior view. (c) Superior view of a horizontal section of the cadaver brain, 
showing the lateral ventricles and some other features of the cerebrum. Note the thin layer of gray matter (cerebral cortex) overlying the 
­cerebral white matter. 
c: © McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer/Don Kincaid, dissections
Lateral ventricles
Central canal
Fourth ventricle
Third ventricle
Lateral ventricle
Third ventricle
Cerebrum
Fourth ventricle
(a) Lateral view
(b) Anterior view
Posterior        Anterior
Longitudinal 
ﬁssure
Corpus callosum
(posterior part)
Choroid plexus
Thalamus
Gyrus
Sulcus
Basal nuclei
Corpus callosum
(anterior part)
Longitudinal 
ﬁssure
Frontal lobe
Gray matter
(cortex)
White matter
Lateral ventricle
Temporal lobe
Third ventricle
Lateral sulcus
Insula
Lateral ventricle
Occipital lobe
(c) Horizontal section
Anterior
Posterior
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      291  

also fills the subarachnoid space and bathes the external surface of the brain and 
spinal cord.
CSF is produced by the filtration of blood plasma through the brain ­surface 
into the subarachnoid space; by the layer of ependymal cells that lines the 
­ventricles; and by a spongy mass of blood capillaries, the choroid plexus (CORE-
oyd), in each of the four ventricles. The CSF produced in the ventricles circulates 
from the lateral ventricles to the third, and down the brainstem canal to the fourth 
ventricle and spinal cord. The fourth ventricle has three pores through which 
CSF exits the internal spaces and enters the subarachnoid space. Here, it bathes 
the outer surfaces of the brain and spinal cord. It is eventually reabsorbed into 
the bloodstream through outgrowths of the arachnoid mater called arachnoid 
granulations.
The CSF provides a carefully regulated chemical environment for the 
brain and continually rinses metabolic wastes from the brain and spinal cord. 
It also provides buoyancy for the brain so it does not rest heavily in the floor 
of the cranium, and cushions the brain to protect it from minor jolts or blows 
to the head.
Blood Supply and the Blood–Brain Barrier
The brain is only 2% of the body weight, yet it has such a high metabolic rate 
that it demands 15% of the blood supply. A mere 4-minute cessation of cerebral 
blood flow can cause irreversible brain damage. It receives its supply through 
two ­internal carotid arteries that begin near the angle of the mandible and enter 
the cranial cavity through the carotid foramina in the base of the skull, and two 
­vertebral arteries that pass up the back of the neck through the transverse foram-
ina of the cervical vertebrae and enter the cranial cavity through the foramen 
magnum. The cerebral arteries and veins are further described at “The Systemic 
­Circuit” in chapter 13. 
Despite its critical importance to the energy-hungry brain, the blood is 
also a source of antibodies, toxins, and other agents that are potentially harm-
ful to the irreplaceable brain tissue. Consequently, there is a blood–brain 
barrier (BBB) that strictly regulates what substances can get from the blood-
stream into the tissue fluid of the brain. The BBB consists mainly of tight 
junctions between the epithelial cells of the cerebral blood capillaries. The 
BBB is freely permeable to such necessities as oxygen and glucose (and such 
drugs as alcohol and nicotine), but it prevents many other substances from 
passing through. Unfortunately, it makes it very difficult to deliver drugs for 
the treatment of brain diseases. For example, the BBB is an obstacle to treat-
ing brain cancer with chemotherapy.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
     1.	What are the three principal subdivisions of the  
brain? Which ones are divided into hemispheres and  
have gyri and sulci? What do the terms gyri and sulci  
mean?
2.	Where are the gray matter and white matter of the brain 
­located?
3.	Describe the source of CSF, the route that it takes through 
and around the CNS, and its functions.
4.	What is the blood–brain barrier, and why is it important?
292      PART 3  Internal Coordination

9.2  Principal Divisions of the Brain
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the parts of the brainstem and describe their structure and 
function;
b.	describe the structure and function of the cerebellum;
c.	describe the locations of the gray matter and tracts of white 
­matter in the cerebrum;
d.	list the five lobes of the cerebrum, identify their anatomical 
boundaries, and state their functions; and
e.	describe the limbic system and identify its major functions.
In our regional survey of the brain, we will start at the rear and work forward, from 
brainstem to cerebrum. This has the advantage of beginning with regions that are 
relatively simple, anatomically and functionally, and working our way up to the 
most complex and mysterious part of the brain, the cerebrum—the seat of such 
complex functions as thought, memory, and emotion. 
The Brainstem
The brainstem (fig. 9.5) is an elongated pillar of nervous tissue extending vertically 
from the foramen magnum to the cerebrum. From inferior to superior, it consists of 
the medulla oblongata, pons, midbrain, and diencephalon (although not all authori-
ties include the diencephalon). The brainstem serves in part as the “information 
highway” between the cerebrum and the lower body; it contains prominent tracts 
of nerve fibers carrying signals coming up from the spinal cord and down from the 
cerebrum.
Embedded among these tracts are at least 100 pairs of nuclei and neural pools—
small masses of gray matter that control fundamental physiological functions of the 
body. Many of these nuclei form a loosely organized core of gray matter called the 
reticular formation with functions as varied as regulation of sleep and conscious-
ness, cardiovascular and respiratory control, and pain modulation. Our survey of the 
brainstem will proceed from bottom to top, and will emphasize functions of nuclei 
associated with the reticular formation.
The Medulla Oblongata
The medulla oblongata6 looks superficially like a slightly wider continuation of the 
spinal cord. It contains fiber tracts that carry sensory information from the spinal 
cord to higher levels of the brain, and motor commands from higher brain centers 
to the spinal cord. The motor signals travel predominantly through a pair of anterior 
ridges called pyramids, shaped somewhat like two parallel baseball bats. When 
you consciously will your muscles to contract, the motor signals pass through here. 
Ridges on the posterior surface of the medulla carry sensory signals destined for the 
cerebrum.
6medulla = pith, inner core; oblongata = elongated
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      293  

Diencephalon:
Diencephalon:
Midbrain:
Thalamus
Pineal gland
Superior colliculus
Inferior colliculus
Spinal cord
Pons
Medulla
oblongata
Cerebral peduncle
Optic tract
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellar
peduncles
(cut edges)
Midbrain:
Thalamus
Optic tract
Cranial nerves:
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Optic nerve (II)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Facial nerve (VII)
Vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
Vagus nerve (X)
Accessory nerve (XI)
Hypoglossal nerve (XII)
Spinal nerves
Pituitary stalk
Cerebral peduncle
Pyramid
Spinal cord
(a) Anterior view
(b) Posterolateral view
Pons
Medulla oblongata:
Diencephalon
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla oblongata
Regions of the brainstem
Figure 9.5 The Brainstem. (a) Anterior view. 
(b) Posterolateral view. The cerebellum is cut off to 
open the fourth ventricle. 
294      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Amid these tracts of white matter are gray matter nuclei concerned with con-
trolling the heart rate and blood pressure; the respiratory rhythm, coughing, and 
sneezing; the digestive tract functions of swallowing, salivation, gastrointestinal 
secretion, gagging, and vomiting; and roles in speech, sweating, and tongue and 
head movements.
The Pons
The pons7 (pronounced “ponz”) is a distinctly wider segment of the brainstem supe-
rior to the medulla. It is the most significant relay center for signals going to the 
cerebellum. It also contains nuclei concerned with sleep, hearing, equilibrium, taste, 
eye movements, facial expressions, facial sensation, respiration, swallowing, blad-
der control, and posture.
The Midbrain
The midbrain is a relatively short bridge between the pons and higher brainstem 
centers. It has a pair of stalks called cerebral peduncles8 (peh-DUN-culs) and another 
pair called cerebellar peduncles that anchor the cerebral hemispheres and cerebel-
lum to the brainstem; these are major communication pathways between these brain 
regions. The midbrain filters pain stimuli and determines whether we become con-
sciously aware of pain and how intensely we feel it. It also has a darkly pigmented 
tissue called the substantia nigra9 (sub-STAN-she-uh NY-gruh), a dark gray to black 
nucleus pigmented with melanin. The substantia nigra produces the neurotransmit-
ter dopamine, which acts on the basal nuclei of the cerebrum (described later) to 
inhibit unwanted muscular movements. Degeneration of the substantia nigra results 
in the tremors and other motor deficiencies of Parkinson disease (see Perspectives 
on Health in section 8.2). The posterior surface of the midbrain has four conspicu-
ous humps called colliculi10 concerned with certain visual and auditory reflexes and 
other functions related to vision and hearing.
The Diencephalon
The diencephalon (DI-en-SEF-a-lon) consists of a large ovoid mass on each side 
of the brain called the thalamus, a median funnel-shaped structure called the hypo-
thalamus, and a median tissue called the epithalamus above them. Authorities vary 
on whether they consider the diencephalon to be part of the brainstem.
A thalamus11 underlies each cerebral hemisphere, perched at the superior end 
of the brainstem (the large blue bodies in fig. 9.5). In about 70% of people, the right 
and left thalami are joined medially by a narrow bridge of tissue. The thalamus plays 
various roles in memory, emotion, motor control, and sensation. Its main function 
is to process incoming sensory information and relay it to the appropriate places in 
the cerebrum. For example, it receives visual signals from the optic nerve, processes 
them, and relays information to the posterior region of the cerebral cortex, where 
we first become aware of what we see. Similarly, the thalamus processes and relays 
signals for taste, smell, hearing, equilibrium, vision, touch, pain, pressure, heat, and 
cold to appropriate processing centers in the cerebrum. Thus, the thalamus is often 
nicknamed “the gateway to the cerebral cortex.”
7pons = bridge 
8ped = foot; uncle = little 
9substantia = substance; nigra = black 
10coll = hill; cul = little 
11thalamus = chamber, inner room
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      295  

A single hypothalamus,12 as its name implies, lies medially beneath the 
thalami. It is shaped somewhat like a flattened funnel, forming the floor and the 
lateral walls of the third ventricle (see fig. 9.2). The hypothalamus is a major 
control center for many instinctive and automatic functions of the body including 
water balance, blood pressure, hunger and thirst, digestive functions, metabo-
lism, stress responses, shivering and sweating, sleep, memory, growth, emotion, 
reproductive cycles, sexual behavior, childbirth, and lactation.  The pituitary 
gland attaches by a stalk to the base of the hypothalamus, and the hypothalamus 
carries out several of its functions by regulating the secretion of pituitary hor-
mones (see section 11.3).
The epithalamus is a small median sliver of tissue that arches over the 
­midline between the thalami. Its most prominent component is the pineal 
gland (see fig. 9.2a), an endocrine gland that produces melatonin and serotonin 
(see section 11.4).
The Cerebellum
The cerebellum is the second-largest part of the brain (fig. 9.6). Even though it 
is only 10% of the brain mass, it contains over 50% of its neurons. As noted ear-
lier, the cerebellum consists of right and left hemispheres connected by a narrow 
bridge, and is marked by slender folia and sulci. The cerebellum has a surface 
cortex of gray matter and a deeper layer of white matter. In a sagittal section, the 
white matter exhibits a branching, fernlike pattern called the arbor vitae13 (AR-bur 
VEE-tee). 
Until recently, the function of the cerebellum 
was thought to be largely limited to motor coor-
dination, as described later in this chapter. How-
ever, with modern brain-imaging techniques such 
as PET scans and functional MRI (fMRI), it has 
become clear that this is only one part of a much 
broader cerebellar role. Its more general ­function 
seems to be the evaluation of various forms of 
sensory input. It is highly engaged in fingertip 
sensation; strategizing movements (such as know-
ing just when and where to reach to catch a flying 
baseball); judging the three-dimensional shape of 
objects (spatial ­perception); judging the passage of 
time; and ­predicting how much the eyes must move 
to compensate for head movements and remain 
visually fixed on an object. Cerebellar lesions 
impair a person’s ­ability to distinguish ­differences 
in pitch between two sounds and to distinguish 
between similar-sounding words such as rabbit 
and rapid.  Some people with cerebellar lesions 
have serious motor deficits. Others have ­difficulty 
planning and scheduling tasks or controlling 
their impulses and emotions. Many children with 
­attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
have abnormally small cerebellums.
12hypo = below 
13arbor = tree; vitae = of life
Figure 9.6 The Cerebellum. (a) Median section, 
showing relationship to the brainstem. (b) Superior 
view. 
 
Superior colliculus
Pineal
gland
Inferior colliculus
Midbrain
Pons
Fourth
ventricle
Medulla
oblongata
White matter
(arbor vitae)
Gray matter
(a) Median section
(b) Superior view
Folia
Anterior
Posterior
Cerebellar
hemisphere
296      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Apply What You Know
Discuss the multifaceted importance of the cerebellum to a tennis player, a 
­concert pianist, and a student driving to class in city traffic.
The Cerebrum
The cerebrum is the largest and most conspicuous part of the brain. It enables you to 
turn pages in a book, read and comprehend the words, remember ideas, talk about 
them, and take an examination. It is the seat of your sensory perception, memory, 
thought, judgment, and voluntary motor control, among other functions.
Cerebral Tissues
As already described, the cerebrum consists of two half-globes, the cerebral hemi-
spheres, separated by the deep longitudinal fissure (see fig. 9.1a). The surface of 
each hemisphere is marked by conspicuous gyri and sulci. Its surface tissue is a 
layer of gray matter called the cerebral cortex,14 which contains the cell bodies of 
the cerebral neurons, their dendrites, and their synapses. Even though it is only 2 to 
3 mm thick, the cortex constitutes about 40% of the mass of the brain and contains 
14 to 16 billion neurons. Elaborate folding allows the cerebrum to contain three 
times as much cortex as we would have if it had a smooth surface. Animals with 
less behavioral sophistication, variability, and adaptability have relatively smooth-
surfaced cerebrums. Only whales, dolphins, and apes rival humans in the extent of 
their cerebral convolutions.
The deeper white matter (see fig. 9.4c) of the cerebrum has no information-­
processing capability. It is composed of neuroglia and myelinated nerve fibers 
(axons) leading to and from the cell bodies of the cortex. These fibers are bundled 
into tracts that connect different gyri or larger regions within each hemisphere, 
pass between higher and lower brain centers and the spinal cord, and connect the 
right and left hemispheres through the thick C-shaped corpus callosum. It is chiefly 
through the corpus callosum that the left and right hemispheres coordinate their 
activities with each other.
Lobes of the Cerebrum
Some cerebral gyri vary from one person’s brain to another and between the right 
and left hemispheres of the same person. Others, however, are quite consistent and 
serve as landmarks that universally define the functional lobes of any human cere-
brum. There are five lobes in each hemisphere, mostly named for the overlying 
cranial bones (fig. 9.7):
	 1.	 The frontal lobe begins immediately behind the frontal bone, superior to 
the eyes. Its posterior boundary is a wavy vertical groove, the central sulcus, 
that extends from the top of the head to the margin of the lateral sulcus, 
which is described shortly. A wide region of the frontal lobe just anterior 
to the central sulcus is concerned with voluntary motor functions. Farther 
anterior to this, between the motor region and the forehead, is the ­prefrontal 
cortex. This is little developed in other mammals but very prominent in 
humans, and is concerned with explicit memory (memory of facts that you 
can verbalize), mood, emotion, motivation, and abstract thought such as 
foresight, planning, problem solving, and social judgment. On the underside 
14cortex = bark, rind
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      297  

of each frontal lobe is a club-shaped olfactory bulb, which receives nerve 
fibers from the nose for the sense of smell and relays these signals to more 
posterior processing centers.
	 2.	 The parietal lobe forms the uppermost part of the brain and underlies the 
parietal bone. Its anterior boundary is the central sulcus and its posterior 
boundary is the parieto–occipital sulcus, visible on the medial surface of 
each hemisphere (see fig. 9.2). This lobe is concerned with the sensory 
­perception and integration of taste; processing visual information; spatial 
perception; language processing; numerical awareness (such as how many 
objects one is seeing); and somatic (body-wall and musculoskeletal) sensa-
tions such as touch, stretch, and pain.
	 3.	 The occipital lobe is at the rear of the head underlying the occipital bone. It 
is the principal visual center of the brain.
	 4.	 The temporal lobe is a lateral, horizontal lobe deep to the temporal bone, 
separated from the parietal lobe above it by a deep lateral sulcus. It is con-
cerned with hearing, smell, emotional behavior, learning, various aspects of 
memory, visual recognition, and language comprehension.
	 5.	 The insula15 is a small mass of cortex deep to the lateral sulcus, made vis-
ible only by retracting or cutting away some of the overlying cerebrum (see 
figs. 9.1c, 9.4c, and 9.7). It plays roles in taste, pain, visceral sensations 
(such as a stomachache), consciousness, emotion, empathy, and cardiovas-
cular homeostasis.
15insula = island
Figure 9.7 Lobes of the Cerebrum. The frontal and temporal lobes are retracted slightly to reveal the insula. 
Precentral
gyrus
Abstract thought
Explicit memory
Mood
Motivation
Foresight and planning
Decision making
Emotional control
Social judgment
Voluntary motor control
Speech production
Central
sulcus
Postcentral
gyrus
Frontal lobe
Taste
Pain
Visceral sensation
Consciousness
Emotion and empathy
Cardiovascular homeostasis
Insula
Taste
Somatic sensation
Sensory integration
Visual processing
Spatial perception
Language processing
Numerical awareness
Parietal lobe
Visual awareness
Visual processing
Occipital lobe
Hearing
Smell
Emotion
Learning
Language comprehension
Memory consolidation
Verbal memory
Visual and auditory memory
Language
Temporal lobe
298      PART 3  Internal Coordination

The Basal Nuclei
The basal nuclei are masses of cerebral gray matter buried deep in the white matter, 
lateral to the thalamus (see fig. 9.4). They receive input from the substantia nigra of 
the midbrain and motor areas of the cerebral cortex and send signals back to both of 
these locations. They are part of a feedback loop that serves in motor control and are 
further discussed in a later section on that topic.
The Limbic System
The limbic16 system is a group of brain structures concerned primarily with learn-
ing, memory, and emotion. It forms a ring of tissue on the medial side of each 
hemisphere, encircling the corpus callosum and thalamus (fig. 9.8). It includes con-
nections to other parts of the brain, including portions of the frontal and temporal 
lobes, hypothalamus, thalamus, and the olfactory apparatus. The last of these may 
explain why certain odors are associated with powerful memories and emotional 
responses. Two particularly important components of the limbic system are the 
amygdala17 (ah-MIG-da-luh) and hippocampus18—both of which are parts of the 
temporal lobe.
The limbic system was originally thought to be associated mainly with smell, 
but later experiments revealed more significant roles in emotion and memory. It is 
involved in feelings that reinforce behaviors important to survival, such as the sense 
of reward associated with eating and sex, fear upon seeing a snake, and aversion to a 
food that has made one sick in the past. Most limbic structures have centers for both 
gratification and aversion. Stimulation of a gratification center produces a sense of 
pleasure or reward; stimulation of an aversion center produces unpleasant sensa-
tions such as sorrow, fear, or avoidance. Aversion centers dominate some limbic 
structures, such as the amygdala, whereas gratification centers dominate others. The 
roles of the amygdala in emotion and the hippocampus in memory are described in 
section 9.3.
Figure 9.8 The Limbic System. This ring of 
structures (shown in violet) includes important cen-
ters of learning and emotion. In the frontal lobe, 
there is no sharp anterior boundary to limbic system 
components and there is no universal agreement 
among anatomists on how much to include in the 
limbic system. 
•	 What component of this system is especially 
associated with the sense of fear?
Corpus 
callosum
Cingulate 
gyrus
Medial 
prefrontal 
cortex
Orbitofrontal 
cortex
Basal nuclei
Amygdala
Temporal lobe
Thalamic
nuclei
Hypothalamus
Fornix
Hippocampus
16limb = border; ic = pertaining to 
17amygdala = almond 
18hippocampus = sea horse, named for its shape
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      299  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 5.	 List the four regions of the brainstem from inferior to 
­superior, and list several functions of each.
  6.	 Where are the thalami located, and what is their primary 
function?
  7.	 Describe the location and functions of the hypothalamus.
 8.	 State several roles of the cerebellum in addition to motor 
coordination.
 9.	 List the five lobes of the cerebrum and some functions of 
each one.
10.	 Emotion is a very complex human function. Name five 
brain structures described in this section that play various 
roles in emotion.
 11.	 State a location in the brain for each of the following  
functions: regulation of heart rate; formation of memories; 
visual awareness; blocking of pain signals; hearing;  
perception of touch; and initiation of body movements.
9.3  Multiregional Brain Functions
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
 a.	identify the destinations of different types of sensory signals  
going to the brain;
b.	identify some of the conscious, thinking (cognitive) areas of the 
brain;
  c.	identify areas of the brain involved in the creation of memories 
and in memory storage and retrieval;
d.	describe how the brain controls the skeletal muscles;
 e.	describe the locations and functions of the language centers of 
the brain;
        f.	discuss the functional relationship between the right and left 
cerebral hemispheres; and
g.	describe how electroencephalograms are recorded and why 
they are clinically useful.
Such brain functions as sensation, memory, language, emotion, motor control, and 
so forth are best considered as multiregional brain functions because they are not 
localized to one specific part of the brain, but involve many. There is no simple one-
to-one relationship between these functions and the anatomical parts described up 
to this point. They are associated especially with the cerebral cortex, but not exclu-
sively; they also involve such areas as the cerebellum, basal nuclei, and others. Some 
of these functions present the most difficult challenges for ­neurobiology, but they 
are the most intriguing functions of the brain and involve its largest areas.
300      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Sensation
The human senses fall into two categories: (1) The special senses employ sense 
organs limited to the head and include vision, hearing, equilibrium, taste, and smell. 
(2) The somatosensory19 or general senses are distributed over the entire body and 
include touch, itch, pain, heat, cold, pressure, stretch, and movement. The regions of 
the brain that receive input for the special senses are (fig. 9.9a)
∙	 vision—the posterior occipital lobe;
∙	 hearing—the superior temporal lobe;
∙	 equilibrium—mainly the cerebellum;
∙	 taste—parts of the insula and lower parietal lobe; and
∙	 smell—the medial surface of the temporal lobe and inferior surface of the 
frontal lobe.
These receiving areas are called primary sensory areas. They merely make 
one aware of a stimulus, but identifying and making sense of it are carried out by 
adjacent sensory association areas of the cerebrum. For example, a visual associa-
tion area immediately anterior to the primary visual area enables one to identify 
what one sees and to relate effectively to one’s visual world.
Signals for the general senses arrive in the postcentral gyrus, a vertical fold of 
the parietal lobe immediately posterior to the central sulcus. Signals coming from 
the spinal cord decussate along the way (see “The Spinal White Matter” in sec-
tion 8.3), so those arising on the right side of the body end in the left postcentral 
gyrus, and vice versa. Each half of the cerebrum therefore senses the opposite side 
of the body. Furthermore, each postcentral gyrus is like an upside-down sensory 
map of the body (fig. 9.9b). This map, often called the sensory homunculus,20 has an 
oddly distorted look because it shows body regions disproportionately large or small 
according to the relative amounts of cerebral cortex dedicated to them. As you can 
see in the figure, much more cortex is concerned with sensations from the face and 
hands, for example, than that concerned with the entire trunk of the body.
Cognition
Cognition21 refers to mental processes such as awareness, perception, thinking, 
knowledge, and memory. It is an integration of information between the routes of 
sensory input and motor output. Cognitive association areas of the cerebrum account 
for 75% of our brain tissue. They include the sensory association areas just described, 
but the earlier discussion also pointed out other, diverse cognitive functions in all five 
lobes of the cerebrum and even in the cerebellum. Lesions in these areas can produce 
a broad spectrum of effects such as inability to recognize familiar faces or to navigate 
within a familiar building; a variety of language deficits (aphasias) described later; 
or profound personality disorders and socially inappropriate behaviors.
Memory is one of the cognitive abilities we value most highly. It is a widely 
distributed function, not localized to any one area of the brain. The creation of 
new memories from ongoing sensory experience, called memory consolidation, 
is a function of the hippocampus, amygdala, and cerebellum, but these are not 
memory-storage depots. Different forms of memory are stored in very different 
regions of the cerebrum—for example, the memory of motor skills such as tying 
one’s shoes or driving a car lies in the basal nuclei; a memory for faces and voices 
resides in the temporal lobe; a memory of languages resides in the posterior tem-
poral to anterior occipital lobe; and memories of odors, tastes, and one’s social 
position are associated with the frontal lobe.
19somato = body 
20hom = man; uncul = little 
21cogni = to know; tion = process
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      301  

Motor Control
Components of the nervous system that control the skeletal muscles are called 
the somatic motor division. This is distinguished from the visceral motor 
(autonomic) division, discussed later, which controls cardiac and smooth mus-
cle. The somatic motor division is under voluntary control—we contract most 
skeletal muscles at will—whereas the visceral motor division is involuntary.
The decision to make a voluntary muscular movement originates in the motor 
association area of the frontal lobe (fig. 9.10a). A “plan of action” is then relayed 
to neurons in the precentral gyrus—the most posterior gyrus of the frontal lobe, 
immediately in front of the central sulcus. From neurons of this gyrus, axons descend 
the brainstem and spinal cord to synapse with motor (efferent) neurons whose axons 
exit the CNS and supply the skeletal muscles. Most of these axons cross over to the 
other side of the body as they pass through the medulla oblongata. Consequently, 
the right cerebrum controls movements on the left side of the body and vice versa. 
This is not true of most head–neck muscles, however, which are controlled by the 
cerebral hemisphere on the same side of the body.
The precentral gyrus, like the postcentral gyrus described earlier, has an upside-
down map of the opposite side of the body (fig. 9.10b). This is depicted as a motor 
homunculus distorted to represent relative amounts of cerebrum dedicated to each 
Motor areas
Central sulcus
Primary
gustatory cortex
Primary 
somatosensory
cortex
Visual
association area
Primary 
visual cortex
Auditory 
association area
Primary 
auditory cortex
Olfactory
association
area
Prefrontal 
cortex
Somatosensory
association area
Thigh
Shoulder
Arm
V
(b)
(a)
Insula
Viscerosensory area
Lateral sulcus
Abdominal
 viscera
Genitalia
Toes
Leg
Hip
Trunk
Eye
Nose
Face
Upper lip
Lower lip
Teeth, gums
Tongue
Thumb (I)
Wrist
Hand
Forearm
Neck
Elbow
IIIII
IV
Fingers
I
II III IV V
Lateral
Medial
Figure 9.9 Sensory Areas of the Cerebrum. 
(a) Primary sensory areas and association areas.  
(b) Sensory map of the postcentral gyrus. The human 
figure is distorted to represent the fact that larger ar-
eas of cortex are concerned with facial sensation, for 
example, than those concerned with the thigh and leg. 
Notice that higher regions of the gyrus, in general, are 
associated with lower regions of the body. 
•	 How do you predict a person would be affect-
ed by a stroke that destroyed much of the post-
central gyrus within the longitudinal fissure?
302      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Figure 9.10 Motor Areas of the Cerebrum. 
(a) Primary motor and motor association areas.  
(b) A frontal section through the precentral gyrus, 
mapping out areas of motor function. Like the sen-
sory map in figure 9.9, the motor map shows an 
inverted arrangement with lower parts of the gyrus 
controlling muscles in higher areas of the body. More 
cerebral tissue is dedicated to fine motor control of 
the hands, face, and speech apparatus than to the 
trunk and lower limb. 
Fingers
Eye and eyelid
Tongue
Ankle
Lips
Face
Jaw
Pharynx
Vocalization
Salivation
Mastication
Swallowing
Neck
Brow
V
Hand
Wrist
Elbow
Shoulder
Trunk
Knee
Hip
Toes
IV
III
II
Thumb (I)
I
II
III
IV
V
(b)
Lateral
Medial
Motor 
association
areas
Broca
area
Central sulcus
Primary motor
cortex
Primary sensory
and sensory
association areas
Prefrontal 
cortex
(a)
region of the body. The amount of cerebral tissue dedicated to hands, face, and 
tongue reflects the importance of fine motor control in speech, facial expressions, 
and use of the hands.
Other areas of the brain important in muscle control are the basal nuclei (see 
fig. 9.4b) and cerebellum. Among other functions, the basal nuclei assume control 
of highly practiced behaviors that one carries out with little thought—writing, typ-
ing, driving a car, or tying one’s shoes, for example. They also control the onset and 
cessation of planned movements, and the repetitive movements at the shoulder and 
hip that occur during walking.
The cerebellum aids in learning motor skills, maintains muscle tone and 
­posture, smooths muscle contractions, coordinates eye and body movements, and 
coordinates the motions of different joints with each other (such as the shoulder 
and elbow in pitching a baseball). The cerebellum monitors the body’s position 
and movements by means of input from the inner ears and sense organs called 
­proprioceptors22 (PRO-pree-o-SEP-turs) in the muscles and joints. It compares the 
body’s actual movements with our cerebral intentions and issues output that adjusts 
and smooths out our movements.
22proprio = one’s own; ceptor = receiver
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      303  

Language
Language includes several cognitive and motor abilities—reading, listening, under-
standing words, writing, and speaking—involving multiple areas of the cerebrum 
(fig. 9.11). The cerebral control of these tasks is very complex, and we can consider 
only a few key centers here. One is the Wernicke23 area (WUR-ni-keh), usually found 
in the left cerebral hemisphere just posterior to the lateral sulcus. Immediately pos-
terior to this is a fold of cerebrum called the angular gyrus, which some authorities 
consider part of the Wernicke area itself. These areas lie at a crossroad between the 
visual cortex of the occipital lobe and the auditory cortex of the temporal lobe. They 
receive input from both and interpret visual images and sounds in terms of learned 
rules of grammar and vocabulary. That is, they create linguistic meaning from what 
we see and hear, and they begin to formulate the phrases of what we will speak.
The Wernicke area transmits a plan of speech forward to the Broca24 area, 
which lies low in the prefrontal cortex of the same hemisphere (usually the left). 
The Broca area also plays a part in constructing grammatically sensible sentences, 
and it compiles a “plan” of motor neuron action that will soon govern the muscle 
­contractions of the larynx, tongue, cheeks, and lips. It transmits this plan by way 
of the insula to the primary motor cortex (precentral gyrus), which then issues 
­commands to the relevant muscles to carry out the speech. Injury to the Wernicke 
or Broca area from stroke or trauma can leave a person with language impairments 
called aphasia25 (ah-FAY-zhee-uh) (see Clinical Application 9.2).
Cerebral Lateralization
The two cerebral hemispheres look identical at a glance, but close examination 
reveals a number of differences. For example, in women the left temporal lobe 
is often longer than the right. In left-handed people, the left frontal, parietal, and 
occipital lobes are usually wider than those on the right. The two hemispheres also 
differ in some of their functions. Brain imaging studies show that certain tasks acti-
Figure 9.11 Language Centers of the Left 
Hemisphere.
Speech center of 
primary motor cortex
Precentral gyrus
Postcentral gyrus
Primary visual 
cortex
Primary auditory
cortex 
(in lateral sulcus)
Anterior
Angular gyrus
Wernicke area
Broca area
Posterior
23Karl Wernicke (1848–1905), German neurologist 
24Pierre Paul Broca (1824–80), French surgeon and anthropologist 
25a = without; phas = speech
304      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Figure 9.12 Lateralization of Cerebral Functions. The two cerebral hemispheres are not functionally identical.
Clinical Application 9.2
APHASIA
Aphasia takes many forms depending on which regions of cerebral tissue, or 
the white-matter tracts between them, are damaged. Injury to the ­Wernicke 
area can make a person unable to recognize spoken or written words or 
­remember the names of familiar objects (anomic27 aphasia). It often results in 
babbling incomprehensible speech filled with made-up words and nonsensical 
syntax (fluent aphasia). Lesions of the Broca area, by contrast, leave a person 
knowing what to say but having great difficulty commanding the muscles to 
say it (nonfluent aphasia). The result is typically a stammering, labored speech 
with partial sentences, or a frustrated tight-lipped reluctance to speak at all. 
Some strokes reduce a person’s vocabulary to only a few words, some-
times the last few that he or she spoke before the stroke occurred. Stranger 
still, damage to certain small areas of cerebral cortex can leave a person with 
impaired mathematical ability, a selective absence of vowels from one’s writ-
ing, or difficulty understanding the second half of each word the person reads.
Speech therapy can help some individuals regain lost language skills, 
depending on the location and extent of tissue damage. Even sex can make 
a difference in recovery; men are three times as likely as women to suffer 
language deficits from left-sided cerebral damage, and women recover more 
easily than men.
Olfaction, left nasal cavity
Memory for shapes
(Limited language 
comprehension, mute)
Left hand motor control
Feeling shapes with 
left hand
Hearing nonvocal sounds 
(left ear advantage)
Musical ability
Intuitive, nonverbal thought
Superior recognition of 
faces and spatial
relationships
Vision, left ﬁeld
Vision, right ﬁeld
Superior language 
comprehension
Rational, symbolic 
thought
Hearing vocal sounds
(right ear advantage)
Feeling shapes 
with right hand
Right hand 
motor control
Speech
Verbal memory
Olfaction, right nasal cavity
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere
Posterior
Anterior
26electro = electricity; encephalo = brain; gram = record 
27a = without; nom = names
vate regions of cerebral cortex localized more in 
one cerebral hemisphere than the other (fig. 9.12). 
However, neither hemisphere is “dominant,” and 
the idea that a person is “left-brained” or “right-
brained” is a pseudoscientific idea born of popular 
psychology with no basis in neuroscience.
The Electroencephalogram
Brain functions and disorders are often studied or 
diagnosed by placing an array of recording elec-
trodes on the scalp and recording the subject’s 
brain waves—­rhythmic voltage changes resulting 
from the synchronized activity of cerebral neu-
rons close to the surface. The recording is called 
an electroencephalogram26 (EEG). It exhibits 
four types of brain waves, each of which domi-
nates a different state of consciousness, wakeful-
ness, or sleep (fig. 9.13). Normal EEGs are use-
ful in studying brain functions such as sleep and 
consciousness, and abnormalities can help diag-
nose epilepsy, degenerative brain diseases, brain 
tumors, metabolic abnormalities, cerebral trauma, 
and so forth. The EEG changes with age and with 
states of consciousness ranging from high alert to 
deep sleep and coma. The complete and persistent 
absence of brain waves is often used as a clinical 
and legal criterion of brain death.
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      305  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	Describe the locations of the primary sensory areas 
for ­vision, hearing, taste, touch, and pain. How would a  
pain in the left foot differ from a pain in the right hand  
with respect to the area of cerebral cortex where these  
sensations are registered?
13.	The hippocampus, amygdala, and cerebellum are  
all involved in memory, but how do their memory  
functions differ?
14.	In what gyrus do motor commands to the skeletal  
muscles originate? How does this gyrus resemble and  
differ from the one that receives somatosensory  
information?
15.	What are the roles of the Wernicke area, Broca area, and 
precentral gyrus in language?
Alpha
waves
Awake but resting, eyes closed, not mentally concentrating on any 
one subject or task
Receiving sensory stimulation or engaged in concentrated mental activity
Drowsy or sleepy state in adults; common in children
Deep sleep
Beta
waves
Theta
waves
Delta
waves
1 second
Figure 9.13 The Electroencephalogram (EEG).
© McGraw-Hill Education/Bob Coyle, photographer
306      PART 3  Internal Coordination

9.4  The Cranial Nerves
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the 12 cranial nerve pairs by name and number;
b.	identify where each cranial nerve originates and terminates; and
c.	state the functions of each cranial nerve.
The brain communicates with the rest of the body through two routes: the spinal 
cord and 12 pairs of cranial nerves. The cranial nerves are numbered I to XII start-
ing with the most anterior pair. Each nerve also has a descriptive name such as optic 
nerve or vagus nerve. Most of these nerves arise from the base of the brain, exit 
the skull through its foramina, and lead to muscles and sense organs located mainly 
in the head and neck. One exception to this pattern is the vagus nerve (X), which 
descends to reach many organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities. Another is the 
accessory nerve (XI), once thought to originate in the medulla oblongata but now 
known to arise only from the cervical spinal cord. Strictly speaking, it is therefore not 
a cranial nerve, but neuroanatomists haven’t kicked it out of the club yet.
Table 9.1 itemizes the cranial nerves and their functions, and figure 9.14 shows 
their points of origin and termination in the brain and peripheral organs. Two of 
Table 9.1  The Cranial Nerves
Number and Name
Function
Anatomical Course
I. Olfactory
Sensory: Smell
From nasal cavity to olfactory bulbs of brain
II. Optic
Sensory: Vision
From eye to thalamus and midbrain
III. Oculomotor
Motor: Eye movements
From midbrain to all muscles of eye movement except as noted for cranial 
nerves IV and VI; muscle that opens eyelid; and internal eye muscles that 
control lens and iris
IV. Trochlear
Motor: Eye movements
From midbrain to superior oblique muscle of eye movement
V. Trigeminal (three  
branches, V1, V2, V3)
Motor: Chewing 
Sensory: Touch, temperature, and pain from 
face
Motor: From pons to masseter, temporalis, and pteryoid muscles of chew-
ing; tensor tympani muscle of middle ear 
Sensory: From facial skin, surface of eye, nasal mucosa, paranasal sinuses, 
palate, teeth and gums, tongue (but not taste buds), floor of mouth, and 
dura mater to pons
VI. Abducens
Motor: Eye movements
From pons to lateral rectus muscle of eye movement
VII. Facial
Motor: Facial expression; secretion of tears, 
saliva, and nasal and oral mucus 
Sensory: Taste
Motor: From pons to muscles of facial expression, salivary glands, tear 
glands, and glands of nasal cavity and palate 
Sensory: From taste buds of anterior tongue to thalamus
VIII. Vestibulocochlear
Motor: Cochlear tuning 
Sensory: Hearing and equilibrium
Motor: From pons to cochlea of inner ear 
Sensory: From cochlea, semicircular ducts, and vestibule of inner ear, to 
medulla oblongata and medulla–pons junction
IX. Glossopharyngeal
Motor: Salivation, swallowing, gagging 
Sensory: Taste; sensations of touch, pressure, 
pain, and temperature in tongue and outer ear; 
regulation of blood pressure and respiration
Motor: From medulla oblongata to salivary glands, glands of tongue, and 
muscle of pharynx 
Sensory: From middle and outer ear, posterior one-third of tongue (includ-
ing taste buds), and pharynx, to medulla oblongata
X. Vagus
Motor: Swallowing, speech, regulation of heart 
rate and bronchial airflow, gastrointestinal 
secretion and motility 
Sensory: Taste; sensations of hunger, fullness, 
and gastrointestinal discomfort
Motor: From medulla oblongata to tongue, palate, larynx, lungs, heart, liver, 
spleen, digestive tract, kidney, and ureter 
Sensory: From root of tongue, pharynx, larynx, epiglottis, outer ear, and 
several thoracic and abdominal viscera, to medulla oblongata
XI. Accessory
Motor: Swallowing; head, neck, and shoulder 
movements
From spinal cord segments C1 to C6, into the cranial cavity and back out 
to palate, pharynx, trapezius, and sternocleidomastoid muscles
XII. Hypoglossal
Motor: Tongue movements
From medulla oblongata to muscles of tongue
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      307  

Optic, oculomotor, trochlear, 
and abducens nerves
VI
IV
III
II
Olfactory nerve
I
Trigeminal nerve, branch V1
V1
V1
V2
V3
V1
V2
V2
V3
V3
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
Trigeminal nerve, branches 
V2 – V3
Vagus nerve
Facial nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Accessory nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Figure 9.14 The Cranial Nerves. Pathways concerned with sensory function are shown in green, and those concerned with motor function 
are shown in red. Arrows indicate the direction in which the nerve signals travel. All cranial nerves except I and II carry sensory fibers, but these 
functions are omitted in cases where the nerve is essentially motor and its sensory function is limited to proprioception (muscle feedback).  
(n. = nerve, nn. = nerves) 

these nerves are purely sensory—the olfactory (I) and optic (II) nerves. The rest are 
mixed nerves, carrying a two-way traffic of sensory signals to the brain and motor 
signals to muscles and other organs. In cases where only the motor function of a 
nerve is described in table 9.1, the sensory function is limited to proprioception—
monitoring the contraction of a muscle and sending information about its perfor-
mance back to the brain.
For centuries, students have invented rhymes and other phrases to help them 
remember the names of the cranial nerves in order. One of the senior author’s stu-
dents, now a neurologist,28 created the following memory aid (mnemonic) in 1993, 
which has since been widely disseminated on the Internet. The first one to four let-
ters of each word (boldfaced) match the initial letters of the cranial nerves: Old Opie 
occasionally tries trigonometry, and feels very gloomy, vague, and hypoactive.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
16.	List the purely sensory cranial nerves and state the 
function of each.
    17.	What is the only cranial nerve that extends beyond the head–
neck region? Name some organs in which it terminates.
18.	If the oculomotor, trochlear, or abducens nerve was dam-
aged, the effect would be similar in all three cases. What 
would that effect be?
19.	Name two cranial nerves involved in the sense of taste and 
explain where their sensory fibers originate.
9.5  The Autonomic Nervous System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	distinguish between the autonomic nervous system (ANS)  
and the somatic motor nervous system;
b.	identify some visceral reflexes;
c.	discuss the relevance of visceral reflexes to homeostasis;
d.	name and compare the two subdivisions of the ANS;
e.	explain the relationship of the adrenal medulla and enteric  
nervous system to the ANS;
   f.	identify the two principal neurotransmitters used by the ANS and 
where each of them is employed in the system; and
g.	explain how the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions can 
have cooperative or antagonistic effects on various organs.
28Marti Haykin, M.D.
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      309  

The autonomic nervous system (ANS) can be defined as a motor nervous ­system 
that controls glands, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle. It is also called the ­visceral 
motor division to distinguish it from the somatic motor division that controls the 
skeletal muscles. The primary targets of the ANS are organs of the thoracic and 
abdominal cavities, such as the heart, lungs, digestive tract, and urinary tract, but it 
also innervates some structures of the body wall, including cutaneous blood vessels, 
sweat glands, and piloerector muscles.
The word autonomic literally means “self-governed.” It refers to the fact that 
the ANS usually carries out its actions without one’s conscious intent, awareness, 
or ability to control it at will. It is for this reason that autonomic responses are used 
as a basis for polygraph (“lie detector”) tests. Visceral effectors do not depend on 
the autonomic nervous system to function, but only to adjust their activity to the 
body’s changing needs. The heart, for example, goes on beating even if all nerves 
to it are severed, but the ANS adjusts the heart rate for such conditions as rest or 
exercise.
Visceral Reflexes
The ANS works through visceral reflexes, which regulate such primitive 
functions as blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, digestion, and 
many others. In short, the ANS quietly manages a myriad of unconscious 
processes responsible for our homeostasis; these are not specifically human 
but among our most basic animal functions. Many drug therapies are based 
on manipulation of autonomic functions (see Perspectives on Health at the 
end of this section).
A visceral reflex arc includes the same basic components as a somatic 
reflex arc (see section 8.3)—receptors, afferent neurons, interneurons, 
efferent neurons, and effectors. For example, high blood pressure ­activates 
a baroreflex29 involving the following components (fig. 9.15): 1  It stim-
ulates stretch receptors called baroreceptors in the internal carotid arteries 
and aorta. 2  They issue signals through afferent fibers in the glossopha-
ryngeal nerves to the medulla oblongata. 3  Interneurons of the medulla 
integrate this input with other information and issue signals back to the 
heart by way of efferent fibers in the vagus nerves. 4  The vagus nerves 
slow down the heart (the effector) and reduce blood pressure. This com-
pletes a homeostatic negative feedback loop and ideally restores blood 
pressure to normal. 
Neural Pathways
The ANS has components in both the central and peripheral nervous sys-
tems. In the CNS, there are autonomic control centers in the hypothalamus 
and other regions of the brainstem, and motor neurons in the spinal cord. 
PNS components include motor neurons in the ganglia and nerve fibers in 
the cranial and spinal nerves you have already studied.
The autonomic pathway to a target organ differs significantly from 
somatic motor pathways. In somatic pathways, a motor neuron in the 
brainstem or spinal cord issues an axon that reaches all the way to a skel-
etal muscle (fig. 9.16a). In autonomic pathways, the signal must travel 
across two neurons to get to the target cells, and it must cross a synapse 
where these neurons meet in an autonomic ganglion (fig. 9.16b, c). The 
first neuron, called the ­preganglionic neuron, has a soma in the brain-
stem or spinal cord; its axon terminates in a ­ganglion outside the CNS. 
29baro = pressure
Glossopharyngeal
nerve transmits signals
to medulla oblongata
Internal carotid
artery
Receptor
Eﬀector
Vagus nerve
transmits
inhibitory 
signals
to cardiac
pacemaker
Baroreceptors
sense increased
blood pressure
Heart rate 
decreases
2
3
4
1
Integrating
center
Figure 9.15 A Visceral Reflex Arc. In the arte-
rial baroreflex, a rise in blood pressure is detected 
by baroreceptors in the carotid artery. The glosso-
pharyngeal nerve transmits signals to the medulla 
oblongata, resulting in parasympathetic output 
through the vagus nerve that reduces the heart rate 
and lowers blood pressure.
310      PART 3  Internal Coordination

It synapses there with a postganglionic neuron whose axon extends the rest of 
the way to the target cells. The axons of these neurons are called the pre- and 
postganglionic fibers. 
Subdivisions of the ANS
The ANS has two subdivisions: sympathetic and parasympathetic. The 
­sympathetic division adapts the body in many ways for physical activity—it 
increases alertness, heart rate, blood pressure and flow, blood glucose con-
centration, and pulmonary airflow. Extreme sympathetic responses are often 
called the “fight-or-flight” reaction because they come into play when an ani-
mal must attack, defend itself, or flee from danger. In our own lives, this reac-
tion occurs in many situations involving arousal, competition, stress, danger, 
anger, or fear—ranging from a game of chess to defending oneself from an 
attacker. Ordinarily, however, the sympathetic division has more subtle effects 
that we notice barely, if at all.
Somatic eﬀectors
(skeletal muscles)
Visceral eﬀectors
(cardiac muscle, 
smooth muscle,
glands)
Myelinated
ﬁber
Myelinated
preganglionic ﬁber
Unmyelinated
postganglionic ﬁber
ACh
ACh
NE
ACh
Autonomic
ganglion
Parasympathetic
ganglion
(a) Somatic motor innervation
(b) Sympathetic motor innervation
(c) Parasympathetic motor innervation
Figure 9.16 Comparison of Somatic and Au-
tonomic Efferent Pathways. (a) In the somatic 
nervous system, each motor nerve fiber extends all 
the way from the CNS to a skeletal muscle. (b) In 
the sympathetic division, a short preganglionic fiber 
extends from the spinal cord to a sympathetic gan-
glion near the vertebral column. A longer postgan-
glionic fiber extends from there to the target organ. 
(c) In the parasympathetic division, a long pregan-
glionic fiber extends from the CNS to a ganglion in 
or near the target organ, and a short postganglionic 
fiber completes the path to specific effector cells 
in that organ (smooth or cardiac muscle, or gland 
cells). (ACh = acetylcholine; NE = norepinephrine)
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      311  

The parasympathetic division, by comparison, has a calming effect on many 
body functions. It is associated with reduced energy expenditure and normal bodily 
maintenance, including such functions as digestion and waste elimination. This is 
sometimes called the “resting-and-digesting” state.
This doesn’t mean that the body alternates between states where one divi-
sion or the other is active and the opposite system is turned off. Normally both 
divisions are active simultaneously, but the balance between them shifts with 
the body’s changing needs. Neither division has universally excitatory or calm-
ing effects. The sympathetic division, for example, excites the heart but inhib-
its digestive and urinary functions, while the parasympathetic division has the 
opposite effects. 
Anatomy of the Sympathetic Division
All efferent, preganglionic fibers of the sympathetic division arise from the 
thoracic and first two lumbar segments of the spinal cord. These fibers travel 
a short distance to ganglia that lie alongside the vertebral column. Here, some 
of the fibers turn and travel up or down to higher and lower ganglia, uniting 
the ganglia into a string called the sympathetic chain. The chain extends 
upward into the cervical region and downward to the sacral and coccygeal 
levels (fig. 9.17a).
Usually, the preganglionic nerve fiber synapses with a postganglionic 
neuron somewhere in the sympathetic chain. Some of the fibers pass through 
the chain without synapsing, however, and go to ganglia wrapped around the 
abdominal aorta, the large artery on the posterior abdominal wall. From either 
the sympathetic chain or these ganglia, postganglionic nerve fibers then com-
plete the path to the target organs. The general pattern in the sympathetic 
division is to have short preganglionic fibers and long postganglionic ones 
(fig. 9.16b).
Most preganglionic fibers branch before reaching their synapses. Typically, 
each preganglionic neuron synapses with 10 to 20 postganglionic neurons. This 
means that a localized output from the spinal cord can branch out and reach several 
target organs at once, such as the eyes, sweat glands, heart, and lungs, creating mul-
tiple effects of the fight-or-flight response (pupillary dilation, sweating, faster heart 
rate, and increased airflow).
Apply What You Know
Which of the types of neural circuits described in figure 8.13 is represented by 
this branching of sympathetic pathways to multiple target organs?
Another component of the sympathetic division is found in the adrenal30 
glands, which lie superior to the kidneys (see fig. 11.12). The inner core of 
each gland, the adrenal medulla, is essentially a sympathetic ganglion. Pre-
ganglionic fibers penetrate through the cortex and terminate on cells of the 
medulla, which secrete epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (nor-
adrenaline) into the blood. These hormones accentuate the effects of the sym-
pathetic division.
30ad = near; ren = kidney
312      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Regions of 
spinal cord
Thoracic
Cervical
Lumbar
Sacral
Preganglionic neurons
Postganglionic neurons
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve
Nerve
plexuses
Facial nerve
Vagus
nerve
Oculomotor nerve
(a) Sympathetic division
(b) Parasympathetic division
Eye, 
tear gland, 
nose
Heart
Lungs,
trachea
Collateral
ganglia
Digestive organs
Urinary tract
Reproductive organs
Figure 9.17 The Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nerve Pathways. (a) Sympathetic pathways. (b) Parasympathetic pathways.  
The direction of signal conduction is away from the CNS in all these pathways. 
• Suppose a person had a spinal cord injury that severed the cord at the cervical level. Which of these functions do you think would be lost, 
and why—acceleration of the heart in response to fear, or the secretion of stomach juices in response to the smell of good food?  

Anatomy of the Parasympathetic Division
Preganglionic fibers of the parasympathetic division leave the CNS by way of 
four cranial nerves—the oculomotor (III), facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), 
and vagus (X) nerves—and by way of spinal nerves from the sacral segments of 
the spinal cord (fig. 9.17b). In comparison to sympathetic preganglionic fibers, 
parasympathetic preganglionics travel relatively long distances to terminal gan-
glia in or near their target organs, and synapse there with short postganglionic 
fibers that complete the path to the target cells (figs. 9.16c and 9.17b). Para-
sympathetic fibers in cranial nerves III, VII, and IX supply target organs in the 
head, such as tear glands, salivary glands, nasal glands, and internal muscles of 
the eyeball (for control of the iris and lens). Cranial nerve X (the vagus nerve), 
however, carries 90% of all parasympathetic fibers and descends through the 
thorax and abdomen to reach numerous organs in these body cavities—heart, 
lungs, esophagus, stomach, intestines, liver, pancreas, and urinary tract. Para-
sympathetic fibers from the sacral region of the spinal cord supply the colon 
and rectum, urinary bladder, and reproductive organs. Fibers from the vagus 
and sacral nerves pass through various nerve plexuses (webs) on their way to 
the target organs.
Neurotransmitters and Receptors
We have already seen a few cases in which the two divisions of the ANS have con-
trasting effects on the same organs. The sympathetic division accelerates the heart-
beat, for example, and the parasympathetic division slows it down; the sympathetic 
division inhibits digestion and the parasympathetic division stimulates it. The key 
to such contrasting effects, and to many drug actions, depends on differences in the 
neurotransmitters employed by the two divisions and in the types of neurotransmit-
ter receptors found in the target cells. A single neurotransmitter can excite some 
organs and inhibit others because of differences in the type of receptor those organs 
have for it.
The two main neurotransmitters employed in the ANS are acetylcholine (ACh) 
and norepinephrine (NE). A cholinergic31 nerve fiber or receptor is one that, respec-
tively, secretes or binds ACh. An adrenergic32 nerve fiber or receptor secretes or 
binds NE; it is named for an older synonym for NE, adrenaline. 
All preganglionic fibers of the ANS are cholinergic; they release ACh to 
stimulate the postganglionic neurons. Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers also 
are cholinergic, whereas most sympathetic postganglionic fibers are adrenergic 
(table 9.2). 
Table 9.2  Locations of Cholinergic and Adrenergic Fibers in the ANS
Division
Preganglionic Fibers
Postganglionic Fibers
Sympathetic
Always cholinergic
Mostly adrenergic;  
a few cholinergic
Parasympathetic
Always cholinergic
Always cholinergic
31cholin, from acetylcholine; erg = work, action 
32after noradrenaline, a synonym for norepinephrine
314      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Dual Innervation
Many organs receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic input. In the eye, 
for example, the iris receives fibers of both types (fig. 9.18). Sympathetic fibers 
dilate the pupil, a well-known sympathetic effect, whereas parasympathetic fibers 
­constrict it. When the two divisions of the ANS have opposite effects on the same 
organ, they are said to have antagonistic effects.
In other cases, the two divisions have cooperative effects. Saliva, for example, 
consists of a watery solution of digestive enzymes plus slippery mucus that makes 
food easier to swallow. Sympathetic fibers stimulate mucus secretion, and parasym-
pathetic fibers stimulate enzyme secretion.
It is not always necessary to have dual innervation, however, for the ANS to 
produce opposite effects on an organ. Most blood vessels, for example, receive 
only sympathetic nerves. When the nerves increase their firing rate, they con-
strict the vessels, which raises the blood pressure. When the nerves decrease 
their firing rate, they allow the blood vessels to relax and dilate, which lowers 
the blood pressure. In some cases, such as sudden emotional shock, the sympa-
thetic firing rate decreases so much that the blood pressure falls too low and a 
person faints.
Table 9.3 presents several examples of the sympathetic and parasympathetic 
effects on various target organs and bodily processes.
Higher-Level Regulation of the ANS
Even though autonomic means “self-governed,” the ANS is not an independent 
nervous system. All of its output originates in the CNS, and it is strongly influ-
enced by the cerebral cortex, hypothalamus, limbic system, medulla oblongata, and 
spinal cord. Consequently, our emotions affect such autonomic functions as blood 
pressure, heart rate, digestion, and sexual function. Other autonomic responses 
originate in the brainstem or are at least influenced by it, such as thermoregula-
tion, salivation, digestive secretion, bladder and bowel control, and pupillary light 
reflexes.
The spinal cord also contains integrating centers for such autonomic reflexes 
as defecation, urination, erection, and ejaculation. Fortunately, the brain is able to 
inhibit defecation and urination consciously, but when injuries sever the spinal cord 
from the brain, the autonomic spinal reflexes alone control the elimination of urine 
and feces. The lack of voluntary control over these functions is called urinary or 
fecal incontinence. Erection and ejaculation can occur through autonomic spinal 
reflexes alone even in men with spinal cord injuries who cannot feel the associated 
sensations.
Brain
Spinal cord
Parasympathetic ﬁbers 
of oculomotor nerve (III)
Cholinergic
stimulation
of pupillary
constrictor
Sympathetic
ﬁbers
Adrenergic
stimulation of
pupillary dilator
Iris
Pupil
Sympathetic
(adrenergic) eﬀect
Parasympathetic
(cholinergic) eﬀect
Pupil dilated
Pupil constricted
Figure 9.18 Dual Innervation of the Iris. Shows 
antagonistic effects of the sympathetic (yellow) and 
parasympathetic (blue) divisions on the iris.
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      315  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
20.	Trace the pathway of a parasympathetic nerve fiber 
from the medulla oblongata to the small intestine.
     21.	What neurotransmitters are secreted by adrenergic and  
cholinergic fibers?
22.	What are the two ways in which the sympathetic and  
parasympathetic divisions can affect each other when they 
both innervate the same target organ? Give examples.
23.	How can the sympathetic division have contrasting effects  
in a target organ without dual innervation?
24.	Give examples of how the CNS influences the autonomic 
nervous system, which is regarded as part of the PNS.
Table 9.3  Effects of the Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Divisions
Target
Sympathetic Effect
Parasympathetic Effect
Eye
Iris
Pupillary dilation
Pupillary constriction
Lens
Relaxation for far vision
Contraction for near vision
Integumentary System
Merocrine sweat glands
Secretion
No effect
Piloerector muscles
Hair erection
No effect
Circulatory System
Heart rate and force
Increase
Decrease
Cutaneous blood vessels 
Constriction
Dilation, blushing
Respiratory System
Bronchioles
Dilation, increased airflow
Constriction, reduced airflow
Urinary System
Kidneys
Reduced urine output
No effect
Bladder wall
No effect
Contraction
Digestive System
Salivary glands
Thick mucous secretion
Thin serous secretion
Gastrointestinal motility
Reduced
Increased
Liver
Glycogen breakdown
Glycogen synthesis
Reproductive System
Penis and clitoris
No effect
Erection
Glandular secretions
No effect
Stimulation
Orgasm, smooth muscle roles
Stimulation
No effect
316      PART 3  Internal Coordination

(continued on next page)
PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
n understanding of neurotransmitter and receptor types in 
the brain and autonomic nervous system has given rise to 
the large field of neuropharmacology—the branch of science that 
deals with the design of drugs that mimic, enhance, or inhibit the 
action of these neurotransmitters.
A number of drugs work by stimulating adrenergic and 
cholinergic neurons or receptors. For example, phenylephrine, 
found in such cold medicines as Dimetapp and Sudafed PE, 
aids breathing by stimulating a subclass of adrenergic recep-
tors called  α-adrenergic (alpha-adrenergic) receptors. It dilates 
the bronchioles and constricts nasal blood vessels, thus reduc-
ing swelling in the nasal mucosa. Some drugs work by binding 
to adrenergic receptors without stimulating them, thereby block-
ing the action of epinephrine and norepinephrine. Propanolol, for 
example, reduces high blood pressure by blocking β-adrenergic 
(beta-adrenergic) receptors; it is in a family of drugs called 
β-blockers.
Other drugs target parasympathetic effects. Pilocarpine 
relieves glaucoma (excessive pressure in the eyeball) by mimick-
ing an action of acetylcholine, dilating a vessel that drains fluid 
from the eye. Some drugs block ACh effects. For example, ACh 
normally stimulates constriction of the pupil and secretion of 
respiratory mucus. Atropine blocks certain muscarinic ACh recep-
tors, so it is useful for dilating the pupils for eye examinations and 
drying the mucous membranes of the respiratory tract in prepara-
tion for inhalation anesthesia. It is an extract of the deadly night-
shade plant, Atropa belladonna. Women of the Middle Ages used 
nightshade to dilate their pupils, which was regarded as a beauty 
enhancement.33
Many other drugs are designed to act on the central nervous 
system. Sigmund Freud predicted that psychiatry would even-
tually draw upon biology and chemistry to deal with emotional 
problems once treated only by counseling and psychoanalysis. A 
branch of neuropharmacology called psychopharmacology has 
fulfilled his prediction. This field dates to the 1950s when chlor-
promazine, an antihistamine, was incidentally found to relieve the 
symptoms of schizophrenia.
The management of clinical depression is one example 
of how psychopharmacology has supplemented counsel-
ing approaches. A person’s mood is strongly influenced by 
neurotransmitters in a family called the monoamines, includ-
ing norepinephrine and ­serotonin. Some forms of depression 
result from monoamine deficiencies, and therefore yield to 
drugs that prolong the effects of the monoamines already pres-
ent at the synapses. Fluoxetine (Prozac), for example, blocks 
the reabsorption of serotonin by the presynaptic neurons that 
release it. This causes serotonin to linger longer in the syn-
apse, producing a mood-elevating effect. Fluoxetine is called 
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). It is also used 
to treat fear of rejection, excess sensitivity to criticism, lack of 
self-esteem, and inability to experience pleasure, all of which 
were long handled only through counseling, group therapy, or 
psychoanalysis.
Our growing understanding of neurochemistry also gives 
us deeper insight into the action of addictive drugs of abuse 
such as amphetamines and cocaine. Amphetamines (“speed”) 
chemically resemble norepinephrine and dopamine, two neu-
rotransmitters associated with elevated mood. Dopamine 
is especially important in sensations of pleasure. Cocaine 
blocks dopamine reuptake and thus produces a brief rush of 
good feelings. But when dopamine is not reabsorbed by the 
neurons, it diffuses out of the synaptic cleft and is degraded 
elsewhere. Cocaine thus depletes the neurons of dopamine 
faster than they can synthesize it, so that finally there is no 
longer an adequate supply to maintain normal mood and the 
user becomes dependent on the cocaine. The postsynaptic 
D r u g s  a n d  t h e  N e r v o u s  S y s t e m
33bella = beautiful, fine; donna = woman
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      317  

(continued from previous page)
neurons make new dopamine receptors as if “searching” for 
the neurotransmitter—all of which leads ultimately to anxiety, 
depression, and the inability to experience pleasure without 
the drug.
Another drug from which many derive pleasure, but with far 
less harmful consequences, is caffeine. Caffeine works because 
of its similarity to adenosine (fig. 9.19). Adenosine, which you 
know as a component of DNA, RNA, and ATP, also acts in the 
brain to inhibit ACh release. One theory of sleepiness is that it 
results when prolonged metabolic activity breaks down so much 
ATP that the accumulated adenosine has a noticeably inhibitory 
effect. Caffeine resembles adenosine closely enough to bind to 
its receptors, but it does not produce the inhibitory effect. Thus, it 
blocks adenosine action, enhances ACh secretion, and makes a 
person feel more alert.
Aging of the Nervous System
The nervous system reaches its peak development around 
age 30. After age 40, the brain loses about 5% of its mass every 
10 years, and possibly faster after age 70. In old age, the cerebral 
gyri are narrower, the sulci are wider, the cortex is thinner, and 
there is more space between the brain and meninges. The re-
maining cortical neurons have fewer synapses, and for multiple 
reasons, synaptic transmission is less efficient: The neurons pro-
duce less neurotransmitter, they have fewer receptors, and the 
neurwoglia around the synapses are more leaky and allow neu-
rotransmitter to escape from the synapses. The degeneration of 
myelin sheaths with age also slows down nerve conduction.
Neurons exhibit less rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi 
complex with age, which indicates that their metabolism is slow-
ing down. Old neurons accumulate more neurofibrillary tangles—
dense mats of cytoskeletal elements in their cytoplasm. In the ex-
tracellular material, plaques of amyloid protein appear, especially 
in people with Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease (AD). AD is 
the most common nervous disability of old age (see Perspectives 
on Health in section 8.2).
Not all functions of the central nervous system are equally 
­affected by senescence. Motor coordination, intellectual function, 
and short-term memory decline more than language skills and 
long-term memory. Elderly people are often better at remembering 
things in the distant past than remembering recent events.
The sympathetic nervous system loses adrenergic recep-
tors with age and becomes less sensitive to norepinephrine. This 
­contributes to a decline in homeostatic control of such variables 
as body temperature and blood pressure. Many elderly people 
­experience orthostatic hypotension—a drop in blood pressure 
when they stand, which sometimes results in dizziness, loss of 
­balance, or fainting.
Figure 9.19 Adenosine and Caffeine. Adenosine, a break-
down product of ATP and other chemicals, inhibits ACh release and 
produces a sense of sleepiness. Caffeine is similar enough to block 
the action of adenosine by binding to its receptors. This results in 
increased ACh release and heightened arousal.
left: © Stockbyte/PunchStock RF  right: © Foodcollection RF
Caﬀeine
Adenosine
O
O
H3C
N
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
N
N
N
NH2
O
OH
OH
OH
N
318      PART 3  Internal Coordination

C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Electroneurodiagnostic (END) technologists are also called 
EEG technologists, although their duties are broader than 
recording electroencephalograms. END technologists work 
primarily in hospital neurology departments, operating equip-
ment that records electrical activity of the brain, spinal cord, 
and peripheral nerves, thus obtaining data used by neu-
rologists in diagnosing and monitoring a broad spectrum of 
neurological diseases: epilepsy, stroke, encephalitis, head 
trauma, and Alzheimer disease. END technologists are also 
involved in sleep studies and assessment of brain death.
There are more openings for END technologists than 
there are qualified people to fill them, so job opportunities are 
excellent. One must have good manual dexterity, excellent 
oral and written communication skills, and a basic ability to 
use computers and electronic equipment. Training programs 
require only a high school diploma for entry, and extend for 12 to 24 months leading to an associate degree or certification. The 
training includes electronics, computer skills, neuroanatomy, neuropathology, psychology, and other topics. See appendix B for 
links to further career information.
E l e c t r o n e u r o d i a g n o s t i c 
Te c h n o l o g i s t
© Larry Mulvehill/Science Source
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      319  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the NERVOUS SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Endocrine System
The hypothalamus controls the pituitary 
gland; the sympathetic nervous system 
­controls the adrenal medulla; the brain 
­synthesizes several hormones.
Skeletal System
Nervous stimulation affects bone growth 
and remodeling by regulating the muscle 
tension exerted on the bones.
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Nerves to lymphoid organs influence production 
of immune cells; the nervous system regulates 
immune responses; emotional states influence 
disease susceptibility and severity.
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
Respiratory System
The brain regulates rate and depth of breathing, 
and the autonomic nervous system influences 
ease of pulmonary airflow.
© Mediscan/Alamy
Urinary System
The sympathetic division regu-
lates rate of urine production 
by adjusting renal blood flow 
and pressure; nervous ­reflexes 
control emptying of bladder.
© Medical Body  
Scans/Science Source
Digestive System
The nervous system regulates appetite, 
feeding behavior, digestive tract motility 
and secretion, and defecation.
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
Reproductive System
The nervous system regulates sex drive,  
arousal, and orgasm; the brain secretes a  
hormone ­(oxytocin) involved in sexual pair- 
bonding, ­childbirth, and lactation; the brain 
­stimulates pituitary hormones that control  
sperm and egg production, the menstrual  
cycle, pregnancy, and lactation.
© mevans/Getty Images RF
Muscular System
Skeletal muscles can’t contract without 
nervous system stimulation; the nervous 
system controls all body movements.
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
Circulatory System
The autonomic nervous system regulates heartbeat, blood 
vessel diameters, blood pressure, and routing of blood; 
sympathetic stimulation enhances blood clotting.
© Getty Images
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
Integumentary System
The autonomic nervous system regulates 
piloerection, sweating, and cutaneous 
blood flow, thereby adjusting heat loss 
through the skin.
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
320

Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
9.1  Overview of the Brain 
1.	 Principal portions of the brain—cerebrum, cerebellum, and 
brainstem—and major features of their gross anatomy
2.	 Meninges of the brain and some ways in which they differ 
from the meninges of the spinal cord
3.	 The distribution of gray and white matter in the brain
4.	 Four ventricles of the brain
5.	 The functions, sources, flow, and reabsorption of cerebrospinal 
fluid
6.	 Arteries that supply the brain
7.	 The blood–brain barrier, how it protects the brain, and how it 
presents an obstacle to certain forms of medical treatment
9.2  Principal Divisions of the Brain 
1.	 Locations, anatomical features, and functions of the medulla 
oblongata, pons, midbrain, thalamus, and hypothalamus
2.	 Gross anatomy, histology, and functions of the cerebellum
3.	 Gross anatomy of the cerebrum, including the names and 
boundaries of its five lobes
4.	 The distribution of gray and white matter in the cerebrum and 
the three types of tracts of white matter
5.	 Functions of the five lobes of the cerebrum
6.	 The location and basic functions of the basal nuclei of the 
cerebrum
7.	 Major components, locations, and functions of the limbic 
­system, especially the amygdala and hippocampus
9.3  Multiregional Brain Functions 
1.	 Areas of cerebrum that receive input for the special and general 
senses
2.	 The functional difference between primary sensory areas and 
sensory association areas
3.	 Sensory organization of the postcentral gyrus
4.	 Locations of some of the cognitive functions of the brain
5.	 Areas of the brain concerned with the creation and storage of 
memories
6.	 Areas of the brain concerned with voluntary motor control, 
especially organization of the precentral gyrus and the role of 
the cerebellum in motor coordination
7.	 Locations and functions of the language centers of  
the brain
8.	 Functional differences between the right and left cerebral 
hemispheres
9.	 Brain waves seen in the electroencephalogram, and the clinical 
uses of the EEG
9.4  The Cranial Nerves 
1.	 Numbers and names of the cranial nerves
2.	 The origin, termination, and functions of each nerve
9.5  The Autonomic Nervous System 
1.	 Differences between the autonomic and somatic motor 
­divisions of the nervous system
2.	 Targets (effectors) of the autonomic nervous system (ANS)
3.	 Examples of visceral reflexes and a visceral reflex arc
4.	 Anatomical and functional differences between the 
­sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions
5.	 Roles of the sympathetic chain ganglia and adrenal medulla in 
the sympathetic division
6.	 Which cranial and spinal nerves carry fibers of the 
­parasympathetic nervous system, and the destinations  
of each
7.	 Two primary neurotransmitters of the ANS, and the ­distinction 
between and locations of adrenergic and cholinergic nerve 
fibers and receptors
8.	 Antagonistic and cooperative effects in the ANS
9.	 Examples of ANS regulation by the cerebrum, hypothalamus, 
limbic system, lower brainstem, and spinal cord
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which of these is posterior to the hypothalamus?
a.	 the thalamus
b.	 the optic chiasm
c.	 the fourth ventricle
d.	 the pituitary gland
e.	 the corpus callosum
	 2.	 The blood–brain barrier is formed by
a.	 Schwann cells.
b.	 ependymal cells.
c.	 epithelial cells of the capillaries.
d.	 the pia mater.
e.	 the arachnoid villi.
Study Guide
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      321  

	 3.	 The right precentral gyrus controls muscles on the left side of 
the body because the motor nerve fibers decussate as they pass 
through
a.	 the pyramids of the medulla oblongata.
b.	 the posterior horn of the spinal cord.
c.	 the corpus callosum between cerebral hemispheres.
d.	 the white matter of the cerebral hemisphere.
e.	 the tracts of the spinal cord.
	 4.	 The medulla oblongata plays a direct role in all of the 
­following except
a.	 speech.
b.	 respiration.
c.	 swallowing.
d.	 the heartbeat.
e.	 memory.
	 5.	 Nearly all sensory signals pass through a “gateway to the 
­cerebral cortex” called the 
 on their way to centers  
of ­consciousness in the brain.
a.	 thalamus
b.	 hypothalamus
c.	 midbrain
d.	 pons
e.	 cerebellum
	 6.	 Movement disorders are most likely to result from  
injury to
a.	 the Wernicke area.
b.	 the cerebellum.
c.	 the prefrontal cortex.
d.	 the temporal lobe.
e.	 the postcentral gyrus.
	 7.	 To smile, frown, or blow a kiss depends most on which of the 
following cranial nerves?
a.	 accessory
b.	 glossopharyngeal
c.	 trigeminal
d.	 facial
e.	 trochlear
	 8.	 Most parasympathetic nerve fibers travel through
a.	 the corpus callosum.
b.	 thoracic spinal nerves.
c.	 sacral spinal nerves.
d.	 the vagus nerve.
e.	 the trigeminal nerve.
	 9.	 Damage to the 
 nerve could result in defects of eye 
movement.
a.	 optic
b.	 vagus
c.	 trigeminal
d.	 facial
e.	 abducens
	10.	 All of the following except the 
 nerve begin or end in 
the orbit.
a.	 optic
b.	 oculomotor
c.	 trochlear
d.	 abducens
e.	 accessory
	11.	 The right and left cerebral hemispheres are connected to each 
other by a thick C-shaped tract of fibers called the 
.
	12.	 The brain has four chambers called 
 filled with 
 fluid.
	13.	 On a sagittal plane, the white matter of the cerebellum exhibits 
a branching pattern called the 
.
	14.	 Acetylcholine binds to a category of neurotransmitter receptors 
called 
 receptors.
	15.	 Cerebrospinal fluid is secreted partly by a mass of blood 
­capillaries called the 
 in each ventricle.
	16.	 The primary motor area of the cerebrum is the 
 gyrus 
of the frontal lobe.
	17.	 Sense organs called 
 monitor stretch, movement, 
and tension in the muscles and joints, giving one a nonvisual 
awareness of the body’s position and movement.
	18.	 Any area of cerebral cortex that identifies or interprets sensory 
information is called a/an 
 area.
	19.	 The awareness of visual input lies in the 
 lobe of the 
cerebrum.
	20.	 The motor pattern for speech is generated in an area of cortex 
called the 
 and then transmitted to the primary motor 
cortex to be carried out.
Answers in appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 The two hemispheres of the cerebellum are separated by the 
longitudinal fissure.
	 2.	 All cerebrospinal fluid is produced by the choroid plexuses of 
the brain ventricles.
	 3.	 The functions of the limbic system include regulation of the 
respiratory and cardiac rhythms.
322      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
	 4.	 Each half of the brain has its own thalamus, hypothalamus, and 
epithalamus.
	 5.	 The sympathetic nervous system stimulates digestion.
	 6.	 Hearing is a function of the occipital lobe.
	 7.	 The gray matter of the brain is organized into functional 
­regions called tracts.
	 8.	 In the parasympathetic nervous system, the preganglionic ­fibers 
are adrenergic and usually shorter than the ­postganglionic 
fibers.
	 9.	 All of the cranial nerves innervate structures limited to the 
head–neck region; everything below the neck is innervated  
by spinal nerves.
	10.	 The optic nerve controls movements of the eye.
Answers in appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Which cranial nerve conveys pain signals to the brain in  
each of the following situations? (a) Sand blows into your eye. 
(b) You bite the rear of your tongue. (c) Your stomach hurts 
from eating too much.
	 2.	 A person can survive destruction of an entire cerebral 
­hemisphere but cannot survive destruction of the  
hypothalamus, which is a much smaller mass of brain 
­tissue. Explain this difference and describe some ways that 
­destruction of a cerebral hemisphere would affect one’s  
quality of life.
	 3.	 Suppose you were walking alone at night and suddenly heard a 
dog growling cl se behind you. Describe several ways in which 
your sympathetic nervous system would prepare you to deal 
with this situation.
CHAPTER 9   The Nervous System II      323  

Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• “Basic Structure of Neurons” in section 8.1
• Action potentials in nerve fibers (see “Conducting 
a Nerve Signal to Its Destination” in section 8.2)
• “Lobes of the Cerebrum” in section 9.2
• Areas of primary sensory cortex (see 
“Sensation” in section 9.3)
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter Outline
10.1 Receptors and Sensations
• Types of Sensory Information 
• General and Special Senses 
10.2 The General Senses
• Simple Nerve Endings 
• Pain 
10.3 The Chemical Senses—Taste and Smell
• Gustation—The Sense of Taste 
• Olfaction—The Sense of Smell 
10.4 The Ear—Equilibrium and Hearing
• General Anatomy of the Ear 
• Equilibrium 
• The Cochlea and Hearing 
• The Auditory Projection Pathway 
10.5 The Eye and Vision
• Anatomy of the Orbital Region 
• Anatomy of the Eyeball 
• Forming the Visual Image 
• Generating the Visual Nerve Signal 
• The Visual Projection Pathway
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 10.1: Migraine Headache
• Clinical Application 10.2: Middle-Ear Infection
• Clinical Application 10.3: Glaucoma
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Sense Organs 
• Career Spotlight: Optician
• Study Guide
The Sense  
Organs
10
Chapter
Module 7: Nervous System
Iris camera technology reveals the beautiful intricacy of the human iris, as unique to 
each individual as fingerprints. Iris recognition systems are increasingly used for security 
clearances and in place of passports at some airports.
© Robert Mora/Alamy
324	

A
nyone who enjoys music, art, fine food, or a good conversation 
knows the value of the human senses. Indeed, sensory input is nec-
essary to the integrity of one’s personality, intellectual function, and even 
sanity; extreme sensory deprivation can lead to hallucinations, incoherent 
thought patterns, deterioration of intellectual function, and sometimes 
morbid fear or panic. Such effects sometimes occur in burn patients who 
are immobilized and extensively bandaged (including the eyes). Sensory 
deprivation has been used by oppressive governments for the torture of 
political prisoners.
Yet much of the information communicated by the sense organs 
never comes to our conscious attention—for example, information about 
blood pressure and composition, body temperature, and muscle tension. 
Despite our lack of awareness, such information is necessary for internal 
communication and control. The sense organs are therefore vital not just 
to our conscious awareness or enjoyment of the environment but also to 
homeostasis and our very survival in a ceaselessly changing and chal-
lenging world.
A sensory receptor is any structure specialized to detect a stimulus. Some recep-
tors are simple, bare nerve endings, such as the receptors for heat and pain, while 
others are true sense organs. A sense organ is a structure composed of nervous 
tissue along with muscular, epithelial, or connective tissues that enhance the 
organ’s response to a certain type of stimulus. Sense organs can be as complex 
as the eye and ear or as microscopic and simple as a dendrite wrapped in a little 
connective tissue.
Sensory signals to the brain sometimes produce a sensation—the subjective 
awareness of a stimulus. However, most sensory signals delivered to the CNS pro-
duce no conscious sensation at all. Some are filtered out in the brainstem before 
reaching the cerebral cortex, a valuable function that keeps us from being dis-
tracted by innumerable unimportant stimuli detected by the sense organs. Other 
10.1  Receptors and Sensations
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define receptor and sense organ;
b.	describe the types of information obtained from sensory  
receptors; and
c.	classify the human sense organs into broad functional  
categories.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      325  

nerve signals concern functions that do not require our conscious attention, such 
as monitoring blood pressure and pH.
Types of Sensory Information
Sensory receptors provide the CNS with four kinds of information about a stimu-
lus—type, location, intensity, and duration:
	 1.	 Type (modality) refers to variations as different as vision, hearing, taste, and 
pain, but also to finer differences within these major categories—a red or blue 
color or a bitter or sweet taste, for example. The action potentials for vision are 
identical to the action potentials for taste or any other sensory type. So how 
can the brain tell a visual signal from a taste signal? Modality is determined 
by where the sensory signals end in the brain. In theory, if we could rewire the 
brain so signals from the ear were routed to the visual cortex of the occipital 
lobe, we would perceive acoustic signals as light rather than sound.
	 2.	 Location is also determined from which nerve fibers issue signals to the 
brain. Any sensory neuron detects stimuli within an area called its ­receptive 
field. In the sense of touch, for example, a single sensory neuron may 
­cover an area of skin as great as 7 cm in diameter. No matter where the 
skin is touched within that field, the brain receives signals from that neuron  
(fig. 10.1a). One cannot determine whether the skin was touched at point A 
or at some other point 4 or 5 cm away, but in some areas of the body, such as 
the back, it isn’t necessary to make finer distinctions. On the other hand, we 
must be able to more precisely localize touch sensations from the fingertips. 
Here, each sensory neuron may cover a receptive field as small as 1 mm in 
diameter, so two points of contact just 2 mm apart will be felt separately 
(fig. 10.1b). You can imagine the importance of this to reading braille, ap-
preciating the fine texture of a fabric, or manipulating a small object such as 
a sesame seed.
(a) One large receptive ﬁeld (arrow)
Neuron
Neuron 1
1
2
3
Neuron 2
Neuron 3
(b) Three small receptive 
ﬁelds (arrows)
Figure 10.1 The Receptive Field of a Nerve  
Ending. (a) A neuron with a large receptive field, as 
found in the skin of the back. If the skin is touched si-
multaneously at two closely spaced locations within the 
same receptive field, both touches stimulate the same 
nerve fiber and the brain perceives this as a single touch. 
(b) Neurons with small receptive fields, as found on the 
fingertips. Two closely spaced touches here are likely 
to stimulate different nerve fibers, enabling the brain to 
perceive them as separate touches.
• Which of these do you think would be characteristic 
of your lips?
326      PART 3  Internal Coordination

	 3.	 Intensity refers to whether a sound is loud or soft, a light is bright or dim, a 
pain is mild or excruciating, and so forth. One way of communicating stimu-
lus intensity is for a nerve fiber to fire more rapidly in response to a high-
intensity stimulus and more slowly in response to a low-intensity stimulus. 
Another is that intense stimuli stimulate a larger number of nerve fibers to 
fire than weak stimuli do. Yet a third is that weak stimuli activate only the 
most sensitive neurons, whereas strong stimuli also activate the less sensi-
tive ones. Therefore, the brain can discern stimulus intensity by monitoring 
which nerve fibers are sending it signals, how many nerve fibers are doing 
so, and how fast those nerve fibers are firing.
	 4.	 Duration, or how long a stimulus lasts, is encoded by changes in the firing 
frequency of a nerve fiber with the passage of time. All receptors exhibit the 
property of sensory adaptation. If the stimulus is prolonged, the firing of 
the neuron gets slower over time; with it, so does our conscious sensation. 
Adapting to hot bathwater is an example of this. Sensory adaptation also 
explains why we may notice a suspicious odor (such as a gas leak) for several 
seconds and then the sensation fades in intensity even if the stimulus is still 
there. Some receptors adapt much more slowly, such as those for muscle ten-
sion and body position. The brain must always be aware of the body’s posi-
tion and movements, so it would be problematic if these receptors adapted 
too quickly and ceased to inform the brain of such things.
Interestingly, as diverse as this information is, all of it comes to the brain in 
one simple form—a chain of action potentials. We can think of all sense organs 
as transducers—devices that convert one form of energy (light, heat, chemicals, 
touch, sound) into another (action potentials). The process of converting stimulus 
energy to nerve energy is called sensory transduction. This chapter will explain 
how receptors achieve that.
General and Special Senses
There are multiple ways of classifying the senses and receptors. The general senses 
are distributed over much or all of the body—in the skin, muscles, tendons, joints, 
and viscera. They include the senses of touch, pressure, pain, heat and cold, stretch, 
and others. The special senses are limited to the head and employ receptors that are 
innervated by the cranial nerves. They include taste, smell, hearing, equilibrium, 
and vision. 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1. Not every sensory receptor is a sense organ.  
Explain.
2. Not every sensory signal results in a person’s conscious 
awareness of a stimulus. Explain.
3. What are the four important qualities of a stimulus that sense 
organs communicate to the brain? Give some examples.
4. State two examples of general senses and two examples  
of special senses.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      327  

Receptors for the general senses are relatively simple in structure and physiology. 
They consist of one or a few sensory nerve fibers and, usually, a sparse amount of 
connective tissue. A few examples are illustrated in figure 10.2.
Simple Nerve Endings
The simplest receptors are bare dendrites with no connective tissue and include the 
following.
∙	 Free nerve endings include warm receptors that respond to rising tempera-
tures, cold receptors that respond to falling temperatures, and nociceptors1 
(NO-sih-sep-turs) that produce pain sensations in response to tissue injury. 
Free nerve endings are especially abundant in the skin and mucous mem-
branes.
∙	 Tactile discs are receptors for light touch that are employed for detecting  
textures, edges, and shapes. They are flattened nerve endings that terminate 
adjacent to a specialized tactile cell at the base of the epidermis. Compression 
of the tactile cell releases a chemical signal that excites the associated nerve 
fiber.
∙	 Hair receptors are dendrites that coil around a hair follicle and respond to 
movements of the hair. They are stimulated when, for example, an ant walks 
across one’s skin, bending one hair after another. However, they adapt quickly, 
so we are not constantly irritated by the feel of clothing against the skin. Hair 
receptors are particularly important in the eyelashes, where the slightest touch 
triggers a protective blink reflex.
Some other simple nerve endings have glial cells or connective tissue wrapped 
around the nerve fiber. Most of these are receptors for touch, pressure, or stretch. 
Some of them, such as the muscle spindles involved in somatic reflexes (see “The 
Stretch Reflex” in section 8.3), are proprioceptors2 (PRO-pree-oh-SEP-turs)—
receptors specialized to detect the position and movement of the body and its 
parts. Two other encapsulated nerve endings are as follows (several additional 
types are not considered here).
∙	 Tactile corpuscles, like tactile discs, are receptors for light touch and tex-
ture and are found in the dermal papillae at the boundary between the 
1noci = pain
2proprio = of one’s own; ceptor = sensory receptor
Free nerve endings
Tactile corpuscle
Lamellar corpuscle
Tactile disc
Nerve ending
Hair receptor
Tactile cell
Nerve ending
Tactile cell
Figure 10.2 Receptors for the General 
(Somatosensory) Senses.
10.2  The General Senses
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe some relatively simple and widespread sensory nerve 
endings and the sensations associated with them;
b.	define and distinguish some types of pain;
c.	identify some chemicals that stimulate pain receptors; and
d.	explain the mysterious-seeming phenomena of referred pain, 
phantom pain, and the relative painlessness of some major 
injuries.
328      PART 3  Internal Coordination

dermis and epidermis. Each consists of two or three nerve fibers meander-
ing upward through a tall mass of flattened Schwann cells. They are espe-
cially concentrated in sensitive hairless areas such as the fingertips, palms, 
eyelids, lips, nipples, and genitals. Drag a fingernail lightly across the 
back of your hand, then across your palm. The difference in sensation that 
you feel is due to the high concentration of tactile corpuscles in the palmar 
skin. Tactile corpuscles enable you to tell the difference between satin and 
sandpaper, for example, by light strokes of your fingertips.
∙	 Lamellar corpuscles are sensitive to deep pressure, stretch, tickle, and vibra-
tion. They are 1 or 2 mm long and visible to the naked eye. In cross section, 
they look like an onion slice, with the nerve fiber at the core surrounded by 
layers of flattened Schwann cells and fibroblasts. They are especially abun-
dant in the periosteum of bone, joint capsules, the pancreas and some other 
viscera, and deep in the dermis, especially in the hands, feet, breasts, and 
genitals.
Pain
Pain is discomfort caused by tissue injury or noxious stimulation; it typically leads 
to evasive action. Few of us enjoy pain and we may wish that no such thing existed, 
but it is one of our most important and purposeful senses and we would be far 
worse off without it. We see evidence of this in leprosy and diabetes mellitus, in 
which the sense of pain is often diminished by nerve damage. The absence of pain 
makes people unaware of minor injuries that, if not cared for, can become infected 
and grow worse. Victims may lose fingers, toes, or entire limbs. In short, pain is an 
adaptive sensation that enhances survival and well-being.
Pain is not simply an effect of overstimulation of nerve endings meant for other 
functions. It has its own specialized nerve fibers, the nociceptors, which respond 
to chemicals released by injured tissues. They are especially dense in the skin and 
mucous membranes and occur in nearly all organs, but are absent from the brain. 
During brain surgery, patients sometimes must be awake to communicate with the 
surgeon but need only a local anesthetic for the skin and meninges; operation on the 
brain itself produces no pain.
Pain from the skin, muscles, and joints is called somatic pain. Pain from the 
internal organs of the body cavities is called visceral pain. The latter often results 
from stretch, chemical irritants such as alcohol and bacterial toxins, or a drop in 
blood flow, as in menstrual cramps. It is often accompanied by nausea.
Three fascinating aspects of pain are referred pain, phantom pain, and spinal 
gating of pain. Referred pain is a phenomenon in which pain from the viscera is 
mistakenly thought to come from the skin or other superficial sites—for example, 
when the pain of a heart attack is felt “radiating” along the left shoulder and arm. 
This results from the fact that pain fibers from the heart and skin converge on the 
same neurons in the central nervous system, so by the time these signals get to 
the pain centers of the brain, the brain cannot identify their source. Of these two, 
the skin is more frequently injured, so the brain acts as if it “assumes” that the 
pain most likely comes from the skin. Knowledge of the areas of referred pain 
(fig. 10.3) is important to a physician in diagnosing the true source of discomfort 
reported by a patient.
Phantom pain is the eerie sensation of pain coming from a limb that has 
been amputated. It may be associated with other illusory sensations as well, 
such as the bulk and weight of the absent limb or feelings of itching or move-
ment. Any irritation of the stump of a limb can set off nerve impulses along the 
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      329  

People are sometimes severely injured and yet feel little or no pain—for 
example, soldiers mortally wounded on a battlefield. The absence or minimal 
sense of pain results from a mechanism called spinal gating. Certain spinal 
and brainstem neurons secrete pain-blocking substances called endorphins and 
enkephalins, which stop pain signals at synapses in the cord or brainstem before 
they reach conscious levels of the brain. We make more everyday use of this 
phenomenon when, for example, we painfully bump our elbow and rub the area 
to ease the pain. The rubbing action activates the spinal gating mechanism and 
lessens the pain. Unfortunately, efforts to employ endorphins or enkephalins for 
the clinical management of pain have been disappointing. 
Figure 10.3 Referred Pain. (a) Basis of referred 
pain in a heart attack. The brain cannot distinguish 
the source of pain if two or more origins feed into 
the same interneurons and CNS pathways to the 
sensory cortex. (b) Pain from the viscera is often felt 
in specific regions of the skin. 
Lung and diaphragm
Heart
Stomach
Pancreas
Colon
Urinary
bladder
Kidney
Liver and
gallbladder
Small intestine
Appendix
Ureter
Liver and
gallbladder
(b)
?
(a)
Clinical Application 10.1
MIGRAINE HEADACHE
About 5% of men and twice as many women in the United States suffer 
from migraine headaches. These differ from ordinary tension headaches 
and the symptomatic headaches that stem from underlying disorders such 
as brain tumors and infections. Migraines are felt as throbbing, moderate 
to severe pain, often behind one eye or ear. In slightly over half of migraine 
sufferers, these headaches are limited to one side of the head (the word 
migraine is a French corruption of the Latin hemicrania, “half-cranium”). 
They are commonly preceded by an aura, or subjective sensation that a 
headache is coming on, that may include visual disturbances such as light 
flashes and blind spots, and sometimes dizziness or ringing in the ears. 
The aura often lasts for 20 to 30 minutes before the onset of pain itself, and 
is associated with a wave of reduced cerebral blood flow starting in the 
occipital region and progressing forward in one hemisphere of the brain. 
A migraine headache commonly lasts from 4 hours to 3 days and may be 
accompanied by photophobia (aversion to light), scalp tenderness, nausea, 
and vomiting. The pain arises not from the brain tissue but from fibers of 
the trigeminal nerve that innervate the dura mater and cerebral arteries. 
The cause of migraine headaches is still not well known; possible culprits 
of special interest to medical physiologists are serotonin and other neu-
rotransmitters that stimulate blood vessel dilation and constriction.
corresponding spinal pathway, and the brain does not perceive that the distal 
part of the limb is absent.
330      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Our world is made of chemicals, and many of these play an essential survival role 
in the selection of appropriate foods, avoidance of danger, and so forth. We chemi-
cally monitor our food and drink through the sense of taste and monitor the air 
through the sense of smell. These are called the chemical senses. Chemoreceptors 
are organs and nerve endings that detect chemicals; they include receptors in some 
arteries for monitoring blood chemistry, and our organs of taste and smell.
Gustation—The Sense of Taste
Gustation begins with the chemical stimulation of sensory cells clustered in about 
4,000 taste buds. Most of these are on the tongue, but some occur inside the cheeks 
and on the palate, pharynx, and epiglottis, especially in infants and children. The 
visible bumps on the tongue are not taste buds but various types of lingual papillae 
(fig. 10.4), including vallate, foliate, fungiform, and filiform types. Most of our taste 
buds are in 7 to 12 circular vallate papillae that form a V at the rear of the tongue. 
The spiky filiform papillae (responsible for the roughness of a cat’s tongue) have no 
taste buds in humans but are employed in perception of food texture, or what food 
technologists call mouthfeel.
Regardless of location, all taste buds look much the same—ovoid clusters 
of banana-shaped taste cells mixed with nonsensory supportive cells and unspe-
cialized basal cells that replace dead taste cells (fig. 10.4d). Taste cells have 
Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
5. Name some simple sensory nerve endings and  
identify sensations produced by each.
6. What is the difference between somatic and visceral pain?
7. Why does the brain perceive the pain of a heart attack as 
coming from the shoulder and arm?
8. Explain how a major, fatal injury can feel less painful than a 
relatively minor cut or burn.
10.3  The Chemical Senses—Taste  
and Smell
Expected Learning Outcomes 
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the receptor cells for taste and smell and identify their 
anatomical locations;
b.	identify the five primary taste sensations and the chemicals that 
produce them;
c.	discuss factors other than taste that contribute to the flavor of 
food; and
d.	identify the brain regions that process gustatory and olfactory 
information.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      331  

Lingual tonsil
Palatine 
tonsil
Fungiform
papillae
Epiglottis
Vallate
papillae
Foliate
papillae
Taste pore
Taste hairs
Taste cell
(b) Vallate papillae
(d) Taste bud
(a) Tongue
(c) Foliate papillae
Supporting 
cell
Basal
cell
Sensory
nerve
ﬁbers
Synaptic
vesicles
Tongue
epithelium 
Taste buds
Vallate papillae
Filiform papillae
Foliate papilla
Taste pore
Taste bud
microvilli called taste hairs that project into a pit called the taste pore at the 
apex of the taste bud. To stimulate the taste cells, food chemicals (tastants) must 
dissolve in the saliva and flow into the taste pore to reach the taste hairs. Taste 
cells are epithelial cells, not neurons, but they have synaptic vesicles at the base 
of the cell that release a neurotransmitter and stimulate an adjacent nerve fiber.
The five primary taste sensations follow:
	 1.	 Salty, produced by metal ions such as sodium and potassium. Electrolyte 
deficiencies can cause a person or animal to crave salty food.
	 2.	 Sweet, produced by sugars and many other organic compounds and usually 
associated with high-calorie foods.
	 3.	 Sour, produced by the acids in such foods as citrus fruit.
Figure 10.4 Taste (Gustatory) Receptors. (a) Dorsal view 
of the tongue and locations of the papillae. (b) Detail of 
three vallate papillae, the type where most taste 
buds are located. (c) Taste buds on the walls 
of adjacent foliate papillae. (d) Structure of 
a taste bud. 
c: © Ed Reschke 
332      PART 3  Internal Coordination

	 4.	 Bitter, produced by organic alkaloid compounds such as nicotine, caffeine, 
and quinine, and associated with plant toxins and spoiled foods. The bitter 
sensation probably served in evolution as a warning not to ingest a substance, 
but many people cultivate a liking for certain bitter foods and drinks, such as 
capers and tonic water.
	 5.	 Umami3  (pronounced “ooh-mommy”), a meaty taste produced by amino 
acids such as aspartic and glutamic acid and by monosodium glutamate 
(MSG), a glutamic acid salt widely used as a flavor-enhancing food additive.
Recent research suggests that two more primary tastes may warrant inclusion in 
this list, as they each have their own unique oropharyngeal receptors: water (if one 
considers that a “taste”) and oleogustus,4 the proposed name for the taste of fats.
The flavor of a food involves much more than its taste; it is also affected by 
aroma, texture, temperature, appearance, and state of mind. Without their aromas, 
cinnamon merely tastes faintly sweet and coffee and peppermint are bitter. The 
hot flavor of peppers and some other foods stems from stimulation of free sensory 
endings of the trigeminal nerve rather than stimulation of the taste buds.
The facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves (cranial nerves VII, IX, and 
X) convey taste signals to the medulla oblongata of the brain. Signals are relayed 
from here to regions of the insula and postcentral gyrus of the cerebrum, where 
we become conscious of a taste and integrate it with sensations of smell, vision, 
texture, and temperature to form our overall impression of the flavor and palat-
ability of a food.
Olfaction—The Sense of Smell
Olfaction, the sense of smell, is a response to airborne chemicals (odorants). 
These are detected by a patch of sensory epithelium called the olfactory mucosa 
in the roof of the nasal cavity (fig. 10.5). The mucosa measures about 5 cm2 and 
consists of 10 to 20 million olfactory cells, nonsensory supporting cells and basal 
cells, and mucus-secreting olfactory glands. Olfactory cells are true neurons, 
unlike taste cells. They have a swollen tip bearing 10 to 20 cilia called olfactory 
hairs, a bulbous body containing the nucleus, and a basal end that tapers to a thin 
axon leading to the brain. Being the only neurons directly exposed to the external 
environment, they live only about 60 days and are continually replaced by divid-
ing basal cells.
The first step in olfaction is usually that an odor molecule diffuses through 
the mucus on the surface of the olfactory epithelium and binds to one of the hairs 
on a receptor cell. This leads to depolarization of the cell, generating action poten-
tials in its axon. Some chemicals, however, act on nociceptors of the trigeminal 
nerve rather than on olfactory cells—for example, ammonia, menthol, chlorine, 
and the capsaicin of hot peppers. “Smelling salts” revive unconscious persons by 
strongly stimulating the trigeminal nerve endings with ammonia fumes.
The axons from multiple olfactory cells converge to form little bundles 
that collectively constitute the olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I). These penetrate 
through several pores in the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone. Directly above 
this plate, the nerve fibers end in a pair of olfactory bulbs of the brain (see fig. 
9.14). From here, other neurons form bundles of fibers called olfactory tracts that 
relay signals to multiple destinations in the cerebrum and brainstem, especially 
the primary olfactory cortex in the temporal lobe. Higher brain centers interpret 
complex odors such as chocolate, coffee, and perfume by decoding a mixture of 
signals, like combining different primary colors to get all the colors of the light 
spectrum.
3umami = Japanese slang loosely meaning delicious or yummy 
4oleo = oil; gust = taste
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      333  

Apply What You Know
Look up the meaning of anosmia. Explain why anosmia could endanger a per-
son’s health or life. Also describe a couple of your favorite foods or beverages 
and how your enjoyment of them would be affected by anosmia.
Figure 10.5 Smell (Olfactory) Receptors.  
(a) Location of the olfactory mucosa in the nasal cavi-
ty. (b) Structure of the olfactory mucosa and its nerve 
pathways to the olfactory bulb of the brain. (c) Detail 
of an olfactory cell. 
Airflow
Basal cell
Cribriform 
plate of 
ethmoid bone
Olfactory cell
Supporting 
cells
Olfactory hairs
Granule cell
Olfactory tract
Olfactory 
nerve fascicle
Olfactory gland
Mucus
Odor
molecules
(b)
(a)
(c)
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory nerve
fascicle
Olfactory 
mucosa (reflected)
Olfactory
hairs
Dendrite
Neurosoma
Axon
334      PART 3  Internal Coordination

10.4  The Ear—Equilibrium and Hearing
Expected Learning Outcomes 
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify the anatomical components of the outer, middle, and 
inner ear;
b.	explain how the vestibular system of the inner ear functions to 
give us a sense of the body’s position and movements; and
c.	explain how the cochlea of the inner ear converts the vibrations 
of a sound wave into a nerve signal, and how the brain interprets 
such signals.
 Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
9. Other than the tongue, where are taste buds located? Are 
taste buds visible with the naked eye? Explain.
10. Which of these are neurons—taste cells or olfactory cells? 
Which cell type binds stimulant molecules with microvilli? 
Which one employs cilia?
11. What are the roles of gustation and olfaction in creating the 
sensation of flavor?
12. Where do the axons of the olfactory cells end? Where in the 
brain is the primary olfactory cortex located?
The ear serves two very different human senses—equilibrium and hearing. The first 
of these was the original evolutionary function of the ear. Its role in hearing emerged 
only as vertebrates colonized land and benefited from sensitivity to airborne vibra-
tions. This was when animals evolved the outer and middle ears, including an ear-
drum (tympanic membrane), and a new inner-ear structure, the cochlea, specialized 
for hearing. As you will soon see, however, the cochlea and organs of balance work 
by surprisingly similar means—the movement of inner-ear fluids and gelatinous 
membranes relative to a type of sensory cells called hair cells.  The ears are 
mechanoreceptors—organs that generate nerve signals in response to physical dis-
tortion of the plasma membranes of receptor cells. Touch, pressure, and some of our 
other senses also fall in this category. (Can you think of some others?)
General Anatomy of the Ear
The ear consists of three sections called the outer, middle, and inner ear (fig. 10.6). 
The outer ear collects sound waves; the middle ear relays them to the inner ear 
and has devices for protecting the ear from loud sounds; and the inner ear contains 
devices for converting vibrations and body movements into nerve signals.
The Outer Ear
The most prominent feature of the outer ear is the fleshy auricle (pinna) on the 
side of the head. The auricle is shaped and supported by elastic cartilage except 
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      335  

Figure 10.6 General Anatomy of the Ear.
• Cranial nerves are numbered I through XII. 
Give the name and roman numeral of the thick 
yellow cranial nerve emerging at the right side 
of this figure. 
 
Outer ear
Middle ear
Inner ear
Stapes
Incus
Malleus
Ossicles:
Auricle
Auditory 
canal
Lobule
Semicircular ducts
Vestibular nerve
Cochlear nerve
Cochlea
Round window 
Tympanic cavity
Tensor tympani 
muscle
Auditory tube
Tympanic
membrane
Oval window
Vestibule
5oss = bone; icle = little 
6malleus = hammer, mallet 
7incus = anvil 
8stapes = stirrup 
9Bartholomeo Eustachio (1520–74), Italian anatomist
for the fatty lobule (earlobe), and has a pattern of whorls and recesses that direct 
sound into the auditory canal. The auditory canal, or external acoustic meatus 
(me-AY-tus), is a passage through the temporal bone leading to the eardrum. It 
follows a slightly S-shaped course for about 3 cm. It is lined with skin and pos-
sesses ceruminous and sebaceous glands. The secretions of these glands form 
cerumen (earwax), which waterproofs the canal, inhibits bacterial growth, and 
keeps the eardrum pliable. It also coats the guard hairs at the entrance to the 
canal, making them sticky and more effective at blocking parasites and debris 
from entering the canal.
The Middle Ear
What we colloquially call the eardrum is more properly known as the tympanic 
membrane. It marks the beginning of the middle ear. Medial to the membrane is 
a tiny air-filled chamber, the tympanic cavity, only 2 to 3 mm wide. It contains 
the body’s three smallest bones and its two smallest skeletal muscles. The three 
bones, called auditory ossicles,5 transfer vibrations from the tympanic membrane 
to the inner ear. From lateral to medial, they are the malleus6 (attached to the 
inside of the tympanic membrane), incus,7 and stapes8 (STAY-peez).
The tympanic membrane would not vibrate freely if the air pressure on one 
side were much greater than pressure on the other side. Therefore, the middle ear 
is connected to the pharynx by the auditory (pharyngotympanic or eustachian9) 
tube. This tube is normally flattened and closed, but when we yawn or swallow, 
it opens and allows air to enter or leave the tympanic cavity. This equalizes air 
pressure on the two sides of the tympanic membrane, but unfortunately it also 
frequently allows throat infections to spread to the middle ear (see Clinical Appli-
cation 10.2).
336      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Auditory tube
The two muscles of the middle ear are called the stapedius (sta-PEE-dee-us) 
and tensor tympani (TEN-sur TIM-pan-eye). They insert on the stapes and mal-
leus, respectively. In response to loud but slowly building noises such as thunder, 
they contract and inhibit the movement of these bones, protecting sensory cells of 
the inner ear from destructive overstimulation. They are not adequately effective, 
however, at protecting the inner ear (or one’s hearing) from constant loud noise such 
as amplified concert music or from sudden loud noises such as gunshots close to 
the ear. Such sounds can irreversibly destroy sensory cells of the inner ear and cause 
permanent hearing impairment.
The Inner Ear
The inner ear is a complex region that transforms mechanical energy (vibration) to 
nerve energy. It is housed in a maze of passages in the temporal bone called the bony 
labyrinth and consists mostly of a complex of fluid-filled chambers and tubes called 
the membranous labyrinth (fig. 10.8). The membranous labyrinth within the bony 
labyrinth is thus a tube-within-a-tube structure, like a bicycle inner tube within a tire. 
The membranous labyrinth is filled with a liquid called endolymph, similar to intracel-
lular fluid, and surrounded by a liquid called perilymph, similar to cerebrospinal fluid.
Clinical Application 10.2
MIDDLE-EAR INFECTION
Otitis10 media (middle-ear infection) is especially common in children because 
their auditory tubes are relatively short and horizontal compared to those of 
adults (fig. 10.7), providing easy passage for microbes to travel from the throat 
to the middle-ear cavity. Infection can lead to fluid accumulation in the mid-
dle ear, which inhibits the vibration of the auditory ossicles, impairs hearing, 
and causes pain. If untreated, the infection can spread and cause meningitis, a 
potentially deadly infection of the meninges around the brain. Chronic otitis 
media can also cause fusion of the ossicles, thus causing hearing loss. It is 
sometimes necessary to drain the fluid from the middle ear by puncturing the 
tympanic membrane and inserting a tiny drainage tube—a procedure called 
tympanostomy.
10ot = ear; itis = inflammation
Figure 10.7 (a) The auditory tube in the child is oriented more horizontally 
compared to that of the sloping tube in the adult. (b) The more nearly vertical tube 
in the adult effectively drains the middle ear and lessens the risk of infections.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      337  

The stapes of the middle ear has an elongated base plate suspended in an open-
ing called the oval window. This window marks the beginning of the inner ear. On 
the other side of it is a chamber, the vestibule, filled with endolymph. Within the 
vestibule are two pouches called the saccule and utricle, and arising from it are three 
loops called semicircular ducts and a snail-like coil called the cochlea (fig. 10.6). 
The saccule, utricle, and semicircular ducts are collectively called the vestibular 
apparatus, and are the organs of equilibrium. The cochlea is the organ of hearing.
Equilibrium
Equilibrium is the sense of body position, movement, and balance. There are two 
forms of equilibrium for which we have different (but functionally overlapping) 
inner-ear structures: (1) Static equilibrium, the sense of orientation of the head in 
space (whether it is erect or tilted in any direction), is served by the saccule and 
utricle. (2) Dynamic equilibrium, the sense of movement and acceleration, is also 
served by the saccule and utricle as well as by the semicircular ducts.
The saccule11 and utricle12 are pouches immediately medial to the middle ear. 
Each is filled with endolymph and contains a patch of epithelium called a macula,13 
composed of sensory hair cells and nonsensory supporting cells (fig. 10.9). A hair 
cell is a columnar to pear-shaped cell with hairlike microvilli called stereocilia14 
on its apical surface. Overlying the macula is a layer of gel called the otolithic 
­membrane, containing granules of protein and calcium carbonate called otoliths.15 
The otoliths give the membrane added weight and inertia, which enhances its ability 
to stimulate the hair cells when the body moves.
To understand how this mechanism works, consider the macula that lies almost 
horizontally on the floor of the utricle. When you tilt your head down to read a book, 
the heavy otolithic membrane sags downward and bends the stereocilia, stimulating 
the hair cells. These cells also respond when the body accelerates or decelerates hori-
zontally. For example, if you are sitting in a car that begins to move, the macula moves 
(a)
(b)
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Saccule
Vestibule:
Utricle
Cochlea
Semicircular 
ducts
Ampullae 
Temporal
bone
11saccule = little sac 
12utricle = little bag 
13macula = spot, patch 
14stereo = solid 
15oto = ear; lith = stone
Figure 10.8 The Membranous Labyrinth of 
the Inner Ear. (a) Position and orientation of inner-
ear structures within the temporal bone. (b) Struc-
ture of the membranous labyrinth and origins of the 
vestibulocochlear nerve. 
338      PART 3  Internal Coordination

at the same speed, but the inertia of the otolithic membrane makes it lag behind 
briefly. This bends the stereocilia backward and stimulates the hair cells. If you slow 
down and stop, the macula slows down at the same rate, but the otolithic membrane 
briefly keeps moving forward and bends the stereocilia the other way. By compar-
ing input from the utricles of both ears, your brain can evaluate tilts of the head and 
changes in horizontal motion.
The saccule has an almost vertical macula and its hair cells therefore respond to 
vertical acceleration and deceleration. If, for example, you are standing in an elevator 
that begins to move up, the otolithic membrane pulls down on the stereocilia. As the 
elevator slows to a stop, the macula does too, but the membrane keeps moving upward 
for a moment. At both the start and stop, the hair cells are stimulated and your brain 
becomes aware of your vertical movements. The macula sacculi also senses more 
natural vertical movements of the head, as when you stand up and as your head bobs 
up and down during walking and running.
The head also rotates, such as when you spin in a rotating chair, walk down a hall 
and turn a corner, or bend forward to pick something up from the floor. Such move-
ments are detected by the three semicircular ducts (fig. 10.10). One of these lies on 
a plane about 30° from horizontal, and the other two are oriented vertically at right 
angles to each other. Each duct has a bulb at its base called the ampulla. Within the 
ampulla, there is a mound of sensory epithelium called the crista ampullaris, once 
Stereocilia
of hair
cells bend
Otolithic 
membrane 
sags
Gravitational
force 
Otolithic 
membrane
Otoliths
Hair cell
Supporting
cell
(b)
(c)
Vestibular
nerve
Saccule
(cut open)
Utricle
(cut open)
Cochlear
nerve
Maculae
(a)
Base of
cochlea
Semicircular
ducts
Vestibular
nerve
Figure 10.9 The Saccule and Utricle. (a) Locations 
of the maculae. (b) Structure of a macula. (c) Movement 
of the otolithic membrane when the head is tilted.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      339  

again composed of hair cells and supporting cells. These are topped by a gelatinous 
cap called the cupula, but this gel has no otoliths. The ducts are filled with endolymph.
Suppose you’re sitting in a rotating office chair and you spin around to get 
something from a desk behind you. The horizontal semicircular duct will spin with 
you, but the fluid within it will lag behind a bit. The moving cupula will push against 
the fluid and bend backward. This bends the stereocilia of the hair cells and stimu-
lates them. Tilting your head forward or sideways—say, to pick up something on the 
floor or to lie down in bed—similarly engages the vertical semicircular ducts and 
stimulates their hair cells. The ducts are arranged to detect rotation in any of the x, 
y, and z geometric planes, and movements in a direction between any two of these 
planes create a mixture of signals from two or more of the ducts in each ear.
When a hair cell is stimulated, it releases a neurotransmitter from synaptic 
vesicles at its base and stimulates an adjacent nerve fiber. The nerve fibers from the 
utricle, saccule, and semicircular ducts form the vestibular nerve, which joins the 
cochlear nerve, discussed shortly, to form cranial nerve VIII, the vestibulocochlear 
nerve described in section 9.4. The nerve fibers lead mostly to the pons of the brain-
stem. The pons relays signals to several other centers you have studied in the last 
Cupula
Endolymph
Hair cells
Supporting
cells
Sensory
nerve ﬁbers
Crista
ampullaris
Crista ampullaris
Direction of
head rotation
Endolymph lags
behind because
of inertia
Cupula is 
pushed over 
and stimulates
hair cells
Semicircular ducts:
Anterior
Lateral
Posterior
Ampullae
(cut open)
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 10.10 The Semicircular Ducts. (a) Struc-
ture of the semicircular ducts, with each ampulla 
opened. (b) Detail of the sensory receptor in the am-
pulla. (c) Action of the endolymph on the cupula and 
hair cells when the head rotates.
340      PART 3  Internal Coordination

two chapters: (1) the primary somatosensory cortex, where one becomes conscious 
of head movements; (2) the spinal cord, where one generates signals to the muscles 
that maintain posture and balance; (3) the cerebellum, a center of motor coordina-
tion; and (4) midbrain nuclei that activate eye movements to compensate for head 
movements, keeping one’s vision fixed on a given target in spite of head motion.
The Cochlea and Hearing 
 
Hearing is the awareness of sound, waves of molecular motion created by vibrat-
ing objects. The outer and middle ear are concerned with collecting airborne sound 
waves and transferring vibration to the inner ear. In the inner ear, only the cochlea16 
(COC-lee-uh) is concerned with hearing. Named for its coiled snail-like shape, this 
structure converts vibrations to nerve signals.
The cochlea is a fleshy tube that coils around a screwlike bony core. A vertical sec-
tion through the cochlea cuts the coil at each turn, as shown in figure 10.11. The tube 
is divided into a triangular space called the cochlear duct, filled with endolymph, and 
Tectorial
membrane
Hairs 
(stereocilia)
Inner hair 
cell
Outer
hair cells
(a)
(c)
(b)
Tectorial 
membrane
Basilar 
membrane
Spiral
organ
Scala
Scala
Cochlear duct
Fibers of
cochlear nerve
Supporting 
cells
Basilar 
membrane
Cochlear duct
Cochlear nerve
Figure 10.11 The Cochlea. (a) A vertical section, 
which cuts through the cochlea at each turn of the 
coiled tube. (b) Detail of one section through the  
cochlea. (c) Detail of the spiral organ. 
16cochlea = snail
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      341  

two larger spaces called scalae (SCALE-ee) above and below it, filled with 
perilymph. A thin membrane separates the upper scala from the cochlear 
duct and a thicker basilar membrane forms the floor of the cochlear duct, 
separating it from the lower scala. The basilar membrane is a platform for 
the sensory cells of the cochlea.
The sensory cells of hearing, like those of equilibrium, are hair 
cells. Together with supporting cells and accessory membranes, they 
are arranged into a coiled ribbon called the spiral (acoustic) organ. 
Cochlear hair cells are organized into two groups. Everything we hear 
comes from a single row of about 3,500 inner hair cells, each with a 
row of about 50 or 60 stereocilia on the surface (fig. 10.12). Across from 
these, farther away from the bony core of the cochlea, are about 20,000 
outer hair cells. These are arranged in three rows, and each cell bears a 
V-shaped array of stereocilia. Despite their greater number and arguably 
more interesting appearance, they do not generate the sounds we hear. 
They tune the cochlea to enable the brain to better discriminate one pitch 
of sound from another.
A gelatinous tectorial17 membrane lies just above the hair cell ste-
reocilia. Medially, this membrane is anchored to the core of the cochlea. 
Laterally, it is anchored by the tips of the outer hair cell stereocilia, 
which are embedded in the gel. The stereocilia of the inner hair cells 
stop just short of the tectorial membrane and lie free in the endolymph.
The essence of sound and hearing is this: Vibrating objects set air 
molecules in motion, like a series of colliding billiard balls, until some 
strike the tympanic membrane and set it in motion. The ossicles of the middle ear 
transfer this vibration to the fluids of the inner ear. Each time the footplate of the 
stapes moves in and out at the oval window, it moves the perilymph of the upper 
scala, which in turn transfers pressure through the endolymph to the basilar mem-
brane of the cochlea (fig. 10.11). The basilar membrane vibrates up and down and 
the hair cells go along for the ride. With each upward movement, stereocilia of 
the inner hair cells are pushed against the tectorial membrane above, forcing them 
to bend over. As we saw in the vestibular apparatus, this bending excites the hair 
cells and stimulates them to release neurotransmitter from the synaptic vesicles at 
the base of each cell. The neurotransmitter excites adjacent fibers of the cochlear 
nerve and generates a nerve signal, which we will trace later. Thus, vibrations of 
the basilar membrane are translated to rhythmic bursts of nerve activity in the 
cochlear nerve.
Two features of a sound are particularly important to our sense of hearing—
its loudness (amplitude) and its frequency (low-pitched or high). The basilar 
membrane is structured in such a way that it generates a code for each of these 
sound qualities in the nerve signal.
The louder a sound, the more vigorously the basilar membrane vibrates. This 
results in stronger signaling of the cochlear nerve fibers by the hair cells, and 
more action potentials per second in the cochlear nerve fibers to the brain. The 
brain interprets a high rate of nerve firing as a loud sound and a low firing rate as 
a quieter sound.
As for the frequency (pitch) of a sound, the basilar membrane tapers from 
a relatively stiff and narrow proximal end, anchored to the base of the cochlea, 
to a wide and limber distal end, with no anchorage, at the apex of the cochlea. 
High-pitched sounds cause the most vibration at the narrow basal end, much as 
the shortest strings of a piano produce the highest pitch (fig. 10.13). Low-pitched 
17tect = roof
Outer
hair cells
Inner
hair cells
Figure 10.12 Apical Surfaces of the Cochlear 
Hair Cells.
© Quest/Science Photo Library/Science Source 
• Which of the cells in this photo are the source 
of all sounds that one hears? What do the other 
cells do, if we cannot hear any of the nerve sig-
nals that come from them?
342      PART 3  Internal Coordination

sounds produce the most vibration at the wide distal end, like the longest piano 
strings producing bass notes. The brain receives signals from a mixture of nerve 
fibers representing all areas of the cochlea, and decodes the mixture of signals 
into a perception of pitch. Most things we hear, of course, are not pure tones 
but complex sounds with a variety of pitches, stimulating all parts of the basilar 
membrane to varying degrees. The brain therefore has to carry out quite a phe-
nomenal task of decoding the complex message. Neuroscientists have achieved 
a deep understanding of this mechanism, but the details are beyond the scope of 
this book.
The Auditory Projection Pathway
Nerve fibers from the basilar membrane feed into the cochlear nerve, which then 
becomes part of the already-discussed vestibulocochlear nerve leading to the pons 
(see fig. 10.8). The pons sends signals back to the cochlea for tuning by the outer 
hair cells, and back to the middle ear for the reflexes of the stapedius and tensor 
tympani muscles. It also compares input from the right and left ears to give us a 
Tympanic membrane (vibrating)
Stapes footplate (vibrating)
Scalae
Cochlear 
duct
Basilar 
membrane
(vibrating)
Low-frequency sound
(20–800 Hz)
Proximal end
(attached)
Distal 
end
(free)
Medium-frequency 
sound
(1,500–4,000 Hz)
High-frequency sound
(7,000–20,000 Hz)
20,000 
(c)
(b)
(a)
5,000
1,000
500
200 Hz
Figure 10.13 Frequency Response of the Basilar 
Membrane of the Cochlea. (a) The cochlea, uncoiled 
and laid out straight. (b) Sound waves produce a wave 
of vibration along the basilar membrane. The areas of 
greatest vibration vary with the frequency of the sound. 
The amount of vibration is greatly exaggerated in this il-
lustration. (c) The taper of the basilar membrane and its 
correlation with sound frequencies. High frequencies are 
best detected by hair cells near the narrow proximal end 
of the membrane (left), and low frequencies by hair cells 
near the wide free end (right). (Hz = hertz, or cycles per 
second, a measure of the frequency of a sound wave)
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      343  

sense of binaural18 hearing, the ability to localize sounds in space. The signals 
for hearing ascend to the inferior colliculi of the midbrain, which further aid in 
binaural hearing and in processing fluctuations in pitch. Finally, signals ascend 
farther to be relayed through the thalamus to the primary auditory cortex in the 
temporal lobe of the cerebrum, which is where we become consciously aware of 
the sound. 
Before You Go On 
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
13. What mechanism protects the inner ear from dam-
age by loud sounds? What part of the brain controls 
this mechanism?
14. Name six places where hair cells can be found in the inner 
ear. How do hair cells resemble neurons? How do they differ 
from neurons?
15. Explain how a semicircular duct differs in function from the 
saccule and utricle.
16. Describe the events beginning with vibration of the tympanic 
membrane and ending with the release of neurotransmitter 
from a cochlear hair cell.
17. How can the brain tell a low-pitched sound from a high-
pitched sound? A loud sound from a softer sound?
18bin = two; aur = ears
10.5  The Eye and Vision
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe organs surrounding the eye that protect it and aid in its 
functions;
b.	describe the anatomy of the eye itself;
c.	explain how the eye controls light and focuses it on the retina;
d.	explain how cells of the retina absorb light and generate nerve 
signals; and
e.	describe the projection pathway that these signals take through 
the brain.
The eyes are classified as photoreceptors, organs specialized to detect light. Vision, 
a step beyond mere photoreception, is the ability to form a recognizable image of an 
object that emits or reflects light. It begins with focusing light on a membrane called 
the retina, the site of our sensory cells for vision. Here, the light creates a chemical 
reaction that leads to the generation of a nerve signal. The brain must receive and 
interpret this nerve signal for the process of vision to be complete.
344      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Anatomy of the Orbital Region
The eyeball occupies a bony socket called the orbit. This general area of the face 
is the orbital region. It contains structures that protect and aid the eye (fig. 10.14):
∙	 The eyebrows enhance facial expressiveness and perhaps shield the eye to 
some degree from glare and forehead perspiration.
∙	 The eyelids (palpebrae) block foreign objects from the eye, screen out visual 
stimuli to facilitate sleep, and blink periodically to moisten the eye with tears 
and sweep debris from its surface. An eyelid consists mostly of orbicularis 
oculi muscle covered with skin. Along the margin of the eyelid are 20 to 25 
tarsal glands that secrete a protective oily film onto the eye surface. The 
eyelashes serve as guard hairs to keep debris from the eye; touching them 
stimulates hair receptors and triggers the blink reflex.
∙	 The conjunctiva (CON-junk-TY-vuh) is a transparent mucous membrane that 
covers the inner surface of the eyelid and anterior surface of the eyeball except 
for the region of the cornea. It produces a thin mucous film that prevents dry-
ing of the eye. It is richly innervated and very sensitive to pain, and well sup-
plied with minute blood vessels. The appearance of “bloodshot” eyes is due to 
dilation of these vessels.
∙	 The lacrimal apparatus is a group of structures that produce tears and drain 
them away from the eye. Its chief organ is the lacrimal (tear) gland—an  
almond-shaped gland in the superolateral corner of the orbit, between the eye-
ball and frontal bone. Approximately 12 short ducts lead from the gland and 
secrete tears onto the surface of the conjunctiva. Tears cleanse and lubricate the 
eye surface, supply oxygen and nutrients to the conjunctiva, and contain an an-
tibacterial enzyme to prevent eye infections. After flowing across the eye, tears 
drain into a pore at the medial corner of each eyelid and from there into a lac-
rimal sac in the medial wall of the orbit. A nasolacrimal duct drains the tears 
from here into the nasal cavity; watery eyes can therefore lead to a runny nose.
∙	 Orbital fat fills the space between the eyeball and bones of the orbit. It cush-
ions the eye, allows it to move freely, and protects the blood vessels, nerves, 
and muscles of the orbit.
Orbicularis oculi
muscle
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Cornea
Conjunctiva
(a)
(b)
Superior rectus
Lacrimal
gland
Ducts 
Lacrimal
sac
Nasolacrimal
duct
Inferior rectus
Tarsal glands
Lateral rectus
Figure 10.14 Accessory Structures of the 
Orbit. (a) Sagittal section of the orbit. A few of 
the specific extrinsic muscles are shown (superior, 
lateral, and inferior rectus muscles). (b) The lacrimal 
apparatus for secreting tears and draining them 
into the nasal cavity.  
• What would be the expected result of an infec-
tion that blocked the pores at the medial cor-
ner of the eyelids?
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      345  

∙	 Six extrinsic muscles arise from the walls of the orbit and insert on the sur-
face of the eyeball. The term extrinsic distinguishes these from the intrinsic 
muscles inside the eyeball that control the lens and iris. The extrinsic muscles 
move the eye when we look up, down, or to one side.
Anatomy of the Eyeball
The eyeball itself is a sphere about 24 mm (1 in.) in diameter. It is composed of 
three tissue layers that form the wall of the eye, optical components that admit and 
focus light, and neural components that absorb light and generate a nerve signal 
(fig. 10.15).
	 1.	 The outer fibrous layer is composed of the opaque white sclera (“white of 
the eye”) over most of the eye surface, and the transparent cornea over the 
anterior central region. Only the cornea admits light into the eye.
	 2.	 The middle vascular layer consists of three regions:
	
     ∙  The iris, an adjustable diaphragm that admits light through its central open-
ing, the pupil. The iris contains pigment cells with variable amounts of 
melanin. If melanin is abundant, the eye color ranges from hazel to brown 
or black. If melanin is scanty, light reflects from a more posterior layer of 
the iris and gives it a blue, green, or gray color.
	
     ∙  The ciliary body, a thick ring of muscular tissue that encircles and sup-
ports the iris and lens and adjusts lens shape for focusing.
	
     ∙  The choroid (CORE-oyd), a deeply pigmented layer, rich in blood vessels, 
that underlies and nourishes the retina.
	 3.	 The inner neural layer consists of the retina and the beginning of the optic 
nerve.
Sclera
Choroid
Retina
Macula lutea
Optic nerve
Central artery and
vein of retina
Optic disc
(blind spot)
Fovea centralis
Vitreous 
body
Anterior 
chamber
Pupil
Cornea
Iris
Suspensory 
ligament
Posterior
chamber
Ciliary body
Ora serrata
Lens
Figure 10.15 The Eye (Sagittal Section).  
 
346      PART 3  Internal Coordination

The optical components of the eye are transparent elements that admit light 
rays, bend (refract) them, and focus images on the retina. They include the cornea 
(already discussed) and the following:
	 1.	 The aqueous humor, a watery fluid that fills all the space between the cor-
nea and lens. The space from lens to pupil is called the posterior chamber, 
and the space from pupil to cornea is called the anterior chamber. The cili-
ary body secretes aqueous humor into the posterior chamber, the fluid flows 
through the pupil into the anterior chamber, and here it is reabsorbed by a 
circular vein called the scleral venous sinus (fig. 10.16). Normally the rate of 
reabsorption balances the rate of secretion, but see Clinical Application 10.3 
for an important exception.
	 2.	 The lens is suspended behind the iris by a ring of fibers, the suspensory liga-
ment, that attaches it to the ciliary body. Tension on these fibers somewhat 
flattens the lens so it is about 9.0 mm in diameter and 3.6 mm thick at the 
middle. When the lens is removed from the eye and not under tension, it has 
a more spheroidal shape.
Clinical Application 10.3
GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma19 is a state of elevated pressure in the eye that occurs when aqueous 
humor is secreted faster than it is reabsorbed. It results from an obstruction 
of the scleral venous sinus. Pressure in the anterior and posterior chambers 
pushes the lens back and puts pressure on the vitreous body. The vitreous body 
then presses excessively on the retina and choroid and compresses the blood 
vessels that nourish the retina. Without a good blood supply, retinal cells die 
and the optic nerve may atrophy, leading to blindness. Often the damage is 
already irreversible by the time a person notices the first symptoms. Illusory 
light flashes are an early warning sign of glaucoma. In later stages, the suf-
ferer may experience dimness of vision (origin of the word glaucoma), a nar-
row visual field, and colored halos around artificial lights. The progression 
of glaucoma can be halted with drugs or surgery, but lost vision cannot be 
restored. The disease can be detected at an early stage in the course of regular 
eye examinations. The field of vision is checked, the retina and optic nerve are 
visually inspected with an ophthalmoscope, and pressure in the eye is checked 
with an instrument called a tonometer, which measures tension on the cornea.
19glauc = grayness
Iris
Vitreous 
body
Posterior 
chamber
Lens
Anterior 
chamber
Cornea
Ciliary body
Scleral 
venous sinus
Figure 10.16 The Flow of Aqueous Humor. 
Blue arrows indicate the flow of aqueous humor 
from the ciliary body into the posterior chamber 
behind the iris, its flow through the pupil into the 
anterior chamber, and its reabsorption by the scleral 
venous sinus anterior to the iris.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      347  

	 3.	 The vitreous body is a transparent jelly that fills the large space behind the 
lens. It maintains the spheroidal shape of the eyeball and keeps the retina 
smoothly pressed against the rear of the eyeball.
The neural components of the eye are the retina and optic nerve. The retina is a thin 
transparent membrane that lines the posterior two-thirds of the eye. It is attached to 
the rest of the eyeball at only two points—the optic disc, which is a posterior circu-
lar area where the optic nerve originates, and the ora serrata,20 a scalloped margin 
that encircles the eye at the anterior edge of the retina, slightly posterior to the lens 
(fig. 10.15). The rest of the retina is unattached but is held firmly against the wall of 
the eyeball by the vitreous body.
The retina can be examined with an illuminating and magnifying instrument 
called an ophthalmoscope (off-THAL-mo-scope) (fig. 10.17). Directly posterior to 
the center of the lens, on the visual axis of the eye, is a patch of cells called the 
macula lutea21 (MACK-you-la LOO-tee-ah), about 3 mm in diameter. In the center 
of the macula is a pit, the fovea centralis, which produces the most finely detailed 
visual images.
The optic disc lies about 3 mm medial to the fovea. Nerve fibers from all 
areas of the retina converge here and leave the eye to form the optic nerve. The 
optic disc is the one area of retina devoid of sensory cells; it forms a blind spot 
in the visual field. To compensate for this, the eye makes tiny, unnoticed scan-
ning movements of the visual field, and the brain “fills in” the blind spot with 
Fovea 
centralis
Optic disc
(b)
(a)
(c)
Venule
Arteriole 
Macula
lutea
Figure 10.17 The Fundus (Rear) of the Eye. 
(a) A typical ophthalmoscopic image. (b) Major fea-
tures of the fundus. Note the blood vessels diverg-
ing from the optic disc, where they enter by way of 
the optic nerve. (c) Use of the ophthalmoscope.
a: © Lisa Klancher c: © Peter Dazeley/Getty Images
• Is figure (a) the subject’s right or left eye? How 
can you tell?
20ora = mouth; serrata = scalloped, serrated 
21macula = spot; lutea = yellow
348      PART 3  Internal Coordination

essentially imaginary information so that we are not distracted by a patch of 
darkness in the field. Blood vessels also enter and leave at this point. Eye exami-
nations serve for more than evaluating the visual system; they allow for direct, 
noninvasive examination of these vessels for signs of hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, atherosclerosis, and other vascular diseases.
Apply What You Know
Some have suggested that the blind spot of one eye is compensated for by the 
other eye, with each eye seeing the area of the visual field that the other eye 
cannot. What simple experiment could you do that would prove this wrong?
Forming the Visual Image  
The visual process begins when light rays enter the eye, focus on the retina, and 
produce a tiny inverted image. The pupil dilates or constricts to determine how 
much light enters the eye. Dilation is achieved by the pupillary dilator, a system 
of contractile cells in the iris that radiate from the pupil like the spokes of a wheel. 
These cells respond to the sympathetic nervous system and dilate the pupil when 
light intensity falls, when we look from a nearby to a more distant object, or when 
the body is in a general state of sympathetic arousal. Constriction is achieved by a 
circle of smooth muscle in the iris called the pupillary constrictor, innervated by 
the parasympathetic nervous system (see fig. 9.18). Pupillary constriction occurs 
when light intensity rises and when we shift our focus to a relatively close object. 
The responses to light are called photopupillary reflexes.
Image formation depends on refraction, the bending of light rays. Light trav-
els at different speeds through media such as air, water, and glass. When light rays 
strike a denser medium at a 90° angle, they merely slow down; but if they strike at 
an oblique angle, like the curved off-center areas of the cornea, they also bend. In 
vision, the greatest amount of refraction, and therefore most focusing, occurs at the 
air–cornea interface. The lens contributes additional refraction and fine-tunes the 
focusing process begun by the cornea. The aqueous humor and vitreous body have 
relatively little effect. An important difference between the cornea and lens is that 
the curvature of the cornea is fixed, and therefore so is the amount of refraction 
occurring at the air–cornea interface. The curvature of the lens, however, can be 
adjusted moment by moment.
When we look at objects more than 6 m away, our eyes are in a relatively relaxed 
state called emmetropia (EM-eh-TRO-pee-ah). Light rays entering the eyes are nearly 
parallel, the pupil is relatively dilated, and the lens is relatively thin, about 3.6 mm at 
the center (fig. 10.18a). When we look at something closer than 6 m, the light rays 
from it diverge more strongly as they approach the eyes and thus require more effort to 
get them to come together again (focus) on the retinas. The eyes must do three things 
to compensate for divergence of the rays: (1) convergence—they must turn medially 
so that both of them aim at the object (the fixation point); (2) accommodation—the 
lenses thicken to as much as 4.5 mm at the center, increasing their refractive power 
so they can focus the rays on the retina; and (3) pupillary constriction—the pupil 
narrows to screen out divergent light rays at the periphery of the lens, which could not 
be effectively focused because they wouldn’t pass through very much lens material  
(fig. 10.18b). Inadequate convergence can result from unequal strength of the extrinsic 
eye muscles and can cause double vision. You can simulate this effect by pressing gen-
tly on one eyelid as you view this paragraph. The image will fall on noncorresponding 
regions of the two retinas and you will see double.
The closest an object can be and still come into focus is called the near point 
of vision. It depends on the flexibility of the lens. The lens stiffens with age, so 
a 10-year-old child can focus on objects only 9 cm away, but by age 60, the near 
point averages about 83 cm from the eye. That is, older people have more difficulty 
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      349  

focusing on things close to the face—a condition called presbyopia22—hence the 
common joke among older people, “My arms have gotten shorter!”
Generating the Visual Nerve Signal
Sensory transduction, the conversion of light energy into nerve signals, occurs in 
the retina. To understand the process, we must begin with the retina’s cellular layout 
(fig. 10.19). Its outermost layer is a dark pigment epithelium that absorbs excess 
light. Facing this is a layer of receptor cells called rods and cones, which are packed 
with visual pigments (rhodopsin in rods and photopsin in cones) to absorb light and 
begin the process of sensory transduction.
Rods and cones are connected to a thick layer of neurons called bipolar 
cells, and these are connected, directly or indirectly, to a single layer of large round 
neurons called ganglion cells. Ganglion cells are the innermost cells of the retina, 
adjacent to the vitreous body. Their axons converge at the rear of the eye to form the 
optic nerve that leaves the eyeball and passes to the brain.
Figure 10.18 Focusing and Accommodation 
in Distance and Near Vision. (a) When we view a 
distant scene, light rays entering the eye are nearly 
parallel. The lens is relatively thin and the pupil rel-
atively dilated. (b) When we view a nearby object, 
light rays are more divergent. The eyes converge, 
the lens thickens, and the pupil constricts. These re-
flexes are mediated through the midbrain.
Lens
relatively
thin
Light rays
nearly
parallel
(a) Distant vision
(b) Near vision
Pupil
relatively
dilated
Lens
relatively
thick
Pupil
relatively
constricted
Light rays
divergent
22presby = old age; opia = eye condition
350      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Photoreceptors are named for their shapes (fig. 10.20). The slender rods consist 
of a cell body containing the nucleus, an inner segment containing mitochondria 
and other organelles, and a cylindrical outer segment that faces the back of the eye. 
The outer segment contains a stack of membranous discs, like a roll of pennies in a 
paper wrapper. Each disc is packed with molecules of the visual pigment rhodopsin 
(ro-DOP-sin). This is where light absorption occurs, the first step toward generat-
ing a visual nerve signal. Rhodopsin is a complex of a protein called opsin and a 
vitamin Aderivative called retinal (RET-ih-nal, rhyming with “pal”). Thus, a dietary 
deficiency of vitamin A can lead to night blindness, a difficulty seeing in dim light.
Cones are structurally similar to rods. The outer segment is shorter and more 
conical, and it has parallel infoldings of the plasma membrane rather than a stack 
of membranous discs. These infoldings are packed with the cone visual pigment, 
­photopsin. Unlike rhodopsin, which has only one chemical form, there are three 
forms of photopsin that enable us to have color vision. Cones work in a manner simi-
lar to rods, but in brighter light. We will examine their properties in the next section.
When a rod is in the dark, unstimulated, it releases a steady stream of inhibitory 
neurotransmitter from synaptic vesicles in the base of the cell. This inhibits the bipolar 
cells, the next cells in line. When light enters the eye, rhodopsin absorbs it. Retinal 
changes shape and separates from the opsin. Purified rhodopsin has a violet color, but 
(b)
Pigment
epithelium
Rod
Cone
Photoreceptors:
Transmission
of cone signals
Transmission
of rod signals
Horizontal cell
Bipolar cell
Amacrine cell
Ganglion cell
Nerve ﬁbers
To optic nerve
Direction of light
Back of eye
Back of eye
Front of eye
Sclera
Choroid
Pigment epithelium
Rod and cone outer 
segments
Rod and cone nuclei
Bipolar cells
Ganglion cells
Nerve ﬁbers to optic
nerve
Vitreous body
(a)
Figure 10.19 The Retina. (a) Photomicrograph. The sclera and 
choroid are external to the retina; the pigment epithelium is the 
most superficial layer of the retina itself. (b) Diagram of the relation-
ships of the retinal cells. 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      351  

when it absorbs light and breaks 
apart, it becomes colorless. This 
step in the visual process is there-
fore called bleaching. When this 
happens, the rod stops releasing 
neurotransmitter. The bipolar cell, 
no longer inhibited, stimulates a 
ganglion cell. The ganglion cell is 
the only retinal cell type that pro-
duces action potentials. It responds 
to the foregoing changes with a 
burst of action potentials—a nerve 
signal that travels out the optic 
nerve.  Cones work in essentially 
the same way, but they are less 
sensitive and work only at higher 
light intensities.
A substantial amount of 
information processing occurs 
in the retina before the result-
ing signal is sent to the brain. 
Other types of retinal cells, such 
as horizontal cells and amacrine 
cells (fig. 10.19b), are involved in detecting the boundaries of objects, movement, 
changes in light intensity, and other aspects of the visual scene.
The Roles of Rods and Cones
A human retina contains about 130 million rods and 6.5 million cones. These two 
receptor cells are concerned with distinctly different aspects of vision. All rods con-
tain identical rhodopsin molecules. As a result, they all respond to light in the same 
way and have no basis for distinguishing colors (different wavelengths of light) from 
each other; essentially, rods produce visual sensations of shades of gray (monochro-
matic, or black-and-white, vision). Furthermore, they are active only in dim light, 
producing night (scotopic) vision and grainy, low-resolution images.
In bright daylight and typical room lighting, rods are “bleached out” and don’t 
respond at all. However, they are very sensitive to low intensities, responding to 
light even as dim as starlight reflected from white paper. Such dim light stimulates 
any one rod very weakly, but hundreds of rods converge to stimulate each bipo-
lar cell, and many bipolar cells then collaborate to stimulate each ganglion cell. 
Although this extensive neural convergence (see section 8.2) enables the eye to 
respond to very dim light, it also means that each optic nerve fiber going to the brain 
conveys information from a relatively large patch of retina with hundreds of rods. 
The resulting image is like a very coarse-grained, overenlarged newspaper photo-
graph or low-resolution image on a computer monitor.
Cones, on the other hand, are somewhat responsive even at moonlight intensity, 
but function best at daylight and room light intensities; they are responsible for day 
(photopic) vision. Since they act in brighter light than rods do, they do not have to 
team up to stimulate a bipolar cell; they have far less neural convergence than the 
rod pathways. Indeed, in the fovea, there are about 4,000 tiny cones and no rods at 
all, and each cone has its own bipolar cell and ganglion cell—like a “private line” 
to the brain. As a result, each optic nerve fiber in this region sends a signal repre-
senting only a very tiny area of the retina, and the resulting image is a fine-grained, 
high-resolution one.
Figure 10.20 Rod and Cone Cells. (a) Rods and 
cones of a salamander retina (electron micrograph). 
(b) Structure of human rod and cone cells.
a: © Eye of Science/Science Source
• Vision requires a steady supply of ATP. Would 
you expect this to be made in the outer seg-
ment, inner segment, or cell body? Explain.
Outer
segment
Inner
segment
Cell 
body
Stalk
Mitochondria
Nucleus
Synaptic
vesicles
Rod
Cone
Rod
Cone
(a)
2 μm
(b)
352      PART 3  Internal Coordination

When we look directly at something, we aim each 
eye so the image falls on the fovea and we see the object 
as sharply as possible. If you fix your gaze on a few 
words of this book, for example, you will notice (don’t 
move your eyes!) that the words to the left and right of 
that are blurry. That’s because our peripheral vision is 
a relatively low-resolution system that serves mainly to 
alert us to objects or movements in that region, stimu-
lating us to turn our eyes or head to look that way and 
identify what is there.
Another well-known aspect of cones is that they 
provide trichromatic color vision. There are three 
varieties of photopsin in cones (fig. 10.21): So-called 
short-wavelength (S) cones have a photopsin that 
best absorbs light in the violet part of the spectrum; 
medium-wavelength (M) cones peak in the green 
part of the spectrum; and although long-wavelength 
(L) cones peak in the yellow-green wavelengths, they 
are the only cones whose absorption extends into the red 
wavelengths, so they bear sole responsibility for our ability 
to see red. The brain distinguishes colors from each other 
based on the mixture of signals it gets from these three types of cones.
People with a genetic lack of any one of these three photopsins have 
color blindness. Those with red–green color blindness, the most common 
form, have difficulty distinguishing shades of green, orange, and red from 
each other (fig. 10.21b). This is a sex-linked genetic trait occurring in 
about 8% of males but only about 0.5% of females. Such males inherit the 
gene for red–green color blindness on the X chromosome received from 
their mothers. Females can also inherit the gene from their mothers, but 
they also usually inherit a gene for normal color vision on the X chromo-
some contributed by their fathers, which masks the effect of the maternal 
gene. The father contributes no X chromosome to his sons, so he cannot 
contribute a gene to mask the maternal effect on a son’s color vision.
The Visual Projection Pathway
Once nerve signals are generated in the retina, where do they go? The two optic nerves 
enter the cranial cavity, converge, and form an X called the optic chiasm23 (fig. 10.22). 
Here, half of the nerve fibers from each eye cross over to the opposite side of the brain. 
The right cerebral hemisphere thus receives input from the medial (nasal) side of the 
left eye and the lateral side of the right eye. The left cerebral hemisphere receives the 
medial fibers from the right eye and lateral fibers from the left. Consequently, the 
right brain sees things on the left side of the body, the left brain sees things on the 
right side of the body, and the two overlap in the middle. Recall that the right brain 
controls most voluntary motor responses on the left side of the body, and vice versa, 
so each cerebral hemisphere visually monitors the side of the body where it exercises 
its primary motor control.
Slightly posterior to the optic chiasm, most optic nerve fibers terminate at syn-
apses in the thalamus. New nerve fibers begin here and continue through the white 
matter as the optic radiation, which travels the rest of the way to the primary visual 
cortex in the occipital lobe at the rear of the cerebrum. This is where one becomes 
aware of the visual stimulus. A stroke that destroys occipital lobe tissue can leave a 
person blind in one-half of the visual field even if the eyes still function normally. 
Neurons of the primary visual cortex communicate with neurons of the nearby visual 
association area, just anterior to the primary cortex. The visual association area  
100
80
60
40
20
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
(b)
 
S cones
420 nm
M cones
531 nm
L cones
558 nm
Rods
500 nm
400
500
600
700
23chi = X
Figure 10.21 Color Vision. (a) Absorption curves 
of rods and the three types of cones. (b) What num-
ber do you see? People with normal trichromatic vi-
sion should see 74, but people with red–green color 
blindness see no discernible number.
b: © Steve Allen/Getty Images RF
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      353  

integrates visual input with memory and enables us to identify and interpret what we 
are seeing at the moment, as well as to form new short- or long-term visual memories.
A few optic nerve fibers take a different course. Instead of going to the thalamus, 
they lead to two midbrain nuclei—one that controls accommodation of the lens and 
the photopupillary reflex, and one that controls reflexes of the muscles that move the 
eye (for example, causing us to look toward something we see moving in our periph-
eral vision). 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
18. Briefly state the function of each of these orbital 
structures: tarsal glands, lacrimal gland, conjunctiva, 
and extrinsic muscles.
19. How does the aqueous humor differ from the vitreous body 
in composition, location, and function?
20. What specific region of the retina produces the most high-
resolution images? Why?
21. What component of the eye has the greatest role in refract-
ing light rays to form an image on the retina?
22. Explain why cone cells produce high-resolution images and 
rod cells do not; why cones provide day vision and rods do 
not; and why cones provide color vision and rods do not.
Optic 
nerve
Optic tract
Midbrain
nucleus
Superior
colliculus
of the
midbrain
Lateral
geniculate 
nucleus of
thalamus
Optic 
chiasm
Left eye
Right eye
Occipital lobe
(visual cortex)
Optic radiation
Crossed
(contralateral)
ﬁber
Uncrossed
(ipsilateral)
ﬁber
Fixation
point
Figure 10.22 The Visual Projection Pathway 
to the Brain. Note that half of the nerve fibers from 
each retina (red and violet) cross over to the oppo-
site side of the brain when passing through the op-
tic chiasm. The right occipital lobe thus monitors the 
left half of the visual field and vice versa.
• If a cerebral hemorrhage destroyed the op-
tic radiation in just one cerebral hemisphere, 
where would you expect blindness to be expe-
rienced, and why—total blindness in both eyes; 
total blindness in just one eye; blindness in the 
medial field of vision of both eyes; blindness in 
the peripheral field of both eyes; or blindness 
in the peripheral field of just one eye?
354      PART 3  Internal Coordination

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
T
he most common health problems related to the senses are in 
vision and hearing. Some of these are commonplace changes 
that occur almost inevitably with age, whereas others are caused 
by disease or trauma that can occur at any age.
H e a r i n g  D i s o r d e r s
T
he most common complaint about hearing is partial deafness. 
Deafness means any hearing loss, whether temporary or per-
manent. Conductive deafness results from conditions that reduce 
the transfer of vibrations to the inner ear. Such conditions may in-
clude a damaged tympanic membrane, otitis media, blockage of 
the auditory canal with earwax or other matter, and otosclerosis. 
Otosclerosis24 is fusion of the auditory ossicles to each other or 
fusion of the stapes footplate to the oval window. Either way, it pre-
vents the ossicles from vibrating freely. Repeated middle-ear infec-
tions can cause otosclerosis.
Sensorineural (nerve) deafness results from death of hair cells 
or any of the nervous elements concerned with hearing. It is a com-
mon occupational disease of factory and construction workers, 
musicians, and other people exposed to frequent and sustained 
loud sounds. Deafness leads some people to delusions of being 
talked about, disparaged, or cheated. Beethoven said his deafness 
nearly drove him to suicide.
Sensorineural deafness is often accompanied by tinnitus 
(ti-NITE-us), a persistent sense of ringing, whistling, clicking, or 
buzzing in the ear. The physiological basis of tinnitus is not well 
known, but it may represent an illusion of sensory input from 
cochlear hair cells that are no longer present, much like the illusion 
of phantom pain from a limb that has been amputated.
V i s u a l  D i s o r d e r s
T
he most common visual disorders concern inability to focus 
properly. Myopia (nearsightnedness) is an inability to focus on 
distant objects. It results from eyeballs that are a little too long, so 
light rays come to a focus before they reach the retina instead of fo-
cusing on the retina. The rays have begun to diverge again by the 
time they reach the retina, so the resulting image is blurry. Myopia 
is treated with corrective lenses that make the rays diverge slightly 
before entering the eye, so they converge again at a greater dis-
tance behind the cornea—on the retina.
Hyperopia (farsightnedness) is much the opposite—the eye-
ball is abnormally short, light rays have not yet converged to a focal 
point by the time they reach the retina, and one has difficulty focus-
ing on nearby objects. This is corrected by lenses that begin the 
process of convergence before the light rays enter the eye, so they 
reach their focal point sooner, on the retina.
Many people suffer astigmatism, a condition in which focusing 
on objects in one plane, such as the vertical, makes objects in a dif-
ferent plane, such as the horizontal, go out of focus. This is the result 
of a cornea that is somewhat ovoid, like the back of a spoon, instead 
of circular. Astigmatism is also treated with corrective lenses.
More serious problems are glaucoma (see Clinical Application 
10.3) and cataracts. A cataract is a cloudiness of the lens, making 
the vision dim or milky, as if looking at a scene from behind a water-
fall—hence the name.25 The lenses become more predisposed to 
cataracts as they thicken with age. Their degeneration is often 
accelerated and worsened by diabetes mellitus. Heavy smoking 
and excessive exposure to the ultraviolet rays of sunlight are addi-
tional risk factors for cataracts. Cataracts can be treated by replac-
ing the lenses with plastic ones. The artificial lenses improve vision 
almost immediately, but glasses may still be needed for near vision.
24oto = ear; scler = hardening, stiffening; osis = condition, process
25cataract = waterfall
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      355  

Aging of the Sense Organs
Some sensory functions begin to decline shortly after adolescence, 
or even earlier. Many schoolchildren and adolescents already ex-
perience the beginning of presbyopia, the stiffening of the lenses 
mentioned earlier, and thus find it harder to focus without corrective 
lenses. Later in life, people often notice a deficiency of night vision, 
as more and more light is needed to stimulate the retina. This has 
several causes: There are fewer receptor cells in the retina, the vitre-
ous body becomes less transparent, the pupil becomes narrower as 
the pupillary dilators atrophy, and the lenses tend to yellow with age. 
Adjusting to the dark takes longer because enzymatic reactions in 
the rod cells are slower. Elderly people also have an elevated risk of 
glaucoma and cataracts (see Perspectives on Health)—both of which 
can cause serious visual impairment, even blindness. Having to give 
up reading and driving can be among the most difficult changes of 
lifestyle for elderly people.
Auditory sensitivity peaks in adolescence and declines after-
ward. The tympanic membrane and the joints between the audi-
tory ossicles become stiffer, so vibrations are transferred less effec-
tively to the inner ear, creating a degree of conductive deafness. 
In addition, the numbers of cochlear hair cells and cochlear nerve 
fibers decline with age, potentially leading to sensorineural deaf-
ness (see Perspectives on Health). The greatest hearing loss occurs 
in the frequency range of conversation. The death of receptor cells 
in the semicircular ducts, utricle, and saccule and of nerve fibers in 
the vestibular nerve and neurons in the cerebellum results in poor 
balance and dizziness—a factor in falls that sometimes lead to se-
verely disabling bone fractures.
The senses of taste and smell are blunted as the numbers of 
taste buds, olfactory cells, and second-order neurons in the olfac-
tory bulbs decline. Elderly people often find food less appealing, so 
declining sensory function can be a factor in malnutrition.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
An optician fills prescriptions for eyeglasses or contact lenses. Whereas op-
thalmologists or optometrists perform eye tests and determine the appropriate 
strength of corrective lenses, opticians ensure that the prescription is filled ac-
curately. Opticians assist patients with selection of eyeglasses or contact lenses 
to ensure that they fit with maximum comfort and functionality. They also educate 
the patient about proper cleaning and care of the eyewear.
Opticians are typically employed by chain stores with optical departments or 
by hospitals, health clinics, or private doctors’ offices that have their own stores. 
In addition to customer interaction, the job often entails business management. 
The optician does not require the same level of advanced training as optometrists or ophthalmologists. Most opticians obtain 
a 2-year associate degree from a college with a program in optometric technology. Several states require that opticians be  
licensed. For links to further career information, see appendix B.
O p t i c i a n
© Huntstock/Getty Images RF
356      PART 3  Internal Coordination

2.	 Anatomy of the auricle and auditory canal, and functions of 
cerumen
3.	 Anatomy of the middle ear, especially its tympanic membrane, 
auditory tube, auditory ossicles, and muscles; the function of 
each of these
4.	 The relationship between the bony labyrinth,  
membranous labyrinth, perilymph, and endolymph of 
the inner ear
5.	 The function and anatomical components of the vestibular 
apparatus
6.	 The structure of hair cells and how it relates to the generation 
of sensory signals
7.	 The locations and cellular organization of the saccule and 
utricle, how they generate sensations of motion and body  
orientation, and how they differ
8.	 Anatomy of the semicircular ducts, the type of sensation they 
produce, and how the three ducts in each ear differ from each 
other in orientation and function
9.	 The destinations of signals for equilibrium in the brain, and the 
pathways taken to these destinations
10.	 Gross anatomy of the cochlea, and the anatomical 
­relationships of its fluid-filled spaces, basilar membrane, 
and spiral organ
11.	 Structure of the cochlear hair cells, their relationship 
to the basilar and tectorial membranes, and the spatial 
­arrangement and functional difference between inner and 
outer hair cells
12.	 How sound waves in the auditory canal ultimately result in 
movement of the basilar membrane and hair cells
13.	 How hair cell movements result in auditory nerve signals
14.	 How the brain discriminates between sounds of different  
loudness and pitch
15.	 The destinations of signals for hearing in the brain, the 
pathway taken to these destinations, and types of information 
processing that occur at different points on this route
10.5  The Eye and Vision 
1.	 Structure and function of components of the orbital region 
external to the eyeball
2.	 Anatomy of the lacrimal apparatus and the pathway that 
tears follow from their origin to their drainage into the nasal 
cavity
3.	 The three layers of the eyeball and the components of 
each one
4.	 Optical components of the eyeball, their locations, and their 
functions
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
10.1  Receptors and Sensations 
	 1.	 The meaning of receptor and distinction between a receptor 
and a sense organ
	 2.	 Why not all sensory signals result in a sensation
	 3.	 Four properties of a stimulus—type, location, intensity, and 
duration—and how the brain is able to interpret each on the 
basis of the nerve signals it receives
	 4.	 Why sense organs are described as transducers
	 5.	 The difference between general and special senses, and which 
senses belong in each category
10.2  The General Senses 
1.	 Five types of simple nerve endings, their structural differences, 
and the senses for which each is responsible
2.	 The importance of pain and the harmful consequences of  
lacking a sense of pain
3.	 Distinctions between somatic and visceral pain
4.	 The reasons for referred pain and phantom pain
5.	 How spinal gating alters a person’s sense of pain
10.3  The Chemical Senses—Taste and Smell 
1.	 The locations of taste buds and their relationship to the lingual 
papillae
2.	 The cellular organization of a taste bud and the relationship of 
taste cells to sensory nerve fibers
3.	 The five primary taste sensations and the types of tastants that 
produce each sensation
4.	 The difference between taste and flavor; nongustatory factors 
that influence flavor
5.	 The location and cellular structure of the olfactory mucosa
6.	 The mechanism by which odorants trigger an olfactory nerve 
signal
7.	 The cranial nerves that carry gustatory and olfactory stimuli, 
and the brain regions that receive and integrate these signals
8.	 The terminal olfactory regions of the brain and the route that 
olfactory nerve signals travel to get there
10.4  The Ear—Equilibrium and Hearing 
1.	 The three principal regions of the ear and general function of 
each one
Study Guide
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      357  

5.	 Neural components of the eyeball and specialized regions of 
the retina
6.	 Locations of the pupillary dilator and constrictor, their respec-
tive nerve supplies, and the conditions under which they alter 
the diameter of the pupil
7.	 Relative contributions of the cornea and lens to the refraction 
of light rays
8.	 Responses of the eye to shifting one’s focus from a distant 
object to a nearby one
9.	 Principal cell types of the retina and their relationships to each 
other
10.	 Parts of a rod or cone cell, location of the visual pigment, and 
how light absorption by the pigment leads to the generation of 
a nerve signal
11.	 How and why the rod and cone system differ with respect to 
light sensitivity, visual resolution, and capacity for color vision
12.	 Why vision is sharpest at the fovea
13.	 How the retina generates signals that the brain can interpret as 
differences in color
14.	 The destination of visual signals in the brain and the pathways 
taken to get there
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 All of the following are classified as special senses except
a.	 taste.
b.	 touch.
c.	 vision.
d.	 hearing.
e.	 equilibrium.
	 2.	 A nociceptor is a nerve ending responsible for the sense of
a.	 touch.
b.	 vibration.
c.	 heat or cold.
d.	 taste or smell.
e.	 pain.
	 3.	 The occipital lobe is concerned mainly with the sense of
a.	 vision.
b.	 proprioception.
c.	 pain.
d.	 taste.
e.	 hearing.
	 4.	 A stomachache is classified as
a.	 fast pain.
b.	 phantom pain.
c.	 visceral pain.
d.	 somatic pain.
e.	 referred pain.
	 5.	 Which of these is not one of the five primary taste sensations 
detected by the taste buds?
a.	 sweet
b.	 spicy
c.	 bitter
d.	 salty
e.	 umami
	 6.	 Olfactory cells are found in
a.	 the olfactory tract.
b.	 the olfactory bulb.
c.	 the primary olfactory cortex.
d.	 the olfactory mucosa.
e.	 the temporal lobe.
	 7.	 The malleus, incus, and stapes are components of
a.	 the outer ear.
b.	 the middle ear.
c.	 the vestibular system.
d.	 the bony labyrinth.
e.	 the inner ear.
	 8.	 The malleus, incus, and stapes have their closest anatomical 
and functional association with
a.	 the stapedius and tensor tympani.
b.	 the auditory canal.
c.	 the auditory tube.
d.	 the semicircular ducts.
e.	 the cochlear hair cells.
	 9.	 A single sensory cell type is associated with all of the  
following except
a.	 low-resolution vision.
b.	 low-light vision.
c.	 black-and-white vision.
d.	 photopic vision.
e.	 rhodopsin.
	10.	 Nerve fibers of the optic nerve originate from
a.	 rod cells.
b.	 cone cells.
c.	 both rods and cones.
d.	 ganglion cells.
e.	 bipolar cells.
	11.	 Pressure on a tissue is detected by a simple sense organ called 
a 
 , which has a nerve fiber surrounded by onionlike 
layers of flattened Schwann cells and fibroblasts.
	12.	 Our sharpest vision is in a retinal pit called the 
 
directly behind the central axis of the lens.
	13.	 The optic nerves cross at a point called the 
 , where 
half of the nerve fibers from each eye are routed to each  
cerebral hemisphere.
	14.	 A person might have dry eyes if the ducts of the 
 
glands were overly constricted or obstructed.
	15.	 The sense of vertical movement, as when rising from a chair or 
riding in an elevator, originates in a patch of sensory cells in a 
chamber called the 
 .
	16.	  
 is a change in the thickness of the lens to enable the 
eye to focus on nearby objects.
358      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
	17.	 Nerve fibers for the sense of smell originate in the olfac-
tory mucosa and terminate in a part of the brain called the 
 .
	18.	 The sensory cells of hearing, called 
 , are arranged in 
four spiral rows in the cochlea.
	19.	 A person can have color blindness if he or she has a defective 
gene for one of the three types of 
 cells.
	20.	 The position and movements of the body and its limbs are 
detected by sense organs called 
 .
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These  
Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 The usual cause of pain is an undesirable overstimulation of 
receptors whose normal function is touch.
	 2.	 The olfactory hairs in the nose and the hairs on cochlear hair 
cells are actually modified cilia.
	 3.	 Differences in the color of light or the pitch of a sound are 
communicated to the brain by differences in the firing frequen-
cies of the sensory nerve fibers.
	 4.	 Hair receptor is another name for a hair cell of the inner ear.
	 5.	 In vision, most light refraction occurs as light passes through 
the lens of the eye.
	 6.	 The right occipital lobe receives all visual input from the left eye, 
and the left occipital lobe receives all input from the right eye.
	 7.	 Deep bass tones stimulate the same cochlear hair cells as high 
treble tones, but base and treble notes stimulate them at  
different frequencies.
	 8.	 The auditory (pharyngotympanic) tube lets air into the inner ear 
to equalize pressure on both sides of the tympanic membrane.
	 9.	 After passing across the surface of the eye, tears are reabsorbed 
by the lacrimal gland and returned to the blood stream.
	10.	 The taste buds, also known as lingual papillae, can be seen on 
the surface of the tongue with a magnifying glass.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 You are sitting in a chair attending lecture, your head tilted 
forward as you take notes. When the lecture ends, you raise 
your head from your notebook, rise from your chair and leave 
the room, walk down the hall, and turn a corner headed for 
your next class. Describe all the actions that would occur in 
your utricle, saccule, and semicircular ducts to make your brain 
aware of these movements.
	 2.	 Although it is unusual for a female to be color-blind, Julie 
is one such case. Do you think her father is color-blind? Her 
mother? Explain.
	 3.	 Frank has worked for years as a stage manager for a traveling 
rock band, and never took precautions to protect his hearing. 
By the age of 30, he finds he can no longer hear the high notes 
on an electronic keyboard. What region of his cochlea do you 
believe is damaged? Name the specific cells in that region that 
have likely been destroyed.
CHAPTER 10   The Sense Organs      359  

Chapter Outline
11.1 Overview of the Endocrine System
• Hormones and Endocrine Glands 
• Comparison of the Nervous and Endocrine 
Systems 
11.2 Endocrine Physiology
• Hormone Structure 
• Hormone Receptors and Effects 
• Hormone Interactions 
• Hormonal Control of Homeostasis 
• Hormone Clearance 
11.3 The Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
• Pituitary Anatomy 
• Anterior Pituitary Hormones 
• Posterior Pituitary Hormones 
• Control of the Pituitary Gland 
11.4 Other Endocrine Glands and Tissues
• The Pineal Gland 
• The Thyroid Gland 
• The Parathyroid Glands 
• The Thymus 
• The Pancreas
• The Adrenal Glands 
• The Gonads 
• Endocrine Functions of Other Organs and 
Tissues 
11.5 Stress Physiology
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 11.1: Hormone Receptors 
and Therapy
• Clinical Application 11.2: Thyroid Disorders
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Endocrine System 
• Career Spotlight: Diabetes Educator 
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
11
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Positive and negative feedback and homeostasis 
(see “Homeostasis and Feedback” in section 1.2)
• Hydrophilic and hydrophobic qualities of 
molecules (see “Water” in section 2.2)
The Endocrine 
System
Module 8: Endocrine System 
The thyroid gland is the body’s largest endocrine gland. Thyroid hormone regulates 
the metabolic rate in adulthood and is important for normal prenatal nervous system 
development and tissue growth.
© Sciepro/Science Photo Library/Getty Images RF
360	

T
he trillions of cells that make up the human body don’t 
­function in isolation. They coordinate their activities by commu-
nicating through chemical signals, most of which are produced by the 
­nervous and endocrine systems. In previous chapters you learned that the 
­nervous system signals are neurotransmitters. The endocrine signals are 
­hormones. You have undoubtedly heard of estrogen, testosterone, and 
insulin, examples of hormones that have widespread effects on the body.
Hormones are fundamental to homeostasis. They play key roles in 
growth and development, metabolism and energy balance, water and 
caloric balance, reproduction, and stress responses. Endocrine disorders 
such as diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism are relatively common. 
These diseases are caused by problems with hormone production or cell 
response to specific hormones.
In this chapter we will first examine hormone structure and general 
mechanisms of action, then provide a survey of endocrine glands and 
tissues, the hormones they produce, and the functions these hormones 
perform.
11.1
 Overview of the Endocrine System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define hormone and endocrine system; and
b.	describe differences and similarities between the nervous and 
endocrine systems.
Hormones and Endocrine Glands
Hormones1 are chemical messengers secreted by endocrine glands or tissues into 
the blood. They travel everywhere the blood goes, but they affect only cells that have 
receptors for them—called their target cells. Hormones produced in one part of the 
body often affect very distant organs or cells. For example, those produced by the 
pituitary gland in the head affect organs in the abdominal and pelvic cavities.
The endocrine system is composed of the glands and cells that secrete hor-
mones (fig. 11.1). The science of endocrinology embraces the study of this system 
and the diagnosis and treatment of its disorders. Traditionally, endocrine glands 
have been distinguished from exocrine glands (see section 4.5). Exocrine glands 
typically release their secretions to a local tissue surface by way of ducts, whereas 
endocrine glands are ductless and release their secretions (hormones) into the 
blood—as reflected in the word endocrine.2 In recent decades, however, scientists 
have recognized that hormones are secreted by many cells and organs that aren’t 
traditionally considered to be endocrine glands, such as adipocytes, osteoblasts, and 
the brain, heart, liver, and small intestine. 
1hormone = to excite, set in motion 
2endo = internal; crin = to secrete
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      361  

Posterior
view
Trachea
Pineal gland
Pituitary gland
Hypothalamus
Thyroid gland
Thymus
Adrenal gland
Pancreas
Gonads:
Parathyroid 
glands
Ovary (female)
Testis (male)
Figure 11.1 Major Organs of the Endocrine 
System. This system also includes gland cells in 
many other organs not shown here. 
• After reading this chapter, name at least three 
hormone-secreting organs and tissues that are 
not shown in this illustration.
Comparison of the Nervous and Endocrine Systems  
One way to better understand the endocrine system is to compare it to 
the nervous system (fig. 11.2). The  purpose of both systems is internal 
­communication, but they differ in significant ways (table 11.1). For example, 
the nervous system communicates by means of both electrical and chemi-
cal signals, whereas the endocrine system relies solely on chemical mes-
sengers. The nervous system responds very quickly to a stimulus and stops 
responding as soon as stimulation ceases; the endocrine system is slower to 
respond and stop. The nervous system generally sends its signals to a specific 
organ, in contrast to the endocrine system whose hormones go everywhere 
the blood goes. 
Despite their differences, the nervous and endocrine systems have 
much in common. For example, some chemicals such as norepinephrine 
and ­dopamine function as both hormones and neurotransmitters. Some 
­hormones are secreted by specialized neurons called neuroendocrine cells, 
362      PART 3  Internal Coordination

which ­functionally belong to both the endocrine and nervous systems. In 
­addition, hormones and neurotransmitters may have similar effects on the 
same ­target cells; for example, norepinephrine (a neurotransmitter) and glu-
cagon ­(a ­hormone) both target liver cells and cause the release of glucose. 
­Neurons sometimes trigger hormone secretion, and hormones may stimu-
late or inhibit neurons. Thus, the two systems regulate each other as they 
­coordinate ­activities of other body systems. 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 1. Define endocrine system, hormone, and target cell.
2. Compare and contrast how the nervous system and endocrine 
system coordinate human physiology, and ­describe some 
ways in which these two systems overlap and interact.
Figure 11.2 Communication by the Nervous 
and Endocrine Systems. (a) A neuron has a long 
fiber that delivers its neurotransmitter to the imme-
diate vicinity of its target cells. (b) Endocrine cells 
secrete a hormone into the bloodstream (left). At 
a point often remote from its origin, the hormone 
leaves the bloodstream and enters or binds to its 
target cells (right). 
Neuron
Nerve impulse
Neurotransmitter
Endocrine
cells
Hormone in
bloodstream
Target cells
Target cells
(b) Endocrine system
(a) Nervous system
Table 11.1  Comparison of the Nervous and Endocrine Systems
Nervous System
Endocrine System
Communicates by means of electrical 
impulses and neurotransmitters
Communicates by means of hormones
Releases neurotransmitters at synapses  
at specific target cells
Releases hormones into bloodstream for 
general distribution throughout body
Usually has relatively local,  
specific effects
Sometimes has very general, widespread 
effects
Reacts quickly to stimuli, usually within  
1–10 ms
Reacts more slowly to stimuli, often taking 
seconds to days
Stops quickly when stimulus  
stops
May continue responding long after 
­stimulus stops
Adapts relatively quickly to continual 
­stimulation
Adapts relatively slowly; may respond for 
days to weeks
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      363  

11.2  Endocrine Physiology
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	characterize the three chemical classes of hormones and state 
examples of each;
b.	describe how hormones act on their target cells and ­receptors;
c.	discuss some types of interaction between multiple ­hormones;
d.	explain how the body regulates rates of hormone ­secretion; 
and
e.	explain how the body rids itself of a hormone whose job is done.
Hormone Structure
Hormones are classified into three groups on the basis of their chemical structure 
(fig. 11.3). (1) Steroid hormones are lipids synthesized from cholesterol, and share 
its basic structure of four organic rings with varied side groups. Some familiar ste-
roid hormones are testosterone and estradiol (an estrogen). (2) Monoamines are 
small molecules synthesized from the amino acids tyrosine and tryptophan, such 
as thyroxine (a thyroid hormone) and epinephrine. They are named for the fact that 
they have an amino group (—NH— or —NH2). (3) Peptide hormones are chains 
ranging from 3 to more than 200 amino acids long; those 50 amino acids or longer 
are considered proteins, and some are glycoproteins—proteins with carbohydrate 
attached. Oxytocin is an example of a small peptide hormone, composed of only 
9 amino acids. Insulin is composed of 51 amino acids, large enough to be regarded 
as a protein. 
CH3
Testosterone
O
(a) Steroids
(c) Peptides
(b) Monoamines
CH3
OH
Estradiol
HO
I
I
I
I
CH3
CH
CH2
OH
CH2
C
H
COOH
H2N
O
OH
HO
HO
Thyroxine
Epinephrine
CH2
NH
OH
Oxytocin
Insulin
364      PART 3  Internal Coordination
Figure 11.3 The Chemical Classes of 
­Hormones. (a) Two steroid hormones, defined by 
their four-membered rings derived from ­cholesterol. 
(b) Two monoamines, derived from amino acids and 
defined by their —NH— or —NH2 (amino) groups. (c) 
A small peptide hormone, ­oxytocin, and a protein 
hormone, insulin, defined by their chains of amino 
acids (the yellow circles).

Hormone Receptors and Effects
The function of a hormone is to stimulate a physiological change in a target 
cell. In order to do this, the hormone must first bind to a receptor—a protein 
within the target cell or in its plasma membrane. A given hormone fits its recep-
tor much like a key fits only one lock. A “key” such as insulin will fit only an 
insulin receptor (“lock”), for example; it will not fit an estrogen receptor. Many 
hormones are in the blood at one time, but any given organ or cell responds 
only to those for which it has the proper receptors—just as there are many radio 
broadcast signals in the air at once, but you hear only the one to which you tune 
your own radio.
The location of the lock varies with the chemical nature of the hormone. 
Peptide hormones and most monoamines (such as epinephrine) are hydrophilic 
and cannot pass into the target cell. They must bind to a receptor at the cell sur-
face (fig. 11.4a). The hormone acts as a first messenger “knocking at the door” 
of the target cell. Its receptor is closely associated with a membrane enzyme 
that responds by producing a second messenger inside the cell. Often, the sec-
ond messenger is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), made by remov-
ing two phosphate groups (PPi) from ATP. Cyclic AMP generally activates or 
deactivates cytoplasmic enzymes. This can lead to various metabolic effects in 
the cell. For example, an activated enzyme can turn certain metabolic pathways 
on; it can “wake up” certain genes, leading to the production of new enzymes; 
or it can change the permeability of the plasma membrane, thereby altering the 
transport of materials into or out of the target cell. Glucagon, for example, acts 
on liver cells to activate metabolic pathways leading to the release of blood 
sugar (see fig. 11.11). 
Steroid hormones, in contrast, are hydrophobic and readily diffuse 
through the phospholipids of the target-cell membrane. Most of them pass 
directly into the cell’s nucleus and bind to a receptor associated with the DNA 
(fig. 11.4b). This typically causes a gene to be transcribed, which leads to the 
production of a specific protein. That protein can then alter cell ­metabolism 
in various ways. For example, when estrogen enters a cell of the uterus dur-
ing the first half of a woman’s menstrual cycle, it binds to a nuclear recep-
tor and activates a gene for progesterone receptors. The cell produces those 
receptors, preparing itself to respond to the progesterone that will arrive in 
the second half of the cycle. The progesterone itself will activate other genes 
that cause the lining of the uterus to thicken and prepare for the possibility 
of pregnancy.
Hormone Interactions
We never have just a single hormone in circulation; the blood plasma is always a 
“cocktail” of many hormones traveling together. Often, two or more of these act 
on the same target organ and alter each other’s effects. There are three types of 
­hormone interactions:
	 1.	 Permissive effects, in which one hormone enhances the target organ’s 
­response to another hormone secreted later. The way that estrogen primes the 
uterus to respond to the later arrival of progesterone, as just described, is an 
example of this.
	 2.	 Antagonistic effects, in which one hormone opposes the action of ­another. 
For example, insulin stimulates the liver to absorb glucose and lower its 
blood concentration, whereas glucagon stimulates the liver to release glucose 
and raise the blood sugar level (see fig. 11.11).
Figure 11.4 Hormone Actions on a Target 
Cell. (a) Peptide hormones cannot enter their target 
cells; they bind to surface receptors and activate in-
tracellular processes, working through second mes-
sengers such as cAMP. (b) Steroid hormones freely 
enter their target cells and usually bind to receptors 
in the nucleus associated with specific genes in the 
DNA. Either process can lead to a great variety of 
metabolic effects on the target cell. 
 
• Would testosterone act by mechanism (a) or 
mechanism (b)? Explain.
+
(a) Peptide
hormone
(b) Steroid
hormone
Various
metabolic
eﬀects
Enzyme
activation
Protein
synthesis
mRNA
Gene
transcription
DNA
Hormone
receptor
Nucleus
Hormone
receptor
Membrane
enzyme
ATP
cAMP
PPi
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      365  

Hormonal Control of Homeostasis
The endocrine system precisely regulates numerous variables in the body 
through feedback control. Most often, hormonal control relies on negative feed-
back, in which the secretion of a hormone reverses (negates) a change in a physi-
ological variable. In a negative feedback loop, the body senses a change in a 
variable, an endocrine gland responds by altering the rate of hormone secretion, 
and target cells respond in a way that will ultimately bring the variable back to 
its original state.
An example of this is the regulation of blood sugar (glucose). When the glucose 
level rises during digestion of a meal, endocrine cells of the pancreas respond by 
secreting insulin. Among other effects, insulin targets liver, muscle, and other cells 
and causes them to remove glucose from the blood and store it for later use. The 
feedback mechanism thus reverses the original change in blood glucose level and 
maintains homeostasis.
Both positive and negative feedback mechanisms also regulate the endocrine 
glands themselves, as section 11.3 will show with regard to the pituitary gland.
Hormone Clearance
After they are secreted, hormones don’t linger in the blood forever. Most are taken 
up by the liver and kidneys, chemically degraded, and excreted in the bile or urine. 
Some hormones are removed from the blood very quickly; for example, growth 
hormone levels decline by 50% within 20 minutes. Others linger longer; thyroid 
­hormone, for example, maintains an effective level in the blood for as long as 
2 weeks after its secretion ceases (as when the thyroid gland has been surgically 
removed to treat thyroid cancer). 
Clinical Application 11.1
HORMONE RECEPTORS AND THERAPY
In treating endocrine disorders, it is essential to understand the role of 
­hormone receptors. For example, pituitary dwarfism is now rare because it 
is easily treated in childhood with growth hormone, and genetic ­engineering 
has now made human growth hormone freely available. However, there is 
­another form of dwarfism, Laron dwarfism, which results from a defect in 
the ­receptor for growth hormone. Administering growth hormone has no 
­benefit to these ­patients because the body doesn’t respond to it. Similarly, 
type 2 diabetes ­mellitus, the most common form of diabetes, results from 
an ­insulin ­receptor defect or deficiency. No amount of insulin replacement 
can correct this. ­Another implication of hormone–receptor physiology for 
therapy is that ­estrogen stimulates the growth of some malignant tumors 
with estrogen ­receptors. For this reason, estrogen replacement therapy 
should not be used for women with ­estrogen-­dependent cancer or who are 
at risk for it.
	 3.	 Synergistic effects, in which two hormones acting together produce a 
much stronger response than the sum of their separate effects. In men, for 
example, testosterone and follicle-stimulating hormone would have very 
little effect on sperm production if they each worked alone, but when they 
work together, the testes produce 300,000 sperm per minute.
366      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
3. Define the three chemical classes of hormones and 
give an example of each.
4. Explain what a hormone receptor is and state two places 
where receptors are located in the target cells.
5. Describe three ways in which hormones can influence each 
other’s actions.
6. Explain how the endocrine system can maintain homeostasis 
through negative feedback. Give an example.
11.3  The Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the anatomical relationship between the pituitary gland 
and hypothalamus;
b.	explain how the hypothalamus controls pituitary functions; and
c.	name the pituitary gland hormones and explain their effects.
This section and the next one survey the major glands of the endocrine system. 
We begin our exploration with the pituitary and a nearby region of the brain that 
controls it, the hypothalamus. You may remember that the hypothalamus regu-
lates a wide range of body functions, including water balance, energy balance, 
growth, and reproduction (see section 9.2). It fulfills these roles in large part by 
controlling the production and secretion of hormones from the pituitary gland. 
Thus, the pituitary is an important link in the neural and hormonal regulation of 
homeostasis.
Pituitary Anatomy
Even though the pituitary gland (hypophysis3) controls more bodily functions than 
any other endocrine gland, it is only about as big as a kidney bean. It grows about 
50% larger, however, during pregnancy. It is located just below the hypothalamus 
(see fig. 11.1), sheltered in the sella turcica,4 a saddlelike enclosure in the sphenoid 
bone (see section 6.3). 
3hypo = below; physis = growth 
4sella = saddle; turcica = Turkish
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      367  

The pituitary appears to be a single structure, but functionally and 
­embryologically, it is divided into anterior and posterior lobes. The ­anterior 
pituitary gland develops from a pouch in the roof of the embryonic ­pharynx 
(throat) (fig. 11.5). Meanwhile, the posterior pituitary gland arises as a 
­downgrowth from the hypothalamus, and retains its connection to the brain 
throughout life. The two parts of the pituitary gland come to lie side by side 
before the bone forms around them, and are so closely joined together that they 
appear to be a single gland. 
The hypothalamus is attached to the posterior pituitary gland by a stalk 
­containing bundles of nerve fibers (fig. 11.6a). These fibers originate in two 
­separate nuclei in the hypothalamus, represented in blue and green in the 
­figure. These distinct groups of neurons synthesize two hormones, oxytocin and 
­antidiuretic hormone, which we will examine shortly, and transport them down 
the nerve fibers for storage in the posterior pituitary. Under appropriate ­conditions, 
the hypothalamus sends electrical signals down the same fibers to stimulate the 
posterior pituitary to release those hormones into the blood.
 The hypothalamus connects to the anterior pituitary gland by a network of small 
blood vessels called the hypophyseal portal system (fig. 11.6b). A portal system is one 
in which blood flows from one capillary bed to another before returning to the heart. In 
this specific case, the hypothalamus secretes chemical signals into the capillaries at its 
end of the portal system; these signals travel a short distance to the anterior pituitary; 
and here they leave the bloodstream through a second capillary network and tell the 
anterior pituitary what to do. We will examine these signals shortly in more detail.
(a)  4 weeks
(b)  8 weeks
(c)  16 weeks
Future hypothalamus
Future cerebrum
Future posterior pituitary
Future anterior pituitary
Pharynx
Tongue
Future thyroid 
gland
Mouth
Hypothalamus
Optic chiasm
Posterior lobe
Anterior lobe
Sphenoid bone
Pharynx
Pituitary stalk
Hypothalamus
Future posterior
pituitary
Pharynx
Future anterior
pituitary
Figure 11.5 Embryonic Development of the 
Pituitary Gland. (a ) Sagittal section of the head at 
4 weeks, showing the neural and pharyngeal origins 
of the pituitary gland. (b) Pituitary development at 
8 weeks. The anterior pituitary has now separated 
from the pharynx. (c) Development at 16 weeks. The 
two lobes are now encased in bone and so closely 
associated they appear to be a single gland.
368      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Third ventricle
of brain
Floor of 
hypothalamus
Stalk
Posterior lobe
Anterior lobe
(a)
Hypothalamic 
nuclei
Oxytocin
Antidiuretic hormone
(b)
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Prolactin-inhibiting hormone
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Somatostatin
Follicle-stimulating hormone
Luteinizing hormone
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Prolactin
Growth hormone
Hypothalamic
nerve ﬁbers
Hypothalamic 
capillaries
Artery to 
hypothalamus
Hypothalamic
neurons 
(cell bodies)
Portal blood 
vessels
Pituitary
capillaries
Posterior lobe
Anterior lobe
Hypothalamic hormones
Anterior lobe hormones
Anterior
Posterior
Figure 11.6 Anatomy and Control of the Pituitary Gland. (a) Control of the posterior lobe. The nuclei in blue and green synthesize 
­oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone and transport them down nerve fibers in the stalk for storage in the posterior lobe. Later, nerve signals 
­passing down the stalk trigger the posterior lobe to release these hormones. (b) Control of the anterior lobe. Neurons in the hypothalamus 
­secrete releasing and inhibiting hormones into hypothalamic blood capillaries. These hormones (small black dots) travel down the portal system 
to capillaries in the anterior lobe. Leaving the bloodstream at that point, they stimulate anterior lobe cells to secrete their hormones, or in other 
cases inhibit them from doing so. 
 
• Which lobe of the pituitary gland is essentially composed of brain tissue?
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      369  

Anterior Pituitary Hormones
The anterior pituitary gland synthesizes six peptide hormones. The first 
two are called gonadotropins5 because they target the gonads (ovaries and 
­testes).
	 1.	 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). FSH stimulates the development 
of gametes (sex cells) in women and men. Once females reach reproduc-
tive age, FSH stimulates the maturation of bubblelike follicles that con-
tain the eggs. In the process, it stimulates the follicles to secrete estro-
gen. Therefore, FSH plays an important role in the regulation of monthly 
ovarian and menstrual cycles. In males, it stimulates the production of 
sperm.
	 2.	 Luteinizing hormone (LH). LH also targets the ovaries and testes. In 
females, it stimulates ovulation, the release of the egg from the follicle. 
The follicle left behind after ovulation develops into a yellowish structure 
called the corpus luteum.6 Under the influence of LH, the corpus luteum 
secretes progesterone, which serves to maintain the lining of the uterus 
should pregnancy occur. In males, LH stimulates the testes to secrete 
testosterone.
	 3.	 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), also called thyrotropin. TSH stim-
ulates the thyroid gland to secrete thyroid hormone, which is necessary for 
regulation of metabolism.
	 4.	 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), also called corticotropin. ACTH 
stimulates the adrenal cortex, the outer layer of the adrenal gland near the 
kidney, to secrete hormones called glucocorticoids. These are important in 
glucose, fat, and protein metabolism.
	 5.	 Prolactin7 (PRL). Pituitary cells that produce PRL increase greatly in size 
and number during pregnancy. After a woman gives birth, PRL stimulates 
the mammary glands to secrete milk. 
	 6.	 Growth hormone (GH), also called somatotropin. The pituitary gland pro-
duces at least a thousand times as much GH as any other hormone. In gener-
al, GH promotes tissue growth by mobilizing energy from fat, raising levels 
of calcium and other electrolytes, and stimulating protein synthesis, mitosis, 
and cellular differentiation. Rather than targeting one or a few organs, GH 
has widespread effects on the body. The effects are most conspicuous during 
childhood and adolescence, but important for tissue maintenance and repair 
throughout life.
Posterior Pituitary Hormones
The posterior pituitary gland stores and releases two small peptide hormones 
­produced by the hypothalamic nuclei.
	 1.	 Oxytocin8 (OT) (see fig. 11.3c). The most obvious effect of oxytocin 
is stimulation of uterine smooth muscle, leading to contractions during 
labor and delivery. A synthetic form of oxytocin, Pitocin, is sometimes 
administered to women to induce labor. During lactation, OT targets cells 
in the mammary glands that cause milk to flow to the nipple. In both men 
and women, oxytocin surges during sexual arousal and orgasm; its ­release 
5trop = to turn, change 
6corpus = body; lute = yellow 
7pro = favoring; lact = milk 
8oxy = sharp, quick; toc = birth
370      PART 3  Internal Coordination

may help propel sperm through the male reproductive tract and ­assist 
in transporting sperm up the female reproductive tract. ­Oxytocin has 
also been called the “love hormone” because of its role in the ­formation 
of emotional attachments between mothers and offspring and ­between 
­sexual partners.
	 2.	 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also called vasopressin. ADH has the 
same structure as oxytocin except for two of its amino acids. One function 
of the hypothalamus is to regulate fluid balance in the body. It does this 
in part by synthesizing ADH, which stimulates the kidneys to retain water 
and reduce urine output. Alcohol inhibits ADH release, which partially 
explains the increased urine production when one consumes alcoholic 
­beverages.
Control of the Pituitary Gland
The hypothalamus controls the anterior pituitary gland by secreting several 
releasing and inhibiting hormones into the portal system. They travel to the 
anterior pituitary, leave the blood vessels, and either stimulate or suppress the 
output of the corresponding pituitary hormones. The hypothalamus thereby 
regulates the numerous body functions that are affected by the anterior 
­pituitary.
The hypothalamic hormones are listed in the violet box in figure 11.6b. Releas-
ing hormones stimulate the anterior pituitary to secrete its hormones (pink box) 
into the blood. For example, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulates 
the pituitary to secrete thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH) into the 
blood. Hypothalamic inhibiting hormones suppress pituitary output. For example, 
prolactin-inhibiting hormone suppresses prolactin secretion when a woman is not 
­pregnant or nursing.
The hypothalamus controls the posterior pituitary by sending nerve signals 
down the stalk, commanding it to release ADH when there is a need to reduce 
­urinary water loss, or OT during childbirth and breast-feeding.
Figure 11.7 summarizes the flow of information from the hypothalamus to 
the anterior pituitary and from the pituitary to its target organs. Superficially, 
this may seem like a military chain of command from hypothalamus (“the gen-
eral”) to pituitary (“the lieutenant”) to the target organs (“the privates”). But 
unlike a military chain of command, the endocrine system does not work strictly 
from the top down. Here, the privates also give commands to the lieutenant and 
even to the general, through communication loops of both negative and positive 
feedback. For example, we have already seen that the hypothalamus secretes 
TRH to stimulate the pituitary, the pituitary secretes TSH to stimulate the thy-
roid, and the thyroid responds by secreting thyroid hormone (TH). But TH then 
feeds back to both the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary to reduce TRH and 
TSH output, as if saying, “That’s enough for now.” This keeps TH secretion 
from becoming excessive. This particular chain of responses is called negative 
feedback inhibition. 
By contrast, we saw earlier (see fig. 1.5) that during childbirth, pituitary oxy-
tocin (OT) stimulates labor contractions in the uterus, and stretch receptors in the 
uterus issue nerve signals back to the hypothalamus to say, “Send more oxytocin!” 
The hypothalamus commands the posterior pituitary to release more OT. This is a 
case of positive feedback control of the pituitary.
Apply What You Know
Explain the phrase, “The pituitary gland is a link between the neural regulation 
and hormonal regulation of homeostasis.” 
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      371  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
   7. Explain why the anterior and posterior pituitary glands 
are considered to be separate glands, despite their 
close ­physical relationship.
8. Prepare a study aid for yourself by constructing a table with 
three columns. In the left column, list the six hormones that are 
synthesized and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland; in 
the middle column, identify the target organ of each hormone; 
and in the right column, list the effects of each hormone.
9. How does the hypothalamus control the anterior pituitary 
gland? How does it control the posterior pituitary gland?
10. List the posterior pituitary gland hormones and explain their 
functions.
 11. Describe the influence of the pituitary target organs over 
hypothalamic and pituitary function.
Growth hormone
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone
Thyroid-
stimulating
hormone 
Prolactin
Liver
Fat, 
muscle,
bone
Mammary
gland
Luteinizing hormone 
 Follicle-stimulating hormone
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
Hypothalamus
Adrenal cortex
Ovary
Testis
Thyroid
Growth hormone–releasing
hormone
Figure 11.7 The Chain of Command from 
­Hypothalamus to Anterior Pituitary Gland to 
Target Organs. 
 
372      PART 3  Internal Coordination

11.4  Other Endocrine Glands and Tissues
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the structure and locations of the remaining endocrine 
glands;
b.	name the hormones that the glands produce;
c.	list the targets and explain the effects of the hormones; and
d.	discuss hormones produced by endocrine cells in tissues and 
organs other than the classic endocrine glands.
Numerous hormones are produced throughout the body. We will begin our 
­discussion with the most superior gland, the pineal gland, and will work our 
way inferiorly through glands in the neck and trunk. Finally, we will discuss 
hormones produced by tissues and organs other than those traditionally regarded 
as endocrine glands.
The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland (PIN-ee-ul) is anatomically associated with the brain. It attaches 
to the roof of the third ventricle, near the posterior end of the corpus callosum (see 
figs. 9.2 and 11.1). The pineal gland secretes melatonin, a monoamine, primarily 
during hours of darkness. Melatonin plays a role in sleep and the basic daily cycles 
of activity known as circadian rhythms.
Intriguing recent studies show that increased melatonin levels are associated with 
decreased incidence of cancer. This finding has implications for our modern lifestyle 
because exposure to light suppresses the production of melatonin. This may explain 
the finding that blind women, whose melatonin production is not suppressed by 
­artificial light, have a lower incidence of breast cancer. In contrast, women who work 
during the night under artificial light (and hence have lower levels of melatonin) have 
a greater incidence of breast cancer.
The pineal gland is large in children but begins to atrophy at about the age of 7. 
By adulthood, it is no more than a fibrous, shrunken mass. As it shrinks, granules 
of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate called pineal sand appear. These tiny 
grains are visible on X-rays and enable radiologists to determine the position of the 
pineal gland. This can be clinically useful if the gland has been displaced by a brain 
tumor or other structural abnormality.
The Thyroid Gland 
  
The thyroid gland (fig. 11.8) lies adjacent to the trachea, near the shieldlike 
­thyroid 9 cartilage of the larynx. It is the largest gland with purely endocrine func-
tions. In adults, it weighs 20 to 25 g, and has a dark reddish brown color due to its 
unusually great blood flow. It is composed of two lobes that are bulbous at their 
inferior end and taper superiorly. In most people, a narrow bridge of tissue, the 
isthmus, crosses the front of the trachea and joins the two lobes, and some people 
have a small third lobe arising medially from the isthmus. 
The thyroid gland is composed of sacs called thyroid follicles. These are lined 
with simple cuboidal epithelium composed of follicular cells, which ­synthesize 
9thyr = shield; oid = like, resembling
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      373  

Thyroid 
cartilage
Trachea 
Thyroid
gland
Inferior 
thyroid vein
(b)
Isthmus
Superior 
thyroid artery 
and vein
(a)
Follicular
cells
Parafollicular (C)
cells
Stored
thyroid hormone
Follicle
thyroid hormone (TH). TH is a double-ringed monoamine made from two mol-
ecules of the amino acid tyrosine. About 90% of the daily output of TH is in a 
form called thyroxine, also known as T4 or tetraiodothyronine (TET-ra-EYE-
oh-doe-THY-ro-neen) because it has four iodine atoms (see fig. 11.3b). The other 
10% is called T3 or triiodothyronine (try-EYE-oh-doe-THY-ro-neen) because it 
has only three iodine atoms. 
When TH reaches a target cell, T4 is converted to T3. T3 enters the nucleus and 
binds to receptors associated with the DNA. Its primary effect is to stimulate an 
increase in metabolic rate. There is a resulting rise in the body’s ATP, oxygen, and 
fuel consumption (and therefore in appetite) and in heat production. TH secretion 
rises in cold weather to compensate for the body’s heat loss. TH also stimulates 
growth of the bones, skin, and other tissues; increases alertness; and is crucial to 
development of the fetal nervous system.
Figure 11.8 The Thyroid Gland. Gross ­anatomy, 
anterior view. Major blood vessels are shown only 
on the anatomical right. (b) Histology. 
  
b: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
• What is the function of the C cells in part (b)? 
10Robert James Graves (1769–1853), Irish physician
Clinical Application 11.2
THYROID DISORDERS
Thyroid disorders result from too little thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism) 
or too much (hyperthyroidism). They occur more frequently in women than 
in men. The most common cause of hypothyroidism in adults is Hashimoto 
­disease, an autoimmune disorder that destroys the thyroid gland. Symptoms 
include thinning hair and scaly skin, cold intolerance, weight gain, and ­mental 
­sluggishness. Graves10 disease (toxic goiter) is a form of hyperthyroidism 
in which ­dysfunctional antibodies mimic the effect of thyroid-stimulating 
­hormone, causing the thyroid gland to secrete excessive thyroid hormone. The 
resulting signs and symptoms include rapid weight loss, increased sweating, 
­irritability, heart palpitations, and protruding eyeballs (exopthalmia). Graves 
disease is sometimes treated with radioactive iodine that kills the thyroid cells, 
or the gland may be surgically removed. Either treatment requires thyroid 
­hormone replacement therapy for the rest of one’s life, although this is ­relatively 
easy and inexpensive compared to other hormone replacement therapies.
374      PART 3  Internal Coordination

In addition, the thyroid gland has small clusters of C (clear) cells, or 
parafollicular cells, nestled between the follicles. They produce a peptide 
hormone called calcitonin in response to elevated blood calcium levels. Cal-
citonin inhibits the bone-resorbing activity of osteoclasts and stimulates bone 
deposition by osteoblasts. Calcitonin is significant in children but seems to 
have little effect in adults. No disease results from an excess or deficiency of 
calcitonin.
The Parathyroid Glands 
 
Four small, ovoid parathyroid glands are usually located on the posterior 
­surface of the thyroid (see fig. 11.1), although their location varies. They secrete 
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which is the dominant ­calcium-regulating 
­hormone in adults. In response to a blood calcium ­deficiency, it ­stimulates 
osteoclasts and inhibits osteoblasts, thereby dissolving bone and raising 
the blood calcium level. Note that these effects are opposite from those of 
­calcitonin. PTH also stimulates the kidneys to produce calcitriol, which 
­promotes absorption of calcium in the digestive tract. If the parathyroids 
are accidentally removed in the course of neck surgery, immediate hormone 
replacement therapy is necessary; a person can otherwise die within a few 
days of blood calcium deficiency.
The Thymus
The thymus is a bilobed gland in the mediastinum superior to the heart, behind the 
sternal manubrium. It is the site of maturation for certain white blood cells called 
T lymphocytes (T for thymus-dependent), which play a critical role in immunity. 
The thymus secretes hormones called thymosin and thymopoietin, which regulate 
the development and activity of T lymphocytes and stimulate the development of 
other lymphatic organs. The thymus is discussed more thoroughly in section 14.1 in 
­relation to its immune function.
In the fetus and infant, the thymus is enormous compared to adjacent 
organs, sometimes extending from near the diaphragm to the neck (fig. 11.9). It 
continues to grow until age 5 or 6, but after the age of 14 it shrinks dramatically. 
By old age, it is a small fibrous and fatty remnant barely distinguishable from 
surrounding tissue. 
Thyroid
Thymus
Lung
Heart
Trachea
Diaphragm
Liver
(a)  Newborn
(b)  Adult
Figure 11.9 The Thymus. Thymus of the new-
born, showing its large size. (b) Atrophied thymus of 
the adult. 
 
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      375  

The Pancreas 
The pancreas is an elongated, spongy organ located below and behind the stomach 
(fig. 11.10). It is approximately 15 cm long and 2.5 cm wide. One end of it nestles in 
the curve of the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum. Most pancreatic tis-
sue functions as an exocrine digestive gland, but scattered throughout the exocrine 
tissue, especially in the tail of the pancreas, are 1 to 2 million little endocrine cell 
clusters called pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans11). 
Insulin and glucagon are the most important pancreatic hormones. They regulate 
the blood concentration of glucose, a vital fuel for most of the body’s tissues. Neurons 
especially depend on glucose and quickly die if it is not available.
Insulin is produced by beta (β) cells of the islets in response to a rise in 
blood glucose during and after a meal. Insulin promotes the uptake of glucose 
by liver, muscle, and fat cells, among others, and promotes glycogen synthesis 
­(glycogenesis12) and fat storage (fig. 11.11a). These processes lower the blood 
glucose concentration. 
Glucagon is produced by alpha (α) cells of the islets in response to falling 
levels of blood glucose. In contrast to insulin, glucagon promotes the mobilization 
of fuels. Its primary action is on the liver, where it stimulates the breakdown of gly-
cogen (glycogenolysis13) and the synthesis of glucose from proteins or their amino 
acids (gluconeogenesis14) (fig. 11.11b). These processes release glucose into the 
blood, raising its concentration and making it available to other tissues.
Bile duct
Duodenum
Tail of pancreas
Head of
pancreas
(a)
(b)  Pancreatic islet
Pancreatic
ducts
Beta cell
Alpha cell
(c)
Pancreatic
islet
Exocrine
acinus
11Paul Langerhans (1847–88), German anatomist 
12glycogen + genesis = creation, formation of 
13glycogen + lysis = splitting, breaking apart 
14gluco = glucose, sugar; neo = new; genesis = creation, formation of
Figure 11.10 The Pancreas. (a) Gross anatomy 
of the pancreas and its relationship to the duode-
num. (b) Cell types of a pancreatic islet. (c) Light 
­micrograph of a pancreatic islet amid the darker 
exocrine acini. 
 
c: © Ed Reschke
• What is the function of the exocrine cells in this 
gland?
376      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Figure 11.11  Effects of Insulin and Glucagon. 
(a) Insulin promotes the uptake of blood glucose by 
cells and its polymerization to make glycogen, an 
energy-storage carbohydrate. In doing so, it lowers 
the blood sugar level. (b) Glucagon stimulates some 
cells, especially in the liver, to break down glycogen 
and release glucose to the bloodstream, thereby 
raising blood sugar level. Glycogenesis is the syn-
thesis of glycogen; glycogenolysis is its hydrolysis 
(breakdown to glucose); and gluconeogenesis is the 
synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrates, espe-
cially fats and proteins.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
(a) Actions
of insulin
(b) Actions of 
glucagon
Liver cell
O
O
O
O
) A
(a)
o
ctio
uc
) Ac
(b
gl
Absorption
of blood
sugar
Elevated
blood
sugar
Glycogenesis
Glycogenolysis
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
Glycog
cog
cog
cog
cog
coggeno
eno
eno
eno
eno
enolys
lys
lys
ys
ys
lys
lys
lys
lys
lysissisisisisis
Glycogen
Gluconeogenesis
Glucose
Glucose
Fat
Protein
Blood
The Adrenal Glands 
Each kidney is topped by a hatlike adrenal gland (fig. 11.12a). These are relatively 
large in the fetus and infant but shrink about 50% by the age of 2 years. The adrenal 
gland has two distinct portions that differ in embryonic origin and the hormones 
produced—an inner medulla surrounded by an outer cortex. 
The Adrenal Medulla
The adrenal medulla (fig. 11.12a) develops from the same embryonic cells 
that give rise to the sympathetic nervous system, and its cells are essentially 
modified sympathetic postganglionic neurons (see “Anatomy of the Sympa-
thetic Division” in section 9.5). They have no axons or dendrites but secrete 
their products directly into the blood. They secrete mainly epinephrine and 
norepinephrine, two monoamines involved in stress responses. They are dis-
cussed later under stress physiology. As you may recall, norepinephrine is also 
a sympathetic neurotransmitter.
The Adrenal Cortex
The adrenal cortex produces steroid hormones (corticosteroids), all of which are 
synthesized from cholesterol. It has three tissue layers that differ in their hormone 
output (fig. 11.12b).
∙	 The zona glomerulosa15 (glo-MER-you-LO-suh) is the thin, outermost layer 
of the cortex. Its cells are arranged in rounded clusters for which this zone is 
named.
15glomerul = little ball; osa = full of
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      377  

∙	 The zona fasciculata16 (fah-SIC-you-LAH-ta) is the middle and thickest layer 
of the cortex. Its cells are arranged in parallel cords (fascicles) perpendicular 
to the gland surface. They have a foamy look stemming from their high lipid 
content.
∙	 The zona reticularis17 (reh-TIC-you-LAR-iss), is a narrow, innermost layer 
whose cells form a branching network (reticulum).
One of the corticosteroids is aldosterone, produced only in the zona glomeru-
losa. Nicknamed “the salt-retaining hormone,” it is part of a vital renin–angiotensin–­
aldosterone (RAA) hormone system that stimulates the kidneys to retain sodium ions in 
the blood instead of allowing them to be lost in the urine. Water follows the sodium by 
osmosis, so aldosterone slows down the body’s rate of urinary water loss and helps to 
maintain blood volume and pressure. Aldosterone and some similar, minor hormones 
are collectively called mineralocorticoids.
Another corticosteroid is cortisol, produced in the zona fasciculata and zona 
reticularis. It is secreted in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from 
the anterior pituitary gland. Its most noticeable effects are on adipose tissue, muscle, 
and the liver. It raises the levels of blood glucose and other fuels, providing the body 
with the energy to respond to stress. Cortisol stimulates muscles to break down their 
own proteins and release the amino acids into circulation; it stimulates the liver to syn-
thesize glucose from these free amino acids; and it stimulates adipose tissue to break 
down fats, releasing fatty acids into circulation as a supplemental fuel. These effects 
are important to the body’s ability to adapt to stress and will be discussed later under 
stress physiology. Cortisol and similar, lesser hormones are called glucocorticoids.
Adrenal gland
Kidney
Adrenal cortex
Adrenal medulla
(a)
(b)
Connective
tissue capsule
Adrenal cortex
Zona
glomerulosa
Zona
fasciculata
Zona
reticularis
Adrenal
medulla
16fascicul = little bundle; ata = possessing 
17reticul = little network; aris = pertaining to
Figure 11.12 The Adrenal Gland. (a) Location 
and gross anatomy. (b) Histology. 
 photo: © Victor Eroschenko
378      PART 3  Internal Coordination

The third group of corticosteroids are sex hormones—androgens and smaller 
amounts of estrogens—produced in both the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. 
Androgens stimulate many aspects of male development and reproductive physiology. 
In men, the testes secrete most of the male hormones, so their adrenal androgens are 
of relatively minor importance. Androgens are also important in female physiology, 
however, and the adrenal cortex is their sole source. The principal adrenal androgen is 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). In the male fetus, DHEA plays an important role 
in development of the male reproductive tract. At sexual maturity, DHEA acts in both 
sexes to stimulate development of pubic and axillary hair and apocrine sweat glands.
Apply What You Know
The zona fasciculata grows significantly thicker in pregnant women. What do you 
think could be the benefit of this?
The Gonads
The gonads (ovaries and testes) function as both endocrine and exocrine glands. 
Their exocrine products are eggs and sperm, and their endocrine products are 
gonadal hormones, mostly steroids.
The ovaries secrete estrogen, progesterone, and inhibin. In females of repro-
ductive age, the ovaries undergo monthly cyclical changes that involve hormone 
production. In the first part of the ovarian cycle, a bubblelike follicle develops, con-
sisting of the egg (oocyte) surrounded by follicular cells that pile atop each other 
to form layers (fig. 11.13a). Follicular cells produce estrogen. In the middle of the 
cycle, the egg is released by ovulation. The remains of the follicle become the cor-
pus luteum, a structure that secretes progesterone. 
Estrogen and progesterone regulate the ovarian and menstrual cycles, prepare 
the uterus for implantation of the embryo, maintain pregnancy, and contribute to the 
development of the reproductive system. Inhibin is also secreted by the follicle and 
corpus luteum. It is an inhibitory signal to the anterior pituitary gland that regulates 
the secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). The ovarian and menstrual 
cycles and associated hormones are discussed in more detail in chapter 19.
The testes secrete testosterone and inhibin. Most of the testis is composed of 
microscopic seminiferous tubules that produce sperm. The wall of the tubules is 
formed of germ cells in the process of becoming sperm, and nurse cells, which 
support and protect the germ cells and secrete inhibin. By limiting FSH secretion, 
inhibin regulates the rate of sperm production. Nestled between the tubules are clus-
ters of interstitial endocrine cells (cells of Leydig18), the source of testosterone 
(fig. 11.13b). Testosterone sustains sperm production and the sex drive throughout 
adolescent and adult life. It stimulates development of the male reproductive system 
in the fetus, and the development of the masculine physique in adolescence.
Endocrine Functions of Other Organs and Tissues
In recent decades, physiologists have discovered several hormones secreted by 
organs and tissues that were not traditionally regarded as endocrine glands.
∙	 The heart. Rising blood pressure stretches the heart wall and stimulates 
muscle cells in the atria to secrete natriuretic19 peptides. These hormones 
increase urine output and sodium excretion and oppose the actions of angio-
tensin II, described shortly. The effect of natriuretic peptides is to lower blood 
pressure.
Figure 11.13 The Gonads. (a) Histology of an 
ovarian follicle. (b) Histology of the testis. 
a: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images b: © Ed Reschke
50 μm
(b)
Interstitial
endocrine
cells
Seminiferous 
tubule
Blood vessels
Follicular cells
(source of 
estrogen)
Ovary
(a)
100 μm
Testis
Nurse cells
Egg cell (oocyte)
18Franz von Leydig (1821–1908), German histologist 
19natri = sodium; uretic = pertaining to urine
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      379  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12. Make a chart that lists the glands from the preceding 
section, the hormones they secrete, the target tissues, and 
the actions of the hormones.
13. What hormone increases the body’s heat production in cold 
weather? What other functions does this hormone have?
14. What hormones are produced by the adrenal cortex and 
what are their functions?
15. Name one hormone produced by each of the following 
­organs—the heart, kidney, stomach, and ovary—and state the 
function of each hormone.
∙	 The liver. The liver is involved in the production of at least five hormones: (1) 
It collaborates with the skin and kidneys to produce calcitriol (vitamin D3). 
(2) It secretes a blood protein called angiotensinogen, which is converted to 
the hormone angiotensin II, whose effects are described shortly in relation to 
the kidneys. (3) It secretes erythropoietin (EPO) (er-RITH-ro-POY-eh-tin), 
a hormone that stimulates red blood cell production. (4) It secretes hepcidin, 
a regulator of iron homeostasis. (5) It secretes insulin-like growth factor I 
(IGF-I), a hormone that aids the action of growth hormone.
∙	 The kidneys. The kidneys, like the liver, produce erythropoietin and perform 
certain steps in both calcitriol and angiotensin II synthesis. Angiotensin II 
has numerous effects. It stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, 
thus promoting sodium and water retention, and it constricts blood vessels and 
increases cardiac output. The overall effect of all of these is to increase blood 
pressure. 
∙	 The stomach and intestines. These organs secrete enteric20 hormones that 
coordinate different regions and glands of the digestive system with each oth-
er. For example, the stomach secretes gastrin when food arrives. Gastrin stim-
ulates the production of hydrochloric acid, which aids protein digestion. Other 
hormones regulate feelings of hunger and satiety, and are the focus of much 
interest because of the prevalence of obesity. For example, ghrelin (GRELL-
in), a “hunger hormone,” sends signals to the hypothalamus to stimulate the 
appetite. In contrast, peptide YY (PYY), secreted by the small and large in-
testines, creates a feeling of satiety and has an appetite-suppressing effect.
∙	 Adipose tissue. Fat cells secrete the protein hormone leptin, which has long-
term effects on appetite-regulating centers of the hypothalamus. A low level 
of leptin, signifying a low level of body fat, increases appetite and food intake, 
whereas a high level of leptin tends to blunt the appetite. Early-onset obesity 
may sometimes be related to defective leptin receptors. Leptin also serves as 
a signal for the onset of puberty, which is delayed in persons with abnormally 
low levels of body fat.
∙	 Osseous tissue. Osteoblasts of the bone tissue secrete osteocalcin, which not 
only contributes to the structure of the bone matrix but also stimulates the 
pancreatic islets and adipose tissue. Its effect is to increase the secretion and 
action of insulin. It also also seems to inhibit weight gain (fat deposition) and 
the onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
20entero = intestine
380      PART 3  Internal Coordination

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
M
edical problems with the endocrine system center mostly 
on three dysfunctions: hyposecretion (hormone deficiency), 
hypersecretion (hormone excess), and hormone inaction, in which 
a normal amount of hormone is secreted but the body doesn’t 
respond normally to it. Hypo- and hypersecretion disorders have 
specific names that often refer to the specific endocrine gland, 
such as hypo- and hyperthyroidism.
One example of a hyposecretion disorder is diabetes insipi-
dus, in which the posterior pituitary puts out little or no antidiuretic 
hormone. The kidneys, as a result, fail to conserve water; one 
therefore produces enormous quantities of urine, although the 
urine is glucose-free (unlike the sugary urine in diabetes mellitus). 
Hormone hyposecretion is often treated with hormone replace-
ment therapy. An example of a hypersecretion disorder is pheo-
chromocytoma21 (FEE-oh-CRO-mo-sy-TO-muh), a tumor of the 
adrenal medulla that secretes up to 27 times the normal amounts 
of epinephrine and norepinephrine. This often causes drenching 
sweats, crises of severe headaches and hypertension, and sudden 
death from stroke or cardiac arrhythmia, often before the disease 
is diagnosed. An example of target-cell insensitivity is androgen-
insensitivity syndrome (AIS), in which the body lacks testosterone 
receptors. Even though testosterone is present, it has no effect. In 
males with AIS, the genitalia show female anatomy, and at puberty, 
the small amount of estrogen produced by the testes causes males 
to develop enlarged breasts and other feminine features. Despite 
their outward appearance, such males are sterile because they do 
not develop an internal female reproductive tract or ovaries.
D i a b e t e s  M e l l i t u s
D
iabetes mellitus (DM) is the world’s most common metabolic 
disease and occurs in forms that exemplify both ­hyposecretion 
and hormone inaction. It is the leading cause of adult blindness, 
­renal failure, gangrene, and the necessity for limb amputations.
Classic signs and symptoms of DM are “the three polys”: 
­polyuria22 (excessive urine output), polydipsia23 (intense thirst), 
and polyphagia24 (ravenous hunger). These are common patient 
­complaints when first presenting to a physician, and diabetes can 
be confirmed by three clinical findings in blood and urine tests: 
hyperglycemia25 (elevated blood glucose), glycosuria26 (glucose in 
the urine), and ketonuria (ketones in the urine).
There are two types of diabetes mellitus: type 1 and type 2. 
Type 1 diabetes, formerly called insulin-dependent or juvenile-
onset diabetes, accounts for about 10% of cases. It is an autoim-
mune condition that results from destruction of pancreatic beta 
cells by one’s own antibodies. Type 1 diabetes is most often diag-
nosed around the age of 12 but it can also appear later in life. Treat-
ment includes meal planning, exercise, self-monitoring of blood 
glucose levels, and periodic injections of insulin or delivery of insu-
lin by a pump worn on the body.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, formerly called non-insulin-dependent 
or adult-onset diabetes, accounts for 90% of cases, including nearly 
7% of the U.S. population. Type 2 diabetics may have normal or even 
elevated insulin levels; the problem is insulin resistance—a failure 
of target cells to respond to it. The three major risk factors for type 
2 diabetes are heredity, age, and obesity. It tends to run in families, 
and obesity and physical inactivity increase insulin resistance. Life-
style changes over recent decades mean that many of us eat too 
much and do not exercise enough. The incidence of type 2 diabetes 
has therefore increased, and more and more people are developing 
it at a young age. The relationship between obesity and diabetes 
mellitus is complex, but one factor is that adipocytes produce a hor-
monelike secretion that indirectly interferes with glucose transport 
into most kinds of cells. Type 2 diabetes can often be managed with 
a combination of weight loss, careful attention to diet, and exercise. 
Some patients receive medications that improve insulin secretion or 
target-cell sensitivity, and some take insulin injections to supplement 
insulin-sensitizing drugs.
When cells cannot absorb glucose, they rely on fat and protein 
for energy. Fat and protein breakdown results in muscular atrophy 
and weakness. Rapid fat breakdown elevates blood concentrations 
of free fatty acids and their breakdown products, ketones. As acids, 
ketones lower the blood pH and produce a condition called keto-
acidosis. Ketoacidosis depresses the nervous system, produces a 
deep gasping breathing typical of terminal diabetes, and leads to 
diabetic coma and death.
In the long term, diabetes mellitus can lead to degenera-
tive neurological and cardiovascular diseases, including diabetic 
neuropathy (nerve damage) and atherosclerosis (blockage of 
blood vessels with lipid deposits). Diabetic neuropathy can make 
a patient dangerously unaware of minor injuries, which can thus 
fester from neglect and contribute to gangrene and the necessity 
of amputation. Many diabetics lose their toes, feet, or legs to the 
disease. Atherosclerosis leads to poor circulation, which contrib-
utes to gangrene, kidney failure, and blindness.
21pheo = dusky; chromo = colored; cyt = cells; oma = tumor 
22poly = much, excessive; uri = urine 
23poly = much, excessive; dipsia = drinking 
24poly = much, excessive; phagia = eating 
25hyper = excess; glyc = sugar, glucose; emia = blood condition 
26glyco = glucose, sugar; uria = urine condition
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      381  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
16. Identify a variety of physical and emotional causes 
of stress.
17. Identify the dominant hormones of each stage of stress, and 
explain how the pathological progression of stress relates to 
the use or depletion of various body fuels.
11.5  Stress Physiology
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define stress in physiological terms;
b.	identify the stress hormones and explain their roles in adapting 
to stress.
Stress is defined as any situation that upsets homeostasis and threatens one’s physi-
cal or emotional well-being. Physical causes of stress (stressors) include injury, sur-
gery, hemorrhage, infection, intense exercise, pain, and malnutrition, among others. 
Emotional causes include fear, anger, grief, depression, anxiety, and guilt. Whatever 
the cause, we react to stress in a fairly consistent way called the stress response, 
mediated by the endocrine system and sympathetic nervous system. Three stages of 
stress are recognized, each with its own characteristic hormonal responses.
	 1.	 The alarm reaction is mediated mainly by norepinephrine from the ­sympathetic 
nerves and epinephrine from the adrenal medulla. These chemicals raise the 
heart rate, blood pressure, and blood glucose level; ­promote ­pulmonary ven-
tilation; and prepare the body for action such as ­fighting or escaping danger. 
In most cases, we recover from stress during this stage. If a stressful situation 
persists, however, the increased consumption of liver and muscle glycogen can 
push one to the next stage.
	 2.	 The stage of resistance develops as stored glycogen is depleted and the de-
mand for glucose must be met by tapping into alternative fuels. ACTH and 
cortisol are secreted to break down stored fat and protein into fatty acids, 
glycerol, and amino acids. The liver utilizes glycerol and amino acids to syn-
thesize more glucose. Fatty acids and glucose are oxidized to make ATP. 
Sometimes to our misfortune, long-term cortisol release inhibits the immune 
system. Chronic stress therefore increases one’s susceptibility to infections, 
ulcers, and even cancer.
	 3.	 The stage of exhaustion sets in as even one’s reserve alternative fuels are 
depleted. When fat stores are gone, the body begins breaking down more 
and more protein to meet its energy needs. Thus there is a progressive 
wasting away of muscles and weakening of the body. Elevated aldosterone 
secretion can cause excessive salt and water retention, hypertension, and 
depletion of potassium from the body. Death can result in this stage from 
heart failure, kidney failure, or overwhelming infection. 
382      PART 3  Internal Coordination

Aging of the Endocrine System
The endocrine system shows less degenerative change in old 
age than any other organ system. Although the reproductive 
hormones drop sharply in old age and growth hormone and thy-
roid hormone secretion decline steadily after adolescence, other 
hormones continue to be secreted at fairly stable levels even 
into old age. Target-cell sensitivity declines, however, so some 
hormones have less effect. For example, the pituitary gland is 
less sensitive to negative feedback inhibition by adrenal gluco-
corticoids; consequently, ACTH secretion and the response to 
stress are more prolonged than usual. Diabetes mellitus is more 
common in old age, largely because target cells have fewer in-
sulin receptors. In part, this is an effect of increased adiposity in 
old age. The more fat there is at any age, the less sensitive other 
cells are to insulin. In addition, most people lose muscle mass 
in old age, and muscle is the body’s most significant glucose-
buffering tissue. 
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Diabetes mellitus is the world’s most widespread metabolic disease, and peo-
ple with diabetes often express frustration and dissatisfaction with the care 
they receive. Patients who cannot adequately manage their diabetes suffer 
needless disability and premature death. A diabetes educator is a professional 
who assists, educates, and provides emotional support for diabetes patients 
and their caregivers. Diabetes educators teach techniques of blood glucose 
monitoring, insulin injection, and the care and use of insulin pumps. They 
counsel patients on diet, exercise, taking their medication regularly, coping 
emotionally with the disease, and other skills—all aimed at behavioral changes 
that will produce better health outcomes. They work in hospitals, physicians’ 
­offices, outpatient clinics, pharmacies, home-health-care organizations, and other settings. They are usually able to spend more 
time with a patient than the physician can, and to provide more emotional support.
A candidate for diabetes educator must have very good communication skills; a sound knowledge of biological, clinical, and 
social sciences; and an ability to relate comfortably, patiently, and effectively with people of all kinds. Many diabetes educators 
are registered nurses who specialize and become diabetes nurse educators (DNEs). Diabetes educators, however, also come 
from a wide variety of other backgrounds and include dietitians, pharmacists, social workers, exercise physiologists, and mental 
health professionals. With experience and self-directed online coursework, one may become a Certified Diabetes Educator (CDE) 
or sit for board exams to become board-certified in advanced diabetes management (BC-ADM). See appendix B for further infor-
mation on becoming a diabetes educator.
D i a b e t e s  E d u c a t o r
© Rolf Bruderer/Getty Images RF
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      383  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the ENDOCRINE SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems 
Integumentary System
Sex hormones affect development of body hair and 
apocrine glands, and estrogen ­affects subcutaneous 
fat deposition as well as skin hydration and elasticity.
Skeletal System
Many hormones affect bone development and homeo-
stasis, including growth hormone, parathyroid hormone, 
calcitonin, calcitriol, estrogen, and progesterone.
Muscular System
Growth hormone and testosterone stimulate ­muscular 
growth; insulin regulates carbohydrate ­metabolism in 
muscle; other hormones affect ­electrolyte balance, 
which is critical to muscular function.
Nervous System
The endocrine system exerts negative feedback inhibition on 
the hypothalamus; several hormones affect nervous system 
development, mood, and behavior; other hormones affect 
electrolyte balance, which is critical to neuron function.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Hormones stimulate lymphoid organs and 
thereby influence production of immune cells, 
and regulate immune responses and thus 
influence disease susceptibility and severity.
Respiratory System
Epinephrine and norepinephrine 
increase pulmonary airflow.
Circulatory System
Angiotensin II, aldosterone, ADH, and natriuretic peptides regulate 
blood volume and pressure; EPO regulates production of red blood 
cells; epinephrine, thyroid hormone, and other hormones affect 
heart rate and contraction force.
Reproductive System
Gonadotropins, sex steroids, and other 
­hormones regulate sexual development, 
sperm and egg production, sex drive, 
the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, fetal 
­development, and lactation.
Digestive System
Insulin and glucagon regulate nutrient 
storage and metabolism; enteric hormones 
regulate gastrointestinal secretion, motility, 
and appetite.
Urinary System
ADH regulates water 
excretion; PTH, calcitriol, 
and aldosterone regulate 
electrolyte excretion.
All Systems
Growth hormone, insulin, insulin-like growth factors, thyroid hormone, and 
glucocorticoids affect the development and metabolism of most tissues.
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone Images/Getty Images
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Getty Images
384

Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
11.1  Overview of the Endocrine System
1.	 The meaning of hormone and the components of the endocrine 
system
2.	 The reason why only some organs respond to a hormone even 
though it travels throughout the body
3.	 The distinction between exocrine glands and endocrine glands
4.	 Functional similarities and differences between the endocrine 
system and nervous system and examples of how the systems 
overlap
11.2  Endocrine Physiology
1.	 The three chemical classes of hormones, with examples of 
each
2.	 Why the relationship between a hormone and receptor is de-
scribed as a “lock-and-key” mechanism
3.	 How hydrophilic and hydrophobic hormones differ in their 
actions at a target cell
4.	 Three ways in which hormones influence each other’s action 
when two or more hormones act on the same target organ
5.	 How hormone secretion is regulated by negative feedback 
loops
6.	 How a hormone’s actions are halted once its purpose has been 
served
11.3  The Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
1.	 The structural relationship and embryonic origins of the two 
lobes of the pituitary gland
2.	 How the hypothalamus is functionally connected to each of the 
lobes
3.	 Hormones of the anterior pituitary and their target organs and 
functions
4.	 Hormones of the posterior pituitary and their target organs and 
functions
5.	 How the hypothalamus controls secretion by each of the 
­pituitary lobes
6.	 How positive and negative feedback from target organs 
­regulate pituitary function
11.4  Other Endocrine Glands and Tissues
1.	 The location of the pineal gland and the action of melatonin
2.	 The location and histology of the thyroid gland
3.	 The chemical nature of thyroid hormone and the differences 
between T3 and T4
4.	 The effects of thyroid hormone
5.	 The source and effects of calcitonin
6.	 The location of the parathyroid glands, their hormone, and its 
function
7.	 The location and endocrine function of the thymus
8.	 Why the pancreas is considered to be both an exocrine and 
endocrine gland
9.	 The cells that produce insulin and glucagon and the functions 
of these hormones
10.	 The location and two main components of the adrenal glands
11.	 Hormones of the adrenal medulla and their effects
12.	 Tissue layers of the adrenal cortex
13.	 Hormones of the adrenal cortex, their functions, and the tissue 
layers that produce each one
14.	 Hormones of the female and male gonads, their cellular 
sources, and their functions
15.	 Names and functions of the hormones produced by the 
heart, liver, kidneys, stomach, intestines, adipose tissue, 
and bones
11.5  Stress Physiology
1.	 The physiological definition of stress
2.	 Physical and emotional causes of stress
3.	 Three stages of the stress response, the major controlling 
­hormones of each, and the events that mark transitions from 
one stage to the next
Study Guide
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      385  

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which hormone relies on a second messenger to cause a 
­cellular response?
a.	 testosterone
b.	 glucagon
c.	 progesterone
d.	 aldosterone
e.	 cortisol
	 2.	 Which of the following does not influence blood pressure?
a.	 aldosterone
b.	 natriuretic peptide
c.	 epinephrine
d.	 cortisol
e.	 angiotensin II
	 3.	
 leads to increased osteoclast activity and elevates 
blood calcium concentration.
a.	 Parathyroid hormone
b.	 Calcitonin
c.	 Thyroxine
d.	 Aldosterone
e.	 ACTH
	 4.	 Where are receptors for insulin located?
a.	 in the pancreatic beta cells
b.	 in the blood plasma
c.	 on the target-cell membrane
d.	 in the target-cell cytoplasm
e.	 in the target-cell nucleus
	 5.	 Which hormone is not released in response to stress?
a.	 ACTH
b.	 cortisol
c.	 leptin
d.	 epinephrine
e.	 norepinephrine
	 6.	 Which hormone would be released if a person was dehydrated?
a.	 glucagon
b.	 ADH
c.	 ACTH
d.	 insulin
e.	 natriuretic peptide
	 7.	 Which gland is derived from an embryonic pouch in the roof 
of the pharynx?
a.	 pineal gland
b.	 posterior pituitary gland
c.	 thyroid gland
d.	 parathyroid gland
e.	 anterior pituitary gland
	 8.	 Which hormone is secreted by alpha cells?
a.	 calcitonin
b.	 glucagon
c.	 insulin
d.	 growth hormone
e.	 epinephrine
	 9.	 Which hormone is not synthesized and secreted by the anterior 
pituitary gland?
a.	 TSH
b.	 ACTH
c.	 prolactin
d.	 FSH
e.	 oxytocin
	10.	 What endocrine disorder is characterized by polyuria, ­polyphagia, 
and polydipsia?
a.	 hypothyroidism
b.	 Graves disease
c.	 diabetes insipidus
d.	 diabetes mellitus
e.	 Cushing syndrome
	11.	 In response to stress, 
 stimulates glucose synthesis in 
liver cells and the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue.
	12.	 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is synthesized in the 
 
and released by the 
 .
	13.	 The hypothalamus can monitor the body’s fat content by the 
blood concentration of 
 , a hormone secreted by 
­adipocytes.
	14.	 The stomach secretes 
 , a hormone that stimulates 
­appetite.
	15.	 The hypophyseal portal system is a means for the brain to 
­communicate with the 
 .
	16.	 In males, testosterone is mainly secreted by the 
 cells 
of the testes. 
	17.	 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) targets the 
 and 
.
	18.	 The 
 gland secretes melatonin.
	19.	 The 
 produces hormones that stimulate T lymphocyte 
maturation.
	20.	 Muscular contractions of the uterus during labor and delivery 
are stimulated by 
 .
Answers in Appendix A
386      PART 3  Internal Coordination

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Insulin sensitivity increases when the percentage of body fat 
rises.
	 2.	 Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone target 
the ovaries but have no effect on the testes.
	 3.	 If fatty plaques of atherosclerosis blocked the arteries of the 
hypophyseal portal system, the function of the ovaries and 
testes would probably not be affected.
	 4.	 The pineal gland and thymus become larger as one ages.
	 5.	 The adrenal cortex secretes catecholamines.
	 6.	 Glucagon is released immediately after you have eaten a meal.
	 7.	 The second stage of the stress response is dominated by the 
hormone epinephrine.
	 8.	 Oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) are secreted 
through a duct leading to the posterior pituitary.
	 9.	 Thyroxine reduces metabolic rate and heat production.
	10.	 A peptide hormone can freely enter a target cell, but a steroid 
hormone cannot.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Suppose you were walking down a dark, unfamiliar street 
when suddenly a large, growling dog leapt out from behind 
a tree in front of you. List two hormones that would be re-
leased in response to your fear, and describe their actions. 
If you had to run down the street to escape, what hormone 
would be secreted to support the continued demands for 
energy?
	 2.	 Tom Harley is a motorcycle enthusiast who goes out rid-
ing every weekend. One day he rear-ends a car that stops 
unexpectedly in front of him. Tom falls hard on his face and 
badly fractures his nose and sphenoid bone. He recovers, but 
ever since then he has had polyuria—he produces enormous 
amounts of urine each day and he is continually dehydrated 
and intensely thirsty. In view of your knowledge of the 
pituitary gland, explain how his injury could have led to this 
condition.
	 3.	 Ricardo, an 11-year-old boy, is taken to a physician when his 
parents notice that he is ravenously hungry and thirsty, and 
also has to go to the bathroom a lot. Tests reveal that he has 
elevated blood glucose levels and glucose in the urine. What 
condition does Ricardo have? What hormone is lacking, and 
how might his symptoms be alleviated?
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
CHAPTER 11   The Endocrine System      387  

Chapter Outline
12.1 Introduction
• Functions of the Circulatory System 
• Components and General Properties 
of Blood 
• Blood Plasma 
• Production of Blood 
12.2 Erythrocytes
• Quantity and Structure 
• Hemoglobin 
• The Erythrocyte Life Cycle 
• Blood Types 
12.3 Leukocytes
• Structure and Function 
• Types of Leukocytes 
• The Leukocyte Life Cycle 
12.4 Platelets
• Structure and Function 
• Platelet Production 
• Cessation of Bleeding
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 12.1: Sickle-Cell Disease
• Clinical Application 12.2: The Complete 
Blood Count
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Phlebotomist
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
12
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• “Osmosis” in section 3.2
• Red bone marrow (see “Gross Anatomy of Bones” 
in section 6.1)
The Circulatory 
System I
BLOOD
The formed elements of blood. This shows lymphocytes (blue), erythrocytes (red), and 
platelets (violet) in a mesh of fibrin, a sticky blood-clotting protein.
© Dr. Yorgos Nikas/Science Source
Module 9: Circulatory System
PART 4  Circulation and Defense
388	

Functions of the Circulatory System 
The circulatory system consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood. The term 
cardiovascular system2 refers only to the heart and blood vessels, which are dis-
cussed in chapter 13.
Single-celled organisms and even the simplest multicellular animals can meet 
their needs by diffusion of substances from the environment through the plasma 
membranes of their cells. However, as animals evolved larger bodies, some cells 
were too far from the surface to have their needs met so simply. Larger animals devel-
oped a system of internal passages—blood vessels—to distribute the ­necessities of 
life to all cells of the body. A pump, the heart, was necessary to move ­materials 
B
lood has always had a special mystique. Since ancient times, 
­people have seen blood flow from the body and with it, the life of the 
individual. It is no wonder that blood was seen as the source of a ­mysterious 
“vital force.” It was long thought that hereditary and even moral traits 
were transmitted through the blood, and people still use such unfounded or 
­metaphorical expressions as “I have one-quarter Cherokee blood.”
Even though it is an especially accessible tissue, little was known 
about the specific functions of blood before the twentieth century. From 
ancient Egypt to the 1800s, physicians believed they could treat almost 
any malady, from pneumonia to menstrual cramps, by draining “bad 
blood” from their patients. Indeed, bloodletting was a likely factor in the 
death of George Washington, who had a probable streptococcus infection 
and insisted that his doctors bleed him.
Over the past several decades, technology has ushered in a new era for 
hematology,1 the study of blood. Diseases such as cancer and AIDS have 
given added impetus to hematology research, and recent discoveries have 
saved and improved the lives of countless people who otherwise would 
have suffered and died.
12.1  Introduction
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify the major components of the circulatory system;
b.	explain the functions of the circulatory system;
c.	describe the components and the physical properties of blood; 
and
d.	summarize the composition of blood plasma.
1hem, hemato = blood; logy = study of 
2cardio = heart; vas = vessel
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      389  

along these vessels. And of course there had to be blood itself, the liquid medium of 
transport for those materials. But the functions of blood are more diverse than that. 
In humans, they are as follows.
Transport:
∙	 The blood carries oxygen from the lungs to all of the body’s tissues, while 
it picks up carbon dioxide from those tissues and carries it to the lungs to be 
removed from the body.
∙	 It picks up nutrients from the digestive tract and distributes them to all tissues.
∙	 It carries metabolic wastes to the kidneys for removal.
∙	 It carries hormones from endocrine cells to their target cells.
∙	 It transports stem cells to their destinations.
Protection:
∙	 White blood cells destroy harmful microorganisms and cancer cells.
∙	 Antibodies and other blood proteins neutralize toxins and help to destroy 
pathogens.
∙	 Blood plays several roles in inflammation, a mechanism for limiting the 
spread of infection and promoting the repair of injured tissue.
∙	 Platelets and other blood-borne agents initiate blood clotting and other pro-
cesses for minimizing blood loss.
Regulation:
∙	 Blood helps maintain optimal fluid balance and distribution in the body by 
absorbing or giving off fluid under different conditions.
∙	 Blood proteins stabilize the pH of extracellular fluids by buffering acids 
and bases.
∙	 Shifts in blood flow help to regulate body temperature by routing blood to the 
skin for heat loss or routing it deeper to retain heat in the body.
In sum, the blood plays numerous roles in maintaining homeostasis. Considering its 
vital functions, it is easy to understand why an excessive loss of blood is fatal, and 
why the circulatory system evolved mechanisms for ­minimizing such loss.
Components and General Properties of Blood
Table 12.1 lists several properties of blood. It is a liquid connective tissue composed 
of plasma and formed elements. Plasma is a clear, light-yellow fluid that forms the 
Table 12.1  General Properties of Blood
Characteristic
Typical Values for Healthy Adults*
Mean fraction of body weight
8%
Volume in adult body
Female: 4–5 L; male: 5–6 L
Mean temperature
38°C (100.4°F)
pH
7.35–7.45
Hematocrit (packed cell volume)
Female: 37% to 48%; male: 45% to 52%
Hemoglobin
Female: 12–16 g/dL; male: 13–18 g/dL
Mean RBC count
Female: 4.2–5.4 million/μLMale: 4.6–6.2 million/μL
Platelet count
130,000–400,000/L
Total WBC count
5,000–10,000/L
*Values vary slightly depending on the testing methods used.
390      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Figure 12.1 The Formed Elements of Blood.
•	 What do erythrocytes and platelets lack that 
the other formed elements have?
Figure 12.2 Separating Plasma and Formed 
Elements of Blood. Centrifuging a sample of 
blood separates the erythrocytes from the leuko-
cytes and platelets (buffy coat) and plasma. The per-
centage of the volume composed of erythrocytes is 
called the hematocrit.
Formed
elements
Plasma
(55% of whole blood)
Buﬀy coat: leukocytes 
and platelets
(<1% of whole blood)
Erythrocytes
(45% of whole blood)
Centrifuge
Withdraw
blood
extracellular matrix of the tissue. Formed elements are cells and cell fragments—
red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets (fig. 12.1). The term formed ele-
ments denotes that these are membrane-enclosed entities with a specific structure; 
they can’t all be called cells, because platelets are merely fragments of certain bone 
marrow cells.
Most adults have 4 to 6 L of blood. It is typically about 55% plasma and 45% 
formed elements by volume. These proportions are determined by taking a sample 
of blood in a tube and spinning it for a few minutes in a centrifuge. The relatively 
dense formed elements are forced to the bottom of the tube and the plasma rises to 
the top (fig. 12.2). The red blood cells are the densest elements and constitute any-
where from about 35% to 50% of total blood volume depending on one’s sex, age, 
diet, and degree of physical activity. This value, called the hematocrit, is commonly 
used in clinical assessment. The white blood cells and platelets settle in a narrow 
cream- or buff-colored zone called the buffy coat just above the red blood cells. At 
the top of the tube is the plasma, which accounts for the rest of the volume.
Blood Plasma
Plasma is a complex mixture of water, proteins, nutrients, nitrogenous wastes, hor-
mones, and gases (table 12.2). Serum is the fluid that remains when the blood clots 
and the solids are removed.
Protein is the most abundant plasma solute by weight, totaling 6 to 9 grams 
per deciliter (g/dL). Plasma proteins play a variety of roles including clotting, 
immune defense, and transport of other solutes such as iron, lipids, and hydropho-
bic hormones. The three major categories of proteins are albumin, globulins, and 
fibrinogen. Other plasma proteins are essential for life but are found in far smaller 
quantities.
Albumin is the smallest and most abundant plasma protein. It transports vari-
ous solutes and buffers the pH of the plasma. It also makes a major contribution 
Small 
lymphocyte
Neutrophil
Erythrocyte
Eosinophil
Young 
neutrophil
Monocyte
Neutrophil
Basophil
Large
lymphocyte
Neutrophil
Small
lymphocyte
Platelets
Monocyte
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      391  

to two important physical properties of blood: viscosity and osmolarity. Viscosity 
refers to the thickness or stickiness of a fluid that results from cohesion of its par-
ticles. Whole blood is 4.5 to 5.5 times as viscous as water, mainly because of the 
red blood cells. Plasma alone, however, is 2.0 times as viscous as water, mainly 
because of albumin. Viscosity is important in circulation because it is one deter-
minant of blood flow through the vessels. If the blood is too viscous, it flows slug-
gishly, whereas if viscosity is reduced, blood flows too easily. Either condition puts 
a strain on the heart and may lead to cardiovascular problems.
The osmolarity of blood is the concentration (molarity) of particles that 
cannot pass through the walls of the blood vessels (see appendix C); it is deter-
mined mainly by the total concentration of protein, sodium, and erythrocytes in 
the blood. As blood reaches the tissues, fluid moves through the capillary wall, 
carrying nutrients and oxygen to the surrounding cells. The water must then be 
reabsorbed to maintain appropriate blood volume and fluid balance. Reabsorp-
tion into the bloodstream by osmosis is governed by the relative osmolarity of the 
blood versus the tissue fluid. If the blood osmolarity is too high, the bloodstream 
absorbs too much water, and blood volume and pressure are elevated, placing a 
potentially dangerous strain on the heart and vessels. If osmolarity is low, excess 
water remains in the tissues, they become edematous (swollen), and blood pres-
sure may drop. Albumin is essential to maintaining optimal osmolarity and, there-
fore, optimal fluid balance.
The other main categories of protein are globulins and fibrinogen. Globulins 
play important roles in immunity, clotting, and transport. Fibrinogen is a soluble 
precursor of fibrin, a sticky protein that forms the framework of a blood clot. The 
liver supplies nearly all of the plasma proteins except for the antibodies, and secretes 
as much as 4 g of protein per hour.
Apply What You Know
How could a disease such as liver cancer or hepatitis result in impaired blood 
clotting?
Production of Blood 
 
Blood must be continually produced to replace blood cells that grow old and die 
and plasma components that are consumed or excreted. Plasma is formed mainly by 
water absorption from the digestive tract. Electrolytes and nutrients also come from 
the digestive tract. 
Production of formed elements is called hemopoiesis3 (HE-mo-poy-EE-sis). 
An adult typically produces 400 billion platelets, 100 billion red blood cells, and 
Table 12.2  Composition of Blood Plasma
Water
92% by weight
Proteins
6–9 g/dL
Nutrients
Glucose, amino acids, lipids (cholesterol, fatty acids, triglycerides, 
and phospholipids), vitamins, iron, and trace elements
Electrolytes
Salts formed of cations and anions of sodium, potassium, 
­magnesium, calcium, and other elements
Nitrogenous wastes
Urea, uric acid, creatine, creatinine, bilirubin, ammonia
Hormones
Insulin, thyroid hormone, estrogen, and all other hormones
Blood gases
Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen
3hemo = blood; poiesis = formation
392      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

12.2  Erythrocytes
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the structure and explain the function of red blood cells;
b.	characterize the structure and function of hemoglobin;
c.	define some clinical measurements of RBC and hemoglobin 
quantities and give some typical values for each;
d.	discuss the life cycle of erythrocytes; and
e.	explain the molecular basis of blood types and their clinical 
significance.
Erythrocytes4 (red blood cells, RBCs) have two main functions: (1) to pick 
up oxygen from the lungs and transport it to body tissues, and (2) to pick up 
carbon dioxide from the tissues and unload it in the lungs (although they 
transport only about 5% of the blood CO2). Although severe deficiency of 
leukocytes or platelets can be fatal within a few days, a severe deficiency 
of erythrocytes can be fatal within minutes. Death ensues rapidly in cases of 
massive hemorrhaging, for example, because of the loss of erythrocytes and 
the oxygen they carry.
10 billion white blood cells every day. (That is roughly one million RBCs per sec-
ond!) From infancy onward, the red bone marrow is the site of most blood cell 
production. Hemopoietic stem cells (HSCs) found in red bone marrow have the 
potential to give rise to all the different kinds of formed elements. Later sections of 
this chapter explain the formation of specific types.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 1.	Describe the transport, protective, and regulatory 
functions of the blood.
2.	What are the two principal components of blood? List the dif-
ferent kinds of formed elements and their primary functions.
3.	What are the three major classes of plasma proteins? Briefly 
explain their functions.
4.	Define viscosity and osmolarity, and explain how each con-
tributes to normal function of the circulatory system.
5.	Why must blood be constantly replaced? What is hemopoi-
esis, and where does it occur?
4erythro = red; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      393  

Quantity and Structure
Erythrocytes are the most abundant formed elements. Viewed with a micro-
scope, the RBCs crowd the field (see fig. 4.23). Their number is critically 
important to health because it determines the amount of oxygen the blood can 
carry. A ­routine clinical measurement in hematology is the hematocrit5 (packed 
cell volume, PCV)—the percentage of blood volume composed 
of RBCs (fig.  12.2). In women, it normally ranges between 
37% and 48% and, in men, between 45% and 52%. The RBC 
count is normally 4.2 to 5.4 million/microliter (μL) in women 
and 4.6 to 6.2 million/μL in men. This is often expressed as 
cells per cubic millimeter (mm3); 1 μL = 1 mm3. The sex dif-
ference occurs because male hormones, androgens, stimulate 
red blood cell production, whereas estrogens do not. In addi-
tion, women of reproductive age may have lower numbers of 
RBCs due to blood loss during menstruation or because of 
fetal demands for iron during pregnancy.
Erythrocytes are discoidal, pillowlike cells with a thick 
rim and a thin sunken center (fig. 12.3). The cells have a 
diameter of about 7.5 μm. The interior of the cell is curiously 
devoid of distinguishing features because, unlike most cells, 
RBCs have few or no organelles. The lack of a nucleus and 
DNA renders them incapable of mitosis and protein synthe-
sis, resulting in an inability for self-repair. The advantage of 
losing the nucleus during development, however, is that cells 
acquire their distinctive biconcave shape by caving in at the 
center where the nucleus used to be. The primary benefit of 
this shape is that it enables the dense slurry of RBCs to flow 
smoothly through blood vessels with minimal turbulence, and 
allows the RBCs to bend and pass through the tiniest blood 
vessels.
Hemoglobin
The color of blood is due to hemoglobin (Hb), a red, iron-
containing protein. Hemoglobin consists of four polypeptide 
chains called globins (fig. 12.4). Two of these, the alpha 
(α) chains, are 141 amino acids long, and the other two, 
5hemato = blood; crit = to separate
Figure 12.3 The Structure of Erythrocytes. (a) Dimensions 
and shape of an erythrocyte. (b) Erythrocytes viewed with the 
scanning electron microscope (SEM). Note their discoidal, con-
cave shape. (c) Erythrocytes in a blood capillary viewed with the 
transmission electron microscope (TEM). Note the absence of or-
ganelles and other internal features in the cells, and how thin the 
cells are at the center. 
b: © Susumu Nishinga/Getty Images; c: © Thomas Deernick, NCMIR/Science Source 
• Why are erythrocytes caved in at the center?
Surface view
7.5 μm
2.0 μm
Sectional view
(a)
(b)
Capillary
wall
7 μm
Erythrocytes
Lymphocyte
(c)
394      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

the beta (β) chains, are 146 amino acids long. Each globin has a ­nonprotein 
­component bound to it called the heme group, a carbon–nitrogen ring with 
an iron atom (Fe) at the center. An O2 molecule binds to each Fe; therefore, 
each ­hemoglobin can carry up to four O2. Hemoglobin also transports about 
5% of the CO2 in the blood, but this is bound to the globin component rather 
than to the heme. A hemoglobin molecule can thus transport both gases 
­simultaneously.
RBCs are designed to transport oxygen very efficiently. Lacking organelles, 
they have more space to pack with hemoglobin. The cytoplasm of an RBC consists 
mainly of a 33% solution of hemoglobin, with about 280 million molecules per cell. 
The total hemoglobin concentration of whole blood is normally 13 to 18 g/dL 
in men and 12 to 16 g/dL in women. RBCs lack mitochondria, and therefore rely 
exclusively on anaerobic fermentation to meet their own ATP requirement. If they 
made their ATP with mitochondria and aerobic respiration, they would consume 
their oxygen cargo instead of delivering it to other cells, like a bakery truck driver 
who’s supposed to deliver doughnuts to the grocery store but eats half of them along 
the way.
Apply What You Know
How many molecules of O2 can be carried in one red blood cell?
Figure 12.4 The Structure of Hemoglobin. 
(a) The hemoglobin molecule consists of two alpha 
polypeptides and two beta polypeptides, each con-
jugated with a nonprotein heme group. (b) Structure 
of the heme group.
•	 Where does oxygen bind to this molecule?
Heme 
groups
(a)
(b)
C
CH3
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
N
CH
CH
CH
CH
CH2
COOH
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
COOH
CH2
CH3
HC
C
C
C
C
HC
Fe
CH2
Beta
Alpha
Alpha
Beta
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      395  

Clinical Application 12.1
SICKLE-CELL DISEASE
Sickle-cell disease is a hereditary hemoglobin defect occurring mostly 
among people of African descent; its symptoms occur in about 1.3% of 
­African Americans, and about 8.3% are asymptomatic carriers with the po-
tential to pass the genetic trait to their children. The disease is caused by a 
defective gene that codes for the amino acid valine instead of glutamic acid 
at one position in each beta hemoglobin chain. Manifestation of the disease 
requires that an individual inherit defective copies of the gene from both 
parents. This results in an abnormal hemoglobin called hemoglobin S (HbS). 
HbS turns to gel at low oxygen levels, as when blood passes through the ox-
ygen-hungry skeletal muscles. The RBCs become elongated, stiffened, and 
pointed (sickle-shaped) (fig. 12.5). These deformed, inflexible cells adhere 
to each other and clog the tiny blood capillaries, shutting down the blood 
flow to tissues downstream. This produces severe pain and can lead to heart 
failure or stroke, among other effects. The spleen removes defective RBCs 
faster than they can be replaced, thus leading to anemia. Without treatment, 
a child has little chance of living to age 2, and even with the best treatment, 
few victims live to age 50.
Sickle-cell disease originated in areas of Africa where millions of lives 
have been lost to malaria over thousands of years. Malarial parasites nor-
mally invade and reproduce in RBCs but cannot survive in RBCs with HbS. 
Thus the sickle-cell gene confers resistance to malaria, even in individuals 
who carry only one copy of the gene (are heterozygous for it) and do not 
have sickle-cell disease. Natural selection has favored the persistence of the 
gene in certain areas in Africa where the number of lives saved by resistance 
to malaria has far outweighed the deaths due to sickle-cell disease. In North 
America, where malaria is rare, the incidence of the gene among those of 
African descent has declined because there is little evolutionary benefit from 
possessing it and so many of those who do possess it die young, without 
reproducing.
Figure 12.5 Sickle-Cell Disease. 
One deformed, sickled erythrocyte 
and three normal erythrocytes.
© Meckes/Ottawa/Science Source
396      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

The Erythrocyte Life Cycle
An erythrocyte lives for an average of 120 days from the time it is produced in the 
red bone marrow until it dies. In a state of balance, RBCs are born and die at about 
equal rates, over 1 million cells per second.
The production of red blood cells is called erythropoiesis (eh-RITH-ro-poy-
EE-sis) (fig. 12.6). It is one aspect of the more general process of hemopoiesis, the 
production of all formed elements of the blood. Like all formed elements, RBCs 
trace their origin to a bone marrow stem cell, the hemopoietic stem cell (HSC). 
HSCs give rise to more specialized cells called colony-forming units (CFUs), each 
type destined to produce one class of formed elements.
The transformation from an HSC to a mature RBC takes 3 to 5 days and involves 
four major developments—a reduction in cell size, an increase in cell number, the 
synthesis of hemoglobin, and the loss of the nucleus and other organelles. Once the 
nucleus and other organelles have been expelled, the cell is called a reticulocyte and 
is ready to leave the bone marrow and enter the circulating blood. Reticulocytes 
are named for cytoplasmic clusters of ribosomes visible as a fine network in young 
RBCs. Even this disappears within the first day or two in circulation, but an elevated 
reticulocyte count can suggest a blood disease with abnormally rapid RBC pro-
duction. Production of RBCs is stimulated by the hormone erythropoietin (EPO), 
which is produced in the kidneys and liver and targets bone marrow. EPO levels rise 
when blood oxygen levels fall below normal, thus stimulating a corrective rise in 
RBC count.
As the RBC ages, its membrane proteins deteriorate. Without a nucleus or 
ribosomes, it cannot synthesize new proteins and its membrane becomes increas-
ingly fragile. Eventually, the cell ruptures as it tries to flex its way through tight 
capillaries. Many RBCs die in the spleen, which has been called an “erythro-
cyte graveyard.” Its narrow channels severely challenge the ability of old, fragile 
RBCs to squeeze through the organ and they become trapped, broken up, and 
destroyed.
When the RBCs rupture, or undergo hemolysis6 (he-MOLL-ih-sis), hemoglobin 
is released and an empty plasma membrane is left behind. Macrophages digest the 
membrane fragments and hemoglobin, separating heme from the globin. The globin 
is hydrolyzed into free amino acids, which become available for protein synthesis or 
energy, according to the body’s needs. The iron released from the heme to the blood 
is used in the same way as dietary iron. The rest of the heme is eventually ­converted 
to a vivid yellow–green pigment called bilirubin.7 The liver removes bilirubin from 
the blood and secretes it into the bile, which is then stored in the gallbladder. The 
­gallbladder releases the bile to the small intestine, where bacteria convert it to a 
pigment that colors the feces brown. A high level of bilirubin in the blood causes 
­jaundice, a yellowish cast in light-colored skin and the whites of eyes. Jaundice may 
be a sign of liver disease, bile duct obstruction, or rapid RBC destruction.
Figure 12.6 Erythropoiesis. Stages in the 
­development of erythrocytes.
6hemo = blood; lysis = splitting, breaking 
7bili = bile; rub = red; in = substance
Hemopoietic
stem cell
Erythrocyte
colony-forming unit
Reticulocyte
Mature
erythrocyte
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      397  

Blood Types
Transfusions of blood from person to person have saved countless lives. Even in 
ancient Rome, physicians began to experiment with transfusions, but had mixed 
results; some lives were saved, but many died of transfusion reactions. It was not 
until 1900 that a young researcher in Vienna, Karl Landsteiner, discovered blood 
types A, B, and O. He showed that plasma from one group of people (type A) caused 
the red cells of another group (type B) to clump, or agglutinate. This explained why 
a transfusion of blood from a person with a different blood type could have disas-
trous consequences. This concept of compatibility laid the groundwork for success-
ful therapeutic use of transfusions.
Blood types are based on interactions between large molecules called 
­antigens and antibodies. Antigens occur on the surfaces of cells and enable the 
body to distinguish its own cells from foreign matter. When the body detects 
an antigen of foreign origin, it activates an immune response. One aspect of the 
response is the production of antibodies, proteins produced by certain white 
blood cells. One method of antibody action is agglutination, in which anti-
body molecules bind to the surface antigens of foreign RBCs and stick them 
together.
Human blood groups are determined by genetic variation in antigens on the 
RBC surface. A person can have the type A antigen, type B, both, or neither, 
making his or her blood type A, B, AB, or O, respectively (fig. 12.7). One who 
has type A antigens on the RBCs has anti-B antibodies in the plasma and vice 
versa. A type O person has both anti-A and anti-B, and a type AB person has 
neither of them. That is, one has antibodies against any ABO antigen except 
the antigens on one’s own RBCs. Consequently, if a type A patient mistakenly 
received a transfusion with type B blood, the patient’s anti-B antibodies would 
attack the type B erythrocytes. The transfused RBCs would agglutinate, block 
small blood vessels, burst open (hemolyze), and release their hemoglobin. Free 
hemoglobin can block kidney tubules and cause death from acute renal failure. 
Another consideration in transfusion compatibility is that antibodies in a mis-
matched donor’s plasma can attack RBCs in the recipient—for example, if type 
O blood was transfused into a type B patient. In short, a transfusion patient 
should always receive blood of his or her own type; strictly speaking, there is 
no such thing as a universal donor or universal recipient, despite the former 
popularity of these expressions.
Apply What You Know
A person who has type AB blood needs a transfusion. What type or types of 
blood can he or she receive?
In 1940, the Rh blood group was discovered in rhesus monkeys, for which it 
is named. Rh-positive people have Rh antigens on their RBCs, whereas these are 
lacking in Rh-negative individuals. The Rh blood type is often combined with the 
ABO type in a single expression such as A+ for type A, Rh-positive, or O– for type 
O, Rh-negative.
Clinical problems can arise for an Rh+ fetus carried by a woman who is Rh–. 
During the first pregnancy, there is usually no problem because maternal and fetal 
blood do not mix until birth, when shearing of the placenta from the uterine wall 
exposes the mother to the Rh+ fetal blood. She then begins producing antibod-
ies against it that may jeopardize her future pregnancies. If she becomes pregnant 
with another Rh+ fetus, antibodies she produced when her first baby was born can 
diffuse through the placenta into the fetal blood of the second baby and attack its 
RBCs. The baby may be born with a severe anemia called hemolytic disease of the 
newborn, or erythroblastosis fetalis. Pregnant women who are Rh– may be given 
an Rh immune globulin that binds to the fetal RBC antigens so they cannot ­stimulate 
Figure 12.7 Chemical Basis of the ABO Blood 
Types. (a) The four blood types in the ABO group 
differ in the terminal sugars of the carbohydrate 
chains attached to the RBC plasma membranes. 
Each color represents a different sugar. Note that 
type AB red cells have both the type A and type 
B antigens. (b) RBC agglutination in a mismatched 
transfusion. Five-sided antibodies in the recipient 
blood plasma bind A or B antigens on the RBCs of 
the donor blood.
Type O
Type B
Type A
(a)
(b)
Type AB
Antibodies
(agglutinins)
398      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

her immune system to produce the antibodies that would cause agglutination. In 
severe cases of erythroblastosis fetalis, an exchange transfusion may be given to 
completely replace the infant’s Rh+ blood with Rh– blood.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
6.	Define hematocrit and give the normal ranges for 
women and men.
  7.	Describe the size, shape, and contents of an erythrocyte. 
How does the lack of mitochondria relate to the function of 
red blood cells?
8.	What is the function of hemoglobin? Describe its structure. 
What is the role of iron? Define hemoglobin concentration 
and provide units of measurement.
9.	List the stages in the production of an RBC. Why do RBCs 
die? What happens to their components when they die and 
disintegrate?
10.	Describe the antigens that determine the ABO blood types. 
What are antibodies and antigens and how do they interact 
to cause a transfusion reaction? What is the clinical signifi-
cance of the Rh blood group?
12.3  Leukocytes
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	discuss the general function of leukocytes and the specific func-
tions of each individual type;
b.	characterize the appearance and relative abundance of each 
type of leukocyte; and
c.	describe the life cycle of leukocytes.
Leukocytes8 (also called white blood cells or WBCs) protect us from infectious 
microorganisms and other pathogens, and we would soon succumb to disease 
without their defense. When viewed with a microscope, they stand out as vividly 
stained islands among a sea of the more numerous and pale erythrocytes. They 
are much more abundant in the body than their low numbers in blood slides 
would suggest because they spend only a few hours in the bloodstream, then 
migrate through the walls of capillaries and spend the rest of their lives in con-
nective tissues. The bloodstream is like the subway that the WBCs take to work; 
in the blood smears, we see only the ones on their commute, not those already 
at work in the tissues.
8leuko = white; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      399  

Nucleus
Lysosomes
5 μm
Structure and Function
Leukocytes are not uniform but vary in form and function. In contrast to erythro-
cytes, they retain their organelles throughout their life; thus, when viewed with 
a transmission electron microscope, they show a complex internal structure 
(fig. 12.8). Among their organelles are lysosomes and the usual instru-
ments of protein synthesis—the nucleus, rough endoplasmic reticulum, 
ribosomes, and Golgi complex—for leukocytes must synthesize pro-
teins such as lysosomal enzymes to carry out a variety of functions. 
Types of Leukocytes
The five types of leukocytes are distinguished from each other by 
their relative size and abundance, the size and shape of their nuclei, 
the presence or absence of certain cytoplasmic granules, the coarse-
ness and staining properties of those granules, and most importantly their 
functions.
All WBCs have organelles that appear as granules under the light 
microscope. Some of these are lysosomes called nonspecific granules 
because they occur in all five WBC types. Others are various kinds of specific 
granules that occur only in three WBC types—neutrophils, eosinophils, and 
basophils, which are therefore called granulocytes. Specific granules stain 
conspicuously and distinguish each cell type from the others. They contain 
enzymes and other chemicals employed in defense. The two remaining WBC 
types—monocytes and lymphocytes—are called agranulocytes because they 
lack specific granules.
Bear in mind that the color of WBC nuclei (usually violet) and the colors 
described below for their granules are not natural colors. They result from the dyes 
used to stain blood smears, and they can vary depending on what stain was used on 
any blood smears you may study.
Granulocytes
	 1.	 Neutrophils (NEW-tro-fills) (fig. 12.9a) are the most abundant WBCs, 
constituting 60% to 70% of the circulating leukocytes. Not only are they 
easy to find in blood smears, they are also easily recognized by their 
­violet-staining, multilobed nucleus—usually three or four lobes connected 
by thin strands. The cytoplasm is lightly stippled with tiny, pale granules. 
Neutrophils are aggressive antibacterial cells. They are quickly attracted to 
areas of infection or inflammation, where they crawl about phagocytizing 
and digesting bacteria they encounter. They also secrete a cloud of toxic 
chemicals (hydrogen peroxide and bleachlike hypochlorite) that kills even 
Figure 12.8 The Structure of a Leukocyte. 
This example is an eosinophil. The lysosomes seen 
here are the coarse pink granules seen in the cyto-
plasm of the eosinophil in figure 12.9.
© Scott Camazine/Alamy
Figure 12.9 The Five Kinds of Leukocytes. 
Note the size of each WBC type compared to the 
RBCs around it. (a) Neutrophils exhibiting charac-
teristic multilobed nuclei. (b) An eosinophil with a 
typical bilobed nucleus and coarse pink-staining 
granules. (c) A basophil, with coarse violet-staining 
granules obscuring the nucleus. (d) A lymphocyte, 
almost entirely filled by its nucleus. (e) A monocyte 
with a typical C-shaped nucleus. 
a-c: © Ed Reschke; d-e: © Michael Ross/Science Source 
(a) Neutrophils
(e) Monocyte
(d) Lymphocyte
(c) Basophil
(b) Eosinophil
400      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

greater numbers. The chemicals are lethal to the neutrophils themselves, 
which typically have a short life span. Neutrophils that have died in combat 
are a major component of pus and are responsible for its milky color. An 
elevated neutrophil count in the blood is clinically important because it 
may indicate an infection.
	 2.	 Eosinophils (EE-oh-SIN-oh-fills) (fig. 12.9b) represent only 2% to 4% 
of the WBC total, but are also easy to recognize. They usually have a 
large, bilobed nucleus, like two balloons tied together by a short string. 
The cytoplasm contains an abundance of large, rosy pink to pinkish-
orange specific granules. Eosinophils secrete chemicals that weaken or 
destroy large parasites such as hookworms or tapeworms, which are too 
large to be destroyed by any one WBC. They also help to dispose of an-
tigen–antibody complexes formed in immune reactions (see “Humoral 
Immunity” in section 14.4). Their numbers rise in parasitic infections, 
allergies, and diseases of the spleen and central nervous system, and 
fluctuate between day and night and over the course of the menstrual 
cycle.
	 3.	 Basophils (BASE-oh-fills) (fig. 12.9c) are the rarest of WBCs, compris-
ing from less than 0.5% to about 1% of the total. They are recognizable 
because of their abundant, very coarse granules, usually stained dark vio-
let (sometimes pink). The granules hide the nucleus from view, but the 
nucleus is large, pale, and typically S- or U-shaped. Basophils secrete 
histamine, a vasodilator that widens blood vessels, speeds the flow of 
blood to injured tissue, and makes the blood vessels more permeable so 
that agents such as neutrophils and clotting proteins can get into the con-
nective tissues more quickly. They also secrete heparin, an anticoagu-
lant that inhibits blood clotting and thus promotes the mobility of other 
WBCs in the area. They are important in allergy, inflammation, and at-
tracting neutrophils and other WBCs to sites of infection. An elevated 
basophil count is commonly seen in diabetes, chickenpox, and various 
other diseases.
Agranulocytes
	 4.	 Lymphocytes (LIM-fo-sites) (fig. 12.9d) are second to neutrophils in abun-
dance at 25% to 33% of the WBC count, and are quickly spotted on a blood 
slide. Their dark violet nucleus fills nearly the entire cell. The cytoplasm 
stains a clear light blue color and forms a narrow and sometimes barely de-
tectable rim around the nucleus. The subclasses of lymphocytes are indis-
tinguishable under the light microscope but have distinct immune functions 
discussed in chapter 14. The lymphocyte count rises in diverse infectious 
diseases and immune responses. 
	 5.	 Monocytes (MON-oh-sites) (fig. 12.9e) are the largest WBCs and comprise 
about 3% to 8% of the WBC count. The nucleus is large and typically ovoid, 
kidney-shaped, or horseshoe-shaped. The cytoplasm contains sparse, fine 
granules. After migrating from the blood into the connective tissues, mono-
cytes transform into even larger cells called macrophages9 (MAC-ro-fay-
jez). They consume and destroy microoganisms, foreign debris, and dead or 
dying body cells, ingesting as much as a whopping 25% of their own volume 
per hour. They also aid in alerting the immune system to invading pathogens 
or foreign matter. The monocyte count tends to rise in inflammation and 
viral infections.
9macro = big; phage = eater
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      401  

The Leukocyte Life Cycle
Leukopoiesis (LOO-co-poy-EE-sis), the production of white blood cells, begins 
with the same hemopoietic stem cells (HSCs) as erythropoiesis. Some HSCs differ-
entiate into distinct types of colony-forming units (CFUs), which then go on to pro-
duce any of three cell lines—myeloblasts committed to producing the three kinds 
of granulocytes, monoblasts giving rise to monocytes, and lymphoblasts producing 
lymphocytes (fig. 12.10).
Granulocytes and monocytes stay in the red bone marrow until they are needed; 
the marrow contains 10 to 20 times as many of these cells as the circulating blood 
does. Lymphocytes begin developing in the bone marrow but do not stay there. 
Some migrate to the thymus and mature there; then from either the bone marrow 
or thymus, lymphocytes disperse and colonize the lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils, 
and mucous membranes. Their life histories and migrations are further discussed 
in chapter 14.
Circulating leukocytes don’t stay in the blood for very long. Granulocytes 
circulate for 4 to 6 hours and then migrate into the tissues, where they live another 
4 or 5 days. Monocytes travel in the blood for 10 to 20 hours, then migrate into 
the tissues and differentiate into macrophages, which can live for as long as a 
few years. Lymphocytes are responsible for long-term immunity and therefore 
may survive for lengths of time ranging from a few weeks to decades. They leave 
the bloodstream for the tissues and eventually enter the lymphatic system, which 
empties them back into the blood. They are continually cycled between the blood, 
lymph, and tissue fluid.
Figure   12.10 Leukopoiesis. Stages in the 
development of leukocytes.
Hemopoietic
stem cell
Leukocyte
colony-forming
units
Mature
leukocytes
Lymphoblast
Lymphocyte
Monoblast
Monocyte
Basophil
Myeloblast
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
402      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
G
iven the vital functions of blood, it is no surprise that ­disorders 
can have disastrous consequences for health. A deficiency 
or excess of a specific cell type underlies many blood ­diseases. 
­Misshapen or oddly colored cells may also indicate ­certain ­underlying 
conditions.
E r y t h r o c y t e  D i s o r d e r s
T
he two most common RBC disorders are anemia10 (an RBC 
or hemoglobin deficiency) and polycythemia11 (POL-ee-sih-
THEME-ee-uh) (an RBC excess). There are three fundamental 
causes of anemia:
	 1.	 Reduced erythropoiesis. When hemoglobin or erythro-
cytes are produced too slowly to keep up with the rate of 
RBC death, an individual becomes anemic. One cause of 
suppressed RBC manufacture or hemoglobin synthesis is a 
dietary deficiency of minerals or vitamins needed for their 
production. For example, a lack of iron suppresses erythro-
poiesis and leads to iron-deficiency anemia. Elderly people 
may experience pernicious anemia, an immune disorder 
that destroys stomach tissue. Normally the stomach pro-
duces a protein called intrinsic factor, needed for absorbing 
vitamin B12 from the food. Vitamin B12 is required for eryth-
ropoiesis. The immune attack on the stomach thus results 
in a vitamin B12 deficiency. Gastric-bypass patients also ex-
perience a similar anemia because of the surgical removal 
of stomach tissue or disconnection of the stomach from the 
small intestine, where the intrinsic factor is needed. Radia-
tion, viruses, and some poisons can cause anemia by de-
stroying bone marrow. Kidney disease can lead to anemia 
because of inadequate production of erythropoietin (EPO), 
a hormone that is the principal stimulus for RBC production.
	 2.	 Rapid RBC destruction. Excess RBC destruction that ex-
ceeds the rate of erythropoiesis results in hemolytic ane-
mia. Causes include various poisons, drug ­reactions, sickle-
cell disease, snake venoms, and blood-destroying parasitic 
infections such as malaria.
	 3.	 Hemorrhage. Blood loss may lead to hemorrhagic anemia. 
This can be a consequence of trauma such as gunshot, 
automobile, or battlefield ­injuries; hemophilia; ruptured 
­aneurysms; or heavy menstruation.
Anemia, whatever its fundamental cause, may lead to hypoxia, 
a deficiency of oxygen in the tissues. In severe cases, the 
affected person is lethargic and becomes short of breath upon 
physical exertion. The skin may be pallid because of the lack of 
hemoglobin.
Polycythemia can result from cancer of the bone marrow or 
from a multitude of other conditions. Dehydration, for example, is 
characterized by loss of water from the blood while erythrocytes 
remain and become highly concentrated. Abnormally high oxy-
gen demand (as in people who engage in overzealous aerobic 
exercise) or low oxygen supply (as occurs with smoking, emphy-
sema, or ascent to high altitude) stimulates erythropoiesis. RBC 
counts can rise as high as 11 million RBCs/µL and hematocrit as 
high as 80%. The thick blood “sludges” in the vessels, increases 
blood pressure, and puts dangerous strain on the cardiovascular 
system that can lead to heart failure or stroke.
L e u k o c y t e  D i s o r d e r s
A
deficiency of WBCs is called leukopenia12 (LOO-co-PEE-nee-uh). 
A low WBC count may be due to poisoning from lead, mercu-
ry, or arsenic, or to radiation exposure. Infectious diseases such as 
AIDS, measles, mumps, chickenpox, influenza, and poliomyelitis also 
deplete WBCs. Certain drugs such as glucocorticoids, anticancer 
drugs, and immunosuppressant drugs given to transplant patients 
lower the WBC count. A patient with insufficient WBCs can’t effec-
tively fight disease and is susceptible to infections and cancer.
An excess of WBCs is leukocytosis.13 A higher-than-normal 
WBC count can be due to infection or allergy, or even dehydration 
or emotional disturbances. For clinical purposes, a differential WBC 
count, in which the percentage of each type of WBC is determined, is 
more useful than a total WBC count. For example, a high neutrophil 
count is a sign of bacterial infection, whereas a high eosinophil count 
usually indicates an allergy or a parasitic infection such as worms.
Leukemia is a cancer that originates from mutated hemopoi-
etic cells. Proliferation of the malignant cells results in an extraor-
dinarily high number of circulating leukocytes and their precursors 
(fig. 12.11). Leukemia is classified as myeloid or lymphoid, acute 
10an = without; emia = blood 
11poly = many; cyt = cells; hemia = blood condition
12leuko = white; penia = deficiency 
13leuko = white; cyt = cell; osis = condition
(continued on next page)
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      403  

or chronic. Myeloid leukemia is characterized by uncontrolled 
granulocyte production, whereas lymphoid leukemia involves 
uncontrolled lymphocyte or monocyte production. Acute leukemia 
appears suddenly, progresses rapidly, and causes death within 
a few months if left untreated. Chronic leukemia develops more 
slowly and may be undetected for many months. 
As the cancerous cells proliferate uncontrollably, they 
replace normal bone marrow and a person suffers from a defi-
ciency of normal WBCs, RBCs, and platelets. The numerous can-
cerous leukocytes that are produced are immature and are inca-
pable of fulfilling their roles as defenders against disease. The 
lack of functional WBCs renders the patient vulnerable to infec-
tion; the paucity of RBCs leads to anemia and fatigue; and the 
platelet deficiency results in hemorrhaging and impaired blood 
clotting. Although the immediate cause of death is usually hemor-
rhage or opportunistic infection, cancerous cells may metastasize 
from the bone marrow to other organs of the body, where they 
displace or compete with normal cells. Widespread metastasis is 
not easily treated by either surgery or radiation therapy and may 
lead to death of the individual.
75 μm
(b)
Platelets
Neutrophils
Lymphocyte
Erythrocytes
(a)
Monocyte
Figure 12.11     Normal and Leukemic Blood. (a) A normal blood 
smear. (b) Blood from a patient with acute monocytic leukemia. 
Note the abnormally high number of WBCs, especially monocytes.
a: © Ed Reschke; b: © Leonard Lessin/Science Source
• With all these extra white blood cells, why isn’t the body’s 
­infection-fighting capability increased in leukemia?
Clinical Application 12.2
THE COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
The complete blood count (CBC) is a very common clinical test that affords a 
wealth of information about a patient’s health. It includes hematocrit; hemo-
globin concentration; total RBC, WBC, and platelet counts; RBC size; and 
a differential WBC count, among other values. The differential WBC count 
quantifies what percentage of the WBCs consists of each cell type. The rel-
ative proportions of one WBC type to another can be valuable indications 
of various disease states such as infections, inflammation, allergies, cancer, 
AIDS, and certain metabolic diseases.
Blood counts used to be done by visual examination with a microscope, 
but now are usually done with an electronic cell counter. Cell counters force a 
blood sample through a tiny orifice and count cells as voltage pulses that vary 
with cell type and size. They give much faster and more accurate results than 
visual inspection. However, cell counters still misidentify some cells, and a 
medical technologist must review the results for suspicious data and visually 
identify cells that the instrument cannot. If a CBC does not provide enough 
information or if it suggests certain disorders, additional tests may be done 
such as coagulation time or a bone marrow biopsy.
(continued from previous page)
404      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 11.	 What is the general purpose of WBCs?
12.	 What is the difference between granulocytes and agranulo-
cytes? Which leukocytes belong to each category?
13.	 List the five kinds of leukocytes in order of abundance and 
describe how to identify each one.
14.	 Explain the functions of each type of leukocyte.
15.	 What are macrophages? What class of WBCs do they arise 
from?
16.	 What does leukopoiesis have in common with erythropoiesis? 
How does it differ?
12.4  Platelets
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the structure and functions of blood platelets;
b.	describe platelet production; and
c.	describe blood clotting and other mechanisms for controlling 
bleeding.
Circulatory systems developed very early in animal evolution, and with them 
evolved mechanisms for stopping leaks, which are potentially fatal. Platelets are the 
major players in cessation of bleeding and are the focus of this section.
Structure and Function
Platelets are small circulating fragments of bone marrow cells called megakaryo-
cytes and serve various roles in blood clotting and other functions listed later in this 
section. They are among the formed elements of blood, but they are not cells, since 
they never have a nucleus of their own at any time in their development. They are 
the second most abundant formed element after erythrocytes. They are so much 
smaller than RBCs, however (2 to 4 µm in diameter), that they contribute even less 
than WBCs to total blood volume.
Platelets have a complex internal structure that includes lysosomes, mitochon-
dria, a cytoskeleton, granules filled with platelet secretions, and a system of chan-
nels that open onto the platelet surface (the open canalicular system) (fig. 12.12a). 
When activated, they form pseudopods and are capable of ameboid movement. 
Platelets have a variety of functions:
	 1.	 They secrete vasoconstrictors, chemicals that cause spasmodic constriction 
of broken vessels and thus help reduce blood loss.
	 2.	 They stick together to form temporary, relatively fragile platelet plugs to seal 
small breaks in injured blood vessels.
	 3.	 They secrete clotting factors that promote blood clotting.
	 4.	 They initiate the formation of a clot-dissolving enzyme that dissolves blood 
clots that have outlasted their usefulness.
	 5.	 They secrete growth factors that stimulate mitosis in fibroblasts and smooth 
muscle and thus help maintain and repair blood vessels.
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      405  

Figure 12.12 Platelets and Their Production. 
(a) Structure of blood platelets. (b) Platelet produc-
tion. The megakaryocyte extends tendrils into the 
capillaries (sinusoids) of the red bone marrow, 
where blood flow shears off pieces called proplate-
lets. These break up into platelets as they travel in 
the blood stream. Note the size of the megakaryo-
cyte compared to that of the mature RBCs and 
WBCs around it. 
 
a: © NIBSC/Science Photo Library/Science Source
Platelets
WBC
RBC
Megakaryocyte
Pseudopod
Open
canalicular
system
Granules
Mitochondria
2 μm
(a)
(b)
Bloodﬂow
Proplatelets
Endothelium
Sinusoid of
bone marrow
14mega = giant; karyo = nucleus; cyte = cell 
15hemo = blood; stasis = stability
Platelet Production
Production of platelets, called thrombopoiesis, is one aspect of hemopoiesis. 
Some hemopoietic stem cells differentiate into megakaryocytes14 (meg-ah-CAR-
ee-oh-sites), gigantic cells up to 150 µm in diameter, large enough to be visible to 
the naked eye. Each has a huge multilobed nucleus and multiple sets of chromo-
somes (fig. 12.12b).
Platelets arise from long, beaded processes that extend from the surface of the 
megakaryocyte into the lumen of capillaries in the bone marrow. The force of the 
blood flow shears the tips of these processes off, releasing them as proplatelets that 
further fragment into individual platelets, especially as they pass through the lungs. 
About 25% to 40% of the platelets are stored in the spleen and released as needed. 
The rest circulate freely in the blood and live for 5 or 6 days.
Cessation of Bleeding
The circulatory system has evolved overlapping mechanisms to seal itself after 
injury. Hemostasis,15 the cessation of bleeding, occurs in three stages:
	 1.	 Vascular spasm, the prompt constriction of a broken vessel. This narrows 
the opening and reduces blood loss. It is triggered in part by serotonin, a 
vasoconstrictor secreted by the platelets. 
406      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

	 2.	 A platelet plug, a sticky mass of platelets that acts as a stopper to close small 
breaks in a vessel. In an undamaged blood vessel, the endothelium is smooth 
and coated with a platelet repellent to prevent adhesion. But when a vessel is 
broken, platelets adhere to the roughened surfaces and now-exposed collagen 
fibers of the vessel wall. The platelets then put out long, spiny pseudopods 
that adhere to other platelets and the vessel wall. The pseudopods contract 
and pull the wall together, and the platelet mass may reduce or stop minor 
bleeding.
	 3.	 Coagulation (clotting) is the last but most effective defense against bleed-
ing. It is a complex process involving more than 30 chemical reactions and 
a multitude of protein clotting factors produced by the liver and platelets. 
Most of these function as enzymes that activate other enzymes in a cascad-
ing chain of events. Ultimately, this series of reactions converts the plasma 
protein fibrinogen to sticky fibrin (fig. 12.13). Fibrin adheres to the wall of 
the blood vessel, and as blood cells and platelets arrive, many of them stick 
to it like insects in a spider web. The resulting mass of fibrin, platelets, and 
blood cells forms a clot that ideally seals the break in the blood vessel long 
enough for the vessel to heal.
There are two ways of initiating coagulation—the intrinsic and extrinsic path-
ways (fig. 12.13). The intrinsic pathway is called this because everything needed 
for coagulation is contained in the blood itself. It begins when platelets adhere to a 
damaged vessel and secrete a clotting factor named factor XII. It continues through a 
series of three enzymatic reactions with more and more product at each step, ending 
with factor VIII. This is also called antihemophiliac factor A because hemophilia 
results from a hereditary inability to produce factor VIII. The extrinsic pathway is 
so named because it employs a clotting factor from sources other than the blood—
factor III (thromboplastin), released from damaged tissues surrounding a blood ves-
sel, as when you cut yourself or hit your thumb with a hammer. 
Factor III and factor VIII both activate another clotting factor called factor X, 
the start of a common pathway that completes the coagulation process. Thus you 
can see that the extrinsic pathway gets to factor X in just one step, whereas the 
intrinsic pathway requires four steps. The extrinsic pathway therefore clots the blood 
more quickly.
From factor X to the end, coagulation is completed by the same mechanism 
(the common pathway) regardless of how it started. Factor X activates an enzyme 
called prothrombin activator. This enzyme activates prothrombin, a protein from 
the liver, and converts it to thrombin. Thrombin is an enzyme that converts another 
liver protein, fibrinogen, into fibrin. Fibrin is the sticky mesh that traps platelets and 
blood cells and forms the vessel-sealing clot.
Several steps in all three pathways—intrinsic, extrinsic, and common—also 
require calcium as a cofactor. Blood clotting can therefore be blocked by binding all 
the calcium in a blood sample, making it unavailable to these enzymes. In drawing 
blood for clinical testing or blood banking, this can be done with calcium-binding 
salts of oxalate, citrate, and others, or with the chemical heparin, which works by 
blocking thrombin action and other mechanisms.
It is important to distinguish coagulation from agglutination. In both reactions, 
blood cells or platelets aggregate and stick together, so they may seem to be superfi-
cially similar processes. However, the mechanisms are entirely different. In coagu-
lation, formed elements are stuck together by fibrin. In the agglutination of blood, 
RBCs are stuck together by antibody molecules (see “Blood Types” in section 12.2).
Once a leak is sealed and the crisis has passed, platelets secrete platelet-derived 
growth factor (PDGF), a substance that stimulates fibroblasts and smooth muscle to 
proliferate and replace the damaged tissue of the blood vessel. When tissue repair is 
completed and the blood clot is no longer necessary, the clot must be disposed of. 
Platelets then secrete a protein that initiates a series of reactions leading to a fibrin-
digesting enzyme called plasmin. Plasmin dissolves the old blood clot.
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      407  

Extrinsic pathway
Intrinsic pathway
Common pathway
Factor XII
Factor VIII
Antihemophiliac
factor A
Prothrombin
activator
Factor X
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Other clotting
factors
Liver
Platelets
Fibrin
Blood clot
Liver
Ca2+
Factor III
A deficiency of any clotting factor can shut down the coagulation cascade. In 
hemophilia, for example, a hereditary lack of a single protein in the cascade impairs 
blood clotting and the ability to control bleeding. Most hemophiliacs suffer from a 
lack of factor VIII; before purified factor VIII became available in the 1960s, more 
than half of those with hemophilia died before age 5 and only 10% lived to age 21. 
Although purified factor VIII enabled hemophiliacs to quickly control bleeding and 
engage in typical activities, it came at a steep price. Many hemophiliacs became 
Figure 12.13 The Pathways of Coagulation. 
Most clotting factors act as enzymes that convert the 
next factor from an inactive form to an active form. 
One enzyme molecule at any given level activates 
many enzyme molecules at the next level down, so 
the overall effect becomes amplified at each step. A 
blood clot with platelets (orange) trapped in a sticky 
protein mesh is shown at the bottom. 
 Photo: © P. Motta/SPL/Science Source
• After you read about hemophilia later in this sec-
tion, explain whether it would affect the extrinsic 
mechanism, intrinsic mechanism, or both.
408      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

infected with hepatitis or HIV carried in the donated plasma. Factor VIII is now 
obtained from recombinant bacteria rather than from donor blood, so there is no 
longer any risk of infection to patients.
Unwanted clotting is a more common problem than the inability to form clots. 
Most strokes and heart attacks are due to thrombosis16—the abnormal clotting of 
blood in an unbroken vessel. A thrombus (clot) may grow large enough to obstruct 
a small vessel, or a piece of it may break loose and begin to travel in the bloodstream 
as an embolus.17 An embolus may lodge in a small artery and block blood flow to tis-
sues downstream. If the vessel supplies a vital organ such as the heart, brain, or lung, 
infarction (tissue death) may result. About 650,000 Americans die annually of throm-
boembolism (traveling blood clots) in the coronary, cerebral, or pulmonary arteries.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
17.	 List several functions of blood platelets.
18.	 How are platelets produced? Describe the size and internal 
structure of platelets.
19.	 Explain the three basic mechanisms of hemostasis.
20.	Describe the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways of 
coagulation.
21.	 What is hemophilia?
22.	Define thrombus and embolus, and explain how they may 
lead to tissue damage.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A phlebotomist18 draws blood for the purposes of clinical testing, blood bank-
ing, or transfusion. Although this is often done by nurses and physicians, phle-
botomists are employed to reduce the workload on these other professionals, 
especially in hospitals and blood drives. Some phlebotomists travel to nursing 
homes, outpatient clinics, or patients’ homes to collect samples; some states 
employ phlebotomists as dialysis technicians. Samples are usually taken by 
puncturing a vein, but with specialized training, some phlebotomists draw arte-
rial samples, usually from the radial or ulnar arteries at the wrist.
Training and certification requirements vary from state to state. One must 
have a high-school diploma or general educational development (GED) ­certificate, 
then may undertake training ranging from 6 weeks at a trade school or career center to a college associate degree. ­Training 
­typically includes anatomy, legal aspects of blood collection, patient interaction skills, and blood-collecting techniques. A 
state may require certification by such agencies as the National Phlebotomy Association or the American Society of Clinical 
­Pathologists. For further information on careers in phlebotomy, see appendix B.
P h l e b o t o m i s t
16thromb = clot; osis = condition 
17em = in, within; bolus = ball, mass
18phlebo = vein; tom = cut; ist = one who
© Ariel Skelley/Blend Images/Getty Images
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      409  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the BLOOD Affects Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Blood provides the WBCs that 
combat pathogens that breach 
the skin surface.
Skeletal System
The blood picks up RBCs, WBCs, and 
platelets from the red bone marrow; 
delivers the hormones that regulate the 
production of these formed elements; 
and delivers the minerals and regulatory 
­hormones essential for bone metabolism.
Muscular System
The blood delivers oxygen and nutrients, and removes 
metabolites and heat generated by the muscles.
Nervous System
Cerebrospinal fluid is derived from blood 
plasma; strokes from cerebral blood clots 
are a leading cause of death.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The cellular and molecular components of the 
­immune system are important components of 
the blood; lymph is derived from and ultimately 
returned to the blood plasma; and blood-borne 
­lymphocytes and monocytes densely populate 
the ­lymphatic organs and tissues.
Respiratory System
The blood transports respiratory gases, and 
blood pH and the partial pressures of blood 
gases drive the respiratory rhythm.
Endocrine System
The blood provides precursors for hormone synthesis and 
distributes all hormones to their target organs.
Reproductive System
The blood distributes all sex hormones.
Digestive System
The blood transports digested nutrients.
Urinary System
Urine production begins as a filtrate 
of the blood plasma, and water and 
vital solutes retained by the kidneys 
are returned to the blood.
All Systems
The blood provides oxygen and nutrients to all organs, carries 
away metabolic wastes, and prevents hyperthermia by trans-
porting heat from the core to the body surface. 
© iconogenic/Getty 
Images RF
© Getty Images
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
410

CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      411  
Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
12.1  Introduction 
1.	 The components of the circulatory system; the differences 
between the cardiovascular system and circulatory system
2.	 The diverse functions of the blood; contributions of blood to 
homeostasis
3.	 The two main components of whole blood; the relative 
amounts of formed elements and  plasma in whole blood; and 
the three main types of formed elements
4.	 The components of blood plasma and their functions
5.	 The basis of blood viscosity and osmolarity and their impor-
tance in cardiovascular function
6.	 The formation of blood plasma
7.	 The definition of hemopoiesis and description of where it 
­occurs 
8.	 The name of the bone marrow cell type that ultimately gives 
rise to all formed elements
12.2  Erythrocytes 
1.	 Ways of quantifying erythrocytes and hemoglobin levels, and 
typical values for women and men
2.	 The structure and function of erythrocytes, and the reason for 
their unusual structure
3.	 The structure and function of hemoglobin and how it binds 
blood gases
4.	 The process of erythropoiesis; the hormone that stimulates it
5.	 The life span, death, and disposal of RBCs and hemoglobin
6.	 The molecular basis of blood types A, B, AB, and O, and defi-
nitions of antigen and antibody
7.	 The cause and mechanism of a transfusion reaction and why it 
can lead to death; the meanings of agglutination and hemolysis
8.	 The two blood types of the Rh group
9.	 The cause of hemolytic disease of the newborn; why it is less 
common in a first pregnancy than in later ones
12.3  Leukocytes 
1.	 The general function of leukocytes (WBCs)
2.	 The difference between granulocytes and agranulocytes
3.	 The name, physical characteristics, and functions of each WBC 
type
4.	 The cell lines that give rise to WBCs
5.	 The life history of WBCs after their release from the bone 
­marrow
12.4  Platelets 
1.	 The structure of platelets; why they are not considered to be 
cells
2.	 Functions of platelets
3.	 The site and process of platelet production
4.	 The general term for cessation of bleeding, and the three stages 
of the process
5.	 The intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways of coagulation 
and the ultimate product of these reactions
6.	 Differences between coagulation and agglutination
7.	 The process of breaking down a clot that is no longer needed
8.	 The hereditary and molecular bases of hemophilia
9.	 The differences between thrombosis, thrombus, and embolus; 
the danger of thromboembolism

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which contribute(s) most to viscosity of the blood?
a.	 albumin
b.	 fibrinogen
c.	 globulins
d.	 sodium
e.	 erythrocytes
	 2.	 What would be a normal hematocrit value for an adult male?
a.	 50%
b.	 25%
c.	 4.6 million/µL
d.	 between 60% and 70%
e.	 not less than 75%
	 3.	 Which is not a cause of leukocytosis?
a.	 dehydration
b.	 AIDS
c.	 allergy
d.	 leukemia
e.	 bacterial infection
	 4.	 What blood type is a person who has only A antigens on his or 
her erythrocytes?
a.	 type B
b.	 type AB
c.	 type O
d.	 type A
e.	 Rh+
	 5.	 Which of these is a granulocyte?
a.	 a monocyte
b.	 an erythrocyte
c.	 a lymphocyte
d.	 a macrophage
e.	 an eosinophil
	 6.	 Platelets have all of the following functions except
a.	 coagulation.
b.	 plugging broken blood vessels.
c.	 transporting oxygen.
d.	 stimulating vasoconstriction.
e.	 repairing blood vessels after an injury.
	 7.	 Histamine and heparin are secreted by
a.	 lymphocytes.
b.	 basophils.
c.	 monocytes.
d.	 eosinophils.
e.	 platelets.
	 8.	 Which cells fight bacteria by phagocytizing them and bom-
barding them with hydrogen peroxide?
a.	 lymphocytes
b.	 macrophages
c.	 neutrophils
d.	 eosinophils
e.	 basophils
	 9.	 Which is not true of erythrocytes?
a.	 They have no nucleus.
b.	 They have no mitochondria.
c.	 Their cytoplasm consists mostly of a 33% solution of 
hemoglobin.
d.	 They live for about 60 days.
e.	 Their main function is to transport O2 and CO2.
	10.	 What is the first event that occurs in hemostasis?
a.	 vascular spasm
b.	 platelet plug formation
c.	 coagulation
d.	 conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin
e.	 secretion of platelet-derived growth factor
	11.	 Production of all the formed elements of blood is called 
 .
	12.	 The percentage of blood volume composed of RBCs is called 
the 
 .
	13.	 After monocytes emigrate from the blood into the connective 
tissues, they become 
 .
	14.	 The cessation of bleeding is called 
 .
	15.	
 is the fluid that remains if all the formed elements 
and fibrinogen are removed from the blood.
	16.	 The hereditary lack of factor VIII causes a disease called 
 .
	17.	 An abnormally low WBC count is called 
 .
	18.	 The smallest and most abundant plasma protein, 
 , 
plays a role in maintaining blood osmolarity and viscosity.
	19.	 An excess of RBCs is called 
 .
	20.	 The production of red blood cells is called 
 .
Answers in Appendix A
412      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 By volume, the blood usually contains more formed elements 
than plasma.
	 2.	 An increase in the albumin concentration of the blood would 
tend to reduce blood pressure.
	 3.	 Anemia is caused by a low oxygen concentration in the blood.
	 4.	 The most important WBCs in combating a bacterial infection 
are basophils.
	 5.	 All mature formed elements have nuclei.
	 6.	 Lymphocytes are the most abundant WBCs in the blood.
	 7.	 The mechanisms for coagulation and agglutination are essen-
tially the same.
	 8.	 Hemopoietic stem cells in bone marrow give rise to all formed 
elements except lymphocytes.
	 9.	 Since RBCs have no nuclei, they do not live as long as granu-
locytes do.
	10.	 Leukemia is a severe deficiency of WBCs.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 A patient is found to be seriously dehydrated and to have an 
elevated RBC count. Does the RBC count necessarily indicate 
a disorder of erythropoiesis? Why or why not?
	 2.	 Patients suffering from renal failure are typically placed on 
hemodialysis and erythropoietin (EPO) replacement therapy. 
Explain the reason for giving EPO, and predict what the 
consequences would be of not including this in the treatment 
regimen.
	 3.	 Patients with leukemia are susceptible to infections such as 
pneumonia and also often suffer from anemia. Explain why 
these conditions are associated with leukemia.
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere. 
CHAPTER 12   The Circulatory System I      413  

Chapter Outline
13.1 Overview of the Cardiovascular System
• The Pulmonary and Systemic Circuits 
• Position, Size, and Shape of the Heart 
• The Pericardium 
13.2 Gross Anatomy of the Heart
• The Heart Wall 
• The Chambers 
• The Valves 
• Blood Flow Through the Chambers 
• Coronary Circulation 
13.3 Physiology of the Heart
• Cardiac Muscle 
• The Cardiac Conduction System 
• Electrical Activity and Contraction 
• Nerve Supply to the Heart 
• The Electrocardiogram 
• The Cardiac Cycle 
• Cardiac Output 
13.4 General Anatomy of Blood Vessels
• The Vessel Wall 
• Arteries, Capillaries, and Veins 
• Variations in Circulatory Routes 
13.5 Physiology of Circulation
• Blood Pressure 
• Peripheral Resistance 
• Regulation of Blood Pressure and Flow 
• Capillary Fluid Exchange 
• Venous Return 
13.6 Circulatory Routes and Blood Vessels
• The Pulmonary Circuit 
• The Systemic Circuit
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health 
• Clinical Application 13.1: Cardiac Arrythmia
• Clinical Application 13.2: Congestive Heart Failure
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Circulatory System
• Career Spotlight: Electrocardiographic Technician 
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide 
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
13
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Thoracic cavity anatomy (see section 1.3)
• Desmosomes and gap junctions (see section 3.2)
• Simple squamous epithelium (see section 4.2)
• Resting membrane potentials and action 
potentials (see section 8.1)
The Circulatory 
System II
THE HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
A colorized image of 
coronary blood vessels 
that have been injected 
with a dye to enhance 
their visibility in an X-ray. 
Such an image is called a 
coronary angiogram.
© SPL/Science Source
Module 9: Circulatory System
414	

W
e are more conscious of our heart than we are of most 
organs, and more wary of its failure. The Greek scholar Aristotle 
thought the heart served primarily as the seat of emotion, a view that 
persisted through the Middle Ages. Even today, the heart is associated 
with emotions, as is reflected in its prominence on Valentine’s Day and 
in common phrases such as “heartfelt,” “dart to the heart,” and “heart-
broken” to describe various feelings. It was not until the Renaissance that 
the anatomy and physiology of the heart were systematically studied. 
The blood vessels, too, were the subject of many previous misconcep-
tions, such as the idea that the arteries carried not blood but a mysterious 
“vital spirit,” and that the veins sent blood to the organs, which then con-
sumed it like food. Not until the seventeenth century was it proven that 
blood recirculates repeatedly to the heart, an inference soon supported by 
discovery of the microscopic blood capillaries that connect the arterial 
and venous systems. 
The heart and blood vessels are of great interest in medical research 
and practice due to the prevalence of cardiovascular disease. In recent 
decades, advances such as coronary bypass surgery, valve replacements, 
and artificial pacemakers have prolonged countless lives. It is certain 
that cardiology will long remain one of the most dramatic and attention-
getting fields of medicine.
13.1  Overview of the Cardiovascular 
System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	distinguish between the pulmonary and systemic circulations;
b.	describe the general location, size, and shape of the heart; and
c.	describe the pericardium, which encloses the heart.
The cardiovascular system consists of the heart and the blood vessels, whereas the 
circulatory system includes these and the blood. The heart functions as a muscular 
pump that keeps blood flowing through the vessels. The vessels deliver blood to 
tissues throughout the body, where it unloads the oxygen and nutrients vital to their 
survival, and then return it to the heart. Cardiology is the study of the heart, clinical 
evaluation of its functions and disorders, and treatment of cardiac diseases.
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      415  

CO2
O2
CO2
O2
Systemic circuit
Pulmonary circuit
O2-rich,
CO2-poor
blood
O2-poor,
CO2-rich
blood
The Pulmonary and Systemic Circuits
The cardiovascular system has two major divisions: a pulmonary circuit, which 
carries blood to the lungs for gas exchange and returns it to the heart, and a systemic 
circuit, which supplies blood to all organs of the body, including the lungs and the 
wall of the heart itself (fig. 13.1).
The right side of the heart supplies the pulmonary circuit. It receives oxygen-
poor blood that has circulated through the body and pumps it into a large artery, 
the pulmonary trunk. From there, the oxygen-poor blood is distributed to the lungs, 
where it unloads carbon dioxide and picks up a fresh load of oxygen. It then returns 
this oxygen-rich blood to the left side of the heart by way of pulmonary veins.
The left half of the heart supplies the systemic circuit. It pumps blood into 
the largest artery, the aorta, which gives off branches that ultimately deliver 
oxygen to every organ of the body. After the blood has picked up carbon 
dioxide from the tissues, it returns to the right heart by way of the two 
largest veins—the superior vena cava, which drains the upper body, and 
the inferior vena cava, which drains everything below the diaphragm.
Position, Size, and Shape of the Heart
The heart is located in the thoracic cavity in the mediastinum, 
between the lungs and deep to the sternum (fig. 13.2). Tilted slightly 
toward the left, about two-thirds of the heart lies to the left of the 
median plane. The broad superior portion of the heart, the base, is 
the point of attachment for the pulmonary trunk, pulmonary veins, 
and aorta—the so-called great vessels. The inferior end tapers to a 
blunt point, the apex, immediately above the diaphragm.
The normal adult heart weighs about 300 g (10 ounces) and 
measures about 9 cm (3.5 in.) wide at the base, 13 cm (5 in.) from 
base to apex, and 6 cm (2.5 in.) from anterior to posterior at its thick-
est point. Whatever one’s body size, the healthy heart is roughly the 
same size as the fist.
The Pericardium
The heart is enfolded in a double-walled sac called the pericardium 
(fig. 13.2c). The outer wall, the pericardial sac (parietal pericardium), 
has a tough, superficial fibrous layer of dense irregular connective tissue, 
and a deep serous layer. The serous layer turns inward at the base of the 
heart and forms the epicardium (visceral pericardium), which covers the 
heart surface.
The space between the parietal and visceral pericardium is the 
pericardial cavity. The heart is not inside the pericardial cavity; all the 
cavity contains is a small amount (5–30 mL) of pericardial fluid, exuded 
by the serous layer of the pericardium. The fluid lubricates the membranes 
and allows the heart to beat with minimal friction. The pericardium not only 
reduces friction but also isolates the heart from other thoracic organs and 
anchors it within the thoracic cavity.
Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardium, most often caused by viral  
infection, in which membranes may become roughened and produce a painful friction 
rub with each heartbeat.
Figure 13.1 General Schematic of the Cardio-
vascular System. 
•	 Are the lungs supplied by the pulmonary ­circuit, 
the ­systemic circuit, or both? Explain.
416      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Lungs
Right
ventricle
Thoracic
vertebra
Pericardial 
cavity
Sternum
(a)
(b)
Superior
vena cava
Right lung
Aorta
Parietal
pleura (cut) 
Pulmonary 
trunk
Pericardial
sac (cut)
Apex 
of heart
Diaphragm
Interventricular
septum
Left
ventricle
Base of
heart
Anterior
Posterior
Pericardial sac
Pericardial
cavity
Epicardium
Myocardium
(c)
Endocardium
Epicardium
Fibrous layer
Pericardial sac:
Serous layer
Figure 13.2 Position and Relationships of the 
Heart. (a) Cross section of the thorax showing the 
relationship of the heart to the lungs and thoracic 
cage. Structures have the same orientation as in 
the viewer’s body. (b) Anterior view with the lungs 
slightly retracted and the pericardial sac opened. 
(c) The pericardium and heart wall. A fist in a balloon 
shows, by analogy, how the double-walled pericar-
dium wraps around the heart.  
•	 Would it be more correct to say the heart lies 
within the pericardial cavity, or that it is sur-
rounded by the pericardial cavity? Why? What’s 
the difference? 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      417  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t  
know.
1.	 Distinguish between the pulmonary and systemic 
circuits, and state which part of the heart supplies each one.
2.	Make a two-color sketch of the pericardium, using one color 
for the pericardial sac and another for the epicardium. For 
the pericardial sac, label both the fibrous and serous layers. 
Show the relationship between the pericardium, pericardial 
cavity, and heart wall.
The Heart Wall
The heart wall consists of three layers—a thick muscular myocardium sandwiched 
between two thin serous membranes, the epicardium and endocardium (fig. 13.2). 
The epicardium,1 as we have already seen, covers the surface of the heart. It 
consists of a simple squamous epithelium overlying a layer of areolar tissue; in 
most places it is as thin as tissue paper, and translucent so that the underlying 
muscle shows through. In some areas, it also has a layer of adipose tissue. Some 
individuals have a thick blanket of fat around the entire heart, but this is not a 
healthy condition.
The myocardium,2 composed of cardiac muscle, makes up most of the mass 
of the heart. It does the contractile work of the heart, and its thickness varies greatly 
according to the workload of individual chambers. This muscle coils around the 
ventricles in such a way as to create a twisting action when it contracts, “wringing” 
blood out of the heart like wringing out a wet towel.
1epi = upon; cardi = heart 
2myo = muscle; cardi = heart
13.2
 Gross Anatomy of the Heart
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	name and describe the three layers and four chambers of the 
heart;
b.	describe the surface features of the heart;
c.	explain the structure and function of the valves;
d.	trace the flow of blood through the chambers; and
e.	name the vessels that supply blood to the heart wall.
418      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Pulmonary trunk
Left pulmonary
artery
Left pulmonary
veins
Left atrium
Apex of heart
Inferior vena cava
Right ventricle
Right atrium
Superior vena cava
Right pulmonary
veins
Branches of the 
right pulmonary
artery
Ascending
aorta
Aortic arch
Coronary sulcus
Anterior
interventricular
sulcus
Left ventricle
(a)  Anterior view
Left pulmonary 
artery
Left  pulmonary 
veins
Left atrium 
Left ventricle
Apex of heart
Right ventricle
Right atrium
Superior
vena cava
Right pulmonary
veins
Right pulmonary
artery
Aorta
(b) Posterior view
Fat
Inferior vena cava
Coronary sulcus
Coronary sinus
Posterior
interventricular
sulcus
Figure 13.3 External Anatomy of the Heart. The unlabeled coronary blood 
vessels on the heart surface are identified in figure 13.5. 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      419  

Aorta 
Right
pulmonary 
veins
Inferior
vena cava
Right AV
(tricuspid) valve
Right
ventricle
Right
atrium
Superior
vena cava
Pulmonary trunk
Left pulmonary 
artery
Left pulmonary 
veins
Aortic valve 
Left AV (mitral)
valve
Left atrium
Left ventricle
(a)
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Interventricular 
septum
(b)
The endocardium3 lines the interior of the heart chambers, covers the 
valve surfaces, and is continuous with the inner lining (endothelium) of the 
blood vessels. Like the epicardium, it is composed of simple squamous epi-
thelium overlying a thin layer of areolar tissue, but it contains no adipose 
tissue.
The heart also has a connective tissue framework called the fibrous skeleton, 
concentrated especially in the wall between the atria and ventricles and in rings 
around the valve orifices. It has several roles: (1) It provides attachment for the 
valves and holds the valve orifices open, yet prevents them from being excessively 
stretched when blood surges through. (2) It anchors the cardiac muscle cells, giving 
them something to pull on when they contract. (3) It serves as an electrical insula-
tor between the atria and ventricles, and thus prevents the atria from stimulating 
the ventricles directly; this is important in the timing and coordination of cardiac 
excitation and contraction.
The Chambers
The heart has four chambers that receive and eject blood (figs. 13.3 and 13.4). 
The two smaller, superior chambers are the right and left atria (AY-tree-uh; 
singular, atrium4). They are thin-walled receiving chambers for blood returning 
to the heart by way of the great veins. Most of the mass of each atrium is on the 
posterior side of the heart, so only a small portion is visible from the anterior 
view (fig. 13.3).
3endo = internal; cardi = heart 
4atrium = entryway
Figure 13.4 Internal Anatomy of the Heart. 
(a) Anterior view. Arrows indicate the path of blood 
flow through the heart, with oxygen-poor blood in-
dicated by violet arrows and oxygen-rich blood by 
orange arrows. (b) Cross section, showing shapes 
and spatial relationship of ventricles. The right ven-
tricle wraps around the left in a C shape, but both 
ventricles have the same volume. 
420      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

The two inferior chambers, the right and left ventricles,5 compose most of the 
bulk of the heart. They are strong pumps that eject blood into the arteries and keep it 
flowing around the body. The right ventricle constitutes most of the anterior portion 
of the heart, whereas the left ventricle forms the apex and inferoposterior portion. 
The right ventricle wraps partially around the left like a crescent (fig. 13.3b), so 
in anatomical art and teaching models it often looks smaller than it really is. Both 
ventricles have the same internal volume, and it is imperative that they pump the 
same amount of blood.
The boundaries of the four chambers are marked on the surface by three sulci 
(grooves), which are largely filled with fat and coronary blood vessels. The coronary6 
sulcus encircles the heart near the base and separates the atria from the ventricles. It 
is a deep groove that is easily seen when one lifts the edges of the atria (fig. 13.3a). 
The anterior and posterior interventricular sulci run obliquely down the front and 
back of the heart from the base toward the apex. They overlie the wall that separates 
the right and left ventricles, and therefore mark the boundary between these chambers.
The thickness of the walls varies among the chambers. The atria have thin flac-
cid walls, corresponding to their light workload—all they do is pump blood to the 
ventricles immediately below. The walls of the ventricles are much thicker, espe-
cially the left, which is two to four times as thick as the right because it pumps blood 
through the entire body, whereas the right ventricle pumps blood only to the lungs 
and back. The interventricular septum is a thick muscular wall between the two 
ventricles; the interatrial septum lies between the atria.
The Valves
Four heart valves ensure a one-way flow of blood—one between each atrium and its 
ventricle and one at the exit from each ventricle to its great artery (fig. 13.4). Each 
valve consists of two or three flaps of thin tissue called cusps (leaflets).
The atrioventricular (AV) valves control the opening between each atrium and 
the ventricle below it. They ensure that blood can’t regurgitate back into the atria 
when the ventricles contract. The right AV valve is often called the ­tricuspid valve 
because it has three cusps. The left AV valve is called the mitral valve for its resem-
blance to a miter, the headdress of a church bishop. (It was formerly known also as 
the bicuspid valve from a mistaken belief that it had only two cusps.) Each cusp is 
anchored to conical papillary muscles on the floor of the ventricle by way of stringy 
tendinous cords (chordae tendineae) (KOR-dee ten-DIN-nee-ee). When the ven-
tricles contract, the papillary muscles tense the cords and prevent the AV valves from 
bulging back into the atria or flipping inside out like windblown umbrellas. Exces-
sive bulging due to slack tendinous cords is called valvular prolapse.
The pulmonary and aortic valves (collectively called semilunar7 valves) 
lie between the ventricles and great arteries. The pulmonary valve controls the 
opening from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk, and the aortic valve 
controls the opening from the left ventricle into the aorta. Each semilunar valve 
has three cusps shaped like shirt pockets. When blood is ejected from the ven-
tricles, it opens these valves and presses their cusps against the arterial walls. 
When the ventricles relax and expand, arterial blood flows backward toward the 
ventricles, but quickly fills the cusps. The inflated pockets meet at the center and 
quickly seal the opening, so little blood is able to return to the ventricles. Because 
of the way these cusps are attached to the arterial wall, they cannot prolapse any 
more than a shirt pocket turns inside out if you jam your hand into it. Thus, they 
don’t require or possess tendinous cords.
5ventr = belly, lower part; icle = little 
6coron = crown; ary = pertaining to 
7semi = half; lunar = like the moon
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      421  

Blood Flow Through the Chambers 
 
Until the sixteenth century, anatomists thought that blood flowed directly from the 
right ventricle to the left through invisible pores in the septum. In actuality, blood in 
the right and left chambers is kept entirely separate in the adult. Thus, deoxygenated 
blood returning from the tissues and destined for the lungs doesn’t mix with oxygen-
ated blood that has returned from the lungs. Figure 13.4a shows the pathway of blood 
as it travels from the right atrium through the body and back to the starting point.
Blood that has been through the systemic circuit returns by way of the superior 
and inferior venae cavae to the right atrium. It flows directly from the right atrium, 
through the right AV valve, into the right ventricle. When the right ventricle con-
tracts, it ejects this blood through the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary trunk, on 
its way to the lungs to exchange carbon dioxide for oxygen.
Blood returns from the lungs by way of two pulmonary veins on the left and 
two on the right; all four of these empty into the left atrium. Blood flows through 
the left AV valve into the left ventricle. Contraction of the left ventricle ejects this 
blood through the aortic valve into the ascending aorta, on its way to another trip 
around the systemic circuit.
Coronary Circulation
If your heart lasts for 80 years and beats an average of 75 times a minute, it will beat 
more than 3 billion times and pump more than 400 million liters of blood. It is a remark-
ably hardworking organ that requires an abundant supply of oxygen and nutrients.
The energetic demands of the heart mean that it receives a disproportionate 
amount of the body’s blood supply. The blood vessels devoted to supplying the heart’s 
own tissues constitute the coronary circulation (fig. 13.5). At rest, these vessels sup-
ply the heart wall with about 250 mL of blood per minute. This is about 5% of the cir-
culating blood going to meet the metabolic needs of the heart alone, even though the 
heart is only 0.5% of the body’s weight. It receives 10 times its “fair share” to sustain 
its strenuous workload. Of course, the amount increases dramatically during exercise. 
Arterial Supply
Coronary arteries are a focus of attention by health professionals and laypeople alike 
because their blockage by atherosclerosis can lead to heart attacks (fig. 13.5d; see 
also Perspectives on Health at the end of this section). The pattern of vessel branch-
ing is one of the most variable aspects of anatomy; the following description 
describes the pattern seen in about 70% to 85% of the population.
Immediately after the aorta leaves the left ventricle, it gives off a right and left 
coronary artery. The openings of the two arteries lie behind the cusps of the aortic 
valve. When the ventricles relax, a small amount of blood flows backward in the 
aorta and fills the cusps, allowing flow into the coronary arteries. Thus, unlike most 
arteries in the body, coronary artery flow peaks during ventricular relaxation rather 
than ventricular contraction.
∙	 The left coronary artery (LCA) curves under the left atrium and travels a 
short distance before dividing into two branches: the anterior interventricular 
and circumflex branch. The anterior interventricular branch is also known 
clinically as the left anterior descending (LAD) branch. It travels down the an-
terior interventricular sulcus to the apex of the heart, rounds the bend, and con-
tinues a short distance up the posterior side. It supplies both ventricles and the 
anterior two-thirds of their septum. The circumflex branch continues around 
the left side of the heart in the coronary sulcus. On the posterior side of the 
heart, it gives off a left marginal branch that descends toward the apex and 
supplements the blood supply to the left ventricle. 
∙	 The right coronary artery (RCA) supplies the right atrium, continues along 
the coronary sulcus, and gives off two branches. The right marginal branch 
422      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

runs toward the apex and supplies portions of the right atrium and ventricle. 
The posterior interventricular branch runs down the posterior interven-
tricular sulcus and supplies the posterior walls of both ventricles as well as 
the posterior portion of the interventricular septum. It ends where it joins the 
anterior interventricular branch of the LCA.
Venous Drainage
Venous drainage refers to the route by which blood leaves an organ. In the heart, 
after the blood flows through the coronary arteries and passes through capillaries, 
it drains into several veins that return the blood to the right atrium. The four most 
significant are the following:
∙	 The coronary sinus is a large, horizontal, venous tunnel in the coronary sul-
cus on the posterior side of the heart (fig. 13.5b). It collects blood from the 
following veins, among others, and then empties into the right atrium.
Coronary
sinus
Right coronary
artery (RCA)
Posterior
interventricular
branch of RCA
Circumﬂex
branch of
LCA
Left marginal
branch of
LCA
Left 
marginal
vein
Posterior
interventricular
vein
Great cardiac
vein
Circumﬂex 
branch
of LCA 
(a) Anterior view
(c)
(d)
(b) Posterior view
Right
coronary
artery
(RCA)
Left coronary
artery (LCA)
Left atrium
(raised)
Great cardiac
vein
Anterior
interventricular 
branch of LCA
Right
marginal
branch
of RCA
Right marginal
branch of RCA
Lumen
Atherosclerotic plaque
Artery wall
Figure 13.5 The Major Coronary Blood 
Vessels. (a) Anterior view. (b) Posterior view. 
(c) A polymer cast of the coronary circulation. (d) 
Cross section of a coronary artery with advanced 
atherosclerosis. Most of the lumen is obstructed by 
a plaque of calcified scar tissue. The small remain-
ing space can easily be blocked by thrombosis, em-
bolism, or vasoconstriction, causing a myocardial 
infarction. 
c: © SPL/Science Source; d: © Ed Reschke
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      423  

∙	 The posterior interventricular (middle cardiac) vein leads up the posterior 
interventricular sulcus to the sinus.
∙	 The left marginal vein passes from the apex up the left margin of the heart to 
the sinus.
∙	 The great cardiac vein passes up the anterior aspect of the heart from the 
apex toward the coronary sulcus, then arcs around the left side of the heart and 
empties into the sinus.
PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
s we get older, our arteries become less distensible and 
less able to protect smaller downstream arteries from blood 
pressure surges that can potentially rupture them. The increas-
ing stiffness of the arteries is called arteriosclerosis (“hardening 
of the arteries”). It results mainly from cumulative damage by free 
radicals, which cause gradual deterioration of elastic and other tis-
sue in the arterial wall, much like old rubber bands become less 
stretchy (see “Ions, Electrolytes, and Free Radicals” in section 2.1).
Another contributing factor in arterial stiffness is atheroscle-
rosis,8 the growth of lipid deposits in the arterial walls. Atheroscle-
rosis begins when a vessel is damaged by hypertension, diabetes, 
or other factors. Macrophages invade the damaged tissue and 
accumulate cholesterol and fat from the blood. In time, the lesion 
grows into a fatty plaque (atheroma). Platelets adhere to these 
plaques and secrete growth factors that stimulate the proliferation 
of smooth muscle and connective tissue. The plaque grows into a 
bulging mass of lipid, fiber, and smooth muscle that blocks blood 
flow through the vessel (fig. 13.5). Blood clots can easily develop on 
these plaques and finish off the obstruction of the vessel, or break 
free and travel as emboli to block smaller vessels downstream.
Degradation and blockage of vessels by atheromas often lead 
to kidney failure, heart attack, or stroke. Blockage occurs in both 
arteries and veins, but is more crucial in arteries because this is 
where it has the potential to shut off blood flow to a vital tissue. 
C o r o n a r y  A r t e r y  D i s e a s e
C
   oronary artery disease (CAD) is a degenerative change in the 
coronary arteries associated with atherosclerosis. It is the most 
common cause of heart failure and one of the leading killers in the 
United States. An early warning symptom of CAD is angina pecto-
ris, a transient substernal chest pain that occurs when obstructed  
coronary arteries are not delivering enough oxygen to some   
areas of the myocardium. Angina is often a forerunner to myocardial  
infarction.
One of the treatments for CAD is balloon angioplasty. A cardiolo-
gist inserts a catheter into the femoral artery at the groin and threads 
it all the way up to the heart and into the diseased coronary artery. A 
tiny balloon at the tip of the catheter is then inflated, which crushes the 
atheroma and plasters it against the vessel wall. This opens the ves-
sel, restores blood flow, and relieves pain, but it is typically a tempo-
rary solution and often has to be repeated. It does not reduce the risk 
of heart attack or death in patients under medical treatment regimens.
A more invasive procedure is coronary bypass surgery, in 
which the chest is opened, the patient is put on a heart–lung bypass 
machine, and undamaged vessels (usually from the leg or chest) are 
attached above and below the damaged portion of the coronary 
artery. This provides a detour around the obstruction so blood can 
reach downstream tissues.
Prevention of CAD is, of course, preferable to treatment. 
Regular exercise, a healthy body weight, and a diet rich in fruits 
and vegetables and low in saturated fat and cholesterol all protect 
against CAD. Avoiding smoking is also important. For discussion of 
the so-called “good” and “bad cholesterol” (more correctly known 
as high- and low-density lipoproteins, or HDLs and LDLs) in relation 
to cardiovascular health, see “Blood Lipoproteins” in section 18.1. 
While lifestyle plays a role, some risk factors for CAD are 
unavoidable. One of these is heredity. In a pair of identical twins, if 
one suffers CAD or dies of a resulting MI, the other is much more 
likely to do so at a similar age than is a nonidentical sibling with a 
similar lifestyle. Males and older people are also more at risk of 
CAD than females and younger people. Drugs that control hyper-
tension and lower cholesterol levels are commonly used to reduce 
the progression of cardiovascular disease.
A t h e r o s c l e r o s i s  a n d
H a r d e n i n g o f  t h e  A r t e r i e s
8athero = fatty; scler = hard; osis = condition
424      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
3.	Which layer of the heart wall is thickest? How do the 
other two resemble and differ from each other?
4.	What are structural and functional differences between the 
atrioventricular and semilunar valves?
5.	Trace the route of the blood through the heart, naming each 
chamber and valve in order.
6.	Trace the alternative routes of blood flow through the coro-
nary arteries and veins that supply the heart wall.
13.3  Physiology of the Heart
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the structure of cardiac muscle cells and their  
attachments to each other;
b.	explain why the heart needs such a high capacity for aerobic 
respiration;
c.	list the components of the heart’s electrical conduction system, 
explain how it coordinates the beating of the heart chambers, 
and compare and contrast action potentials of the pacemaker 
and myocardium;
d.	describe the nerve supply to the heart;
e.	diagram the electrocardiogram and label and explain each of  
its waves;
f.	 describe the key events that occur through one cycle of cardiac 
contraction and relaxation;
g.	explain what causes the “lubb-dupp” sounds of the heartbeat; and
h.	define cardiac output and explain what determines it and what 
chemical agents can modify it.
Despite our justifiable fear of heart failure, the heart is a remarkably hardworking and 
reliable organ. Two of its most important physiological properties are its rhythmicity 
and its resistance to fatigue. In this section, we examine the bases for those two prop-
erties and the operation of the heart through one cycle of contraction and relaxation.
Cardiac Muscle
The work of the heart is, of course, done by its muscle cells, called cardiomyocytes.9 
Like skeletal muscle fibers, they are striated, but they differ in several other ways. They 
are short stocky cells rather than slender fibers—typically 50 to 100 µm long and 10 to 
20 µm wide (fig. 13.6). Most have a single nucleus, often surrounded with glycogen.
The ends of each cardiomyocyte are slightly branched, so the cell somewhat 
resembles a short log with notches in the ends. Each branch reaches out to connect 
9cardio = heart; myo = muscle; cyte = cell
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      425  

Gap junctions
Desmosomes
Intercellular space
Mitochondria
Intercalated
discs
Glycogen
Nucleus
Striated myoﬁbril
(c)
(b)
Striations
Nucleus
Intercalated discs
(a)
Figure 13.6 Cardiac Muscle. (a) Light micro-
graph. (b) Structure of a cardiomyocyte and its 
relationship to adjacent cardiomyocytes. All of the 
colored area is a single cell. Note that it is notched 
at the ends and typically linked to two or more 
neighboring cardiomyocytes by the mechanical 
and electrical junctions of the intercalated discs. 
(c) Structure of an intercalated disc. 
c: © Ed Reschke
end to end with another cardiomyocyte. The cells stimulate each other through these 
connections and therefore act as a unit rather than independently. Their synchro-
nized activity is necessary for the coordinated contractions of the heart chambers.
The ends where two cardiomyocytes meet are marked by intercalated discs 
(in-TUR-kuh-LAY-ted), which appear through the microscope as dark transverse 
426      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

lines, heavier than the striations. The plasma membrane of each cell at this point 
is folded somewhat like the bottom of an egg carton, increasing the surface area 
of cell-to-cell contact. The cells are joined at the discs by desmosomes and other 
mechanical junctions that keep them from pulling apart when the myocardium con-
tracts. Electrical gap ­junctions (see “Cell Junctions” in section 3.2) in the interca-
lated discs allow ions to flow from one cell directly into the cytoplasm of the next, 
thus enabling electrical excitation to spread rapidly from cell to cell.
The heart requires a great deal of energy to beat so steadily, year after year 
without fail. Although it weighs only 300 g, it produces and consumes about 5 kg 
of ATP per day. Fatty acids and glucose provide most of the energy for ATP pro-
duction. Cardiomyocytes make ATP almost exclusively by aerobic respiration, 
and are therefore very resistant to fatigue. To meet this ATP demand, they have 
exceptionally large mitochondria constituting about 25% of the cell volume, in 
contrast to skeletal muscle, which has smaller and fewer mitochondria occupying 
only 2% of a cell. Cardiomyocytes need an abundant, reliable supply of oxygen, 
which makes the coronary circulation especially critical.
The Cardiac Conduction System
The heart is described as autorhythmic because it beats at its own rhythm without 
need of stimuli from the nervous system. This results from the action of modified 
cardiomyocytes that have lost the ability to contract, and are instead specialized 
to depolarize spontaneously at regular time intervals. Such cells are concentrated 
in two masses called sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes. Other noncontractile 
cardiomyocytes behave much like nerves; together with the nodes, they form the 
cardiac conduction system. Electrical signals travel rapidly through the system 
in the following order, ultimately to stimulate the contractile cardiomyocytes and 
generate the heartbeat (fig. 13.7):
	 1	 The sinoatrial (SA) node. This is the heart’s pacemaker, a patch of cells in 
the right atrium near the superior vena cava. These cells depolarize every 
0.8 seconds or so at rest, setting off each heartbeat and determining the heart 
rate—about 70 beats/min. at that rate of pacemaker firing, and faster if the 
pacemaker fires more often.
	 2	 Internodal conduction. Signals from the SA node spread through both atria, 
causing them to contract before the ventricles.
Right atrium
Left
atrium
Sinoatrial node
(pacemaker)
Atrioventricular
node
Atrioventricular 
bundle
Bundle
branches
Subendocardial
conducting network
2
3
4
5
1 SA node ﬁres.
Excitation spreads through
atrial myocardium.
AV node ﬁres. 
Excitation spreads down AV
bundle.
Subendocardial conducting
network distributes excitation
through ventricular
myocardium.
1
2
3
4
5
2
Figure 13.7 The Cardiac Conduction System. 
Electrical signals travel along the pathways indicated 
by the arrows. 
•	 One atrium begins contracting slightly ­before 
the other. Which do you think begins first, and 
why?
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      427  

	 3	 The atrioventricular (AV) node. The AV node is a patch of cells similar 
to the SA node but located in the interatrial septum just above the tricuspid 
valve. It acts as the gateway for all electrical signals headed for the ven-
tricles. The signals must pass through this node because the fibrous skel-
eton blocks them from traveling to the ventricles by any other route. The 
AV node has fewer gap junctions than the other parts of the conduction 
system, so it delays the signal for about 100 ms. This allows the ventricles 
time to fill with blood before the signal travels on and stimulates them to 
contract. 
	 4	 The atrioventricular (AV) bundle. This is a cord of modified cells that 
leaves the AV node and travels to the interventricular septum. In the septum, 
it forks into the right and left bundle branches, which descend toward the 
apex of the heart. 
	 5	 The subendocardial conducting network (formerly called Purkinje fibers) 
consists of large cells that arise from the bundle branches. They pass down 
the interventricular septum just under the endocardium, then turn upward 
at the apex of the heart and branch into little vinelike tips throughout the 
ventricular myocardium. They conduct action potentials very rapidly, and  
excitation spreads almost immediately throughout the entire ventricular 
mass, making it contract in near unison.
Cardiac signals travel about 1 meter per second (m/s) through the muscle 
of the atria. When they reach the AV node, they slow down to 0.05 m/s—analo-
gous to a car on a state highway that has to slow down for a small town with one 
stoplight. Thus the signal is delayed enough to allow the ventricles to fill with 
blood. In the AV bundle and subendocardial conducting network, the signal 
speeds up to 4 m/s, like the car speeding up again on the other side of town. As 
small as the heart is, signals traveling at such a speed can reach all cells of the 
ventricular myocardium in a small fraction of a second, contributing to their 
near-simultaneous contraction.
Electrical Activity and Contraction
We saw in section 8.2 that neurons have a stable voltage across the plasma mem-
brane called a resting membrane potential, as they “wait” for excitation from an 
external source. Stimulation opens membrane channels, allowing ions to flow 
through, resulting in an action potential. Cells of the cardiac SA node, however, 
behave differently. They do not rely on an external source of stimulation and they do 
not have a stable resting potential. Their membranes are leaky, continually allowing 
sodium ions into the cell. Each time this leakage raises the membrane potential to 
its threshold voltage, it sets off an action potential; the pacemaker fires and initiates 
another heartbeat.
The contractile cardiomyocytes, however, do have a stable resting poten-
tial, waiting at a voltage of about –90 mV to receive a signal from the sub-
endocardial conducting network or from each other. The arrival of a signal 
opens ion channels in the cell and causes an action potential, which triggers 
contraction of the cell much like we saw in skeletal muscle. Unlike the action 
potentials of neurons and skeletal muscle, however, the action potential in 
cardiac muscle is not simply a quick up-and-down voltage spike. In skeletal 
muscle, an action potential falls back to the resting level in about 2 millisec-
onds (ms). In cardiac muscle, however, the voltage remains elevated for about 
200 ms (one-fifth of a second). This produces a prolonged contraction of the 
myocardium, necessary to ensure effective ejection of blood from the ven-
tricles. It also prevents the cardiomyocytes from being stimulated again too 
soon. Premature restimulation could create a state of tetanus, causing the heart 
to “seize up” and cease pumping.
428      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Nerve Supply to the Heart
Even though the heart has its own pacemaker, it obviously doesn’t always beat 
at the same rate. A typical resting heart rate is about 70 to 75 beats/min. (bpm), 
whereas vigorous exercise can raise it to as high as 230 bpm. The heart rate is 
modified by the autonomic nervous system. Sympathetic fibers travel through 
cardiac nerves to the SA and AV notes and the myocardium. They release nor-
epinephrine, which stimulates more rapid firing of the SA node and stronger 
contractions in the cardiomyocytes. Parasympathetic fibers travel to the heart 
through the two vagus nerves. In the heart wall itself, they synapse with short 
postganglionic neurons that lead to the SA and AV nodes; the myocardium 
receives little or no parasympathetic input. Parasympathetic fibers secrete ace-
tylcholine, which slows the heartbeat by decreasing the speed of depolarization 
in the pacemaker cells.
The Electrocardiogram
Next to listening to the heart sounds with a stethoscope, the most common clinical 
method of evaluating heart function is the electrocardiogram10 (ECG or EKG). 
The depolarization and repolarization of the atrial and ventricular myocardium gen-
erate electrical currents that are detectable with electrodes on the skin. These signals 
can be amplified and displayed on either a paper chart or a video monitor. The ECG 
is the record of these signals (fig 13.8).
Three major events are seen in the ECG: the P wave, QRS complex, and 
T wave. The letters don’t stand for words, but were used to designate the waves 
by the German physiologist Willem Einthoven. He developed the technique and 
10electro = electricity; cardio = heart; gram = record of; EKG is from the German spelling, 
Elektrokardiogramm
Figure 13.8 The Electrocardiogram.
Atria
contract
Ventricles
contract
All four chambers
relaxed
+1
0
–1
Millivolts
P wave
T wave
R
Q
S
0.8 second
Time
(seconds)
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      429  

Clinical Application 13.1
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA
Cardiac arrhythmia means any deviation from the normal heart rhythm. It 
can occur in either the atria or the ventricles. The most common form in the 
atria is atrial flutter, in which these chambers show weak chaotic contractions 
at about 250 to 350 bpm. The ECG shows a “sawtooth” pattern with multiple 
small atrial peaks between QRS waves. In itself, it is not life-threatening and it 
can come and go, but it may cause fatigue, pain, dizziness, and breathlessness 
and it can sometimes lead to more serious conditions such as blood clots in 
the heart.
The most serious ventricular arrhythmia is ventricular fibrillation (VF 
or V-fib), an uncoordinated squirming contraction of the ventricles often 
brought on by myocardial infarction (tissue death) or drugs of abuse such as 
amphetamines. A heart in VF is often said to feel like a squirming “bag of 
worms.” The ECG shows grossly irregular waves of depolarization with no 
recognizable P, QRS, and T waves. There is no effective pumping of blood 
from such weak, uncoordinated ventricles, and without treatment, death is 
imminent. VF can be halted with a strong electrical shock from a defibril-
lator, but this is only a temporary life-prolonging measure. The patient may 
require a pacemaker, coronary bypass surgery, or other measures to manage 
the underlying problem.
made the first successful ECG in 1895, and later was awarded the Nobel Prize 
in Physiology or Medicine. The P wave reflects depolarization of the atria. The 
QRS complex represents depolarization of the ventricles. It is the largest wave 
of the ECG because the ventricles constitute the largest muscle mass in the heart 
and generate the strongest electrical current. The atria repolarize during the QRS 
complex but their effect is largely masked by depolarization of the ventricles. 
The T wave represents ventricular repolarization. These waves are not action 
potentials of individual cardiomyocytes but composite voltage changes produced 
by many cells.
Heart rate can be determined by measuring the time between successive  
R peaks. We will see in the next section how the waves of the ECG are correlated 
with the mechanical pumping actions of the heart.
The electrocardiogram is useful because it provides a noninvasive, if indirect, 
snapshot of heart function and a tool for rapid preliminary diagnosis of a variety of 
cardiac conditions (see Clinical Application 13.1).
The Cardiac Cycle
A cardiac cycle consists of one complete contraction and relaxation of all four heart 
chambers, encompassing events from the beginning of one heartbeat to the begin-
ning of the next. Any chamber is said to be in systole (SIS-toe-lee) when it contracts 
and in diastole (dy-ASS-toe-lee) when it relaxes; when these words are used with-
out specifying a chamber, however, they usually refer to the ventricles. Excitation 
of a heart chamber depolarizes its myocardium and leads to systole; repolarization 
relaxes its muscle and leads to diastole. If the relevant valves are open and allow 
blood to flow through, systole generally expels blood from a chamber and diastole 
allows a chamber to refill.
430      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Figure 13.9 illustrates the mechanical events of the cardiac cycle correlated with 
the electrocardiogram and heart sounds. Closely follow the figure as you study the text. 
	 1	 Initially, all four chambers are relaxed, in diastole. The AV valves are open, 
and without any effort from the heart, blood flows passively through these 
valves into the ventricles. This alone accounts for more than two-thirds of the 
ventricular filling.
	 2	 The SA node fires, exciting the atrial myocardium and producing the P wave 
of the ECG. Atrial systole contributes the last 30% or so of ventricular filling. 
At the end of atrial systole, each ventricle contains about 130 mL of blood.
	 3	 The AV node fires and electrical excitation spreads throughout the ventricu-
lar myocardium, producing the QRS complex in the ECG and setting off 
ventricular systole. Meanwhile, the atria relax. Pressure in the ventricles rises 
sharply. Blood surges against the AV valves and forces them shut; the surge 
against this obstacle creates a vibration heard with the stethoscope as the 
first heart sound (S1). At first, the ventricles can’t eject any blood because 
pressure in the aorta and pulmonary trunk is still higher than ventricular 
pressure and it holds the two semilunar valves closed.
	 4	 When ventricular pressure exceeds pressure in the arteries, the semilunar 
valves open and blood spurts into the aorta and pulmonary trunk. Ventricular 
ejection lasts about 200 to 250 ms, the length of time described earlier when 
the cardiomyocyte membrane voltage remains elevated. When one is at rest, 
each ventricle expels about 70 mL of blood; this is called the stroke volume 
(SV). Another 60 mL, almost half of what was in the ventricle, remains be-
hind to mix with fresh blood on the next cycle. In vigorous exercise, however, 
QRS
1
2
3
4
5
P
T
A
tr
ia
l 
s
y
st
o
l
e
A
tr
ia
l 
di
a
st
ol
e
A
tr
ia
l 
d
ia
st
o
l
e
V
e
n
tr
i
c
u
la
r 
d
i
a
s
t
o
l
e
V
e
n
tr
i
c
u
l
a
r 
s
y
s
t
o
l
e
Figure 13.9 The Cardiac Cycle. Transitions 
from phases 1 to 2, 2 to 3, and 4 to 5 correspond 
to the electrocardiogram waves indicated in red. 
•	 The ventricles begin contracting at phase 3 but 
cannot change volume until phase 4. Why?
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      431  

stroke volume increases and the ventricles may eject as much as 90% of their 
blood. Diseased hearts may eject much less than 50%.
	 5	 The myocardium repolarizes and produces the T wave of the ECG. The ven-
tricles now relax and expand. All four chambers are again in diastole. Very 
briefly, blood in the aorta and pulmonary trunk surges backward, filling the 
pocketlike cusps of those two valves. The three valve cusps come together 
in the middle of the artery and close that opening. The surge of aortic and 
pulmonary blood against the closed valves creates another bump, heard as 
the second heart sound (S2). As the ventricles expand, the AV valves reopen 
and the ventricles begin to refill with blood pouring down from the atria. The 
cycle begins anew.
Listening to the heart sounds with a stethoscope is a common part of a physical 
examination. It is an example of auscultation (AWS-cul-TAY-shun), listening to the 
sounds the body makes. The first and second heart sounds are often described as 
sounding like a “lubb-dupp.” The first heart sound, S1 (“lubb”), is louder and longer, 
and the second, S2 (“dupp”), is softer and shorter.
Heart murmurs are whooshing or swishing sounds that are not part of the 
“lubb-dupp” sounds. Most heart murmurs are harmless, but some of them indicate 
valve problems. For example, blood may be regurgitated from the ventricles into the 
atria during ventricular systole because of structural problems with the AV valves. If 
the defect is great enough to interfere with the normal flow of blood, valve replace-
ments may be an option. Since the 1960s, there has been a great deal of success in 
replacing defective valves with either mechanical valves or biological material such 
as heart valves from pigs. These surgical procedures have prolonged numerous lives.
Cardiac Output
The purpose of the cardiac cycle is to eject blood into the great arteries. The vol-
ume of blood ejected by each ventricle per minute (mL/min.) is called the cardiac 
output. Mathematically, it is the product of stroke volume, SV (mL/beat), and heart 
rate, HR (beats/min.)—that is, SV × HR = CO. Typical adult resting values are
70 mL/beat (SV) × 75 beats/min. (HR) = 5,250 mL/min. (CO).
Thus, the body’s entire volume of blood (usually 4–6 L) passes through the heart 
every minute. Vigorous exercise can raise CO to as much as 21 L/min., and world-
class athletes can pump up to 35 L/min.
Given that SV × HR = CO, there are obviously only two ways to increase car-
diac output: Increase the heart rate or the stroke volume (or both). The heart rate 
increases when the sympathetic nervous system is activated and its neurotransmit-
ter, norepinephrine, and the similar hormone epinephrine are released. Other agents 
that increase heart rate include thyroid hormone, nicotine, and caffeine. In contrast, 
the parasympathetic nervous system and its neurotransmitter acetylcholine slows 
down the heart rate, as do excessive levels of calcium or potassium.
Increasing the stroke volume (and thereby cardiac output) is accomplished by 
increasing the contraction strength of the cardiomyocytes. Stronger contractions are 
caused by sympathetic system agents epinephrine and norepinephrine, as well as 
calcium, the hormone glucagon, and the drug digitalis. Conversely, several factors 
can weaken myocardial contractions and reduce cardiac output, including potassium 
or calcium excesses, oxygen deficiency, and abnormally low blood pH (acidosis). 
Note that some agents affect both the heart rate and contraction strength; epinephrine 
increases both, and potassium excess (hyperkalemia) reduces both.
Apply What You Know
Physical exercise obviously increases cardiac output. Do you think it achieves 
this through heart rate, contraction strength, or both? Explain.
432      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
             7.	Describe the structure of intercalated discs and  
explain the functional importance of each feature.
         8.	Why must the signal for each heartbeat slow down at the  
AV node?
         9.	Why is it so important that the action potential of a cardio-
myocyte remain elevated for an extended time, instead of  
being a quick up-and-down voltage change like it is in skel-
etal muscle?
10.	Describe the major events in each stage of the cardiac cycle, 
beginning when all chambers are in diastole.
11.	 What is represented by the P, QRS, and T waves of the ECG? 
Draw a simple diagram of an ECG trace and label the waves.
12.	What are two ways that cardiac output may be increased? List 
specific chemicals that speed up or slow down the heart, and 
that strengthen or weaken its contractions.
13.4  General Anatomy of Blood Vessels
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the structure of a blood vessel;
b.	compare and contrast arteries, capillaries, and veins; and
c.	explain how portal systems and anastomoses differ from the 
most common route in which blood flows from the heart and 
back again.
There are three categories of blood vessels—arteries, veins, and capillaries. The 
three differ in direction of blood flow, the pressure they must withstand, and the 
corresponding histological structure of their walls.
The Vessel Wall
The walls of arteries and veins are composed of the following three tissue layers 
(fig. 13.10).
	 1.	 The tunica interna11 (TOO-ni-ca in-TER-nuh) lines the inside of the vessel 
and is exposed to the blood. It consists of a simple squamous epithelium 
called the endothelium, overlying a basement membrane and a sparse layer 
of loose connective tissue. The endothelium acts as a selectively perme-
able barrier to materials entering or leaving the bloodstream. It also secretes 
chemicals that prevent blood cells and platelets from adhering to the vessel 
11tunica = coat; interna = internal
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      433  

Lumen
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Nerve
Basement
membrane
Lumen
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Nerve
Basement
membrane
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Basement
membrane
Valve
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Basement
membrane
Endothelium
Basement
membrane
Large vein
Medium vein
Venule
Capillary
Distributing (medium) artery
Arteriole
Conducting (large) artery
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Basement
membrane
Internal elastic layer
External elastic layer
Tunica interna:
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Endothelium
Basement
membrane
Aorta
Inferior
vena
cava
Direction
of blood
ﬂow
wall, and others that dilate or constrict blood vessels and thereby regulate the 
flow of blood.
	 2.	 The tunica media, the middle layer, is usually thickest. It consists of smooth 
muscle, collagen, and elastic tissue. It strengthens the vessels and prevents 
the blood pressure from rupturing them, and its muscle carries out vasocon-
striction and vasodilation.
	 3.	 The tunica externa is the outermost layer. It consists of loose connective 
tissue that often blends into surrounding tissues and anchors the blood vessel 
to them. It is penetrated by small nerves, lymphatic vessels, and small blood 
vessels (vasa vasorum) that serve the tissues of the larger vessel.
In contrast to these, capillaries are very thin-walled vessels with only a 
tunica interna. 
Figure 13.10 Histology of Blood Vessels. Note 
the changes in wall structure as we progress around 
the circuit from high-pressure arteries, to blood cap-
illaries (exchange vessels), to low-pressure veins.
•	 Why do the arteries need so much more elastic 
tissue than the veins do?
434      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Arteries, Capillaries, and Veins
All vessels that carry blood away from the heart are classified as arteries, whereas 
all vessels that carry blood back to the heart are classified as veins. Capillaries are 
microscopic vessels that connect the smallest arteries to the smallest veins.
Arteries
Each beat of the heart creates a surge of pressure in the arteries as blood is ejected 
into them. Arteries withstand these surges because of their resilient structure. They 
are more muscular than veins, and retain their round shape even when empty. They 
are divided into three categories by size, but of course there is a gradual transition 
from one to the next.
	 1.	 Conducting (elastic or large) arteries include the largest arteries, such as 
the aorta and pulmonary trunk, and may be up to 2.5 cm (1 in.) in diam-
eter. The tunica media is dominated by layers of perforated elastic sheets like 
slices of Swiss cheese rolled up into a tube; smooth muscle and collagen are 
present but less visible. The abundance of elastic tissue enables conducting 
arteries to expand during ventricular systole and recoil during diastole. Their 
expansion protects smaller downstream arteries by reducing the pressure 
surge during ejection of blood from the heart, and their recoil prevents blood 
pressure from dropping too low when the heart relaxes.
	 2.	 Distributing (muscular or medium) arteries are smaller branches that dis-
tribute blood to specific organs. You could compare a conducting artery to an 
interstate highway and distributing arteries to the exit ramps and state high-
ways that serve individual towns. These arteries are dominated by smooth 
muscle in the tunica media, with less abundant elastic tissue. All conducting 
arteries and most distributing arteries are named and can be traced in a care-
ful dissection or surgery. Examples include the brachial and femoral arteries 
in the arm and thigh, and the renal artery that supplies blood to the kidney.
	 3.	 Resistance (small) arteries are usually too variable in location and number 
to be given individual names. Their tunica media is composed almost en-
tirely of smooth muscle, with little elastic tissue. The smallest of these, called 
arterioles, have only one to three layers of smooth muscle and a very thin 
tunica externa.
Capillaries
For the blood to serve any purpose, materials such as nutrients, wastes, and hor-
mones must pass between the blood and tissue fluids, through the walls of the ves-
sels. This occurs mostly in the capillaries (fig. 13.11a), which are therefore often 
called the exchange vessels of the cardiovascular system. It is estimated that there 
are a billion capillaries, enough to ensure that each cell is within four to six cell 
widths of the nearest capillary.  
Capillaries are composed of only an endothelium and basement membrane. 
Their walls are as thin as 0.2 to 0.4 µm, and they range about 5 to 9 µm in diameter. 
Since erythrocytes are about 7.5 µm in diameter, they often have to stretch into elon-
gated shapes to squeeze through the smallest capillaries.
Continuous capillaries, the most common type, are tubes of endothelial cells 
rolled up like burritos and held together by tight junctions (fig. 13.11b). Water 
and small solutes pass through the wall via narrow gaps called intercellular clefts 
between the cells, or by passing through the cells themselves. Continuous capillaries 
sometimes have cells called pericytes associated with them. Among other functions, 
these can differentiate into new endothelial and smooth muscle cells and contribute 
to the repair of damaged capillaries and other vessels.
In organs such as the kidneys where rapid filtration is important, or pancreatic 
islets where it is necessary for the capillaries to take up large molecules (insulin 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      435  

and glucagon), there are special fenestrated capillaries with large filtration pores 
in them, somewhat like a sheet of pie dough with a lot of holes punched in it by a 
small cookie cutter, then rolled into a tube. Intercellular clefts are only about 4 nm 
wide, but filtration pores range from 20 to 100 nm wide and thus allow much larger 
molecules to pass through.
Intercellular
cleft
Secretory 
vesicle
Endothelial
cell
Pericyte
Arteriovenous
anastamosis
Venule
Arteriole
Capillaries
Precapillary
sphincters
Tight
junction
(c)
(b)
(a)
Pinocytotic
vesicle
Erythrocyte
Figure 13.11 Blood Capillaries. (a) A capillary 
bed arising from an arteriole and draining into a ven-
ule. Arrows indicate the direction of blood flow. The 
flow of blood into any given capillary is regulated by 
a few smooth muscle cells that encircle the capil-
lary mouth and constitute a precapillary sphincter. 
(b) Cross section of a continuous capillary and an 
associated cell called a pericyte. (c) Photograph of 
dye-injected capillary beds. 
c: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
Apply What You Know
Considering the functions of the skeletal muscles and the anterior lobe of the 
pituitary gland, which would you expect to have continuous capillaries and which 
to have fenestrated capillaries? Explain.
Capillaries are organized into capillary beds, webs of 10 to 100 vessels aris-
ing from a single arteriole (fig. 13.11). At the beginning of each capillary is a 
ring of smooth muscle cells called a precapillary sphincter, which can dilate to 
let blood into a capillary or constrict to shut down local blood flow. Blood flow 
436      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Figure 13.12 Variations in the Systemic 
Circuit. (a) The most common pathway, in which 
blood passes through only one capillary bed be-
fore returning to the heart. (b) A portal system, in 
which blood passes through two capillary beds 
in series before returning to the heart. (c) An ar-
teriovenous anastomosis (shunt), in which blood 
bypasses the capillaries by flowing directly from an 
artery to a vein.
(a) Simplest 
pathway
(1 capillary bed)
(b) Portal system
(2 capillary beds)
(c) Arteriovenous
anastomosis
(shunt)
through the capillary beds is regulated to match the metabolic needs of tissues. 
There isn’t enough blood in the body to fill the entire vascular system at once; 
consequently, about three-quarters of the body’s capillaries are shut down at any 
given time. For example, about 90% of capillaries in skeletal muscle have little or 
no blood flow during rest. In contrast, during exercise, they receive an abundant 
flow, while capillary beds elsewhere—for example, in the intestines—shut down 
to compensate.
Veins
Veins are relatively thin-walled and flaccid, and expand easily to accommodate a 
greater volume of blood than arteries do. Being farther from the heart, veins have a 
much lower blood pressure than arteries and their blood flow is steady, rather than 
pulsating with the heartbeat as it does in arteries. Therefore, veins do not require 
such muscular or elastic walls to withstand pressure surges.
Small veins merge to form larger and larger ones, like river tributaries, as they 
approach the heart. In examining the types of veins, we will follow the direction of 
blood flow, working from smallest to largest vessels.
	 1.	 Venules receive blood from capillaries. They range up to 1 mm in diam-
eter. The smallest of them have no tunica media and are quite porous; this 
is where most white blood cells leave the bloodstream to wander among the 
connective tissues.
	 2.	 Medium veins range up to 10 mm in diameter and have a thicker tunica 
media and externa; they are more muscular than venules but less so than 
medium arteries. Most veins with individual names are in this category, 
such as the brachial veins in the arm. Many medium veins in the limbs have 
venous valves that ensure a one-way flow of blood toward the heart, against 
the pull of gravity. These are discussed later under the subject of venous 
blood flow.
	 3.	 Large veins have diameters greater than 10 mm. These include veins that 
empty into the heart—the two venae cavae and four pulmonary veins.
Variations in Circulatory Routes
The most common pattern of systemic blood flow is for blood to leave the heart via 
the arteries, pass through one capillary bed (often quite distant from the heart), then 
return to the heart via the veins. However, there are important variations on this pat-
tern (fig. 13.12). In a portal system, the blood flows through two capillary beds in 
a row before returning to the heart. We have seen one of these already between the 
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary gland (see “Pituitary Anatomy” in section 11.3), 
and we will encounter others in the intestine–liver relationship and in the ­kidneys. 
Portal systems are found where a substance is to be picked up by one capillary bed 
and immediately given off by another. 
In contrast, anastomoses (ah-NASS-tuh-MO-seez), or shunts, are 
routes in which the blood bypasses capillaries, going directly from an 
artery to a vein (an arteriovenous anatomosis), from one vein to another 
(a venous anastomosis), or from one artery to another (an arterial anasto-
mosis). Arteriovenous anastomoses are found at the bases of the fingers, 
for example, where they can allow blood to detour and avoid the fingers in 
cold weather in order to reduce heat loss. The resulting lack of warming 
of the fingers, however, is the reason why frostbite so commonly occurs 
here. (The same is true of the toes, nose, and ears.) Venous anastomoses 
are very common in such places as the hand and forearm, where they pro-
vide alternative routes of venous return in case one route is blocked. Some 
of these are often visible through the skin on the back of the hand. One 
place to find arterial anastomoses is in the coronary blood vessels, allow-
ing blood to bypass an arterial blockage and nourish the heart tissue by 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      437  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
13.	Name the three tunics of a typical blood vessel and 
explain how they differ from each other.
14.	Contrast the tunica media of a conducting artery, arteriole, and 
medium vein, and explain how the histological differences are 
related to the functional differences between these vessels.
15.	Describe the structural and functional differences between 
continuous and fenestrated capillaries.
16.	Define portal system and anastomosis, and explain their special 
functional purposes.
13.5  Physiology of Circulation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define blood pressure and explain how it is commonly  
measured;
b.	explain the relationship between blood pressure, resistance, and 
flow;
c.	describe three factors that determine resistance to blood flow; 
d.	discuss local, neural, and hormonal control of blood pressure;
e.	explain how blood pressure and osmotic pressure interact in 
capillary fluid exchanges; and
f.	 describe the mechanisms for returning venous blood to the 
heart.
We have seen how the heart pumps blood through the blood vessels to deliver it 
to tissues and organs. Blood flow is the amount of blood passing any given point 
(or entering any given tissue or organ) per unit time. Perfusion is the flow relative 
to a given mass of tissue, such as milliliters of blood per minute per 100 grams of 
tissue. Thus, a small organ such as the pituitary gland could have greater perfusion 
but lower flow than a large organ such as a thigh muscle. Blood flow is governed 
by the fundamental principles that govern the flow of any fluid—pressure and 
resistance. 
an alternative route. They are also common at joints such as the knee and elbow, 
where they allow alternative routes of blood flow if flexion of a joint temporarily 
compresses one of the arteries.  
438      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Blood Pressure
Blood pressure (BP) is the force exerted by blood on a vessel wall. Contraction 
of the heart initiates a wave of pressure that sharply decreases as the blood flows 
farther and farther away from the ventricle of origin. Blood always flows down a 
gradient from a point of high pressure to a point of lower pressure. The greater the 
pressure difference, the greater the flow. Think of a garden hose by analogy. If you 
slightly open the tap, you get a trickle of water from the end of the hose. Open the 
tap wider, and the water gushes out. Flow increases because you have increased the 
pressure difference between the beginning and end of the hose.
Arterial blood pressure is expressed as a ratio of the systolic pressure gener-
ated by contraction (systole) of the left ventricle, to diastolic pressure, the mini-
mum to which the BP falls when the ventricle is in diastole. Both are expressed in 
millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). A typical healthy adult pressure is 120/80 mm Hg 
(120 mm Hg systolic, 80 mm Hg diastolic).
Blood pressure measurement is a familiar part of a routine physical examina-
tion and is performed with a sphygmomanometer (SFIG-mo-meh-NOM-eh-tur). 
This device consists of an inflatable cuff connected to a rubber bulb for pumping air 
into it, and a dial gauge or a calibrated mercury column for measuring air pressure 
in the cuff. To take a patient’s blood pressure, the examiner wraps the cuff snugly 
around the patient’s arm and inflates it with the bulb until it exceeds the systolic 
blood pressure. By squeezing the brachial muscles, this procedure collapses the bra-
chial artery deep within. Even during systole, the heart cannot force blood through 
the artery, and there is no blood flow distal to that point. The examiner now listens 
with a stethoscope at the bend of the elbow (cubital region) while slowly releasing 
air from the cuff.
At first there is no sound, but as soon as the systolic BP slightly exceeds the 
cuff pressure, each heartbeat forces the brachial artery open and allows a brief jet of 
blood to pass through. The vessel collapses again at diastole. This jet of blood and 
the subsequent surge of blood against the recollapsed artery cause turbulence that 
the examiner hears as a faint “bump” sound. The cuff pressure at the instant of the 
first bump is noted as the systolic BP. The examiner continues to release air from 
the cuff. During this time, a bump is heard every time the artery collapses—that is, 
once in each heartbeat. But soon the cuff pressure falls to a point that the brachial 
artery remains open even during diastole, and no further sounds are heard. The point 
at which the last bump is heard is noted as the diastolic BP.
One reason blood pressure is of keen interest to health providers and patients 
alike is that persistent high blood pressure is associated with increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Blood pressure typically rises in and beyond middle age 
as the arteries become less resilient. A persistent resting blood pressure above 
140/90 mm Hg is considered to be hypertension (high blood pressure). This does 
not include temporary elevations of BP due to exercise or emotional responses. 
Weight loss, exercise, and healthy diets can help to lower blood pressure in indi-
viduals who have hypertension. Many adults take medication to keep their blood 
pressure in what is considered to be a healthy range. A persistent low BP is called 
hypotension. It may result from blood loss, dehydration, or inability to regulate 
blood pressure fluctuation in old age, and is routinely seen in patients approaching 
the moment of death. There is no particular numerical criterion for hypotension.
Blood pressure is determined by three principal variables: (1) cardiac output, 
discussed earlier in the chapter; (2) blood volume, which is regulated mainly by the 
kidneys; and (3) resistance to flow, discussed next.
Peripheral Resistance
Resistance is a measure of hindrance to blood flow through a vessel caused by 
­friction between the moving fluid and stationary vessel walls. Peripheral ­resistance 
is opposition to flow in vessels away from the heart, as opposed to resistance 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      439  

encountered in the heart itself. When resistance increases, flow decreases unless the 
heart pumps harder to compensate for it.
Resistance is determined by three principal variables:
	 1.	 Viscosity, the “thickness” of the blood. Higher viscosity increases resistance 
and impedes flow. (Imagine the difference between trying to suck molasses 
compared to water into a syringe.) The most significant determinants of blood 
viscosity are the concentrations of erythrocytes and albumin. A deficiency of 
RBCs or albumin reduces viscosity, and an excess of either increases it.
	 2.	 Vessel length. The farther a liquid travels through a vessel, the more cumula-
tive resistance it encounters; pressure and flow both decline with distance. 
This is why, in a reclining person, arteries of the feet have less flow and a 
weaker pulse than arteries near the heart. 
	 3.	 Vessel radius, the most important variable in flow. Vessel lengths 
and blood viscosity don’t change from one minute to the next, so the 
only way to control peripheral resistance from moment to moment 
is by adjusting the radius of the blood vessels. Narrowing of the ves-
sel,  vasoconstriction, and widening of a vessel,  vasodilation, are 
achieved by contraction or relaxation of the muscle in the tunica media. 
  Radius (R) is a very potent factor in blood flow (F) because flow is propor-
tional to the fourth power of radius (F ∝ r4); in other words, their relationship 
is exponential. Doubling the radius of a vessel increases flow by 16 times 
(r4 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 16). Arterioles can change their radius as much as three-
fold, which would result in an 81-fold (34) change in blood flow. Going back 
to our earlier garden hose analogy, you could compare the effect of vasocon-
striction on flow to what would happen if you backed your car over the hose.
12angio = vessels; genesis = production of
Apply What You Know
Dehydration can raise the viscosity of the blood even when there is no change 
in the absolute amount of albumin or number of RBCs in the blood. Explain how.
Regulation of Blood Pressure and Flow
The perfusion of each organ is not constant but varies depending on its ever-changing 
demand for blood. During exercise, for example, vasodilation of vessels supplying 
skeletal muscle and the heart results in a greater percentage of blood being directed 
to those organs. Perfusion is controlled by local, neural, and hormonal mechanisms.
Local Control
A tissue with a very high metabolic rate needs more blood, oxygen, and nutrients, 
but such a tissue also produces metabolic by-products such as CO2, lactic acid, ade-
nosine, and others that relax the smooth muscle of arterioles. The vessels dilate 
and perfusion increases to meet the demands of the tissue. Other local chemicals 
released by platelets, endothelial cells, and connective tissue cells—such as hista-
mine and nitric oxide—also dilate vessels and increase perfusion.
Long-term metabolic demand also stimulates new blood vessels to grow into 
a tissue—a process called angiogenesis.12 A denser capillary network then meets 
the elevated needs of the tissue. This occurs in such cases as muscular conditioning 
and in the monthly regrowth of the uterine lining after a woman’s menstrual period. 
­Cancerous tumors also induce angiogenesis to feed their growth, and one line of can-
cer research is to develop drugs that may starve a tumor by blocking angiogenesis.
440      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

2 
3
4
4
1
Ascending 
aorta
Aortic arch
Baroreceptor
Internal 
carotid artery
Vasomotor 
center
Medulla
oblongata
Baroreceptors
Common 
carotid
arteries
Baroreceptors detect degree of stretch in arteries 
and transmit signals to vasomotor center.
1
Vasomotor center integrates input.
2
Outgoing signals are carried by sympathetic
nerves to blood vessels. 
3
Blood vessels constrict or dilate to adjust blood
pressure. 
4
Neural Control
Blood vessel diameter is also regulated by the autonomic nervous system. Arter-
ies near the heart—especially the aortic arch and internal carotid arteries—have 
sensory nerve endings called baroreceptors that monitor blood pressure (BP) 
and ­transmit signals to the medulla oblongata of the brainstem (fig. 13.13). 
The medulla has a group of neurons called the vasomotor center that 
issues signals to the blood vessels. When blood pressure rises above 
normal, the vasomotor center sends signals to the blood vessels to 
dilate, thereby decreasing peripheral resistance; when BP falls 
below normal, in contrast, the center constricts vessels and 
thereby raises peripheral resistance and systemic blood pres-
sure. These reactions are called baroreflexes. Think of how 
pressure rises if you squeeze a plastic bottle of water; the same 
principle applies to regulating BP. 
Blood pressure is continuously adjusted in response to 
a variety of circumstances. When you rise quickly from bed, 
for example, gravity draws the blood downward and BP in the 
head and neck falls. The baroreceptors and medulla respond quickly 
to constrict blood vessels and accelerate the heart, maintaining blood 
flow to the brain and preventing you from fainting. If the reflex is not 
quick enough, you may briefly feel dizzy. The vasomotor center also 
receives input from brain centers concerned with thought and emotion. 
This is why stress, anger, or excitement raises the blood pressure. 
Hormonal Control 
 
Some hormones affect blood pressure by constricting or dilating blood vessels.
∙    Epinephrine from the adrenal medulla and norepinephrine from sym-
pathetic nerves dilate some vessels, such as arteries of the skeletal muscles, 
but constrict other vessels, such as those of the digestive tract and skin. Dur-
ing exercise, this gives priority to perfusion of the organs where it is needed 
most, routing blood away from other organs that can temporarily do with 
less. Epinephrine secreted during exercise or stress can also constrict vessels 
throughout the body and raise overall blood pressure.
∙    Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor that raises blood pressure. It is 
produced through the collaborative action of the liver, kidneys, and lungs 
(see fig. 16.9). An enzyme required for its synthesis is angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE). Hypertension is often treated with drugs called ACE inhibi-
tors, which block this enzyme, thus lowering angiotensin II levels and blood 
pressure.
Certain other hormonal mechanisms can affect blood pressure by regulating urinary 
loss of water, which in turn affects blood volume. 
∙    Natriuretic peptides, secreted by the heart when blood pressure is too high, 
stimulate the kidneys to excrete more sodium. Water follows by osmosis and 
is lost from the body, thereby lowering blood volume and pressure. Thus, the 
more natriuretic peptide secreted, the lower the BP will be.
∙    Aldosterone promotes sodium and water retention and thus raises BP. One 
way of lowering BP is for the adrenal glands to secrete less aldosterone and 
allow greater elimination of water from the body.
∙   Antidiuretic hormone also promotes water retention, and here again BP can 
be lowered by reducing ADH secretion and producing more urine.
The actions of these hormones on the kidneys will be further described in 
chapter 16.
Figure 13.13 Neural Control of Blood Pressure 
by Baroreflexes. 
 
• If the blood vessels dilate, does that raise or 
lower the blood pressure? Explain.
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      441  

Filtration
overrides
osmosis
Osmosis
overrides
ﬁltration
Blood capillary
Lymphatic capillary
About 15%
reabsorption
About 85%
reabsorption
Blood ﬂow
Arteriole
(a)
(c)
(b)
Venule
Figure 13.14 Capillary Fluid Exchange. (a) 
At the arterial end of a capillary, blood ­pressure 
­overrides osmosis and fluid filters from the ­capillary 
into the tissues. (b) At the venous end, blood pres-
sure is lower and is now overridden by osmosis, 
which results in net fluid uptake by the capillary. 
(c) Excess fluid not reabsorbed by the blood cap-
illary is absorbed from the tissues by a lymphatic 
­capillary. 
Capillary Fluid Exchange
Capillaries are “the business end” of the cardiovascular system. The system would 
be useless if the blood could not release some materials to the tissues and pick up 
other materials from them. These exchange processes occur across the thin walls of 
the capillaries and smallest venules, but capillaries greatly outnumber venules and 
are the site of most fluid exchange.
Some ways for substances to pass across a vessel wall follow.
	 1.	 Diffusion. If a substance is more concentrated in the blood than in the sur-
rounding tissue fluid and is capable of crossing the vessel wall, it will leave 
by diffusion; if it is more concentrated in the tissue fluid, it will tend to enter 
the blood by diffusion. Substances leaving the systemic blood in this manner 
include glucose, oxygen, and steroid hormones; substances picked up by the 
systemic blood in this way include carbon dioxide and other wastes. Oxygen, 
carbon dioxide, and steroids diffuse through the plasma membranes and cy-
toplasm of the endothelial cells; hydrophilic substances such as glucose and 
electrolytes diffuse through the clefts between the cells.
	 2.	 Filtration. This is a process in which the blood pressure forces fluid through 
the capillary wall, carrying solutes with it. 
	 3.	 Osmosis. Because of the high concentration of sodium, protein, and eryth-
rocytes in the blood, capillaries have a strong tendency to absorb water from 
surrounding tissues by osmosis. Solutes dissolved in the water may flow 
along with it into the blood; this is called solvent drag.
Near the arterial end, a typical capillary tends predominantly to give off fluid 
to the tissues, delivering vital materials to the cells such as oxygen and nutrients. At 
the venous end, it tends predominantly to absorb fluid, picking up and carrying away 
such materials as metabolic wastes and excess water (fig. 13.14). How can a single 
capillary do both? 
When blood enters a capillary from an arteriole, it is under relatively high pres-
sure (typically about 30 mm Hg). This tends to force fluid out through the capillary 
wall. At the same time, however, the capillary tends to absorb water by osmosis. But 
442      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

since the outward-acting blood pressure overrides the inward-acting osmotic pressure, 
the effect in most capillaries is for more fluid to leave the capillary at this end than to 
reenter it. But blood pressure drops along the length of the capillary because of resis-
tance to flow, and by the time blood reaches the venous end of a capillary, it is about 
13 mm Hg. Now osmosis overrides the outward blood pressure, so the venous end of 
a capillary tends to absorb more fluid from the tissues than it gives off.
Typically, though, a capillary reabsorbs only about 85% as much fluid as it fil-
ters into the tissue. The excess 15% is reabsorbed by lymphatic vessels, discussed 
in chapter 14. If the amount of fluid leaving the capillaries is greater than the total 
amount reabsorbed by the blood capillaries and lymphatics, however, then fluid 
builds up in the tissue, causing swelling or edema. 
Venous Return
After the blood has done its job of exchanging material with the tissues, it has to 
return to the heart to be repressurized. Flow back to the heart is called venous 
return. Pressure generated by the heartbeat is the most important force that returns 
blood to the heart, even though pressure is much lower in the veins 
than it is in arteries. For a person in a sitting or standing position, 
gravity is also a significant force aiding or opposing venous return. 
It aids blood in the head and neck—anywhere above the heart—
to flow down the superior vena cava into the heart. However, it 
opposes the venous return of blood from points below the heart such 
as the abdomen and lower limbs. The pressure gradient generated by 
the heart isn’t sufficient to force all this blood to flow uphill back to 
the heart, against the pull of gravity. The heart needs help, and it gets 
this in two main ways.
One is the skeletal muscle pump (fig. 13.15). As muscles of 
the limbs contract and relax, they squeeze the blood vessels that lie 
among them, promoting a flow of blood. Medium veins in the limbs 
are equipped with one-way valves. These valves point upward, so as 
muscles compress a vein, blood can flow upward toward the heart; 
but when the muscles relax, the valves prevent it from flowing back 
down toward the hands and feet. Muscular activity therefore causes 
blood to flow upward, bit by bit, with the valves acting as check-
points to prevent backflow. However, in many people—especially 
Clinical Application 13.2
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
In certain conditions, the heart fails to pump with sufficient strength to ad-
equately supply blood to tissues and organs. People with heart failure feel fa-
tigued and can’t exercise normally because cardiac output fails to keep pace 
with demands of exercising muscles, for example. Heart failure is often associ-
ated with persistent high blood pressure, which causes the heart to work harder 
to push the blood through the vessels. Over time, the heart wall stretches and the 
heart becomes noticeably enlarged, but the thin walls contract only weakly. The 
kidneys respond to heart failure by retaining water and salt, thereby increasing 
blood volume and blood pressure. The elevated pressure causes excess fluid 
to filter out of the blood and often to accumulate in the ankles, feet, and lungs, 
causing edema. The body becomes “congested” with fluid, explaining why the 
term congestive heart failure is used to describe this condition. Heart failure 
can’t be reversed but symptoms can be relieved with the use of diuretics, which 
act by increasing the volume of urine and thereby reducing fluid in the body. 
Other medications include drugs that increase the force of cardiac contraction. 
Figure 13.15 Venous Valves and the Skeletal 
Muscle Pump. (a) Muscle contraction squeezes 
the deep veins and forces blood through the next 
valve in the direction of the heart. Valves below the 
point of compression prevent backflow. (b) When 
the muscles relax, blood flows back downward un-
der the pull of gravity but can flow only as far as the 
nearest valve.
To heart
Valve open
Valve closed
Venous
blood
(a) Contracted skeletal muscles
 (b) Relaxed skeletal muscles
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      443  

those who must stand for long periods on their jobs—blood accumulates in the veins 
and stretches them until the valve cusps cannot meet in the middle. The valves then 
allow blood to flow back down. This distension of the veins can become permanent,  
creating ­varicose veins that are often visible through the skin. 
The other aid to venous return is the thoracic pump. When you inhale, your 
chest expands and pressure in the thoracic cavity drops below the pressure in your 
abdominal cavity. The pressure difference squeezes the abdominal portion of the infe-
rior vena cava, pushing the blood upward to the chest like ketchup being squeezed out 
of a plastic container. Pressure differences between abdominal and thoracic veins help 
blood flow upward to the heart, which is one reason why exercise and deep breathing 
are good for circulation.
When the heart fails to pump enough blood to meet the demands of the organs, 
a person enters a state of circulatory shock. One cause of circulatory shock is loss 
of blood volume by hemorrhaging. Other causes include tumors that compress veins 
and block the flow of blood, and venous pooling, in which blood accumulates in the 
lower parts of the body instead of returning to the heart. Venous pooling shock may 
be caused by allergic reactions that result in widespread vasodilation, as in allergies 
to peanuts or bee stings. Standing still for too long (as in choir or the military) so the 
skeletal muscle pump is not working can cause blood to pool in the legs, which may 
lead to fainting (syncope) (SIN-co-pee). In many cases the body can recover from 
mild shock on its own, as when one recovers from a faint, but in more severe cases a 
person can die from circulatory shock.  
13.6  Circulatory Routes and Blood Vessels
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	trace the route of blood through the pulmonary circuit;
b.	identify the principal systemic arteries and veins of the body; and
c.	trace the systemic flow of blood from the heart to any major 
organ or body region and back to the heart, naming the vessels 
through which it would travel.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 17.	 How does a sphygmomanometer measure blood pressure? 
In a BP such as 120/80 mm Hg, what do the top and bottom 
numbers represent and what does “mm Hg” mean?
18.	List the three main determinants of blood pressure.
19.	How do viscosity, vessel length, and vessel radius influence 
resistance and flow? Why is radius the most important of 
these?
20.	Describe the mechanisms of local, neural, and hormonal 
control of blood flow. Identify the hormones that affect blood 
pressure, and explain how they work.
21.	Explain how the skeletal muscle pump and thoracic pump 
contribute to venous return. 
444      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Left pulmonary artery
Left ventricle
Right pulmonary
artery
Right ventricle
Pulmonary trunk
Pulmonary vein
(to left atrium)
Pulmonary artery
(from right ventricle)
Alveolar sacs
and alveoli
Alveolar 
capillaries
(b)
(a)
Figure 13.16 The Pulmonary Circuit. (a) Gross anatomy. (b) Micro-
scopic anatomy of the blood vessels that supply the pulmonary alveoli. 
All alveoli are surrounded by a basketlike mesh of capillaries, but to 
show the alveoli, this drawing omits the capillaries from some of them.
We conclude this chapter with a survey of the major arteries and veins and the 
routes taken by circulating blood. This discussion is confined to adult circula-
tion; special features of fetal circulation and how it changes after birth are shown 
in ­figure 20.8.
The Pulmonary Circuit
The pulmonary circuit (fig. 13.16) serves only to exchange CO2 for O2. The lungs 
receive a separate systemic blood supply, via the bronchial arteries, to nourish 
the pulmonary tissues. The pulmonary circuit begins with the pulmonary trunk 
arising from the right ventricle. The trunk branches into right and left pulmonary 
arteries, and these give off further branches just before or after entering each lung. 
Ultimately these arteries lead to a web of capillaries around each pulmonary air sac, 
or alveolus. Their relationship to the alveolus and the exchange of O2 and CO2 are 
detailed in chapter 15. Leaving the alveolar capillaries, the blood flows into pulmo-
nary venules and larger veins until finally, two pulmonary veins from each lung 
enter the left atrium of the heart (see fig. 13.3).
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      445  

Diaphragm
Vertebral a.
Subclavian a.
Axillary a.
Aortic arch
Subclavian a.
Brachiocephalic trunk
Common carotid a.
Internal carotid a.
External carotid a.
Common iliac a.
Inferior mesenteric a.
Gonadal a.
External iliac a.
Internal iliac a.
Superior mesenteric a.
Renal aa.
Celiac trunk
Deep femoral a.
Femoral a.
Popliteal a.
Anterior tibial a.
Fibular a.
Dorsal pedal a.
Posterior tibial a.
Ulnar a.
Radial a.
Brachial a.
Aorta
The Systemic Circuit
The systemic circuit (figs. 13.17 and 13.18) supplies oxygen and nutrients to all 
organs and removes their metabolic wastes. Part of it, the coronary circulation, was 
described earlier in this chapter. This section surveys the other major arteries and 
veins region by region, from head to foot. It must be noted that there is a great deal 
Figure 13.17 The Major Systemic Arteries. 
Different arteries are illustrated on the left than on 
the right for clarity, but nearly all of them occur on 
both sides (a. = artery).
446      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

External jugular v.
Internal jugular v.
Basilic v.
Median cubital v.
Cephalic v.
Common iliac v.
Internal iliac v.
External iliac v.
Diaphragm
Kidney
Brachiocephalic v.
Subclavian v.
Axillary v.
Femoral v.
Posterior tibial vv.
Deep femoral v.
Femoral v.
Popliteal v.
Anterior tibial vv.
Great saphenous v.
Superior vena cava
Hepatic v.
Inferior vena cava
Renal v.
Brachial vv.
Gonadal vv.
Radial vv.
Fibular vv.
Ulnar vv.
of anatomical variation in the circulatory system; this description outlines only the 
most common circulatory pathways.
It is important that you consult the illustrations as you read the text, just as you 
use a map to visualize the branches of highways and city streets. A verbal description 
alone doesn’t allow effective navigation of the circulatory landscape. As we trace the 
arteries and veins, we will do so in the direction the blood flows. That is, in describing 
Figure 13.18 The Major Systemic Veins. Dif-
ferent veins are illustrated on the left than on the 
right for clarity, but nearly all of them occur on both 
sides (v. = vein, vv. = veins).
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      447  

R. common 
carotid a.
L. common 
carotid a.
R. subclavian a.
L. subclavian a.
Ascending aorta
Diaphragm
Descending aorta,
thoracic (posterior 
to heart)
Aortic hiatus
Coronary aa.
Aortic arch
Descending aorta,
abdominal
Brachiocephalic trunk
arteries, we begin near the heart and trace them distally, whereas in describing veins, 
we will begin distally and trace them approaching the heart. In describing the smaller 
divisions of larger arteries, we speak of them as branches. In describing the smaller 
divisions of larger veins, however, we speak of them as tributaries, because like the 
streams that form the tributaries of a river, they contribute blood to the larger vessel.
The names of blood vessels often give clues to their location or destination. For 
example, the brachial artery runs through the arm region; the ulnar and femoral arter-
ies are named for adjacent bones; and the renal vein drains the kidney. Adjacent veins 
and arteries often have similar names (femoral artery and femoral vein, for example). 
Thus, the names may help you remember and identify principal arteries and veins. 
When an artery or vein is unusually short and quickly branches, it is called a trunk.
Initial Segments and Branches of the Aorta
The aorta is the body’s largest artery. It is divided into three portions—ascending 
aorta, aortic arch, and descending aorta (fig. 13.19).
∙	 Ascending aorta. The ascending aorta begins at the left ventricle and rises for 
a short distance from the heart. Its only branches are the coronary arteries to 
the heart wall, described earlier.
∙	 Aortic arch. The aortic arch is the superior ∩-shaped segment, like the han-
dle on a cane. It gives off three major arteries in the following order:
∘	 Brachiocephalic13  trunk (BRAY-kee-oh-seh-FAL-ic). This short vessel 
rises from the right side of the aortic arch and soon branches into the right 
common carotid and right subclavian arteries described later.
∘	 Left common carotid artery (cah-ROT-id). Unlike the right common 
­carotid, the left one arises directly from the aortic arch.
Figure 13.19 The Thoracic Aorta and Its 
Branches. (L. = left, R. = right, a. = artery, aa. = arter-
ies) 
13brachio = arm; cephal = head 
448      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Internal carotid a.
External carotid a.
Carotid sinus
Vertebral a.
Axillary a.
Subclavian a.
Common
carotid  a.
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Thyroid gland
(a)
Cerebral arterial
circle
Internal carotid a.
Basilar a.
Anterior 
cerebral a.
Vertebral a.
Middle cerebral a.
Posterior 
cerebral a.
(b)
∘	 Left subclavian14 artery (sub-CLAY-vee-un). Unlike the 
right subclavian, the left one arises directly from the aortic 
arch. This is the third and last artery to arise from the arch 
before the aorta begins its descent.
∙	 Descending aorta. The descending aorta passes downward 
behind the heart, near the vertebral column, through the tho-
racic and abdominal cavities. It is called the thoracic aorta 
above the diaphragm before it passes through an opening 
called the aortic hiatus. Below the diaphragm it is called 
the abdominal aorta. It ends in the lower abdominal cavity by 
forking into the lower limbs.
Arteries of the Head and Neck
The head and neck receive blood primarily from two arteries on each side 
(fig. 13.20a).
∙	 Common carotid arteries. The right common carotid artery splits 
from the brachiocephalic trunk, whereas the left common carotid ar-
tery arises directly from the aortic arch. The common carotids pass 
up the front of the neck, alongside the trachea, where their pulse can 
be palpated.
14sub = below; clavi = clavicle, collarbone
Figure 13.20 Arteries of the Head and Neck. 
(a) Superficial arteries. (b) Base of the brain showing 
the blood supply to the brainstem, cerebellum, and 
cerebral arterial circle. (a. = artery) 
•	 List the arteries, in order, that an erythrocyte 
must travel to get from the left ventricle to the 
skin of the left side of the forehead.
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      449  

15jugul = neck, throat
∙	 Vertebral arteries. These arise from the right and left subclavian arteries and 
travel up the back of the neck through the transverse foramina of vertebrae 
C1 through C6. They enter the cranial cavity through the foramen magnum, 
bound for the brain.
The common carotid arteries have the most extensive distribution of all the 
head–neck arteries. Near the laryngeal prominence (“Adam’s apple”), each com-
mon carotid splits into external and internal branches.
∙	 External carotid artery. This branch ascends the side of the head and pro-
vides branches to the thyroid gland, larynx, tongue, teeth, scalp, facial skin 
and muscles, and chewing muscles.
∙	 Internal carotid artery. This branch passes medial to the angle of the man-
dible and enters the cranial cavity through the carotid canal of the temporal 
bone. It supplies the orbits and about 80% of the cerebrum. Compressing the 
internal carotids near the mandible can therefore cause loss of consciousness.
The vertebral arteries give rise to branches that supply the cervical vertebrae, 
spinal cord and its meninges, and deep muscles of the neck. They then enter the 
foramen magnum and continue as follows (fig. 13.20b):
∙	 Basilar artery. Within the cranial cavity, the vertebral arteries converge to 
form a single median basilar artery along the anterior surface of the brain-
stem. The basilar artery gives off branches to the cerebellum, pons, and inner 
ear, then divides and flows into the cerebral arterial circle.
∙	 Cerebral arterial circle. The basilar and internal carotid arteries flow into 
this loop of vessels surrounding the pituitary gland. Most people lack one or 
more components of this circle; only 20% have a complete arterial circle. The 
circle gives off anterior, posterior, and middle cerebral arteries that provide 
the most significant blood supplies to the cerebrum. Blood supply to the brain 
is so critical that it is furnished by several arterial anastomoses, so if blood 
flow along one route is cut off, there are alternative routes through the arte-
rial circle to reach the same brain tissue. Knowledge of the distribution of the 
arteries arising from the circle is crucial for understanding the effects of blood 
clots, aneurysms, and strokes on brain function.
Veins of the Head and Neck
∙	 Dural sinuses. After blood circulates through the brain tissue, it collects in 
large thin-walled veins called dural sinuses—blood-filled spaces between the 
layers of the dura mater (see fig. 9.3). The most superficial of these is the 
superior sagittal sinus, which courses along the top of the head just beneath 
the cranium along the median plane; students often see this vessel in animal 
brain dissections if the dura mater is present. At the rear of the head, a pair of 
transverse sinuses arches around toward the ears just under the cranial bone 
(fig. 13.21b). They collect blood from all the other dural sinuses and then exit 
the cranium through the jugular foramen just posterior to each ear.
Blood flows down the neck mainly through three veins on each side, all of which 
empty into the subclavian vein.
∙    Internal jugular15 veins (JUG-you-lur). These are continuations of the trans-
verse sinuses after the vessels exit the cranium. They travel deep to the sterno-
cleidomastoid muscles. They also pick up blood from the face, temporal region, 
and thyroid gland before emptying into the subclavian vein.
∙	 External jugular veins. These are smaller veins on the superficial sur-
face of the sternocleidomastoids. They too pass down the neck, draining 
450      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

(b)
(a)
Internal
jugular v.
Brachiocephalic v.
Axillary v.
Subclavian v.
External
jugular v.
Vertebral v.
Straight sinus
To internal
jugular v.
Transverse sinus
Dural sinuses
Thyroid gland
Figure 13.21 Veins of the Head and Neck. (a) Superficial veins. (b) Base of the 
brain showing some of the dural sinuses and other drainage from the cerebrum. (Not 
all of these veins and sinuses are discussed in the text.) (v. = vein) 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      451  

Common carotid aa.
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Left subclavian a.
Aortic arch
Bronchial aa.
Descending aorta
Right subclavian a.
Vertebral a.
Axillary a.
Brachial a.
Radial a.
Ulnar a.
tributaries from the facial muscles, scalp, and other superficial structures 
before ending at the subclavian veins.
∙	 Vertebral veins. These travel with the vertebral arteries through the trans-
verse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. They drain the vertebrae, spinal cord, 
and small deep muscles of the neck.
Arteries of the Thorax
The thoracic aorta issues numerous branches to the vertebrae, spinal cord and its 
meninges, breasts, lungs, pleurae, pericardium, esophagus, diaphragm, and skin 
and muscles of the thoracic wall. In the shoulder region, the subclavian artery 
adjacent to the clavicle and the axillary artery in the region of the axilla (armpit) 
give off several branches to the breast, scapula, intercostal muscles, and muscles 
of the pectoral, shoulder, and arm regions. These thoracic arteries are illustrated 
in figure 13.22, but their names and further description are beyond the scope of this 
book. Arteries to the breast are larger in females than in males, and enlarge still 
further during lactation.
Veins of the Thorax
The first three veins below return blood from the shoulder region to the heart, and 
the azygos system drains the wall and viscera of the thorax (fig. 13.23).
∙	 Subclavian vein. This vessel drains the upper limb. It runs with its compan-
ion, the subclavian artery, posterior to the clavicle. It receives the external 
jugular vein and vertebral vein along the way, then ends (in name only) where 
it merges with the internal jugular vein.
∙	 Brachiocephalic vein. This is formed by union of the subclavian and internal 
jugular veins and then continues the approach to the heart.
∙	 Superior vena cava. This large vein is formed by the union of the right 
and left brachiocephalic veins. It travels inferiorly for about 7 cm and emp-
ties into the right atrium of the heart. It drains all structures superior to the 
diaphragm except the pulmonary circuit and coronary circulation. It also 
receives drainage from the abdominal cavity by way of the azygos system.
Figure 13.22 Arteries of the Thorax and 
Upper Limb. (a. = artery, aa. = arteries) 
452      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Jugular vv.
External
Superior vena cava
Subclavian v.
Azygos v.
Brachiocephalic vv.
Intercostal vv.
Ascending lumbar vv.
Internal
Basilic v.
Cephalic v.
Ulnar vv.
Radial vv.
Median cubital v.
Brachial vv.
Basilic v.
Cephalic v.
Subclavian v.
Axillary v.
Superﬁcial veins
Deep veins
T12
T9
T8
T4
∙	 Azygos system. The principal venous drainage of the thoracic organs is by 
way of the azygos system (AZ-ih-goss). The most prominent vein of this 
system is the azygos16 vein, an unpaired vessel that ascends the right side of 
the posterior thoracic wall. The azygos system receives numerous tributaries 
from many thoracic organs and tissues. A series of intercostal veins between 
Figure 13.23 Veins of the Thorax and ­Upper 
Limb. Note color coding of deep and superficial 
veins in the upper limb (v. = vein, vv. = veins). 
16unpaired; from a = without; zygo = union, mate
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      453  

the ribs empty in a ladderlike series into the azygos system. This system also 
receives blood from as far away as the lower limbs and lower abdomen by 
way of two ascending lumbar veins.
Arteries of the Upper Limb 
In the limbs (appendicular region), the arteries are usually deep and well protected. 
The upper limb is supplied by a prominent artery that changes name along its course 
from subclavian to axillary to brachial, then issues branches to the arm, forearm, 
and hand (fig. 13.22).
∙	 Subclavian artery. The left subclavian artery arises from the brachioce-
phalic trunk and the right subclavian artery arises directly from the aor-
tic arch, as described earlier. Each subclavian artery passes posterior to the 
clavicle, downward over the first rib, and ends in name only at the rib’s 
lateral margin.
∙	 Axillary artery. The subclavian changes name to axillary artery as soon as it 
passes the first rib. It continues through the axillary region (armpit) and ends, 
again in name only, at the neck of the humerus. Beyond this, it is called the 
brachial artery.
∙	 Brachial artery (BRAY-kee-ul). This artery continues down the medial and 
anterior sides of the humerus and ends just distal to the elbow, supplying the 
anterior flexor muscles of the arm along the way. Just distal to the elbow, it 
branches into the next two arteries.
∙	 Radial artery. This branch descends the forearm laterally, alongside the ra-
dius, nourishing the lateral forearm muscles. The most common place to take 
a pulse is at the radial artery just proximal to the thumb.
∙	 Ulnar artery. This branch descends medially through the forearm, alongside 
the ulna, nourishing the medial forearm muscles. The radial and ulnar arteries 
join at the wrist to form arterial arches that issue smaller arteries to the palmar 
region and fingers.
Veins of the Upper Limb 
Veins of the appendicular region occur in both deep and superficial groups; you 
may be able to see several of the superficial ones in your forearms and hands. 
Veins of the upper limb lead ultimately to the axillary and subclavian veins 
(fig. 13.23). Beginning distally with the veins that drain the hand, and following 
the direction of blood flow toward the heart, the most prominent superficial veins 
are as follows:
A superficial venous network, often visible on the back of the hand, drains the 
palmar region and fingers and gives rise to the cephalic and basilic veins.
∙	 Cephalic17 vein (sef-AL-ic). This vein begins on the lateral side of the hand, 
travels up the lateral side of the forearm and arm to the shoulder, and joins 
the axillary vein there. Intravenous fluids are often administered through the 
distal end of the cephalic vein.
∙	 Basilic18 vein (bah-SIL-ic). This vein begins on the medial side of the hand 
and travels up the posterior side of the forearm, continuing into the arm. It 
turns deeper about midway up the arm and joins the brachial vein near the ax-
illa. As an aid to remembering which vein is cephalic and which is basilic, vi-
sualize your arm held straight away from the torso (abducted) with the thumb 
up. The cephalic vein runs along the upper side of the arm closer to the head 
17cephalic = related to the head 
18basilic = royal, prominent, important 
454      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Aortic hiatus
Celiac trunk
Superior 
mesenteric a.
Renal a.
Gonadal aa.
Inferior 
mesenteric a.
Common 
iliac a.
Internal 
iliac a.
(a)
Splenic a.
(b)
Duodenum
L. gastric a.
Celiac trunk
Gallbladder
Superior mesenteric a.
Pancreas
Common hepatic a.
Ascending 
colon
Cecum
Superior 
mesenteric a.
Appendix
(c)
L
Ileum
Jejunum
Transverse colon
Aorta
Liver
Spleen
Aorta
(as suggested by cephal, “head”), and the name basilic is suggestive of the 
lower (basal) side of the arm (although the word really means “prominent”).
∙	 Median cubital vein. This is a short connection between the cephalic and 
basilic veins that obliquely crosses a in the cubital fossa. It is often clearly vis-
ible through the skin and is a common site for drawing blood.
Deeper venous arches in the hand also receive blood from the fingers and pal-
mar region and give rise to the first two veins below.
∙	 Radial veins. A pair of radial veins arises from the lateral side of the 
hand and courses up the forearm alongside the radius. They join 
near the elbow and form one of the brachial veins.
∙	 Ulnar veins. A pair of ulnar veins runs from the hand up the 
forearm alongside the ulna. They unite near the elbow to 
form the other brachial vein.
∙	 Brachial veins. The two brachial veins continue up the 
arm, flanking the brachial artery, and converge into a 
single vein just before the axillary region.
∙	 Axillary vein. This vein arises by the union of the 
brachial and basilic veins. It passes through the ax-
illary region, picking up the cephalic vein along the 
way. At the lateral margin of the first rib, its name 
changes to the subclavian vein. We have already traced 
the course of the subclavian vein in discussion of veins of 
the thorax.
Arteries of the Abdominopelvic Region
The descending aorta passes through an opening in the diaphragm and 
continues through the abdomen to the level of vertebra L4, where it 
branches into right and left common iliac arteries (fig. 13.24a). Along 
its descent, it gives rise to the following branches in the order listed. 
Those indicated in the plural are paired right and left, and those indi-
cated in the singular are solitary median arteries.
Figure 13.24  Arterial Supply to the 
­Abdominopelvic Region. (a) The abdominal aor-
ta and its branches. (b) Branches of the celiac trunk 
arising from the upper aorta. (c) Branches of the 
superior mesenteric artery supplying the intestines. 
(a. = artery; aa. = arteries) 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      455  

∙	 Celiac trunk. The short, stubby celiac19 (SEE-lee-ac) trunk supplies the upper 
abdominal viscera. It goes for only about 1 cm before dividing into three branch-
es: the common hepatic artery to the liver, splenic artery to the spleen, and left 
gastric artery to the stomach. These arteries and their branches also supply the 
gallbladder, pancreas, lower esophagus, and greater omentum (fig. 13.24b).
∙	 Superior mesenteric artery. This is the most significant intestinal blood sup-
ply. It arises from the aorta, not far below the celiac trunk, and fans out in the 
mesentery to supply nearly all of the small intestine and the proximal half of 
the large intestine (fig. 13.24c).
∙	 Renal arteries. Right and left renal arteries supply the kidneys.
∙	 Gonadal arteries. More specifically called ovarian arteries in the female and 
testicular arteries in the male, these long, slender arteries descend along the 
posterior body wall to the female pelvic cavity or male scrotum, where they 
supply the ovaries or testes.
∙	 Inferior mesenteric artery. This artery arises medially from the lower aorta 
and fans out within the mesentery to supply the distal end of the large intestine.
∙	 Common iliac arteries. Finally, the aorta forks into these two short arteries at 
its inferior end.
∙	 Internal iliac artery. The common iliac artery descends for about 5 cm along 
the posterior wall of the pelvic cavity, then divides in two. One division, the 
internal iliac artery, supplies mainly the pelvic wall, gluteal muscles, hip 
joint, urinary bladder, rectum, the uterus and part of the vagina in women, and 
the prostate in men. The other division, the external iliac artery, supplies the 
lower limb and is discussed later.
Veins of the Abdominopelvic Region
We will trace the veins in ascending order, following the blood flow back toward 
the heart.
∙	 Internal iliac vein. This vein drains the gluteal muscles, the medial aspect 
of the thigh, the urinary bladder and rectum, the prostate of the male, and the 
uterus and vagina of the female.
∙	 Common iliac vein. This vein is formed by the union of the internal iliac and 
an external iliac, described later, which ascends from the lower limb.
∙	 Inferior vena cava (IVC). The IVC is the body’s largest blood vessel, having 
a diameter of about 3.5 cm. It is a single median vein formed by the union of 
the right and left common iliac veins at the level of vertebra L5 (fig. 13.25a). 
The IVC picks up blood from several veins that drain the lumbar body wall, 
and the following tributaries, among others. At its superior end, it penetrates 
the diaphragm and immediately enters the right atrium of the heart from below. 
It does not receive any thoracic drainage.
∙	 Gonadal veins. Like the corresponding arteries, these are called ovarian veins 
in the female and testicular veins in the male. They are long, slender veins that 
originate in the ovaries or testes and climb the posterior abdominal wall. The 
right gonadal vein empties into the IVC whereas the left gonadal vein empties 
into the left renal vein.
∙	 Renal veins. These veins drain the kidneys into the IVC.
The venous drainage of much of the digestive system forms the hepatic20 
­portal system (fig. 13.25b). This network of veins receives all of the blood drain-
ing from the abdominal digestive tract as well as from the pancreas, gallbladder, 
19celi = belly, abdomen 
20hepat = liver; ic = pertaining to
456      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Hepatic vv.
L. ascending 
lumbar v.
R. renal v.
L. renal v.
L. gonadal v.
R. gonadal v.
(a)
Common iliac v.
Internal iliac v.
External iliac v.
R. ascending 
lumbar v.
Diaphragm
Inferior 
vena cava
Hepatic vv.
Liver
Gallbladder
Hepatic 
portal v.
Ileum
Rectum
(b)
Spleen
Inferior 
vena cava
Inferior 
mesenteric v.
Superior 
mesenteric v.
Colon
Splenic v.
Figure 13.25 Venous Drainage of the Abdominopelvic Region. (a) Anatomy 
of the inferior vena cava and its tributaries. (b) The hepatic portal system, which drains 
blood from the major digestive organs and others into the liver. (v. = vein, vv. = veins) 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      457  

and spleen. It is called a portal system because it connects capillaries of the intes-
tines and other digestive organs to capillaries in the liver; thus, the blood passes 
through two capillary beds before it returns to the heart. Intestinal blood is richly 
laden with nutrients for a few hours following a meal. The hepatic portal system 
gives the liver first claim to these nutrients before the blood is distributed to the 
rest of the body. It also allows the blood to be cleansed of bacteria and toxins 
picked up from the intestines, an important function of the liver. The main com-
ponents of the hepatic portal system follow. 
∙	 Inferior mesenteric vein. This vein arises from a fanlike array of small veins in 
the mesentery that drain the rectum and distal part of the colon.
∙	 Superior mesenteric vein. This vein begins with a similar fanlike array of 
veins in the mesentery, but these drain the entire small intestine, the ascending 
and transverse colon, and stomach.
∙	 Splenic vein. This vein drains the spleen and travels across the abdominal 
cavity toward the liver. Along the way, it picks up veins from the pancreas, 
then the inferior mesenteric vein, and ends where it meets the superior mes-
enteric vein.
∙	 Hepatic portal vein. This vein is formed by convergence of the splenic 
and superior mesenteric veins. It enters the inferior surface of the liver 
and leads ultimately to capillaries called the hepatic sinusoids, detailed in 
chapter 17.
∙	 Hepatic veins. Blood from the liver drains into a few short hepatic veins that 
exit its superior surface and pass only a very short distance before ending high 
on the inferior vena cava.
Arteries of the Lower Limb 
As we have already seen, the aorta forks at its lower end into the right and left 
common iliac arteries, and each of these soon divides again into an internal 
and external iliac artery. We discussed the internal iliac artery earlier, and 
we now trace the external iliac artery as it descends into the lower limb (see 
fig. 13.17).
∙	 External iliac artery. The external iliac artery passes behind the inguinal 
ligament at the top of the thigh and is then named the femoral artery.
∙	 Femoral artery. The femoral artery passes superficially through the groin 
in a region called the femoral triangle. Its pulse can be palpated in the upper 
medial thigh, and this is an important emergency pressure point for stopping 
arterial bleeding in the lower limb. It gives off several branches that supply 
the femur and the skin and muscles of the thigh before it descends to the 
knee.
∙	 Popliteal artery. This is a continuation of the femoral artery in the popliteal 
fossa of the posterior side of the knee. Its branches supply the knee joint, pa-
tella, fibula, and some calf muscles. Just below the knee, the popliteal artery 
branches into the next two arteries.
∙	 Posterior tibial artery. This is a continuation of the popliteal artery that 
passes down the posterior side of the leg, supplying flexor muscles along the 
way. Inferiorly, it passes behind the medial malleolus of the ankle and into the 
plantar region of the foot.
∙	 Anterior tibial artery. This artery immediately penetrates the interosseous 
membrane between the upper tibia and fibula and emerges on the anterior side 
of the membrane. It travels to the ankle, supplying the extensor muscles of the 
leg along the way.
458      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

∙	 Dorsal pedal artery. The inferior end of the anterior tibial artery gives rise to 
the dorsal pedal artery on the upper side of the foot. This is a useful site for 
palpating the pulse in infants and judging the adequacy of lower limb circula-
tion (from strength of the pulse) in adults.
Veins of the Lower Limb  
As in the upper limb, the lower limb has both superficial and deep veins (see 
fig. 13.18). 
∙	 Great (long) saphenous21 vein (sah-FEE-nus). This is a prominent super-
ficial vein and is the longest vein in the body. It arises from the medial side 
of the foot and travels all the way up the leg and thigh to the inguinal region, 
where it empties into the femoral vein described shortly. It is commonly 
used as a site for the long-term administration of intravenous fluids; it is 
a relatively accessible vein in infants and in patients in shock whose veins 
have collapsed. Portions of this vein are often used as grafts in coronary 
bypass surgery.
∙	 Small (short) saphenous vein. This superficial vein arises from the lateral 
side of the foot and travels only as high as the knee. There, it drains into the 
popliteal vein described below.
  Following are the deep veins of the lower limb.
∙	 Fibular (peroneal) veins. Blood draining the foot enters a pair of fibular 
veins on the lateral side of the ankle. These veins run side by side, ascending 
the back of the leg, and converge like an inverted Y into a single vein.
∙	 Posterior tibial veins. Similarly, blood from the foot drains into a pair of 
posterior tibial veins on the medial side of the ankle. These also ascend 
the leg side by side, embedded deep in the calf muscles. They converge 
like an inverted Y into a single vein about two-thirds of the way up the 
tibia.
∙	 Popliteal vein. The two inverted Ys just described converge on each other 
near the knee to form the popliteal vein, which passes through the popliteal 
fossa.
∙	 Anterior tibial veins. Two anterior tibial veins arise from the superomedial 
aspect of the foot and travel up the anterior compartment of the leg between 
the tibia and fibula. They converge just distal to the knee and then flow into 
the popliteal vein.
∙	 Femoral vein. This is a continuation of the popliteal vein into the thigh. It 
drains blood from the deep thigh muscles and femur.
∙	 External iliac vein. This vein is formed by the union of the femoral and great 
saphenous veins near the inguinal ligament. We already traced the course of 
the internal iliac vein of the pelvic region. The external and internal iliacs 
unite to form the common iliac vein, also described earlier.  
21saphen = standing
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      459  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
22.	Contrast the pathways and destinations of the  
external and internal carotid arteries.
23. Briefly state the organs or parts of organs that are supplied 
with blood by (a) the cerebral arterial circle, (b) the celiac 
trunk, (c) the superior mesenteric artery, and (d) the internal 
iliac artery.
24. If you were dissecting a cadaver, state where would you 
look to locate (a) the cephalic vein, (b) the dorsal pedal  
artery, and (c) the femoral artery and vein.
25. If you were dissecting a cadaver, where would you look for 
the internal and external jugular veins? What muscle would 
help you distinguish one from the other?
26.	Trace one possible path of a red blood cell from the left ven-
tricle to the foot.
27.	State two reasons why the great saphenous vein is clinically 
significant.
Aging of the Circulatory System
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of death in old 
age. As cardiac muscle atrophies with age, the heart wall ­becomes 
thinner and weaker, resulting in reduced cardiac ­output. The ­fibrous 
components of the heart stiffen, limiting cardiac ­expansion and 
weakening its contractions. Degenerative changes in the nodes 
and conduction pathways increase the risk of cardiac ­arrhythmias. 
In addition, coronary atherosclerosis is, to varying ­degrees, a 
­universal feature of the aging heart and increases the risk of 
­myocardial infarction (see Perspectives on Health).
Systemic arteries stiffened by arteriosclerosis cannot ­expand 
effectively to accommodate the pressure surges of cardiac 
­systole. Consequently, blood pressure tends to rise steadily with 
age. Atherosclerosis also narrows the arteries and reduces blood 
flow to such vital organs as the brain, kidneys, and the heart it-
self, weakening these organs. Reduced flow to skeletal muscles 
reduces physical endurance. Atherosclerotic plaques can become 
focal points of spontaneous blood clotting (thrombosis), especially 
in the lower limbs, where blood flow is relatively slow and blood 
clots more easily. About 25% of people over 50 experience ve-
nous blockage by blood clots—especially people who don’t ex-
ercise regularly to stimulate optimal blood flow. Degenerative 
changes in the veins are most evident in the lower limbs, where 
the ­venous valves ­become weaker and less able to stop the back-
flow of blood. Chronic stretching of the veins makes varicose 
veins and ­hemorrhoids more common in and beyond middle age.
Reduction of cardiovascular function is an inevitable part 
of aging. However, numerous studies show that exercise, while 
it doesn’t stop the clock from ticking, slows it considerably. Ex-
ercise increases flexibility of arteries, lowers resting heart rate, 
and boosts the ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently. It 
has the added benefit of lowering blood pressure. In addition, 
exercise is associated with increased cerebral blood flow and 
enhanced cognitive function. Regular exercise increases the 
chance of leading an active, healthy life, even into old age.   
460      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
An electrocardiographic (ECG or EKG) technician prepares electrocardiograms 
(ECGs) for diagnostic, exercise testing, and other purposes. The ECG techni-
cian prepares the patient for the test by attaching electrodes to specific sites 
on the chest and limbs and monitors the equipment while results are recorded. 
One can become a certified ECG technician through programs at community 
colleges or vocational colleges. A typical course of training entails 4 months 
beyond high school and includes anatomy and physiology, medical terminol-
ogy, interpretation of cardiac rhythms, patient-care techniques, cardiovascular 
medication, and medical ethics. Many people, however, become ECG techni-
cians through on-the-job training rather than formal programs. Most employers 
prefer to train people who are already in a health-care profession, such as nurses’ 
aides. With more advanced training, one may become a cardiovascular technologist and assist physicians in diagnosis, cardiac 
catheterization, echocardiography, and other more specialized skills and for correspondingly better salaries. For further informa-
tion on a career as an ECG technician or cardiovascular technologist, see appendix B.
E l e c t r o c a r d i o g r a p h i c  Te c h n i c i a n
© MCT/Getty Images
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      461  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems 
Integumentary System
The routing of blood to and away 
from the skin is vital to maintaining 
stable core body temperature.
Skeletal System
The bloodstream picks up RBCs, WBCs, 
and platelets from the red bone marrow 
and delivers the hormones that regulate 
the production of these formed elements. It 
also provides minerals for bone deposition 
and delivers hormones that regulate the 
metabolism of osseous tissue.
Muscular System
Vasodilation in the muscles provides the added 
oxygen and energy substrates required for exercise 
and removes the metabolites and heat generated 
by the muscles.
Nervous System
Endothelial cells of the cerebral blood vessels produce the 
blood–brain barrier; capillary ­filtration in the choroid plexuses 
of the brain produces ­cerebrospinal fluid; and strokes from 
cerebral hemorrhage are a leading cause of death.
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Capillary filtration produces tissue fluid, which 
becomes lymph; all lymph ultimately returns to 
the bloodstream at the subclavian veins; the 
bloodstream carries the leukocytes and plasma 
proteins (antibodies, complement, and oth-
ers) involved in immunity.
Respiratory System
Capillary osmosis and low pulmonary blood 
pressure prevent the lungs from filling with 
fluid.
Endocrine System
The bloodstream transports all hormones, and includes the portal 
system of blood vessels for hypothalamo–pituitary communication.
Reproductive System
The bloodstream transports all sex hormones; 
vasodilation produces penile erection, enabling 
intercourse and fertilization; and blood vessels in the 
scrotum act as a countercurrent heat exchange sys-
tem that prevents overheating of the testes, which 
would otherwise halt sperm production.
Digestive System
Capillaries of the intestinal wall pick up and transport 
digested nutrients; special capillaries (sinusoids) of the 
liver cleanse the blood of bacteria and other impurities; 
the circulatory system reabsorbs and recycles bile acids 
and minerals from the intestines; and blood-borne hor-
mones regulate gastrointestinal activity and appetite.
Urinary System
Capillary filtration is the first step in urine 
production, and capillary reabsorption carries 
away the water and solutes reabsorbed by 
the kidneys; kidney function is regulated by 
several blood-borne hormones.
All Systems
The heart and blood vessels circulate the blood and thus enable it to perform all the 
functions listed in the Connective Issues for chapter 12. Capillary  
filtration and osmosis maintain fluid balance in all organs.
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Getty Images

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
13.1  Overview of the Cardiovascular System 
1.	 Definitions of cardiovascular system and cardiology
2.	 The purpose of the pulmonary and systemic circuits and what 
side of the heart supplies each
3.	 Description of the location and position of the heart, using pre-
cise anatomical terms
4.	 The relationship between the epicardium, pericardial sac, and 
pericardial cavity
5.	 The function of pericardial fluid
13.2  Gross Anatomy of the Heart 
1.	 The three layers of the heart wall and the histology of each
2.	 Location and functions of the connective tissue of the heart
3.	 Surface features of the heart and how they relate to its internal 
structure
4.	 The reason for variations in wall thickness of different heart 
chambers
5.	 Similarities and differences in the structure and function of the 
atrioventricular valves compared to the semilunar valves 
6.	 The flow of blood through the heart, from the venae cavae to 
the aorta, naming all chambers, vessels, and valves through 
which the blood passes 
7.	 Why the heart receives a disproportionate amount of blood 
relative to its percentage of body mass
8.	 Names and pathways of the coronary blood vessels
13.3  Physiology of the Heart 
1.	 Structurally distinctive properties of cardiac muscle and the 
reasons for its special features 
2.	 Components of the cardiac conducting system and their loca-
tions
3.	 The origin and propagation of electrical excitation through the 
heart 
4.	 The anatomical and functional relationship between the SA 
node and AV node
5.	 How and why the electrical activities of the SA node and 
cardiomyocytes differ from that of skeletal muscle 
6.	 Sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation of the heart 
7.	 The waves of the ECG and the electrical events associated 
with each
8.	 Definitions of systole and diastole
9.	 The key events in each phase of the cardiac cycle: electri-
cal events, chamber contractions and relaxations, valve 
opening and closing, sources of the two heart sounds, 
correlations with the waves of the ECG, and movements of 
the blood
10.	 The meaning of cardiac output and the two factors that deter-
mine it
11.	 Neural and chemical factors that increase or reduce cardiac 
output and how they do so
13.4  General Anatomy of Blood Vessels 
1.	 The layers of a blood vessel wall and their structural 
­differences
2.	 The definitions of arteries, capillaries, and veins
3.	 Types or subclasses of arteries, capillaries, and veins; how 
they differ structurally, and the functional relevance of those 
differences
4.	 Functional significance of capillary beds and precapillary 
sphincters
5.	 The structure and functional significance of portal systems and 
anastomoses
13.5  Physiology of Circulation 
1.	 Definitions of flow and blood pressure
2.	 The method of measuring blood pressure, and a typical healthy 
adult value
3.	 How peripheral resistance influences blood flow; the three 
variables that govern resistance; and why vessel radius is the 
most important of these variables
4.	 How a tissue can regulate its own blood supply independently 
of nerves and hormones
5.	 How baroreceptors and the vasomotor center regulate blood 
flow
6.	 Hormones that can raise and lower blood pressure, and how 
they do so
7.	 Mechanisms of capillary fluid exchange
8.	 How a capillary can give off fluid at one end and reabsorb it at 
the other end
9.	 Mechanisms that allow blood to return to the heart even 
against the pull of gravity
10.	 Definition and causes of circulatory shock
  CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II    463  

13.6  Circulatory Routes and Blood Vessels 
1.	 The path of a blood cell from pulmonary trunk to left atrium, 
naming the blood vessels
2.	 Segments of the thoracic aorta, the arteries arising from each, 
and destinations of the blood in those arteries 
3.	 Major arteries of the head and neck, including the routes of 
blood flow to the brain
4.	 Veins of the head, neck, and thorax, and the route that blood 
travels in these veins to the heart
5.	 Major arteries and veins of the upper limb
6.	 Major branches of the abdominal aorta and the structures they 
supply
7.	 Major abdominal veins and the organs or regions they drain
8.	 The general function and circulatory routes of the hepatic 
portal system
9.	 Major arteries and veins of the lower limb
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 The cardiac conduction system includes all of the following 
except
a.	 the SA node.
b.	 the AV node.
c.	 the tendinous cords.
d.	 the bundle branches.
e.	 the subendocardial conducting network.
	 2.	 The most prominent vessel draining blood from the anterior 
ventricular myocardium is
a.	 the great saphenous vein.
b.	 the anterior interventricular branch.
c.	 the middle cardiac vein.
d.	 the great cardiac vein. 
e.	 the not-so-great cardiac vein.
	 3.	 The outermost layer of the heart wall is known as
a.	 the pericardial sac.
b.	 the epicardium.
c.	 the parietal pericardium.
d.	 the tunica externa.
e.	 the serosa.
	 4.	 Intestinal blood flows into the liver by way of
a.	 the superior mesenteric vein.
b.	 the hepatic portal vein.
c.	 the abdominal aorta.
d.	 the hepatic sinusoids.
e.	 the hepatic veins.
	 5.	 Ventricular contraction begins at the time of
a.	 opening of the AV valves.
b.	 the P wave.
c.	 the T wave.
d.	 the QRS complex.
e.	 the second heart sound.
	 6.	 Janet is allergic to bee stings. One day she was stung and her 
blood pressure dropped so low that she lost consciousness and 
required emergency treatment. Janet had experienced
a.	 myocardial infarction.
b.	 cerebral vascular accident.
c.	 venous pooling shock.
d.	 ventricular fibrillation.
e.	 cardiogenic shock.
	 7.	 Which of the following is most responsible for speeding up the 
heart rate during exercise?
a.	 increased outflow of Na+ from pacemaker cells in the SA 
node
b.	 norepinephrine released from sympathetic nerves
c.	 acetylcholine released from vagus nerves
d.	 outward leakage of K+ from pacemaker cells
e.	 release of histamine
	 8.	 Michael has a tumor that grows to the size of a grapefruit and 
compresses his external iliac artery. This will result in greatly 
reduced blood flow to
a.	 his lower limb.
b.	 his brachial region.
c.	 his cerebrum.
d.	 his kidneys.
e.	 his small and large intestines.
	 9.	 What event in the heart corresponds to the first heart sound?
a.	 the P wave
b.	 the T wave
c.	 diastole
d.	 closing of the semilunar valves
e.	 closing of the AV valves
	10.	 Which type of blood vessels are up to 2.5 cm in diameter and 
have an abundance of elastic tissue?
a.	 continuous capillaries
b.	 distributing arteries
c.	 venules 
d.	 large veins
e.	 conducting arteries
	11.	 The contraction of any heart chamber is called 
 and its 
relaxation is called 
 .
	12.	 The instrument that measures blood pressure is the 
 .
	13.	 A large unpaired artery from the superior abdominal aorta 
called the 
 supplies the liver, pancreas, stomach, and 
spleen.
	14.	 The 
 nerves innervate the heart and serve to reduce 
heart rate.
	15.	 Most of the blood supply to the brain comes from a complex of 
arteries around the pituitary gland called the 
 .
	16.	 The clinical term for high blood pressure is 
 .
	17.	 Mechanoreceptors that respond to pressure changes in major 
arteries near the heart are called 
 .
464      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

	18.	 Death of cardiac tissue from lack of blood flow is commonly 
known as a heart attack, but clinically called 
 .
	19.	 Repolarization of the ventricles produces the 
 of the 
electrocardiogram.
	20.	 The 
 is an artery whose branches supply parts of 
both ventricles and the anterior portion of the interventricular 
septum.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 The blood supply to the myocardium is the coronary circula-
tion; everything but this is called the systemic circuit.
	 2.	 The first branch off the aortic arch is the right subclavian 
artery.
	 3.	 Blood pressure can be lowered by increasing the secretion of 
aldosterone.
	 4.	 The pulmonary veins carry blood from the heart to the lungs.
	 5.	 Arteries have a series of valves that ensure a one-way flow of 
blood.
	 6.	 If the radius of a blood vessel doubles and all other factors re-
main the same, blood flow through that vessel will also double.
	 7.	 In the hepatic portal system, blood passes through one capillary 
bed before the blood returns to the heart.
	 8.	 An electrocardiogram is a tracing of the action potential of a 
single cardiomyocyte.
	 9.	 The first heart sound occurs at the time of the T wave of the 
electrocardiogram.
	10.	 The tendinous cords extend from the cusps of the semilunar 
valves to the papillary muscles in the ventricles.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Mr. Jones, 78, dies of a massive myocardial infarction triggered 
by coronary thrombosis. Upon autopsy, necrotic myocardium 
is found in the lateral and posterior right ventricle and posterior 
interventricular septum. Based on the information in this chapter, 
where in the coronary circulation do you think the thrombosis 
occurred?
	 2.	 Marco and Paul are college roommates. Marco is on the 
school water polo team, and spends at least an hour a day 
exercising. Paul does not regularly exercise, and usually plays 
video games when he is not studying. Marco’s resting heart 
rate is 52 beats per minute, on average, whereas Paul’s aver-
age heart rate is 75 beats per minute. At rest, Marco’s stroke 
volume (SV) is 100 mL/beat; Paul’s is 70 mL/beat. Calculate 
the resting cardiac output (CO) for Marco and Paul. Explain 
anatomical and physiological reasons Paul has a higher heart 
rate.
	 3.	 Diuretics are drugs that increase urine output, and are often 
used to treat hypertension. Explain why they would have the 
desired effect of lowering blood pressure. 
Improve Your Grade 
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere. 
CHAPTER 13   The Circulatory System II      465  

B A S E  C A M P
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of the 
following concept from chapter 12.
• Leukocyte types and their functions, especially 
lymphocytes (see section 12.3)
The Lymphatic 
System and  
Immunity
Chapter
14
Chapter Outline
14.1 The Lymphatic System
• Functions of the Lymphatic System 
• Lymphatic Vessels and Lymph 
• Lymphatic Tissues 
• Lymphatic Organs 
14.2 Innate Immunity
• Physical Barriers 
• Protective Cells 
• Protective Proteins 
• Protective Processes
14.3 Features of Adaptive Immunity
• Antigens 
• Lymphocytes 
• Antibodies
• Antigen-Presenting Cells 
14.4 Cellular and Humoral Immunity
• Cellular Immunity 
• Humoral Immunity 
• Active and Passive Immunity 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 14.1: Lymph Nodes and  
Metastatic Cancer
• Clinical Application 14.2: Hypersensitivity,  
Allergies, and Anaphylactic Shock 
• Perspectives on Health 
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
• Career Spotlight: Public Health Nurse
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide
Module 10: Lymphatic System
Two natural killer (NK) cells (orange) attacking a cancer 
cell (red). NK cells are an important defense against cancer, 
often destroying malignant cells before they can seed the 
growth of a tumor. 
© Eye of Science/Science Source
466	

Y
ou may be surprised to know that the human body harbors at 
least 10 times as many bacterial cells as it does human cells. We 
provide them with a warm, wet, nutritious environment where all of their 
needs are met. We are tolerant of and even dependent upon our microbial 
guests. However, we are also constantly exposed to new microbial invad-
ers that enter our body through the food we eat, the water we drink, the 
air we breathe, and the surfaces we touch. Most of these are harmless, 
but others have the potential to be pathogenic, or disease-causing. It is a 
wonder that the body isn’t overrun and consumed by microbes—which 
indeed quickly happens when one dies and homeostasis ceases.
What prevents these microbes from taking over? In 1882, Russian 
zoologist Elie Metchnikoff discovered mobile, phagocytic cells that 
attacked and seemed to be devouring foreign matter introduced into 
animals such as starfish larvae. He named the attacking cells phagocytes 
and coined the term phagocytosis for the cell process we know so well 
today. His work set the stage for the science of immunology, the study of 
the immune system, and he justifiably received a Nobel Prize in 1908 for 
this work.
The immune system is not an organ system in itself, but a population 
of cells that inhabit all of our organs and defend the body against disease. 
Immune cells are especially concentrated in a true organ system, the lym-
phatic system, which plays crucial roles not only in immunity but also in 
body fluid distribution. This chapter explores and integrates the functions 
of the lymphatic and immune systems.
14.1  The Lymphatic System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the functions and basic components of the lymphatic system;
b.	discuss how lymph is formed;
c.	explain how lymph is returned to the bloodstream; and
d.	identify the major lymphatic tissues and organs, and describe 
their location, structure, and functions.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     467  

L. internal jugular v.
Axillary lymph node
Spleen
Abdominal, 
intestinal,
and mesenteric
lymph nodes
Inguinal lymph nodes
Cervical lymph nodes
R. lymphatic duct
Thymus
Thoracic duct
Collecting vessels
Palatine tonsil
Red bone marrow
Thoracic duct
Intestinal trunk
R. and l. lumbar trunks
Popliteal lymph nodes
Our environment is populated by innumerable pathogens—bacteria, viruses, fungi, 
and other microbes that can cause disease. One of our defenses against these is the 
lymphatic system (fig. 14.1), a network of tissues, organs, and vessels that recover 
tissue fluid, inspect it and cleanse it of pathogens, activate immune responses, and 
return the fluid to the bloodstream. Components of the system include (1) lymph, the 
fluid that it collects from the tissues and returns to the bloodstream; (2) ­lymphatic 
vessels (also simply called lymphatics), which resemble veins and transport the 
Figure 14.1 The Lymphatic System. 
 
468      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

lymph; (3) lymphatic tissue, composed of loose aggregations of lymphocytes in 
the connective tissues of various organs such as the digestive and respiratory tracts; 
and (4) lymphatic organs, structures enclosed in a fibrous capsule and containing 
organized masses of lymphatic tissue. The principal lymphatic organs we will dis-
cuss are the tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes.
Functions of the Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system has three functions:
	 1.	 Fluid recovery. Fluid continually seeps from the blood capillaries into the 
tissue spaces. The blood capillaries reabsorb about 85% of this fluid and the 
lymphatic system absorbs the other 15%. If not for the lymphatic system, this 
15% would amount to a loss of 2 to 4 L of water and one-quarter to one-half 
of the protein from the blood plasma per day. One would quickly die from the 
loss of blood volume and resulting circulatory failure.
	 2.	 Immunity. Fluid recovered from body tissues is checked by the lymphatic 
system for toxins, microbes, and other threats. The lymphatic system also 
guards the openings of the digestive, respiratory, and other tracts. When dis-
ease agents are detected, immune cells of the lymphatic system are quickly 
mobilized to fight them off.
	 3.	 Lipid absorption. Special lymphatic vessels called lacteals in the small intes-
tine absorb dietary lipids. The lipids travel through lymphatic vessels that ul-
timately empty into the large left subclavian vein. From here, the bloodstream 
can distribute these lipids throughout the body for storage or immediate use.
Lymphatic Vessels and Lymph
The lymphatic system recovers excess tissue fluid by means of innumerable micro-
scopic vessels called lymphatic capillaries that permeate almost all of the body’s 
tissues. These are similar to blood capillaries, but with important differences. They 
are closed at one end (fig. 14.2) and are essentially sacs of thin, loosely overlapping 
endothelial cells. The endothelial cells are tethered to surrounding tissue by protein 
filaments that keep the sac from collapsing. Unlike endothelium of blood capillar-
ies, the cells are not joined by tight junctions but have large gaps between them for 
passage of proteins, bacteria, and white blood cells.
Lymphatic
capillary
(a)
(b)
Tissue cell
Venule
Arteriole
Capillary bed
Tissue ﬂuid
Tissue ﬂuid
Endothelium
of lymphatic
capillary
Anchoring
ﬁlaments
Lymph
Opening
Figure 14.2 Lymphatic Capillaries. 
(a) Relationship of the lymphatic capillaries to a bed 
of blood capillaries. (b) Uptake of tissue fluid by a 
lymphatic capillary.
• Why can metastasizing cancer cells get into 
the lymphatic system more easily than they 
can enter the bloodstream?
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     469  

Drained
by right
lymphatic
duct
Drained
by 
thoracic 
duct
Thoracic lymph 
nodes
Thoracic duct
Right lymphatic duct
Azygos vein
Diaphragm
Right lumbar trunk
Left lumbar trunk
Intestinal trunk
Right 
lymphatic duct
Right 
subclavian 
vein
Axillary 
lymph 
nodes
Lymphatics
of breast
Internal
jugular veins
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.3 Edema. On the right is a 52-year-old woman with severe 
edema of the legs and feet; on the left, for comparison, is a 21-year-old 
woman without edema. Blockage of lymphatic vessels is one of several 
causes of edema.
© MedicImage/Alamy
Figure 14.4 Lymphatics of the 
Thoracic Region. (a) Lymphatics 
of the thorax and upper abdomen 
and their relationship to the subcla-
vian veins, where the lymph returns 
to the bloodstream. (b) Lymphatic 
drainage of the right mammary and 
axillary regions. (c) Regions of the 
body drained by the right lymphatic 
duct and thoracic duct. 
• Why are the axillary lymph 
nodes often biopsied in cases 
of breast cancer?
470      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Figure 14.5 Valves in the Lymphatic Vessels. 
(a) Photograph of a lymphatic valve. (b) Operation of 
the valves to ensure a one-way flow of lymph.
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
• What would be the consequence if these 
valves did not exist?
Lymph
Lymph ﬂows
forward through
open valves
(a)
(b)
Closed valves
prevent backﬂow
Valve
Overlapping edges of the endothelial cells act as valves that open and close 
depending on pressure in the surrounding tissue fluid. When tissue fluid pressure 
is high, the flaps are pushed inward (open) and fluid enters the lymphatic vessel. 
Inadequate fluid recovery from the tissues can result in edema, a swelling and 
puffiness due to fluid accumulation (fig. 14.3). Once recovered tissue fluid enters 
the lymphatic vessels, it is called lymph.
As lymphatic capillaries converge, they become larger vessels with differ-
ent names. Lymphatic capillaries converge to form thin collecting vessels. These 
converge to form six lymphatic trunks, each of which drains a major portion of 
the body. For example, the lumbar trunks drain the lumbar region as well as the 
lower limbs. All lymphatic trunks converge to form just two collecting ducts, 
the largest lymphatic vessels (fig. 14.4). The lesser of these, the right lymphatic 
duct, receives lymphatic drainage from the right side of the head and chest and 
from the right upper limb. It empties into the right subclavian vein. The other one, 
called the thoracic duct, is larger and longer. It receives lymphatic trunks that 
drain all of the body below the diaphragm; the left side of the head, neck, and 
chest; and the left upper limb. It empties into the left subclavian vein. Thus, both 
ducts return lymph to the bloodstream at the subclavians. In summary, the route 
from the tissue fluid back to the bloodstream is lymphatic capillaries → collect-
ing vessels → six lymphatic trunks → two collecting ducts → subclavian veins 
(see fig. 14.1). There is a continual recycling of fluid from blood to tissue fluid to 
lymph and back to the blood.
The larger lymphatic vessels are similar to veins in their structure, with a 
three-layered wall and valves that ensure a one-way flow of fluid (fig. 14.5). 
In contrast to blood, the lymph does not flow in response to a pump like the 
heart. As a result, it flows at even lower pressure and speed than venous blood, 
propelled by four mechanisms: (1) Lymphatic vessels contract rhythmically 
when flowing lymph stretches their walls. (2) Contracting skeletal muscles 
compress the lymphatics and move the lymph, like the skeletal muscle 
pump that moves venous blood. (3) Breathing creates pressure differ-
ences between the abdominal and thoracic cavities that cause lymph 
to flow upward into the thoracic lymphatics, in the same manner as 
the thoracic pump that aids venous blood flow (see section 13.5 for 
both the skeletal muscle and thoracic pumps). (4) Finally, at the 
point where the collecting ducts empty into the subclavian veins, 
the rapidly flowing bloodstream draws lymph into it. Given these 
mechanisms, it is easy to see why physical exercise significantly 
increases the rate of lymphatic return.
Lymph is similar to blood plasma but with less protein. Usu-
ally clear and colorless, its composition and characteristics vary 
somewhat from place to place. For example, lymph draining from 
the small intestine may have a milky appearance because it contains 
dietary lipids. In addition to proteins, lymph contains lymphocytes, 
macrophages, bacteria, viruses, cellular debris, and sometimes even 
traveling cancer cells.
Lymphatic Tissues
Lymphatic tissues are aggregations of lymphocytes in the connective tis-
sue of mucous membranes and various organs. Lymphatic tissue is particu-
larly abundant in body passages open to the exterior—the respiratory, diges-
tive, urinary, and reproductive tracts—where it is called mucosa-associated 
lymphatic tissue (MALT). It guards the body against environmental pathogens 
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     471  

entering the body orifices such as the nose, mouth, anus, vagina, and urethra. In 
other places, lymphocytes and macrophages congregate in dense masses called 
lymphatic nodules, which come and go as pathogens invade the tissues and the 
immune system answers the challenge. Abundant lymphatic nodules are a rela-
tively constant feature of lymph nodes, tonsils, and the appendix.
Lymphatic Organs
Lymphatic organs have well-defined anatomical sites and at least partial 
­connective tissue capsules that separate the lymphatic tissue from ­neighboring 
tissues. The principal lymphatic organs are the tonsils, thymus, spleen, and 
lymph nodes.
The Tonsils
The tonsils are patches of lymphatic tissue located at the entrance of the 
pharynx, where they guard against inhaled and ingested pathogens (fig. 14.6). 
Numerous lingual tonsils are concentrated in a patch on each side of the root 
of the tongue; a pair of palatine tonsils lies on the lateral walls of the poste-
rior oral cavity; and a single pharyngeal tonsil (adenoids) is found medially 
at the rear of the nasal cavity. Each tonsil has deep pits (tonsillar crypts) 
surrounded by lymphatic nodules. A partial capsule underlies each tonsil and 
separates it from deeper tissues, whereas the superficial surface of the tonsil 
is covered by the epithelium of the tongue or pharynx. Inflammation of the 
tonsils—most often the palatine—is called tonsillitis, and is characterized 
by redness, swelling, and pain. Tonsillitis used to be routinely treated by 
surgical removal of the tonsils (tonsillectomy) but is now usually treated with 
antibiotics.
Figure 14.6 The Tonsils. (a) Locations of the ton-
sils. (b) Histology of the palatine tonsil. 
b: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
(b)
Tonsillar crypts
Lymphatic
nodules
Pharyngeal
epithelium
Pharyngeal
tonsil
Palate
Palatine
tonsil
Lingual
tonsil
(a)
472      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

The Thymus
The thymus (fig. 14.7) is located between the heart and the base of the neck. The 
thymus is completely enclosed in a fibrous capsule. The interior of the thymus is 
divided into compartments called lobules, each of which has a relatively light center 
called the medulla, surrounded by a darker cortex. The lobules contain a network 
of interconnected epithelial cells and a large population of lymphocytes called T 
cells (T for thymus). The epithelial cells secrete thymosin and other hormones that 
promote the development and action of T cells. In the cortex, they help to form a 
blood–thymus barrier that isolates developing T cells from blood-borne antigens. 
The importance of thymic signaling molecules is demonstrated by the fact that if 
the thymus is removed from newborn mammals, they waste away and never develop 
immunity. Later in this chapter, we further examine the role of the thymus in matu-
ration of the T cells.
(a)
Right lobe
Trabecula
Left lobe
Lobule
Trabecula
Cortex
Medulla
(b)
(c)
Dendritic cell
Capsule
Trabecula
Epithelium
Cortex
Medulla
Medullary
epithelial cells
T lymphocytes
Cortical
epithelial cells
Macrophage
Figure 14.7 The Thymus. (a) Gross anatomy. 
(b) Histology. (c) Cellular architecture of a lobule. 
b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     473  

The Spleen
The spleen is the body’s largest lymphatic organ—up to 12 cm 
long and usually weighing about 150 g. It is located in the 
upper left abdomen, tucked snugly between the diaphragm, 
left kidney, and stomach (fig. 14.8). It has a medial slit, the 
hilum, where the splenic artery enters and the splenic 
vein leaves. The spleen’s major function is to filter the 
blood and cleanse it of bacteria and other foreign mat-
ter. It is densely stuffed with lymphocytes and macro-
phages, which monitor the blood for pathogens. The 
spleen houses a large army of monocytes, which it 
releases in response to wounds, heart attacks, or 
microbial infection. The monocytes help to combat 
pathogens and repair damaged tissues. The spleen 
is also known as the “erythrocyte graveyard”; old, 
fragile RBCs rupture as they squeeze through 
its capillary walls. RBC components such as the 
membrane fragments are disposed of and free 
hemoglobin travels to the nearby liver for break-
down and iron recycling. Furthermore, as we’ll 
see later in this chapter, erythrocytes transport for-
eign antigens to the spleen where the antigens are 
stripped off and disposed of by the spleen’s mac-
rophages.
The spleen is highly vascular and vulnerable to 
trauma and infection. A ruptured spleen can hemor-
rhage fatally, but is difficult to repair surgically. There-
fore, a once-common procedure in such cases was its 
removal, splenectomy. A person can live without a spleen, 
but people with splenectomies are more susceptible to infec-
tions and premature death, and splenectomy is now performed 
less commonly than it used to be. 
Diaphragm
Spleen
Splenic artery
Splenic vein
Pancreas
Kidney
Inferior vena
cava
Aorta
Common iliac
arteries
(a)
(b)
Inferior
Splenic
vein
Splenic
artery
Hilum
Superior
Clinical Application 14.1
LYMPH NODES AND METASTATIC CANCER
Metastasis is the phenomenon in which cancer cells break free of the original 
primary tumor, travel to other sites of the body, and establish new tumors. 
Gaps in the walls of lymphatic capillaries allow cancer cells to enter and travel 
in the lymph. The abnormal cells eventually lodge in a lymph node, multiply 
there, and destroy it. Cancerous lymph nodes are swollen, relatively firm, and 
usually painless. Cancer of a lymph node is called lymphoma.
Once a tumor is established in one node, cells may emigrate and travel to 
the next node. If the cancer is detected early enough, it may be eradicated by 
removing not only the primary tumor, but the lymph nodes downstream from 
that point. For example, breast cancer is often treated with a combination of 
lumpectomy (removing the primary tumor and surrounding tissue from the 
breast) or mastectomy (removing the entire breast) and removal of nearby axil-
lary lymph nodes. 
Figure 14.8 The Spleen.  (a) Position of the 
spleen in the left upper quadrant of the abdomi-
nal cavity. (b) Gross anatomy of the medial surface. 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer
474      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Artery
and vein
Eﬀerent
lymphatic
vessel
Aﬀerent 
lymphatic
vessels
Medullary sinus
Medullary cord
Capsule
Reticular tissue
Cortex
Lymphatic nodule
Medulla
Figure 14.9 Anatomy of a Lymph Node. 
Partially bisected lymph node showing pathway of 
lymph flow. 
Lymph Nodes
Lymph nodes are the most numerous lymphatic organs, numbering in the hun-
dreds (see fig. 14.1). They lie along the course of the lymphatic vessels and 
serve essentially to filter and cleanse the lymph as it flows on its way back to 
the bloodstream, and to detect and activate an immune response to microbes or 
other disease agents that may have been picked up from the tissue fluid. In order 
to do so, they need both incoming (afferent) and outgoing (efferent) lymphatic 
vessels; all other lymphatic organs have efferent lymphatics only. Lymph nodes 
are especially concentrated in the neck (cervical region), armpit (axillary region), 
groin (inguinal region), mediastinum, and mesenteries around the intestines, with 
smaller clusters in the bend of the elbow and knee. Infections often result in swol-
len lymph nodes that can be palpated in the neck, armpit, knee, or groin. Lymph 
nodes also are common sites of metastatic cancer, since loose cancer cells can 
travel in the lymph, lodge in the nearest node, and seed the growth of a new tumor 
(see Clinical Application 14.1).
A lymph node (fig. 14.9) is a small elongated or bean-shaped structure, usually 
less than 3 cm long, embedded in fat or other connective tissue. About two-thirds of 
the node has a convex surface that receives several afferent lymphatics. The oppo-
site concave surface has a slit called the hilum where the efferent lymphatics, usually 
one to three in number, leave the node. Small arteries and veins enter and leave the 
node at the hilum as well.
The node is enclosed in a fibrous capsule with septa that penetrate and loosely 
compartmentalize its interior. The interior is divided into a relatively light-staining 
and loosely organized medulla just inside the hilum, encircled by a darker, C-shaped 
cortex in the convex regions of the node. The lymphocytes in the cortex are arranged 
in ovoid lymphatic nodules, whereas in the medulla they are arranged in elongated 
medullary cords with lymph-filled sinuses between them. The dense concentra-
tion of lymphocytes in the node, especially in the cortex, give the tissue a granular 
appearance. Lymphocytes multiply profusely in the nodes, which are a major source 
of lymphocytes entering the bloodstream.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     475  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 List the primary functions and four major components 
of the lymphatic system.
2.	How does fluid get into the lymphatic system? What prevents 
it from draining back out?
3.	What is the difference between a lymphatic tissue and a lym-
phatic organ? Give an example of each.
4.	List the lymphatic organs and describe the location, structure, 
and function of each.
5.	What two functions are performed by macrophages and lym-
phocytes found in a lymph node? 
14.2  Innate Immunity
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
  a.	define immune system, innate immunity, and adaptive immunity;
b.	explain the types and importance of physical barriers in defense 
against pathogens;
  c.	enumerate the defensive functions of each kind of white blood cell;
d.	describe the role of the complement system;
e.	explain the process of inflammation; and
   f.	discuss the mechanism, benefits, and drawbacks of fever.
Apply What You Know
Why is it important that afferent and efferent lymphatic vessels ensure that lymph 
only flows one way in the lymph node?
Flowing lymph typically passes through one node after another as it finds its 
way to the subclavian veins, where it reenters the bloodstream. In addition to lym-
phocytes, the node is populated by phagocytic macrophages. They remove about 
99% of the impurities that enter the node (microbes, tissue debris, and other such 
matter), so by the time the lymph has flowed through a series of nodes and empties 
into the blood, it is essentially devoid of foreign matter but has numerous lympho-
cytes that it contributes to the blood. 
In addition to simple filtration and phagocytosis, the lymph nodes monitor the 
collected tissue fluid for foreign antigens—macromolecules that activate immune 
responses. If a macrophage detects and phagocytizes an antigen, it digests it and 
displays molecular fragments of it bound to proteins on its surface. Lympho-
cytes detect these displayed fragments and begin an immune response detailed 
later in this chapter. The macrophages and certain other cells are called antigen-­
presenting cells (APCs) for this behavior. More about their role in immunity will be  
said later.
476      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Figure 14.10 Macrophage Phagocytizing 
Bacteria. Filamentous pseudopods of the macro-
phages snare the rod-shaped bacteria and draw 
them to the cell surface, where they are phagocy-
tized.
© David M. Phillips/Science Source
Macrophage
Pseudopods
Bacteria
Infectious diseases have long ravaged human populations, from the bubonic plague in 
medieval times, to the invasion of smallpox that killed large numbers of indigenous 
people in the Americas when it was introduced by Europeans, to the shadow of ebola 
that has recently haunted parts of Africa. The agents of infectious disease are called 
pathogens, and range from viruses and bacteria to fungi and parasitic worms. Our first 
line of defense against such pathogens is our skin and mucous membranes—physical 
barriers to invasion. If these barriers are broken, pathogens penetrate the body tissues 
and other elements of the immune system are called upon to protect us.
The immune system consists of physical barriers, immune cells, antimicrobial 
proteins, and other mechanisms that neutralize and destroy pathogens, ideally before 
they cause disease. These defenses are divided into innate immunity and adaptive 
immunity. Innate immunity consists of a variety of defenses that we are born with. 
Its barriers and protective cells indiscriminately hinder and attack foreign invad-
ers and promote processes such as inflammation and fever that usually inactivate 
pathogens. Some infections, however, overpower the innate immune response, and 
­adaptive immunity is activated. It increases the power to focus on the specific 
type of pathogen that has invaded and adapts to its unique characteristics. It also 
leaves our body with a memory of the pathogen so we can react more quickly and 
efficiently if we should encounter it again. These immune defenses keep us healthy 
most of the time, despite our constant exposure to diverse pathogens. 
Physical Barriers
The body is especially vulnerable to invasion in places where internal passages open 
to the exterior environment—the nose, mouth, anus, urethra, and vagina. The mucous 
membranes that line our respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive tracts, and 
the skin that covers the body, are physical barriers that microbes cannot easily breach.
Several features make the skin an especially effective barrier. The epidermal 
cells are joined by tight junctions and are composed mainly of keratin, a tough 
protein that is difficult to penetrate. Furthermore, the skin surface is inhospitable 
for microbial growth. It is mostly dry, whereas microbes prefer a moist environ-
ment, and it lacks nutrients conducive to their survival. A thin film of acidic sweat 
and antimicrobial chemicals also retards pathogen growth and survival. Mucous 
membranes, too, are difficult to penetrate because of tight junctions between the 
epithelial cells; because the mucus itself is sticky and entraps microbes; and because 
the mucus contains lysozyme, an enzyme that destroys bacteria.
Protective Cells
Nevertheless, the foregoing barriers are not completely impenetrable. Wounds or insect 
bites may breach the skin, for example, and the mucous membranes of the internal sur-
faces may be torn or irritated. Every time we brush our teeth, we create microscopic 
abrasions of the gums that invite invasion by the many microbes of the oral cavity. If 
microbes get past such physical barriers, they are attacked by macrophages and other 
phagocytes that have a voracious appetite for foreign matter, and they are assaulted by 
toxic chemicals produced by white blood cells (fig. 14.10). 
The five types of leukocytes were described and pictured in section 12.3. Fol-
lowing is a summary of their most important immune roles.
∙	 Neutrophils move in large numbers to sites of infection where they recognize 
and destroy microorganisms, especially bacteria. They not only voraciously 
phagocytize bacteria but also secrete a chemical killing zone of lethal chemi-
cals, including hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorite, the active ingredient 
found in chlorine bleach. This cloud of toxic chemicals kills significantly more 
microbes than phagocytosis does, but also kills the neutrophils themselves.
∙	 Eosinophils weaken or destroy parasites too large for phagocytosis, respond 
to allergens, and phagocytize and remove antigen–antibody complexes from 
the tissues.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     477  

∙	 Basophils secrete histamine and heparin—a vasodilator and anticoagulant, 
respectively—which enhance the delivery of blood and immune cells to sites 
of infection or inflammation.
∙	 Lymphocytes are of several types with varied roles explained in the ensuing 
discussion of adaptive immunity, including secretion of antibodies, direct at-
tacks on pathogenic microbes, and destruction of infected and cancerous cells.
∙	 Monocytes transform to macrophages in connective tissues, where they func-
tion as phagocytes and as messengers to cells that activate adaptive immunity 
when it is necessary.
Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that contribute to the innate 
immune response. They continually patrol the body “on the lookout” for patho-
gens or diseased host cells. They attack and destroy bacteria, cells infected with 
viruses, cancer cells, and cells of transplanted tissues and organs. Upon recogni-
tion of an enemy cell, the NK cell binds to it and releases proteins called per-
forins (fig. 14.11). This is a “kiss of death”—it creates a hole in the enemy cell 
membrane that allows a rapid inflow of water and salts. This alone may kill 
the cell, but in addition, the NK cell secretes protein-degrading enzymes that 
enter through the hole, destroy the enemy’s enzymes, and induce apoptosis (pro-
grammed cell death). This is part of our innate immunity; it doesn’t rely on prior 
exposure to a pathogen, and it has no memory of prior exposures. This distin-
guishes the action of NK cells from those of other lymphocytes discussed later 
(T and B cells).
Protective Proteins
Multiple types of proteins provide short-term, nonspecific resistance to patho-
gens. Interferons are a family of proteins secreted by cells in response to 
infection by viruses. They signal nearby cells to produce other proteins that 
inhibit viral replication. In addition, they activate natural killer (NK) cells, 
which destroy infected cells before they can liberate a swarm of newly repli-
cated viruses.
The complement system is a group of 30 or more proteins synthesized mainly 
by the liver. They circulate in the blood in an inactive form; when activated by 
pathogens, they initiate a complex cascade of chemical events, which ultimately 
leads to the demise of invading microbes. They were named for the fact that they 
complement the action of the antibodies that we will study shortly, but they also 
contribute to innate immunity. Their effects are to stimulate inflammation, to pro-
mote phagocytosis of pathogens by neutrophils and macrophages, and to attack and 
rupture cells that have been invaded.
Figure 14.11 The Action of a Natural 
Killer Cell.
NK cell
Perforins
Enzymes
Macrophage
Enemy cell
NK cell releases perforins,
which make a hole in the
enemy cell membrane.
1
Enzymes from NK cell 
enter perforin hole and
degrade enemy cell 
enzymes.
2
Enemy cell dies by 
apoptosis.
3
Macrophage engulfs and
digests dying cell.
4
478      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Protective Processes
Inflammation
When you suffer a local infection, a splinter in the skin, a tissue irritation such as blis-
ters from tight shoes, or just an itchy mosquito bite, you may notice redness, swelling, 
heat, and pain in the affected tissue. Those signs and symptoms have traditionally 
been called the four cardinal signs of the defensive process called ­inflammation. 
Words ending in the suffix -itis denote inflammation of specific organs and tissues—
for example, arthritis is inflammation of the joints, dermatitis pertains to the skin, 
and gingivitis is inflammation of the gums. The purposes of inflammation are to 
(1) rapidly bring phagocytes and immune proteins to the infected area, (2) remove the 
debris of damaged tissue, and (3) initiate tissue healing and repair.
Almost immediately after invasion by a microorganism, blood vessels dilate 
and blood flow to the area increases. Tissue damage stimulates basophils of the 
blood and similar mast cells in the connective tissue to release the vasodilator hista-
mine. The cardinal signs of inflammation result from these early responses: (1) Heat 
and (2) redness result from the increased blood flow; (3) swelling (edema) is due to 
increased fluid filtration from the capillaries; and (4) pain results from direct injury 
to the nerves, pressure on the nerves from the edema, and stimulation of pain recep-
tors by lipids called prostaglandins.
The increased blood flow rapidly delivers an army of defensive WBCs. The leu-
kocytes wreak destruction upon pathogens that have invaded the body. Neutrophils 
are the chief enemies of bacteria. Figure 14.12 summarizes their action. Normally, 
neutrophils and other leukocytes travel rapidly through capillaries and don’t linger to 
­interact with endothelial cells. During infections, however, endothelial cells produce 
cell-­adhesion molecules that snag the WBCs as they pass in the bloodstream, caus-
ing them to slowly tumble along the endothelium. Adhesion to the vessel wall gives 
WBCs time to check for signals from nearby injured or infected tissues. In the mean-
time, chemicals cause the endothelial cells of the blood capillaries and venules to sepa-
rate a little, widening the intercellular gaps and permitting the WBCs to crawl through 
in a process called diapedesis. The increased permeability also permits fluid, antibod-
ies, and clotting factors and complement proteins to move into the surrounding tissue.
Within an hour of injury or infection, neutrophils begin to accumulate in 
inflamed tissue and home in on the affected site by chemotaxis, moving up a “scent 
trail” of chemicals released by bacteria and injured tissues. As they encounter bac-
teria, neutrophils avidly phagocytize and digest them and produce the chemical kill-
ing zone described earlier. They also secrete signaling chemicals that recruit more 
WBCs, especially monocytes, to the scene.
One priority of inflammation is to prevent pathogens from spreading through-
out the body. Pathogens are physically trapped by clots that form in areas adjacent to 
the injury; a sticky mesh of fibrin walls off the area, so bacteria and other microbes 
are essentially trapped in a fluid pocket surrounded by a gelatinous, clotted capsule. 
This makes it difficult for them to escape the attacks by phagocytes, antibodies, and 
other defenses.
The battle leaves an aftermath of tissue destruction. Monocytes are the major agents 
of tissue cleanup and repair, arriving within 8 to 12 hours of injury. They emigrate from 
the bloodstream and turn into macrophages. Macrophages engulf and destroy bacteria 
and other pathogens, damaged host cells, and dead and dying neutrophils.
As the battle progresses, all the neutrophils and most of the macrophages die. 
The dead cells, tissue debris, and tissue fluid form a milky pool of pus. Pus is usu-
ally absorbed, but sometimes it accumulates in a cavity called an abscess1 that may 
have to be drained.
Edema also contributes to tissue cleanup. Swelling compresses veins and 
reduces venous drainage, while it forces open the valves of lymphatic ­capillaries 
1ab = away; scess (from cedere) = to go
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     479  

Splinter
Bacteria
From
bacteria
From
damaged
tissues
From
blood
Inﬂammatory
chemicals
1
2
Chemotaxis
3
Phagocytosis
4
Neutrophils
Blood capillary
or venule
Adhesion
Diapedesis
Epidermis
and promotes lymphatic drainage. The lymphatic vessels collect and remove bac-
teria, dead cells, proteins, and tissue debris better than blood capillaries can.
Vasodilation promotes healing by speeding the delivery of oxygen and amino 
acids necessary for protein synthesis. Endothelial cells and platelets release 
chemicals that stimulate tissue regrowth. Meanwhile, the heat of inflamed tissue 
increases the metabolic rate and the speed of mitosis and tissue repair. Pain also 
contributes to recovery. It is an alarm signal that calls our attention to the injury 
and causes us to limit the use of a body part so it has a chance to rest and heal.
Fever
Fever is an abnormal elevation of body temperature resulting from such causes as 
infection, trauma, and drug reactions. It was long regarded as an undesirable side 
effect of illness, and efforts were (and still are) made to reduce it for the sake of 
comfort. It is now recognized, however, as a defensive mechanism that, in modera-
tion, does more good than harm. People recover from colds and other infectious 
diseases more quickly when they allow a fever to run its course rather than using 
fever-reducing medications such as aspirin.
When neutrophils and macrophages phagocytize bacteria, they secrete a 
­pyrogen,2 or fever-producing agent, that stimulates the hypothalamus to secrete a 
2pyro = fire, heat; gen = producing
Figure 14.12 Neutrophil Behavior in Inflam-
mation. Tissue injury and infection cause release 
of inflammatory chemicals from bacteria, the blood, 
and the damaged tissues themselves. Inflammatory 
chemicals stimulate neutrophils to adhere to the 
capillary wall, leave the bloodstream through gaps 
between the capillary cells (diapedesis), follow the 
chemical trail by chemotaxis, and phagocytize (en-
gulf) bacteria.
480      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

prostaglandin. The prostaglandin, in turn, raises the hypothalamic set point for body 
temperature—say to 39°C (102°F) instead of 37°F. Aspirin and ibuprofen reduce 
fever by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis.
When the set point rises, the cutaneous blood vessels constrict to reduce heat 
loss and a person may shiver to generate heat. During the onset of a fever, one 
experiences chills, feels cold and clammy to the touch, and has a rising tempera-
ture (fig. 14.13). In the next stage, the body temperature hovers around the higher 
set point for as long as the pathogen is present. The elevated temperature inhibits 
reproduction by bacteria and viruses, promotes interferon activity, and increases 
metabolic rate and speeds tissue repair. When the infection is defeated, pyrogen 
secretion ceases and the hypothalamic thermostat is set back to normal. This acti-
vates heat-losing mechanisms, especially cutaneous vasodilation and sweating. 
The skin is warm and flushed during this stage. The result is falling temperature 
until it returns to normal.
Even though most fevers are beneficial, excessively high temperature can be 
dangerous. It speeds up enzymatic pathways, thus disrupting metabolic coordina-
tion and leading to cellular dysfunction. Fevers above 40.5°C (105°F) can make a 
person delirious. Convulsions and coma ensue at higher temperatures, and death or 
irreversible brain damage commonly results from fevers that range from 44° to 46°C 
(111° to 115°F).
Normal body 
temperature
Infection and 
pyrogen secretion
1
Temperature (°C)
37
39
38
Hypothalamic
thermostat is 
reset to higher
set point
2
Body temperature rises
Body temperature 
oscillates around
new set point
4
3
Infection ends,
set point returns
to normal
Body temperature
returns to normal
5
6
Figure 14.13 The Course of a Fever.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
6.	List several features that make the skin an effective 
barrier against pathogens.
7.	 Explain the roles of macrophages, natural killer (NK) cells, and 
neutrophils in innate immune defense.
8.	How do interferons and complement proteins protect against 
disease?
9.	Explain the causes of the four cardinal signs of inflammation.
10.	How does inflammation promote the destruction of pathogens?
11.	List three benefits of fever.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     481  

14.3  Features of Adaptive Immunity
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
 a.	compare and contrast adaptive and innate immunity;
b.	contrast cellular immunity and humoral immunity;
  c.	explain what antigens are and discuss their role in immunity;
d.	describe the role played by lymphocytes in the immune 
­response; 
 e.	compare and contrast the developmental processes of T and 
B lymphocytes;
 f  .	 describe the structure and function of antibodies; and
g.	explain the role of antigen-presenting cells in immunity.
The rest of this chapter is concerned with adaptive immunity, which relies on the 
body’s ability to recognize foreign substances individually, respond to them selec-
tively, and remember them so it can defeat them more quickly in future exposures. 
Two characteristics distinguish adaptive immunity from innate immunity:
	 1.	 Specificity. Adaptive immunity is directed against a particular pathogen. Im-
munity to one pathogen doesn’t usually confer immunity to others. A person 
may be immune to measles but still susceptible to polio, for example.
	 2.	 Memory. When reexposed to the same pathogen, the body reacts so quickly 
that there is no noticeable illness. The reaction time for inflammation and 
other innate defenses, by contrast, is just as long for later exposures as for the 
initial one.
There are two forms of adaptive immunity: cellular and humoral. Cellular 
(­cell-mediated) immunity employs lymphocytes that directly attack and destroy for-
eign cells or diseased host cells. It is a means to rid the body of pathogens that reside 
inside our cells, where they are inaccessible to attack by antibodies—for example, 
intracellular bacteria, viruses, yeasts, and protozoans. Cellular immunity also acts 
against parasitic worms, cancer cells, and cells of transplanted organs and tissues.
Humoral (antibody-mediated) immunity employs antibodies, which don’t 
directly destroy a pathogen but tag it for destruction by other mechanisms. The 
term humoral comes from the fact that many of the antibodies are dissolved in body 
fluids, once called “humors.” Humoral immunity is effective against extracellular 
microbes and noncellular entities such as toxins, venoms, and allergens.
Both forms rely on the body’s ability to recognize specific foreign invaders and 
mount a targeted response to them. How this occurs is the focus of the following 
sections. Before we address those mechanisms (the “plot”), let us look at the “cast 
of characters” that play various roles in the drama of immunity.
Antigens
An antigen3 is any molecule that triggers an immune response. Some antigens are 
components of plasma membranes and bacterial cell walls; others are venoms or 
toxins. Most antigens are complex molecules unique to each organism—usually 
proteins, polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or glycolipids. Their uniqueness enables 
3acronym from antibody generating
482      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

the body to distinguish its own (“self”) molecules from those of any other indi-
vidual or organism (“nonself”). The immune system “learns” to distinguish self- 
from nonself-antigens prior to birth; thereafter, it normally attacks only nonself-
antigens.
Small molecules such as simple sugars and amino acids are not generally anti-
genic. They are too universal to all individuals (and species) to help the immune sys-
tem distinguish self from nonself; if the immune system did attack them, it would be 
attacking substances on which our lives depend. However, certain small molecules 
called haptens6 become antigenic by binding to proteins of one’s own body, creat-
ing an antigenic complex. After the first exposure, the hapten alone can activate 
an allergic response. Haptens include penicillin and some other drugs, and various 
chemicals in cosmetics, detergents, industrial chemicals, animal dander, and poison 
ivy (Clinical Application 14.2).
Lymphocytes
The two broad categories of lymphocytes involved in adaptive immunity are T and 
B lymphocytes. T lymphocytes are named for the thymus, where they spend time as 
part of their maturation process. B lymphocytes are named for an organ (bursa) in 
Clinical Application 14.2
HYPERSENSITIVITY, ALLERGIES, AND ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
Hypersensitivity is an excessive, harmful immune reaction to antigens. It in-
cludes reactions to tissues and organs transplanted from another person, abnor-
mal reactions to one’s own tissues (autoimmunity), and allergies,4 which are 
reactions to environmental antigens. Such antigens, called allergens, occur in 
dust; mold; animal dander; toxins from poison oak and other plants; and foods 
such as nuts, eggs, shellfish, and gluten, a protein in wheat flour and some other 
grain products. Drugs such as penicillin are allergenic to some people.
Hypersensitivity may be characterized by a very rapid, acute response, or 
may exhibit a slower onset (1–3 hours after exposure) and last longer (10–15 
hours). The most common allergies are acute in nature and begin seconds after 
exposure. They usually subside after 30 minutes but can be severe or even 
fatal. Allergens bind to the membranes of basophils and stimulate secretion 
of histamine and other inflammatory chemicals that trigger glandular secre-
tion, vasodilation, increased capillary permeability, smooth muscle spasms, 
and other effects. The clinical signs include local edema, mucus hypersecre-
tion, watery eyes, runny nose, hives (red itchy skin), and sometimes breathing 
problems, cramps, diarrhea, and vomiting. Examples of acute sensitivity are 
asthma (see Clinical Application 15.1) and food allergies.
Anaphylaxis5 (AN-uh-fih-LAC-sis) is an immediate and sometimes se-
vere acute reaction. Local anaphylaxis can be relieved with antihistamines. 
Anaphylactic shock, however, is a widespread hypersensitivity characterized 
by dyspnea (labored breathing), widespread vasodilation, and a sudden drop 
in blood pressure that can lead to circulatory shock. Extreme cases can cause 
death due to suffocation or circulatory shock. Antihistamines are inadequate 
to counter anaphylactic shock, but epinephrine relieves symptoms by dilating 
bronchioles, increasing cardiac output, and restoring blood pressure.
4allo = altered; erg = action, reaction 
5ana = against; phylax = protection 
6hapt = grasp, seize
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     483  

chickens where they were discovered, but the B can serve as a reminder that they 
remain in the bone marrow throughout their maturation process. Once mature, both 
types populate the lymph nodes, mucous membranes, and other lymphatic tissues 
and organs throughout the body, and remain on constant surveillance for pathogens. 
They have the ability to recognize and respond to an almost limitless variety of for-
eign agents. In addition, T cells specialize in recognizing and destroying body cells 
that have gone awry and become cancerous.
T Lymphocytes
T lymphocytes (T cells) have a life history involving three stages and anatomical 
stations in the body. We can loosely think of these as their “birth,” their “training” 
or maturation, and finally their “deployment” to locations where they will carry out 
their immune functions.
T cells are “born” in the red bone marrow as descendants of the hemopoietic stem 
cells described in section 12.1. Immature T cells travel from the bone marrow to the 
thymus, where they mature into fully functional T cells (fig. 14.14). Their “training” 
in the thymus is a complex multistep process. The essence of it is that young T cells 
develop antigen receptors on the cell surface and are then tested to see if they will 
respond to foreign antigens and yet not react against one’s self-antigens. About 98% 
of them fail this test (and you thought your final exams were hard!)—either they fail 
to respond to foreign antigens or they overreact to self-antigens, signifying that they 
could be harmful to one’s own tissues. These self-reactive cells are destroyed or ren-
dered inactive, leaving only 2% with the ability to respond selectively to foreign anti-
gens. Now considered to be immunocompetent but self-­tolerant, they multiply and 
build up a huge population of T cells. They now “graduate from school” and disperse 
to the lymph nodes and other organs, ready to do battle.
T cells mature mostly during fetal life and early childhood. The thymus gradu-
ally atrophies as a person ages, but it continues to produce thymosin, a hormone that 
promotes the proliferation of T cells throughout the body.
Figure 14.14 The Life History and Migrations 
of B and T Cells. T cells are represented by the 
red pathways and B cells by the violet. (a) B cells 
achieve immunocompetence in the red bone 
­marrow (left), and many emigrate to lymphatic tis-
sues and organs, including the lymph nodes, ton-
sils, and spleen (right). (b) Plasma cells develop in 
the lymph nodes and other sites, then migrate back 
to the bone marrow and to other lymphatic organs, 
where they spend a few days secreting antibod-
ies. (c) T stem cells migrate from the bone mar-
row and attain immunocompetence in the thymus. 
(d)  ­Immunocompetent T cells emigrate from the 
­thymus and recolonize the bone marrow or colonize 
various lymphatic organs (right).
B cells
Immunocompetent
T cells
(b)
(b)
(b)
Lymph
nodes
Plasma
cells
Plasma
cells
T stem
cells
Thymus
Red bone marrow
(d)
(d)
(c)
(a)
Spleen
Other lymphatic tissues and organs
Tonsils
Cellular immunity
Humoral immunity
Key
484      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

B Lymphocytes
B lymphocytes (B cells) mature in the bone marrow, but they undergo a similar 
process of testing and selection, then likewise disperse and colonize lymphatic 
tissues and organs throughout the body (fig. 14.14). B cells are abundant in 
lymph nodes, mucous membranes, and the spleen. They differ from T cells 
in their mode of attack against foreign invaders, as we will soon see in more 
detail.
Antibodies
Pathogens may be found either in infected cells or outside cells in extracellular 
fluid. In humoral immunity, activated B cells differentiate into plasma cells. 
These cells secrete proteins called antibodies, which bind to pathogens and ulti-
mately lead to their destruction. Antibodies are also known as ­immunoglobulins 
(Ig) or gamma globulins. The basic structural unit of an antibody is a Y-shaped 
protein with four polypeptide chains—two heavy chains about 400 amino acids 
long and the two light chains about half that long (fig. 14.15). The arms have 
a terminal variable (V) region that determines what antigens an antibody will 
bind to, and the rest of the antibody is a constant (C) region that determines the 
functional class to which an antibody belongs. There are five classes of antibod-
ies named IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM, which differ in their functions (table 
14.1). The human immune system is believed to be capable of producing at least 
10 billion and perhaps up to 1 trillion different antibodies. Any one individual 
has a much smaller subset of these, but nevertheless, such diversity helps to 
explain why we can deal with the staggering diversity of antigens that exist in 
our environment. 
Antigen-Presenting Cells
T lymphocytes cannot recognize unprocessed antigens; they must first be 
introduced to them by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that process and dis-
play antigen fragments. Antigen-presenting cells include macrophages of 
various kinds, dendritic cells of the skin and mucous membranes, and even 
B lymphocytes, which can play an antigen-presenting role in addition to their 
other functions.
When an APC encounters an antigen, it internalizes it by phagocytosis, digests 
it with lysosomal enzymes, and displays the relevant (antigenic) fragments attached 
Figure 14.15 Antibody Structure. A molecule 
of IgG.
Variable
(V) regions
Constant
(C) regions
Light chain
Antigen-binding
site
Heavy chain
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     485  

Table 14.1  Antibody Classes
Class
Location and Function
IgA
Found in blood plasma, mucus, tears, milk, saliva, and intestinal secretions. 
Provides passive immunity to the newborn.
IgD
A membrane protein of B cells; thought to function in activation of B cells 
by antigens.
IgE
A membrane protein of basophils and mast cells. Stimulates them to release 
histamine and other chemical mediators of inflammation and allergy; important 
in hypersensitivity reactions; attracts eosinophils to sites of parasitic infection.
IgG
Constitutes about 80% of circulating antibodies in blood plasma. IgG and IgM 
are responsible for most adaptive immune responses against invaders.
IgM
Constitutes about 10% of circulating antibodies in plasma. When found in the 
membrane of B cells, it acts as part of the antigen receptor. It is also secreted 
by the cell in the first part of the immune response.
Figure 14.16 The Action of Antigen-­
Presenting Cells (APCs). Stages in the 
processing and presentation of an antigen 
by an APC such as a macrophage. 
Phagocytosis
of antigen
Lysosome
Antigen
residue is 
voided by 
exocytosis
Processed 
antigen
fragments 
displayed on
macrophage
surface
Antigen
fragments
2
3
4
5
6
1
Antigen and
enzyme mix
Antigen is
degraded
Lysosome
fuses with
phagocytic 
vesicle
to proteins on its surface (fig. 14.16). This is like an invitation to the immune system 
to launch an attack on the antigenic invader. We shall see shortly how the immune 
cells respond in different forms of adaptive immunity.
With so many cell types involved in immunity, it is no surprise that chemical 
messengers are required to coordinate their activities. Lymphocytes and APCs com-
municate with a great variety of chemical signals called interleukins.7
7inter = between; leuk = leukocytes
486      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

14.4  Cellular and Humoral Immunity
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the types of lymphocytes involved in cellular immunity and 
describe the roles they play;
b.	describe the process of antigen presentation and T cell 
­activation;
c.	describe how T cells destroy infected cells;
d.	explain how humoral immunity differs from cellular immunity;
e.	explain how B cells recognize and respond to an antigen;
  f.	describe how antibodies lead to destruction of pathogens; 
g.	explain the role of memory cells in immunity; and
h.	compare and contrast active and passive immunity.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	List two ways in which adaptive immunity differs from 
innate immunity.
13.	What are the two forms of adaptive immunity?
14.	Define antigen and explain what role antigens have in ­immunity.
15.	What role does the thymus play in the life history of a T cell?
16.	State at least two differences between B cells and T cells.
17.	 Describe the structure, location, and basic function of 
­antibodies.
18.	Describe how antigen-presenting cells process an antigen.
The two forms of adaptive immunity, cellular and humoral, differ in the types of 
lymphocytes involved and their mode of attack. Thus, they are not redundant but 
complementary methods of defeating pathogens and remembering them so those 
pathogens are less able to make one ill in the future.
Cellular Immunity
Cellular (cell-mediated) immunity is a form of specific defense in which T lympho-
cytes directly attack and destroy cells that have become infected or turned cancer-
ous. The sacrifice of infected cells prevents the spread of infection to healthy cells. 
The main classes of T cells involved in cellular immunity follow.
	 1.	 Cytotoxic T (TC) cells are “effector” cells that selectively carry out the attack 
on infected or cancerous cells.
	 2.	 Helper T (TH) cells promote the action of TC cells, but also play key roles in 
humoral immunity and nonspecific defense.
	 3.	 Memory T (TM) cells are descended from the cytotoxic T cells and are re-
sponsible for “remembering” the pathogen that infected the destroyed cells.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     487  

Both cellular and humoral immunity occur in three stages: recognition, attack, 
and memory (or “the three Rs of immunity”—recognize, react, and remember). In 
cellular immunity, the key events of each stage are as follows (fig. 14.17). 
	 1	 Recognition. Cytotoxic and helper T cells patrol the lymph nodes and 
other tissues, inspecting the body’s cells as though looking for trouble. If 
a cell is diseased—for example, if it is infected with a virus or it has turned 
­malignant—it will exhibit abnormal host (self) antigens on its surface. If a 
cytotoxic T (TC) cell detects this, it is activated; it multiplies rapidly and 
produces a clone of itself—a large number of identical TC cells programmed 
against that antigen. This process is called clonal selection. Antigen-present-
ing cells (APCs), by contrast, display foreign antigens on their surface, such 
as antigens from bacteria and other invaders of the body. Helper T (TH) cells 
respond to these by secreting chemical signals (interleukins) with multiple 
effects: They attract “reinforcements” to the battlefield (neutrophils, mac-
rophages, and natural killer cells), and they stimulate clonal selection and 
maturation of T and B cells as illustrated. (We will discuss the B cells later 
and focus on the T cells for now.)
Figure 14.17 The Three Stages of Cellular 
Immunity.
Clonal
selection
Antigen
Antigen
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TH
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TC
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
TM
Memory
T cells
Cytotoxic
T cell clone
Enemy
cell
Infected or
malignant cell
Antigen-
presenting cell
Cytotoxic
chemicals
Lethal hit
Reexposure
T cell
recall response
Enemy cell
Destruction
Recognition
1
Attack
2
Memory
3
Interleukins
488      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

T cell
Dying cancer cell
Figure 14.18 T Cell Attack.  Four cytotoxic T cells 
have bound to this cancer cell and delivered a lethal 
hit of toxic chemicals that will destroy it. 
 
© Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source
Figure 14.19 The Central Role of Helper 
T Cells in Immunity. 
Interleukin
Interleukin
Macrophage activity
Leukocyte chemotaxis
Inﬂammation
Clonal
selection 
of B cells
Clonal selection
of cytotoxic 
T cells
Innate
immunity
Humoral
immunity
Cellular
immunity
APC
Helper T
(T4) cell
Macrophage-
activating factor
	 2	 Attack. An army of T cells now goes on the attack against the enemy 
cells. TC cells are the only lymphocytes that attack and kill enemy 
cells directly. A TC cells “docks” on the enemy cell surface and 
delivers a lethal hit of chemicals that will destroy it (fig. 14.18), 
then goes off in search of other enemy cells, leaving these 
chemicals behind to do their work. The toxic chemicals include 
(a) perforins and granzymes, which destroy a cell in the man-
ner we saw earlier for natural killer (NK) cells (see fig. 14.11); 
(b) interferons, which inhibit the replication of viruses and 
activate NK cells, among other effects; and (c) tumor necro-
sis factor, which aids in macrophage activation and kills can-
cer cells, sometimes seeming to miraculously “melt away” 
malignant tumors. As helper T cells recruit more and more 
TC cells, the immune response exerts an overwhelming force 
against malignant and infected cells or foreign pathogens and 
destroys them.
	 3	 Memory. Adaptive immunity is defined in part by the ability to 
remember this encounter so the body can respond more quickly 
next time. The clonal selection described at step    produces not 
only TC cells, but also memory T (TM) cells. These are long-lived 
cells; they are much more numerous than the original population of T cells 
for that ­pathogen; and they can be activated more quickly than the foregoing 
first-time response. Therefore, upon reexposure to the same pathogen later in 
life, TM cells mount a rapid T cell recall response. TC cells quickly build up 
large numbers that destroy the invading pathogen so quickly we don’t even 
notice any illness. That is, we are immune to that disease.
Note that helper T cells are necessary to stimulate an attack against foreign 
antigens. Indeed, TH cells play a central coordinating role in all of the body’s main 
lines of defense. When they encounter an antigen-presenting cell bearing a foreign 
antigen, they secrete various signaling chemicals that promote innate, humoral, and 
cellular immunity (fig. 14.19). The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) prefer-
entially attacks TH cells and a few other targets, thus striking at the crossroad of all 
three forms of immunity and explaining why AIDS is so devastating.
Humoral Immunity
Humoral immunity employs B lymphocytes. It is a more indirect means of ­fighting 
pathogens than cellular immunity. Instead of directly attacking cells, humoral 
immunity uses antibodies that bind to antigens and tag them for ­destruction 
by other means. But like cellular immunity, humoral immunity works in three 
stages—recognition, attack, and memory.
Recognition 
Figure 14.20 depicts the following stages of antigen recognition leading up to the 
attack. These events occur mainly in our lymph nodes, where there is a dense popu-
lation of B cells ready to respond to antigens delivered to them. 
	 1	 Antigen binding. A B cell has thousands of surface receptors for one par-
ticular type of antigen. B cell activation begins when an antigen binds to 
several of these receptors, which cluster together and are taken into the cell 
by receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
	 2	 Antigen presentation. The B cell internalizes and processes the antigen and 
displays fragments of it on its plasma membrane—thus B cells, like macro-
phages, act as antigen-presenting cells. A helper T cell binds to the antigen–
B cell complex and secretes an interleukin that activates the B cell. 
	 3	 Clonal selection. The B cell responds to the interleukin by dividing into a 
clone of identical B cells programmed against the antigen.
1
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     489  

	 4	 Differentiation. Some members of the clone become memory B cells while 
others enlarge and differentiate into plasma cells, which were so named in 
the nineteenth century because they have a large volume of cytoplasm (then 
called plasma) compared to other lymphocytes. Their volume is due to a 
large amount of rough endoplasmic reticulum (fig. 14.21), which you will 
remember as a cell’s apparatus for protein synthesis. Their product is anti-
bodies, which carry out the attack stage that we examine next. About 10% of 
the B cells in a given clone stay in lymph nodes, but the rest leave, take up 
residence elsewhere, and produce antibodies until they die.
Antigen binding
Immunocompetent B cells
exposed to antigen. Antigen
binds only to B cells with
complementary receptors.
Antigen presentation
B cell internalizes antigen 
and displays processed 
antigen fragment. Helper 
T cell binds to B cell and 
secretes interleukin.
Clonal selection
Interleukin stimulates 
B cell to divide 
repeatedly and 
form a clone.
Diﬀerentiation
Some cells of the 
clone become 
memory B cells. 
Most diﬀerentiate 
into plasma cells.
Plasma cells
Antigen
Receptor
Lymphocyte
Helper T cell
Antigen fragment
Interleukin
B cell
Memory B cell
1
2
3
4
Mitochondria
Nucleus
(a) B cell
(b) Plasma cell
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Figure 14.20 The Recognition Stage of 
­Humoral Immunity
Figure 14.21 B Cell and Plasma Cell. (a) B cells 
have little cytoplasm and scanty organelles. (b) A 
plasma cell, which differentiates from a B cell, has an 
abundance of rough endoplasmic reticulum.
a–b: © Don W. Fawcett/Science Source
490      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Apply What You Know
Consider the function of rough endoplasmic reticulum and the chemical nature of 
antibodies. Explain how the difference between a B cell and plasma cell ­relates to 
plasma cell function.
Attack
The plasma cell is a remarkably efficient protein factory, pumping out 2,000 anti-
body molecules per second. This comes at a cost to self-maintenance, however, 
and a plasma cell dies after only 4 to 5 days of such intense activity. The antibodies 
remain and lay the groundwork for the attack phase. Although antibodies do not, 
themselves, destroy enemy antigens, they can use any of the following means to 
render them harmless and mark them for destruction.
∙	 Neutralization. Only certain regions of an antigen molecule are pathogenic—
for example, the parts of a toxin molecule or virus that enable them to bind to 
human cells. Antibodies can neutralize an antigen by binding to these active 
regions and masking their effects.
∙	 Activation of the complement system. Activation of the complement system 
is the most important way antibodies provide defense against foreign cells 
such as bacteria. When an antibody of the IgG or IgM class binds to an an-
tigen, complement proteins bind to receptors on the antibody. This initiates 
the cascade of events that leads to destruction of the invader by complement 
mechanisms described earlier (see section 14.2).
∙	 Agglutination is the clumping of enemy cells by antibodies. It occurs in mis-
matched blood transfusions and even more importantly as a defense against 
bacteria. An antibody molecule has 2 binding sites at the tips of each Y-shaped 
monomer, and therefore 10 of these on an IgM pentamer; thus, it can bind to 
antigen molecules on two or more enemy cells at once and stick them together 
(fig. 14.22a). This immobilizes microbes and other alien cells and prevents 
them from spreading through the tissues. Further, neutrophils and macro-
phages can phagocytize agglutinated clusters of bacteria more efficiently than 
phagocytizing bacteria one at a time.
∙	 Precipitation is a similar process in which antigen molecules (not whole 
cells) are clumped by adhesion to antibodies (fig. 14.22b). This creates large 
antigen–antibody complexes that can be removed and degraded by eosino-
phils, or they can bind to red blood cells and travel with them to the liver and 
spleen, where they are stripped off the RBC and disposed of. This process of 
ridding the body of agglutinated antigens is called immune clearance.
Memory
When a person is exposed to a particular antigen for the first time, the 
immune reaction is called the primary response (fig. 14.23a). The 
appearance of protective antibodies is delayed for 3 to 6 days while B 
cells multiply and differentiate into plasma cells. As the plasma cells 
begin secreting antibody, the IgM level (titer) in the blood rises, fol-
lowed in a few days by IgG. The IgM and IgG titers fall to low levels 
within a month or so.
The primary response, however, leaves one with an immune mem-
ory of the antigen. We saw that during clonal selection, some members 
of the clone become memory B cells rather than plasma cells. Memory 
B cells, found mainly in the lymph nodes, mount a very quick secondary 
response if reexposed to the same antigen (fig. 14.23b). Plasma cells 
form within hours, and the antibody titer rises much higher than before 
and peaks within a few days. The response is so rapid that the antigen has 
little chance to exert a noticeable effect on the body, and no illness results. 
Antibodies
(IgM)
Antigens
(a)
(b)
Antibodies
Figure 14.22 Agglutination and Precipitation 
by Antibodies. (a) Agglutination of foreign erythro-
cytes by IgM. (b) Precipitation of free antigens by an 
antibody such as IgG, forming an antigen–antibody 
complex.
Serum antibody titer
Days from ﬁrst exposure
to antigen
Days from reexposure
to same antigen
Primary response
IgM
IgM
IgG
IgG
Secondary response
0
0
 5 
 5 
10
10
15
15
20
20
25
25
Figure 14.23 The Primary and Secondary 
Responses in Humoral Immunity. The ­individual 
is exposed to antigen on day 0 in both cases. Note 
the differences in the speed of response, the height 
of the antibody titers, and the rate of decline in 
­antibody titers.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     491  

The IgG level remains elevated for weeks to years, conferring lasting protection. Mem-
ory doesn’t last as long in humoral immunity, however, as it does in cellular immunity.
Active and Passive Immunity
Up to this point, we have examined immunity only as a process that occurs in 
response to unintentional but natural exposure to environmental antigens. However, 
there are other varieties of immunity bestowed by intentional antigen exposure or by 
acquiring antibodies produced by another individual.
Any case in which the body produces its own antibodies or T cells is called 
active immunity. What we have studied so far is considered natural active immu-
nity, because it results from natural exposure to antigens. In contrast, artificial active 
immunity is a process in which we deliberately subject ourselves to antigens in order 
to stimulate antibody or T cell production and produce an immune memory that 
protects us against future disease—in other words, vaccination.
Because of vaccination, certain diseases that were once dreaded harbingers of 
death are now little more than ghostly memories. Vaccinations rely on injecting dead or 
disabled pathogens that stimulate the production of antibodies but do not make the per-
son ill. If one then encounters that antigen later in life, a rapid secondary response occurs 
and prevents it from causing disease. Spectacular success has been achieved with cer-
tain vaccines; for example, the World Health Organization launched a campaign in the 
1960s to eradicate smallpox worldwide, and no cases have been known to occur naturally 
since 1977. Smallpox is the only disease thus far to be eradicated, but there is hope that 
the world may be rid of polio in the not-too-distant future. A global initiative to eradi-
cate polio was begun in 1988, when there were some 350,000 cases in 125 countries. 
Thanks to vigorous vaccination efforts, by 2014 that number had dropped to fewer than 
400 cases. New cases occur today only in Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
At one time, optimists hoped that vaccines would wipe out infectious disease. 
We now know that infectious diseases are so complex that we will never completely 
conquer them—we are locked in an arms race that has been carried out for millions 
of years. For example, despite great effort, scientists have yet to develop effective 
vaccines against global diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, or AIDS.
We can also acquire disease resistance by passive immunity, bestowed by either 
natural or artificial means. Natural passive immunity is the process in which a fetus or 
infant acquires antibodies from the mother through the placenta before birth or via the 
breast milk after. It provides important early protection of the infant until it can build its 
own immunity by exposure to environmental antigens. Artificial passive immunity can 
be acquired at any age by injecting blood serum from another person or from animals 
(such as horses) that have made antibodies against a specific antigen. Such immune 
serum is used for emergency treatment of snakebites, botulism, tetanus, rabies, and 
other diseases. The immunity conferred by serum is short-lived, lasting only until the 
body degrades the injected antibodies.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the  
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 19.	Name four types of lymphocytes involved in cellular  
immunity. Which of these is also essential to humoral immunity?
20.	What are the three phases of cellular and humoral immune responses?
 21.	Explain how helper and cytotoxic T cells are activated.
22.	Describe how cytotoxic T cells destroy target cells.
23.	Compare and contrast a B cell and a plasma cell.
24.	Discuss three ways antibodies act against antigens.
25.	Why does the secondary immune response prevent a patho-
gen from causing disease, yet the primary response does not?
26.	Explain how vaccination works.
492      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
A
IDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) is a modern 
plague that affects every part of the world, but incredibly, was 
unknown before the early 1980s. Globally, nearly 40 million are in-
fected with the virus that causes AIDS. Each year over a million 
people die of the disease. Sub-Saharan Africa is the most heavily 
affected region, with as many as 25% of adults infected in some 
areas. The disease has had profound demographic, social, and 
economic impacts in many parts of the world. 
AIDS is caused by HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), which 
is spread by contact with body fluids such as blood, semen, vaginal 
secretions, and breast milk. It is most frequently passed from per-
son to person during sexual activity, but may also be spread through 
infected needles, or from mothers to their infants in breast milk. HIV 
primarily infects helper T cells. Figure 14.24a shows components 
of the virus. Its surface molecules bind to corresponding receptors 
on the plasma membrane of the helper T (TH) cells. Once inside the 
cell, the virus may remain latent for anywhere from 2 to 15 years. 
This is why most people have no clinical symptoms for a period 
of time after infection. Once the virus becomes active in TH cells, 
it replicates and the cells eventually die. As the cells die, millions 
of new infectious viral particles spew forth into the bloodstream 
and infect more T cells (fig. 14.24b). A healthy TH count is 600 to 
1,200 cells/µL; a criterion for AIDS is a count less than 200/µL. The 
scarcity of TH cells disables the specific immune response and the 
A I D S :  A  G l o b a l  E p i d e m i c
patient succumbs to opportunistic infections such as pneumonia or 
tuberculosis or dies from cancer—diseases that are normally kept 
under control by adaptive immunity.
There is currently no cure for AIDS. The disease can be 
prevented by avoiding contact with body fluids such as blood 
or semen that might be infected. In recent years, antiretroviral 
medications that disable the HIV virus and prevent its replica-
tion have dramatically improved the survival of HIV-positive per-
sons. However, the cost of these drugs means that they are out of 
reach for many, especially in less-developed countries where the 
disease has spread at an alarming rate (mostly through hetero-
sexual sexual activity). The AIDS epidemic has triggered unprec-
edented efforts to develop a vaccine or cure, but the challenges 
to doing so are daunting. The virus is one of the fastest-evolving 
microbes that exists. It reproduces incredibly rapidly—a single 
virus can produce billions of copies in a day. In addition, it accu-
mulates numerous mutations as it copies its genetic material, and 
therefore is constantly reinventing itself. It thus presents a mov-
ing target that frustrates attempts to develop a vaccine with an 
effective antigen.
HIV and AIDS dramatically illustrate the importance of under-
standing the fundamental mechanisms of the immune system. 
They also highlight the vulnerability of the human species to dis-
ease, even in this era of sophisticated medical intervention.
Figure 14.24 The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). (a) Structure of the virus. (b) Viruses emerging from a dying helper T cell. 
Each virus can now invade a new helper T cell and produce a similar number of descendants.
b: © NIBSC/SPL/Science Source
Envelope:
  Glycoprotein
  Phospholipid
Matrix
Capsid
RNA
Reverse
transcriptase
(a)
(b)
Dying T cell
Emerging
viruses
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     493  

C A R E E R     SPOTLIGHT
Public health nurses are registered nurses (RNs) who usually work in govern-
ment, for private nonprofit agencies, or in clinics. They focus on the overall 
health of communities, working to educate individuals, families, and other 
groups about health-care issues, disease prevention, nutrition, and child care. 
They collaborate with community leaders, teachers, parents, and physicians 
in ensuring the health of the community. The tasks of a public health nurse 
focus on prevention and education and include vaccinating children against childhood diseases, administering flu shots, and 
­screening populations for hypertension. Qualifications vary from state to state—some require a bachelor’s degree in nursing 
whereas in other states an associate degree from a community college suffices. See appendix B for further information on 
­careers in public health nursing.
P u b l i c  H e a l t h  N u r s e
© Will & Deni McIntyre/Getty Images
Aging of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The amounts of lymphatic tissue and red bone marrow decline 
with age. Consequently, there are fewer hemopoietic stem cells, 
disease-fighting leukocytes, and antigen-presenting cells (APCs). 
Also, the lymphocytes produced in these tissues often fail to mature 
or become immunocompetent. Both humoral and cellular immunity 
depend on APCs and helper T cells, and therefore both types of 
immune response are blunted. As a result, an older person is less 
protected against cancer and infectious diseases. It becomes es-
pecially important in old age to be vaccinated against influenza and 
other acute seasonal infections.
494      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

All Systems
Lymphatics drain excess tissue fluid and remove cellular debris and pathogens from tissues.  
The immune system defends other systems from infection and cancer.
CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the LYMPHATIC AND IMMUNE SYSTEMS Affect Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Lymphatic drainage prevents cutaneous 
edema; dendritic cells of the immune 
system densely populate the skin and 
guard against invasion.
Skeletal System
Interleukins affect the rate of 
hemopoiesis in the red bone 
marrow.
Muscular System 
Lymphatics prevent muscular 
edema.
Nervous System
Microglia of the immune system protect 
tissues of the central nervous system 
from agents of disease.
Circulatory System
Lymphatics return fluid to the blood-
stream and help to sustain blood ­volume; 
the spleen and other lymphatic ­organs 
­prevent accumulation of debris and 
­foreign matter in blood; the spleen 
­disposes of old RBCs.
Respiratory System
Alveolar macrophages remove debris 
from lungs; lymphatics keep the pul-
monary alveoli dry by preventing fluid 
accumulation.
Endocrine System
Lymph transports some hormones.
Reproductive System
Ovaries and testes require immune 
barriers to protect haploid germ cells 
against immune attack.
Digestive System
Lymph absorbs dietary lipids from the 
small intestine and transports them to 
the liver; hepatic macrophages play a 
defensive role in the liver.
Urinary System
Lymphatics absorb fluid and proteins 
in the kidneys, helping the kidneys to 
concentrate the urine and conserve 
water.
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Getty Images
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/
Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© iconogenic/Getty 
Images RF
	
495

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
14.1  The Lymphatic System 
1.	 Definitions of lymphatic system, immune system, and 
­immunology
2.	 The types of pathogens
3.	 Major components and functions of the lymphatic system
4.	 Types and structure of lymphatic vessels
5.	 Origin and composition of lymph and the route of its flow
6.	 Lymphatic tissues, their locations and histology, and how they 
differ from lymphatic organs
7.	 The types, locations, structure, and function of tonsils
8.	 The location, anatomy, and functions of the thymus
9.	 The location, anatomy, and functions of the spleen
10.	 Anatomy, histology, and functions of lymph nodes, and areas 
of lymph node concentration in the body
11.	 The relationship of lymph nodes to lymphatic vessels and how 
this relates to their lymph-cleansing function
14.2  Innate Immunity 
1.	 Definitions of innate and adaptive immunity and differences 
between the two
2.	 The role of skin and mucous membranes as a first line of 
defense
3.	 How each leukocyte type functions in immune defense
4.	 The role of natural killer (NK) cells in recognizing and 
­destroying enemy cells
5.	 The role of interferons in defense
6.	 The definition of complement system and ways in which it 
leads to the destruction of pathogens
7.	 The definition of inflammation and its four cardinal signs
8.	 Definitions of adhesion, diapedesis, and chemotaxis and the 
role of neutrophils in inflammation
9.	 The mechanisms by which inflammation combats a pathogen 
and promotes healing
10.	 Benefits and dangers of fever
11.	 The roles of pyrogens, prostaglandins, and the hypothalamus 
in fever
14.3  Features of Adaptive Immunity 
1.	 Two characteristics of adaptive immunity that distinguish it 
from innate immunity
2.	 The two types of adaptive immunity, and their similarities and 
differences
3.	 Definition of antigen and why antigens are fundamental to 
specific immunity
4.	 How haptens differ from other antigens, how they ­become 
­antigenic, and where one might encounter haptens in 
­everyday life
5.	 Similarities and differences between T and B lymphocytes
6.	 The life history of a T cell from its “birth” until it is ready to 
do battle
7.	 Similarities and differences between the life history of a B cell 
and that of a T cell
8.	 The basic structure and varied classes of antibodies, and how 
antibody structure relates to the ability to recognize and bind a 
specific antigen 
9.	 Some types of antigen-presenting cells and their role in the 
immune response
10.	 Definition of interleukins and their role in immunity
14.4  Cellular and Humoral Immunity 
1.	 The four types of T cells associated with cellular immunity
2.	 Differences between TH cells and TC cells in the types of anti-
gens they recognize
3.	 How antigen-presenting cells help T cells recognize enemy 
antigens
4.	 The roles of clonal selection and interleukins in cellular and 
humoral immunity
5.	 The nature of a TC cell’s lethal hit on an enemy cell
6.	 The mechanism of memory and the T cell recall response in 
cellular immunity
7.	 The process of antigen recognition and B cell activation in 
humoral immunity
8.	 The relationship between a B cell and a plasma cell, and their 
structural and functional differences
9.	 Why we say only that antibodies indirectly promote the de-
struction of antigens rather than destroying them directly
10.	 Three ways in which antibodies promote antigen destruction
11.	 The mechanism of memory and the secondary response in hu-
moral immunity; similarities and differences between memory 
in the two forms of adaptive immunity
12.	 The difference between active and passive immunity and the 
reason artificial immunity is associated with vaccination
496      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Classic signs of inflammation include all of the following 
except
a.	 edema.
b.	 fever.
c.	 redness.
d.	 pain.
e.	 heat.
	 2	 Which of the following cells are involved in innate but not 
adaptive immunity?
a.	 helper T cells
b.	 cytotoxic T cells
c.	 natural killer cells
d.	 B cells
e.	 plasma cells
	 3.	 Histamine produced by 
 acts to 
 blood  
vessels.
a.	 neutrophils; constrict
b.	 basophils; dilate
c.	 eosinophils; dilate
d.	 NK cells; constrict
e.	 cytotoxic T cells; rupture
	 4.	 Which of these lymphatic organs has a cortex and a medulla: 
(I) spleen; (II) lymph node; (III) thymus; (IV) red bone 
marrow?
a.	 II only
b.	 III only
c.	 II and III only
d.	 III and IV only
e.	 I, II, and III
	 5.	 All of the following are important in innate immunity except
a.	 histamine.
b.	 pyrogens.
c.	 inflammation.
d.	 clonal selection.
e.	 interferons.
	 6.	 Where do T cells attain immunocompetence?
a.	 in the red bone marrow
b.	 in the lymph nodes
c.	 in the thymus
d.	 in the spleen
e.	 in the mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue
	 7.	 The only lymphatic organ with both afferent and efferent 
lymphatic vessels is
a.	 the spleen.
b.	 a lymph node.
c.	 a palatine tonsil.
d.	 the pharyngeal tonsil.
e.	 the thymus.
	 8.	 Antibodies cannot get inside a host cell to destroy a viral 
infection. Therefore, we use ________ to combat viral  
infections.
a.	 interleukins
b.	 complement
c.	 humoral immunity
d.	 haptens
e.	 cytotoxic T cells
	 9.	 Which statement is not true of antibodies?
a.	 They directly kill infected cells by using a lethal hit.
b.	 They are proteins.
c.	 They have constant regions that define the antibody 
class.
d.	 They are produced by plasma cells.
e.	 They activate the complement system.
	10.	 All lymph ultimately reenters the bloodstream at what point?
a.	 the right atrium
b.	 the common carotid artery
c.	 the internal iliac veins
d.	 the subclavian veins
e.	 the inferior vena cava
	11.	 Any organism capable of causing disease is called a/an 
.
	12.	 The lymphatic vessels of the small intestine that absorb dietary 
lipids are called 
.
	13	 Cells that inhibit T cell responses once a pathogen has been 
eradicated are called 
.
	14.	
 are small proteins, synthesized in response to viral 
infections, that inhibit viral replication and activate natural 
killer (NK) cells.
	15.	 B cells become 
 cells before they begin to secrete 
antibodies.
	16.	 Cells that process antigens and display fragments of them to 
activate the adaptive immune response are called 
.
	17.	 Tonsillitis most often involves inflammation of the 
tonsils.
	18.	 The 
 is located in the mediastinum, and is large in 
childhood but atrophies after about age 15.
	19.	
 are phagocytic cells that wander in connective  
tissues and kill bacteria by releasing a lethal cloud of  
chemicals, including hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorite.
	20.	 Basophils release a chemical called 
 that causes  
vasodilation.
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These  
Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Cytotoxic T cells play roles in both innate and adaptive 
immunity.
	 2.	 Perforins have a role only in adaptive immunity.
CHAPTER 14  The Lymphatic System and Immunity     497  

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
	 3.	 Lymphatic capillaries are less permeable than blood 
capillaries.
	 4.	 T lymphocytes are involved exclusively in cellular immunity.
	 5.	 Phagocytosis is the only means by which neutrophils kill  
bacteria.
	 6.	 Lymph nodes are populated by B cells but not T cells.
	 7.	 HIV infects primarily B cells.
	 8.	 Most plasma cells form in the red bone marrow.
	 9.	 The complement proteins of the blood plasma come primarily 
from plasma cells.
	10.	 Lymphatic nodules are a prominent feature of the tonsils, 
lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen.
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) is a ge-
netic disorder that results in scarcity or absence of both T and 
B cells from birth. Explain why children with SCID must live 
in protective enclosures, such as sterile plastic chambers and 
suits. How are SCID and AIDS similar? How do they differ?
	 2.	 In treating a woman for malignancy in the right breast, a 
surgeon removes some of her axillary lymph nodes. Following 
the surgery, the patient experiences edema of her right arm. 
Explain why.
	 3.	 A burn research center uses mice for studies of skin grafting. 
To prevent rejection of grafted tissues, the mice are thymec-
tomized at birth (their thymus is removed). Even though B 
cells do not develop in the thymus, the mice show no humoral 
response and are very susceptible to infection. Explain why 
the removal of the thymus would improve the success of skin 
grafts but adversely affect humoral immunity.
498      PART 4  Circulation and Defense

Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Thoracic cavity anatomy (see section 1.3) 
• Types of epithelial tissue (see section 4.2)
• Serous and mucous membranes (see section 4.5)
• Bones of the nasal region (see section 6.3)
• Brainstem anatomy (see section 9.2)
• Pulmonary blood circulation (see section 13.6)
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter Outline
15.1 Functions and Anatomy of the Respiratory 
System
• Respiratory Functions 
• Respiratory Anatomy 
15.2 Pulmonary Ventilation
• The Mechanics of Breathing 
• Measurements of Ventilation 
• Neural Control of Breathing 
 15.3 Gas Exchange and Transport
• Composition of Air 
• Alveolar Gas Exchange 
• Gas Transport 
• Systemic Gas Exchange 
• Blood Gases and the Respiratory Rhythm 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 15.1: Asthma
• Clinical Application 15.2: High-Altitude Physiology 
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Respiratory System 
• Career Spotlight: Respiratory Therapist
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide
The Respiratory 
System
15
Chapter
PART 5  Intake and Output
Branching of the bronchial trees into the lungs, seen from below in 
this artistic conception. Each lung receives one main bronchus, which 
ultimately branches into 8 million microscopic alveolar sacs and 150 
million alveoli, where the bloodstream picks up oxygen.
© Anatomical Travelogue/Science Source
Module 11: Respiratory System
	
499

B
reath represents life. The first breath of a baby and the last gasp 
of a dying person are two of the most dramatic moments of human 
experience. It is evident that one can’t live very long without breathing. 
But why do we breathe? It comes down to the fact that our cells, tissues, 
and organs depend on the energy carrier ATP to sustain their activities. 
By far the greatest amount of ATP synthesis occurs in mitochondria, 
requires oxygen, and produces carbon dioxide. Breathing supplies 
oxygen and eliminates carbon dioxide. The respiratory system consists 
essentially of passageways that deliver air to the lungs, where oxygen 
diffuses into the blood and carbon dioxide diffuses out. The respiratory 
system collaborates closely with the circulatory system to provide oxy-
gen to the tissues and remove carbon dioxide from them.
Respiratory Functions
The obvious function of the respiratory system is to obtain oxygen (O2) from the atmo-
sphere and to expel the carbon dioxide (CO2) generated by our metabolism. However, 
the respiratory system has a broader range of functions than commonly supposed:
∙	 Gas exchange. Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the atmo-
sphere and blood occurs in the lungs.
∙	 Communication. The babbling of babies, complex speech, and vocalizations 
such as laughing and crying result from air passing through respiratory pas-
sageways.
∙	 Sense of smell. Chemoreceptors in the nose allow us to perceive odors.
∙	 Acid–base balance. CO2 reacts with water to produce acid. Therefore, if our 
blood pH rises too high, we can lower it by slowing our breathing to let a little 
more CO2 accumulate. Conversely, if the pH falls too low, it can be corrected 
(raised) by exhaling CO2 faster than the body produces it. 
∙	 Expulsion of abdominal contents. A breath-holding Valsalva maneuver 
helps to expel abdominal contents during urination, defecation, and childbirth.
Respiratory Anatomy
The respiratory system consists of air passages from the nose to the lungs and 
gas-exchange surfaces in the lungs themselves (fig. 15.1). The air we breathe flows 
15.1  Functions and Anatomy  
of the Respiratory System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain the functions of the respiratory system;
b.	name and describe the structures of the respiratory system; and
c.	trace the passage of air from the nose to the alveoli.
500      PART 5  Intake and Output

through a series of ever smaller tubes until it finally reaches millions of tiny sacs 
deep in the lungs; there, the thin walls allow oxygen and carbon dioxide to be quickly 
exchanged between the air and blood. The respiratory system is often divided into 
the upper respiratory tract, which includes structures in the head and neck (from 
nose through larynx), and the lower respiratory tract, which includes structures in 
the thorax (from trachea through lungs).  
The Nose
The lower half of the nose is shaped mostly by hyaline cartilage and the upper half 
by bone. You can easily find the boundary between bone and cartilage by palpating 
your own nose. During normal breathing, air is drawn through the nostrils or nares 
(NAIR-eze), the anterior boundary of the nose (fig. 15.2). The nostrils have stiff 
guard hairs, or vibrissae (vy-BRISS-ee), that prevent insects and large airborne par-
ticles from entering. The nose extends posteriorly to the posterior nasal apertures, 
or choanae1 (co-AH-nee), that lead into the throat. 
The nasal cavity is divided into right and left halves by a wall, the nasal sep-
tum, composed of bone and hyaline cartilage. The roof and walls of the cavity are 
formed by the ethmoid and sphenoid bones. The floor is formed by the palate, 
which separates the nasal cavity from the oral cavity and allows you to breathe 
while chewing food. The palate is divided into a bony hard palate anteriorly and a 
fleshy soft palate posteriorly. The lateral walls of the nasal cavity have inward folds 
called nasal conchae that reach almost all the way to the septum, thus occupying 
most of the cavity. They cause the airflow to be quite turbulent; as the inhaled air 
contacts the mucous membrane covering the conchae, it is warmed, humidified, and 
cleansed of most of its debris (such as particles of dust and pollen). 
Nasal cavity
Nostril
Hard palate
Larynx
Trachea
Right lung
Posterior 
nasal 
aperture
Soft palate
Pharynx
Epiglottis
Esophagus
Left lung
Left main
bronchus
Pleural
cavity
Pleura
(cut)
Diaphragm
Figure 15.1 The Respiratory System. 
1choana = funnel
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      501  

Figure 15.2 Anatomy of the Upper Respiratory Tract. (a) Median section of the cadaver head. (b) Internal anatomy. (c) The nasal septum 
and regions of the pharynx. 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer/Don Kincaid, dissections
•	 Draw or describe a line across part (b) of this figure to indicate the boundary between the upper and lower respiratory tract.
Oropharynx
Nasopharynx
Laryngopharynx
Nasal septum
Pharynx:
Frontal sinus
Nasal conchae:
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Guard hairs
Naris (nostril)
Hard palate
Upper lip
Tongue
Lower lip
Mandible
Larynx
(b)
(c)
Sphenoid sinus
Posterior nasal
aperture
Pharyngeal
tonsil
Auditory tube
Soft palate
Uvula
Palatine tonsil
Lingual tonsil
Epiglottis
Esophagus
Trachea
Vocal cord
Nasal conchae:
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Tongue
Hard palate
Epiglottis
Vocal cord
Larynx:
Trachea
(a)
Esophagus
Vertebral column
Cribriform plate
Sites of respiratory control nuclei:
Pons
Medulla oblongata
Auditory tube
Nasopharynx
Uvula
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Frontal sinus
502      PART 5  Intake and Output

Most of the nasal cavity is lined with respiratory epithelium of the ciliated, 
pseudostratified columnar type. Nasal mucus is secreted by goblet cells of the 
respiratory epithelium, glands deeper in the mucosa, and the paranasal sinuses, 
which drain into the nose. Inhaled dust, pollen, bacteria, and other foreign matter 
cling to the sticky mucus, which is swept by cilia into the pharynx. The mucus and 
its load of debris are then swallowed and most foreign material is kept from the 
lungs. A small portion of the epithelium in the roof of the nasal cavity is olfactory 
­epithelium, responsible for the sense of smell. It is also pseudostratified columnar, 
but its cilia are immobile and serve to bind odor molecules rather than move mucus.
The Pharynx
The pharynx2 (FAIR-inks), or throat, is a muscular funnel that extends from the 
posterior nasal apertures to the larynx and esophagus. It consists of three regions: 
the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx (fig. 15.2c). The nasopharynx 
is a space superior to the soft palate that serves as a passageway for air. It houses 
the pharyngeal tonsil, a patch of lymphoid tissue that is well positioned to respond 
to airborne pathogens. The auditory (eustachian) tube from the middle ear opens 
into the nasopharynx. This explains why an infection in the nose and throat may 
cause a middle-ear infection (otitis media) (see Clinical Application 10.2).
The oropharynx lies between the soft palate and root of the tongue. It contains 
the palatine and lingual tonsils and serves as a passageway for both food and air. The 
laryngopharynx (la-RIN-go-FAIR-inks) extends from the union of the nasopharynx 
and oropharynx to the opening of the esophagus. The nasopharynx is lined with 
pseudostratified columnar epithelium whereas the oropharynx and laryngopharynx 
are lined with stratified squamous epithelium, adapted to the fact that the last two 
passages must tolerate the abrasion of swallowed food. Muscles of the pharynx 
facilitate swallowing and contribute to speech.
The Larynx
The larynx (LAIR-inks), or “voice box,” is a chamber composed mainly of car-
tilage and muscle (fig. 15.3). Its main function is to prevent food and drink from 
entering the airway, but it has evolved the additional role of sound production.
Epiglottis 
Hyoid bone
Thyroid cartilage
Laryngeal prominence
Cricoid cartilage
Trachea
(a) Anterior
(b) Posterior
(c) Median
Tracheal cartilage
Epiglottis
Cricoid cartilage
Vocal cord
Thyroid cartilage
Fat pad
Hyoid bone
Figure 15.3 Anatomy of the Larynx. Most mus-
cles are removed in order to show the cartilages.
2pharynx = throat
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      503  

Figure 15.4 Endoscopic View of the Larynx. 
Looking into the glottis with a laryngoscope.
© Phototake
Epiglottis
Glottis
Vocal cord
Trachea
Anterior
Posterior
3thyr = shield; oid = resembling 
4epi = above, upon 
5trache = rough
Apply What You Know
Chemicals in cigarette smoke paralyze cilia of the respiratory epithelium. How 
does this affect the mucociliary escalator? What are the possible consequences 
for a person who smokes?
The larynx is framed by nine cartilages. The largest of these is the 
thyroid3 cartilage, named for its shieldlike shape; it has an anterior peak 
(laryngeal prominence) commonly called the “Adam’s apple.” It is 
especially visible in men because testosterone promotes its growth 
during puberty. It forms most of the “box” of the voice box and 
provides anterior anchorage for the vocal cords. A large cricoid 
cartilage and its ligaments attach the inferior end of the larynx to 
the trachea. Other smaller cartilages provide support to soft tissues, 
operate the vocal cords, and shape the epiglottis above.
The epiglottis4 is a spoon-shaped flap that seals the laryngeal 
opening during swallowing to keep food and liquid out of the airway. 
When you swallow, the root of the tongue pushes the epiglottis down-
ward while muscles attached to the thyroid cartilage pull the larynx up to 
meet it. The epiglottis thus caps the opening like a lid and diverts food and 
drink to the esophagus, behind the larynx. If food or liquid gets past the epiglottis, 
it triggers a cough reflex to expel it and, ideally, prevent it from getting as far as the 
trachea or lungs. The epiglottis and smaller cartilages of the larynx serve as important 
landmarks for the placement of a breathing tube by emergency personnel, a procedure 
called endotracheal intubation.
Within the larynx, the vocal cords stretch like a V from the midpoint of the 
thyroid cartilage in front to two small mobile cartilages posteriorly (fig. 15.4). The 
vocal cords and the opening between them are collectively called the glottis. Air-
flow through the glottis vibrates the vocal cords and produces sound. Under the 
control of several small muscles, the cartilages at the posterior ends of the cords 
pivot, altering the tension on the cords and the angle between them. This alters the 
pitch of the voice. The larynx alone produces only crude sounds that some have 
compared to a hunter’s duck call; the pharynx, oral cavity, cheeks, tongue, and lips 
shape these sounds into intelligible words. Longer and less taut vocal cords produce 
a lower-pitched sound than shorter or tauter cords; for this reason, men generally 
have lower-pitched voices than women, and adults lower than children.
The Trachea
The trachea,5 or “windpipe,” is about 12 cm (4.5 in.) long and 2.5 cm (1 in.) in 
diameter (fig. 15.5). At its inferior end, it forks into right and left bronchi. It is lined 
with a ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium rich in mucus-producing gob-
let cells. Cilia sweep the mucus and foreign particles upward toward the throat, away 
from the lungs. This mucociliary escalator effectively removes potentially harmful 
debris, including microorganisms that could otherwise cause pulmonary infections.
The trachea is supported by 16 to 20 C-shaped rings of hyaline cartilage, some 
of which can be felt at the front of the neck. Similar to the wire spiral in a vacuum 
cleaner hose, the cartilage rings reinforce the trachea and keep it from collapsing 
when we inhale. The open part of the C faces posteriorly and allows the esophagus 
to expand and push into the muscular posterior wall of the trachea when food is 
swallowed.
504      PART 5  Intake and Output

Muscle
Hyaline 
cartilage ring
Lumen
Mucosa
Mucous gland
(b)
Larynx
Trachea
Main
bronchi
Thyroid 
cartilage 
Cricoid 
cartilage
(a)
(c)
(d)
Particles 
of debris
Cartilage
Chondrocytes
Mucociliary 
escalator
Mucus
Goblet cell
Epithelium:
Ciliated cell
Cilia
Goblet cell
4 μm
Figure 15.5 Anatomy of the Lower Respiratory Tract. 
(a) Anterior view. (b) Cross section of the trachea showing the 
C-shaped cartilage rings. (c) Longitudinal section of the trachea 
showing the action of the mucociliary escalator. (d) Tracheal epi-
thelium showing ciliated cells and goblet cells. 
© Prof. P.M. Motta/Univ. “La Sapienza”, Rome/Science Source
•	 Why do inhaled objects more often go into the right main 
bronchus than into the left?
The Lungs, Pleurae, and Bronchial Tree
The lungs are soft, spongy organs that occupy most of the thoracic 
cavity. They are separated from each other by a partition called 
the mediastinum, which contains the heart, esophagus, and major 
blood vessels. The lungs are roughly cone-shaped with a broad 
base inferiorly; a superior peak, the apex; a broad, curved costal 
surface that lies against the rib cage; and a mediastinal surface 
facing the heart (fig. 15.6). Each lung has a slit (hilum) on the 
mediastinal surface through which it receives bronchi, blood ves-
sels, nerves, and lymphatics. The two lungs are not symmetrical. 
The right lung is divided into three lobes while the left has two. 
The left lung has an indentation called the cardiac impression to 
accommodate the left-leaning apex of the heart.
A serous membrane, the pleura,6 lines the thoracic wall and 
adheres to the lungs. It consists of two layers—one forming the 
outer surface of the lung and the other lining the inner surface of 
6pleur = side of body, rib
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      505  

Figure 15.6 Gross Anatomy of the Lungs. 
(a) Anterior view
Apex of lung
Superior lobe
Mediastinal
surfaces
Middle lobe
Inferior lobar
bronchus
Inferior lobe
Trachea
Main bronchi
Cardiac
impression
Costal
surface
Superior lobar
bronchus
Middle lobar
bronchus
Inferior lobe
Oblique ﬁssure
Base of lung
Oblique
ﬁssure
Superior 
lobe
Larynx:
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Horizontal ﬁssure
Lobar bronchi
Apex
Superior lobe
Pulmonary
arteries
Middle lobe
Inferior lobe
(b) Mediastinal surface, right lung
Pulmonary 
veins
Hilum
Pulmonary 
ligament
Diaphragmatic 
surface
the rib cage. The space between them, called the pleural cavity (fig. 15.7), contains 
only a thin film of pleural fluid. This is a lubricant that reduces friction as the lungs 
expand and contract. Infection of the pleurae produces a condition called pleurisy, in 
which the membranes may become roughened and rub together, making each breath 
a painful experience. Chest wounds can allow air to enter the pleural cavity—a con-
dition called pneumothorax. The membranes then separate and the lung collapses. 
This is treated by drawing the air out through a chest tube inserted between the ribs.
The bronchial tree is a series of branching passages that carry air from the tra-
chea to the gas-exchange surfaces in the lungs. It begins where the trachea splits into 
two main bronchi (BRONK-eye) that lead to the lungs (fig. 15.6a). The right main 
bronchus is slightly wider and more vertical than the left one.
506      PART 5  Intake and Output

Sternum
Ribs
Left lung
Pleural cavity
Vertebra
Spinal cord
Posterior
Anterior
Breast
Heart
Pericardial
cavity
Aorta
Right lung
Parietal
pleura
Visceral 
pleura
Figure 15.8 Histology of the Lung. (a) Light micrograph. (b) Scanning electron micrograph. Note the spongy texture of the lung. 
a: © Microscape/SPL/Science Source; b: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
•	 Histologically, how can we tell that the open passage on the right side of part (a) is a bronchus and not a bronchiole?
(a)
Bronchiole
Alveoli
1 mm
(b)
Branches of
pulmonary
artery
Alveoli
Bronchial mucosa
1 mm
Bronchial
cartilage
Bronchial smooth
muscle
Segmental
(tertiary) bronchus
Figure 15.7 Lungs in Relation to the Thoracic 
Cavity. This cross section of the cadaver is oriented 
the same way as the reader’s body. The pleural cavity 
is especially evident where the left lung has shrunk-
en away from the thoracic wall, but in a living person 
the lung fully fills this space, the parietal and visceral 
pleurae are pressed together, and the pleural cavity 
is only a potential space between the membranes, as 
on the right side of this photograph.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer
Like the trachea, the main bronchi are supported by rings of hyaline cartilage 
and have a layer of smooth muscle in the wall. Progressing distally, the bronchi 
branch into smaller and smaller passageways supported by cartilage plates rather 
than rings. These lead eventually to tubes called bronchioles (BRON-kee-oles), 
less than 1 mm in diameter and with no cartilage at all (fig. 15.8). Smooth mus-
cle is the main supportive tissue of the bronchioles, and unhindered by cartilage, 
the bronchioles have more capacity to dilate and constrict than the bronchi do. 
Such changes in diameter are called bronchodilation and bronchoconstriction,  
respectively, and serve to regulate airflow.
The bronchioles branch into smaller divisions called terminal bronchioles. From 
the nasal cavity through terminal bronchioles, the airway is called the conducting 
zone because it functions only for airflow. Its walls are too thick for efficient gas dif-
fusion to and from the blood. Beyond this, the passages have such thin walls that they 
do exchange gases with the blood and therefore they constitute the respiratory zone. 
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      507  

The passages of the respiratory zone, in order, are respiratory bronchioles, some of 
which are still ciliated; then alveolar ducts, which have a simple squamous epithelium 
and no cilia; and finally, alveolar sacs, which are clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli. 
The Alveoli
An alveolus (AL-vee-OH-lus) is a pouch about 0.2 to 0.5 mm in diameter (fig. 15.9). 
Each lung contains approximately 150 million alveoli, which provide a large surface 
area for gas exchange. Alveoli are lined mostly with squamous alveolar cells whose 
thinness allows for rapid gas diffusion between air and the blood. In addition, more 
rounded great alveolar cells are found in the walls of each alveolus. They secrete 
pulmonary surfactant, a substance that prevents the walls of the alveoli from stick-
ing together. Without surfactant, the surfaces of the alveoli would cling together like 
wet paper, making it difficult for them to inflate during inhalation. A third cell type 
is the alveolar macrophages, which wander the alveoli and phagocytize dust par-
ticles or pathogens that escape the mucociliary escalator. They are the most numer-
ous of all cells in the lung, and as many as 100 million perish each day as they ride 
up the mucociliary escalator to be swallowed and digested, thus ridding the lungs 
of a load of debris.
Each alveolus is covered with a web of blood capillaries. Gases are exchanged 
across a thin respiratory membrane that consists of the squamous alveolar cell, 
the squamous endothelial cell that lines the capillary, and their shared thin basement 
membrane. The total thickness of the respiratory membrane is only 0.5 µm—a very 
minimal barrier to gas exchange. By comparison, a red blood cell has a diameter 
15 times as great, about 7.5 µm.
Blood Supply to the Lungs
The lungs receive two blood supplies—pulmonary and systemic. The pulmonary 
arteries serve only for exchanging CO2 for O2, and lead only to the capillaries 
Clinical Application 15.1
ASTHMA
Asthma sufferers are familiar with the symptoms of an attack—shortness of 
breath, wheezing, and coughing. One person in 12 has asthma in the Unit-
ed States, and the most common sufferers are children. Exposure to a trig-
ger such as cat dander or pollen causes swollen and inflamed airways and 
release of chemicals that cause violent and sudden spasms of the bronchi. In 
the short term, asthma can be medically managed with inhaled drugs called 
β-adrenergic agonists that mimic the effect of epinephrine (adrenaline) and di-
late the bronchioles. Such inhalers treat acute symptoms but not the underlying 
causes. In more severe cases, patients receive inhaled corticosteroids on a daily 
basis to suppress inflammation. Recently, researchers have tried to answer the 
question of why asthma is so prevalent in modern populations, in contrast to 
its relative scarcity even as late as the nineteenth century. A hypothesis that has 
received some support is that enhanced hygiene in modern societies has led to 
reduced exposure to bacteria and parasitic worms in childhood. The immune 
system may not develop as robustly in individuals who lack such exposure to 
pathogens. In addition, women in industrialized countries have the choice of 
whether to breast-feed or bottle feed. Individuals who are not breast-fed may 
lack stimulants to the developing immune system that are present in breast 
milk. This evolutionary point of view provides us with insight into why the 
disease has become one of the most prevalent conditions in the modern world.
508      PART 5  Intake and Output

­surrounding the alveoli. The pulmonary veins lead immediately back to the heart 
(see “The Pulmonary Circuit” in section 13.6). The systemic supply comes from 
about five bronchial arteries arising from the thoracic aorta (see fig. 13.22). They 
serve to nourish the lung tissues and pleurae, leading to capillaries in the bronchi 
and other lung tissues but not to the alveoli. Bronchial veins leaving the lungs drain 
indirectly, via the azygos system (see fig. 13.23), into the superior vena cava.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 A dust particle is inhaled and gets into an alveolus 
without being trapped along the way. Describe the path it 
takes, naming all air passages from the external nares to 
the alveolus. What would happen to it after arrival in the 
alveolus?
2.	Explain how the structure of the larynx prevents choking and 
enables the production of sound.
3.	Describe the relationship between the visceral pleura, pa-
rietal pleura, lungs, and thoracic wall. Why can we say the 
lungs are “surrounded by” the pleural cavity but not “in” the 
pleural cavity?
4.	List the cell types found in the alveoli and explain their 
functions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Terminal
bronchiole
Respiratory
bronchiole
Pulmonary arteriole 
Bronchiole
Pulmonary venule
Alveoli
Alveolar sac
Capillary
networks
around
alveoli
Respiratory membrane:
Squamous alveolar cell
Shared basement membrane
Capillary endothelial cell
Squamous alveolar cell
Alveolar 
macrophage
Respiratory membrane
Fluid with surfactant
Great 
alveolar 
cell
Air
Lymphocyte
Capillary endothelial cell
CO2
O2
Blood
Figure 15.9 Pulmonary Alveoli. (a) Clusters of 
alveoli and their blood supply. (b) Structure of an 
alveolus. (c) Structure of the respiratory membrane.
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      509  

The Mechanics of Breathing
Breathing, or pulmonary ventilation, consists of inspiration (inhaling) and 
expiration (exhaling). One complete inspiration and expiration is called a 
respiratory cycle.
Airflow into and out of the lungs is driven by differences in pressure between 
the atmosphere and the lungs. Like blood and other fluids, air flows from a point of 
high pressure to a point of lower pressure. If atmospheric (barometric) pressure 
is greater than intrapulmonary pressure (pressure inside the lungs), air flows into 
the lungs; if intrapulmonary pressure exceeds atmospheric pressure, air flows out. 
A person breathes by raising and lowering the intrapulmonary pressure so that it 
cyclically falls below and rises above the atmospheric pressure.
Pressure changes inside the lungs that drive ventilation result from contraction 
and relaxation of the diaphragm and other muscles that alter pressure in the thoracic 
cavity. For any container of a given volume, if the volume increases, the pressure falls, 
and vice versa. Consider a syringe, for example. If you pull back the plunger, you 
increase the volume within the syringe, causing the internal pressure to drop. When 
it falls below the surrounding air pressure, air flows into the syringe. Conversely, if 
you push the plunger in, you reduce the volume and increase the pressure within the 
syringe. When its internal pressure rises above the surrounding air pressure, air flows 
out. The respiratory muscles of the thoracic cavity have the same effect on volume 
and pressure within the thorax, and on airflow into and out of the lungs.
The changes in pressure during inspiration and expiration are shown in  
figure 15.10. When dealing with thoracic pressures, we must use a new unit of 
measure, different from what you’re accustomed to. In chapter 13, we used mil-
limeters of mercury (mm Hg) as a measure of blood pressure. This is a measure 
of how high up a vacuum tube a force such as blood pressure or the weight of 
the atmosphere can push a column of mercury. Mercury is a very heavy liquid, 
so we use it because pressures can be measured with a relatively short column of 
mercury, as in the sphygmomanometers of a doctor’s office. But the pressures in 
respiratory airflow are so small that they couldn’t move a mercury column much 
at all; mercury-based instruments aren’t sensitive enough. Respiratory physiolo-
gists therefore traditionally used water columns, which are more sensitive, and the 
pressures are measured in centimeters of water (cm H2O). One mm Hg is about 
13.6 mm H2O (~1.4 cm H2O). Small pressure changes will move a column of 
water more than a column of mercury; one can see them and measure them more 
accurately. 
15.2  Pulmonary Ventilation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain how differences in pressure between the atmosphere 
and lungs account for the flow of air into and out of the lungs;
b.	name the muscles of respiration and describe their roles in inspi-
ration and expiration;
c.	define the clinical measurements of pulmonary ventilation; and
d.	describe the brainstem centers that control breathing and the 
inputs they receive from other parts of the nervous system.
510      PART 5  Intake and Output

Figure 15.10 The Respiratory Cycle. All pressures given here are relative to atmospheric pressure, which is considered to be zero as a 
point of reference. Note that pressures governing respiratory airflow are measured in cm H2O (centimeters of water), not mm Hg. Like bucket 
handles, each rib is attached at both ends (to the spine and sternum) and swings up and down during inspiration and expiration. 
Diaphragm rises
Sternum
Sternum
Rib
Rib
Diaphragm ﬂattens
At rest, atmospheric and
intrapulmonary pressures
are equal, and there is
no airﬂow.
Ribs swing upward
like bucket handles
during inspiration.
Ribs swing downward
like bucket handles
during expiration.
No airﬂow 
Airﬂow 
Airﬂow 
Pleural cavity
Diaphragm
Intrapulmonary pressure 0 cm H2O
Intrapulmonary
pressure +1 cm H2O
Intrapulmonary
pressure –1 cm H2O
1
In inspiration, the thoracic cavity expands laterally, vertically,
and anteriorly; intrapulmonary pressure drops 1 cm H2O below 
atmospheric pressure, and air ﬂows into the lungs.
2
In expiration, the thoracic cavity contracts in all three directions;
intrapulmonary pressure rises 1 cm H2O above atmospheric 
pressure, and air ﬂows out of the lungs.
3
Sternum
Sternum
Ribs depressed, thoracic
cavity narrows
Sternum swings down,
thoracic cavity contracts
posteriorly
Ribs elevated, thoracic
cavity expands laterally
Sternum swings up,
thoracic cavity expands
anteriorly
Rib
Rib
Inspiration
2
Expiration
3
Pause
4
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      511  

Figure 15.11 The Respiratory Muscles. Bold-
face indicates the principal respiratory muscles; the 
others are accessory. Blue arrows indicate muscular 
actions of inspiration and green arrows indicate ex-
piration. The arrows show the direction of muscle 
action. Muscles listed on the left are active during 
inspiration and those on the right are active during 
forced expiration. Note that the diaphragm is active 
in both phases.
The principal muscle (prime mover) of pulmonary ventilation is the diaphragm, 
the muscular dome that separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities (fig. 15.11). 
It alone accounts for about two-thirds of the pulmonary airflow. When relaxed, it 
bulges upward and presses against the base of the lungs, and the lungs are at their 
minimum volume. When the diaphragm contracts, it flattens, dropping about 1.5 cm 
in relaxed inspiration and as much as 7 cm in deep breathing. This enlarges the tho-
racic cavity (including the lungs), reduces intrapulmonary pressure, and produces an 
inflow of air. Other muscles assist the diaphragm. The external intercostal muscles 
pull the ribs upward and the sternum forward, increasing the diameter of the chest. 
In quiet breathing, the dimensions of the thoracic cage increase by only 2 to 5 mm 
in each direction, but combined with the movement of the diaphragm, this increases 
thoracic volume by approximately 500 mL. Thus, during a typical inspiration, about 
500 mL of air flows into the respiratory tract.
Lung expansion doesn’t depend on muscle action alone. The parietal pleura 
adheres to the wall of the rib cage and, in turn, clings to the visceral pleura on the 
outer surface of the lung, much like two wet sheets of paper cling together. When 
the ribs swing upward and outward during inspiration, the pleurae follow them, 
carrying the lung surface with them. Thus, the entire lung expands along with the 
thoracic cage.
Unlike inspiration, quiet expiration is a passive process that doesn’t require 
muscular activity. Many structures of the thorax are elastic: the costal cartilages, 
the ligaments that attach the ribs to the spine, and elastic tissue in the bronchi and 
bronchioles. As the diaphragm and other muscles of inspiration relax, the structures 
spring back to resting size and the thoracic cage decreases in volume and compresses 
Sternocleidomastoid
(elevates sternum)
External intercostals
(elevate ribs 2–12,
widen thoracic cavity)
Diaphragm
(descends and increases 
depth of thoracic cavity)
Inspiration
Internal intercostals
(depress ribs 1–11,
narrow thoracic cavity)
Diaphragm
(ascends and reduces
depth of thoracic cavity)
Rectus abdominis
(depresses lower ribs,
pushes diaphragm upward
by compressing
abdominal organs)
External abdominal oblique
(same eﬀects as
rectus abdominis)
Forced expiration
512      PART 5  Intake and Output

Lung volume (mL)
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
Maximum possible inspiration
Residual
volume
Tidal
volume
Vital capacity
Expiratory
reserve volume
Inspiratory
reserve volume
Maximum voluntary
expiration
Time (sec)
the lungs. This raises the intrapulmonary pressure to a level above that of the atmo-
sphere, forcing air out of the lungs.
During forced expiration—for example, when singing or shouting, coughing 
or sneezing, exercising, or playing a wind instrument—the rectus abdominis pulls 
down on the sternum and lower ribs, while part of the internal intercostal muscles 
pulls the other ribs downward. These actions reduce the chest diameter and help to 
expel air more rapidly and thoroughly. Singers and public speakers employ “abdom-
inal breathing,” in which the transverse abdominal and abdominal oblique muscles 
compress the abdominal cavity and push some of the viscera such as the stomach 
and liver upward against the diaphragm. This increases the pressure in the thoracic 
cavity and helps to expel air. Breathing is also aided by several other muscles of the 
neck, abdomen, lower back, and even the pelvic floor.
Not only does abdominal pressure affect thoracic pressure, the opposite is also 
true. Depression of the diaphragm raises abdominal pressure and helps to expel the 
contents of certain abdominal organs, thus aiding in childbirth, urination, defeca-
tion, and vomiting. During such actions, we often consciously or unconsciously 
employ the Valsalva7 maneuver. This consists of taking a deep breath, holding it by 
closing the glottis, and then contracting the abdominal muscles to raise abdominal 
pressure and push the organ contents out.
Measurements of Ventilation
Measurements of pulmonary ventilation are used to assess the severity of respiratory 
disease or to monitor a patient’s improvement or disease progression. To measure 
pulmonary function, a subject breathes into a device called a spirometer,8 which 
recaptures the expired breath and records the rate of breathing and volumes of air 
that enter and leave the lungs. The measurement of pulmonary function is called 
­spirometry. Figure 15.12 shows values for a healthy adult. These values are propor-
tional to body size; consequently, they are generally higher for men than for women.
One value obtained with a spirometer is tidal volume, the amount of air inhaled 
or exhaled in one relaxed breath. The average tidal volume is about 500 mL. Other 
volumes include the inspiratory reserve volume, the amount of air that can be 
drawn into the lungs beyond the normal quiet inspiration (typically about 3,000 mL), 
and expiratory reserve volume, the amount of air that can be expelled beyond the 
normal quiet expiration (typically about 1,200 mL). Vital capacity is the maximum 
amount of air that can be exhaled after the deepest possible inspiration. It is the 
sum of tidal volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and expiratory reserve volume. 
It represents the maximum ability to ventilate lungs in 
one breath, and is an especially important measure of 
pulmonary health. Even when one exhales as much as 
possible, an amount of air called the residual volume 
remains in the lungs and mixes with fresh air on the 
next inspiration. The residual volume prevents collapse 
of the alveoli and allows gas exchange to continue even 
between inspirations.
Spirometry is especially valuable for the diagno-
sis and assessment of restrictive and obstructive lung 
disorders. Restrictive disorders are conditions associ-
ated with poor pulmonary compliance—the ability of 
the lungs to expand when pressure changes. Because 
of differences in age or pulmonary health, one person’s 
lungs may expand more readily than another person’s 
in response to an identical pressure change in the tho-
rax. Compliance is compromised when the lungs are 
7Antonio Maria Valsalva (1666–1723), Italian anatomist 
8spiro = breath; meter = measuring device
Figure 15.12 Spirometry. The wavy line indicates 
inspiration when it rises and expiration when it falls.
© BSIP/Science Source
•	 Why does accurate spirometry require the sub-
ject to wear a nose clip, as the boy in the photo 
is doing?
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      513  

Input for 
voluntary control
of breathing,
emotional 
inﬂuences, etc.
Input for blood
and CSF pH, 
stretch receptors 
in lungs and 
pleurae, and 
bronchial irritants
Brainstem
integrating 
centers
Spinal
integrating 
centers
Ventral 
respiratory
group 
(VRG)
Phrenic
nerve
Intercostal
nerve
Brainstem
Pons
Medulla
Spinal cord
stiffened by a buildup of scar tissue in diseases such as tuberculosis and black 
lung disease. Low compliance results in reduced vital capacity. Obstructive 
disorders interfere with airflow by narrowing or blocking airways, making it 
harder to inhale or exhale. Examples include asthma, emphysema, and chronic 
bronchitis (see Clinical Application 15.1 in section 15.1 and Perspectives on 
Health at the end of this section). Obstructive disorders are assessed by having 
a person exhale as rapidly as possible into a spirometer. A healthy adult should 
be able to expel 75% to 85% of the vital capacity in 1.0 second. A value lower 
than 75% indicates the patient probably has an obstructive disorder.
Apply What You Know
Suppose a person has a tidal volume of 500 mL, an inspiratory reserve 
volume of 2,800 mL, and an expiratory reserve of 1,000 mL. Calculate vital 
capacity. If this person can exhale 2,500 mL in 1.0 second with maximum ef-
fort, what percentage of the vital capacity is this? What does the ­percentage 
indicate about the person’s health?
Figure 15.13 Respiratory Control Centers in the Central Nervous 
System. The ventral respiratory group (VRG) is the pacemaker that generates 
the rhythm of breathing. Its output goes to spinal integrating centers that give 
rise to the intercostal and phrenic nerves, which innervate the intercostal mus-
cles and diaphragm. A brainstem integrating center processes information from 
multiple sources and then issues output to the VRG to adjust the respiratory 
rhythm.
Neural Control of Breathing
Breathing, like the heartbeat, is automatic; we breathe without thinking about 
it, which is a good thing or we would fear going to sleep. However, in contrast 
to the heart, the lungs don’t have a built-in pacemaker. Instead, they rely on 
messages from the nervous system to coordinate the complex skeletal muscle 
actions required to sustain ventilation. The unconscious cycle of breathing is 
controlled by respiratory centers in the brain, specifically in the medulla oblon-
gata and pons (fig. 15.13).
The principal pacemaker for breathing is the ventral respiratory group 
(VRG) of neurons in the medulla oblongata. It contains inspiratory neurons that, 
at rest, typically fire for about 2 seconds and issue nerve signals to the respiratory 
muscles via the spinal cord, paired phrenic nerves to the diaphragm, and paired 
intercostal nerves to the intercostal muscles. The VRG also contains expiratory 
neurons, which then begin to fire and inhibit the inspiratory neurons for about 
3 seconds. The typical resting breathing rhythm of about 12 breaths/min. results 
from these neuron groups in the VRG “taking turns” in this manner.
Of course, we don’t always breathe at that relaxed rate. The medulla and 
pons receive input from several sources that influence one’s respiratory rate and 
depth. Chemoreceptors monitor the pH of the blood and cerebrospinal fluid as 
well as blood CO2 and O2; stretch receptors in the pleurae and bronchial tree 
monitor expansion of the lungs; irritant receptors in the bronchial tree inhibit 
respiration in response to smoke, noxious fumes, and other agents; centers in 
the hypothalamus and limbic system can alter one’s respiration in response to 
emotions; and cerebral centers enable us to voluntarily modify our respiration, 
as in speaking, singing, laughing, swimming, or crying.
514      PART 5  Intake and Output

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
S
moking cigarettes is a relatively recent cultural practice that has 
profound impacts on respiratory health. Tobacco use contrib-
utes to premature death due to emphysema, cancer, and cardio-
vascular disease. The history of respiratory diseases is linked to the 
use of cigarettes, which were not manufactured until the end of the 
nineteenth century. At the beginning of the twentieth century, lung 
cancer was uncommon, but by the 1990s, it had become the leading 
cause of cancer deaths in the United States. Despite decades of re-
search that demonstrates the link between smoking and myriad dis-
eases, approximately 17% of adults in the United States still smoke.
C h r o n i c  O b s t r u c t i v e 
P u l m o n a r y  D i s e a s e
C
  hronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a collective 
term for chronic bronchitis and emphysema. It is among the 
leading causes of disability and death in the United States, and is 
almost always caused by cigarette smoking.
Chronic bronchitis begins with cellular abnormalities brought 
on by persistent exposure to cigarette smoke. Many ciliated cells 
of the respiratory tract transform into nonciliated squamous cells. 
Meanwhile, cilia on cells that retain them are paralyzed by toxins 
in the smoke. The lack of competent cilia impairs the mucociliary 
escalator, which fails to transport debris and microorganisms away 
from the lungs to the throat. Attempts to clear the airway result in a 
persistent cough, the “smoker’s hack.” Inhaled particulates in smoke 
bypass the damaged cilia and travel as far as the alveoli. Alveolar 
macrophages ingest these, especially tar, and fill with black material, 
leading to the black color of smokers’ lungs. The immune function 
of the macrophages is also impaired. Stagnation of the respiratory 
mucus and immune suppression of the macrophages invite recur-
ring infections and inflammation, leading to shortness of breath (dys-
pnea) and oxygen deficiency in the blood and tissues (hypoxia).
In emphysema, the alveoli become hyperinflated and many of 
them burst. The lungs can become permeated with grape-size and 
larger spaces that take the place of functional alveoli. As the disease 
progresses, symptoms include dyspnea, extreme fatigue, inability to 
tolerate even slight physical exertion such as walking across a room, 
and mental sluggishness due to inadequate oxygenation of the brain.
Chronic hypoxia from COPD stimulates the kidneys to secrete 
erythropoietin, which stimulates the production of more erythro-
cytes (see section 12.2). A sharp rise in RBC count increases blood 
viscosity and pressure, puts a strain on the heart, and thus leads to 
cardiac disease as a further consequence of smoking.
L u n g  C a n c e r
C
igarette smoke contains over 60 carcinogens, substances 
known to cause cancer. Accumulation of mutations results 
in the formation of lung tumors (fig. 15.14), over 90% of which de-
velop in the mucous membranes of the large bronchi. In the most 
common form of lung cancer, squamous-cell carcinoma, the bron-
chial epithelium changes from the ciliated pseudostratified type to 
the stratified squamous type. Proliferating cells invade the tissues 
under the epithelium, producing bleeding lesions. Dense masses of 
fibrous tissue (collagen) replace functional lung tissue. In the most 
dangerous form of lung cancer, small-cell (oat-cell) carcinoma, ma-
lignant cells quickly spread beyond the lungs and establish second-
ary (metastatic) tumors in the mediastinum and other organs.
Degeneration of the lungs produces a cough, but coughing 
is such an everyday occurrence among smokers that it seldom 
causes much alarm. The first sign of serious trouble may be cough-
ing up blood. By the time lung cancer is diagnosed, it usually has 
already metastasized to other organs such as the heart, bones, 
liver, lymph nodes, and brain. The chance of recovery is poor rela-
tive to other cancers, with only 18% of patients surviving for 5 years 
after diagnosis.
S m o k i n g  a n d  R e s p i r a t o r y 
H e a l t h
(a) Healthy lung, 
mediastinal surface
(b) Smoker’s lung with 
carcinoma
Tumors
Figure 15.14 Effect of Smoking.
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Dennis Strete, photographer; b: © Biophoto Associates/
Science Source
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      515  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
5.	Explain pressure changes that occur in the thorax 
during inspiration and expiration. Why does contraction 
of the diaphragm cause inspiration but contraction of the 
abdominal muscles causes expiration?
6.	What is the prime mover of respiration? What other muscles 
act as synergists during inspiration and forced expiration?
7.	 Define tidal volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and 
expiratory reserve volume. How is vital capacity calculated? 
Explain why vital capacity is useful for assessing pulmonary 
function.
8.	Name the principal brainstem center that sets the respiratory 
rhythm, and explain how it does so.
9.	Identify several sources of input that the brainstem center 
receives and uses to modify the respiratory rhythm under 
special circumstances.
15.3  Gas Exchange and Transport
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define partial pressure and explain how it affects diffusion of 
gases across the respiratory membrane;
b.	describe gas exchange in the lungs and systemic capillaries;
c.	describe how O2 and CO2 are transported in the blood; and
d.	explain the effect of blood gases and pH on the respiratory 
rhythm.
Composition of Air 
Ultimately, respiration is about gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide. The 
respiratory structures and mechanisms discussed so far only set the stage for deliv-
ering oxygen to the tissues and returning carbon dioxide to the lungs where it can 
be expelled. To grasp how these processes occur, it is necessary to begin with the 
composition of the air we inhale.
The air we breathe consists of 78.6% nitrogen, 20.9% oxygen, 0.04% carbon 
dioxide, traces of several other gases, and variable amounts of water vapor (0.5% on 
a typical cool clear day). Atmospheric pressure is the sum of the pressures exerted 
separately by each of the gases. The separate contribution of each gas is called its 
partial pressure, and is symbolized with a P followed by the formula of the gas, 
such as Po2. For example, oxygen accounts for 20.9% of the volume of air. At the 
average sea-level atmospheric pressure of 760 mm Hg, its partial pressure is there-
fore:
Po2 =  0. 209 × 760 mm Hg = 159 mm Hg
516      PART 5  Intake and Output

When there is a difference between the partial pressure of a gas at one point 
and its partial pressure at another point, we say there is a partial-pressure gradient. 
Movement of a gas from the point of high partial pressure to the point of low partial 
pressure is movement down the gradient.
Alveolar Gas Exchange 
Alveolar gas exchange (external respiration) refers to the loading of O2 and 
unloading of CO2 in the pulmonary alveoli. It depends on the tendency of gases to 
diffuse down their partial-pressure gradients. As we saw earlier, the Po2 at sea level 
is 159 mm Hg. As the air is breathed into the alveoli, it becomes humidified and its 
partial pressure of H2O rises, making the proportion of oxygen lower. By the time 
the air reaches the alveoli, it has a Po2 of about 104 mm Hg, compared to 40 mm Hg 
in the blood of the surrounding capillaries. Oxygen therefore diffuses down its pres-
sure gradient across the respiratory membrane from the alveolar air into the blood. 
In contrast, carbon dioxide has a Pco2 of about 46 mm Hg in the capillary blood 
and 40 mm Hg in the inhaled air, so it diffuses from the capillary into the alveolus.
Alveolar gas exchange is subject to several factors that affect diffusion through 
the respiratory membrane:
	 1.	 Partial-pressure gradient. The greater the difference in partial pressure be-
tween one point and another, the faster the gas will diffuse. This is why a 
patient’s blood oxygen level can be improved by giving oxygen-enriched air.
	 2.	 Membrane thickness. Normally the respiratory membrane is very thin, but 
in conditions such as pneumonia, it can be thickened by fluid accumulation 
(pulmonary edema). Gases then have to travel farther from the alveolar air 
space to the blood, and as a result, oxygen can’t get to the red blood cells 
quickly enough to fully load their hemoglobin and the blood can become 
oxygen-deficient (a state called hypoxemia).
	 3.	 Membrane surface area. Each lung has about 70 m2 of respiratory mem-
brane, normally a more-than-adequate surface area for gas exchange. De-
generative pulmonary diseases such as emphysema, however, dramatically 
reduce the surface area and result in low blood Po2. This is why persons with 
emphysema often must use supplemental oxygen—to compensate for the re-
duced alveolar surface area by accentuating the pressure gradient in point 1 
of this list.
Gas Transport
Gas transport refers to the manner in which the blood carries oxygen and carbon 
dioxide between the lungs and systemic tissues. As we saw earlier, oxygen has a 
higher Po2 in the alveoli than in the blood arriving at an alveolus, so it diffuses into 
the blood. About 98.5% of it enters the erythrocytes (RBCs) and binds to the iron 
in the hemoglobin molecules (see fig. 12.4). Hemoglobin with oxygen bound to it 
is called oxyhemoglobin. Since the hemoglobin molecule has four heme groups, 
and each heme can bind one O2 molecule, each hemoglobin can carry up to four O2. 
The remaining 1.5% of the transported O2 is dissolved gas in the blood plasma. The 
poison carbon monoxide also binds to the iron, and much more tightly than oxygen 
does. It prevents hemoglobin from binding oxygen, and this is precisely why breath-
ing carbon monoxide in the air can be fatal.
The blood also transports carbon dioxide. The Pco2 in systemic tissue fluid is 
typically about 46 mm Hg, and in the arriving arterial blood it is about 40 mm Hg. 
Therefore, CO2 diffuses from the tissue fluid into the blood. About 5% of it binds 
to proteins such as hemoglobin and plasma albumin, and 5% is transported as dis-
solved gas much like the CO2 in champagne and carbonated beverages. Ninety per-
cent, however, reacts with water to produce carbonic acid (H2CO3), which then 
dissociates into bicarbonate and hydrogen ions:
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      517  

CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → HCO3
– + H+
This reaction occurs primarily within the RBCs, which have an enzyme called 
carbonic anhydrase that greatly accelerates the process. The H+ binds to hemoglo-
bin and thus does not greatly affect the blood pH; the HCO3
– diffuses out of the RBC 
into the blood plasma. Carbon dioxide binds to a different site on hemoglobin (the 
globin) than the oxygen does (the heme), so hemoglobin can transport both gases 
simultaneously.
Systemic Gas Exchange
Systemic gas exchange (internal respiration) means the unloading of O2 and load-
ing of CO2 at the systemic capillaries. Blood arriving here typically has a Po2 of 
about 95 mm Hg and the surrounding tissue fluid has about 40 mm Hg. Oxygen 
therefore dissociates from the oxyhemoglobin molecule and diffuses out of the 
blood into the tissue fluid. Typically, the blood gives up about 22% of its oxygen in 
one pass through a systemic capillary bed, so it still has 78% of its load as it returns 
to the heart and lungs.
The amount of oxygen unloaded, however, is not constant in all tissues or at 
all times. Active tissues need more oxygen, and fortunately, hemoglobin adjusts its 
unloading to variations in local demand. In highly active tissue such as exercising 
muscle, it can unload up to 80% of its oxygen. There are multiple mechanisms by 
which hemoglobin adjusts O2 unloading to the metabolic state of a local tissue. A 
few of these (not a complete list) follow.
	 1.	 Active tissues consume O2 rapidly, lowering the Po2 of the tissue fluid. If 
there is a greater difference between the Po2 of the blood and tissue fluid, 
then O2 diffuses more rapidly into the tissue. This is a case of the partial-
pressure gradient issue explained earlier.
	 2.	 Active tissues produce more CO2 than less active ones. CO2 generates acid 
through the carbonic acid reaction shown above, lowering the pH of the 
Clinical Application 15.2
HIGH-ALTITUDE PHYSIOLOGY
One of the most thrilling adventures one can have is to climb mountains, but 
climbing at high altitudes poses physiological challenges. In the past sever-
al decades, many people have attempted to ascend Mount Everest, which at 
8,848 m (29,029 ft) is the highest point on the earth’s surface. The atmospheric 
pressure at the peak is approximately 255 mm Hg, or about one-third of the 
pressure at sea level. Oxygen is still approximately 21% of the mix of gases in 
the air; thus, the Po2 is only 53 mm Hg. At very high altitudes, the Po2 gradient 
between the alveolus and the blood capillaries is not great enough to drive the 
diffusion of O2 to the blood.
At high altitude, the body responds in the short term by increasing ven-
tilation and heart rate, resulting in enhanced oxygen delivery to the tissues. 
Climbers attempt to offset the lack of oxygen by a process called acclimatiza-
tion; they ascend to increasingly higher elevations over a period of several 
days or even weeks. The slow ascent leads to physiological changes that help 
one cope with the “thin air.” For example, within a few days at high altitude, 
red blood cell production increases due to increased levels of erythropoietin 
(EPO) secreted by the kidneys. As a result, the hematocrit, normally about 
40% to 45%, can rise to over 55%. In addition, the mitochondria become more 
efficient at using O2 to produce ATP. Despite acclimatization, ascent to very 
high altitudes (over 20,000 ft) often leads to symptoms such as fatigue, head-
ache, nausea, and a decline in cognitive ability.
518      PART 5  Intake and Output

tissue fluid. Hemoglobin responds to the lower pH by releasing more O2—a 
phenomenon called the Bohr effect.
	 3.	 Active tissues generate more heat than less active ones. Hemoglobin releases 
O2 more easily at higher temperatures, thus unloading more O2 to the warm-
est, most active tissues.
Blood Gases and the Respiratory Rhythm
We breathe more heavily at some times (during exercise, for example) than at oth-
ers. Pulmonary ventilation varies as it adjusts to the body’s rate of CO2 production 
and demand for O2. The effect is to maintain a stable blood pH (7.40 ± 0.05) and 
systemic arterial Po2 and Pco2 of 95 and 40 mm Hg, respectively. Regulation of 
these values depends on input to brainstem respiratory centers from the previously 
described chemoreceptors that monitor the composition of blood and cerebrospinal 
fluid. The most potent stimulus for breathing is pH, followed by CO2. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, the least significant is O2.
A blood pH below 7.35 is known as acidosis. The corrective homeostatic 
response to acidosis is an increase in the rate and depth of breathing, “blowing off” 
CO2 faster than the body produces it. As CO2 is eliminated from the body, the car-
bonic acid reaction shifts to the left:
CO2 + H2O ← H2CO3 ← HCO3
– + H+ 
Thus, the H+ on the right is consumed, raising the pH and ideally returning it to 
normal.
A pH greater than 7.45 is alkalosis. The response to this is a reduced respiratory 
rate and depth, allowing some CO2 to accumulate and lower the pH to normal. You 
can see that Pco2 and pH are very closely linked in regulating respiration. Oxygen 
normally has little effect because hemoglobin is almost saturated with O2 anyway 
when it leaves the lungs, and little can be gained from heavier breathing. Oxygen 
does become more influential, however, in conditions involving high altitude (avia-
tion and mountain climbing) and in diseases such as emphysema and pneumonia.
In summary, the main chemical stimulus to pulmonary ventilation is a change 
in pH that stimulates chemoreceptors of the brain and arteries. A pH change derives 
from changes in Pco2 of the arterial blood. Therefore, changes in levels of carbon 
dioxide in the blood indirectly influence pulmonary ventilation. Ventilation is 
adjusted to maintain arterial pH at about 7.40. Normally, arterial Po2 has relatively 
little effect on respiration.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
10.	Identify three factors that affect the efficiency of alveolar gas 
exchange.
11        .	How is most oxygen transported in the blood?
12.	What are the three ways in which blood transports CO2? 
Which one is most significant?
13.	Give three reasons why highly active tissues extract more 
oxygen from the blood than less active tissues.
14.	What is the most potent chemical stimulus to respiration?
15.	Explain how changes in pulmonary ventilation can correct pH 
imbalances.
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      519  

Aging of the Respiratory System
Respiratory failure is one of the leading causes of death in elderly 
people, but the gradual decline of respiratory function begins as 
early as the 30s. This decline is one of several factors in the gradual 
loss of physical endurance. The costal cartilages and joints of the 
thoracic cage become less flexible, and the lungs have less elas-
tic tissue and fewer alveoli. Vital capacity, forced expiratory volume, 
and other values fall. Elderly people are also less capable of clearing 
the lungs of irritants and pathogens and are therefore increasingly 
vulnerable to respiratory infections. Pneumonia causes more deaths 
than any other infectious disease and is often contracted in hospi-
tals and nursing homes. The chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases 
(COPDs)—emphysema and chronic bronchitis—are more common in 
old age since they represent the cumulative effects of a lifetime of 
degenerative change. COPDs also contribute to cardiovascular dis-
ease, hypoxemia (low blood Po2), and hypoxic degeneration in all 
organ systems.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT 
R e s p i r a t o r y  T h e r a p i s t
The respiratory therapist (RT) is an essential part of medical teams that deal with 
respiratory health. An RT specializes in assessment and treatment of respira-
tory conditions such as asthma or emphysema, and conditions that stem from 
other causes but affect breathing, such as strokes, heart attack, and spinal cord 
trauma. An RT is skilled in the use of equipment such as mechanical ventilators, 
which assist with breathing, and spirometers, devices that measure respiratory 
volumes. He or she may work in a variety of settings including hospital intensive 
care units, emergency rooms, or neonatal units; on emergency flight teams; or 
in home health care. To become an RT, students usually must complete either 
an associate degree or certificate program at a community college, or a 4-year 
bachelor’s degree. One must pass national exams to become either a certified respiratory therapist or registered respiratory thera-
pist. See appendix B for further information on careers in respiratory therapy.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Rick Brady, photographer
520      PART 5  Intake and Output

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the RESPIRATORY SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Nervous System
Respiratory control is necessary in carrying out 
vocalizations initiated by the nervous system; 
acid–base balances resulting from respiratory 
dysfunction can make neurons insufficiently or 
excessively excitable.
Skeletal System
Any respiratory disorder that causes 
hypoxemia stimulates accelerated 
erythropoiesis in the red bone marrow.
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone 
Images/Getty Images
Circulatory System
By participation in angiotensin II production, lungs 
contribute to hormonal control of blood flow and blood 
pressure; variations in respiratory rate stabilize blood 
pH; thoracic pump aids in venous return of blood to the 
heart; obstruction of pulmonary circulation can lead to 
right-sided heart failure.
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
Urinary System
The Valsalva maneuver aids in 
emptying the urinary bladder; 
respiratory and urinary systems 
collaborate in regulating acid–
base balance.
© Medical Body  
Scans/Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
© mevans/Getty Images RF
Muscular System
Acid–base imbalances caused by 
respiratory dysfunction can affect 
neuromuscular function. Acidosis, for example, 
makes muscular reflexes more sluggish.
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
Endocrine System
Lungs contain angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE), which converts angiotensin I to the hor-
mone angiotensin II; hypoxemia stimulates the 
secretion of the hormone erythropoietin.
Integumentary System
Respiratory dysfunctions can cause such 
skin discolorations as cyanosis (blueness) 
or erythema (redness).
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
All Systems
The respiratory system provides oxygen to all tissues and removes their carbon dioxide.
© Getty Images
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
Thoracic pump aids lymph flow.
Digestive System
The Valsalva maneuver aids in vom-
iting and defecation.
Reproductive System
The Valsalva maneuver aids in 
childbirth.
	
521

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
15.1  Functions and Anatomy of the 
Respiratory System
	 1.	 Five functions of the respiratory system
	 2.	 Function of the vibrissae (guard hairs)
	 3.	 Anterior and posterior boundaries of the nose
	 4.	 Structure and functional significance of the nasal conchae
	 5.	 Histology of the respiratory epithelium and the functional 
significance of its ciliated cells and goblet cells
	 6.	 Three divisions of the pharynx
	 7.	 Major structural features of the larynx and the function of the 
epiglottis
	 8.	 How the vocal cords produce sound; how their sound is 
transformed into intelligible words; and why men, women, and 
children differ in the pitch of the voice
	 9.	 Structure of the trachea and the functional significance of its 
cartilage, smooth muscle, and epithelial type
	10.	 The nature and functional importance of the mucociliary 
escalator
	11.	 Gross anatomy of the lungs and their spatial relationships with 
other thoracic structures
	12.	 Structure and function of the pleurae
	13.	 Anatomy and histology of the bronchial tree from the main 
bronchi through the bronchioles
	14.	 Distinctions between the upper and lower respiratory tract and 
the conducting and respiratory zones of the tract
	15.	 Components of the respiratory zone of the airway and the 
relationship of their special histology to their function
	16.	 Cellular organization of the alveoli, the function of each cell 
type, and the structure of the respiratory membrane
	17.	 The source and function of pulmonary surfactant
	18.	 The two sources of blood to the lungs and their functional 
difference
15.2  Pulmonary Ventilation 
	 1.	 Definitions of inspiration, expiration, and respiratory cycle
	 2.	 How respiratory airflow is governed by atmospheric and 
intrapulmonary pressures
	 3.	 The principal muscles of inspiration and how their actions 
result in an inflow of air
	 4.	 Role of the pleurae in inspiration
	 5.	 The normal mechanism of relaxed expiration, and why it does 
not require a muscular effort
	 6.	 Muscles that assist with forced expiration
	 7.	 How the Vasalva maneuver is performed and what bodily 
functions it aids
	 8.	 Definitions of the lung volumes and capacities measured with 
a spirometer, and why this is done
	 9.	 Definitions and examples of restrictive and obstructive lung 
disorders
	10.	 Locations of the principal pacemaker of breathing, how its 
neurons control the respiratory cycle, and the inputs it receives 
to modify respiratory rate and depth
15.3  Gas Exchange and Transport 
	 1.	 The composition of the air we breathe
	 2.	 The meaning of partial pressure and how the partial pressures 
of gases such as O2 and CO2 are calculated
	 3.	 The meaning of alveolar gas exchange and how it is governed 
by gradients of partial pressure
	 4.	 Three factors that can alter the efficiency of alveolar gas 
exchange
	 5.	 How O2 and CO2 are transported in the blood; which of the 
methods depend on hemoglobin and how they relate to 
hemoglobin structure
	 6.	 The chemical equation for the formation of carbonic acid 
from water and CO2; how it relates to CO2 transport and 
blood pH
	 7.	 The meaning of systemic gas exchange and how it relates to 
partial-pressure gradients
	 8.	 How hemoglobin is able to release more oxygen to some 
tissues than to others in accordance with the metabolic state of 
different tissues
	 9.	 How respiration relates to the pH of the blood
	10.	 Definitions of acidosis and alkalosis and how the respiratory 
system responds to each
	11.	 Why Po2 normally has little effect on pulmonary 
ventilation
522      PART 5  Intake and Output

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which structure seals the opening to the larynx and diverts 
food and drink to the esophagus?
a.	 glottis
b.	 epiglottis
c.	 vocal cord
d.	 thyroid cartilage 
e.	 cricoid cartilage
	 2.	 The structures responsible for warming and humidifying air as 
it travels through the nasal cavity are
a.	 choanae.
b.	 conchae.
c.	 nares.
d.	 vibrissae.
e.	 goblet cells.
	 3.	 In speech, crude sounds are converted to recognizable words 
primarily by
a.	 the trachea.
b.	 the thyroid cartilage.
c.	 the vocal cords.
d.	 the epiglottis.
e.	 the lips and tongue.
	 4.	 A restrictive lung disorder is most likely to result in
a.	 slower airflow.
b.	 a reduced vital capacity.
c.	 alkalosis.
d.	 pulmonary scar tissue.
e.	 a COPD.
	 5.	 The source of pulmonary surfactant is
a.	 the visceral pleura.
b.	 tracheal glands.
c.	 alveolar capillaries.
d.	 squamous alveolar cells.
e.	 great alveolar cells.
	 6.	 Which of the following are fewest in number but largest in 
diameter?
a.	 alveoli
b.	 terminal bronchioles
c.	 alveolar ducts
d.	 bronchi
e.	 respiratory bronchioles
	 7.	 Which of the following is/are not lined with pseudostratified 
columnar epithelium?
a.	 nasal cavity
b.	 trachea
c.	 nasopharynx
d.	 alveolar ducts
e.	 main bronchi
	 8.	 What is the average Po2 at sea level?
a.	 159 mm Hg
b.	 100 mm Hg
c.	 0.03 mm Hg
d.	 40 mm Hg
e.	 46 mm Hg
	 9.	 Which of these values would normally be the highest?
a.	 tidal volume
b.	 inspiratory reserve volume
c.	 expiratory reserve volume
d.	 vital capacity
e.	 It would differ from one person to another.
	10.	 During inspiration, most of the airflow results from the 
action of
a.	 the external intercostal muscles.
b.	 the internal intercostal muscles.
c.	 the diaphragm.
d.	 the rectus abdominis muscle.
e.	 the abdominal oblique muscles.
	11.	 The process of measuring pulmonary function is called 
________.
	12.	 The ________ is a respiratory pacemaker in the medulla 
oblongata.
	13.	 The largest cartilage of the larynx is the ________ cartilage.
	14.	 The last line of defense against inhaled particles is phagocytic 
cells called ________.
	15.	 A serous membrane that clings to the inside walls of the 
rib cage and the superior surface of the diaphragm is the 
________.
	16.	 In the blood, CO2 combines with H2O to form ________.
	17.	 Nerve endings that monitor the pH and chemical composition 
of the blood are called ________.
	18.	 The mechanism that moves debris-laden mucus up the bronchi 
and trachea to the pharynx, where it can be swallowed, is 
called the ________.
	19.	 Each lung receives a main bronchus, blood vessels, and nerves 
through a slit called the ________.
	20.	 ________ is a condition caused by bronchospasm that results 
in shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing.
Answers in Appendix A
CHAPTER 15   The Respiratory System      523  

What’s Wrong with These 
Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 An average tidal volume is 1,000 mL.
	 2.	 Restrictive lung diseases are characterized by narrowed or 
blocked airways.
	 3.	 Most of the CO2 transported by the blood is in the form of dis-
solved gas.
	 4.	 The palatine tonsils are found in the nasopharynx.
	 5.	 Each lung contains approximately 1 million alveoli.
	 6.	 Pulmonary surfactant is produced by squamous alveolar cells.
	 7.	 The most important factor that influences breathing rate and 
depth is Po2.
	 8.	 Reduced respiratory rate and depth of breathing may be associ-
ated with acidosis.
	 9.	 The Po2 in air freshly drawn into the alveoli is 40 mmHg.
	10.	 When intrapulmonary pressure exceeds atmospheric pressure, 
air flows into the lungs.
 Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 In emphysema, there is a substantial loss of pulmonary alveoli 
and gas-exchange surface area, resulting in a low blood Po2. 
Explain why emphysema would also result in a high blood 
Pco2 and acidosis.
	 2.	 Why is it more sensible for the hilum of each lung to be on its 
medial surface than it would be for it to be located at its apex, 
base, or costal surface?
	 3.	 The rhythmic beating of the heart is driven by a pacemaker 
located in the heart itself, yet the rhythmic expansion and 
contraction of the lungs are controlled by a pacemaker in the 
brainstem. Why do you think this is necessary, rather than the 
lungs having their own pacemaker?
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional 
multiple choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
524      PART 5  Intake and Output

16
Chapter
Chapter Outline
16.1 Functions of the Urinary System
• Functions of the Kidneys 
• Metabolic Wastes and Excretion 
16.2  Anatomy of the Kidney
• Gross Anatomy 
• Renal Circulation 
• The Nephron     
16.3 Glomerular Filtration
• Filtration Pressure 
• Glomerular Filtration Rate 
• Regulation of Glomerular Filtration   
16.4 Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion
• The Proximal Convoluted Tubule 
• The Nephron Loop 
• The Distal Convoluted Tubule 
• Tubular Secretion   
16.5 Water Conservation
• The Collecting Duct 
• Control of Water Loss   
16.6 Urine Storage and Elimination
• The Ureters 
• The Urinary Bladder 
• The Urethra 
• Voiding Urine 
• Urine Volume and Properties   
16.7 Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Balance
• Fluid Balance 
• Electrolyte Balance 
• Acid–Base Balance    
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 16.1: Kidney Stones 
• Clinical Application 16.2: Urinary Tract Infection 
• Perspectives on Health 
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Urinary System
• Career Spotlight: Dialysis Technician 
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide  
Module 13: Urinary System
The Urinary 
­System
B A S E  C A M P
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Acids, bases, and pH (see section 2.2) 
• Osmosis and carrier-mediated transport  
(see section 3.2)  
• Blood pressure, resistance, and flow  
(see section 13.5)  
• Capillary fluid exchange (see section 13.5)    
Each kidney has about 1 million of these microscopic, blood-filtering structures 
called glomeruli. An arteriole (yellow) feeds into the glomerulus (pink), a ball of blood 
capillaries that filter the blood and begin the process of urine formation.
© Susumu Nishinaga/Science Source
	
525

The urinary system is one of the anatomically simpler systems of the body, ­having 
only six principal organs: two kidneys, two ureters, the urinary ­bladder, and 
the urethra (fig. 16.1). Most of this chapter concerns the kidneys, the organs of 
urine production. The others—the organs of urine elimination—are treated in 
section 16.6.
Functions of the Kidneys 
The kidneys play more roles than are commonly realized:
∙	 They filter the blood plasma and excrete toxic metabolic wastes. 
∙	 They regulate blood volume, pressure, and osmolarity by regulating water 
output. 
A
n inevitable effect of metabolism is the production of waste 
products that are poisonous to the organism itself, so every living 
thing from bacterium to plant to human must have a way of eliminating 
them. Removing metabolic wastes and toxins from the blood and excret-
ing them from the body is a task of the urinary system. The kidneys do 
much more than this, however, as you will see. They have close functional 
relationships with the endocrine, circulatory, and respiratory systems that 
we have covered in recent chapters. They are involved in regulating fluid, 
electrolyte, and acid–base balances, among other aspects of homeostasis. 
This explains why patients with kidney failure have a number of problems 
that may include anemia, hypertension, and electrolyte imbalances.
Anatomically, the urinary system is closely associated with the 
reproductive system. The two systems have a shared embryonic develop-
ment, and in many animals, the eggs and sperm are emitted through the 
urinary tract. In human males, the urethra continues to serve as a passage 
for both urine and sperm. Thus, the urinary and reproductive systems 
are often collectively called the urogenital or genitourinary system, and 
urologists treat both urinary and male reproductive disorders.  
16.1  Functions of the Urinary System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	name and locate the organs of the urinary system; 
b.	list several functions of the kidneys in addition to urine formation; 
c.	define excretion and identify the systems that excrete wastes; and 
d.	name the major nitrogenous wastes and identify their sources. 
526      PART 5  Intake and Output

∙	 They regulate the electrolyte and acid–base balance of body fluids. 
∙	 They secrete the hormone erythropoietin, which stimulates the production of 
red blood cells and thus supports the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. 
∙	 They carry out the final step in synthesizing the hormone calcitriol (vitamin D) 
and thereby contribute to calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism. 
∙	 They detoxify some drugs. 
Metabolic Wastes and Excretion
Excretion is the process of separating wastes from body fluids and eliminating 
them. A waste is any substance that is useless or present in excess of the body’s 
needs. A metabolic waste, more specifically, is a waste substance produced by 
the body—for example, as a by-product of ATP production or protein catabolism. 
The urinary system excretes a variety of metabolic wastes, toxins, and drugs in 
the urine. Other systems also excrete wastes; for example, the respiratory system 
excretes carbon dioxide, and the digestive and integumentary systems excrete 
water and salts.
Among the most toxic of our metabolic wastes are small nitrogen-containing 
compounds called nitrogenous wastes. About 50% of the nitrogenous waste is 
urea, a by-product of protein metabolism. Protein breakdown produces ammonia, 
which is exceedingly toxic. The liver quickly converts ammonia to urea, which is 
somewhat less toxic. The urea is carried in blood plasma to the kidneys where it is 
filtered into the urine and excreted.
Other nitrogenous wastes in the urine include uric acid and creatinine (cree-
AT-ih-neen), produced by the catabolism of nucleic acids and creatine phosphate, 
respectively. Although less toxic than ammonia and less abundant than urea, these 
too are far from harmless.
Figure 16.1 The Urinary System. 
 
Ureter
Diaphragm
(b) Posterior view
(a) Anterior view
11th and 12th ribs
Urinary bladder
Urethra
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Renal artery
Renal vein
Adrenal gland
Kidney
Vertebra L2
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      527  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
      1.	State four functions of the kidneys other than forming 
urine. 
2.	List four nitrogenous wastes and their metabolic sources. 
 3.	Name some wastes eliminated by systems other than the 
urinary system. 
16.2  Anatomy of the Kidney
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the location and general appearance of the kidney, and 
its relationship to neighboring organs; 
b.	identify the major external and internal features of the kidney; 
c.	trace the flow of blood through the kidney; 
d.	describe the components of a nephron; and 
e.	trace the flow of fluid through the renal tubules. 
The kidneys lie against the posterior abdominal wall at the level of vertebrae T12 to 
L3 (fig. 16.1). About half of the left kidney is within the rib cage, as rib 12 crosses 
it. The right kidney is slightly lower because the space above it is occupied by the 
large right lobe of the liver. The kidneys are retroperitoneal, along with the ureters, 
urinary bladder, renal artery and vein, and adrenal glands, which lie against the 
posterior body wall outside the peritoneal cavity.
Gross Anatomy 
 
Each kidney weighs about 150 g and measures about 11 cm long, 6 cm wide, and 3 
cm thick—roughly the size of a bar of bath soap. The lateral surface is convex, and 
the medial surface is concave and has a slit, the hilum, where it receives the renal 
blood vessels, nerves, lymphatics, and ureter (fig. 16.2).
Connective tissue layers anchor the kidney and protect it from trauma. It is 
surrounded by a thick layer of fat called the perirenal fat capsule, which cushions it 
and helps to hold it in place. The outermost layer of the kidney itself is the fibrous 
(renal) capsule, which encloses the glandular tissue like plastic wrap.
The glandular, urine-forming tissue of the kidney has a C shape enclosing a 
medial space called the renal sinus. The outer rind of the kidney, the renal cortex, 
is about 1 cm thick in most places. Its inner tissue, the renal medulla, is divided into 
6 to 10 cones called renal pyramids, separated from each other by extensions of 
the cortex called renal columns. The broad base of each pyramid faces the cortex, 
and its blunt apex, the renal papilla, faces the sinus. One pyramid and the overlying 
cortex constitute one lobe of the kidney.
528      PART 5  Intake and Output

The papilla of each pyramid nestles in a cup called a minor calyx1 (CAY-lix), 
which collects its urine. Two or three minor calyces (CAY-lih-seez) converge to 
form a major calyx, and two or three major calyces converge in the sinus to form 
the renal pelvis.2 The funnel-like renal pelvis converges on the ureter, a tube that 
leads to the urinary bladder.
Renal Circulation
Although the kidneys account for only 0.4% of the body weight, they receive about 
21% of the cardiac output. This is a reflection of how important they are in eliminat-
ing toxic waste and regulating blood volume and composition.
Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery arising from the aorta. Branches of 
the renal artery lead to arcuate arteries that arch over the base of each renal pyra-
mid, and from here, slender cortical radiate arteries penetrate into the cortex and 
ascend toward the kidney surface (fig. 16.3). Like the trunk of a pine tree, a cortical 
radiate artery gives off a series of lateral branches called afferent arterioles.
Each afferent arteriole supplies the capillaries of one functional unit of the kid-
ney, called a nephron (fig. 16.4). Blood leaves the nephron by way of an efferent 
arteriole, which usually leads to a web of peritubular capillaries that surround the 
winding tubule of the nephron. From here, the blood flows through a series of veins 
that parallel the arteries and have similar names, ultimately leading to the renal 
vein. This vein exits the kidney at the hilum and leads to the inferior vena cava.
The foregoing description pertains only to the blood supply of the renal cortex. 
The renal medulla receives only 1% to 2% of the total blood flow, yet this is crucial 
to renal function. It is supplied by relatively straight, small blood vessels called the 
vasa recta,3 which arise from the efferent arterioles of the deepest nephrons and 
then drain into the arcuate veins.
Renal cortex
Pyramid of renal
medulla
Minor calyx
Major calyx
Renal column
Renal sinus
Renal pelvis
Renal vein
Ureter
Renal artery
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.2 Gross Anatomy of the Kidney.  
(a) Photograph of frontal section. (b) Major anatomical 
features. 
 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/Rebecca Gray, photographer
1calyx = cup 
2pelvis = basin 
3vasa = vessels; recta = straight
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      529  

The Nephron
Each kidney has about 1.2 million urine-forming functional units called nephrons4 
(NEF-rons). This is where the blood plasma is filtered and processed to form urine. 
To understand how just one of these works is to understand nearly everything about 
how the whole kidney works. Each nephron is composed of two principal parts: 
a renal corpuscle, which filters the blood plasma, and a long coiled renal tubule, 
which converts the filtrate to urine (fig. 16.4). 
The Renal Corpuscle
The renal corpuscle is composed of a ball of capillaries called a glomerulus5 
­(glo-MERR-you-lus) and a two-layered glomerular capsule that encloses it like 
a cup (fig. 16.5). The outer layer of the capsule is a simple squamous epithelium, 
and the inner layer consists of elaborate cells called podocytes6 wrapped around 
the capillaries of the glomerulus (see fig. 16.8). The two layers are separated by a 
filtrate-collecting capsular space.
The afferent arteriole delivers blood to the glomerulus and the efferent arteriole 
carries it away. The two arterioles lie snugly side by side, penetrating the capsule at 
a single opening on one side. The afferent arteriole is significantly larger than the 
efferent arteriole. Thus, the glomerulus has a large inlet and a small outlet—resulting 
in unusually high blood pressure in the glomerulus, which is crucial to the kidney’s 
task of blood filtration. The filtrate enters the capsular space and then passes to the 
renal tubule, described next.
Figure 16.3 Renal Circulation. (a) The larger 
blood vessels of the kidney. (b) Flowchart of renal 
circulation (omitting some minor vessels).
Inferior vena cava
Renal v.
Arcuate v.
Peritubular capillaries
Vasa recta
Eﬀerent arteriole
Glomerulus
Aﬀerent arteriole
Cortical radiate a.
Arcuate a.
Renal a.
(a)
Cortical radiate
artery and vein
Renal
cortex
Arcuate
artery 
and vein
Renal
artery
and
vein
Renal
medulla
(b)
Aorta
4nephro = kidney 
5glomer = ball; ulus = little 
6podo = foot; cyte = cell
530      PART 5  Intake and Output

Arcuate vein
Arcuate artery
Vasa recta
Nephron loop
Collecting duct
Nephron
Nephron
Glomerulus
Eﬀerent arteriole
Aﬀerent arteriole
Cortical radiate
artery
Cortical radiate
vein
Peritubular
capillaries
Corticomedullary
junction
PCT
DCT
Medulla
Cortex
Figure 16.4 Blood Circulation in the Nephron. 
For clarity, vasa recta are shown only on the left and 
peritubular capillaries only on the right. In nephrons 
close to the medulla (left), the efferent arteriole gives 
rise to the vasa recta. In nephrons farther out on the 
cortex (right), the nephron loop barely dips into the 
renal medulla and the efferent arteriole gives rise to 
peritubular capillaries (DCT = distal convoluted tubule; 
PCT = proximal convoluted tubule).
The Renal Tubule
The renal tubule is a duct that leads away from the glomerular capsule on the side 
opposite from the two arterioles. It ends at the tip of a renal pyramid. It is about 3 cm 
long and divided into four regions: the proximal convoluted tubule, nephron loop, 
distal convoluted tubule, and collecting duct (fig. 16.6). The first three of these are 
parts of one nephron; the collecting duct receives fluid from many nephrons. Each 
region of the tubule has unique physiological properties and roles in the production 
of urine:
	 1.	 The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) arises from the glomerular capsule. 
It is long and compactly coiled. It is lined with simple cuboidal epithelium 
with dense microvilli that facilitate absorption of materials.  
	 2.	 The nephron loop is a long U-shaped portion of the renal tubule that begins 
where the PCT straightens. The descending limb of the loop dips into the 
medulla and, at its deep end, turns 180° and forms the ascending limb. The 
ascending limb travels back to the cortex, parallel and close to the descend-
ing limb. (In nephrons that are relatively far from the medulla, the loops are 
much shorter or even nonexistent, and many do not penetrate deeply enough 
to reach the medulla.) Some portions of the loop have a simple cuboidal 
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      531  

­epithelium and therefore look thicker than others; thus, they are called the 
thick segments. The rest of the loop has a simple squamous epithelium and 
is called the thin segment. The thin segment is very permeable to water, 
whereas the rest is less so. The thick segments are heavily engaged in the 
active transport of ions, so they require a lot of ATP and the cells here are 
packed with mitochondria, accounting for their thickness. The functional sig-
nificance of the thick and thin segments will be discussed later. 
	 3.	 The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) begins shortly after the ascending limb 
reenters the cortex. It is shorter and less coiled than the proximal convoluted 
tubule. The DCT is the end of the nephron. 
	 4.	 The collecting duct (CD) receives fluid from the DCTs of several nephrons 
as it passes through the cortex before descending into the medulla. Numer-
ous collecting ducts converge toward the apex of a renal pyramid and end in 
pores at the conical tip of the papilla. Urine drains from these pores into the 
minor calyx that encloses the papilla. 
The flow of fluid from the point where it is filtered from the blood to the point 
where urine leaves the body is glomerular capsule → proximal convoluted tubule → 
nephron loop → distal convoluted tubule → collecting duct → minor calyx → major 
calyx → renal pelvis → ureter → urinary bladder → urethra.
Figure 16.5 The Renal Corpuscle. (a) Anatomy 
of the corpuscle. (b) A vascular cast of the glomeru-
lus and nearby arteries. Note the difference in diam-
eters between the afferent and efferent arterioles. 
 
b: © Steve Gschmeissner/Getty Images
• Which is larger, the afferent or efferent arteri-
ole? How does the difference affect glomerular 
blood pressure? 
Aﬀerent
arteriole
Eﬀerent
arteriole
Podocytes
Blood
ﬂow
Blood ﬂow
Glomerulus 
 
Capsular space 
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Glomerular
capillaries
(podocytes 
and capillary 
wall removed)
(a)
Glomerular 
capsule
(b)
Flow of ﬁltrate
Flow of blood
Key
Aﬀerent
arteriole
Glomerulus
Eﬀerent
arteriole
100 μm
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4. Define the two parts of a renal corpuscle, and explain 
what distinguishes a renal corpuscle from a nephron. 
5.	Trace the path taken by one red blood cell from the renal 
artery, through the renal cortex, to the renal vein. 
6.	Trace a drop of urine on its route from the glomerular capsule 
to the point where it leaves the body. 
532      PART 5  Intake and Output

Renal capsule
Collecting duct
Minor
calyx
Nephron
Renal
cortex
Renal
medulla
(a)
(c)
Renal
papilla
Eﬀerent 
arteriole
Aﬀerent
arteriole
Collecting
duct (CD)
Cortical nephron
Convoluted tubules
(PCT and DCT)
Juxtamedullary
nephron
Cortex
Medulla
Papillary
duct
Glomerulus
Glomerular capsule
Renal corpuscle:
Proximal
convoluted
tubule (PCT)
Distal
convoluted
tubule (DCT)
Nephron loop:
   Descending limb
   Ascending limb
   
   Thick segment
   Thin segment   
Nephron
loops
Collecting
duct
Flow of tubular ﬂuid
Flow of blood
Key
(b)
Figure 16.6 Microscopic Anatomy of the Renal Tubule.  
(a) Location of the nephrons in one wedge-shaped lobe of the 
kidney. (b) Structure of a nephron. For clarity, the nephron is 
stretched out to separate the convoluted tubules and the neph-
ron loop is greatly shortened. (c) The true proportions of the 
nephron loops relative to the convoluted tubules. Three neph-
rons are shown. Their proximal and distal convoluted tubules are 
commingled in a single tangled mass in each nephron. Note the 
extreme lengths of the nephron loops.
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      533  

16.3  Glomerular Filtration
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the process by which the kidney filters the blood 
plasma; 
b.	describe how the sympathetic nervous system, hormones, and 
the kidney itself regulate filtration. 
The kidney converts blood plasma to urine in four stages: glomerular filtration, 
tubular reabsorption, tubular secretion, and water conservation (fig. 16.7), which 
will be explored in this order. As it is transformed to urine, the fluid is referred 
to by different names that reflect its changing composition: (1) The fluid in the 
capsular space, called glomerular filtrate, is similar to blood plasma except that it 
has almost no protein. (2) The fluid from the proximal convoluted tubule through 
the distal convoluted tubule is called tubular fluid. It differs from the glomerular 
filtrate because of substances removed and added by the tubule cells. (3) The fluid 
is called urine once it enters the collecting duct, since it undergoes little alteration 
beyond that point except for a change in concentration.
Figure 16.7 Basic Stages of Urine Formation. 
 
Blood ﬂow
Renal corpuscle
Flow of ﬁltrate
Renal tubule
Peritubular 
capillaries
H2O
Urine 
H2O
H2O
Glomerular ﬁltration
Creates a plasmalike 
ﬁltrate of the blood
1
Tubular reabsorption
Removes useful solutes
from the tubular ﬂuid, 
returns them to the blood 
2
Water conservation
Removes water from the 
urine and returns it to
blood; concentrates wastes
4
Tubular secretion
Removes additional wastes 
from the blood, adds them 
to the tubular ﬂuid
3
534      PART 5  Intake and Output

Glomerular filtration, the first step of urine formation, is a process in which 
water and some solutes in the blood plasma are filtered from the capillaries of the 
glomerulus into the capsular space of the nephron. The fluid passes through three 
barriers that constitute the filtration membrane (fig. 16.8):
	 1.	 The endothelium of the capillary. The glomerulus is composed of 
­fenestrated capillaries perforated by large filtration pores (see “Capillaries” 
in section 13.4). Like fenestrated capillaries elsewhere, these are highly 
permeable, but their pores are small enough to exclude blood cells from 
passing to the filtrate. 
	 2.	 The basement membrane. This is a glycoprotein gel that holds back most 
protein and other particles too large to pass through its fine mesh. Passing 
large molecules through it would be like trying to force sand through a kitch-
en sponge; a little plasma protein gets through, but not much. 
	 3.	 Filtration slits. The podocytes of the glomerular capsule are shaped some-
what like octopi, with bulbous cell bodies and several thick arms. Each arm 
has numerous little extensions called foot processes (pedicels7) that wrap 
around the capillaries and interdigitate with each other, like wrapping your 
hands around a pipe and lacing your fingers together. 
Small molecules pass freely through the filtration membrane into the capsular 
space. These include water, electrolytes, glucose, fatty acids, amino acids, nitrog-
enous wastes, and vitamins. Larger particles are turned back by the filtration mem-
brane and left behind in the blood.
Filtration Pressure
Glomerular filtration is driven by the same basic pressures that drive capillary 
fluid exchange in other places (see “Capillary Fluid Exchange” in section 13.5). 
­However, blood pressure is much higher in the glomerulus than in most other 
­capillaries—about 60 mm Hg compared with 10 to 15 mm Hg elsewhere. This 
results from the fact that the afferent arteriole is substantially larger than the efferent 
arteriole, giving the glomerulus a large inlet and small outlet. Two forces oppose 
the blood pressure in the glomerulus: (1) fluid pressure in the capsular space, and 
Capsular space
Foot process of 
podocyte
Filtration slit
Filtration pore
Basement membrane
Endothelial cell of
glomerular capillary
Passed through ﬁlter:
   Water
   Electrolytes
   Glucose
   Amino acids
   Fatty acids
   Vitamins
   Urea
   Uric acid
   Creatinine
Turned back:
   Blood cells
   Plasma proteins
   Large anions
   Protein-bound
     minerals and
     hormones
   Most molecules
     > 8 nm in
        diameter
Bloodstream
(a)
(b)
Podocyte
cell body
Foot 
processes
(separated 
by narrow 
ﬁltration
slits)
Figure 16.8 The Glomerular Filtration Mem-
brane. (a) Components of the filtration membrane. 
(b) Blood capillaries in the glomerulus closely 
wrapped in spidery podocytes.
b: © Don W. Fawcett/Science Source
7pedi = foot; cel = little
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      535  

(2) osmotic pressure of the blood. Normally, the glomerular blood pressure remains 
high enough to override these, so these capillaries engage solely in filtration. They 
reabsorb little or no fluid.
The high blood pressure in the glomeruli makes the kidneys especially 
­vulnerable to hypertension, which can have devastating effects on renal function. 
Hypertension ruptures glomerular capillaries and leads to scarring of the kidneys 
(nephrosclerosis). It promotes atherosclerosis of the renal blood vessels, just as it 
does elsewhere in the body, and thus diminishes renal blood supply. Over time, 
hypertension often leads to renal failure.
Glomerular Filtration Rate
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the amount of filtrate formed per minute by 
the two kidneys combined. In adult females, the GFR is about 105 mL/min.; in 
males, about 125 mL/min. These rates are equivalent to 150 L/day in females and 
180 L/day in males—impressive numbers considering that this is about 60 times 
the amount of blood plasma in the body. Obviously, only a small portion of this is 
eliminated as urine. An average adult reabsorbs 99% of the filtrate and excretes 1 to 
2 L of urine per day.
Regulation of Glomerular Filtration
GFR must be precisely controlled. If it is too high, fluid flows through the renal 
tubules too rapidly for them to reabsorb the usual amount of water and solutes. 
Urine output rises and creates a threat of dehydration and electrolyte depletion. If 
GFR is too low, fluid flows sluggishly through the tubules, and they reabsorb wastes 
that should be eliminated in the urine. GFR is adjusted through neural, hormonal, 
and local mechanisms that control glomerular blood pressure.
	 1.	 Neural control. The sympathetic nervous system richly innervates the 
­kidneys. During exercise or in conditions such as circulatory shock, it 
­constricts the afferent arterioles, reduces GFR, and reduces urine output. 
This conserves water and redirects blood from the kidneys to the heart, brain, 
and skeletal muscles where it is more urgently needed. Urine volume may be 
reduced during participation in a sporting event for this reason. 
	 2.	 Hormonal control. Several hormones also regulate GFR. When blood pres-
sure (BP) drops, the kidneys secrete the enzyme renin (REE-nin). ­Renin 
converts angiotensinogen, a blood plasma protein, into angiotensin I. An 
enzyme found in the lungs, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), further 
converts this to angiotensin II, a hormone that helps to restore fluid volume 
and blood pressure (fig. 16.9). Angiotensin II makes one thirsty and encour-
ages water intake; it stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete ­aldosterone, 
which promotes retention of sodium and water in the body; and it stimu-
lates the posterior pituitary to secrete antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which 
promotes water retention. Aldosterone and ADH reduce urinary water loss 
from the body, while thirst, of course, builds fluid volume and raises BP. 
	
	 	 Angiotensin II is also a potent vasoconstrictor. Widespread vasocon-
striction raises one’s overall blood pressure (BP), while constriction of the 
­efferent arteriole (the glomerular outlet) sustains glomerular blood pressure 
and filtration. By stabilizing GFR, angiotensin II ensures that the kidneys 
continue to filter waste from the body even when systemic blood pressure is 
abnormally low. 
	 3.	 Local control (renal autoregulation). Aside from the neural and ­hormonal 
“remote control” mechanisms, the nephrons also monitor their own perfor-
mance and independently regulate their GFRs. They maintain a relatively 
stable GFR in spite of changes in arterial blood pressure. A rise in BP 
stretches the afferent arteriole and makes it reflexively constrict, so there is 
little increase in blood flow into the glomerulus or in GFR. If BP falls, in 
536      PART 5  Intake and Output

contrast, the afferent arteriole relaxes and allows more blood into the glom-
erulus, so GFR doesn’t fall very much. These local mechanisms ensure that 
urine output changes very little even when one’s overall blood pressure 
changes. 
	
	 	 In addition, as tubular fluid flows through the final portion of the neph-
ron loop, it passes a group of sensory cells that monitor its flow rate and 
osmolarity. A structure called the juxtaglomerular8 apparatus (JUX-
tuh-glo-MER-you-lur) is found where the nephron loop comes into con-
tact with the afferent and efferent arterioles (fig. 16.10). Two special cell 
types occur here: (1) the macula densa,9 a patch of closely spaced epithe-
lial cells at the end of the nephron loop on the side of the tubule facing the 
arterioles; and (2) granular cells, which are enlarged smooth muscle cells 
located mostly in the afferent arteriole, directly across from the macula 
Figure 16.9 The Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone 
Mechanism. This chain of events is activated by a drop in 
blood pressure and acts to raise it again.
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin I
Liver
Kidney
Kidney
Lungs
Cardiovascular
system
Hypothalamus
Adrenal
cortex
Renin
Vasoconstriction
Aldosterone
Elevated blood 
pressure
Angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE)
Angiotensinogen
Drop in blood
pressure
Thirst and
drinking 
Sodium and
water retention
8juxta = next to; glomer = ball; ul = little; ar = pertaining to 
9macula = spot, patch; densa = dense
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      537  

densa. When stimulated by the macula, they dilate or constrict the arteri-
oles. They also secrete the renin that initiates the hormonal mechanisms 
described earlier. 
In spite of these controls, extreme drops in blood pressure can cause the GFR and 
urine output to fall precipitously or even cease. This is seen, for example, in severe 
circulatory shock from hemorrhage.
To summarize the events thus far: Glomerular filtration occurs because the 
high blood pressure of the glomerular capillaries overrides reabsorption. The filtra-
tion membrane allows water and most plasma solutes into the capsular space while 
retaining formed elements and most protein in the bloodstream. Glomerular filtra-
tion is maintained at a fairly steady rate in spite of normal variations in systemic 
blood pressure. This stability is achieved by nervous, hormonal, and local control 
mechanisms.
Figure 16.10 The Juxtaglomerular Apparatus.
Sympathetic 
nerve ﬁber
Podocytes
Granular cells
Aﬀerent arteriole
Eﬀerent arteriole
Nephron
loop
Macula densa
Smooth muscle 
cells
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t  
know.
    7. Name the four stages in which blood plasma is converted  
to urine. 
8. Explain why, in view of the structure of the glomerular 
­filtration membrane, the glomerular filtrate has a different 
composition from the blood. 
9. Assume a person is exercising, sweating profusely, and 
­experiences a significant drop in body fluid and blood 
­volume. Describe the homeostatic mechanisms that would 
help the kidneys maintain a normal GFR. 
538      PART 5  Intake and Output

16.4  Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe how the renal tubules reabsorb water and useful 
­solutes from the glomerular filtrate and return them to the  
blood; and 
b.	describe how the tubules secrete solutes from the blood into the 
tubular fluid. 
The next two steps of converting glomerular filtrate to urine are tubular reabsorp-
tion and tubular secretion, the removal of some chemicals from the tubular fluid 
and addition of other chemicals to it. These two processes occur simultaneously, 
so we discuss them together in this section. We will trace the course of the tubular 
fluid through the nephron, from the proximal convoluted tubule through the distal 
convoluted tubule, and see how it is modified at each point along the way. Refer to 
figure 16.7 to put these processes into perspective.
The Proximal Convoluted Tubule
Tubular reabsorption is the process of reclaiming water and solutes from the tubu-
lar fluid and returning them to the blood. The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) 
reabsorbs about 65% of the tubular fluid, while it also removes some substances 
from the blood and secretes them into the tubule for disposal in the urine. The 
importance of the PCT is reflected in its relatively great length and a shaggy fringe 
(brush border) of tall microvilli that greatly increase its absorptive surface area. 
It requires a great deal of energy to transport materials across the epithelial cells. 
About 6% of the calories you burn each day, and of your ATP budget, goes just to 
driving this process in the PCTs of your kidneys. 
The PCT reabsorbs a greater variety of chemicals than any other part of the 
nephron, including the following substances and many others:
∙	 Electrolytes. Sodium ions (Na+) are reabsorbed by transport proteins in the 
tubule cell membranes. Sodium is the key to everything else, because it cre-
ates an osmotic and electrical gradient that drives the reabsorption of water 
and the other solutes. Chloride ions (Cl–) follow Na+ by electrical attraction; 
potassium, magnesium, and phosphate ions are reabsorbed by membrane 
transport proteins and by leaking through the spaces between epithelial cells. 
∙	 Glucose. Glucose is cotransported with Na+. Normally, all glucose in the tu-
bular fluid is reabsorbed and there is none in the urine. 
∙	 Nitrogenous wastes. Some urea in the tubular fluid is reabsorbed along with 
water in the PCT, but about half of it passes in the urine. Thus, the kidneys 
don’t completely clear the blood of this waste, but keep its concentration down 
to a safe level. 
∙	 Water. The kidneys reduce about 180 L of glomerular filtrate to 1 or 2 L 
of urine each day, so obviously water reabsorption is a significant function. 
About two-thirds of the water is reabsorbed by osmosis in the PCT. 
After water and solutes cross the tubule epithelium, they are reabsorbed into the 
blood by the peritubular capillaries.
There is a limit to the amount of solute that the renal tubule can ­reabsorb 
because there are limited numbers of transport proteins in the plasma membranes. 
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      539  

If all the transporters are occupied as solute molecules go by, no more solute can 
be reabsorbed and the excess passes through the tubule and into the urine. For 
example, all of the glucose that enters the renal tubule is normally reabsorbed; 
the number of transporters is adequate to handle the number of ­glucose mol-
ecules passing down the tubule in a given time. But at any blood glucose level 
above 220 mg/dL or so, glucose filters into the tubules faster than the tubules 
can reabsorb it, and the excess passes in the urine—a condition called glycos-
uria10 (GLY-co-soo-ree-uh). In untreated diabetes mellitus, the plasma glucose 
concentration may exceed 400 mg/dL, so glycosuria is one of the classic signs 
of this disease.
The Nephron Loop
The primary function of the nephron loop is to generate an osmotic gradient that 
enables the collecting duct to concentrate the urine and conserve water, as explained 
later. In addition, however, the loop reabsorbs water and salts. The thin segment 
of the loop is very permeable to water but not to solutes. As tubular fluid flows 
down the descending limb, about 15% of the water is reabsorbed and returned to the 
bloodstream. Cells in the thick segment of the ascending limb are actively engaged 
in salt reabsorption, but are impermeable to water. Therefore, the ascending limb 
selectively reabsorbs salts from the fluid flowing through it. 
The Distal Convoluted Tubule
Fluid arriving in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) still contains about 20% of 
the water and 7% of the salts from the glomerular filtrate. If this were all passed as 
urine, it would amount to 36 L/day and we could hardly ever leave the bathroom! 
Obviously, a great deal of fluid reabsorption still has to occur. The DCT reabsorbs 
variable amounts of water and salts, but much less than the PCT. In keeping with its 
lesser (yet not unimportant) role in reabsorption, it is much shorter than the PCT and 
doesn’t have such a prominent brush border of microvilli. The DCT is regulated by 
several hormones—particularly aldosterone and natriuretic peptides.
Aldosterone, the “salt-retaining hormone,” is secreted by the adrenal cortex 
when the blood pressure or Na+ concentration falls or its K+ concentration rises. It 
stimulates the ascending limb of the nephron loop, the DCT, and the collecting duct 
to reabsorb more Na+ and secrete more K+. Its net effect is that the body retains Na+ 
and water, urine volume is reduced, and the urine has an elevated K+ concentration. 
The retention of salt and water helps to maintain blood volume and pressure.
Natriuretic peptides are secreted by the heart in response to high blood pres-
sure. Their effect is opposite to aldosterone—to increase excretion of Na+ and water 
in the urine, thus reducing blood volume and pressure.
Tubular Secretion
Tubular secretion is a process in which the renal tubule extracts chemicals 
from blood of the peritubular capillaries and secretes them into the tubular fluid 
(see fig. 16.7). In the proximal convoluted tubule and nephron loop, it serves 
three ­purposes: (1) acid–base balance, through secretion of varying proportions 
of hydrogen ions (H+) to bicarbonate ions (HCO3
–); (2) waste removal, through 
extracting urea, uric acid, bile acids, and ammonia from the blood; and (3) clear-
ance of drugs and contaminants from the body, such as morphine, penicillin, and 
aspirin. One reason so many drugs must be taken three or four times a day is to 
keep pace with this rate of clearance and maintain a therapeutically effective drug 
concentration in the blood.
10glycos = sugar; uria = urine condition
540      PART 5  Intake and Output

In summary, the PCT reabsorbs about 65% of the glomerular filtrate and returns 
it to the blood of the peritubular capillaries. Much of this reabsorption occurs by 
osmosis linked to the transport of sodium ions. The nephron loop reabsorbs another 
25% of the filtrate. The DCT reabsorbs more sodium, chloride, and water, but its 
rates of reabsorption are subject to control by hormones, especially aldosterone and 
natriuretic peptides. Drugs, wastes, and other solutes from the blood are secreted 
into the tubular fluid. The DCT essentially completes the process of determining 
the chemical composition of the urine. The principal function left to the collecting 
duct is to conserve water.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
10. List five substances that are reabsorbed in the 
proximal convoluted tubule. Which of these does the most to 
drive reabsorption of the others? Explain how it does that. 
      11.	Explain why glucose appears in the urine of a person with 
diabetes. 
12.	How do the thin and thick segments of the nephron loop 
­differ in their absorptive functions? 
13. Contrast the effects of aldosterone and natriuretic peptides 
on the distal convoluted tubule and on blood volume and 
pressure. 
16.5  Water Conservation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain how the collecting duct and antidiuretic hormone 
­regulate the volume and concentration of urine;  
b.	explain how the kidney maintains an osmotic gradient in the 
renal medulla that enables the collecting duct to function; and 
c.	describe the hormonal mechanism for adjusting the body’s rate 
of water loss to its state of hydration or dehydration. 
The kidneys serve not just to eliminate metabolic waste from the body but also to 
prevent excessive water loss, and thus to support the body’s fluid balance. As the 
kidney returns water to the tissue fluid and bloodstream, the fluid remaining in the 
renal tubule, and ultimately passed as urine, becomes more and more concentrated. 
In this section, we examine the kidney’s mechanism for conserving water and con-
centrating the urine.
The Collecting Duct
The collecting duct (CD) begins in the renal cortex, where it receives tubular fluid 
from numerous nephrons. As it passes through the medulla, it usually reabsorbs 
water and concentrates the urine. When urine enters the upper end of the CD, it is 
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      541  

isotonic with blood plasma—300 milliosmoles per liter (mOsm/L) (see 
appendix C for explanation of this unit of measurement). By the time it 
leaves the lower end, it can be up to four times as concentrated—that is, 
highly hypertonic to the blood plasma.
Two facts enable the collecting duct to produce such hypertonic 
urine: (1) The osmolarity of the tissue fluid surrounding it is four times 
as high in the lower medulla as it is in the cortex. (2) The medullary 
portion of the CD is more permeable to water than to solutes. Therefore, 
as urine passes down the CD through the increasingly salty medulla, 
water leaves the tubule by osmosis, most NaCl and other wastes remain 
behind, and the urine becomes more and more concentrated (fig. 16.11).
It may seem surprising that the tissue fluid is so hypertonic in the 
deep medulla compared to the cortex and upper medulla. We would 
expect the salt to diffuse toward the cortex until it was evenly ­distributed 
through the kidney. However, there is a mechanism that overrides 
this—the nephron loop. Through a complex mechanism beyond the 
scope of this book, it acts as a countercurrent multiplier that continually 
­recaptures salt and returns it to the deep medullary tissue. It is called  
a multiplier because it multiplies the salinity deep in the medulla and a 
countercurrent mechanism because it is based on fluid flowing in oppo-
site directions in the descending and ascending limbs of the loop. The 
different permeabilities of the thin segment (to water only) and thick 
segment (to salts only) are also important to this mechanism. Without 
the action of this countercurrent multiplier, the collecting duct would be 
unable to absorb water and produce such concentrated urine.
Control of Water Loss
Just how concentrated the urine becomes depends on the body’s state of hydration. 
If you are dehydrated, you produce scanty and very concentrated urine. Your high 
blood osmolarity stimulates the release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) from the 
posterior pituitary gland. ADH induces the cells of the collecting duct to synthesize 
aquaporins (water-channel proteins) and install them in the plasma membrane, so 
more water can pass through the epithelium. More water is reabsorbed and is carried 
away by the surrounding blood capillaries (vasa recta). Urine output is consequently 
reduced, and its osmolarity can be as high as 1,200 mOsm/L—four times the osmo-
larity of the blood plasma.
By contrast, if you drink a large volume of water, you soon produce a large 
volume of hypotonic urine. Hydration inhibits ADH secretion, and the tubule cells 
remove aquaporins from the plasma membrane. The cortical portion of the CD 
reabsorbs NaCl, but the CD is less permeable to water. More water passes through 
as abundant, dilute urine, with an osmolarity as low as 50 mOsm/L. This response 
is called water diuresis11 (DY-you-REE-sis).
To summarize what we have studied in this section, the collecting duct can 
adjust water reabsorption to produce urine as hypotonic (dilute) as 50 mOsm/L or 
as hypertonic (concentrated) as 1,200 mOsm/L, depending on the body’s need for 
water conservation or removal. In a state of hydration, ADH is not secreted and the 
cortical part of the CD reabsorbs salt without reabsorbing water; the water remains 
to be excreted in the dilute urine. In a state of dehydration, ADH is secreted, the 
medullary part of the CD reabsorbs water, and the urine is more concentrated. The 
CD is able to do this because it passes through a salinity gradient in the medulla 
from 300 mOsm/L near the cortex to 1,200 mOsm/L near the papilla. This gradient 
is produced by a countercurrent multiplier of the nephron loop, which concentrates 
NaCl in the lower medulla. The vasa recta are arranged in such a way that they can 
supply blood to the medulla without subtracting from its salinity gradient.
Figure 16.11 Water Reabsorption by the Col-
lecting Duct. Note that the osmolarity of the tissue 
fluid increases fourfold from 300 mOsm/L in the 
cortex to 1,200 mOsm/L deep in the medulla. Urine 
concentration increases proportionately as water 
leaves the duct through its aquaporins.
H2O
Nephron
loop
Collecting
duct
Urine 
(up to 1,200 mOsm/L)
Medulla
Cortex
Osmolarity of tissue ﬂuid (mOsm/L)
Tubular ﬂuid 
(300 mOsm/L)
300
600
900
1,200
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
11diuresis = passing urine
542      PART 5  Intake and Output

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
14.	Explain why the osmotic gradient of the renal 
medulla is necessary for the ability of the collecting duct to 
concentrate the urine. 
15.	Discuss the role of the nephron loop in maintaining that 
osmotic gradient. 
16. Predict how a lack of ADH would affect the volume of urine, 
and explain why. 
PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
R
enal insufficiency is a state in which the kidneys cannot main-
tain homeostasis due to extensive destruction of their neph-
rons. Some causes of nephron destruction include the following:
•	 Hypertension 
•	 Atherosclerosis of the renal arteries 
•	 Chronic or repetitive kidney infections 
•	 Trauma from such causes as blows to the lower back or con-
tinual vibration from machinery 
•	 Prolonged ischemia and hypoxia, as in long-distance run-
ners and swimmers 
•	 Poisoning by heavy metals and solvents 
•	 Blockage of renal tubules with proteins small enough to be 
filtered by the glomerulus—for example, myoglobin released 
by skeletal muscle damage and hemoglobin released by a 
transfusion reaction 
•	 Glomerulonephritis, an autoimmune disease of the glomeru-
lar capillaries 
Nephrons can regenerate and restore kidney function after short-
term injuries. Even when some of the nephrons are irreversibly 
destroyed, others hypertrophy and compensate for their lost func-
tion. Indeed, a person can survive on as little as one-third of one 
kidney. When 75% of the nephrons are lost, however, urine output 
may be as low as 30 mL/h compared with the normal rate of 50 
to 60 mL/h. This is insufficient to rid the body of toxic substances, 
including nitrogenous wastes. The level of nitrogenous waste in 
the blood is typically expressed as blood urea nitrogen (BUN). 
An elevated BUN may indicate renal insufficiency, and can prog-
ress to a dangerous state called uremia. Convulsions, coma, and 
death can follow within a few days. Renal insufficiency also tends 
to cause anemia because the diseased kidneys produce too little 
erythropoietin (EPO), the hormone that stimulates red blood cell 
formation.
Hemodialysis is a procedure for artificially clearing wastes 
from the blood when the kidneys are not adequately doing so. 
Blood is pumped from the radial artery to a dialysis machine (artifi-
cial kidney) and returned to the patient by way of a vein. In the dial-
ysis machine, the blood flows through tubes of selectively perme-
able membrane surrounded by dialysis fluid. Urea, potassium, and 
other solutes that are more concentrated in the blood than in the 
dialysis fluid diffuse through the membrane into the fluid, which is 
discarded. Glucose, electrolytes, and drugs can be administered 
by adding them to the dialysis fluid so they will diffuse through the 
membrane into the blood. People with renal insufficiency accu-
mulate substantial amounts of body water between treatments, 
and dialysis serves also to remove this excess water. Patients are 
typically given EPO to compensate for its lack of production by 
the kidneys.
R e n a l  I n s u f f i c i e n c y  a n d  D i a l y s i s
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      543  

16.6  Urine Storage and Elimination
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the functional anatomy of the ureters, urinary bladder, 
and male and female urethra; 
b.	explain how the nervous system and urethral sphincters control 
the voiding of urine; and 
c.	describe some physical and chemical properties of urine. 
Urine is produced continually, but fortunately it doesn’t drain continually from 
the body. Urination is episodic—occurring when we allow it. This is made pos-
sible by an apparatus for storing urine and by neural controls for its timely 
release.
The Ureters
The renal pelvis funnels urine into the ureter, a muscular tube that extends to the 
urinary bladder. The ureter is about 25 cm long and reaches a maximum diameter 
of about 1.7 cm near the bladder. The ureters pass posterior to the bladder and 
enter it from below, pierce its muscular wall, and open onto its floor. A small flap 
of mucosa acts as a valve at the opening of each ureter into the bladder, preventing 
urine from backing up into the ureter when the bladder contracts.
The ureter consists mostly of a thick tube of smooth muscle, surrounded exter-
nally by a sheath of loose fibrous connective tissue that binds it to the body wall, 
and lined internally by a mucosa with a transitional epithelium, an epithelial type 
unique to the urinary tract (see fig. 4.12). When urine enters the ureter and stretches 
it, the muscular wall contracts and initiates a peristaltic wave that milks the urine 
from the renal pelvis down to the bladder. These contractions occur every few sec-
onds to every few minutes, proportional to the rate at which urine enters from above. 
The lumen of the ureter is very narrow and is easily obstructed or injured by kidney 
stones (Clinical Application 16.1).
The Urinary Bladder
The urinary bladder (fig. 16.12) is a muscular sac on the floor of the pelvic 
cavity posterior to the pubic symphysis. Its wall contains three layers of smooth 
muscle that are collectively called the detrusor12 (deh-TROO-zur). The bladder 
is lined internally with an especially thick transitional epithelium that provides 
protection from the caustic urine that is stored there. The openings of the two 
ureters and the urethra mark a smooth triangular area called the trigone13 (TRY-
goan) on the bladder floor. This is a common site of bladder infection (Clinical 
Application 16.2).
12de = down; trus = push 
13tri = three; gon = angle
544      PART 5  Intake and Output

Ureter
Detrusor
Internal urethral
sphincter
Prostatic urethra
Membranous
urethra
External urethral
sphincter
Prostate
Trigone
Ureteral
openings
Spongy (penile)
urethra
Penis
External urethral 
oriﬁce
(b) Male
Ureter
Detrusor
Trigone
Ureteral
openings
External urethral
oriﬁce
Urogenital
diaphragm
External urethral
sphincter
Urethra
(a) Female
Figure 16.12 The Urinary Bladder and Ure-
thra. Frontal sections. 
• Why do women lack the internal urethral 
sphincter present in men? What male-specific 
function does this sphincter serve? 
14calc = calcium, stone; ul = little 
15litho = stone; tripsy = crushing
The bladder is highly distensible. As it fills, it expands superiorly, the wrinkled 
mucosa flattens, and the epithelium thins from five or six cell layers to only two or 
three. A moderately full bladder contains about 500 mL of urine and extends about 
12.5 cm from top to bottom. The maximum capacity is 700 to 800 mL.
The Urethra
The urethra conveys urine from the urinary bladder to the external urethral orifice, 
the point of exit from the body. In the female, the urethra is a tube 3 to 4 cm long 
bound to the anterior wall of the vagina by fibrous connective tissue. Its orifice lies 
between the vaginal orifice and clitoris. The male urethra is about 18 cm long and 
passes through the penis. It has three regions: the prostatic urethra immediately 
Clinical Application 16.1
KIDNEY STONES
A renal calculus14 (kidney stone) is a hard granule composed usually of cal-
cium phosphate or calcium oxalate. Renal calculi form in the renal pelvis and 
are usually small enough to pass unnoticed in the urine flow. Some, however, 
grow as large as several centimeters and block the renal pelvis or ureter, which 
can lead to the destruction of nephrons as pressure builds in the kidney. A 
large, jagged calculus passing down the ureter stimulates strong contractions 
that can be excruciatingly painful. It can also damage the ureter and cause 
hematuria (blood in the urine). Causes of renal calculi include hypercalcemia, 
dehydration, pH imbalances, frequent urinary tract infections, or an enlarged 
prostate gland causing urine retention. Calculi are sometimes treated with 
stone-dissolving drugs, but often they require surgical removal. A nonsurgi-
cal technique called shock wave lithotripsy15 uses ultrasound to pulverize the 
calculi into fine granules easily passed in the urine.
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      545  

inferior to the bladder, where it passes through the prostate and receives not only 
urine but also semen; the membranous urethra, a short, thin-walled segment that 
passes through the pelvic floor; and the spongy urethra, the portion contained in the 
penis, passing through a tissue called the corpus spongiosum (see fig. 19.1).
In males, the detrusor is thickened near the urethra to form an involuntary 
(smooth muscle) internal urethral sphincter. This sphincter contracts during ejac-
ulation to prevent semen from being forced into the urinary bladder. Females do not 
have an internal urethral sphincter, but both sexes have a voluntary (skeletal muscle) 
external urethral sphincter that encircles the urethra where it passes through the 
pelvic floor (the membranous urethra in the male). This sphincter provides volun-
tary control over the voiding of urine.
Voiding Urine 
 
When the bladder is filling, the sympathetic nervous system normally prevents pre-
mature leakage of urine. It issues nerve fibers from the spinal cord to the detrusor to 
relax it, preventing bladder contraction. The external urethral sphincter, innervated 
by somatic nerve fibers, remains contracted and prevents escape of urine. 
The act of urinating, called micturition18 (MIC-too-RISH-un), is initiated by 
an autonomic spinal micturition reflex. Filling of the bladder excites stretch recep-
tors in the bladder wall. They issue signals to the spinal cord, which returns signals 
to the bladder via parasympathetic nerves. Parasympathetic stimulation contracts 
the detrusor. In very young children and in people with spinal cord injuries that 
disconnect the brain from the lower spinal cord, this alone results in emptying of 
the bladder.
Normally, however, one also has voluntary control over urination. Stretch sig-
nals from the bladder ascend the spinal cord to a nucleus in the pons called the 
micturition center. This nucleus integrates information about bladder tension with 
information from other brain centers such as the cerebral cortex. Thus, urination can 
be inhibited by knowledge that the circumstances are inappropriate. If it is desir-
able and appropriate to urinate, signals descend from the pons to inhibit the spinal 
somatic neurons that keep the external urethral sphincter constricted. The sphincter 
then relaxes, and micturition proceeds. If the bladder is not full enough to trigger the 
Clinical Application 16.2
URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Infection of the urinary bladder is called cystitis.16 It is especially common in 
females because bacteria such as Escherichia coli can travel easily from the 
perineum up the short urethra. Because of this risk, young girls should be taught 
never to wipe the anus in a forward direction. Cystitis is frequently triggered in 
women by sexual intercourse (“honeymoon cystitis”). If cystitis is untreated, 
bacteria can spread up the ureters and cause pyelitis,17 ­infection of the renal 
pelvis. If it reaches the renal cortex and nephrons, it is called ­pyelonephritis. 
Kidney infections can also result from invasion by blood-borne bacteria. Urine 
stagnation due to renal calculi or prostate enlargement ­increases the risk of 
infection.
16cyst = bladder; itis = inflammation 
17pyel = pelvis; itis = inflammation 
18mictur = to urinate
546      PART 5  Intake and Output

micturition reflex, but one wishes to “go” anyway because of a long drive or lecture 
coming up, the Valsalva maneuver (see section 15.2) can be used to compress the 
bladder and excite the stretch receptors early, thereby getting the reflex started.
Urine Volume and Properties
An average adult produces 1 to 2 L of urine per day. An output in excess of 2 L/day 
is called diuresis or polyuria19 (POL-ee-YOU-ree-uh). Fluid intake and some drugs 
can temporarily increase output to as much as 20 L/day. Diseases such as diabetes 
may be characterized by chronic polyuria. Low urine output, called oliguria,20 can 
result from kidney disease, dehydration, circulatory shock, and prostate enlargement, 
among other causes. If urine output drops to less than 400 mL/day, unsafe concentra-
tions of wastes accumulate in the blood plasma. Uremia is a condition of danger-
ously high nitrogenous waste levels in the blood, usually indicating kidney failure.
Because it is one of the most accessible body fluids, urine has been used for 
centuries to assess health. It is still common to provide a urine sample during a 
physical examination. The basic composition and properties of urine are as follows: 
∙	 Appearance. Urine varies from almost colorless to deep amber, depending 
on the body’s state of hydration. The yellow color of urine is due to a pig-
ment produced by the breakdown of hemoglobin from expired erythrocytes. 
Unusual colors can be imparted to it by certain foods, vitamins, drugs, and 
metabolic diseases. Pyuria21 (pus in the urine) can indicate a kidney infection. 
Hematuria (blood in the urine) may be due to a urinary tract infection, vari-
ous kidney diseases, trauma, or kidney stones. 
∙	 Odor. Fresh urine has a distinctive but not necessarily repellent odor. As it 
stands, however, bacteria multiply, degrade urea to ammonia, and produce the 
pungent odor typical of stale wet diapers. Asparagus, other foods, and some 
metabolic diseases can impart distinctive aromas to the urine. Diabetes mel-
litus gives it a sweet, “fruity” odor of acetone. 
∙	 Specific gravity. This is a ratio of the density (g/mL) of a substance to the 
density of distilled water. Distilled water has a specific gravity of 1.000 by 
definition, and urine ranges from 1.001 when it is very dilute to 1.028 when it 
is very concentrated. 
∙	 Osmolarity. Urine can have an osmolarity as low as 50 mOsm/L in a very 
hydrated person or as high as 1,200 mOsm/L in a dehydrated person. Com-
pared with the osmolarity of blood (300 mOsm/L), then, urine can be either 
hypotonic or hypertonic. 
∙	 pH. The pH of urine ranges from 4.5 to 8.2 but is usually about 6.0 (mildly 
acidic). This is one reason the urinary tract needs to be protected by transi-
tional epithelium, a tissue found only in this area.  
∙	 Chemical composition. Urine averages 95% water and 5% solutes by volume; 
table 16.1 lists several of the major solutes. It is abnormal to find glucose, free 
hemoglobin, albumin, or bile pigments in the urine; their presence can serve 
as important indicators of disease. 
19poly = many, much; ur = urine; ia = condition 
20olig = few, a little; ur = urine; ia = condition 
21py = pus; ur = urine; ia = condition
Apply What You Know
Predict the effect of dehydration on the specific gravity of urine.
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      547  

Table 16.1 Properties and Composition of Urine
Physical Properties
Specific gravity
1.001–1.028
Osmolarity
50–1,200 mOsm/L
pH
6.0 (range 4.5–8.2)
Solutes
Concentration (mg/dL)*
Output  (g/day)**
Urea
1,800
21
Creatinine
150
1.8
Ammonia
60
0.68
Chloride
533
6.4
Sodium
333
4.0
Potassium
166
2.0
Phosphate
83
1
Calcium
17
0.2
Magnesium
13
0.16
* Typical values for a young adult male 
** Assuming a urine output of 1.2 L/day 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
    17. Where does the ureter begin and end? What 
­prevents contraction of the bladder from forcing urine  
back up to the kidneys? 
18. Explain involuntary and voluntary control of urination. 
19.	Define polyuria, hematuria, and uremia, and identify one 
possible cause of each. 
16.7  Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base  
Balance
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
 a.	name the major fluid compartments; 
 b.	list the body’s sources of water and routes of water loss; 
  c.	describe mechanisms of regulating water intake and output; 
 d.	list the functions of sodium and potassium; 
 e.	explain how electrolyte balance is regulated; and 
         f.	describe three ways the body regulates pH. 
548      PART 5  Intake and Output

In the course of producing urine and eliminating metabolic wastes, the kidneys play 
a vital role in the homeostatic regulation of the body’s fluid, electrolyte, and acid–
base balance. Imbalances in these variables can easily have life-threatening conse-
quences. They are closely regulated by the collaborative effort of the urinary, respi-
ratory, and digestive systems, coordinated by nervous and hormonal mechanisms.
Fluid Balance
Our internal landscape is watery. About 45% to 60% of the adult body is 
made up of water, depending on proportions of fat and lean body mass. 
Adipose tissue contains very little body water, whereas lean mass, which is 
mostly skeletal muscle, contains significant amounts of water. Women on 
average have more adipose tissue than men, and therefore on average have 
less water relative to total body mass. Active people have relatively more 
muscle mass and therefore have more body water relative to weight.
Fluids are distributed between two main areas, or fluid compartments. 
About two-thirds of the body water is in the intracellular compartment, 
within the cells (intracellular fluid). This compartment is separated from 
the extracellular ­compartment (extracellular fluid) by plasma membranes. 
The extracellular ­compartment includes all the fluids outside cells—mainly 
tissue fluid between the cells, plasma in the blood vessels, and lymph in 
lymphatic vessels. 
Apply What You Know
Review synovial fluid of the joints (see section 6.5), cerebrospinal 
fluid of the brain (see section 9.1), and aqueous humor of the eye 
(see section 10.5) if necessary, and explain whether (and why) you 
would classify those as belonging to the intracellular or extracel-
lular compartment.
Fluid balance means a state in which our average daily water gains and losses 
are equivalent (about 2,500 mL/day for the average adult) and body water is prop-
erly distributed among the fluid compartments (not abnormally pooled somewhere, 
as in edema). A little of our body water comes from metabolic processes such as 
aerobic respiration, but for the most part, fluid balance is a matter of intake versus 
output—the amount we ingest in food and drink versus the amount we lose in vari-
ous ways (fig. 16.13). Most of our water loss is through urine, fecal moisture, and 
the breath. We also lose water through the skin in two ways—sweating and cutane-
ous transpiration. Sweat is produced by cutaneous glands, usually in response to 
heat. We’re less conscious of cutaneous transpiration, the diffusion of water through 
the epidermis to the surface, where it evaporates.
Fluid intake is governed mainly by thirst, which is controlled by mechanisms 
shown in figure 16.14. Dehydration raises blood osmolarity and reduces blood vol-
ume. The rise in osmolarity stimulates neurons called osmoreceptors in the hypo-
thalamus, which leads to the sensation of thirst and a desire to drink. Normally, we 
drink long before there is any significant deficit in blood volume or significant rise 
in osmolarity. In a more significant state of dehydration, however, the hormonal 
mechanisms of angiotensin II and antidiuretic hormone, detailed earlier, come into 
play to accentuate the thirst and reduce urinary loss of water. Contrary to popular 
myth, it is not at all necessary to drink 8 glasses (64 ounces) of water per day, or to 
drink even if you don’t feel thirsty, to maintain proper hydration.
Fluid output, as we have seen, is governed mainly by varying urine volume and 
osmolarity, and these are regulated mainly by antidiuretic hormone.
Figure 16.13 Typical Water Gains and Losses 
in a State of Fluid Balance.
• How would the right side of this figure change 
if the person had an abnormally high rate of 
ADH secretion? 
Metabolic water
200 mL
Food
700 mL
Drink
1,600 mL
Feces
200 mL
Expired air
300 mL
Cutaneous
transpiration
400 mL
Sweat 100 mL
Urine
1,500 mL
Gains
2,500 mL/day
Losses
2,500 mL/day
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      549  

Electrolyte Balance
Electrolytes are salts that dissociate into free ions in water. They are essential 
for a tremendous variety of cellular functions, such as nerve and muscle action 
potentials, bone building, enzyme activation, pH balance, osmotic effects on fluid 
balance, and more.
The major cations from electrolytes are sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), and 
calcium (Ca2+), and the major anions are chloride (Cl–), bicarbonate (HCO3
–), 
and phosphates (Pi). In a state of electrolyte balance, each of these is within 
its own normal range of concentration in the body fluids. Electrolyte balance is 
achieved mainly through equivalent daily rates of absorption by the intestines 
and excretion by the kidneys. Calcium regulation was explained under “Mineral 
Homeostasis” in section 6.2). Anion homeostasis tends to come about auto-
matically as an effect of cation regulation, so here we will focus on sodium and 
potassium.
Electrolyte concentrations differ in the intracellular and extracellular compart-
ments. Sodium is the most abundant extracellular cation, and potassium is the most 
abundant in the intracellular fluid. These two ions play pivotal roles in resting and 
action potentials, and sodium is the most significant solute in determining the distri-
bution of water among fluid compartments, because water follows sodium through 
the process of osmosis.
Dehydration
Reduced
salivation
Dry mouth
Sense of
thirst
Ingestion
of water
Rehydrates
blood
Increased
blood osmolarity
Reduced
blood pressure
Renin
Stimulates
hypothalamic 
osmoreceptors
Cools and
moistens mouth
Distends 
stomach 
and intestines
Short-term
inhibition
of thirst
Long-term
inhibition
of thirst
Angiotensin II
Dehydration
Thirst
Rehydration
Stimulates
hypothalamic 
osmoreceptors
Figure 16.14 Dehydration, Thirst, and  
Rehydration.
550      PART 5  Intake and Output

Both sodium and potassium balance are regulated by aldosterone. Aldoste-
rone promotes Na+ reabsorption and K+ excretion by the kidneys. A rise in aldo-
sterone secretion thus results in less Na+ but more K+ in the urine. When the 
aldosterone level is especially high, the urine can be sodium-free. Aldosterone 
has little effect on plasma sodium concentration, however, because when Na+ is 
reabsorbed, a proportionate amount of water is reabsorbed along with it; more fluid 
is retained, but its concentration is unchanged. In contrast to aldosterone, natriuretic 
peptides cause sodium and water to be excreted, thereby lowering blood volume.
Electrolyte imbalances are named with the prefixes hyper- and hypo- to indi-
cate concentrations above or below their normal ranges. Hyponatremia, a sodium 
deficiency, sometimes affects athletes who lose water and sodium through copious 
sweating but compensate by drinking plain water. The resulting dilution of sodium 
in the body fluids can result in weakness, confusion, and even death. Hypernatre-
mia, a sodium excess, is less common but can result from badly managed adminis-
tration of I.V. fluids. 
Potassium imbalances are the most dangerous of all electrolyte imbalances. 
Hypokalemia, a potassium deficiency, can result from chronic vomiting or diarrhea, 
excessive use of laxatives, or aldosterone hypersecretion. Symptoms include muscle 
weakness and cardiac arrhythmia. Hyperkalemia, a potassium excess, can set in rap-
idly when a crush injury (such as getting an arm caught in farm or factory machinery) 
ruptures large numbers of cells and releases intracellular K+ into the extracellular flu-
ids, or it can have a slower onset in cases of aldosterone hyposecretion or renal fail-
ure. Hyperkalemia is associated with muscle cramps, diarrhea, vomiting, and atrial 
fibrillation. Cardiac arrest can result from potassium excess or deficiency, but the 
risk of this is especially great when there is an abrupt potassium overload. Clinical 
administration of I.V. potassium must be done with extreme care for such reasons.
Acid–Base Balance
Our life-sustaining metabolic pathways depend on enzymes; and enzymes, being 
proteins, are very pH-sensitive. Conditions that are even slightly too acidic or basic 
can cause life-threatening disruption of enzyme function. Consequently, the pH of 
our blood and tissue fluid is maintained within a very narrow margin—7.35 to 7.45. 
Acid–base balance, or pH balance, means the regulation of blood pH within this 
range.
A pH above this range is called alkalosis, and a pH below this range is called 
acidosis. Alkalosis causes nerve and muscle cells to be hyperexcitable and can 
lead to consequences as severe as convulsions and respiratory paralysis. Acidosis 
depresses the nervous system and can lead to coma and death. Acidosis is a com-
mon cause of death among diabetics who do not manage their condition well. Our 
homeostasis is constantly challenged by acids of metabolic origin—lactate (lactic 
acid) from anaerobic fermentation, carbonic acid from carbon dioxide, and fatty 
acids from fat catabolism. Acidosis is therefore more common than alkalosis.
The body regulates pH in three ways: chemical buffers, the respiratory system, 
and the urinary system.
Chemical Buffers
A chemical buffer is a mixture that binds excess H+ and removes it from solution 
where there is an excess (low pH), or releases H+ into solution when there is a defi-
ciency (high pH). Buffer solutions therefore tend to have a stable pH even if chal-
lenged by the addition of more acid or base. For example, bicarbonate ions (HCO3
–) 
and the amino groups (—NH2) of proteins can bind and neutralize H+, thereby rais-
ing pH, as follows:
H+ + HCO3
– → H2CO3
H+ + —NH2 → —NH3
+
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      551  

Conversely, if pH rises too high, carbonic acid (H2CO3) and the carboxyl groups 
(—COOH) of proteins can liberate hydrogen ions and lower it:
H2CO3 → HCO3
– + H+
— COOH → —COO– + H+
Bicarbonate, proteins, and phosphates are the most significant chemical buffers 
in the body. Chemical buffers can restore and stabilize normal pH in a fraction of a 
second, but they are relatively limited in the amount of excess acid or base they can 
neutralize.
The Respiratory Buffer
The respiratory system takes longer than chemical buffers to act—a few minutes—
but it can neutralize more acid or base than the chemical buffers alone. It depends on 
the relationship between carbon dioxide and pH, and the ability to vary the breath-
ing rhythm so we retain more CO2 in the body or expel it faster.
Carbon dioxide reacts with water to release acid and lower the pH:
CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → HCO3
– + H+
A CO2 excess in the body therefore tends to cause acidosis, a common occurrence 
in lung diseases such as emphysema where the body cannot expel CO2 as fast as it 
is made. On the other hand, if there is a CO2 deficiency in the body fluids, these 
reactions happen in reverse to raise the CO2 level but lower the H+ concentration, 
thus raising pH:
HCO3
– + H+ → H2CO3 → CO2 + H2O
We saw in section 15.2 that the brainstem respiratory centers are very sensitive 
to pH changes. Acidosis stimulates one to breathe faster to expel CO2 faster than it 
is produced, thus raising the pH to normal. Alkalosis stimulates one to breathe more 
slowly, thus accumulating CO2 and lowering the pH to normal.
The Renal Buffer
Of all buffering mechanisms, the kidneys are slowest to act and require several 
hours or even days to correct a pH imbalance, but they can rid the body of more 
acid than the chemical or respiratory buffer system can. The mechanisms are com-
plex and beyond the scope of this book, but the essence of it is this: When there is 
an excess of acid (H+) in the blood, it reacts with blood bicarbonate ions to form 
carbonic acid, which breaks down to H2O and CO2, like the last of the reactions 
shown in the previous section. These move from the blood into the cells of the 
renal tubule. These epithelial cells have an enzyme that reverses this reaction and 
generates HCO3
– and H+ again. The HCO3
– is returned to the blood and the H+ 
is secreted into the tubular fluid—a case of the tubular secretion phenomenon 
described earlier in this chapter. Thus, H+ is removed from the blood and appears 
in the tubular fluid, although indirectly through the carbonic acid reactions. In the 
tubular fluid, some of this H+ reacts with bicarbonate ions to again produce H2O 
and CO2, and some remains as free H+, giving the urine its characteristic mildly 
acidic pH, about 6.0.
Ammonia (NH3) in the tubular fluid also can react with H+ and chloride ions 
to produce ammonium chloride, NH4Cl. This mechanism can come to the aid of 
acid–base balance when the body is under a particularly heavy acid challenge, and 
the urine then shows up to 10 times as much ammonium chloride as usual. A high 
urine ammonium chloride level can be a sign of an acid-generating disease such as 
diabetes mellitus.
552      PART 5  Intake and Output

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
20. What are the major fluids of the extracellular 
­compartment?
       21. What is the most important mechanism for regulating fluid ­intake? 
What hormone is most important in regulating fluid output?
22. What two organ systems are most important in regulating 
electrolyte balance?
 23. What are the terms for sodium and potassium excess and 
deficiency? What are causes and consequences of sodium 
and potassium imbalances?
 24. What hormones are most important in regulating sodium 
balance? Describe their actions.
25. What are the terms for excessively high and low pH? State 
some causes and effects of each.
26. Describe how chemical buffers, the respiratory system, and 
the kidneys resist or compensate for shifts in body fluid pH.
Aging of the Urinary System
Nephrons are abundant early in life, but the number declines 
­markedly with age. By an age of 85 to 90, there can be as much 
as a 40% reduction in the number of functional nephrons and 
size of the kidneys. In addition, the renal blood supply and GFR 
are ­significantly reduced. The result is that although the aged 
­kidneys function adequately under normal conditions, they cope 
less ­efficiently with illness and in clearance of medications. In men, 
an enlarged prostate may compress the urethra and make it more 
­difficult to void urine. In women, strain on the pelvic floor muscles 
during childbirth makes incontinence more likely later in life.
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Dialysis technicians support the care of patients with kidney 
failure who require dialysis. The job entails setting up and 
operating hemodialysis machines. In addition, the techni-
cian prepares the patient for dialysis and monitors both the 
patient and the machine during the process. The technician 
must learn the scientific principles of dialysis, understand 
the equipment involved, and respond to physical and emo-
tional needs of the person undergoing treatment. Dialysis 
technicians work closely with a team of nurses and physi-
cians who care for the patient. They work at hemodialysis 
facilities in hospitals and outpatient facilities, or may assist 
patients with in-home dialysis. Training is provided on the 
job or through vocational schools or community colleges. 
Dialysis technicians must pass a state exam to become 
­certified. See appendix B for further information on dialysis 
technician careers.
D i a l y s i s  Te c h n i c i a n
© Life in View/Science Source
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      553  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the URINARY SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Renal control of fluid balance is essential 
for sweat secretion; the epidermis is 
normally a barrier to fluid loss—thus,  
the skin and kidneys collaborate to  
maintain fluid balance. 
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
Circulatory System
The kidneys control blood pressure more than 
any other organ; erythropoietin from the kidneys 
regulates hematocrit; the kidneys regulate 
plasma composition. 
© Getty Images
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The acidity of urine destroys pathogens 
and thus defends against infection. 
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
Respiratory System 
The urinary and respiratory 
systems collaborate to regulate 
acid–base balance. 
© Mediscan/Alamy
Digestive System 
The kidneys excrete toxins absorbed by 
the digestive tract; the kidneys excrete 
hormones and metabolites after the liver 
deactivates them; calcitriol synthesized 
by the kidneys regulates Ca2+ absorption 
by the small intestine. 
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
Reproductive System 
The urethra serves as a common 
passageway for urine and semen in 
males; the urinary system of pregnant 
woman eliminates metabolic wastes 
of the fetus. 
© mevans/Getty Images RF
Skeletal System
Renal control of calcium and phosphate 
balance and role in calcitriol synthesis are 
essential for bone deposition. 
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone Images/ 
Getty Images
Muscular System
Renal control of Na+, K+, and Ca2+ balance is 
important for muscle contraction. 
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
Nervous System
The nervous system is very sensitive to fluid, 
electrolyte, and acid–base imbalances that 
may result from renal dysfunction. 
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Medical Body Scans/Science Source
All Systems 
The urinary system serves all other systems by eliminating metabolic 
wastes and maintaining fluid, electrolyte, and acid–base balance. 
Endocrine System 
Renin secretion by the kidneys leads to angiotensin synthesis 
and aldosterone secretion; the kidneys produce erythropoietin. 
	
554

Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
16.1  Functions of the Urinary System 
1.	 The principal organs of the urinary system 
2.	 Functions of the kidneys 
3.	 Definitions of excretion, waste, and metabolic waste 
4.	 The types and sources of nitrogenous wastes 
16.2  Anatomy of the Kidney 
1.	 The anatomical position of the kidneys; their size, shape, and 
connective tissue coverings 
2.	 Internal organization of the glandular and collecting tissues of 
the kidney 
3.	 The route of blood flow through the kidney 
4.	 Structure of the nephron 
5.	 The route of fluid flow through the nephron as it becomes 
urine 
16.3  Glomerular Filtration 
1.	 The four stages in urine formation, and the changing names of 
the fluid at various stages 
2.	 The meaning of glomerular filtration and the site of its  
occurrence 
3.	 Components of the filtration membrane and how they affect 
the composition of the filtrate 
4.	 Factors that determine filtration pressure and glomerular  
filtration rate (GFR) 
5.	 The mechanism of sympathetic nervous control of glomerular 
filtration 
6.	 Hormones that influence glomerular filtration, and their 
mechanisms of action 
7.	 Mechanisms of local control by which a nephron regulates its 
own glomerular filtration 
8.	 Structure of the juxtaglomerular apparatus and how it regulates 
GFR 
16.4  Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion 
1.	 Definitions of tubular reabsorption and tubular secretion 
2.	 Structural adaptations of the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) 
for its role in absorption 
3.	 Substances reabsorbed by the PCT, the mechanisms of reab-
sorption, and how sodium reabsorption drives the others 
4.	 Where the reabsorbed materials go after they leave the renal 
tubule 
5.	 Limitations on solute reabsorption and why excess levels of 
blood glucose result in glycosuria 
6.	 Structure of the nephron loop and how it relates to tubular 
reabsorption 
7.	 Substances that are reabsorbed by the distal convoluted tubule 
(DCT) 
8.	 Hormones that influence DCT function, and their modes of 
action 
9.	 The role of tubular secretion in the composition of the urine 
16.5  Water Conservation 
1.	 The basic function of the collecting duct 
2.	 The significance of tissue fluid osmolarity and selective per-
meability of the collecting duct in urine formation and water 
conservation 
3.	 How the nephron loop creates the osmotic gradient of the renal 
medulla necessary for water conservation 
4.	 Hormonal control of collecting duct function and urine volume 
and concentration 
16.6  Urine Storage and Elimination 
1.	 Anatomy and peristaltic function of the ureters 
2.	 Anatomy of the urinary bladder, its spatial relationship with 
the ureters and urethra, and the changes it undergoes as it fills 
and stretches 
3.	 Structure of the female and male urethra 
4.	 The two urethral sphincters, their locations, and differences in 
their muscular composition and nervous control 
5.	 Components and actions of the spinal micturition reflex 
6.	 The mechanism of voluntary control over micturition 
7.	 Typical daily output of urine, factors that influence it, and 
consequences of insufficient output 
8.	 Physical and chemical properties of normal urine 
16.7  Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Balance 
  1.	 Typical body water content and reasons for its variability 
  2.	 The body’s fluid compartments and how they differ 
  3.	 The meaning of fluid balance 
  4.	 Major sources of water and means of water loss 
  5.	 The principal factors that regulate water intake and output 
Study Guide
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      555  

  6.	 The meanings of electrolytes and electrolyte balance 
  7.	 The most physiologically important ions that arise by 
­electrolyte dissociation in water 
  8.	 Hormonal control of sodium and potassium balance 
  9.	 The names and pathological consequences of sodium and 
potassium deficiencies and excesses 
10.	 The meaning of acid–base balance and why it is crucial to 
one’s metabolic pathways 
11.	 The normal range of blood pH and terms for deviations 
above and below this range 
12.	 Three major chemical buffer systems in the body and 
­examples of how they stabilize pH 
13.	 How variations in respiration can adjust body pH 
14.	 How the kidneys excrete acid and adjust body pH 
15.	 Relative importance, speed, and effectiveness of the 
­chemical, respiratory, and renal buffer systems 
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Micturition occurs when the 
 contracts.
a.	 detrusor  
b.	 internal urethral sphincter 
c.	 external urethral sphincter 
d.	 muscular wall of the ureter 
e.	 muscular wall of the urethra 
	 2.	 The compact ball of capillaries in a nephron is called
a.	 the nephron loop. 
b.	 the peritubular plexus. 
c.	 the renal corpuscle. 
d.	 the glomerulus. 
e.	 the vasa recta. 
	 3.	 Which of these is the most abundant nitrogenous waste in the 
blood?
a.	 uric acid 
b.	 urea 
c.	 ammonia 
d.	 creatinine 
e.	 albumin 
	 4.	 Which of the following is excluded by the filtration membrane 
from passing into the filtrate?
a.	 glucose 
b.	 formed elements of blood 
c.	 sodium 
d.	 water 
e.	 nitrogenous wastes 
	 5.	 What percentage of glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed by the 
proximal convoluted tubule?
a.	 6% 
b.	 25% 
c.	 45% 
d.	 65% 
e.	 The amount varies depending on a person’s state of  
hydration. 
	 6.	 Which of the following does not result from dehydration?
a.	 increased production of angiotensin II 
b.	 stimulation of thirst 
c.	 increased production of ADH 
d.	 increased blood osmolarity 
e.	 increased urine volume 
	 7.	 Each nephron receives its blood supply directly from
a.	 a renal artery. 
b.	 an interlobar artery. 
c.	 a segmental artery. 
d.	 an efferent arteriole. 
e.	 an afferent arteriole. 
	 8.	 Determine the correct order of flow through the renal tubule, if 
we let
I = collecting duct, 
II = distal convoluted tubule, 
III = glomerular capsule, 
IV = proximal convoluted tubule, and 
V = nephron loop. 
a.	 IV–III–V–II–I 
b.	 I–II–IV–III–V 
c.	 IV–II–V–I–III 
d.	 III–IV–V–II–I 
e.	 III–I–IV–V–II 
	 9.	 Which of the following is/are secreted into the renal tubule?
a.	 water 
b.	 glucose 
c.	 bicarbonate ions 
d.	 sodium chloride 
e.	 albumin 
	10.	 How would increased ADH secretion change the urine?
a.	 reduced volume 
b.	 increased volume 
c.	 reduced osmolarity 
d.	 reduced urea concentration 
e.	 reduced potassium concentration 
	11.	 In lung diseases such as emphysema where exhalation is 
­impeded, an excess of 
 may cause acidosis. 
556      PART 5  Intake and Output

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
	12.	
 is the amount of filtrate formed per minute by the 
two kidneys combined. 
	13.	 The two 
 carry urine from the kidneys to the urinary 
bladder. 
	14.	 The 
 is a group of epithelial cells of the nephron loop 
that monitors the flow or composition of the tubular fluid. 
	15.	 To enter the capsular space, filtrate must pass between foot 
processes of the 
, cells that form part of the filtration 
membrane in the glomerular capsule. 
	16.	 The 
 is the functional unit of the kidney where urine 
is produced. 
	17.	 The descending limb of the nephron loop is permeable  
to 
 , whereas the ascending limb of the loop is  
permeable to 
. 
	18.	 The 
 sphincter is under involuntary control and 
relaxes during the male micturition reflex, but contracts during 
ejaculation. 
	19.	 Aldosterone stimulates the ascending limb of the nephron loop, 
the DCT, and the collecting duct to reabsorb more 
 
and secrete more 
 . 
	20.	 The 
 tightly wraps the kidney and protects it from 
trauma and infection. 
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These  
Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Aldosterone has no effect on the distal convoluted tubule. 
	 2.	 Loss of water through the skin occurs only through sweating. 
	 3.	 The kidney has more collecting ducts than nephrons.  
	 4.	 Sodium is reabsorbed only in the proximal convoluted tubule. 
	 5.	 Natriuretic peptides increase blood volume by promoting 
sodium reabsorption in the kidney. 
	 6.	 If all other conditions remain the same, dilation of the afferent 
arteriole reduces the glomerular filtration rate. 
	 7.	 Angiotensin II lowers blood pressure. 
	 8.	 The minimum osmolarity of urine is 300 mOsm/L, equal to the 
osmolarity of the blood. 
	 9.	 The sympathetic nervous system sends signals that contract the 
detrusor and relax the internal urethral sphincter. 
	10.	 A normal GFR is less than 100 mL/min. 
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Animals that live in freshwater, such as muskrats and beavers, 
have very short nephron loops. In view of the function of the 
nephron loop in humans, explain why it is less necessary in 
such aquatic mammals. As a result of this difference, would 
you expect their urine to be hypotonic or hypertonic to ours? 
Why? 
	 2.	 Hypertension (high blood pressure) is often treated with 
medications called ACE inhibitors, which interfere with the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme that is necessary to convert 
angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Explain why ACE inhibitors are 
prescribed to people who suffer from chronic hypertension. 
	 3.	 Cholera is a bacterial infection common in impoverished 
countries and areas stricken by warfare and natural disasters. It 
causes profuse diarrhea and often death, especially in children. 
In view of section 16.7 of this chapter, why do you think these 
children could die in a few days from unrelenting diarrhea? Be 
as detailed as you can about the physiological mechanisms. 
CHAPTER 16   The Urinary System      557  

Chapter Outline
17.1 Overview of the Digestive System
• Digestive System Functions 
• General Anatomy 
17.2 The Mouth Through Esophagus
• The Mouth 
• Saliva and Salivary Glands 
• The Pharynx 
• The Esophagus 
• Swallowing 
17.3 The Stomach
• Anatomy 
• Gastric Secretions 
• Gastric Motility 
• Regulation of Gastric Function 
• Protection of the Stomach 
17.4 The Liver, Gallbladder, and Pancreas
• The Liver
• The Gallbladder and Bile 
• The Pancreas 
17.5 The Small Intestine
• Anatomy 
• Intestinal Secretion and Motility 
17.6 Chemical Digestion and Absorption
• Carbohydrates 
• Proteins 
• Fats 
• Vitamins and Minerals 
• Water 
17.7 The Large Intestine
• Anatomy 
• Intestinal Bacteria
• Absorption and Motility 
• Defecation 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 17.1: Peptic Ulcer 
• Clinical Application 17.2: Lactose Intolerance
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Digestive System  
• Career Spotlight: Dental Hygienist
• Connective Issues 
• Study Guide
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter
17
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Body cavities and membranes (see section 1.3) 
• Peritoneum and intra- and retroperitoneal organs 
(see section 1.3) 
• Carbohydrate, fat, and protein structures  
(see section 2.3) 
• pH and enzyme function (see section 2.3)  
• Epithelial tissues (see section 4.2)  
The Digestive 
System
The small intestine 
absorbs nutrients 
across a vast 
network of blood 
capillaries. This is a 
scanning electron 
microscope image 
of a resin cast of 
blood vessels in the 
small intestine.
© Susumu Nishinga/
Science Source
Module 12: Digestive System
558	

E
ating is a fundamental human behavior, required for 
survival and central to social interactions and cultural iden-
tity. The food we eat is not yet in a form that can be used either for 
energy or as structural building blocks for tissues. The digestive 
system is essentially a disassembly line that breaks food into small 
components such as amino acids and monosaccharides that can be 
transported into cells. Consider what happens when we eat a steak, 
for example. The proteins that make up beef muscle differ very 
little from that of your own muscles. Even if they were identical, 
however, proteins such as myosin in the steak could not be directly 
absorbed, transported in the blood, and incorporated into your 
muscles. The ingested proteins must be dismantled into amino acids 
before they are useful to cells. Once digested, the amino acids in 
the beef proteins might be used to build your own muscle myosin, 
but could equally wind up in your insulin, collagen, or any other 
protein. After the food has been digested, the nutrients are absorbed 
in the digestive tract and then distributed to the tissues. The study 
of the digestive tract and the diagnosis and treatment of its disorders 
is called gastroenterology.1
17.1
 Overview of the Digestive System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	list the functions and major physiological processes of the 
­digestive system; 
b.	distinguish between mechanical and chemical digestion; 
c.	list the regions of the digestive tract and the accessory organs 
of the digestive system; 
d.	describe the histological layers of the digestive tract; 
e.	describe the special nervous network of the digestive 
tract; and 
f.	 describe the relationship between the digestive tract, perito-
neum, and mesenteries. 
1gastro = stomach; entero = intestine; logy = study of
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      559  

Digestive System Functions
The digestive system processes food, extracts nutrients from it, and eliminates the 
residue. It does this in five stages:
	 1.	 ingestion, the selective intake of food; 
	 2.	 digestion, the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into a form 
­usable by the body; 
	 3.	 absorption, the uptake of nutrient molecules into the epithelial cells of the 
digestive tract and then into the blood or lymph;
	 4.	 compaction, absorption of water and consolidation of the indigestible 
­residue into feces; and 
	 5.	 defecation, the elimination of feces. 
Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of food 
into smaller particles, achieved by the cutting and grinding 
action of the teeth and the churning movements of the stom-
ach. Mechanical digestion exposes more food surface to the 
action of digestive enzymes. 
Chemical digestion employs enzymes to break dietary 
macromolecules into their basic building blocks: polysaccha-
rides into monosaccharides, proteins into amino acids, fats into 
monoglycerides and fatty acids, and nucleic acids into nucle-
otides. All chemical digestion is by the process of enzymatic 
hydrolysis, breaking covalent bonds by adding water to them 
(see section 2.3). The digestive enzymes that carry this out are 
produced by the salivary glands, stomach, pancreas, and small 
intestine. 
Some nutrients are already present in usable form in the 
ingested food and are absorbed without being broken down by 
digestion: vitamins, minerals, cholesterol, and water.
General Anatomy
The two anatomical subdivisions of the digestive system are 
the digestive tract and the accessory organs (fig. 17.1). The 
­digestive tract (alimentary2 canal) is a tube that extends 
from mouth to anus, and measures about 5 m (16 feet) long 
in a living person (but longer in the cadaver). It includes 
the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, 
and large intestine. Part of the digestive tract, the stomach 
and intestines, constitutes the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. 
The accessory organs are the teeth, tongue, salivary glands, 
liver, gallbladder, and pancreas. We will first explore the 
structure of the system as a whole and then we will further 
explore the structure and functions of each region.
The digestive tract is essentially a tube open to the envi-
ronment at both ends. With slight variations from one region 
to another, most of it follows the same basic structural plan—
a wall composed of four main tissue layers, from inner to 
outer surface (fig. 17.2):
1.   The mucosa (mucous membrane) lines the lumen. 
It consists of an inner epithelium, a loose connective 
­tissue layer called the lamina propria, and a thin layer 
of smooth muscle. Simple columnar epithelium lines the
2aliment = food
Figure 17.1 The Digestive System. 
 
Small intestine
Ascending
colon
Cecum
Appendix
Descending
colon
Transverse
colon
Liver
Gallbladder
Diaphragm
Sigmoid
colon
Rectum
Anal canal
Pancreas
Bile duct
Anus
Stomach
Esophagus
Submandibular
gland
Pharynx
Parotid
gland
Sublingual gland
Tongue
Teeth
Oral cavity
560      PART 5  Intake and Output

Lumen
Blood vessels
Parasympathetic
ganglion
Diaphragm
Esophageal hiatus
Serosa
Enteric nervous
system
Mucosa:
Epithelium
Lamina propria
Smooth muscle
Muscularis externa:
Inner circular layer
Outer longitudinal
layer
Submucosa
	
	 digestive tract from the stomach through the large intestine; stratified squa-
mous epithelium is found from the oral cavity through the esophagus and 
in the lower anal canal, where the tract is subject to more abrasion. The mu-
cosa often exhibits an abundance of lymphocytes and lymphatic ­nodules—
the mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue (MALT) (see section 14.1). 
	 2.	 The submucosa is a layer of loose connective tissue containing blood ves-
sels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves. 
	 3.	 The muscularis externa consists of smooth muscle, usually arranged in 
two layers: a deep layer whose muscle fibers encircle the tract and a more 
superficial layer whose fibers run longitudinally. The muscularis externa 
is responsible for the motility that propels food and residue through the 
digestive tract. 
	 4.	 A thin serosa (serous membrane) covers the outer surface of most of the 
digestive tract. It consists of areolar tissue topped by a simple squamous 
­epithelium. The serosa begins in the lower 3 to 4 cm of the esophagus and 
ends just before the rectum. The pharynx, most of the esophagus, and the 
rectum are covered instead by a fibrous connective tissue layer called the 
adventitia that blends into the connective tissues of adjacent organs. 
An independent network of neurons called the enteric3 nervous system 
branches throughout the submucosa and muscularis externa. It coordinates muscle 
activity responsible for mechanical mixing of food in the stomach and propulsion 
Figure 17.2 Tissue Layers of the Digestive 
Tract. Cross section of the esophagus just below 
the diaphragm. The layers shown here are typical of 
most of the digestive tract.
3enter = intestine
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      561  

Liver
Gallbladder
Ascending 
colon
Lesser 
omentum
Stomach
Transverse
colon
Small
intestine
(a)
(b)
Descending 
colon
Jejunum
Mesentery of 
small intestine
Sigmoid
colon
Mesentery 
of colon
Greater 
omentum
(retracted)
Greater 
omentum
of material through the intestines, and regulates numerous secretions in different 
gut sections that maintain the optimal pH and biochemical environment for enzyme 
function. This system is thought to have more neurons than the spinal cord! Perhaps 
this is not as surprising as it sounds when one considers the complexity of digestion. 
Neurons in the gut produce some of the same neurotransmitters as are found in the 
brain, such as dopamine and serotonin. The enteric nervous system can function 
completely independently of the central nervous system, although the CNS usually 
exerts a significant influence on it.
The stomach and intestines undergo such strenuous contractions as they process 
food that they need freedom to move in the abdominal cavity. Thus, they are not tightly 
bound to the abdominal wall, but rather are loosely suspended from it by connective 
tissue sheets called mesenteries (fig. 17.3; see also figs. 1.13 and 1.14). The parietal 
peritoneum, a serous membrane that lines the abdominal cavity, turns inward along the 
posterior midline and forms a two-layered mesentery that extends to the digestive tract. 
At the stomach and small intestine, the two layers separate and pass around opposite 
sides of the organ, forming the serosa. The mesenteries hold the abdominal viscera in 
their proper relationship to each other and prevent the small intestine from becoming 
twisted and tangled by changes in body position and by the intestine’s own contrac-
tions. They also provide passage for blood vessels and nerves that supply the digestive 
tract, and contain many lymph nodes and lymphatic vessels and often a substantial 
amount of fat. Much of the adipose tissue in obese individuals is in the mesenteries.
A mesentery called the lesser omentum extends from the right superior margin 
of the stomach to the liver. A larger mesentery, the greater omentum, hangs from the 
inferior margin of the stomach and loosely covers the small intestine like an apron. 
The omenta have a loosely organized, lacy appearance due to irregularities in the 
thickness and amount of fat. 
Some digestive organs such as the stomach and liver are intraperitoneal—
enclosed by serosa on all sides. Others such as the pancreas and duodenum are 
retroperitoneal—lying against the posterior body wall and covered by peritoneum 
only on the anterior surface (see fig. 1.13).
Figure 17.3 Mesenteries of the Digestive Tract. (a) Shown with apronlike greater omentum overhanging the small intestine in its natural 
position. (b) Greater omentum and small intestine retracted to expose other mesenteries of the small and large intestines. 
 
562      PART 5  Intake and Output

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 What is the difference between mechanical and 
chemical digestion? 
2.	List the tissue layers of the digestive tract from inside to out-
side. Describe the characteristics and functions of each. 
3.	Name the independent network of neurons in the digestive 
tract and identify its functions. 
4.	Distinguish between the meanings of peritoneum and 
­mesenteries, and explain the function of the mesenteries. 
5.	Define intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal. Name an organ in 
each category. 
17.2  The Mouth Through Esophagus
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the gross anatomy of the digestive tract from the mouth 
through esophagus; 
b.	describe the general structure of a tooth, and identify the types 
of teeth and their respective positions; 
c.	list the functions of saliva and describe its composition; and 
d.	describe the process of swallowing. 
The Mouth
The mouth is also known as the oral, or buccal, cavity (BUCK-ul). 
Its functions include ingestion (food intake), taste, chewing, mechani-
cal and chemical digestion, swallowing, speech, and respiration. The 
mouth is lined with stratified squamous epithelium.
The cheeks, lips, palate, and tongue enclose the mouth 
(fig. 17.4). The ­vestibule is the space that separates the teeth from 
the cheeks and lips—the space where you insert your toothbrush 
to brush the outer surfaces of the teeth. The fleshiness of the lips 
and cheeks is due mainly to subcutaneous fat and the orbicularis 
oris and buccinator muscles (see “Muscles of the Face” in sec-
tion  7.4). The lips and cheeks retain food and are essential for 
articulate speech and for sucking and blowing actions, including 
suckling by infants.
The tongue, although muscular and bulky, is a remarkably 
agile and sensitive organ. It manipulates food between the teeth 
while it avoids being bitten, and it is sensitive enough to feel a stray 
hair in a bite of food. Its surface is covered with nonkeratinized 
Upper lip
Vestibule
Tongue
Lower lip
Lingual
frenulum
Submandibular
Sublingual
Salivary duct
oriﬁces:
Palatine tonsil
Hard palate
Soft palate
Uvula
Figure 17.4 The Oral Cavity. 
 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      563  

Names of teeth
Age at eruption
(months)
2nd molar
1st molar
Canine
Lateral incisor
Central incisor
6–9
7–11
16–20
12–16
20–26
Names of teeth
(a) Deciduous (baby) teeth
(b) Permanent teeth
(c)
Age at eruption
(years)
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
1st premolar
2nd premolar
1st molar
Canine
2nd molar
3rd molar
(wisdom tooth)
6–8
7–9
9–12
10–12
10–12
6–7
11–13
17–25
Enamel
Dentin
Pulp in pulp cavity
Gingiva
Jaw bone
Root canal
Cementum
Artery, 
nerve, vein
Crown
Root
4frenulum = little bridle 
5uvula = little grape
stratified squamous epithelium and exhibits bumps and projections called lin-
gual papillae, the site of the taste buds (see fig. 10.4). Its anterior two-thirds, 
called the body, occupies the oral cavity; the posterior one-third, the root, occu-
pies the first part of the pharynx. The body is attached to the floor of the mouth 
by a median fold called the lingual frenulum.4
The palate separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavity, making it pos-
sible to breathe while chewing food. Its anterior portion, the hard (bony) pal-
ate, consists of horizontal plates of the maxillae and palatine bones covered 
with a thin mucous membrane. The posterior portion, the soft palate, has no 
bone but is more spongy, containing glandular tissue and skeletal muscle. 
A conical median projection, the uvula,5 is clearly visible at the rear of the 
mouth.
The teeth are collectively called the dentition. They serve to masticate 
the food, breaking it into smaller pieces, making it easier to swallow and 
speeding up chemical digestion by exposing more surface area to enzymatic 
action. Adults normally have 16 teeth in the mandible and 16 in the maxilla. 
From the midline to the rear of each jaw, there are two incisors, a canine, two 
premolars, and up to three molars (fig. 17.5). The chisel-like incisors bite 
off a piece of food, and the slightly pointed canines puncture and shred it. 
Figure 17.5 The Dentition and Structure of a 
Tooth and Its Alveolus. (a) The deciduous (baby) 
teeth and ages at which they emerge from the gums 
(erupt). (b) The adult teeth and ages of eruption. 
Each figure shows only the upper teeth. The ages at 
eruption are composite ages for the corresponding 
upper and lower teeth. Generally, the lower (man-
dibular) teeth erupt somewhat earlier than their up-
per (maxillary) counterparts. (c) Structure of a tooth 
and periodontal tissues. This particular example is a 
molar. 
•	 Which teeth are absent from a 3-year-old child? 
564      PART 5  Intake and Output

Parotid
gland
Parotid duct
Masseter
muscle
Submandibular 
gland                
Submandibular 
duct
Sublingual
gland
Sublingual
ducts
Tongue
Opening of 
submandibular
duct
Mandible
The premolars and molars are “grinders” with broad, lumpy 
surfaces adapted for crushing, shredding, and grinding food.
Regions of a tooth are defined by their relationship to the 
gum, or gingiva (JIN-jih-vuh): The crown is the portion above 
the gum, and the root is the portion inserted into the tooth 
socket below the gum. Internally, the pulp cavity in the 
crown and the narrow root canal in the root are occupied 
by pulp—a mass of loose connective tissue, blood and lym-
phatic vessels, and nerves.
Most of a tooth consists of hard yellowish tissue called 
dentin, covered with enamel in the crown and neck and 
cementum in the root. Enamel is a nonliving, hardened 
secretion, whereas dentin and cementum are living con-
nective tissues with cells or cell processes embedded in 
a calcified matrix. Damaged dentin and cementum can 
regenerate, but damaged enamel cannot—it must be arti-
ficially repaired.
Saliva and Salivary Glands
Saliva is a watery solution of mucus, enzymes, and electro-
lytes. It moistens the mouth, cleanses the teeth, inhibits bac-
terial growth, and dissolves molecules so they can stimulate 
the taste buds. It lubricates food and binds particles together 
into a soft, slippery, easily swallowed mass. Its salivary amylase 
digests some of the starch in our food as we chew, and some of 
the fat after we swallow it and the stomach acid activates its fat-
digesting enzyme, lingual lipase.
We produce about 1.0 to 1.5 liters of saliva per day. Some of this, 
secreted throughout the day whether we are eating or not, comes from 
numerous small salivary glands scattered throughout the mucosa of the tongue, 
lips, cheeks, and palate. The presence of food in the mouth stimulates secretion of 
more abundant saliva from three pairs of major salivary glands external to the oral 
cavity (fig. 17.6): 
	 1.	 The parotid6 glands are located just beneath the skin anterior to the earlobes. 
Their ducts open into the mouth opposite each second upper molar tooth. 
Mumps is an inflammation and swelling of the parotid gland caused by a 
virus. 
	 2.	 The submandibular glands are located halfway along the medial side of the 
body of the mandible. Their ducts empty into the mouth at a papilla beneath 
the tongue, near the lower central incisors. 
	 3.	 The sublingual glands are located in the floor of the mouth. They have mul-
tiple ducts that empty into the mouth beneath the tongue. 
The Pharynx 
The pharynx is a muscular funnel that connects the oral cavity to the esophagus and 
the nasal cavity to the larynx; thus, it is a point where the digestive and respiratory 
tracts intersect. It has a deep layer of longitudinally oriented skeletal muscle and 
a superficial layer of circular skeletal muscle. The circular muscle is divided into 
superior, middle, and inferior pharyngeal constrictors, which force food down-
ward during swallowing. Section 15.1 and fig. 15.2 describe the three regions of the 
pharynx (nasopharyx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx). 
Figure 17.6 The Salivary Glands. Part of the 
mandible has been removed to expose the sublin-
gual gland medial to it. 
 
6par = next to; ot = ear
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      565  

Stomach
Esophagus
Oral phase. The tongue forms a food bolus and
pushes it into the laryngopharynx.
1
Pharyngeal phase. The palate, tongue, vocal
cords, and epiglottis block the oral and nasal
cavities and airway while pharyngeal constrictors
push the bolus into the esophagus.
2
Esophageal phase. Peristalsis drives the bolus
downward, and relaxation of the lower 
esophageal sphincter admits it into the stomach.
3
The Esophagus
The esophagus is a straight muscular tube 25 to 30 cm long (see fig. 17.1). It begins 
posterior to the trachea near the inferior border of the larynx. It passes through the 
mediastinum, penetrates the diaphragm at an opening called the esophageal hiatus, 
then continues another 3 to 4 cm to meet the stomach at the cardial orifice (named 
for its proximity to the heart). A constriction called the lower esophageal sphincter 
prevents stomach contents from regurgitating into the esophagus, thus protecting 
the esophageal mucosa from the erosive effect of stomach acid. “Heartburn” has 
nothing to do with the heart, but is the burning sensation produced by acid reflux 
into the esophagus.
The wall of the esophagus is organized into the tissue layers described ear-
lier, with some regional specializations (see fig. 17.2). The mucosa has a non-
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The submucosa contains mucous 
glands that aid in swallowing. The muscularis externa is voluntary skeletal 
muscle in the upper esophagus, but transitions to involuntary smooth muscle 
in the lower esophagus. When the esophagus is empty, the contraction of its 
muscular wall folds the mucosa and submucosa into longitudinal ridges, giving 
the lumen a starlike shape in cross section. Most of the esophagus is covered 
with a connective tissue adventitia; the short segment below the diaphragm is 
covered by a serosa.
Swallowing
Swallowing, or deglutition (DEE-glu-TISH-un), is a complex action involv-
ing over 22 muscles in the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus. It is coordinated 
by the ­swallowing center in the medulla oblongata, and occurs in three phases 
(fig. 17.7).
	 1	 The oral phase is under voluntary control. The tongue collects food, presses 
it against the palate to form a soft cohesive mass called a bolus, and pushes 
it posteriorly. Food accumulates in the oropharynx in front of the blade of 
the epiglottis. When the bolus reaches a critical size, the epiglottis tips pos-
teriorly and the bolus slides around it through a space on each side, into the 
laryngopharynx. 
	 2	 The pharyngeal phase is involuntary and is initiated when food contacts 
touch receptors of the laryngopharynx. The soft palate and root of the tongue 
block food from entering the nasal cavity or reentering the mouth. The vo-
cal cords adduct (come together) in the middle, and the larynx is pulled up 
against the epiglottis, preventing food from entering the larynx and trachea. 
These actions also widen the upper end of the esophagus to receive the bo-
lus. The pharyngeal constrictors contract in order from superior to inferior 
to drive the bolus downward into the esophagus. Breathing is automatically 
suspended for a moment during this phase. 
	 3	 The esophageal phase is a wave of involuntary contraction called 
­peristalsis, controlled jointly by the brainstem swallowing center and the 
enteric nervous system in the esophageal wall. The esophagus constricts 
above the bolus and relaxes below it, propelling the bolus along. When 
you are standing or sitting upright, most food and liquid drop through the 
esophagus by gravity faster than the peristaltic wave can catch up to it. Peri-
stalsis, however, propels larger food pieces and ensures that you can swal-
low regardless of the body’s position—while lying down or even standing 
on your head! A second wave of peristalsis follows if the first wave is in-
sufficient to clear food from the esophagus. Liquid normally reaches the 
stomach in 1 to 2 seconds and a food bolus in 4 to 8 seconds. As a bolus 
reaches the lower end of the esophagus, the lower esophageal sphincter 
relaxes to let it pass into the stomach. 
Figure 17.7 Swallowing. See numbered steps in 
the text for further explanation. 
•	 What actions prevent the pharynx from forcing 
food back into the mouth or nose? 
566      PART 5  Intake and Output

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
6.	Identify the diverse functions of the mouth and which 
parts perform each function. 
7.	 Describe the spatial relationship of dentin, enamel, and 
cementum in a tooth. Name the four kinds of teeth and state 
how many of each type a person has.  
8.	Name the major salivary glands, state their locations, and 
describe the composition of the saliva. 
9.	Where is the cardial orifice? Name the sphincter found here 
and discuss its function. 
10.	Explain the three stages of swallowing. Which is voluntary 
and which are involuntary? 
17.3  The Stomach
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the gross and microscopic anatomy of the stomach; 
b.	identify the cell types of the gastric mucosa and their functions; 
c.	identify the secretions of the stomach and their functions; 
d.	describe how the nervous system and hormones regulate 
the stomach; and 
e.	explain why the stomach doesn’t digest itself. 
The stomach is a muscular sac in the upper left abdominal cavity immediately infe-
rior to the diaphragm. It functions primarily as a food-storage organ, and holds 1.0 
to 1.5 L after a typical meal. When extremely full, it may hold up to 4 L and extend 
nearly as far as the pelvis.
Well into the nineteenth century, authorities regarded the stomach as essentially 
a grinding chamber, fermentation vat, or cooking pot. We now know that it mechan-
ically breaks down and liquefies the food and begins the chemical digestion of pro-
teins and fat. This produces a pasty mixture of semidigested food called chyme7 
(pronounced “kime”). Most chemical digestion occurs after the chyme passes on to 
the small intestine.
Anatomy
The stomach is J-shaped and divided into four regions (fig. 17.8). (1) The car-
dial part is a small area immediately inside the cardial orifice. (2) The fundus 
is the superior dome that nestles against the diaphragm. (3) The body makes up 
7chyme = juice
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      567  

Pylorus
Pyloric part
Pyloric
sphincter
Lesser omentum
Fundus
Cardial part
Body
Circular muscle
Longitudinal
muscle
Oblique muscle
Greater omentum
Gastric rugae
Diaphragm
Duodenum
the greatest part of the stomach distal to the cardial orifice. (4) The pyloric part 
is a slightly narrower pouch at the inferior end that terminates at the pylorus,8 a 
narrow passage into the duodenum. The pylorus is surrounded by a thick ring of 
smooth muscle, the pyloric sphincter, which regulates the passage of chyme into 
the duodenum.
The stomach wall has the layers typical of the digestive tract with some 
variations. The mucosa is covered with simple columnar epithelium (fig. 17.9). 
The mucosa and submucosa are flat and smooth when the stomach is full, but 
as it empties, these layers form conspicuous longitudinal wrinkles called gastric 
rugae9 (ROO-jee). The lamina propria is almost entirely occupied by glands, to be 
described shortly. The muscularis externa has three layers rather than two: an outer 
longitudinal, middle circular, and inner oblique layer, correlated with the strong 
churning reactions of the stomach.
Apply What You Know
Contrast the epithelium of the esophagus with that of the stomach. Why is each 
epithelial type best suited to the function of its respective organ?
8pylorus = gatekeeper 
9rugae = folds, creases
Figure 17.8 Gross Anatomy of the Stomach 
 
•	 How does the muscularis externa of the stom-
ach differ from that of the esophagus? Why? 
568      PART 5  Intake and Output

Vein
Artery
Mucosa
Submucosa
G cell
Parietal cell
Chief cell
Mucous cell
Lumen of stomach
Epithelium
Gastric pit
Lymphatic
nodule
Lymphatic
vessel
Lamina propria
Gastric gland
Pyloric gland
The gastric mucosa is pocked with depressions called gastric pits lined with the 
same columnar epithelium as the surface. Two or three simple tubular glands open 
into the bottom of each gastric pit. Near the esophagus and pylorus, the stomach 
has cardial and pyloric glands, respectively; their main secretion is mucus. But in 
most of the stomach, we find gastric glands, with a greater variety of cell types and 
secretions:
∙	 Mucous cells secrete mucus. 
∙	 Regenerative cells, found in the base of the pit and neck of the gland, divide 
rapidly and produce a continual supply of new cells to replace cells that die.  
∙	 Parietal cells, found mostly in the upper half of the gland, secrete hydro-
chloric acid, intrinsic factor, and an appetite-regulating hormone, ghrelin (see 
section 18.5). 
∙	 Chief cells, so named because they are the most numerous, secrete the en-
zymes pepsinogen and gastric lipase. 
∙	 Enteroendocrine cells, concentrated especially in the lower end of a gland, 
secrete hormones and local chemical messengers that regulate digestion. 
These include, for example, the G cells in figure 17.9, which secrete the regu-
latory hormone gastrin. 
Figure 17.9 Microscopic Anatomy of the Gas-
tric Mucosa. Both gastric and pyloric glands are 
shown, although pyloric glands are found in the low-
er end of the stomach and gastric glands in the up-
per to middle stomach (fundus and body). 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      569  

Gastric Secretions
The gastric glands produce 2 to 3 L of gastric juice per day, composed mainly of 
water and the following solutes:
∙	 Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is produced by the parietal cells. The gastric juice 
can have a pH as low as 0.8, more acidic than the battery acid of a car and low 
enough to cause a serious chemical burn on the skin. Stomach acid has several 
functions: (1) It activates the enzymes pepsin and lingual lipase; (2) it converts 
dietary iron to a form that the body can absorb and use; (3) it breaks up connec-
tive tissues and plant cells, helping to liquefy food and form chyme; and (4) it 
contributes to innate immunity by destroying most ingested pathogens. 
∙	 Pepsin is an enzyme that digests proteins to shorter peptide chains, which then 
pass to the small intestine where their digestion is completed. Chief cells se-
crete an inactive precursor called pepsinogen, and hydrochloric acid converts 
it to pepsin. 
∙	 Gastric lipase, also secreted by chief cells, digests a small percentage of the 
dietary fat. Most fat, however, is digested in the small intestine. 
∙	 Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein secreted by the parietal cells. It is essen-
tial for the absorption of vitamin B12 by the small intestine. Without vitamin 
B12, hemoglobin cannot be synthesized and anemia develops. The secretion 
of intrinsic factor is the only indispensable function of the stomach. Diges-
tion can continue following removal of the stomach (gastrectomy), but a 
person must then take vitamin B12 by injection, or vitamin B12 and intrinsic 
factor orally. 
∙	 Hormones and local chemical messengers are produced by enteroendocrine 
cells. These include gastrin, serotonin, histamine, somatostatin, and several 
others. Some are peptides identical to those produced in the central nervous 
system, and have thus been called gut–brain peptides. Their roles in diges-
tion and appetite regulation are discussed in later sections of this chapter and 
in section 18.5. Table 17.1 summarizes the principal gastric secretions. 
Table 17.1  Major Secretions of the Gastric Glands
Secretory 
Cells
Secretion
Function
Mucous cells
Mucus
Protects mucosa from HCl and enzymes
Parietal cells
Hydrochloric 
acid
Activates pepsin; helps liquefy food; converts dietary 
iron to usable form; destroys ingested pathogens
Intrinsic factor 
Enables small intestine to absorb vitamin B12
Ghrelin
Stimulates the sense of hunger
Chief cells
Pepsinogen
Converted to pepsin, which digests protein
Gastric lipase
Digests fat
Enteroendocrine 
cells
Gastrin
Stimulates gastric glands to secrete HCl and 
enzymes; stimulates intestinal motility; relaxes ileoce-
cal valve
Serotonin
Stimulates gastric motility
Histamine
Stimulates HCl secretion
Somatostatin
Inhibits gastric secretion and motility; delays 
emptying of stomach; inhibits secretion by pancreas; 
inhibits gallbladder contraction and bile secretion; 
reduces blood circulation and nutrient absorption in 
small intestine
570      PART 5  Intake and Output

Gastric Motility
As you begin to swallow, the swallowing center of the medulla oblongata sig-
nals the stomach to relax, thus preparing it to receive food. The arriving food 
also causes smooth muscle to relax and the stomach stretches to accommodate 
more food.
Peristalsis
Soon, the stomach begins rhythmic peristaltic contractions that churn the food, 
mix it with gastric juice, and promote its physical breakup and chemical digestion. 
When these waves reach the pyloric sphincter, they squeeze it shut. The stomach 
thus squirts only about 3 mL of chyme into the duodenum at a time. Receiving such 
small amounts of chyme enables the duodenum to neutralize the stomach acid and 
digest nutrients little by little. A typical meal is emptied from the stomach in about 
4 hours, but it takes less time if the meal is more liquid and as long as 6 hours if the 
meal is high in fat.
Vomiting
Vomiting is the forceful ejection of stomach and intestinal contents from the 
mouth. It involves multiple muscular actions integrated by the emetic center 
of the medulla oblongata. Vomiting is commonly induced by overstretching of 
the stomach, chemical irritants such as alcohol and bacterial toxins, visceral 
trauma, intense pain, or psychological and sensory stimuli that activate the 
emetic center (repugnant sights, smells, and thoughts). Vomiting is usually pre-
ceded by nausea, and is often accompanied by tachycardia, profuse salivation, 
and sweating.
Chronic vomiting can cause dangerous fluid, electrolyte, and acid–base 
imbalances. In cases of frequent vomiting, as in the eating disorder bulimia, 
the tooth enamel becomes severely eroded by the hydrochloric acid in the 
chyme. Aspiration (inhalation) of this acid is very destructive to the respira-
tory tract. Many have died from aspiration of vomit when they were uncon-
scious or semiconscious. This is the reason that surgical anesthesia, which 
may induce nausea, must be preceded by fasting until the stomach and duode-
num are empty.
Regulation of Gastric Function
Gastric secretion and motility are divided into three stages called the cephalic, gas-
tric, and intestinal phases, based on whether the stomach is being controlled by the 
brain, by itself, or by the small intestine, respectively. These phases overlap and all 
three can occur simultaneously (fig. 17.10).
	 1	 The cephalic phase is the stage in which the stomach responds to the mere 
sight, smell, taste, or thought of food. These sensory and mental inputs 
converge on the hypothalamus, which relays signals to the medulla oblon-
gata. Vagus nerve fibers from the medulla stimulate the enteric nervous 
system, which, in turn, stimulates gastric activity. 
	 2	 The gastric phase is a period in which swallowed food activates gastric 
activity. About two-thirds of gastric secretion occurs during this phase. 
Ingested food stimulates gastric activity both by stretching the stomach 
and by raising the pH of its contents. Three chemical signals activate 
HCl secretion by the parietal cells: acetylcholine from the vagus nerves 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      571  

and histamine and gastrin from the enteroendocrine cells of the gastric 
glands. Gastrin and acetylcholine also signal the chief cells to secrete 
pepsinogen. 
	 3	 The intestinal phase occurs as chyme enters the duodenum and trig-
gers local nervous reflexes and the secretion of regulatory hormones.  
Acid and semidigested fats in the duodenum trigger inhibitory signals, 
sent to the stomach by way of the enteric nervous system. In addition, 
signals from the duodenum to the medulla oblongata inhibit vagal stimu-
lation of the stomach and activate sympathetic neurons, which inhibit 
gastric activity. Furthermore, duodenal enteroendocrine cells release the 
hormones secretin and cholecystokinin (CCK),10 which suppress gas-
tric activity. Collectively, all these neural and hormonal signals from the 
duodenum are like a message to the stomach to slow down and give the 
duodenum time to process the chyme it already contains before sending 
it more. 
Protection of the Stomach
One might think that the stomach would be its own worst enemy; it is, after all, made 
of meat. Some people enjoy haggis and tripe, dishes made from animal stomachs, 
and have no difficulty digesting those. Why, then, doesn’t the human stomach digest 
itself? The stomach is protected in three ways from the harsh acidic and enzymatic 
environment it creates:
	 1.	 The mucosa is coated with thick, highly alkaline mucus that neutralizes HCl 
and resists the enzymes. 
Figure 17.10 Neural and Hormonal Control of 
the Stomach. See numbered steps in the text for 
further explanation.
Vagus nerve
Vagus nerve
–
–
–
0
+
+
+
–
+
0
++
+
+
+
Sensory and 
mental input
Vagus nerve
Gastrin
Histamine
Enteric nervous
system
Chyme
Secretin 
and CCK
Intestinal gastrin
Sympathetic nerve
1
Cephalic phase
Gastric phase
Intestinal phase
2
3
Stimulation
Inhibition
Reduced 
or no eﬀect
Key
10chole = bile; cysto = bladder (gallbladder); kin = action
572      PART 5  Intake and Output

(a) Normal
(c) Helicobacter pylori
(b) Peptic ulcer
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
11.	 Where is the pyloric part of the stomach? Discuss the 
functional importance of the pyloric sphincter. 
12.	List five kinds of cells in gastric glands and state their 
­functions. 
13.	Name the chemical messengers that regulate gastric function 
and state the effect of each. 
14.	Compare and contrast the three phases of gastric regula-
tion. State whether gastric secretion and motility increase or 
decrease in each phase. Summarize the roles of sympathetic, 
parasympathetic, and enteric nervous stimulation over the 
course of these three phases. 
15.	Describe three ways the stomach is protected from 
­self-digestion. 
	 2.	 The epithelial cells are joined by tight junctions that prevent gastric juice 
from seeping between them and digesting the underlying tissue. 
	 3.	 In spite of these other protections, the stomach’s epithelial cells live only 
3 to 6 days and are then sloughed off into the chyme and digested with the 
food. They are replaced just as rapidly, however, by cell division in the 
gastric pits. 
The breakdown of these protective mechanisms can result in inflammation and 
peptic ulcer (Clinical Application 17.1).
Clinical Application 17.1
PEPTIC ULCER
Inflammation of the stomach, called gastritis, can lead to a peptic ulcer 
as pepsin and hydrochloric acid erode the stomach wall (fig. 17.11). Pep-
tic ulcers occur even more commonly in the duodenum and occasionally 
in the esophagus. If untreated, they can perforate the organ and cause 
fatal hemorrhaging or peritonitis. Most such fatalities occur in people 
over age 65.
There is no evidence to support the popular belief that peptic ulcers 
result from psychological stress. Most ulcers involve an acid-resistant bac-
terium, Helicobacter pylori, which invades the mucosa of the stomach and 
duodenum and opens the way to chemical damage to the tissue. Other risk 
factors include smoking and the use of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). NSAIDs suppress the synthesis of prosta-
glandins, which normally stimulate the secretion of protective mucus and 
acid-neutralizing bicarbonate. Aspirin itself is an acid that directly irritates 
the gastric mucosa. Ulcers are often successfully treated with antibiotics 
against Helicobacter combined with bismuth suspensions such as Pepto-
Bismol. 
Figure 17.11 Peptic Ulcer. (a) A healthy muco-
sa in the lower esophagus where it opens into the 
stomach. The small white spots are reflections of 
light from the endoscope. (b) A bleeding peptic ul-
cer. A peptic ulcer typically has an oval shape and 
yellow-white color. Here the yellowish floor of the 
ulcer is partially obscured by black blood clots, and 
fresh blood is visible around the margin of the ulcer. 
(c) Helicobacter pylori, the bacterium responsible 
for most peptic ulcers.
a, b: © CNRI/SPL/Science Source; c: © Eye of Science/Science Source
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      573  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
I
n recent years, headlines about contaminated apple juice, ham-
burger, and spinach, as well as outbreaks of illness on cruise 
ships, have focused public attention on contagious gastrointesti-
nal illnesses. Acute gastrointestinal illness is caused by a variety 
of bacteria and viruses, and is marked by diarrhea, nausea, vomit-
ing, and abdominal pain. Diarrhea occurs when the large intestine 
is irritated by pathogens and feces pass through too quickly for 
adequate water reabsorption. In most cases, the person recovers 
after a few unpleasant days; in severe cases, however, fluid loss 
can lead to dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, shock, and even 
death. When one is suffering from gastrointestinal illness, it is im-
portant to remain hydrated, preferably with beverages that contain 
electrolytes.
Pathogens that cause gastrointestinal disease are transmitted 
via contaminated water or food. Before widespread efforts in the 
nineteenth century to improve sanitation and provide clean drink-
ing water, gastrointestinal infections such as cholera were dev-
astatingly common. Gastrointestinal infections continue to cause 
illness and death throughout the world, especially in developing 
countries. As many as 17% of all deaths worldwide in children less 
than 5 years of age are due to acute gastrointestinal illness.
Three types of bacteria are responsible for many cases of 
gastrointestinal disease in the United States—Salmonella, Cam-
pylobacter, and Shigella. Salmonella is usually transmitted by 
eating foods contaminated with animal feces, such as poultry or 
eggs. Thorough cooking kills the bacteria. Campylobacter is often 
contracted by eating or coming into contact with raw or under-
cooked poultry or other meat, as when one cuts a chicken on a 
cutting board and then prepares other food such as a salad on the 
same board without washing it thoroughly. Some people acquire 
Campylobacter through contact with feces of an infected pet dog 
or cat. Shigella is transmitted from the stool or soiled fingers of 
one person to the mouth of another. This may occur, for example, 
when food handlers neglect to wash their hands with soap after 
they use the bathroom. Shigella can also be spread by flies that 
land in infected feces and then transmit the pathogen when they 
land on food. Shigella outbreaks sometimes occur in day-care cen-
ters when caretakers don’t carefully clean their hands or surfaces 
where diapers are changed.
Rotavirus is the most common cause of severe diarrhea 
in infants and young children in the United States and, indeed, 
throughout the world. Almost all children in the United States are 
likely to be infected with rotavirus before their fifth birthday, and 
most recover without medical intervention. Severe cases require 
hospitalization, where fluids are replaced intravenously. The virus 
spreads rapidly through fecal contamination, hand-to-mouth con-
tact, or physical contact with infected persons or toys. Rotavirus is 
life threatening in infants, who can suffer massive loss of fluid. There 
is no specific drug treatment for rotavirus infection; viruses do not 
respond to antibiotics. Recently, a rotavirus vaccine has been devel-
oped, and public health officials hope that it will prevent severe dis-
ease among children in both developed and poorer nations.
A c u t e  G a s t r o i n t e s t i n a l  I l l n e s s
17.4  The Liver, Gallbladder, and Pancreas
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the gross and microscopic anatomy of the liver, 
­gallbladder, and pancreas; 
b.	discuss the products and functions of each; and 
c.	explain how hormones regulate secretions of the liver and 
­pancreas. 
574      PART 5  Intake and Output

The small intestine receives not only chyme from the stomach but also secretions 
from the liver and pancreas, which enter the digestive tract near the junction of 
the stomach and small intestine. These secretions are so important to the digestive 
processes of the small intestine that it is necessary to understand them before we 
continue with intestinal physiology.
The Liver 
 
The liver (fig. 17.12) is a reddish brown gland located immediately inferior to the 
diaphragm, filling most of the right hypochondriac and epigastric regions. It is the 
body’s largest gland, weighing about 1.4 kg (3 pounds). It has a tremendous variety 
of functions, but only one of them, the secretion of bile, contributes to digestion. 
Others are discussed in “Liver Functions in Metabolism” in section 18.3, which 
provides a more thorough physiological basis for understanding the nondigestive 
roles of the liver.
Gross Anatomy
The liver has four lobes—the right, left, quadrate, and caudate lobes. From an ante-
rior view, we see only a large right lobe and smaller left lobe. They are separated 
by the falciform11 ligament, a sheet of mesentery that suspends the liver from the 
diaphragm and anterior abdominal wall. The round ligament, also visible anteriorly, 
is a fibrous remnant of the umbilical vein, which carries blood from the umbilical 
cord to the liver of a fetus.
From the inferior view, we see a squarish quadrate lobe next to the gall-
bladder and a tail-like caudate12 lobe posterior to that. The gallbladder is a 
sac adhering to a depression between the right and quadrate lobes. Between 
the quadrate and caudate lobes is an opening through which the hepatic portal 
vein and hepatic artery enter and the bile passages leave. The posterior aspect 
of the liver has a deep groove that accommodates the inferior vena cava. The 
liver is covered by a serosa except for its superior surface where it adheres to 
the diaphragm.
Microscopic Anatomy
The interior of the liver is filled with innumerable tiny cylinders called hepatic 
lobules, about 2 mm long by 1 mm in diameter. A lobule consists of a ­central 
vein passing down its core, surrounded by radiating sheets of cuboidal cells 
called ­hepatocytes (fig. 17.12d). Imagine spreading a book wide open until its 
front and back covers touch. The pages of the book would fan out around the 
spine somewhat like the plates of hepatocytes fan out from the central vein of a 
liver lobule.
Each plate of hepatocytes is an epithelium one or two cells thick. The spaces 
between the plates are blood-filled channels called hepatic sinusoids. These are 
bounded by a leaky fenestrated endothelium that freely allows blood plasma into 
the space around the hepatocytes, where it contacts their brush border of micro-
villi. Blood filtering through the sinusoids comes directly from the stomach and 
intestines via the hepatic portal vein. After a meal, the hepatocytes absorb glucose, 
amino acids, iron, vitamins, and other nutrients from it for metabolism or storage. 
They also remove and degrade hormones, toxins, bile pigments, and drugs. At the 
same time, they secrete albumin, lipoproteins, clotting factors, angiotensinogen, and 
other products into the blood. Between meals, they break down stored glycogen 
and release glucose into the circulation. The sinusoids also contain phagocytic cells 
called hepatic macrophages, which remove bacteria and debris from the blood.
11falci = sickle; form = shape 
12caud = tail
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      575  

Right lobe
Left lobe
Falciform
ligament
Sternum
5th rib
Liver
Round ligament
(b) Anterior view
(a) Location
(c) Inferior view
Gallbladder
Inferior 
vena cava
Right lobe
Caudate
lobe
Hepatic 
artery proper
Hepatic 
portal vein
Bile duct
Quadrate lobe
Hepatic 
sinusoid
Branch of
hepatic artery 
proper
Bile passages
(d) Histology
Hepatocytes
Branch of
hepatic
portal vein
Connective 
tissue
Central vein
Figure 17.12 The Liver. (a) Location; note that 
most of the liver lies within the rib cage. (b) Anterior 
view. (c) Inferior view. (d) Histology. Note the rela-
tionship of the ­hepatic lobules to the blood vessels 
and bile passages. 
 
576      PART 5  Intake and Output

Common 
hepatic duct
Cystic duct
Bile duct
Gallbladder
Pancreatic
duct
Jejunum
Accessory
pancreatic duct
Duodenum
Minor duodenal
papilla
Sphincter
Major duodenal
papilla
Circular folds
Pancreas
Hepatopancreatic
ampulla
After filtering through the sinusoids, blood flows into the central vein and from 
there to vessels that lead to a few hepatic veins. These leave the liver at its superior 
surface and drain immediately into the inferior vena cava.
The liver secretes about 500 to 1,000 mL of bile per day into narrow channels 
between sheets of hepatocytes. Bile passes to the common hepatic duct. A short distance 
farther on, this is joined by the cystic duct coming from the gallbladder (fig. 17.13). 
Their union forms the bile duct, which descends through the lesser omentum toward the 
duodenum. Near the duodenum, the bile duct joins the duct of the pancreas and forms 
an expanded chamber called the hepatopancreatic ampulla. The ampulla terminates 
at a fold of tissue on the duodenal wall, the major duodenal papilla. Bile and pancreatic 
juices flow into the duodenum through an opening in the papilla.
The Gallbladder and Bile
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac on the underside of the liver that stores and 
concentrates bile. It is about 10 cm long and internally lined by a highly folded 
mucosa with a simple columnar epithelium. Bile is a fluid containing minerals, 
cholesterol, phospholipids, bile pigments, and bile acids. When released from the 
liver, bile is a light yellow-green color, but when concentrated by the gallbladder, 
it becomes deep green. Its principal pigment is bilirubin, derived from the decom-
position of hemoglobin. Further metabolic derivatives of bilirubin are responsible 
Figure 17.13 Gross Anatomy of the Gallblad-
der, Pancreas, and Bile Passages. The liver is 
omitted to show more clearly the gallbladder, which 
adheres to its inferior surface, and the ducts that 
emerge from the liver tissue. 
 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      577  

for the brown color of feces and yellow color of urine; without bile, human feces 
have a chalky gray color. Bile acids (bile salts) are steroids synthesized from cho-
lesterol. They aid in fat digestion and absorption. All other components of the bile 
are wastes destined for excretion in the feces. When these waste products become 
excessively concentrated, they may form gallstones.
The Pancreas
The pancreas (fig. 17.13) is a spongy, flattened, retroperitoneal gland pressed 
between the posterior body wall and lower margin of the stomach. It measures 12 to 
15 cm long and about 2.5 cm thick. The pancreas is both an endocrine and exocrine 
gland. Its endocrine part is the pancreatic islets, the source of insulin and glucagon, 
described in section 11.4. About 99% of the pancreas is exocrine tissue with a diges-
tive function.
The exocrine pancreas secretes about 1,500 mL of pancreatic juice per 
day. This fluid flows to the duodenum by way of the pancreatic duct, which 
runs lengthwise through the gland and joins the bile duct at the hepatopancreatic 
ampulla. Pancreatic juice is an alkaline solution of mainly sodium bicarbonate 
and enzymes. Two of the enzymes, trypsin and chymotrypsin (KY-mo-TRIP-
sin), digest dietary protein; pancreatic amylase digests starch; pancreatic lipase 
digests fat; and ribonuclease and deoxyribonuclease digest RNA and DNA, 
respectively. We will later examine the mode of action of these enzymes on the 
nutrients.
Pancreatic juice and bile are not secreted continually, but only when needed. 
The following signal molecules activate their secretion:
	 1.	 Acetylcholine (ACh) is secreted by the vagus nerves and enteric plexus 
even before food is swallowed. It stimulates pancreatic secretion, but 
the fluid is retained in the pancreatic duct until chyme enters the duo-
denum. 
	 2.	 Cholecystokinin (CCK) is secreted by the mucosa of the duodenum in re-
sponse to fat in the chyme. It stimulates enzyme secretion by the pancreas, 
contraction of the gallbladder, and relaxation of the sphincter of the ampulla 
so the pancreatic secretions and bile can enter the duodenum and mix with 
the fatty chyme.  
	 3.	 Secretin is produced by the duodenum in response to the acidity of the 
chyme. It stimulates both the liver and pancreas to secrete sodium bi-
carbonate, which buffers the stomach acid and protects the duodenum 
from its erosive effect. The rise in duodenal pH due to this bicarbonate 
also activates digestive enzymes of the pancreatic juice and intestinal 
mucosa. 
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
16.	What does the liver contribute to digestion? 
17.	 Where is bile secreted? Where is it stored? Where does it 
perform its action? 
18.	List three enzymes secreted by the pancreas and state the 
function of each. 
19.	What stimulates cholecystokinin (CCK) secretion, and how 
does CCK affect other parts of the digestive system? 
578      PART 5  Intake and Output

17.5  The Small Intestine
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the gross and microscopic anatomy of the small intes-
tine, including the differences in its three regions; 
b.	state how and for what functional reason the mucosa of the small 
intestine differs from that of the stomach; 
c.	give two reasons why the small intestine needs such a large 
surface area, and four structural features that meet that 
need; and 
d.	describe the types of movement that occur in the small ­intestine. 
Nearly all chemical digestion and nutrient absorption occur in the small intestine. It 
efficiently carries out these tasks partly because it is the longest part of the digestive 
tract—about 5 m long (ranging 3 to 7 m) in a living person, and up to 8 m long in 
the cadaver, where there is no muscle tone. The term small intestine refers not to its 
length but to its diameter—about 2.5 cm (1 in.).
Anatomy
The small intestine is a coiled mass filling most of the abdominal cavity inferior to 
the stomach and liver. It is divided into three regions (fig. 17.14): the duodenum, 
jejunum, and ileum.
The duodenum13 (dew-ODD-eh-num, DEW-oh-DEE-num) constitutes the 
first 25 cm (10 in.). It begins at the pylorus, arcs around the head of the pancreas, 
and curves to the left. Its name refers to its length, about equal to the width of 12 
fingers. Along with the pancreas, most of the duodenum is retroperitoneal. The 
duodenum receives stomach contents, pancreatic juice, and bile. The stomach 
acid is neutralized both by the alkaline pancreatic juice and bicarbonate-rich 
mucus secreted by duodenal glands in the submucosa. The thick mucus serves 
to protect the mucosa from the corrosive stomach acid. Pepsin from the stomach 
is inactivated by the elevated duodenal pH, and pancreatic enzymes take over 
the job of chemical digestion. Fats are physically broken up (emulsified) by the 
bile acids. 
The jejunum14 (jeh-JOO-num) is the first 40% of the small intestine beyond 
the duodenum—roughly 1.0 to 1.8 m in a living person. Its name refers to the fact 
that early anatomists typically found it to be empty. The jejunum is located largely 
in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen. Its wall is relatively thick and muscular, 
and it has an especially rich blood supply and redder color than the rest of the small 
intestine. Most digestion and nutrient absorption occur here.
The ileum15 forms the last 60% of the small intestine (about 1.6 to 2.7 m). 
It lies mostly in the lower right quadrant of the abdomen. Compared with the 
jejunum, its wall is thinner, less muscular, less vascular, and has a paler pink 
color. It has prominent lymphatic nodules in clusters called aggregated lymphoid 
nodules (­formerly called Peyer patches), which are readily ­visible to the naked 
eye and become progressively larger approaching the large intestine.
13duoden = 12 
14jejun = empty, dry 
15from eilos = twisted
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      579  

Ileocecal valve
Ileum
Jejunum
Duodenum
Large intestine
The end of the small intestine is the ileocecal junction (ILL-ee-oh-SEE-cul), 
where the ileum joins the cecum of the large intestine. The muscularis of the ileum 
is thickened at this point to form a sphincter, the ileocecal valve, which protrudes 
into the cecum and regulates the passage of food residue into the large intestine. 
Both the jejunum and ileum are intraperitoneal and thus covered with a serosa, 
which is continuous with the complex, folded mesentery that suspends the small 
intestine from the posterior abdominal wall.
Effective digestion and absorption require that the small intestine have a large 
internal surface area. This is provided by its relatively great length and by three 
kinds of internal folds or projections: circular folds, villi, and microvilli. If the 
mucosa were smooth, like the inside of a hose, it would have a surface area of 
about 0.3 to 0.5 m2, but with these surface elaborations, its actual surface area is 
about 200 m2—clearly a great advantage for nutrient absorption.
Circular folds, the largest elaborations of the intestinal wall, are transverse 
ridges up to 10 mm high that project into the lumen (fig. 17.13). They occur from 
the duodenum to the middle of the ileum, where they cause the chyme to flow on 
a spiral path along the intestine. This slows its progress, causes more contact with 
the mucosa, and promotes more thorough mixing and nutrient absorption.
Villi (VIL-eye; singular, villus) are small finger- to tongue-shaped projections 
about 0.5 to 1.0 mm high (fig. 17.15). They give the mucosa a fuzzy texture like a 
terrycloth towel. Villi are covered with simple columnar epithelium composed of 
two kinds of cells: columnar absorptive cells (enterocytes), which absorb digested 
nutrients, and goblet cells, which secrete a coat of protective mucus over the intesti-
nal surface. The core of a villus is filled with loose connective tissue. Embedded in 
this are an arteriole, a capillary network, a venule, and a lymphatic capillary called 
a lacteal (LAC-tee-ul). Most absorbed nutrients pass into the blood capillaries, but 
most lipids are picked up by the lacteal. The lipids impart a milky appearance for 
which the lacteal is named.16 The lacteal connects with larger lymphatic vessels that 
ultimately carry the lipids to the bloodstream (see “Lymphatic Vessels and Lymph” 
in section 14.1). 
Figure 17.14 Gross Anatomy of the Small In-
testine. Note the spatial relationships of its three 
main regions: duodenum, the first 25 cm past the 
stomach; jejunum, mostly in the upper left abdomi-
nal quadrant; and ileum, mostly in the lower right 
abdominal quadrant, ending at the ileocecal valve. 
16lact = milk
580      PART 5  Intake and Output

(a)
(b)
Absorptive cell
Lacteal 
Capillary network
Goblet cell
Intestinal crypt
Lymphatic vessel
Arteriole 
Venule
Villi 
Brush border
of microvilli
Microvilli form a fuzzy brush border on the surface of each absorptive cell. 
Being only about 1 μm high, microvilli can be resolved only with the electron 
microscope. They greatly increase the absorptive surface area of the small intestine 
and possess brush border enzymes—components of the plasma membrane that 
carry out some of the final stages of chemical digestion.
On the floor of the small intestine, between the bases of the villi, there are numer-
ous pores that open into tubular glands called intestinal crypts. In the upper half, they 
consist of absorptive cells and goblet cells like those of the villi. The lower half is 
dominated by dividing epithelial cells. In its life span of 3 to 6 days, an epithelial cell 
migrates up the crypt to the tip of the villus, where it is sloughed off and digested.
Figure 17.15 Intestinal Villi. (a) Villi. Each villus 
is about 1 mm high. (b) Structure of a villus. 
 
a: © Meckes/Ottawa/Science Source
Apply What You Know
Both the small intestine and the proximal convoluted tubule of the kidney 
(see section 16.4) are tubular structures specialized for absorption. Identify at 
least two features that they have in common to serve this purpose.
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      581  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
20.	What four aspects of its structure give the small 
­intestine such a large surface area? 
21.	 Why are mucous glands more important in the duodenum 
than in other regions of the small intestine? 
22.	Sketch or describe a villus and label its epithelium, brush 
border, lamina propria, blood capillaries, and lacteal. How 
does the function of the blood capillaries differ from that of 
the lacteal? 
23.	Distinguish between segmentation and peristalsis of the 
small intestine. How do these differ in function? 
Figure 17.16 Contractions of the Small Intes-
tine. (a) Segmentation, in which circular constric-
tions of the intestine cut into the contents, churning 
and mixing them. (b) Peristalsis, in which successive 
waves of contraction overlap each other. Each wave 
travels partway down the intestine and milks the 
contents toward the colon.
(a) Segmentation
(b) Peristalsis
Intestinal Secretion and Motility
The small intestine secretes 1 to 2 L of alkaline intestinal juice per day, which helps 
to mix nutrients with digestive enzymes and protect the mucosa from stomach acid.
It exhibits two kinds of contractions—segmentation and peristalsis. These 
serve to (1) mix chyme with intestinal juice, bile, and pancreatic juice, allowing 
them to neutralize acid and digest nutrients more effectively; (2) churn chyme and 
bring it into contact with the mucosa for digestion and absorption; and (3) move 
residue toward the large intestine.
Segmentation (fig. 17.16a) is a movement in which ringlike constrictions 
appear at several places at once along the intestine and then relax as new con-
strictions form elsewhere. This is the most common movement of the small 
intestine. Its effect is to knead or churn the contents so the chyme is thor-
oughly mixed with the digestive enzymes and digestion is more thorough, and 
to ensure that all of the chyme contacts the absorptive surface so the nutrients 
can be absorbed from it. When most nutrients have been absorbed and little 
remains but undigested residue, segmentation declines and peristalsis begins 
(fig. 17.16b). These waves of contraction, somewhat like you would use to 
squeeze toothpaste from a tube, move chyme toward the colon over a period of 
about 2 hours.
582      PART 5  Intake and Output

17.6  Chemical Digestion and Absorption
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe how each major class of nutrients is chemically digest-
ed and name the enzymes involved; and 
b.	describe how each type of nutrient is absorbed by the small 
intestine. 
As food material passes from the mouth through the small intestine, nutrients are 
chemically degraded and absorbed. In this section, we focus on how this occurs, 
especially for the major classes of nutrients—carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. 
These are summarized and compared in figure 17.17.
Carbohydrates
Most digestible dietary carbohydrate is starch. Cellulose is indigestible and is not con-
sidered here, although its importance as dietary fiber is discussed in the next chapter.
Starch (fig. 17.17a) is digested to the disaccharide maltose, and finally to glu-
cose, which is absorbed by the small intestine. The process begins in the mouth, 
where salivary amylase begins to break down the starch into maltose and other small 
carbohydrate chains (oligosaccharides). Salivary amylase functions best at pH 6.8 
to 7.0, typical of the oral cavity. It is quickly denatured upon contact with stomach 
acid, although can continue digesting starch for up to 2 hours in the stomach if it 
is in the middle of a starchy food mass such as a pancake breakfast, where it can 
escape contact with the acid for a while. The stomach itself, however, produces no 
carbohydrate-digesting enzymes. About 50% of dietary starch is digested to maltose 
before it reaches the duodenum. Other dietary sugars include sucrose (cane or table 
sugar) and lactose (milk sugar), but these are not acted upon until they reach the small 
intestine.
Starch digestion resumes in the small intestine when the chyme mixes with 
pancreatic amylase. This breaks the remaining starch and oligosaccharides down 
to maltose. Carbohydrate digestion is completed when the maltose and other disac-
charides contact the brush border of the epithelial cells. Here, they are acted upon by 
three brush border enzymes—maltase, which splits the maltose into glucose mol-
ecules; sucrase, which splits sucrose into glucose and fructose; and lactase, which 
digests lactose to glucose and galactose. In most populations, however, lactase 
activity ceases or declines to a low level after age 4 and lactose becomes indigest-
ible (Clinical Application 17.2).
The monosaccharide products of carbohydrate digestion—glucose, fructose, 
and galactose—are immediately absorbed by carrier-mediated transport across the 
absorptive cell surface. Within the cell, most of the fructose is converted to glucose. 
Glucose, galactose, and any remaining fructose then pass out the base of the epi-
thelial cells by facilitated diffusion, pass into the blood capillaries of the villi, and 
are carried off by the hepatic portal system to the liver for metabolism or storage.
Proteins
Protein (fig. 17.17b) is digested by enzymes called proteases. There are no prote-
ases in the saliva; protein digestion begins in the stomach. Here, pepsin digests 10% 
to 15% of it into shorter peptides and a small amount of free amino acids. Pepsin has 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      583  

Sucrase
Lactase
Dipeptidase
Aminopeptidase
Salivary
amylase
Pepsin
Trypsin
Chymotrypsin
Carboxypeptidase
Pancreatic
amylase
Lingual
lipase
Pancreatic
lipase
Site
(a) Carbohydrates
(b) Proteins
(c) Fats
Mouth
Sucrose
Starch
Maltose
Protein
Small peptides
Dipeptides
Fructose
Galactose
Glucose
Blood capillary
Lacteal
Monoglyceride
Monoglycerides
Triglycerides
Chylomicrons
Micelles
Free fatty
acids
Free
fatty
acids
Fat
Cholesterol
Phospholipids
Fat−soluble vitamins
Cholesterol
Phospholipids
Fat−soluble vitamins
Lactose
Stomach
Small
intestine
(lumen)
Small
intestine
(epithelium)
Circulation
Oligosaccharides
Maltose
Maltase
Free amino acids
(a)
St
h
Figure 17.17 Digestion and Absorption of the Three Major Nutrient Classes. Enzyme names are indicated in red.
a: © Burke/Triolo Productions/Getty Images RF; b, c: © Pixtal/agefotostock RF
•	 As they leave the small intestine, sugars and amino acids arrive at the liver before any other organ, but lipids do not. Why not? Based on 
sections 13.6 and 14.1, trace the route that a dietary fat would have to take to reach the liver.  
584      PART 5  Intake and Output

an optimal pH of 1.5 to 3.5; thus, it is inactivated when it passes into the duodenum 
and mixes with the alkaline pancreatic juice (pH 8).
In the small intestine, three proteases from the pancreas continue the job—
trypsin, chymotrypsin, and carboxypeptidase. Finally, the remaining dipeptides and 
other short chains are taken apart, one amino acid at a time, by two brush border 
enzymes—dipeptidase and aminopeptidase.
Amino acid absorption is similar to that of monosaccharides. There are several 
transport proteins in the epithelial cell membranes for different classes of amino 
acids. At the basal surfaces of the cells, amino acids exit by facilitated diffusion, 
enter the blood capillaries of the villus, and are carried away in the hepatic portal 
circulation.
Amino acids absorbed by the small intestine come not only from dietary pro-
tein but also from sloughed epithelial cells digested by the same enzymes, and from 
the enzymes digesting each other. Thus, the body recycles its own proteins rather 
than losing the valuable amino acids from these cells and enzymes in the feces. The 
amino acids from the last two sources total about 30 g/day, compared with about 44 
to 60 g/day from the diet.
Fats
Fat (triglyceride) digestion (fig. 17.17c) is complicated by the fact that fats are 
hydrophobic and can’t enter the intestinal blood capillaries in significant quantities. 
Fat digestion thus occurs in a more roundabout way than carbohydrate and protein 
digestion.
Saliva contains an enzyme called lingual lipase, which is activated by 
stomach acid and digests some fat there. Most fat, however, leaves the stomach 
undigested. Before being passed along to the small intestine, it is churned and 
Clinical Application 17.2
LACTOSE INTOLERANCE
Homo sapiens is a strange species indeed—the only mammal that continues 
to drink milk after infancy and, moreover, drinks the milk of other species! To 
digest milk sugar, one needs the enzyme lactase, and understandably, lactase 
production ceases in other mammals after they are weaned. It also ceases in 
the majority of humans worldwide. Only in people of western and northern 
Europe, a few pastoral tribes of Africa, and their descendants in the Ameri-
cas and elsewhere, does lactase production continue into adulthood. These 
populations have a long history of milking domestic animals that has led to the 
persistence of lactase production.
People without lactase have lactose intolerance. If they consume milk, 
lactose passes undigested into the large intestine. This causes osmotic reten-
tion of water in the colon and leads to diarrhea. Colonic bacteria ferment the 
lactose, adding gas, painful cramps, and flatulence to the misery of lactose 
intolerance.
Lactose intolerance occurs in about 15% of American whites; 90% 
of American blacks, who are predominantly descended from nonpastoral 
African tribes; 70% or more of Mediterraneans; and nearly all people of 
Asian descent, including those of us (Native Americans) descended from 
early migrants into North, Central, and South America. People with lactose 
intolerance can consume products such as yogurt and cheese, in which bac-
teria have broken down the lactose, and they can digest milk with the aid of 
lactase drops or tablets. 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      585  

broken up into small emulsification droplets by the stomach. In the small 
intestine, the droplets are coated with certain components of the bile—lecithin 
and bile acids—to prevent them from recombining into larger globules. This 
emulsification process is much like the action of scrubbing and dish soap on 
the grease in a frying pan. It exposes far more of the fat’s surface to enzyme 
action.
Lingual lipase no longer works at the pH of the small intestine, but pan-
creatic lipase takes over. It splits two of the fatty acids from each triglyceride 
molecule, leaving free fatty acids and a monoglyceride. These are taken up along 
with dietary cholesterol, phospholipids, and fat-soluble vitamins into small 
droplets called micelles17 (my-SELLS), a component of the bile produced by 
the liver. When micelles contact the brush border, the lipids leave them and are 
transported into the absorptive epithelial cells. Monoglycerides and free fatty 
acids are smaller than triglycerides and easier for the enterocytes to absorb, but 
once inside the enterocytes, they are reassembled into triglycerides. The entero-
cyte Golgi complex then packages all of these lipids into another type of droplet 
called chylomicrons18 (KY-lo-MY-crons), coated with phospholipids and pro-
tein. These leave the base of the cells and enter the lacteal within the villus; they 
are too large to penetrate into the blood capillaries. From the lacteals, the white, 
fatty lymph (chyle) flows through larger and larger lymphatic vessels, eventually 
entering the bloodstream at the left subclavian vein (see “Lymphatic Vessels and 
Lymph” in section 14.1). The further fate of dietary fat is described in “Lipids” 
in section 18.1.
Vitamins and Minerals
Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K are absorbed with other lipids as just described. 
If they are ingested without fat-containing food, they are not absorbed at all but 
are passed in the feces and wasted. Water-soluble vitamins (the B complex and 
vitamin C) are absorbed by simple diffusion, with the exception of vitamin B12. This 
is an unusually large molecule that can only be absorbed if it binds to intrinsic factor 
from the stomach. Minerals (electrolytes) are absorbed along the entire length of the 
small intestine.
Iron and calcium are unusual in that they are absorbed in proportion to the 
body’s need, whereas other minerals are absorbed at fairly constant rates regardless 
of need. Iron absorption is regulated by the liver hormone hepcidin, which limits 
absorption and protects us from a toxic iron overload. Calcium is absorbed mostly 
by diffusion through the gaps between epithelial cells in the jejunum and ileum, 
but in the duodenum its absorption depends on membrane transport proteins and is 
regulated by parathyroid hormone and calcitriol (vitamin D).
Water
The digestive system is one of several systems involved in water balance. The diges-
tive tract receives about 9 L of water per day. Most of this, about 6.7 L, consists of 
the digestive system’s own secretions—saliva, gastric juice, bile, pancreatic juice, 
and intestinal juice. The rest (2.3 L) is from food and drink. The small intestine 
absorbs about 8 L of this, the large intestine absorbs about 0.8 L, and the remaining 
0.2 L is voided in the daily fecal output. Water is absorbed by osmosis, following 
the absorption of salts and organic nutrients that create an osmotic gradient from the 
intestinal lumen to the ECF.
17mic = grain, crumb; elle = little
18chylo = juice; micr = small
586      PART 5  Intake and Output

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 24.	Name the enzymes that digest starch, fat, and 
­protein. Name the end products of their digestion. 
25.	Describe how digested sugars and amino acids get from the 
intestinal lumen into the blood. 
26.	Describe how lipids get from the intestinal lumen into the 
lymph and ultimately the blood. 
    27.	What is the difference between fat-soluble and water-soluble 
vitamins in terms of absorption? 
28.	What are all the sources of water in the digestive tract? 
How much of it is lost by defecation, and what happens to 
the rest of it? 
17.7  The Large Intestine
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the gross anatomy and mucosa of the large intestine;
b.	state the physiological significance of intestinal bacteria;
c.	discuss the types of contractions that occur in the colon; and
d.	explain the neurological control of defecation.
The large intestine (fig. 17.18) receives about 500 mL of indigestible food residue 
per day, reduces it to about 150 mL of feces by absorbing water and salts, and elimi-
nates the feces by defecation.
Anatomy
The large intestine measures about 1.5 m (5 feet) long and 6.5 cm (2.5 in.) in 
diameter. It begins with the cecum,19 a blind pouch in the lower right abdominal 
quadrant inferior to the ileocecal valve. Attached to the lower end of the cecum is 
the appendix, a blind tube 2 to 7 cm long. The appendix is densely populated with 
lymphocytes and is a significant source of immune cells.
The colon is that portion of the large intestine between the ileocecal valve 
and the rectum (not including the cecum, rectum, or anal canal). It is divided into 
the ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid regions. The ascending colon 
begins at the ileocecal valve and passes up the right side of the abdominal cavity. 
It makes a 90° turn near the right lobe of the liver and becomes the transverse 
colon. This passes horizontally across the upper abdominal cavity and turns 90° 
downward near the spleen. Here it becomes the descending colon, which passes 
down the left side of the abdominal cavity. Ascending, transverse, and descending 
colons thus form a squarish, three-sided frame around the small intestine.
19cec = blind
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      587  

The muscularis externa of the colon has longitudinal smooth muscle cells 
­concentrated especially in three thickened, ribbonlike strips, each called a taenia 
coli20 (TEE-nee-ah CO-lye). The muscle tone of the taeniae coli (plural) contracts 
the colon lengthwise and causes its wall to bulge, forming pouches called haustra21 
(HAW-stra; singular, haustrum). 
The pelvic cavity is narrower than the abdominal cavity, so the colon turns 
medially along the hip bone, then downward, forming a roughly S-shaped portion 
called the sigmoid22 colon. In the pelvic cavity, the large intestine continues as the 
rectum,23 about 15 cm long.
The final 3 cm of the large intestine is the anal canal, which passes through 
the pelvic floor and terminates at the anus. Prominent hemorrhoidal veins form 
superficial plexuses in the walls of the anus. Unlike veins in the limbs, they lack 
valves and are particularly subject to distension and venous pooling. Hemorrhoids 
are permanently distended veins that protrude into the anal canal or form bulges 
external to the anus. They often develop in obesity and pregnancy, where pressure 
Figure 17.18 The Large Intestine. 
  
•	 Which anal sphincter is controlled by the 
­autonomic nervous system? Which is ­controlled 
by the somatic nervous system? Explain the 
­basis for your answers.  
Transverse 
colon
Superior 
mesenteric
artery
Haustrum
Ascending
colon
Ileum
Ileocecal 
valve
Cecum
Appendix
Rectum
Anal canal
External anal
sphincter
Sigmoid colon
Descending 
colon
Hemorrhoidal 
veins
Internal anal 
sphincter
Anus
Mesentery
Taenia coli
20taenia = ribbon; coli = of the colon
21haustr = to draw
22sigm = sigma or S; oid = resembling
23rect = straight
588      PART 5  Intake and Output

in the abdominopelvic cavity impedes venous return and causes blood pressure to 
back up in the hemorrhoidal veins.
Most of the large intestine is lined with a simple columnar epithelium contain-
ing an abundance of mucus-secreting goblet cells. The lower anal canal is lined with 
abrasion-resistant stratified squamous epithelium.
The anus is regulated by two sphincters: an internal anal sphincter composed 
of smooth muscle of the muscularis externa and an external anal sphincter com-
posed of skeletal muscle of the pelvic floor.
Intestinal Bacteria 
The healthy adult human gut harbors more than 1,000 species of microbes that con-
tribute about 4.5 kilograms (10 pounds) to body weight. The community of micro-
bial species is called the microbiota. The greatest density of gut microorganisms 
is found in the large intestine. We provide them with room and board, while they 
provide us with nutrients from our food that we are not equipped to extract on our 
own. For example, some bacteria in the colon digest cellulose, pectin, and other 
plant polysaccharides for which we have no digestive enzymes, and we absorb the 
resulting sugars. Others synthesize B vitamins and vitamin K. Vitamin K absorbed 
by the colon is important because the diet alone usually does not provide enough to 
ensure adequate blood clotting. 
The normal gut microbes also deter dangerous pathogens that can’t compete 
successfully with the normal residents for nutrients and space. When a person 
takes antibiotics to combat a bacterial infection, normal gut bacteria are killed 
along with the initial invader, potentially allowing other pathogenic strains to 
establish themselves. This can lead to further disease and sometimes even death. 
Studies have linked intestinal microbial communities with a surprising array of 
conditions ranging from obesity to gastrointestinal disorders such as inflamma-
tory bowel disease. 
One of the less desirable and sometimes embarrassing products of these bacte-
ria is intestinal gas (flatus). This is a mixture of bacterial gases and nitrogen from 
swallowed air. Painful cramping can result when undigested nutrients pass into the 
colon and furnish an abnormal substrate for bacterial action—for example, in lactose 
intolerance. Flatus is composed of nitrogen (N2), carbon dioxide (CO2), hydrogen 
(H2), methane (CH4), hydrogen sulfide (H2S), and two amines—indole and skatole. 
Indole, skatole, and H2S produce the odor of flatus and feces, whereas the others are 
odorless. The hydrogen is combustible and has sometimes ignited during the use of 
electrical cauterization in surgery.
Absorption and Motility
The large intestine takes 36 to 48 hours to reduce the residue of a meal to feces, 
with the residue spending the longest time (about 24 h) in the transverse colon. It 
reabsorbs water and electrolytes (especially NaCl). The feces consist of about 75% 
water and 25% solids. The solids are about 30% bacteria, 30% undigested dietary 
fiber, 10% to 20% fat, and smaller percentages of protein, epithelial cells, mucus, 
and salts. The fat is not from the diet but from broken-down epithelial cells and 
bacteria.
Colonic motility is predominantly a type of segmentation called haustral 
contractions, which occur about every 30 minutes. Distension of a haustrum with 
feces stimulates it to contract. This churns and mixes the residue, promotes water 
and salt absorption, and passes the residue distally to another haustrum. Stronger 
contractions called mass movements occur one to three times a day, last about 15 
minutes, and move residue for several centimeters at a time. Mass movements occur 
especially in the transverse to sigmoid colon, and often within an hour after break-
fast, moving the feces that accumulated and stretched the colon overnight. 
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      589  

Defecation
Like urination, the elimination of feces is not a continual event but is episodic and is 
controlled by neurological reflexes and sphincters; thus, it ordinarily occurs only in 
appropriate circumstances and times. Filling of the stomach with a new meal trig-
gers a gastrocolic reflex through the enteric nervous system, inducing mass move-
ments that propel feces from the upper colon toward the rectum. Stretching of the 
rectum then sets off both enteric and spinal reflexes called defecation reflexes, 
which account for the urge to defecate. 
One of the defecation reflexes, called the intrinsic defecation reflex, is 
­controlled through the enteric plexus of the colonic wall. Stretch signals from 
the rectum are conducted through the plexus (1) to the descending and ­sigmoid 
colon, further activating a peristaltic wave that drives feces downward, and 
(2) to the internal anal sphincter, causing it to relax. In an infant, this alone 
results in defecation. The other reflex, called the parasympathetic defecation 
reflex, is spinal. Stretch signals are conducted to the spinal cord and return to 
the rectum through a visceral reflex arc via parasympathetic nerve fibers in the 
pelvic nerves. These signals likewise intensify peristalsis and relax the internal 
anal sphincter.
Obviously and fortunately, once we have acquired bowel control in childhood, 
we are not at the mercy of these two involuntary reflexes. The external anal sphinc-
ter is skeletal muscle and therefore under voluntary control. Feces usually are voided 
only if we voluntarily relax that sphincter in addition to the foregoing involuntary 
reflexes. The external anal and urinary sphincters are controlled together by inhibi-
tory signals from the brainstem. This is why we find it hard to defecate without 
also urinating. Some spinal cord injuries, however, disconnect the brainstem from 
the lower spinal cord and abolish this voluntary control. The resulting inability to 
voluntarily retain the feces is called fecal incontinence.
Defecation is also aided by the voluntary Valsalva maneuver, in which a breath 
hold and contraction of the abdominal muscles increase abdominal pressure, com-
press the rectum, and squeeze the feces from it.
Apply What You Know
One way to “potty train” a child or housebreak a puppy is to put the child on the 
toilet or the puppy outdoors within half an hour after a meal. Explain why this 
strategy would promote the desired behavioral modification, in view of what you 
now know about the neurological control of the colon.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
29.	List the parts of the large intestine in order from the 
­ileocecal valve to the external anal sphincter. 
30.	Compare and contrast the mucosa and muscularis externa of 
the small and large intestines. 
     31.	Define microbiota, and discuss advantages and disadvan-
tages of the abundant bacterial load in the large intestine. 
32.	Compare and contrast the defecation and urination (micturi-
tion) reflexes. 
590      PART 5  Intake and Output

Aging of the Digestive System
Restaurants commonly offer a “seniors’ menu” and reduced prices 
to customers over 60 or 65 years old, knowing that they tend to eat 
less. There are multiple reasons for this reduced appetite. Older 
people have lower metabolic rates and tend to be less active than 
younger people and, hence, need fewer calories. The stomach at-
rophies with age, and it takes less to fill it up. For many, food has 
less esthetic appeal in old age because of diminished senses of 
smell, taste, and even vision. In addition, older people secrete less 
saliva, making food less flavorful and swallowing more difficult. Re-
duced salivation also makes the teeth more prone to caries (cavi-
ties). Dentures are an unpleasant fact of life for many people over 
65 who have lost their teeth to caries and periodontitis. Atrophy 
of the epithelium of the oral cavity and esophagus makes these 
surfaces more subject to abrasion and may further detract from the 
ease of chewing and swallowing.
The reduced mobility of old age makes shopping and meal 
preparation more troublesome, and with food losing its sensory ap-
peal, some decide that it simply isn’t worth the trouble. However, 
one’s protein, vitamin, and mineral requirements remain essentially 
unchanged, so vitamin and mineral supplements may be needed 
to compensate for reduced food intake and poorer intestinal ab-
sorption. Malnutrition is common among older people and is an 
important factor in anemia, reduced immunity, and generally de-
clining health in old age.
As the gastric mucosa atrophies, it secretes less acid and 
intrinsic factor. Acid deficiency reduces the absorption of calcium, 
iron, zinc, and folic acid. Heartburn becomes more common as 
the weakening lower esophageal sphincter fails to prevent the 
reflux of stomach contents into the esophagus. The most com-
mon digestive complaint of older people is constipation, which 
results from reduced muscle tone and weaker peristalsis of the 
colon. This seems to stem from a combination of factors: atrophy 
of the muscularis externa, reduced sensitivity to neurotransmit-
ters that promote motility, less fiber and water in the diet, and less 
exercise. The liver, gallbladder, and pancreas show only slightly 
reduced function, but the drop in liver function reduces the rate 
of drug deactivation and can contribute to overmedication of the 
elderly.
 C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Dental hygienists are licensed health-care professionals who promote oral 
health and wellness. Their job includes assessment of the health of the oral 
cavity and surrounding structures of the head and neck to inspect for abnor-
malities or diseases such as oral cancer. They review health and dental his-
tory. They clean teeth by removing calculus and plaque. An important aspect of 
their care is teaching patients oral-hygiene techniques. They also apply cavity-
preventive agents such as sealants and fluoride. In addition, they expose and 
develop dental radiographs (X-rays) for the dentist to interpret.
The majority of dental hygienists are employed by dentists and work 
in general dental offices. However, they may also serve in hospitals, nursing 
homes, public-health clinics, and schools. Dental hygienists must complete an accredited degree program and then pass both 
written and clinical examinations in order to be licensed by the state in which they practice. See appendix B for further career 
information in dental hygiene.
D e n t a l  H y g i e n i s t
© MIXA/Getty Images RF
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      591  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the DIGESTIVE SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Integumentary System
Vitamin C absorbed in the small intestine 
is necessary for collagen production and 
skin integrity. 
Skeletal System
The small intestine adjusts calcium ­absorption 
in proportion to the needs of the skeletal 
­system; dental decay or periodontitis can 
lead to bone infections and deterioration of 
mandibular and maxillary bone. 
Muscular System
Between meals glucose is drawn from the 
liver's glycogen stores, supplying energy for 
skeletal muscle movement. 
Nervous System
Some hormones secreted by the stomach and small 
­intestine influence brain centers that regulate appetite. 
Circulatory System
The digestive tract absorbs fluid needed to ­maintain 
blood volume; the liver degrades heme from dead 
erythrocytes and secretes clotting factors, blood al-
bumin, and other plasma proteins except ­antibodies; 
the liver regulates blood glucose level; the intestinal 
epithelium stores iron and releases it as needed for 
hemoglobin synthesis; dental decay or periodontitis 
can lead to heart disease (infectious endocarditis). 
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The GI mucosa is a site of lymphocyte pro-
duction; maternal IgA absorbed by the infant 
intestine confers passive immunity; acid, lyso-
zyme, mucus, and other digestive secretions 
provide innate immunity against pathogens. 
Endocrine System 
The stomach and small intestines produce some 
hormones and thus play an endocrine role; feeding 
stimulates the secretion of growth hormone and 
insulin; the liver degrades hormones and influences 
the rate of hormone clearance from the blood. 
Reproductive System
The digestive system provides nutrients 
for fetal growth and lactation. 
Urinary System
The intestines complement the kidneys in 
water and electrolyte reabsorption; the liver and 
­kidneys collaborate in calcitriol synthesis; the liver 
­synthesizes urea, and the kidneys excrete it. 
Respiratory System
Contraction of abdominal muscles 
aids in expiration by pushing 
digestive organs upward against 
the ­underside of the diaphragm. 
All Systems
The digestive system provides nutrients for all tissues. 
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
© Getty Images
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/Science Source
© mevans/Getty Images RF
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone Images/
Getty Images
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
592

CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      593  
Study Guide
Assess Your Learning  
Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
17.1  Overview of the Digestive System 
1.	 Definition of gastroenterology 
2.	 Five stages through which the digestive system processes  
food 
3.	 Distinction between mechanical and chemical digestion and 
general purposes served by each 
4.	 The two anatomical subdivisions of the digestive system 
5.	 Layers of the digestive tract 
6.	 The enteric nervous system and its function 
7.	 Anatomical relationships among the parietal peritoneum, mes-
entery, greater omentum, and lesser omentum 
8.	 Definitions of intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal 
17.2  The Mouth Through Esophagus 
1.	 Seven functions of the mouth 
2.	 Anatomy and histology of the lips, cheeks, tongue, and palate 
3.	 Tissues of the teeth and the types and numbers of teeth from 
midline to rear of the jaw 
4.	 The three major pairs of major salivary glands; components of 
saliva and their functions 
5.	 Anatomy of the pharynx and the digestive role of its sphincters 
6.	 Anatomy of the esophagus, histology of its wall, and impor-
tance of its lower sphincter 
7.	 The phases of swallowing 
17.3  The Stomach 
1.	 Definition of chyme 
2.	 Role of the stomach in both mechanical and chemical  
digestion 
3.	 Shape of the stomach, its four regions, and its pyloric sphincter 
4.	 Histology of the stomach wall 
5.	 Cells found in the gastric glands and their functions 
6.	 Functions of hydrochloric acid 
7.	 Two food macromolecules that are chemically digested in the 
stomach; the enzymes involved 
8.	 Secretions of parietal and chief cells and the purposes they  
serve 
9.	 The importance of intrinsic factor 
10.	 Contractions of the stomach and the ejection of chyme into the 
duodenum 
11.	 Vomiting, including its stimuli and risks 
12.	 Events of the cephalic, gastric, and intestinal phases of gastric 
activity, and their neural and hormonal regulation 
13.	 Three ways the stomach protects itself from self-digestion 
17.4  The Liver, Gallbladder, and Pancreas 
1.	 How liver function contributes to digestion 
2.	 Gross anatomy of the liver 
3.	 The structure of a hepatic lobule 
4.	 The name and functions of the cuboidal epithelial cells of the 
liver 
5.	 Structure of the gallbladder and bile passages 
6.	 The composition and digestive role of bile 
7.	 The location and gross anatomy of the pancreas 
8.	 Function of the bicarbonate in pancreatic juice 
9.	 Pancreatic enzymes and their individual functions 
10.	 Hormonal regulation of pancreatic function 
17.5  The Small Intestine 
1.	 Length and diameter of the small intestine 
2.	 The three regions of the small intestine, how they differ histo-
logically, and what marks the beginning and end of each 
3.	 Names of the internal folds and projections that increase the 
surface area of the small intestine 
4.	 The structure of a villus, including its types of surface epithe-
lial cells and the contents of its core 
5.	 Differences between intestinal segmentation and peristalsis, 
and the function of each 
17.6  Chemical Digestion and Absorption 
1.	 Chemical digestion of starch in the mouth; the role and sources 
of amylase; how pH affects amylase 
2.	 The actions of maltase, sucrase, and lactase and site where they 
perform chemical digestion 
3.	 The absorption and fate of dietary monosaccharides 
4.	 Sources of amino acids absorbed by the small intestine 
5.	 The definition of protease, the names of proteases involved in 
digestion, and the anatomical sites where different proteases 
work 

594      PART 5  Intake and Output
6.	 How amino acids are absorbed by the small intestine 
7.	 The role of bile and emulsification in fat digestion 
8.	 The role of lipase and chylomicrons in fat digestion 
9.	 The absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, water-soluble vitamins, 
and minerals 
10.	 Varying modes of vitamin absorption in the small intestine 
11.	 The hormonal regulation of calcium and iron absorption 
12.	 The sources, absorption, and elimination of water in the diges-
tive tract 
17.7  The Large Intestine 
1.	 Segments of the large intestine; the distinction between the 
large intestine and colon 
2.	 Comparison of the wall of the small and large intestines and 
functional explanation of the anatomical differences 
3.	 Reasons for the histological difference between the colon and 
anal canal 
4.	 Definition of microbiota and beneficial actions of intestinal 
bacteria; the composition of intestinal gas 
5.	 Absorptive functions of the large intestine 
6.	 Modes of contraction and neural control of the colon 
7.	 The mechanism of defecation 
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Which of the following enzymes acts in the stomach?
a.	 chymotrypsin 
b.	 pepsin 
c.	 lactase 
d.	 dipeptidase 
e.	 sucrase 
	 2.	 Which of the following digests proteins?
a.	 trypsin 
b.	 lipase 
c.	 maltase 
d.	 sucrase 
e.	 amylase 
	 3.	 The lacteals absorb
a.	 chylomicrons. 
b.	 micelles. 
c.	 emulsification droplets. 
d.	 low-density lipoproteins. 
e.	 monosaccharides. 
	 4.	 The folds visible on the inside of an empty stomach are
a.	 circular folds. 
b.	 gastric rugae. 
c.	 haustra. 
d.	 microvilli. 
e.	 villi. 
	 5.	 Which answer correctly lists the order of tissue layers of the 
small intestine, beginning with the innermost layer?
a.	 mucosa, submucosa, serosa, muscularis externa 
b.	 submucosa, mucosa, muscularis externa, serosa 
c.	 serosa, muscularis externa, submucosa, mucosa 
d.	 mucosa, submucosa, muscularis externa, serosa 
e.	 mucosa, muscularis externa, submucosa, serosa 
	 6.	 The gallbladder
a.	 stores and concentrates bile. 
b.	 synthesizes cholesterol. 
c.	 synthesizes bile. 
d.	 secretes lipase. 
e.	 breaks down bilirubin. 
	 7.	 Which structure is not lined with simple columnar epithelium?
a.	 ascending colon 
b.	 duodenum 
c.	 stomach 
d.	 rectum 
e.	 anal canal 
	 8.	 All of the following contribute to the absorptive surface of the 
small intestine except
a.	 its length. 
b.	 the brush border. 
c.	 haustra. 
d.	 circular folds. 
e.	 villi. 
	 9.	 Which of the following secrete hydrochloric acid?
a.	 hepatocytes 
b.	 parietal cells 
c.	 chief cells 
d.	 pancreatic cells 
e.	 enteroendocrine cells 
	10.	 Which of these is the voluntary phase of swallowing?
a.	 oral phase 
b.	 cephalic phase 
c.	 gastric phase 
d.	 secretory phase 
e.	 pharyngeal phase 
	11.	 Most of the bulk of a tooth is composed of a yellowish tissue 
called 
 . 
	12.	 The three regions of the small intestine from proximal to distal 
are the 
 , 
 , and 
 . 
	13.	 The 
 suspends the liver from the abdominal wall and 
separates its right and left lobes. 
	14.	 Pepsinogen is produced by 
 cells. 
	15.	 Haustra are pouchlike outfoldings of the 
 . 
	16.	 The digestive tract has its own independent nervous plexus 
called the 
 nervous system. 
	17.	
 , an enzyme that breaks down starch, is present in 
both pancreatic juice and 
 . 
	18.	 The three pairs of major salivary glands are the 
 , 
 , and  
. 
	19.	 What structure has hard and soft regions and makes it possible 
to continue breathing while chewing food? 
	20.	
 is a wave of muscular contraction produced by 
the muscularis externa that passes along material in the 
­gastrointestinal lumen. 
Answers in Appendix A

What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Micelles are absorbed into lacteals. 
	 2.	 Taeniae coli are found in the small intestine. 
	 3.	 The ileocecal valve regulates the passage of chyme between 
the stomach and the duodenum. 
	 4.	 Vitamin D is necessary for the intestinal absorption of iron. 
	 5.	 The only monosaccharide absorbed in the small intestine is 
glucose. 
	 6.	 Proteases are involved in lipid digestion. 
	 7.	 The first phase of swallowing is the pharyngeal phase. 
	 8.	 Most of the water in the digestive tract is reabsorbed in the 
small intestine. 
	 9.	 Intrinsic factor stimulates the release of bile into the 
­duodenum. 
	10.	 The jejunum is part of the large intestine. 
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Which do you think would have the most severe effect on 
­digestion: surgical removal of the stomach, gallbladder, or 
pancreas? Explain. 
	 2.	 Explain why most lipids must be absorbed by the lacteals rather 
than by the blood capillaries of a villus. 
	 3.	 Follow a peanut butter sandwich through the digestive tract, 
beginning with the mouth. What major nutrient classes are in 
the sandwich? Where do mechanical and chemical ­digestion 
occur? Discuss at least three specific enzymes in your 
­answer. 
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED® Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.         
CHAPTER 17   The Digestive System      595  

Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Composition and structure of polysaccharides, 
disaccharides, and monosaccharides (see 
section 2.3) 
• Composition and structure of triglycerides and of 
saturated versus unsaturated fats (see section 2.3) 
• Composition and structure of amino acids and 
proteins (see section 2.3) 
• Structure and function of ATP (see section 2.3) 
• Metabolism, catabolism, and anabolism (see 
section 2.4) 
• Actions of insulin and glucagon (see section 11.4) 
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter Outline
18.1 Nutrition
• Calories 
• Nutrients 
• Carbohydrates 
• Fiber 
• Lipids 
• Proteins 
• Minerals and Vitamins 
18.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
• Glucose Catabolism 
• Glycolysis 
• Anaerobic Fermentation 
• Aerobic Respiration 
• Overview of ATP Production 
• Glycogen Metabolism 
18.3 Lipid and Protein Metabolism
• Lipids 
• Proteins 
• Liver Functions in Metabolism 
18.4 Metabolic States and Metabolic Rate
• The Absorptive State 
• The Postabsorptive State 
• Metabolic Rate 
18.5 Energy Balance and Appetite Regulation
• Appetite 
18.6 Body Heat and Thermoregulation
• Body Temperature 
• Heat Production and Loss 
• Thermoregulation 
• Disturbances of Thermoregulation 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 18.1: Hepatitis
• Clinical Application 18.2: Hypothermia and Frostbite
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Dietitian
• Study Guide
Mitochondria are the cell’s 
“powerhouses,” the organelles 
that make most of the ATP needed 
to sustain life. If all the body’s 
mitochondria suddenly ceased to 
function, life itself would cease within 
one minute.
© Keith R. Porter/Science Source
Nutrition and 
­Metabolism
18
Chapter
Module 12: Digestive System
596	

F
ood is our source of energy for cellular functions and  
the raw material for building tissues and organs. Understanding 
food and nutrition is far from simple, however. We are surrounded 
by conflicting advice and opinions about what constitutes optimal 
­nutrition. Through most of human history, people struggled to 
­obtain enough food; modern humans face the opposite problem—
access to too much food, leading to obesity and associated  
health problems such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 
In chapter 17, we saw how the digestive system breaks nutrients  
down into usable forms and absorbs them into the blood and 
lymph. We now consider these nutrients in more depth, focusing 
on ­metabolism, the chemical changes that transform the food to 
­energy for cellular function. In addition, we will explore regulation 
of appetite, body weight, and energy balance, and the related topics 
of body heat and thermoregulation.
Good nutrition is part of a healthy lifestyle. Nutrients acquired from food support 
growth and maintenance of tissues and fuel cellular activities. In this section, we 
will discuss the energy content of food and specific nutrients.
18.1  Nutrition
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define calorie and identify the three primary sources of dietary 
calories; 
b.	define nutrient, identify the six major categories of nutrients, and 
distinguish between macronutrients and micronutrients; 
c.	identify the major forms and sources of dietary carbohydrates; 
d.	name some forms of dietary fiber, explain why fiber is important 
in the diet yet is not a nutrient, and distinguish water-soluble 
from water-insoluble fiber; 
e.	discuss the forms of dietary lipid and explain why lipids are 
a more efficient means of energy storage than carbohy-
drates are; 
f.	 describe the forms of blood lipoproteins and explain their 
­respective functions; 
g.	discuss the body’s protein and amino acid requirements; and 
h.	describe the minerals and vitamins required of the diet. 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      597  

Calories 
We eat to acquire energy—the capacity to do work. Energy is measured in ­calories, 
a subject familiar to anyone concerned about the control of body weight. One ­calorie 
is the amount of heat that will raise the temperature of 1 g of water 1°C. The dietary 
Calories (with a capital C) listed on a food package are actually kilocalories (kcal); 
one kilocalorie is 1,000 calories. For most adults, a healthy diet ranges from 2,000 
to 2,500 kcal/day. 
Nearly all dietary calories come from carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Carbo-
hydrates and proteins yield about 4 kcal/g when they are completely oxidized, and 
fats yield about 9 kcal/g.
When a chemical is described as fuel in this chapter, we mean it is oxidized 
solely or primarily to extract energy from it. The extracted energy is usually used to 
make adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy carrier necessary for most cellular 
work.
Nutrients
A nutrient is any ingested chemical that is incorporated into the body’s tissues 
and used for fuel, growth, repair, or maintenance of the body. Nutrients fall into 
six major classes: water, carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, minerals, and vitamins. 
Water, carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are considered macronutrients because 
they must be consumed in relatively large quantities (table 18.1). Minerals and vita-
mins (see table 18.2) are called micronutrients because only small quantities are 
required.
The recommended daily allowance (RDA) of a nutrient is a liberal but safe 
estimate of the daily intake that would meet the nutritional needs of most healthy 
people. Consuming less than the RDA of a nutrient doesn’t necessarily mean you 
will be malnourished, but the probability of malnutrition increases in proportion to 
the amount of the deficit and how long it lasts.
Many nutrients can be synthesized by the body when they are unavailable 
from the diet. The body is incapable, however, of synthesizing minerals, most vita-
mins, eight of the amino acids, and one to three of the fatty acids. These are called 
essential nutrients because it is essential that they be included in the diet.
Table 18.1  Macronutrient Requirements and Functions
Nutrient
Daily Requirement
Representative Functions
Water
2.7–3.7 L
Solvent; coolant; dilutes and eliminates 
­metabolic wastes; supports blood ­volume 
and pressure; reactant or ­product in many 
metabolic ­reactions
Carbohydrates
130 g
Fuel; component of glycoproteins, 
­glycolipids, nucleic acids, and ATP; some 
structural functions
Lipids
80–100 g
Fuel; plasma membrane structure; myelin 
sheaths of nerve fibers; hormones; insula-
tion; protective padding around organs
Proteins
46–56 g
Muscle contraction; structure of ­cellular 
membranes and extracellular material;  
major component of connective tissues; 
enzymes; some hormones; antibodies; 
­transport of plasma lipids; oxygen binding 
and transport; blood clotting; blood viscosity 
and osmolarity; emergency fuel
598      PART 5  Intake and Output

Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates—sugars and starch—serve primarily as fuel for cellular work and 
are required in greater amounts than any other nutrient except water. The brain alone 
consumes about 120 g of glucose per day. Carbohydrates also serve as a structural 
component of other molecules (table 18.1).
Dietary carbohydrates are derived primarily from plants in the form of 
polysaccharides (complex carbohydrates), disaccharides, and monosaccharides. 
The only significant polysaccharide nutrient is starch, obtained principally from 
grains and root vegetables such as potatoes. Cellulose is also an important dietary 
polysaccharide, but it cannot be considered a nutrient because it is not digested 
and does not enter our tissues (see the following section on fiber). Dietary disac-
charides include sucrose, refined from sugarcane and sugar beets, and lactose, 
found in milk. A third disaccharide, maltose, comes mostly from the digestion 
of starch.
Digestion of starch and disaccharides ultimately results in the produc-
tion of three monosaccharides: glucose, fructose, and galactose. Glucose is 
the only monosaccharide present in the blood in significant quantity and is 
therefore known as blood sugar. Its concentration is normally maintained at 
70 to 110 mg/dL in peripheral venous blood. This level is precisely regulated 
by insulin and glucagon. Most body cells rely on a combination of carbohy-
drates and fats to meet energy needs, but some cells such as neurons and eryth-
rocytes depend almost exclusively on blood glucose. Even a brief period of 
hypoglycemia (glucose deficiency) causes nervous system disturbances felt as 
weakness or dizziness.
Apply What You Know
Glucose concentration is about 15 to 30 mg/dL higher in arterial blood than in 
most venous blood. Explain why.
Ideally, most carbohydrate intake should be in the form of starch. This is 
partly because foods that provide starch also usually provide other nutrients. 
Simple sugars, by contrast, not only provide empty calories but also promote 
tooth decay. In a typical American diet, only 50% of the carbohydrates come 
from starch and the other 50% from sucrose and corn syrup. Carbohydrate con-
sumption in the United States has become excessive over the past century due to 
increased use of sugar in processed foods. A century ago, Americans consumed 
an average of 1.8 kg (4 pounds) of sugar per person per year. Now, with sucrose 
and high-fructose corn syrup so widely used in foods and beverages, the average 
American ingests over 28 kg (more than 60 pounds) of added sugar per year. A 
single nondiet soft drink contains 38 to 43 g (about 8 teaspoons) of sugar per 
355 mL (12-ounce) serving.
Fiber
Dietary fiber refers to all fibrous materials of plant and animal origin that 
resist digestion. Most is plant matter—the carbohydrates cellulose and pec-
tin and such noncarbohydrates as gums and lignin. The recommended daily 
allowance is about 30 g of fiber, but average intake varies greatly from country 
to country—from 40 to 150 g/day in India and Africa to only 12 g/day in the 
United States.
Fiber is not considered a nutrient because it is never absorbed into the 
human tissues, but it is an essential component of the diet. Water-soluble 
fiber includes pectin and certain other carbohydrates found in oats, beans, 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      599  

peas, carrots, brown rice, and fruits. It reduces blood cholesterol levels. 
Water-insoluble fiber includes cellulose and lignin. It apparently has no 
effect on cholesterol levels, but it absorbs water and swells, thereby softening 
the stool and increasing its bulk by 40% to 100%. This stretches the colon, 
stimulates peristalsis, and quickens the passage of feces. In doing so, water-
insoluble fiber reduces the risk of constipation and diverticulitis. Recent stud-
ies indicate that dietary fiber, especially from whole grains, plays a role in 
prevention of colon cancer.
Lipids
Fats and other lipids serve as energy-storage molecules and building blocks for cell 
membranes and steroid hormones. Fat (triglyceride, see section 2.3) is the main 
component of adipose tissue, whose various structural and metabolic functions are 
discussed in section 4.3. In addition to fat, the body contains significant amounts 
of other lipids such as phospholipids and cholesterol. These are major structural 
components of plasma membranes and myelin. Cholesterol is also a precursor of 
steroid hormones such as estrogen, testosterone, and cortisol, and of the bile acids 
that aid in fat digestion.
Fat and Energy Storage
Fat constitutes about 15% of the body mass of a healthy man in his early 20s, and 
about 25% of the body mass of a woman. Obesity, an excess of body fat, is discussed 
in Perspectives on Health at the end of this section. Fat is an efficient way to store 
energy. It contains over twice as much energy as carbohydrates (9 kcal/g of fat com-
pared with 4 kcal/g of carbohydrate). Typical fat reserves in a healthy young man 
contain enough energy for 119 hours of running, whereas his carbohydrate stores 
would suffice for only 1.6 hours. Furthermore, fat is hydrophobic, contains almost 
no water, and is therefore a more compact energy-storage substance than carbohy-
drates. Carbohydrates are hydrophilic, absorb water, and thus expand and occupy 
more space in the tissues. 
Dietary Fat and Cholesterol
Dietary fat may be saturated or unsaturated. Saturated fats are predominantly of 
animal origin. They occur in meat, egg yolks, and dairy products but also in some 
plant products such as coconut and palm oils. Unsaturated fats come mostly from 
nuts, seeds, fish, and vegetable oils. Partially hydrogenated oils (so-called trans fats) 
are similar to naturally occurring unsaturated fats, but are manufactured by adding 
hydrogen to oils to make them solid. They have been widely used in processed 
foods and home cooking since 1911, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
announced a ban on them in 2015 because of a demonstrated link to heart disease 
(see Clinical Application 2.2). 
A certain amount of dietary fat is necessary for health. Whereas the body 
can synthesize most fatty acids, essential fatty acids are those we cannot man-
ufacture and must obtain from food. Some fats promote health. For example, 
omega-3 fatty acids, found in oily fish such as salmon, may protect against 
cardiovascular disease. Nevertheless, fat should account for no more than 35% 
of your daily caloric intake, and no more than 10% of your fat intake should 
be saturated fat. A typical American obtains 40% to 50% of his or her calories 
from fat.
Cholesterol is necessary for cell membrane stability and steroid hormone 
production, yet excessive levels of cholesterol in the blood serum increase the 
risk of cardiovascular disease. It is desirable to maintain a serum cholesterol 
concentration of 200 mg/dL or less. This is determined, however, more by 
heredity and physiology than by diet. We synthesize 85% of our cholesterol 
600      PART 5  Intake and Output

internally, and when we reduce dietary cholesterol intake, the body simply 
synthesizes more to make up for it. Restricting dietary cholesterol alone low-
ers the serum cholesterol level by no more than 5%. Dietary cholesterol is no 
longer considered to be a nutritional concern for most people. More impor-
tant is the fact that certain saturated fatty acids (SFAs) raise serum choles-
terol level. Some food advertising is deceptive on this point. It may truthfully 
advertise a food as being cholesterol-free, but neglect to mention that it con-
tains SFAs that can raise the consumer’s cholesterol level anyway. A moderate 
reduction of saturated fatty acid intake can lower blood cholesterol by 15% to 
20%, which is considerably more effective than reducing dietary cholesterol 
alone. The richest dietary source of cholesterol is egg yolks, but it is also 
prevalent in dairy products, shellfish, organ meats such as liver and brains, 
and other mammalian meat. 
Blood Lipoproteins
Lipids must be transported to all cells of the body, yet they are hydrophobic and 
don’t dissolve in the aqueous blood plasma. To overcome this, they are transported 
in the form of complexes called lipoproteins—tiny droplets with a core of choles-
terol and triglycerides and a coating of proteins and phospholipids.
Lipoproteins are classified into categories by their density: high-density 
lipoproteins (HDLs), low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), and very-low-density 
lipoproteins (VLDLs). The higher the ratio of lipid to protein, the lower the den-
sity (easy to remember if you just bear in mind that oil and fat float in water because 
of their relatively low density). VLDLs, produced in the liver, transport triglycer-
ides to adipose tissue for storage; when the triglycerides are removed, the VLDLs 
become LDLs, which contain mostly cholesterol (fig. 18.1a). Cells that need choles-
terol, such as those that synthesize steroid hormones, absorb LDLs from the blood 
by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
High-density lipoproteins start as protein shells produced in the liver. They 
travel in the blood and pick up excess cholesterol and phospholipids from the tis-
sues. The next time the HDL circulates through the liver, cholesterol is removed 
and eliminated in the bile (fig. 18.1b). Therefore, HDLs are a vehicle for removing 
excess cholesterol from the body. A high concentration of HDL protects against 
atherosclerosis, whereas a high LDL concentration is a warning sign because it 
signifies a high rate of cholesterol deposition in the arteries. Elevation of HDLs is 
promoted by a diet low in calories and saturated fats and by regular aerobic exercise. 
LDL levels rise in response to saturated fat consumption, cigarette smoking, and 
stress. In the popular press, HDLs and LDLs are often nicknamed “good choles-
terol” and “bad cholesterol,” respectively, but as we have seen, they are not choles-
terol alone but complexes of proteins and diverse lipids.
Proteins
Proteins play an enormous diversity of roles in cellular processes and cell and tissue 
structure. They serve as signaling molecules (hormones and growth factors); protec-
tive antibodies; and membrane receptors, pumps, and ion channels. They function 
in oxygen transport (hemoglobin), muscle contraction (myosin and actin), and as 
enzymes that catalyze nearly every major reaction of cellular metabolism. Fibrous 
proteins such as collagen, elastin, and keratin make up much of the structure of skin, 
hair, nails, bones, cartilages, tendons, and ligaments. No other class of biomolecules 
has such a broad variety of functions.
Protein constitutes about 12% to 15% of the body’s mass; about 65% of 
your protein is in your skeletal muscles. For persons of average weight, the 
RDA of protein is 46 to 56 g, depending on age and sex. Multiplying your 
weight in pounds by 0.37 or your weight in kilograms by 0.8 gives an estimate 
of your RDA of protein in grams. A higher intake is recommended, however, 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      601  

Liver 
produces 
VLDLs
Triglycerides
removed and stored
in adipocytes
VLDLs become LDLs 
containing mainly
cholesterol
Cells absorb LDLs
by receptor-mediated 
endocytosis
Liver produces
empty HDL shells
HDL shells pick
up cholesterol and
phospholipids
from tissues
Filled HDLs
return to liver
HDL
pathway
VLDL/LDL
pathway
Liver excretes
excess cholesterol
and bile acids
Phospholipid (17%)
Triglyceride (55%)
Cholesterol (20%)
Protein (8%)
Phospholipid (21%)
Triglyceride (6%)
Cholesterol (53%)
Protein (20%)
Phospholipid (25%)
Triglyceride (5%)
Cholesterol (20%)
Protein (50%)
(a)
(b)
Very low−density
lipoprotein (VLDL)
Low-density
lipoprotein (LDL)
High-density
lipoprotein (HDL)
Phospholipid
Triglyceride
Cholesterol
Protein
Key
under conditions of tissue building or repair, such as stress, infection, injury, 
and pregnancy. Infants and children require more protein than adults rela-
tive to body weight because proteins are necessary for building tissues during 
growth.
Total protein intake is not the only measure of dietary adequacy. The nutri-
tional value of a protein depends on whether it supplies the right amino acids in the 
proportions needed to make human proteins. Adults can synthesize 12 of the 20 
amino acids from other organic compounds when they are not available from the 
diet, but there are 8 essential amino acids that we cannot synthesize. These must be 
obtained by including the right proteins in the diet.
Cells don’t store surplus amino acids for later use. When a protein is to be 
synthesized, all of the amino acids necessary must be present at once; if even one is 
missing, the protein can’t be made. High-quality complete proteins are those that 
provide all of the essential amino acids in the necessary proportions for human tis-
sue growth and maintenance. Lower-quality incomplete proteins lack one or more 
essential amino acids. For example, grains are low in lysine, and legumes such as 
beans are low in methionine.
The animal proteins in meat, eggs, and dairy products closely match human 
proteins in amino acid composition. Thus, animal products provide high-quality 
complete protein, whereas plant proteins are incomplete. We typically use 70% 
to 90% of the animal protein we eat but only 40% to 70% of the plant protein. 
It therefore takes a larger serving of plant protein than animal protein to meet 
our needs—for example, we need 400 g (about 14 ounces) of rice and beans 
to ­provide as much usable protein as 115 g (about 4 ounces) of hamburger. 
­Nevertheless, this doesn’t mean that your dietary protein must come from meat; 
indeed, about two-thirds of the world’s population receives adequate protein 
from diets containing very little animal protein. We can combine plant foods 
so that one provides what another lacks—beans and rice, for example, are a 
complementary combination of legume and grain. Beans provide the isoleucine 
and lysine lacking in grains, while rice provides the tryptophan and cysteine 
lacking in beans. In contrast, soybeans contain all of the essential amino acids 
and provide complete protein.
Figure 18.1 Lipoprotein Processing. (a) Three 
types of serum lipoproteins. (b) Pathways of lipopro-
tein processing.
•	 Why is a high HDL:LDL ratio healthier than a 
high LDL:HDL ratio? 
602      PART 5  Intake and Output

Reducing meat intake while increasing plant intake has advantages. Among 
other considerations, plant foods provide more vitamins, minerals, and fiber; 
less saturated fat; and no cholesterol. Also important in our increasingly 
crowded world is the fact that producing meat requires far more land than pro-
ducing food crops.
Minerals and Vitamins
Minerals and vitamins are required in small quantities but have very potent effects 
on physiology. Minerals are inorganic elements that plants extract from soil or water 
and introduce into the food web. Vitamins are small organic compounds that are 
not used as fuel, but serve predominantly as coenzymes or cofactors that enable 
enzymes to function. Deficiencies or excessive amounts lead to disease states and 
are potentially lethal. Table 18.2 summarizes requirements and dietary sources of 
some important minerals and vitamins.
Minerals constitute about 4% of the body mass, with three-quarters of this 
being the calcium and phosphorus in the bones and teeth. Phosphorus is also 
a key structural component of phospholipids and ATP. Calcium, iron, magne-
sium, and manganese function as cofactors for enzymes. Iron is essential to the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin. Many mineral salts function as electro-
lytes. For example, sodium chloride (table salt) is required for nerve and muscle 
function and maintenance of blood volume. The recommended sodium intake 
is 1.1 g/day, but a typical U.S. diet contains about 3 to 7 g/day. This is due not 
just to the use of table salt but more significantly to the large amounts of salt 
in processed foods, much of it “disguised” in soy sauce, MSG (monosodium 
glutamate), baking soda, and baking powder. Broadly speaking, the best sources 
of minerals are vegetables, legumes, milk, eggs, fish, shellfish, and some other 
meats. Cereal grains are a relatively poor source, but processed cereals may be 
mineral-fortified.
Vitamins were originally named with letters in the order of their discovery, 
but they also have chemically descriptive names such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 
and riboflavin (vitamin B2). Most vitamins must be obtained from the diet (table 
18.2), but the body synthesizes some of them from precursors called provitamins—
for example, vitamin D from cholesterol and vitamin A from carotene, abundantly 
present in carrots, squash, and other yellow vegetables and fruits. Vitamin K and 
folic acid are produced by the bacteria of the large intestine, which supplement the 
amounts obtained from the tabulated dietary sources.
Vitamins are classified as water-soluble or fat-soluble. Water-soluble 
­vitamins are absorbed with water from the small intestine, dissolve freely in the 
body fluids, and are quickly excreted by the kidneys. They cannot be stored in the 
body and therefore seldom accumulate to excess. The water-soluble vitamins are 
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and the B vitamins. Ascorbic acid promotes hemoglobin 
synthesis, collagen synthesis, and sound connective tissue structure; it is an anti-
oxidant that scavenges free radicals and possibly reduces the risk of cancer. The B 
vitamins function as coenzymes—small organic molecules that assist enzymes by 
transferring electrons from one metabolic reaction to another, making it possible for 
enzymes to catalyze these reactions. Some of their functions are discussed later in 
this chapter as we consider carbohydrate metabolism.
Fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed with dietary lipids. They are more varied 
in function than water-soluble vitamins. Vitamin A is a component of the visual 
pigments and promotes epithelial tissue maintenance. Vitamin D promotes calcium 
absorption and bone mineralization. Vitamin K is essential to blood clotting. Vita-
mins A and E are antioxidants, like ascorbic acid.
It is common knowledge that various diseases result from vitamin deficien-
cies, but it is less well known that vitamin excess also causes disease. A deficiency 
of vitamin A, for example, can result in night blindness, dry skin and hair, a dry 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      603  

conjunctiva and cloudy cornea, and increased incidence of urinary, digestive, and 
respiratory infections. This is the world’s most common vitamin deficiency. An 
excess of vitamin A, however, may cause anorexia, nausea and vomiting, head-
ache, pain and fragility of the bones, hair loss, an enlarged liver and spleen, and 
birth defects.
Some people take megavitamins—doses 10 to 1,000 times the RDA—­thinking 
that they will improve their health or athletic performance. Vitamins aren’t burned 
as fuel and do not supply energy to the body; small amounts fully meet the body’s 
metabolic needs. There is no evidence that vitamin supplements improve perfor-
mance except when used to correct a dietary deficiency. Megadoses of fat-soluble 
vitamins can be especially toxic.
Table 18.2  Mineral and Vitamin Requirements and Sources
Mineral
RDA (mg)
Some Dietary Sources*
Major Minerals
Calcium
1,000
Milk, fish, shellfish, greens, tofu, orange juice
Phosphorus
700
Red meat, poultry, fish, eggs, milk, legumes, whole grains, nuts
Sodium
1,500
Table salt, processed foods; usually present in excess
Chloride
2,300
Table salt, some vegetables; usually present in excess
Magnesium
310–420
Milk, greens, whole grains, nuts, legumes, chocolate
Potassium
4,700
Red meat, poultry, fish, cereals, spinach, squash, bananas, apricots
Trace Minerals
Zinc
8–11
Red meat, seafood, cereals, wheat germ, legumes, nuts, yeast
Iron
8–15
Red meat, liver, shellfish, eggs, dried fruits, legumes, nuts, molasses
Fluoride
3–4
Fluoridated water and toothpaste, tea, seafood, seaweed
Iodine
0.15
Marine fish, fish oils, shellfish, iodized salt
Vitamin
RDA (mg)
Some Dietary Sources
Water-Soluble Vitamins
Ascorbic acid (C)
75–90
Citrus fruits, strawberries, tomatoes, greens, cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, brussels sprouts
B complex
Thiamin (B1)
1.1–1.2
Red meat, liver, other organ meats, eggs, greens, asparagus, legumes, whole grains, seeds, yeast
Riboflavin (B2)
1.1–1.3
Widely distributed, and deficiencies are rare; all types of meat, milk, eggs, greens, whole grains, apricots, 
legumes, mushrooms, yeast
Pyridoxine (B6) 
1.3
Red meat, poultry, bananas, potatoes, chickpeas, pistachios
Cobalamin (B12)
0.002
Fish, shellfish, liver, poultry, dairy products 
Niacin (nicotinic acid, B3)
14–16
Readily synthesized from tryptophan, which is present in any diet with adequate protein; red meat, liver, 
other organ meats, poultry, fish, apricots, legumes, whole grains, mushrooms
Panthothenic acid (B5)
5
Widely distributed, and deficiencies are rare; red meat, liver and other organ meats, eggs, green and 
­yellow vegetables, legumes, whole grains, mushrooms, yeast
Folic acid (folacin, B9)
0.4
Eggs, liver, greens, citrus fruits, legumes, whole grains, seeds
Biotin (B7)
0.03
Red meat, liver, other organ meats, eggs, cheese, cabbage, cauliflower, bananas, legumes, nuts 
Fat-Soluble Vitamins
Retinol (A)
0.7–0.9
Fish oils, eggs, cheese, milk, greens, other green and yellow vegetables and fruits, margarine
Calcitriol (D)
0.005
Formed by exposure of skin to sunlight; fish, fish oils, fortified milk
α-tocopherol (E)
15
Fish oils, greens, seeds, wheat germ, vegetable oils, margarine, nuts
Phylloquinone (K)
0.09–0.12
Most of the RDA is met by synthesis by intestinal bacteria; liver, greens, cabbage, cauliflower
* “Red meat” refers to mammalian muscle such as beef and pork. Liver is specified separately and refers to beef, pork, and chicken livers, which are similar for most nutrients. “Other organ meats” refers 
to brain, pancreas, heart, kidney, and so on.
604      PART 5  Intake and Output

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
O
 besity is clinically defined as a weight more than 20% above 
the recommended norm for one’s age, sex, and height. In the 
United States, more than one-third of adults are obese and anoth-
er 35% are overweight. About 17% of youth aged 2 to 19 years are 
obese. Body mass index (BMI) is a useful tool for assessing obesity. 
BMI = W/H2, where W is weight in kilograms and H is height in meters. 
(If using weight in pounds and height in inches, BMI = 703 W/H2.) A 
BMI of 20 to 25 is considered to be optimal for most people. A BMI 
over 27 is defined as overweight, and above 30 is considered obese.
The obesity epidemic is a serious health concern. Excess 
fat increases a person’s risk of atherosclerosis, hypertension, 
and joint degeneration; cancer of the breast, uterus, and liver in 
women; and cancer of the colon, rectum, and prostate gland in 
men. Excess thoracic fat impairs breathing and results in increased 
blood Pco2, sleepiness, and reduced vitality. Obesity is also a sig-
nificant impediment to successful surgery.
The rise in obesity has paralleled an increased incidence of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. High levels of abdominal fat are associ-
ated with insulin insensitivity and lead to high blood sugar and all of 
the resulting complications. Until recently, type 2 diabetes almost 
exclusively developed in people who were age 50 and older, but 
the incidence of type 2 diabetes is rising in young people as more 
children become obese.
Heredity plays a significant role in obesity. However, a pre-
disposition to obesity is often greatly worsened by overfeeding in 
infancy and childhood. Consumption of excess calories in childhood 
causes adipocytes to increase in size and number. In adulthood, adi-
pocytes don’t multiply except in some cases of extreme weight gain; 
their number remains constant. Weight gains result from changes in 
cell size (cellular hypertrophy).
As so many dieters learn, it is very difficult to substantially 
reduce one’s adult weight. Most diets are unsuccessful over the 
long run as dieters lose and regain weight over and over. From an 
evolutionary standpoint, this is not surprising. The body’s appetite- 
and weight-regulating mechanisms are geared toward stimulation 
of appetite and eating rather than restraint. In our evolutionary 
past, scarcity of food was a more common problem than food sur-
plus, and ability to store fat was a key survival adaptation. Recent 
changes in human diet and activity have been too rapid for the gene 
pool to respond, with the result that billions of people around the 
world are overfat. Former survival mechanisms have now become 
mechanisms of pathology.
Understandably, pharmaceutical companies are keenly inter-
ested in developing effective weight-control drugs. There could 
be an enormous profit, for example, in drugs that affect appetite-
regulating hormones—for example, by inhibiting the appetite-­
stimulating hormone ghrelin or enhancing or mimicking the 
­appetite-suppressing hormone leptin (see section 18.5). Such efforts 
have so far met with little success. An integrative approach to obe-
sity requires better understanding of appetite and body weight reg-
ulation, as well as emphasis on increased exercise and consumption 
of healthy foods.
O b e s i t y
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
      1.	What are the four classes of macronutrients? 
2.	Why is fiber important in the diet, and why isn’t it considered a nutrient? 
 3.	Why is fat more efficient than carbohydrates for energy storage? 
4.	Contrast the functions of VLDLs, LDLs, and HDLs. Explain 
why a high level of blood HDLs is desirable, but a high level 
of LDLs is undesirable. 
5.	Why do some proteins have more nutritional value than others? 
6.	Define the terms mineral and vitamin. Give several important 
examples of each. 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      605  

(a) Glycolysis
Glucose
2 Pyruvate
2 Lactate
Mitochondrion
(b) Anaerobic
fermentation
(c) Aerobic
respiration
ATP
2
2
Pi
ADP +
ATP
4
4
Pi
ADP +
2 NAD+
2 NADH
2 NADH + H+
18.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	define metabolism, catabolism, and anabolism; 
b.	describe the basic purposes and products of glycolysis, 
­anaerobic fermentation, and aerobic respiration; 
c.	be able to trace the energy content of glucose through all these 
stages of metabolism, stating where the energy is contained by 
the end of each stage; and 
d.	describe the body’s modes of glycogen synthesis and break-
down, and its synthesis of glucose from other noncarbohydrates. 
Figure 18.2 Pathways of Glucose Catabolism. 
(a) Glycolysis. (b) Anaerobic fermentation. (c) Aerobic 
respiration.
Metabolism is the sum of all chemical changes in the body, and consists of two 
classes of reactions: energy-requiring synthesis reactions called anabolism, and 
energy-releasing breakdown reactions called catabolism. In this section, we focus 
mainly on the energy-releasing catabolism of glucose and the use of that energy to 
make ATP.
Glucose Catabolism
Most dietary carbohydrate is burned as fuel within a few hours of absorption. Glu-
cose is the major product of carbohydrate digestion, and provides us with quick 
energy when it is totally oxidized. The overall reaction for this is
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 → 6 CO2 + 6 H2O.
The function of this reaction is not to produce carbon dioxide and water but to trans-
fer energy from glucose to ATP.
If the preceding reaction were carried out in a single step, it would gener-
ate a short, intense burst of heat—like the burning of paper, which has the same 
chemical equation. Not only would this be useless to the body’s metabolism, but 
it would kill the cells. In the body, however, the process is carried out in a series 
of small steps, each controlled by a separate enzyme. Energy is released in small 
manageable amounts, and as much of it as possible is transferred to ATP. The rest 
is released as heat.
Major pathways of glucose catabolism (fig. 18.2) follow.
	 1.	 Glycolysis, which splits a glucose molecule into two molecules of pyruvate, 
takes place in the cytoplasm. 
	 2.	 Anaerobic fermentation processes pyruvate in a way that allows glycolysis 
to continue functioning in a state of oxygen deficiency. 
	 3.	 Aerobic respiration occurs in the presence of oxygen and oxidizes pyruvate 
to carbon dioxide and water. The steps associated with aerobic respiration 
take place in the mitochondria. 
Coenzymes are vitally important to these reactions. Enzymes remove electrons 
(as hydrogen atoms) from the intermediate compounds of these pathways and trans-
fer them to coenzymes, which then donate the electrons to other compounds later in 
one of the reaction pathways. Coenzymes are thus temporary carriers of the energy 
extracted from glucose metabolites. The enzymes of glucose catabolism cannot 
function without their coenzymes.
606      PART 5  Intake and Output

Two coenzymes of special importance are NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide) and FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide). Both are derived from B vitamins: 
NAD+ from niacin and FAD from riboflavin.
Glycolysis
Glycolysis1 consists of a series of enzymatic steps that convert glucose, a six-­
carbon sugar (C6), into two three-carbon (C3) molecules of pyruvate (pyruvic 
acid) (fig. 18.2a). Glycolysis requires an “initial investment” of 2 ATP, but pays it 
back “with interest”—generating 4 ATP, for a net yield of 2 ATP. It also requires  
2 molecules of the coenzyme NAD+. As glycolysis extracts energy from glucose, 
it transfers it to NAD+, creating a higher-energy form, NADH. At the end of 
glycolysis, some of the energy that was in the glucose has escaped as heat, but 
energy still useful to the body remains in the 2 ATP, 2 NADH, and mostly, the 
2 pyruvate.
Anaerobic Fermentation
The fate of pyruvate depends on whether or not oxygen is available. In an exercis-
ing muscle, the demand for ATP may exceed the supply of oxygen. The only ATP 
the cells can make under these circumstances is the 2 ATP produced by glycolysis. 
Cells without mitochondria, such as erythrocytes, are also restricted to making ATP 
by this method.
In the absence of oxygen, a cell resorts to a one-step reaction called anaerobic 
fermentation. (This is often inaccurately called anaerobic respiration, but strictly 
speaking, that is a process found only in certain bacteria.) In this pathway, pyruvate 
is reduced to lactate (lactic acid) (fig. 18.2b) and generates NAD+. NAD+ is neces-
sary to keep glycolysis running; this is the key purpose of anaerobic fermentation, 
not lactate production.
Most cells can survive brief periods of oxygen deficiency by generating ATP 
indirectly in this way. However, oxygen is required to produce enough ATP to sus-
tain the body for more than a few minutes. Skeletal muscle is relatively tolerant of 
anaerobic fermentation, and cardiac muscle less so. The brain employs almost no 
anaerobic fermentation. 
Aerobic Respiration
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate enters the mitochondria and the pathway of 
aerobic respiration (fig. 18.2c). Most of our ATP is produced through oxidation of 
pyruvate in two principal steps:
∙	 matrix reactions, so named because their controlling enzymes are in the fluid 
of the mitochondrial matrix, and 
∙	 membrane reactions, so named because their controlling enzymes are bound 
to the membranes of the mitochondrial cristae. 
The Matrix Reactions
Most of the matrix reactions (fig. 18.3) constitute a series of enzymatic steps called 
the citric acid (Krebs2) cycle. For every glucose molecule that enters glycolysis, 
all of the matrix reactions occur twice (once for each pyruvate). As the products 
of pyruvate pass through the cycle, carbon atoms are stripped away as CO2 and 
ultimately exhaled as metabolic waste. The energy extracted from pyruvate is trans-
ferred to ATP, more NADH, and the reduced (high-energy) form of the other coen-
zyme, FADH2. At the end of the cycle, there is nothing left of the organic matter of 
1glyco = sugar; lysis = splitting 
2Sir Hans Krebs (1900–1981), German biochemist
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      607  

the glucose; its carbon atoms have all been carried away. What remains of value at 
the end of the matrix reactions is the energy content of another 2 ATP, 8 NADH, 
and 2 FADH2. These reduced coenzymes provide energy for the relatively massive 
production of ATP in the membrane reactions that follow.
The Membrane Reactions
The membrane reactions further oxidize NADH and FADH2 and transfer their 
energy to ATP. This is accomplished by passing their electrons along a series of 
enzyme complexes called the mitochondrial electron-transport chain, bound 
to the inner mitochondrial membrane (fig. 18.3). The members of the chain are 
arranged in a precise order that enables each one to receive a pair of electrons and 
pass them to the next—like a row of people passing along a hot potato. By the time 
the “potato” reaches the last member in the chain, it is relatively “cool”—its energy 
has been used to make ATP. The final electron acceptor in the chain is oxygen. Each 
oxygen atom (O) receives two electrons (2 e–) from the transport chain and two 
protons (2 H+) from the matrix reactions, generating water (H2O) as an end product. 
An enzyme called ATP synthase uses energy from this process to generate ATP. 
Citric acid
cycle
2 Pyruvate
8 NADH
2 FADH2
H2O
Oxygen
Protons
(H+)
Membrane reactions
2 e–
6 CO2
(exhaled)
2 e–
ATP
2
2
Pi
ADP +
ATP
28
28
Pi
ADP +
Matrix reactions
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Outer
mitochondrial
membrane
Enzyme complexes of 
mitochondrial electron 
transport chain
ATP synthase
Key
Figure 18.3 Aerobic Respiration. Of the 
8 NADH generated by the matrix ­reactions, 2 
are produced where pyruvate enters the citric 
acid cycle and 6 are ­generated by the citric acid 
cycle itself.
• What two vitamins are needed in the diet 
to make this process work? Why?  
608      PART 5  Intake and Output

This is a relatively prolific mode of ATP production, generating up to 28 more ATP 
in contrast to the 2 from glycolysis and 2 from the matrix reactions.
Overview of ATP Production
In summary, the complete aerobic respiration of glucose can be represented by
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 + 32 ADP + 32 Pi → 6 CO2 + 6 H2 O + 32 ATP,
and the sources of ATP can be summarized as follows:
	
	 2	 ATP from glycolysis (net yield),
	
	 2	 ATP from matrix reactions,
	
+	28	 ATP from membrame reactions 
	
	32	 ATP per glucose.
It is clear that oxygen is required for the most efficient ATP production, and that most 
of the ATP in our bodies is generated by the membrane reactions of the mitochondria.
Apply What You Know
Your friend who is also taking this course begins taking extra vitamins because 
she points to this discussion and says, “Look, they provide energy for making 
ATP. They’ll give me extra energy; pep me up.” But you point to the discussion 
of vitamins in the previous section and say, “Well look here; it says vitamins don’t 
provide energy to the body.” Now you’re both confused. Is your book contradict-
ing itself? Should you start taking the extra vitamins, or is your friend wasting 
money on a misconception? Explain. 
Glycogen Metabolism
ATP is quickly used after it is synthesized—it is an energy-transfer molecule, not an 
energy-storage molecule. Therefore, if the body has an ample amount of ATP and 
there is still more glucose in the blood, it converts the glucose to other compounds 
better suited for energy storage—namely, glycogen and fat. Here we consider the 
synthesis and use of glycogen, a large polymer of glucose stored in the liver, mus-
cles, and a few other organs (see fig. 11.11). Fat is discussed later.
Glycogenesis, the synthesis of glycogen, is stimulated by insulin. It con-
sists of polymerization reactions that link thousands of glucose molecules into 
branched chains of glycogen for storage. The average adult body contains about 
400 to 450 g of glycogen: nearly one-quarter of it in the liver; three-quarters of it 
in the skeletal muscles; and small amounts in cardiac muscle, the uterine lining, 
and other tissues.
Glycogenolysis, the hydrolysis of glycogen, is stimulated by glucagon and 
epinephrine between meals. It releases glucose when new glucose is not being 
absorbed from the intestine. The liver releases glucose into the blood, maintaining 
blood sugar levels between meals. Muscle and other glycogen-storing tissues aren’t 
as good at sharing as the liver—they use the free glucose only for their own needs.
Gluconeogenesis3 occurs when even the stored glycogen isn’t enough to meet 
our energy needs. This is the conversion of noncarbohydrates such as glycerol and 
amino acids to glucose. Since the glycerol comes from the breakdown of fat, glu-
coneogenesis is our means of weight loss when we control calorie intake to “burn 
off” fat. Using amino acids to make glucose, however, is less healthy; it means we’re 
breaking down protein and may be losing muscle mass. This can be a sign of disease 
(as in cancer and uncontrolled diabetes), excessive dieting, or starvation. 
3gluco = sugar, glucose; neo = new; genesis = production of
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      609  

The distinctions between the foregoing similar terms are summarized in 
table 18.3.
Table 18.3 Terminology Related to Glucose and Glycogen Metabolism
Anabolic (Synthesis) Reactions
Glycogenesis
The synthesis of glycogen by polymerizing glucose
Gluconeogenesis
The synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrates such as glycerol and 
amino acids (from fat and protein)
Catabolic (Breakdown) Reactions
Glycogenolysis 
The hydrolysis of glycogen to release glucose 
Glycolysis 
The splitting of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate in preparation 
for anaerobic fermentation or aerobic respiration  
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
  7.	In the laboratory, glucose can be oxidized in a single 
step to CO2 and H2O. Why do living cells do it in so many 
little steps? 
   8.	What are the end products of glycolysis? By the end of gly-
colysis, where is the energy that used to be in the glucose? 
    9.	What is the main advantage of aerobic respiration over 
anaerobic fermentation? 
10.	What is the total yield of ATP for all steps from glucose 
through the end of aerobic respiration? State what quantities 
of ATP are produced at each major stage. 
 11.	What conditions promote glycogenesis, glycogenolysis, and 
gluconeogenesis? 
18.3  Lipid and Protein Metabolism
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the process that uses the energy of triglycerides for 
synthesizing ATP, including the fates of the glycerol and fatty 
acid components; 
b.	describe the process of protein catabolism and why it generates 
nitrogenous wastes; and 
c.	identify several nondigestive functions of the liver. 
In the foregoing discussion, glycolysis and the mitochondrial reactions were 
treated from the standpoint of carbohydrate oxidation. When blood glucose con-
centration is low, most cells can break down other nutrient molecules to produce 
610      PART 5  Intake and Output

Apply What You Know
Explain why extreme low-carbohydrate diets can elevate blood ketone bodies 
and even cause ketoacidosis.
Proteins 
Amino acids are primarily used for protein synthesis—the process of building the 
thousands of different proteins necessary for cellular function and structure. Each 
protein requires a specific combination of amino acids, assembled in proper order 
according to instructions contained in the DNA. Protein manufacture, described in 
section 3.3, is stimulated by various hormones such as growth hormone and thyroid 
hormone. We need a constant supply of amino acids because proteins are continu-
ally degraded and rebuilt.
Amino acids can also be converted to glucose or fat or used directly as 
fuel. Although they are not the preferred fuel of the body, amino acids may be 
­converted to pyruvate or one of the acids of the citric acid cycle (fig. 18.3). 
Before they enter the citric acid cycle, amino acids are deaminated—the amino 
group (—NH2) is removed and becomes ammonia (NH3), which is extremely 
toxic to cells. The liver quickly combines ammonia with carbon dioxide to 
­produce a less toxic waste, urea, which is then excreted in the urine. Urea is 
ATP. Here, we examine metabolic pathways associated with the oxidation of lip-
ids and proteins as fuel.
Lipids
The total amount of triglycerides stored in the body’s adipocytes usually 
remains quite constant, but there is continual turnover as lipids are released, 
transported in the blood, and either oxidized for energy or redeposited in 
other adipocytes. As we all know, a diet high in sugars causes us to gain 
weight, mostly in the form of fat. When sugars and amino acids exceed the 
body’s immediate needs, they can be used to synthesize triglyceride precur-
sors, glycerol and fatty acids. These can then be condensed to form a triglyc-
eride, which is stored in the adipose tissue. Triglyceride synthesis is called 
lipogenesis.
In contrast, if glucose supplies are low, fat is used for fuel. Breaking down 
fat begins with lipolysis (lih-POLL-ih-sis)—splitting triglycerides into glycerol 
and fatty acids. Lipolysis is stimulated by epinephrine, norepinephrine, glucocor-
ticoids, thyroid hormone, and growth hormone. The glycerol and fatty acids are 
further oxidized by separate pathways (fig. 18.4). Glycerol enters the pathway of 
glycolysis. It generates only half as much ATP as glucose, however, because it is 
a C3 compound (compared with glucose, C6); thus, it leads to the production of 
only half as much pyruvate.
The fatty acids are oxidized in the mitochondria into 2-carbon fragments called 
acetyl groups and fed into the matrix reactions. A typical fatty acid of 16 carbon 
atoms can yield 129 molecules of ATP—obviously a much richer source of energy 
than a glucose molecule.
Excessively rapid fat breakdown, as in diabetes mellitus, can produce an 
overload of small organic acids called ketone bodies. Their accumulation can 
cause a pH imbalance called ketoacidosis. In untreated diabetes, cells cannot 
take up glucose and therefore oxidize fats. This leads to a telltale sweet odor on 
the breath from exhaled acetone (one of the ketone bodies); a diagnostic pres-
ence of ketone bodies in the urine; and often a ketoacidosis-induced coma and 
death.
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      611  

NH3
CO2
Glucose
Fat
Liver
Kidney
Urine
Matrix
reactions
Glycolysis
Glycerol
Stored
fat
Mitochondrion
Membrane
reactions
Acetyl
groups
Fatty acids
Amino acids
Protein
Urea
ATP
Figure 18.4 Fat and Protein Catabolism. 
­Pathways for burning fat and protein as fuel to 
­generate ATP. 
the body’s main nitrogenous waste. When a diseased liver cannot produce urea, 
ammonia accumulates in the blood and death from hepatic coma may ensue 
within a few days.
Liver Functions in Metabolism
The liver plays a wide variety of roles in the processes discussed in this chapter—
especially carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism. Although it is connected 
to the digestive tract and generally regarded as a digestive gland, the overwhelm-
ing majority of its functions are nondigestive (table 18.4). All of these are per-
formed by the cuboidal hepatocytes described in section 17.4. Such functional 
diversity is remarkable in light of the uniform structure of these cells. Because 
of the numerous critical functions performed by the liver, degenerative liver dis-
eases such as hepatitis, cirrhosis, and liver cancer are especially life-threatening 
(Clinical Application 18.1).
612      PART 5  Intake and Output

Clinical Application 18.1
HEPATITIS
Hepatitis, inflammation of the liver, is usually caused by one of three strains of 
the hepatitis virus. They differ in mode of transmission, severity of the result-
ing illness, affected age groups, and the best strategies for prevention. Hepatitis 
A is common and mild. Over 45% of people in urban areas of the United States 
have had it. It spreads rapidly in such settings as day-care centers, and it can be 
acquired by eating uncooked seafood such as oysters. Hepatitis B and C are far 
more serious. Both are transmitted sexually and through blood and other body 
fluids; the incidence of hepatitis C surpasses AIDS as a sexually transmitted 
disease. They may be passed among injecting drug users who share needles 
and may be transmitted by using nonsterile instruments during body pierc-
ings or tattoos. Initial signs and symptoms of hepatitis include fatigue, nausea, 
vomiting, and weight loss. The liver becomes enlarged and tender. Jaundice, 
or yellowing of the skin, tends to follow as hepatocytes are destroyed, bile 
passages are blocked, and bile pigments accumulate in the blood. Hepatitis A 
causes up to 6 months of illness, but most people recover and then have perma-
nent immunity to it. Hepatitis B and C, however, often lead to chronic hepati-
tis, which can progress to cirrhosis or liver cancer. More liver transplants are 
necessitated by hepatitis C than by any other cause.
Table 18.4  Functions of the Liver
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Converts dietary fructose and galactose to glucose. Stabilizes blood glucose concentra-
tion by storing excess glucose as glycogen (glycogenesis); releasing glucose from glyco-
gen when needed (glycogenolysis); and synthesizing glucose from fats and amino acids 
(gluconeogenesis) when glucose demand exceeds glycogen reserves.
Lipid Metabolism
Carries out most of the body’s fat synthesis and synthesizes cholesterol and phospholip-
ids; produces VLDLs to transport lipids to adipose tissue and other tissues for storage or 
use; and stores fat in its own cells. Carries out most oxidation of fatty acids; produces 
ketone bodies. Produces HDL shells, which pick up excess cholesterol from other tissues 
and return it to the liver; excretes the excess cholesterol in bile.
Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism
Carries out most deamination of amino acids. Converts ammonia to urea. Synthesizes 
nonessential amino acids.
Synthesis of Plasma Proteins
Synthesizes nearly all the proteins of blood plasma, including albumin, globulins, fibrino-
gen, and several clotting factors.
Vitamin and Mineral Metabolism
Converts vitamin D3 to calcidiol, a step in the synthesis of calcitriol; stores a 3- to 4-month 
­supply of vitamin D. Stores a 10-month supply of vitamin A and enough vitamin B12 to last for 
several years. Stores and releases iron as needed. Excretes excess calcium by way of the bile.
Digestion
Synthesizes bile acids and lecithin, which emulsify fat and promote its digestion.
Disposal of Drugs, Toxins, and Hormones
Detoxifies alcohol, antibiotics, and many other drugs. Degrades hormones, removing 
them from circulation. 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      613  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	What two products result from the hydrolysis of 
triglycerides? How is each of them used to make ATP, and 
how does the ATP yield from this compare to the yield from 
glucose? 
13.	Why can an abnormally rapid rate of fat oxidation result in a 
pH imbalance in the body? 
14.	What must be done to an amino acid before it can enter the 
citric acid cycle? What happens to the by-product of this pre-
paratory reaction? 
15.	List at least six nondigestive functions of the liver. 
18.4  Metabolic States and Metabolic Rate
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	distinguish the absorptive (fed) state from the postabsorptive 
(fasting) state; 
b.	explain what happens to carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and amino 
acids in each of these states; 
c.	describe the hormonal and nervous regulation of each state; 
d.	define metabolic rate and basal metabolic rate; and 
e.	describe some factors that alter the metabolic rate. 
Your metabolism changes from hour to hour depending on how long it has been 
since your last meal. For about 4 hours during and after a meal, you are in the 
absorptive (fed) state. This is a time in which nutrients are being absorbed and may 
be stored or used immediately to meet energy and other needs. The postabsorptive 
(fasting) state prevails in the late morning, late afternoon, and overnight. During 
this time, the stomach and small intestine are empty and the body’s energy needs 
are met from stored fuels.
The Absorptive State
In the absorptive (fed) state, blood glucose is readily available for ATP synthesis. It 
serves as the primary fuel and spares the body from having to draw on stored fuels. 
The status of major nutrient classes during this phase is as follows.
∙	 Carbohydrates. Absorbed sugars are transported by the hepatic portal system 
to the liver. Most glucose passes through the liver and becomes available to 
cells everywhere in the body. Glucose in excess of immediate need, however, 
is absorbed by the liver and may be converted to glycogen or fat. Most fat 
synthesized in the liver is released into the circulation. 
614      PART 5  Intake and Output

∙	 Fats. Dietary fats enter the lymph before entering the bloodstream. Unlike 
other nutrients, they initially bypass the liver. Fats are taken up by tissues, espe-
cially adipose and muscular tissue, for which they are a major energy source. 
∙	 Amino acids. Amino acids, like sugars, circulate first to the liver. Most pass 
through and become available to other cells for protein synthesis. Some, how-
ever, are removed by the liver and are (1) used for protein synthesis, (2) deami-
nated and used as fuel for ATP synthesis, or (3) deaminated and used for fatty 
acid synthesis. 
Regulation of the Absorptive State
The absorptive state is regulated largely by insulin, which is secreted by beta cells 
of the pancreas in response to elevated blood glucose and amino acid levels. Its 
release is also stimulated by the intestinal hormones gastrin, secretin, and chole-
cystokinin. Insulin, well known for lowering blood sugar, has more functions than 
one might suppose.
∙	 Within minutes, it increases the cellular uptake of glucose by as much as 
20-fold. As cells absorb glucose, the blood glucose concentration falls. 
∙	 It stimulates glucose oxidation, glycogenesis, and fat synthesis. 
∙	 It stimulates the active transport of amino acids into cells and promotes pro-
tein synthesis. 
The Postabsorptive State
The essence of the postabsorptive (fasting) state is to prevent blood glucose con-
centration from falling below a range of about 90 to 100 mg/dL. This is especially 
critical to the brain, which normally doesn’t use alternative energy substrates. The 
postabsorptive status of major nutrients is as follows:
∙	 Carbohydrates. Glucose is drawn from the body’s glycogen reserves 
(glycogenolysis) or synthesized from other compounds (gluconeogen-
esis). The liver usually stores enough glycogen after a meal to support 
4 hours of postabsorptive metabolism before significant gluconeogen-
esis occurs. 
∙	 Fats. Adipocytes and hepatocytes hydrolyze fats and convert the glycerol to 
glucose. Free fatty acids (FFAs) can be used as a source of energy by most 
body cells. 
∙	 Proteins. If glycogen and fat reserves are depleted, the body begins to use 
proteins as fuel. 
Regulation of the Postabsorptive State
Postabsorptive metabolism is more complex than the absorptive state. It is regu-
lated mainly by the sympathetic nervous system and glucagon. As blood glucose 
levels drop, insulin secretion declines and pancreatic alpha cells secrete glucagon. 
­Glucagon promotes glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, which raise the blood glu-
cose level, and it promotes fat breakdown and a rise in FFA levels. Thus, it makes 
both glucose and lipids available for fuel.
The sympathetic nervous system also promotes glycogenolysis and fat break-
down, especially under conditions of injury, fear, anger, and other forms of stress. 
Adipose tissue is richly innervated by the sympathetic nervous system. Adipocytes, 
hepatocytes, and muscle cells also respond to epinephrine from the adrenal medulla. 
In circumstances with a threat of injury, the sympathetic system mobilizes stored 
energy reserves and makes them available to meet the demands of tissue repair. 
Stress also stimulates the release of cortisol, which promotes fat and protein catabo-
lism and gluconeogenesis (see section 11.5).
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      615  

Metabolic Rate
Metabolic rate refers to the amount of energy liberated in the body per unit of time, 
expressed in such terms as kcal/h or kcal/day. Metabolic rate depends on ­physical 
activity, mental state, absorptive or postabsorptive status, thyroid hormone and 
other hormones, and other factors. Your basal metabolic rate (BMR) is a baseline 
when you’re awake but relaxed, in a postabsorptive state 12 to 14 hours since the last 
meal. It is not the minimum metabolic rate needed to sustain life, however. When 
you’re asleep, your metabolic rate is slightly lower than the BMR. Total metabolic 
rate is the sum of BMR and energy expenditure for voluntary activities, especially 
muscular contractions.
The BMR of an average adult is about 2,000 kcal/day for a male and slightly 
less for a female. Roughly speaking, therefore, we must therefore consume at least 
2,000 kcal/day to fuel our essential metabolic tasks—active transport, muscle tone, 
brain activity, cardiac and respiratory rhythms, renal function, and other essential 
processes. Even a relatively sedentary lifestyle requires another 500 kcal/day to sup-
port a low level of physical activity, and someone who does hard physical labor may 
require as much as 5,000 kcal/day.
Aside from physical activity, some factors that raise the total metabolic rate 
(TMR) and caloric requirements include pregnancy, anxiety (which stimulates epi-
nephrine release and muscle tension), fever (TMR rises about 14% for each 1°C of 
body temperature), and thyroid hormone. TMR is relatively high in children and 
declines with age. Therefore, as we reach middle age we often find ourselves gain-
ing weight with no apparent change in food intake.
Some factors that lower TMR include apathy, depression, and prolonged star-
vation. In weight-loss diets, loss is often rapid at first and then goes more slowly. 
This is partly because the initial loss is largely water weight and partly because the 
TMR drops over time, fewer dietary calories are “burned off,” and there is more 
fat synthesis even with the same caloric intake. As we reduce food intake, the body 
reduces its metabolic rate to conserve body mass—thus making weight loss all the 
more difficult.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t 
know.
 16.	Define absorptive state and postabsorptive state. In 
which state is the body storing excess fuel? In which state is 
it drawing from these stored fuel reserves? 
     17.	What hormone primarily regulates the absorptive state, and 
what are the major effects of this hormone? 
 18.	What is the main priority of postabsorptive metabolism? 
What are the principal nervous and hormonal means of 
regulating it? 
 19.	Define basal metabolic rate and explain how it differs from 
total metabolic rate. What factors raise the total metabolic 
rate? 
20.	List a variety of factors and conditions that raise your total 
metabolic rate above your basal metabolic rate. 
616      PART 5  Intake and Output

18.5  Energy Balance and Appetite 
­Regulation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain the concept of energy balance; 
b.	name the hormones that regulate short- and long-term appetite 
and describe the effects of each; 
c.	name the appetite-stimulating and -inhibiting signals secreted in 
the hypothalamus, and describe their effects. 
The subjects of nutrition and metabolism quickly bring to mind the subject of 
body weight and the popular desire to control it. Weight is determined by the 
body’s energy balance—if energy intake and output are equal, body weight is 
stable. We gain weight if energy intake exceeds output and lose weight if output 
exceeds intake.
Despite variation in daily food intake and energy expenditure, energy bal-
ance is closely regulated, and most people maintain a fairly constant body 
weight. However, humans, unlike other animals, often ignore feelings of sati-
ety to eat more than is comfortable. In modern times, access to abundant, 
appealing, high-calorie food is coupled with a relatively inactive lifestyle. 
Consequently, many people have excess amounts of body fat and obesity has 
become common. Evidence from twin and adoption studies and family pedi-
grees indicates that about 30% to 50% of the variation in human weight is 
due to heredity; the rest is due to environmental factors such as exercise and 
eating habits.
Appetite
The struggle for weight control often seems to be a struggle against the appetite. 
Since the early 1990s, physiologists have discovered several hormones called  
gut–brain peptides that control short- and long-term appetite and body weight. The 
following three peptides work over the short term—minutes to hours—first making 
one feel hungry and motivated to eat, then causing a feeling of satiety that signals 
an end to the meal.
∙	 Ghrelin4 is secreted by parietal cells in the stomach. It has been called the 
“hunger hormone” because it is a powerful appetite stimulator. Shortly after 
eating, ghrelin concentration in the blood drops. 
∙	 Peptide YY (PYY) is secreted by cells in the ileum and colon that sense 
that food has arrived even as it enters the stomach. The primary effect 
of PYY is to signal satiety and terminate eating. Thus, ghrelin is one of 
the signals that begins a meal, and PYY is one of the signals that ends 
it. PYY remains elevated well after a meal. It acts as a kind of brake that 
4named partly from ghre = growth, and partly as an acronym derived from growth hormone 
releasing
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      617  

prevents the stomach from emptying too quickly; thus, it prolongs the 
sense of satiety. 
∙	 Cholecystokinin (CCK) is secreted by cells in the duodenum and jejunum. 
It stimulates the brain and produces an appetite-suppressing effect. Thus, it 
joins PYY as a signal to stop eating. (Earlier, we saw that CCK also regulates 
activity of the gallbladder and pancreas; see section 17.4). 
Other peptides regulate appetite, metabolic rate, and body weight over the 
longer term, thus governing one’s average rate of caloric intake and energy expen-
diture over periods of weeks to years. The following two members of this group 
work as “adiposity signals,” informing the brain about how much fat we have 
and activating mechanisms for adding or reducing fat. Adipose tissue is increas-
ingly seen as an important source of multiple hormones that influence the body’s 
energy balance.
∙	 Leptin5 is secreted mainly by adipocytes throughout the body. Its level is pro-
portional to fat stores, so this is the brain’s primary way of knowing how 
much body fat we have. Leptin inhibits fat deposition. Animals with a leptin 
deficiency or a defect in leptin receptors overeat and become extremely obese. 
With few exceptions, however, obese humans are not leptin-deficient and are 
not aided by leptin injections. More commonly, it seems that human obesity is 
linked to unresponsiveness to leptin—a receptor defect rather than a hormone 
deficiency. 
∙	 Insulin is secreted by pancreatic beta cells in response to eating. As we 
have seen, insulin lowers glucose levels in the blood by causing it to be 
transported into cells. In addition, like leptin, it signals the status of the 
body’s fat stores, but in contrast to leptin, insulin promotes fat deposition. 
When average daily insulin secretion rises, food intake and body weight 
increase. 
An important brain center for appetite regulation is the hypothalamus. All 
five of the aforementioned peptides have receptors in the hypothalamus, which 
in turn, secretes signals according to information it receives (fig. 18.5). One of 
these is neuropeptide Y (NPY), a potent appetite stimulant. Ghrelin stimulates 
NPY secretion, whereas insulin, PYY, and leptin inhibit it. The hypothalamus 
also secretes melanocortin, which inhibits eating. Leptin stimulates melanocor-
tin secretion and inhibits the secretion of appetite stimulants called endocan-
nabinoids, named for their resemblance to the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) of 
marijuana.
Hunger is stimulated not only by chemical signals but also by movements 
of the stomach and intestinal walls. Mild hunger contractions begin soon after 
the stomach is emptied and increase in intensity over a period of hours. They 
can become quite a painful and powerful incentive to eat, yet they don’t affect 
the amount of food consumed. Food intake is terminated by more than hor-
monal signals. Merely chewing and swallowing food briefly satisfy the appe-
tite. Inflating the stomach with a balloon inhibits hunger even in an animal that 
hasn’t actually swallowed any food. Satiety produced by these mechanisms, 
however, is short-lived. Lasting satiety depends on the absorption of nutrients 
into the blood.
Appetite is a question of not merely how much but also what kind of food is 
consumed. Humans are adapted to eat a wide variety of foods including plants 
and meat. Some foods provide nutrients that others do not. Different neurotrans-
mitters seem to govern the appetite for different classes of nutrients. For example, 
­norepinephrine stimulates the appetite for carbohydrates, galanin for fatty foods, 
and endorphins for protein.
5lept = thin
618      PART 5  Intake and Output

Key
Hunger
Forebrain
Hypothalamus
Satiety
NPY-
secreting
neurons
Melano-
cortin-
secreting
neurons
Insulin
Ghrelin
PYY
Leptin
CCK
Pancreas
Stomach
Small
intestine
Large
intestine
Adipose tissue
Stimulatory
eﬀect
Inhibitory
eﬀect
Figure 18.5 Gut–Brain Peptides in 
Appetite Regulation. Peptides produced 
by the digestive tract, pancreas, and adi-
pose tissue stimulate or inhibit the brain and 
regulate appetite.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
 21.	How does the effect of ghrelin differ from the effects 
of peptide YY and cholecystokinin? Where is each of these 
hormones secreted? 
22.	Contrast the effects of leptin and insulin on long-term energy balance. 
23.	Where are neuropeptide Y and melanocortin secreted? 
What are their effects? 
24.	Identify some neurotransmitters that stimulate the appetite 
for specific categories of nutrients. 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      619  

18.6  Body Heat and Thermoregulation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	state the normal ranges of human core and shell temperature; 
b.	identify the principal sources of body heat; 
c.	define and contrast three modes of heat loss and their relative 
contributions to total heat loss; 
d.	describe how the hypothalamus monitors body tempera-
ture and how the heat-losing and heat-promoting centers 
work; and 
e.	name and describe the pathological states of excessively high 
and low body temperatures. 
The enzymes that control our metabolism depend on an optimal, stable temperature. 
In order to maintain this, heat loss from the body must be matched by heat genera-
tion. Thermoregulation, the balance between heat production and loss, is therefore 
a critically important aspect of homeostasis.
Body Temperature
Body temperature fluctuates about 1°C (1.8°F) in a 24-hour cycle. It tends to be 
lowest in the early morning and highest in the late afternoon. Temperature also var-
ies from one place in the body to another, and from person to person. Thus, it is hard 
to specify any body temperature as “normal.”
The most important measure is the core temperature—the temperature of 
organs in the cranial, thoracic, and abdominal cavities. It can be closely estimated 
from rectal temperature, which is relatively easy to measure. It is typically 37.2° to 
37.6°C (99.0°–99.7°F) but may be as high as 39°C (102.2°F) during vigorous exer-
cise such as running for prolonged periods.
Shell temperature is the cooler temperature closer to the surface, especially 
skin and oral temperature. Adult oral temperature is typically 36.6° to 37.0°C 
(97.9°–98.6°F) but may be as high as 40°C (104°F) during hard exercise. Shell 
temperature fluctuates as a result of processes that serve to maintain a stable core 
temperature.
Heat Production and Loss
Most body heat comes from metabolic reactions related to nutrient oxidation and 
ATP use. At rest, most heat is generated by the brain, heart, liver, and endocrine 
glands. Skeletal muscles contribute about 20% to 30% of the total resting heat. How-
ever, during vigorous exercise, they produce 30 to 40 times as much heat as the rest 
of the body.
The body loses heat in four ways: radiation, conduction, convection, and 
evaporation.
	 1.	 Radiation is the loss of thermal energy through infrared (IR) rays emitted by 
all moving molecules. We absorb heat from every object around us, but it is 
especially noticeable coming from the sun or a heat lamp. Since we are usu-
ally warmer than the objects around us, however, we usually lose more heat 
this way than we gain. 
620      PART 5  Intake and Output

	 2.	 Conduction is the transfer of kinetic energy from molecule to mol-
ecule as they collide with one another. Heat from your body warms the 
clothes you wear, the chair you sit in, and the air around you through 
conduction. 
	 3.	 Convection is the movement of warm air away from the body and its 
replacement by a current of cooler air (or water, if one is immersed in 
a cool lake or bath). It accelerates the process of conductive heat loss. 
Convection can occur spontaneously as the lower density of warm air 
or water makes it rise, with cooler air or water coming from below to 
replace it, but it can also be accelerated by a breeze or a fan forcing air 
movement. 
	 4.	 Evaporation underlies the cooling effect of perspiration. It requires an 
appreciable input of heat to overcome the tendency of water molecules 
to cling together by hydrogen bonding, so when water molecules do 
break free and evaporate, they carry a substantial amount of heat with 
them. In extreme conditions, the body can lose 2 L or more of sweat 
and, with it, up to 600 kcal of heat per hour. Air movement (convection) 
also speeds evaporative heat loss, as we feel most dramatically when 
we’re wet with sweat and a cooling breeze picks up or we stand in front 
of a fan. 
The relative amounts of heat lost by the different methods depend on prevailing 
conditions. A nude body in still air at 21°C (70°F) loses about 60% of its heat by 
radiation, 18% by conduction, and 22% by evaporation. If air temperature is higher 
than skin temperature, evaporation becomes the only means of heat loss because 
radiation and conduction add more heat to the body than they remove. Hot, humid 
weather hinders even evaporative cooling because there is less of a humidity gradi-
ent from skin to air.
Thermoregulation
Thermoregulation is achieved through several negative feedback loops. The 
hypothalamus monitors the temperature of the blood and receives signals 
from nerve endings (thermoreceptors) in the skin. In turn, its heat-sensing 
neurons send signals to hypothalamic nuclei called the heat-losing and heat-
promoting centers.
When the body is overheated, as from exercise or a hot environment, the heat-
losing center stimulates the dilation of cutaneous blood vessels. This increases 
blood flow through the skin and thus promotes heat loss to the surrounding 
air (fig. 18.6a). If this fails to restore normal temperature, the heat-losing center 
triggers sweating.
In a cold environment, the heat-promoting center of the hypothalamus 
activates mechanisms to conserve body heat or generate more. By way of the 
sympathetic nervous system, it causes cutaneous vasoconstriction. This retains 
warm blood deeper in the body and less heat is lost through the skin (fig. 
18.6b). If this fails to restore or maintain normal core temperature, the body 
resorts to shivering. On a cold day, you may notice that your muscles become 
tense and you begin to shiver. Muscle contraction causes heat to be released 
when ATP is produced, and shivering can increase the body’s heat production 
as much as fourfold.
A more long-term mechanism for generating heat is to raise meta-
bolic rate. After several weeks of cold weather, for example, metabolic rate 
increases as much as 30%. Activation of the sympathetic nervous system 
raises the metabolic rate, with the result that more nutrients are burned as 
fuel. We consume more calories to “stoke the furnace” and, consequently, 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      621  

36°C
Core
37°C
Core
37°C
32°C
Shell
28°C
34°C
31°C
(a) Hot surroundings
(b)  Cold surroundings
have greater appetites in the winter than in the summer. Infants generate heat 
by breaking down brown fat, a tissue in which lipolysis is not linked to ATP 
synthesis (see “Adipose Tissue” in section 4.3), so all the energy released 
from the fat is in the form of heat.
In addition to these physiological mechanisms, humans and other animals 
practice behavioral thermoregulation. For example, just getting out of the 
sun greatly cuts down heat gain by radiation; shedding heavy clothing helps 
to cool the body; or putting on a sweater or adding another blanket to the bed 
conserves heat.
In summary, you can see that thermoregulation is a function of mul-
tiple organs: the brain, autonomic nerves, skin, blood vessels, and skeletal 
muscles.
Figure 18.6 Distribution of Body Heat in Hot 
and Cold Surroundings. (a) In a hot environ-
ment, cutaneous vasodilation carries heat close to 
the body surface and the shell is relatively thin. (b) 
In a cold environment, cutaneous vasoconstriction 
retains heat deeper in the body and the insulating 
shell is significantly thicker. It is easy to see from this 
why frostbite so often affects extremities such as 
fingers and toes. 
622      PART 5  Intake and Output

Disturbances of Thermoregulation
Either excessively low body temperature, called hypothermia, or excessively high 
body temperature, called hyperthermia, can disrupt metabolism to the point of 
death. Hypothermia can result from exposure to cold weather or immersion in icy 
water (Clinical Application 18.2). If the core temperature falls below 33°C (91°F), 
the metabolic rate drops so low that heat production can’t keep pace with heat loss, 
and the temperature falls even more. Death from cardiac fibrillation may occur 
below 32°C (90°F), but some people survive body temperatures as low as 29°C 
(84°F) in a state of suspended animation. A body temperature below 24°C (75°F) 
is usually fatal.
Hyperthermia is characterized by heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and heatstroke. 
Heat cramps are painful muscle spasms that result from excessive electrolyte loss 
in the sweat. They occur especially when a person begins to relax after strenuous 
exertion and heavy sweating. Heat exhaustion results from more severe water and 
electrolyte loss and is characterized by low blood pressure, dizziness, vomiting, and 
sometimes fainting. Heatstroke (sunstroke) occurs when the core body tempera-
ture is over 40°C (104°F); the skin is hot and dry; and the subject exhibits nervous 
system dysfunctions such as delirium, convulsions, or coma. It is also accompanied 
by tachycardia, hyperventilation, inflammation, and multiorgan dysfunction; it is 
often fatal.
Section 14.2 describes the mechanism of fever and its importance in com-
bating infection. Fever is a normal protective mechanism that should be allowed 
to run its course if temperature isn’t extraordinarily high. A body temperature 
above 42° to 43°C (108°–110°F), however, is dangerous. At a core temperature 
of 44° to 45°C (111°–113°F), metabolic dysfunction and neurological damage 
can be fatal.
Clinical Application 18.2
HYPOTHERMIA AND FROSTBITE
Hypothermia occurs when the body can’t generate heat as quickly as it is 
lost to the environment. All of us have experienced a drop in body tem-
perature in response to cold weather; a decrease in body temperature of 1° 
to 2°C (1.8° to 3.6°F) leads to shivering, goose bumps, and numb hands. 
Exposure to extreme cold, however, can lead to hypothermia, when body 
temperature drops to a level where the hypothalamus can no longer pro-
duce an adequate response, and cellular metabolic processes slow to the 
point of disrupting normal body function. Mountain climbers exposed to 
low temperatures and windy conditions must be careful to notice the symp-
toms of hypothermia in themselves and their companions—poor muscle 
coordination, difficulty speaking, blue fingertips and lips, and impaired 
cognitive ability. Drinking warm liquids, getting to shelter, and warming 
with blankets or by sharing body heat are essential to prevent a further 
slide toward nervous system depression and possible death. Another con-
cern is frostbite, which results from exposure of body surfaces to tem-
peratures low enough to freeze tissues. It occurs most often in regions of 
high surface area and exposure—fingers and toes, earlobes, and the tip of 
the nose. If intracellular water freezes, the ice crystals expand and rupture 
cells, and tissues die. In severe cases, gangrene follows thawing and the 
affected areas must be amputated.
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      623  

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
25.	Define core and shell temperature. Why can’t we 
­define shell temperature in terms of a fixed anatomi-
cal boundary or distance from the body surface? 
26.	What is the primary source of body heat? What are some 
lesser sources? How does the proportion of heat produced 
by skeletal muscles change during exercise compared to 
rest? 
27.	 Distinguish between radiation, conduction, convection, 
and evaporation as modes of heat loss. Consider a person 
­outdoors on a day when the air temperature is 38°C (101°F); 
what would be the person’s sole mode of body heat loss? 
28.	Explain how the hypothalamus acts to return body tempera-
ture to normal if it senses that it is too warm or too cool. 
29.	Describe the effects of hyperthermia and hypothermia. 
30.	Distinguish between heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and 
­heatstroke. 
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
A registered dietitian (RD) is a food and nutrition expert. To become an RD 
requires earning a bachelor’s degree, completing an internship approved 
by the American Dietetic Association, and passing a national examina-
tion. Registered dietitians focus on prevention and treatment of disease 
using a nutritional approach. They work in a variety of settings, often as 
members of a medical team in hospitals, clinics, or other care facilities 
such as nursing homes. They offer nutritional counseling in schools, child-
care centers, and correctional facilities. They may also provide nutritional 
support to both professional and recreational athletes in sports facilities. 
Dietitians serve in the food and nutrition industry and are also active in 
nutrition research.
A dietetic technician, registered (DTR), is a nutrition practitioner who has completed an associate degree at an accredited 
institution, an approved internship, and a national DTR examination. The majority of DTRs work with RDs as nutrition counselors 
in hospitals, clinics, and other health-care facilities; public health settings such as schools and child-care centers; and weight-
management centers. The obesity epidemic and studies that link chronic diseases to diet have focused our attention on nutri-
tion, and have highlighted the key role that these professions play in disease prevention and management.
See appendix B for further information on careers in dietetics.
D i e t i t i a n
© Science Source
624      PART 5  Intake and Output

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning  
Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
18.1  Nutrition 
1.	 Definitions of calorie (with a lowercase c) and kilocalorie 
(kcal) 
2.	 The definition of nutrient, and why some substances  
are ­important in the diet yet cannot be considered  
nutrients 
3.	 The energy content of carbohydrates and proteins compared 
with that of fat 
4.	 The meanings of macronutrients and micronutrients, with 
examples of each 
5.	 Why certain fatty acids and amino acids are called  
“essential” 
6.	 The chief dietary mono-, di-, and polysaccharides and some 
sources of each 
7.	 Examples of dietary fiber and why fiber is important 
8.	 Reasons why fat is superior to carbohydrates for long-term 
energy storage 
9.	 Differences between saturated and unsaturated fats and some 
dietary sources of each 
10.	 Why cholesterol is important for normal function, and some 
foods high in cholesterol 
11.	 The relative effect of dietary cholesterol versus other factors 
that influence one’s blood cholesterol level 
12.	 How blood lipoproteins enable lipids to be transported in spite 
of their hydrophobic nature 
13.	 The three kinds of blood lipoproteins and the differences 
­between their composition and function 
14.	 The true meanings of so-called good cholesterol and bad 
­cholesterol, and why these blood lipoproteins have acquired 
those colloquial expressions 
15.	 Several functions of dietary proteins 
16.	 How proteins of plant and animal origin differ in nutritional 
value, and how one can obtain all necessary amino acids from 
a diet free of animal protein 
17.	 The definition of essential amino acid and how essential amino 
acids are obtained 
18.	 The best dietary sources of minerals; important minerals in the 
body and their general functions 
19.	 The general functions of vitamins and how they differ from 
other small organic compounds 
20.	 The difference between water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins; 
examples of each 
21.	 The hazards of excessive vitamin intake 
18.2  Carbohydrate Metabolism 
1.	 The definition of metabolism and its two subdivisions 
2.	 The equation for the complete oxidation of glucose 
3.	 Why the human body can’t simply break down glucose in one 
reaction step 
4.	 The three major pathways of glucose catabolism 
5.	 The two coenzymes involved in glucose oxidation and the 
general role that they have in common 
6.	 The end products of glycolysis 
7.	 The purpose of anaerobic fermentation, and its main reactant 
and end product 
8.	 Where aerobic respiration occurs in the cell; differences 
between the matrix and membrane reactions; and the relative 
ATP yield of each 
9.	 Distinctions between glycolysis, glycogenesis, glycogenolysis, 
and gluconeogenesis, including the purpose, input, and output 
(products) of each 
18.3  Lipid and Protein Metabolism 
1.	 The breakdown products of triglyceride hydrolysis and how 
each of these can be used to make ATP 
2.	 The relative ATP yield of fat versus glucose oxidation 
3.	 The cause and pathological effects of ketoacidosis 
4.	 The process of catabolizing proteins for fuel and how it gives 
rise to ammonia and urea 
5.	 Five (or more) nondigestive functions of the liver 
18.4  Metabolic States and Metabolic Rate 
1.	 The distinction between the absorptive and postabsorptive 
metabolic states 
2.	 How carbohydrates, fats, and proteins (or amino acids) are 
processed during each of those states 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      625  

3.	 The hormonal and nervous mechanisms for regulating these 
two states 
4.	 Definitions of basal and total metabolic rate, and some typical 
values of each 
5.	 Factors that raise and lower metabolic rate 
18.5  Energy Balance and Appetite Regulation 
1.	 The concept of energy balance 
2.	 The roles of ghrelin, peptide YY, and cholecystokinin as short-
term regulators of appetite 
3.	 The two long-term adiposity signals to the brain and their 
­effects on body fat stores 
4.	 The role of the hypothalamus in appetite regulation; two 
­peptides produced by the hypothalamus that stimulate or 
inhibit appetite 
18.6  Body Heat and Thermoregulation 
1.	 The difference between core temperature and shell temperature, 
and where one would place a thermometer to measure each 
2.	 The source of most body heat when one is at rest 
3.	 The four ways in which the body loses heat 
4.	 How the hypothalamus monitors and regulates body ­temperature 
5.	 How the body core and shell change in hot and cold conditions 
6.	 The terms for abnormally high and low body temperatures and 
causes and effects of each 
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	
 are not used as fuel and are required in relatively small 
quantities.
a.	 Micronutrients 
b.	 Macronutrients 
c.	 Essential nutrients 
d.	 Proteins 
e.	 Lipids 
	 2.	 The only significant digestible polysaccharide in the diet is
a.	 glycogen. 
b.	 cellulose. 
c.	 starch. 
d.	 maltose. 
e.	 fiber. 
	 3.	 Which of the following store(s) the greatest amount of energy 
for the smallest amount of space in the body?
a.	 glucose 
b.	 triglycerides 
c.	 glycogen 
d.	 proteins 
e.	 vitamins 
	 4.	 A/an 
 is a nutrient that cannot be synthesized by the 
body and therefore must come from the diet.
a.	 omega-3 fatty acid 
b.	 saturated fat 
c.	 high-density lipoprotein 
d.	 extrinsic fatty acid 
e.	 essential fatty acid 
	 5.	 Which of the following is most likely to make you hungry?
a.	 leptin 
b.	 ghrelin 
c.	 cholecystokinin 
d.	 peptide YY 
e.	 melanocortin 
	 6.	 Which of the following normally releases glucose from the 
liver between meals?
a.	 insulin 
b.	 glycogenesis 
c.	 glycolysis 
d.	 glycogenolysis 
e.	 gluconeogenesis 
	 7.	 What function is served by oxygen in the process of aerobic 
respiration?
a.	 It provides the energy necessary to get glycolysis started. 
b.	 It oxidizes glucose to pyruvate. 
c.	 It converts pyruvate to lactate. 
d.	 It transfers high-energy electrons between mitochondrial 
enzymes. 
e.	 It serves as the final electron acceptor in the electron-­transport 
chain. 
	 8.	 Glycolysis has a net yield of 
 molecules of ATP for 
each ­molecule of glucose.
a.	 2 
b.	 4 
c.	 28 
d.	 32 
e.	 38 
	 9.	 Which of these occurs in the mitochondrial matrix?
a.	 glycolysis 
b.	 glycogenesis 
c.	 the electron-transport chain 
d.	 the citric acid cycle 
e.	 anaerobic fermentation 
	10.	 Absorbing heat from the sun is an example of
a.	 conduction. 
b.	 convection. 
c.	 hyperthermia. 
d.	 radiation. 
e.	 evaporation. 
	11.	 A/an 
 protein lacks one or more essential amino acids. 
	12.	 Lipoproteins called 
 are sometimes nicknamed 
“good ­cholesterol,” whereas others called 
 are 
­characterized as “bad ­cholesterol” because they are 
­associated with ­atherosclerosis. 
626      PART 5  Intake and Output

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere. 
	13.	 Synthesis of glucose from amino acids or triglycerides is called 
 . 
	14.	 The major nitrogenous waste resulting from protein catabolism 
is 
 . 
	15.	 The organ that synthesizes the nitrogenous waste in question 
14 is the 
 . 
	16.	 The hormone 
 is the main regulator of the absorptive 
state. 
	17.	 The temperature of organs in the body cavities is called 
 . 
	18.	 The appetite hormones leptin and ghrelin act on the 
 , 
an ­important brain center for appetite regulation. 
	19.	 In the process of anaerobic fermentation, pyruvate is reduced 
to 
 . 
	20.	 A biochemist or physiologist would generally use the term 
 and the abbreviation 
 for what a dietitian 
would call one Calorie or 1,000 calories. 
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Ghrelin and leptin are two hormones that stimulate the 
­appetite. 
	 2.	 Water is not considered a nutrient because we don’t digest it 
and it contains no calories. 
	 3.	 A gram of sugar contains more than twice as much energy as a 
gram of fat. 
	 4.	 Most of the body’s cholesterol comes from the diet. 
	 5.	 Most of the liver’s functions are digestive. 
	 6.	 Even under anaerobic conditions, the mitochondria can 
­produce a little ATP. 
	 7.	 The shell body temperature is defined as the temperature of the 
skin and subcutaneous fat. 
	 8.	 Gluconeogenesis occurs especially in the absorptive state 
­during and shortly after a meal. 
	 9.	 Dangerously high levels of blood ketone bodies can result from 
excessively low-fat diet fads. 
	10.	 At a comfortable air temperature, the body loses more heat by 
conduction than by any other means. 
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Cyanide blocks the transfer of electrons from the final 
­cytochrome to oxygen in the electron-transport chain. In light 
of this, explain why it causes sudden death. Also explain 
whether cyanide poisoning could be treated by giving a patient 
supplemental oxygen, and justify your answer. 
	 2.	 People with type 1 diabetes mellitus inject insulin to help 
lower blood sugar. Explain why they may sometimes become 
­hypoglycemic (experience low blood sugar). What hormone 
would be secreted to counteract the effects of hypoglycemia? 
	 3.	 Your friend is trying to reduce his cholesterol and is 
­discouraged. He says to you, “I only eat foods that say they 
are cholesterol-free on the labels! How could I still have high 
cholesterol?” Explain to your friend why he still may have 
high cholesterol even if he eats foods that are advertised as 
cholesterol-free. 
CHAPTER 18   Nutrition and Metabolism      627  

Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Chromosome structure (see fig. 3.16) 
• Mitosis (see section 3.4) 
• Gonadotropins of the pituitary (see section 11.3)
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter Outline
19.1 Essentials of Sexual Reproduction
19.2 The Male Reproductive System
• Anatomy 
• From Puberty to Andropause 
19.3 The Female Reproductive System
• The Ovaries and Reproductive Tract 
• External Genitalia 
• Breasts 
• From Puberty to Menopause 
19.4 The Production and Union of Sex Cells
• Meiosis and Gametogenesis 
• Spermatogenesis, Sperm, and Semen 
• Oogenesis and the Ovarian–Menstrual 
Cycle 
• Uniting the Gametes 
19.5 Pregnancy, Childbirth, and Lactation
• Pregnancy 
• Childbirth 
• Postpartum Changes 
• Lactation 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 19.1: Prostate Diseases
• Clinical Application 19.2: Cervical Cancer 
• Perspectives on Health
End of Chapter
• Aging of the Reproductive System  
• Career Spotlight: Midwife
• Connective Issues
• Study Guide
The Reproductive 
System
19
Chapter
 Module 14: Reproductive System
PART 6  Human Life Cycle
Only one sperm will enter this egg; the egg has mechanisms for blocking all other 
sperms from entering and giving it a lethal gene overdose.
© David M. Phillips/Science Source
628	

F
rom all we have learned of the structure and function of the 
human body, it seems a wonder that it works at all! The fact is, 
however, that even with modern medicine we cannot keep it working 
forever. The body suffers various degenerative changes as we age, 
and eventually our time is up and we must say good-bye. Yet our 
genes live on in new containers—our offspring. In this chapter, we 
examine the male and female roles in producing a new life; and in 
chapter 20, we examine the human life history from prenatal devel-
opment to old age.
The essence of sexual reproduction is that it is biparental—the offspring receive 
genes from two parents and therefore are not genetically identical to either one. 
To achieve this, the parents must produce gametes1 (sex cells) that meet and 
combine their genes in a zygote2 (fertilized egg). The gametes require two prop-
erties to succeed at this: motility so they can establish contact, and nutrients 
for the embryo. A single cell cannot perform both roles well, because to carry 
ample nutrients means to be relatively heavy, which is inconsistent with motil-
ity. Therefore, these tasks are divided between two kinds of gametes. The small 
motile one—little more than DNA with a propeller—is the sperm, and the large 
nutrient-laden one is the egg (ovum). The reproductive systems of the two 
sexes jointly serve to produce and unite these gametes, harbor the fetus and give 
birth, and nourish the infant.
19.1
 Essentials of Sexual Reproduction
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain why sexual reproduction in humans requires two differ­
ent types of gametes;
b.	enumerate the functions of the male and female reproductive 
systems; and
c.	distinguish between the gonads of the two sexes, and between 
the internal and external genitalia. 
1gam = marriage, union 
2zygo = yoke, union
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      629  

The organs that produce the gametes—the testes of the male and ovaries of the 
female—are collectively called the gonads3 or primary sex organs. In addition to 
producing gametes, they produce sex hormones with widespread effects throughout 
the body, such as bone growth and maintenance, muscle growth, hair growth, and 
fat deposition. The other organs necessary for reproduction are called secondary sex 
organs, such as the penis, uterus, mammary glands, and others to be considered in 
this chapter.
According to location, reproductive organs are also classified as external and 
internal genitalia. The external genitalia are located in the perineum between the 
thighs. Most of them are externally visible or located superficially beneath the skin. 
The internal genitalia are located mainly in the pelvic cavity, except for the male 
testes and some associated ducts in the scrotum.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	Define gonad in a way that includes the word 
gamete(s).
2.	Distinguish between a gamete and a zygote.
3.	Distinguish between internal and external genitalia.
Anatomy 
This section surveys the male reproductive system (fig. 19.1), which is con-
cerned with the production and delivery of sperm. We will proceed roughly in 
the order of sperm formation, transport, and emission, thus beginning with the 
testes, continuing through the duct system and accessory organs, and ending 
with the penis.
3gon = seed
19.2
 The Male Reproductive System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the anatomy of the male reproductive tract; 
b.	trace the pathway taken by a sperm cell from its formation to 
ejaculation, naming all the passages that it travels; 
c.	describe the structure, locations, and functions of the male 
accessory glands, scrotum, and penis; and 
d.	discuss male sexual development from puberty through 
andropause. 
630      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Urinary
bladder
Scrotum
(a)  Sagittal section
Rectum
Bulbospongiosus
muscle
Pubic
symphysis   
Prostate
Ejaculatory duct
Testis
Bulbourethral 
gland
Epididymis
Ductus (vas) deferens
Shaft of penis
Glans of penis
Prepuce
Corpus cavernosum
Seminal vesicle
Root of
penis
Urethra
Ureter
Seminal
vesicle
Ejaculatory 
duct
Bulb
Bulbourethral
gland
Corpus 
cavernosum
Corpus 
spongiosum
Testis
Penis
Urinary
bladder
Prostate
Prostatic
urethra
Membranous
urethra
Ductus deferens
Spongy (penile)
urethra
Glans of penis
(b) Posterior view
Epididymis
Corpus spongiosum
Figure 19.1 The Male Reproductive 
System. 
 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      631  

The Testes
The testes (testicles) produce both sex hormones and sperm. They are oval and 
slightly flattened, about 4 cm long and 2.5 cm wide (fig. 19.2). The testis has a 
white fibrous capsule with extensions (septa) that divide the interior tissue into 
about 300 wedge-shaped lobules. Each lobule contains one to three seminiferous4 
tubules (SEM-ih-NIF-er-us)—slender ducts up to 70 cm long each, in which the 
Ductus
deferens
Spermatic cord
Epididymis
Epididymis
Testis
Scrotum
(folded down)
Ductus deferens
(a)
(b)
Spermatic
cord
Blood vessels
and nerves
Seminiferous
tubule
Lobule
Septum
2 cm
50 μm
(d)
(c)
Seminiferous
tubule
Interstitial
endocrine cells
Germ cells
Sperm tails
Nurse cell
Figure 19.2 The Testis and Associated Struc-
tures. (a) The scrotum is opened and folded down­
ward to reveal the testis and associated organs. (b) 
Anatomy of the testis, epididymis, and spermatic 
cord. (c) Electron micrograph of a seminiferous tu­
bule. (d) Light micrograph. 
a: © McGraw-Hill Education/ Dennis Strete, photographer;
c: © Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source; d: © Ed Reschke
4semin = seed, sperm; fer = to carry
632      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

sperm are produced. Between the tubules are clusters of  interstitial endocrine 
cells, the source of testosterone.
A seminiferous tubule has a narrow lumen lined by a thick epithelium  
(fig. 19.2c, d). The epithelium consists of several layers of germ cells in the process 
of becoming sperm, and a much smaller number of tall nurse cells (supporting  
cells, sustentocytes5), which support and protect the germ cells and promote 
their development. The germ cells depend on the nurse cells for physical support, 
­nutrients, waste removal, growth factors, protection from the immune system, and 
other needs. The nurse cells also secrete a hormone, inhibin, that regulates the rate 
of sperm production, as we will see later.
The Epididymis, Ductus Deferens, and Urethra
Mature sperm drift slowly down the seminiferous tubules and leave the testis by 
way of about 12 short ducts on its posterior side. These lead to an organ called 
the epididymis6 (EP-ih-DID-ih-miss) that adheres to the posterior side of the testis 
(fig. 19.2a, b). The epididymis, a site of sperm maturation and storage, contains a 
single coiled duct embedded in connective tissue. The duct is about 6 m (20 ft) long, 
but it is so slender and highly coiled that it’s packed into an epididymis only 7.5 cm 
long. It reabsorbs about 90% of the fluid secreted by the testis. Sperm mature as they 
travel down the epididymis over a period of about 20 days. They are stored here and 
in the adjacent portion of the ductus deferens, which follows. Stored sperm remain 
fertile for 40 to 60 days, but if they become too old without being ejaculated, they 
disintegrate and the epididymis reabsorbs them.
The duct of the epididymis straightens out at the inferior end, turns 180°, 
and becomes the ductus deferens. This is a muscular tube about 45 cm long and 
2.5 mm in diameter. It has a very narrow lumen and a thick wall of smooth muscle 
important in ejaculation. It used to be called the vas deferens, which is the basis of 
the term vasectomy, the male method of contraception that entails cutting out a short 
segment of the duct at the rear of the scrotum to interrupt the flow of sperm. The 
ductus deferens travels upward through a passage in the groin, the inguinal canal, 
and enters the pelvic cavity. There, it turns medially and approaches the urinary 
bladder. Posterior to the bladder, the ductus deferens ends by uniting with the duct 
of the seminal vesicle, a gland considered later. The two ducts unite into a short 
(2 cm) passage called the ejaculatory duct, which passes through the prostate gland 
and empties into the urethra (fig. 19.1).
The male urethra is shared by the reproductive and urinary systems, although 
it cannot pass urine and semen simultaneously. It is about 20 cm long and consists 
of three regions: the prostatic urethra embedded in the prostate, the short membra-
nous urethra passing through the pelvic floor, and the long spongy (penile) urethra 
­passing through the penis (fig. 19.1).
The Scrotum
The testes are contained in the scrotum,7 a pendulous pouch of skin, muscle, and 
fibrous connective tissue (fig. 19.3). The left testis is usually suspended lower than 
the right so the two are not compressed against each other between the thighs. The 
scrotum is divided into right and left compartments by a median septum.
The scrotum also contains the epididymis and spermatic cord associated with 
each testis. The spermatic cord is a fibrous bundle that contains the ductus deferens, 
blood and lymphatic vessels, and nerves. It passes upward behind and superior to the 
testis, then anterior to the pubis and into the inguinal canal.
5sustento = support 
6epi = upon; didym = twins, testes 
7scrotum = bag 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      633  

Connective tissue fasciae
Spermatic cord:
Epididymis
Tunica vaginalis
Testis
Cremaster
Testicular artery
Ductus deferens
Pampiniform plexus
Shaft
Prepuce (foreskin)
Glans
Median septum of scrotum
Cremaster
Dartos fascia
Scrotal skin
Sperm production requires a temperature of about 35°C—or 2°C cooler than 
the temperature in the pelvic cavity—and the scrotum has three mechanisms for 
controlling testicular temperature. In response to cold, a muscle of the spermatic 
cord called the cremaster8 contracts and draws the testes closer to the body, 
while the dartos fascia, a layer of smooth muscle beneath the skin, contracts and 
tautens the scrotum. When warmer, the cremaster and dartos both relax and the 
testes are suspended farther away from the pelvic floor. In addition, the spermatic 
cord has a network of veins, the pampiniform plexus, that carries heat away 
from the arterial blood on its way to the testis, preventing the warm blood from 
overheating the testis.
The testes begin their fetal development high in the abdominal cavity near the 
kidneys. As the fetus grows, the testes descend and eventually pass through the 
inguinal canal into the scrotum. About 3% of boys are born with the testes still 
in the pelvic cavity, a condition called cryptorchidism (undescended testes). If 
uncorrected, this condition will lead to sterility because sperm cannot develop at 
the pelvic cavity temperature. The condition can be corrected with a testosterone 
­injection or a minor surgery to bring the testes into the scrotum.
The Seminal Vesicles
A pair of glands called seminal vesicles (seminal glands) occurs on the posterior 
side of the urinary bladder (see fig. 19.1). Each has a connective tissue capsule, 
smooth muscle, and a single, highly convoluted and branched duct that exits the 
gland and joins the ductus deferens. The vesicles produce a yellowish secretion that 
forms about 60% of the semen. Its composition and functions are discussed later.
Figure 19.3 The Scrotum and Spermatic 
Cord. The cremaster, pampiniform plexus, and dar­
tos fascia serve in various mechanisms for regulat­
ing the temperature of the testis. 
 
8cremaster = suspender
634      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

The Prostate
The prostate9 (PROSS-tate) surrounds the urethra and ejaculatory duct immedi-
ately inferior to the urinary bladder (Clinical Application 19.1). It measures about 
2 × 4 × 3 cm and opens into the prostatic urethra by numerous pores in the urethral 
wall. The thin, milky secretion of the prostate constitutes about 30% of the semen. 
Its functions, too, are considered later.
The Bulbourethral Glands
The bulbourethral glands are brownish, spherical glands about 1 cm in diameter, 
with a short duct to the uretha at the root of the penis (see fig. 19.1). During sexual 
arousal, they produce a clear slippery fluid that provides some of the lubrication 
for intercourse, but more importantly, neutralizes the acidity of residual urine in the 
urethra (thus protecting the sperm).
The Penis
The penis10 serves to deposit semen in the vagina. The externally visible portion of 
it, composed of the shaft and glans11 (fig. 19.4), is half its total length. In the flaccid 
(nonerect) state, the external portion measures about 8 to 10 cm (3–4 in.) long and 
3 cm in diameter; the typical dimensions of an erect penis are 13 to 18 cm (5–7 in.) 
long and 4 cm in diameter. The glans is the expanded head at the distal end of the 
penis with the external urethral orifice at its tip. 
The skin is loosely attached to the shaft, allowing for movement and expan-
sion during erection. It continues over the glans as the prepuce (­foreskin). 
Clinical Application 19.1
PROSTATE DISEASES
The prostate remains at a stable size from age 20 to 45 or so, then begins to 
grow slowly. By age 70, over 90% of men show some degree of noncancerous 
enlargement called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). The main concern in 
BPH is that it compresses the urethra, makes it harder to empty the bladder, 
requires more frequent urination since the bladder refills more quickly, and 
may promote bladder and kidney infections.
Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men (after lung 
cancer); it affects about 9% of men over the age of 50. Tumors tend to form 
near the periphery of the gland, where they don’t obstruct urine flow and 
easily go unnoticed until they cause pain. Prostate cancer can metastasize to  
nearby lymph nodes and then to the lungs and other organs. Once it metasta-
sizes, it has a 50% to 90% mortality rate, but is highly survivable if detected 
and treated before then. It can be detected by palpation through the rectal wall, 
called digital rectal examination (DRE), or by blood tests for certain prostatic 
enzymes. One of these enzymes is known as prostate-specific antigen, so the 
blood assay is called a PSA test. Prostate cancer grows so slowly that if it is 
discovered late in life, the risks of surgery may be greater than the risk of 
metastasis; a patient and doctor may opt just to “keep an eye on it” and forego 
treatment if it presents no imminent threat.
9pro = before; stat = to stand; avoid the misspelling prostrate 
10penis = tail 
11glans = acorn
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      635  

Dorsal vein
Dorsal nerve
Dorsal artery
Deep artery
Corpus cavernosum
Tunica 
albuginea
Urethra
Corpus spongiosum
Prepuce
Glans of penis
Frenulum
External urethral oriﬁce
(a)
(b)
Ventral
Dorsal
Lacunae
Skin
Superﬁcial fascia
Deep fascia
Median septum
Corpus spongiosum
The inner ­surface of the prepuce and facing surface of the glans are covered 
with a thin mucous membrane similar to the inner surface of the eyelid. In 
infancy and childhood, these two membranes are fused to each other; attempts 
to retract the foreskin of an infant or child can be injurious. The membranes 
separate gradually in later childhood and adolescence. The adult prepuce 
remains anchored to the proximal margin of the glans by a ventral fold of tissue 
called the frenulum.  The prepuce is the most densely innervated and sensi-
tive region of the penis, with an abundance of tactile corpuscles and nerves. 
Circumcision thus removes the most sensitive part of the penis. The exposed 
mucous membrane of the glans then transforms to a thin, drier, and less sensi-
tive epidermis. 
Internally, the penis consists mainly of three cylindrical bodies called 
erectile tissues (fig. 19.4b), which fill with blood during sexual arousal and 
account for its enlargement and erection. A single erectile body, the corpus 
spongiosum, passes along the ventral side of the penis and encloses the urethra. 
It expands at the distal end to fill the entire glans. The upper side of the penis 
has a pair of erectile tissues called corpora cavernosa (singular, corpus caver-
nosum), which extend only as far as the margin of the glans. They are separated 
by a median septum and sheathed in a tight fibrous tunic, which plays a role in 
erection explained later.
All three cylinders of erectile tissue are spongy in appearance and con-
tain tiny blood sinuses called lacunae. The partitions between lacunae, called 
trabeculae, are composed of connective tissue and smooth muscle. In the 
flaccid penis, muscle tone collapses the lacunae, which appear as tiny slits in 
the tissue.
Figure 19.4 Anatomy of the Penis. (a) Superfi­
cial dissection of shaft, lateral view. (b) Cross section 
at midshaft. 
636      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

At the body surface, the penis turns 90° posteriorly and continues inward as the 
root. The corpus spongiosum ends internally as a dilated bulb, which is ensheathed 
in the bulbospongiosus muscle. The corpora cavernosa diverge like the arms of a 
Y and attach the penis to the pubic arch of the pelvic girdle.
From Puberty to Andropause
Unlike any other organ system, the reproductive system remains dormant for sev-
eral years after birth. Around age 10 to 12 in most boys and 8 to 10 in girls, a surge 
of pituitary gonadotropins awakens the reproductive system and begins preparing 
it for adult reproductive function. Adolescence12 is the period from the onset of 
gonadotropin secretion and reproductive development until a person attains full 
adult height, usually in the late teens to early twenties. Puberty13 is the first few 
years of adolescence, until the first menstrual period in girls and the first ejaculation 
of viable sperm in boys. In North America, this is typically attained around age 12 
in girls and 14 in boys.
As the brain matures, the hypothalamus begins to secrete gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH). GnRH stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to 
secrete two gonadotropins—follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing 
hormone (LH). Although named for their functions in females, LH also stimu-
lates the interstitial endocrine cells of the testis to secrete testosterone, and FSH 
renders the seminiferous tubules more sensitive to testosterone. Without FSH, the 
tubules don’t respond to testosterone at all. Testosterone produces many conspicu-
ous effects on the adolescent male:
∙	 Growth of the sex organs, beginning with the testes and scrotum, then 
the penis and internal ducts and glands. This is accompanied by sperm  
production. 
∙	 A burst of generalized body growth, due especially to elongation of the 
limb bones and increasing muscle mass under the influence of both tes-
tosterone and growth hormone. This is accompanied by enlargement of 
the larynx, deepening of the voice, and an elevated metabolic rate and 
appetite. 
∙	 Appearance of pubic hair, axillary hair, and later, the facial hair, along with 
the apocrine sweat glands in these areas. 
∙	 Awakening of the sex drive, or libido, accompanied by frequent erection and 
spontaneous ejaculation, especially in the sleep (nocturnal emission or “wet 
dreams”). 
Throughout adulthood, testosterone sustains the male reproductive tract, sperm 
production, and libido. The nurse cells also secrete a hormone called inhibin. By 
inhibiting FSH but not LH secretion, this hormone can slow down sperm production 
without reducing the body’s other responses to testosterone.
Testosterone secretion peaks at about 7 mg/day at age 20, then declines steadily 
to as little as one-fifth of this level by age 80. Since testicular hormones normally 
inhibit pituitary gonadotropin secretion, the declining level of testosterone is 
­accompanied by a rising level of FSH and LH after age 50. These hormonal changes 
may produce effects that some call andropause or male climacteric. Andropause 
has little or no noticeable effect in most men, but in some cases there are mood 
changes, hot flashes, or illusions of suffocation—symptoms similar to those of 
menopause in women. Men normally produce sperm to the end of life, although in 
reduced numbers.
12adolesc = to grow up 
13pub = body hair, or puber = grown up
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      637  

We will soon explore the process of sperm production and physiology of 
­intercourse for the male, but first we will survey the female reproductive system. 
We can then take a more integrative view of what sperm and egg production, as well 
as the responses of intercourse, have in common for both sexes.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
4.	What are seminiferous tubules? What types of cells 
compose them? What is their relationship to the interstitial 
endocrine cells? 
5.	Describe the pathway taken by the sperm from the time 
they leave the testis until they are ejaculated. What point in 
this pathway is the main storage place for sperm awaiting 
ejaculation? 
6.	Describe three ways in which the body regulates the 
temperature of the testes, and explain why this is important. 
7.	 Name the three accessory glands of the male reproductive 
system, describe their locations, and state their functions. 
8.	What are the two kinds of erectile tissues in the penis, and 
where are they located? 
9.	What pituitary hormones regulate the secretion and action of 
testosterone? Describe several effects of testosterone. 
The female reproductive system is more complex than the male’s because it 
serves more purposes. Whereas the male needs only to produce and deliver 
gametes, the female must do these as well as provide nutrition and safe harbor 
for embryonic and fetal development, then give birth and nourish the infant. 
Furthermore, female reproductive physiology is more conspicuously cyclic, 
and female hormones are secreted in a more complex sequence compared 
with the relatively steady, simultaneous secretion of regulatory hormones in 
the male. 
19.3   The Female Reproductive System
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the anatomy and histology of the ovaries; 
b.	describe the gross anatomy and histology of the female repro­
ductive tract; 
c.	describe the structure and function of the glands and other ac­
cessory organs of the female reproductive system; and 
d.	 discuss female sexual development from puberty through 
menopause. 
638      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Primary 
follicle
Tertiary
follicle
Secondary
follicle
Suspensory ligament
and blood vessels
Mature
follicle
Oocyte
Ovulated
oocyte
Corpus
luteum
Corpus
albicans
Ovarian
ligament
Primordial
follicles
Fimbriae
of uterine
tube
Medulla
Cortex
The Ovaries and Reproductive Tract
The female reproductive tract consists of a pair of uterine (fallopian) tubes, the uterus, 
and the vagina. The ovaries, strictly speaking, are not part of the reproductive tract, 
but are most conveniently considered here as a starting point for our description.
The Ovaries
The ovaries14 (fig. 19.5) are the female gonads; they produce egg cells (ova) and 
sex hormones. Each ovary lies in a shallow depression of the posterior pelvic wall 
and is held in place by several connective tissue ligaments (see fig. 19.7). The ovary 
is almond-shaped, about 3 cm long, 1.5 cm wide, and 1 cm thick. It is enclosed 
in a white fibrous capsule, and internally it is loosely divided into a central core 
(medulla) of fibrous connective tissue and blood vessels, and an outer zone (cortex) 
where the eggs develop.
Unlike the testis, the ovary has no ducts. Instead, each egg develops in its own 
bubblelike follicle and is released by ovulation, the bursting of the follicle. A child’s 
ovaries are smooth-surfaced, but during the reproductive years, they become cor-
rugated with bulges created by growing follicles. Figure 19.5 shows several types of 
follicles that coincide with different stages of egg maturation, as discussed later. The 
wall of each follicle, composed in mature follicles of inner, multilayered granulosa 
cells and an outer husk called a theca, is the source of the female sex hormones, 
particularly estrogens and progesterone. We will later examine these follicles, their 
cyclic development, and their endocrine functions in more detail. 
Figure 19.5 Structure of the Ovary. Arrows 
indicate the developmental sequence of the ovar­
ian follicles; the follicles do not migrate around the 
ovary, and not all the follicle types illustrated here 
are present simultaneously. 
 
14ov = egg; ary = place for
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      639  

Uterine tube
Urinary bladder
Ovary
Fundus of uterus
Vaginal oriﬁce
Rectum
Pubic symphysis
Fimbriae
Cervix of uterus
Anus
Prepuce
Labium minus
Labium majus
Mons pubis
Urethra
Peritoneum
Clitoris
Body of uterus
Figure 19.6 The Female Pelvic Cavity and Re-
productive Organs (Sagittal Section). 
 
The Uterine Tubes
The uterine (fallopian15) tube is a muscular canal about 10 cm long that extends 
from each ovary to the uterus (fig. 19.6). At the distal (ovarian) end, it flares into 
a trumpetlike infundibulum16 with feathery projections called fimbriae17 (FIM-
bree-ee) for catching an ovulated egg. The mucosa of the uterine tube is folded into 
longitudinal ridges and has an epithelium of ciliated cells and a smaller number of 
secretory cells (fig. 19.7a). The cilia beat toward the uterus and, with the help of mus-
cular contractions of the tube, convey the egg or developing embryo in that direction.
The Uterus
The uterus18 (figs. 19.6 and 19.7) is a muscular chamber that opens into the roof 
of the vagina and usually tilts forward over the urinary bladder. It harbors the fetus, 
provides nutrition, and expels the fetus at the end of its development. It is ­somewhat 
pear-shaped, with a broad superior curvature called the fundus, a midportion 
called the body, and a cylindrical inferior end called the cervix. The nonpregnant 
uterus measures about 7 cm from cervix to fundus, 4 cm wide at its broadest point 
on the fundus, and 2.5 cm thick, but it expands enormously during pregnancy to 
accommodate the growing fetus.
15Gabriele Fallopio (1523−62), Italian anatomist and physician 
16infundibulum = funnel 
17fimbria = fringe 
18uterus = womb
640      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Ovarian artery
Ovarian vein
Ovary
Ligaments
Uterine tube
Ovarian ligament
Body
Fundus
Uterine tube
Infundibulum
Fimbriae
Endometrium
Myometrium
Perimetrium
Cervix
Vagina
Cervical canal
(b)
(a)
Uterine
tube
Ligament
(c)
Ovary
The lumen is roughly triangular, with its upper corners opening into the uterine 
tubes and the lower end communicating with the vagina by way of a narrow passage 
through the cervix called the cervical canal (fig. 19.7b). The canal contains glands 
that secrete mucus, thought to inhibit the spread of microorganisms from the vagina 
into the uterus.
The uterine wall consists of a thin external serosa called the perimetrium, a thick 
middle layer called the myometrium, and an inner mucosa called the ­endometrium. 
The myometrium19 consists mainly of smooth muscle and is responsible for the 
labor contractions that help to expel the fetus.
The endometrium20 has a simple columnar epithelium and deep glandular pits 
with coiled spiral arteries between them (see fig. 19.16). The superficial half to  
two-thirds of the endometrium, called the functional layer, is shed in each ­menstrual 
period. The deeper layer, called the basal layer, stays behind and regenerates a new 
functional layer in the next cycle. When pregnancy occurs, the endometrium is the 
site of attachment of the embryo and forms part of the placenta from which the fetus 
is nourished.
Figure 19.7 The Female Reproductive Tract. 
(a) Electron micrograph of the mucosa of the uter­
ine tube, showing ciliated cells (yellow) and mucous 
cells (red). (b) Posterior view of the reproductive tract 
and associated organs. (c) Relationship of the ovary 
to ligaments of the uterus and uterine tube. 
 
a: © Science Source
19myo = muscle; metr = uterus 
20endo = inside; metr = uterus
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      641  

The Vagina
The vagina23 (see figs. 19.6 and 19.7) is a tube 8 to 10 cm long that allows for 
the discharge of menstrual fluid, receipt of the penis and semen, and birth of 
a baby. The vaginal wall is thin but very distensible. It has no glands, but it is 
lubricated by serous fluid seeping through its wall and mucus draining from 
the cervix. The vaginal epithelium is nonkeratinized stratified squamous—the 
form of tissue best adapted for lubrication and abrasion resistance. Its cells are 
rich in glycogen. ­Bacteria ferment this to lactic acid, which produces a low 
vaginal pH (about 3.5–4.0) that inhibits the growth of pathogens.
(a) Normal cells
(b) Malignant (CIN III) cells
Figure 19.8 Pap Smears. These are smears of epithelial cells from the cervix. In the malignant (cancerous) cells, note the loss of cell volume 
and the greatly enlarged nuclei.
a: © SPL/Science Source; b: © Parviz M. Pour/Science Source
Clinical Application 19.2
CERVICAL CANCER
Cervical cancer occurs most often among women from ages 30 to 50, 
­especially those who smoke, began sexual activity at an early age, or have 
histories of ­frequent sexually transmitted diseases or cervical inflammation. 
It is often caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV) (see Perspectives on 
Health in the next section). Cervical cancer usually begins in the lower cervix, 
develops slowly, and remains a local, easily removed lesion for several years. 
If the cancerous cells spread to the subepithelial connective tissue, however, 
the cancer is said to be invasive and is much more dangerous.
The best protection against cervical cancer is early detection by means of 
a Pap21 smear (fig. 19.8). Loose cells are scraped from the cervix and micro-
scopically examined for signs of dysplasia (abnormal development) or car-
cinoma (cancer). Different grades of abnormality call for measures ranging 
from a repeat smear in a few months to a biopsy. Confirmed ­cases of cervical 
cancer can be treated with radiation therapy, electrosurgical ­excision, or hys-
terectomy.22 From age 21 to 65, women are advised to have a Pap smear every 
3 years. Pap smears are not recommended before age 21 or after 65.
21George N. Papanicolaou (1883−1962), Greek-American physician and cytologis 
22hyster = uterus; ectomy = cutting out 
23vagina = sheath
642      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

At the vaginal orifice, the mucosa folds inward and forms a membrane, the 
hymen, which stretches across the opening. The hymen has one or more openings 
to allow menstrual fluid to pass through, but it usually ruptures during or before the 
first intercourse, sometimes in the course of medical examinations, tampon use, or 
exercise.
External Genitalia
The external genitalia of the female are collectively called the vulva24; they include 
the mons pubis, labia majora and minora, clitoris, vaginal orifice, and accessory 
glands and erectile tissues (fig. 19.9).
The mons25 pubis is an anterior mound of adipose tissue and skin overlying 
the pubic symphysis, bearing most of the pubic hair. The labia majora26 (singular, 
labium majus) are a pair of thick folds of skin and adipose tissue forming the lateral 
borders of the vulva; they bear pubic hair only on their lateral surfaces. Medial 
to these are the hairless labia minora27 (singular, labium minus), much thinner 
because they are not adipose. The area enclosed by them, called the vestibule, con-
tains the urinary and vaginal orifices. At the anterior margin of the vestibule, the 
labia minora meet and form a hoodlike prepuce over the clitoris.
The clitoris28 (CLIT-er-is, cli-TOR-is) consists of a pair of corpora cavernosa, 
similar to the dorsal half of the penis; it has no corpus spongiosum and it does 
not enclose the urethra. Only its head, the glans, is external, protruding slightly 
from the prepuce; a leglike crus anchors it to the pelvic girdle on each side. The 
function of the clitoris is entirely sensory, serving as the primary center of sexual 
stimulation.
Just deep to the labia majora, a pair of subcutaneous erectile tissues called the 
vestibular bulbs brackets the vagina like parentheses. They become congested 
with blood during sexual excitement and cause the vagina to tighten somewhat 
around the penis, enhancing sexual stimulation for both partners. On each side 
of the vagina is a pea-size greater vestibular gland with a short duct opening 
into the vestibule or lower vagina. These glands moisten the vulva, and during 
sexual excitement they provide most of the lubrication for intercourse. The vesti-
bule is also lubricated by a number of lesser vestibular glands. A pair of mucous 
paraurethral glands opens into the vestibule near the external urethral orifice. 
They eject fluid, sometimes abundantly, during orgasm. They arise from the same 
embryonic structure as the male’s prostate, and their fluid is similar to the pros-
tatic secretion.
Breasts
The breast (fig. 19.10) is a mound of tissue overlying the pectoralis major in both 
the male and female. The female breast markedly enlarges at puberty and remains 
so for life, but usually contains very little mammary gland. The mammary gland 
develops within the breast during pregnancy, remains active in the lactating breast, 
and atrophies when a woman ceases to nurse.
The breast has two principal regions: the conical to pendulous body, with 
the nipple at its apex, and an extension toward the armpit called the axillary 
tail. Lymphatics of the axillary tail are especially important as a route of breast 
cancer metastasis, making this region particularly important to include in breast 
self-examination.
Urethral
oriﬁce
Vaginal oriﬁce
Anus
Vestibule
Prepuce
Clitoris
Mons pubis 
Hymen
Labium majus
Labium minus
Vaginal
oriﬁce
Anus
Clitoris
Vestibular
bulb
Greater 
vestibular
gland
Glans
Crus
(b)
(a)
Pubic
symphysis
Urethral
oriﬁce
Paraurethral 
gland
Figure 19.9 The Female Perineum. (a) Surface 
anatomy. (b) Subcutaneous structures. 
 
24vulva = covering 
25mons = mound, eminence; pub = body hair 
26labia = lip; major = larger, greater 
27labia = lips; minor = smaller, lesser 
28origin uncertain; possibly from kleis = door key, or klei + ein = to close 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      643  

The nipple is surrounded by a circular colored zone, the areola. Dermal blood 
capillaries and nerves come closer to the surface here than in the ­surrounding skin 
and make the areola more sensitive and deeper in color. The areola has sparse 
hairs and areolar glands, visible as small bumps on the surface. The areolar 
glands and sebaceous glands of the region oil the skin and help to prevent chap-
ping in a nursing mother.
Internally, the nonlactating breast is mostly adipose and collagenous tissue 
(fig. 19.10b). Breast size is determined by the adipose tissue and is unrelated to 
the amount of milk the mammary gland can produce. Even in the nonlactating 
Figure 19.10 The Breast. Parts (a), (c), and (d) 
depict the breast in a lactating state. Some of the 
features in (a) and (c) are absent from the nonlactat­
ing breast in part (b). The cluster of lobules boxed in 
(c) would contain numerous microscopic acini like 
the ones in (d). 
b: From Anatomy & Physiology Revealed, © McGraw-Hill Education/
The University of Toledo, photography and dissection;  
d: © Dr. Donald Fawcett/Science Source
Adipose tissue
Lobe
Lobules
Areolar glands
Areola
Nipple
Lactiferous sinus
Lactiferous ducts
Secretory cells
Lobules
Lobe
Adipose tissue
Nipple
Lactiferous sinus
Lactiferous duct
Myoepithelial cells
Rib
Intercostal muscles
Pectoralis minor
Pectoralis major
Fascia
(a) Anterior view, lactating breast
(b) Cadaver breast, nonlactating
(c) Sagittal section, lactating breast
(d) Mammary acini
644      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

breast, the region of the areola exhibits a system of short lactiferous29 ducts lead-
ing to the nipple. During pregnancy, these branch and develop into 15 to 20 lobes 
of glandular tissue arranged radially around the nipple. Each lobe has numerous 
secretory acini (fig. 19.10d) drained by one lactiferous duct, which dilates to form 
a lactiferous sinus just before opening onto the skin surface. Lactation and func-
tional details of the mammary acinus are discussed at the end of this chapter.
From Puberty to Menopause
Female puberty is under much the same hormonal control as that of the male, 
although it begins at a slightly younger age—typically age 9 or 10 in the United 
States and Europe, but as young as age 3 in 1% to 3% of girls. Rising levels of 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulate the anterior pituitary gland to 
secrete follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). FSH, 
especially, stimulates development of the ovarian follicles, which, in turn, secrete 
estrogens, progesterone, inhibin, and a small amount of androgen. Estrogens30 are 
feminizing hormones with widespread effects on the body.
The earliest noticeable sign of female puberty is breast development, begin-
ning with the breast bud, a small conical elevation of the areola. The lobules and 
ducts develop early under the influence of estrogens, progesterone, and other hor-
mones, followed by the growth of adipose and fibrous tissue and development of the 
bud into a fuller breast. Breast development is complete around age 20, but minor 
changes occur in each menstrual cycle and major changes in pregnancy. The onset 
of breast development is soon followed by the appearance of pubic and axillary hair, 
sebaceous (oil) glands, and axillary (underarm) glands.
Next comes the first menstrual period, called menarche31 (men-AR-kee). This 
occurs when a girl attains about 17% body fat, and therefore depends on nutrition. 
The average age at menarche in Europe and America is now about 12. Menarche 
doesn’t necessarily signify fertility. A girl’s first few cycles are typically anovula-
tory (no egg is ovulated), probably because it takes an egg cell about 290 days to 
reach maturity and readiness to ovulate. Most girls don’t ovulate regularly until a 
year or more after they begin menstruating.
Estrogen stimulates growth of the ovaries and secondary sex organs, and the 
secretion of growth hormone. This brings about a rapid increase in height, widen-
ing of the pelvis, and the fat deposition that contours the maturing female body. 
Inhibin is secreted in girls, as it is in boys, and regulates the development of eggs 
and follicles.
Around the age of 45 to 55, women, like men, go through a midlife change in 
hormone secretion called the climacteric. In women, it is accompanied by meno-
pause, the cessation of menstruation. A female is born with hundreds of thousands 
of eggs in her ovaries, each in its own follicle. The older she gets, the fewer follicles 
remain. Climacteric begins not at any specific age, but when she has only about 
1,000 follicles left. Even the remaining follicles secrete less estrogen and proges-
terone. The drop in ovarian hormones brings about various degrees of atrophy in 
the uterus, vagina, breasts, skin, and bones. Blood vessels constrict and dilate in 
response to shifting hormone balances, and the sudden dilation of cutaneous arteries 
may cause hot flashes—a spreading sense of heat from the abdomen to the tho-
rax, neck, and face, commonly accompanied by sweating and sometimes headaches 
resulting from the sudden dilation of arteries in the head. It is difficult to precisely 
establish the time of menopause because the menstrual periods can stop for several 
months and then begin again. Menopause is generally considered to have occurred 
when there has been no menstruation for a year or more.
29lact = milk; fer = to carry 
30estro = desire, frenzy; gen = to produce 
31men = monthly; arche = beginning
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      645  

Before You Go On
 Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
10.	What structure in the ovary serves the same purpose 
as seminiferous tubules in the testis? In what ways does it 
differ from a seminiferous tubule? 
 11.	What structure transports an egg from the ovary to the 
uterus? What feature within this structure moves the egg 
along this route? 
 12.	Name the upper, middle, and lower parts of the uterus and 
the three layers of the uterine wall. 
 13.	Identify all structures enclosed within the labia majora, 
including the subcutaneous glands, and describe their 
relative positions. 
 14.	What is the difference between the breast and mammary 
gland? What traces of mammary gland can be found in the 
nonlactating breast? 
 15.	What hormone from the brain stimulates the onset of 
puberty? How does that hormone lead to the production of 
estrogen?  
19.4   The Production and Union 
of Sex Cells
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	explain the relevance of meiosis to sexual reproduction, state the 
stages of meiosis, and describe how it differs from mitosis; 
b.	describe the stages in the production of sperm and eggs, how 
these stages relate to meiosis, and the major differences be­
tween sperm and egg production; 
c.	give a functional description of the major components of semen 
and sperm cells; 
d.	relate the process of egg production to the cyclic changes in the 
ovary and uterus; 
e.	describe the production of eggs and how it is correlated with 
cyclic changes in the ovaries and uterus; and 
f.	 describe the physiological processes that occur in the male and 
female during sexual intercourse. 
The essence of reproduction is the production and fusion of gametes—eggs and 
sperm. We’ve examined male and female structures associated with reproduction. 
Now let’s see how sex cells are produced and how they get together.
646      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Meiosis and Gametogenesis
Sexual reproduction greatly increases genetic diversity, thereby enhancing species 
survival, but it poses a problem: Human cells normally have 46 chromosomes, and 
two cells—one from each parent—unite to produce a child. What’s to prevent the 
child from having 92 chromosomes per cell, and the generation after that having 
184, and so on? Sexual reproduction has to avoid such doubling of the chromosome 
number in each new generation. This is where meiosis32 comes in.
To understand meiosis, it is important to know that the chromosomes of most 
cells occur in 23 pairs—designated chromosomes 1 through 22 and one pair of 
sex chromosomes, designated X and Y in the male and two Xs in the female. In all 
23 pairs, one chromosome was contributed by the individual’s mother and the other 
by the father. Within each pair except the male’s XY, the two chromosomes look 
identical, carry genes for the same traits, and are called homologous chromosomes. 
Any cell that has 23 chromosome pairs (46 chromosomes in all) is called a diploid 
cell, symbolized 2n. In contrast, the germ cells (sperm, eggs, and some of the devel-
opmental stages leading to them) have 23 unpaired chromosomes, and are called 
haploid (n). One function of meiosis is to reduce diploid stem cells to haploid germ 
cells; this is why meiosis is also called reduction division.
Meiosis has many similarities to mitosis (see section 3.4), but several important 
differences:
	 1.	 Mitosis serves a range of functions including fetal development, childhood 
growth, and tissue maintenance and repair, whereas meiosis is used only for 
the production of gametes. 
	 2.	 Mitosis maintains a constant number of chromosomes from parent cell to 
daughter cells, whereas meiosis reduces the chromosome number from dip-
loid to haploid. 
	 3.	 Mitosis doesn’t change the genetic makeup of the chromosomes. In an early 
stage of meiosis, however, the chromosomes of each pair join and exchange 
portions of their DNA. This creates new combinations of genes—some from 
one’s mother and some from one’s father on each chromosome—so the chro-
mosomes we pass to our offspring are not the same ones that we inherited 
from our parents. 
	 4.	 In mitosis, each parent cell produces only two daughter cells. In meiosis, it 
produces four. In the male, four equal-size sperm develop from each original 
germ cell. In the female, though, three of the four daughter cells are tiny cells 
that soon die, and only one large, mature egg is produced. 
Meiosis consists of two cell divisions in succession (fig. 19.11). The first divi-
sion produces two haploid daughter cells, and the second division divides each of 
these into two more, so that the ultimate outcome is four haploid cells. In the first 
division (meiosis I), after two homologous chromosomes exchange segments of 
their DNA, they migrate to separate daughter cells. The daughter cells thus have 
only 23 chromosomes, but each chromosome retains its double-stranded form, com-
posed of two chromatids joined at the centromere (see fig. 3.19, section 3.4). In the 
second division (meiosis II), each centromere divides and each daughter cell now 
receives 23 single-stranded chromosomes.
Spermatogenesis, Sperm, and Semen
Both sperm and egg production rely on mitosis and meiosis. Sperm production 
is called spermatogenesis. In the average young man, it occurs at the remarkable 
rate of about 300,000 sperm per minute, or 400 million per day. Yet these sperm 
constitute only about 10% of the fluid that is ejaculated, called the semen. The germ 
32meio = less, fewer 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      647  

Figure 19.11 Meiosis. For simplicity, the cell is shown with only two pairs of homologous chromosomes. Human cells begin meiosis with 
23 pairs. 
 
•	 Although we pass the same genes to our offspring as we inherit from our parents, we do not pass on the same chromosomes. What event in this 
figure accounts for the latter fact?
Early prophase I
Chromatin condenses to
form visible chromosomes;
each chromosome has 2
chromatids joined by a
centromere.
Mid- to late prophase I
Homologous chromosomes 
form pairs called tetrads.
Chromatids often break
and exchange segments
(crossing-over). Centrioles
produce spindle ﬁbers.
Nuclear envelope 
disintegrates.
Metaphase I
Tetrads align on
equatorial plane of 
cell with centromeres 
attached to spindle 
ﬁbers.
Anaphase I
Homologous
chromosomes 
separate and 
migrate to opposite
poles of the cell.
Telophase I
New nuclear 
envelopes
form around
chromosomes;
cell undergoes
cytoplasmic 
division
(cytokinesis).
Each cell is 
now haploid.
Prophase II
Nuclear envelopes
disintegrate again;
chromosomes still
consist of 2 chromatids. 
New spindle forms.
Metaphase II
Chromosomes align on
equatorial plane.
Anaphase II
Centromeres divide;
sister chromatids
migrate to opposite 
poles of cell. Each
chromatid now constitutes
a single-stranded 
chromosome.
Telophase II
New nuclear envelopes
form around chromosomes;
chromosomes uncoil and
become less visible;
cytoplasm divides.
Final product is 4
haploid cells with
single-stranded
chromosomes.
Chromosome
Tetrad
Centrioles
Spindle
ﬁbers
Centromere
Equatorial
plane
Cleavage furrow
Crossing-over
Nucleus
Meiosis I (ﬁrst division)
Meiosis II (second division)
Centromere
Chromatid
648      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

cells that undergo spermatogenesis are nestled in the nurse cells of the seminiferous 
tubules until the process is complete and they are released into the tubule lumen.
Spermatogenesis
At birth, the testes contain stem cells called spermatogonia, which lie dormant for 
years around the perimeter of the seminiferous tubules. At puberty, testosterone 
reactivates them and initiates spermatogenesis. The essential steps of spermatogen-
esis are as follows (fig. 19.12), numbered to match the figure. 
 1	 Spermatogonia divide by mitosis and sustain a man’s lifetime supply of 
sperm. One daughter cell from each division remains near the tubule wall, 
maintaining a lifelong population of stem cells. The other daughter cell mi-
grates slightly away from the tubule wall on its way to dividing and differen-
tiating into sperm. 
	 2	 The latter cell enlarges and becomes a primary spermatocyte. Since this 
cell is about to undergo meiosis and become genetically different from 
other cells of the body, it must be protected from the immune system. 
Ahead of the primary spermatocyte, the tight junction between two nurse 
cells is dismantled, while a new tight junction forms behind the spermato-
cyte. The spermatocyte moves toward the lumen, like an astronaut passing 
through a double-door airlock, and is now protected by the barrier closing 
behind it. 
2
3
4
5
1
n
n
n
n
Spermatogonium
Spermatogonium
Basement membrane
of seminiferous tubule
Primary
spermatocyte
Secondary spermatocyte
Tight junction
Nurse cell
Spermatid
Spermiogenesis
Meiosis II
Meiosis I
Sperm
2n
2n
2n
n
n
Lumen of
seminiferous tubule
Cross section of
seminiferous tubules
Blood–testis barrier
Figure 19.12 Spermatogenesis. The process 
proceeds from the bottom of the figure ­(periphery 
of the seminiferous tubule) to the top (lumen of 
the tubule). The daughter cells from second­
ary spermatocytes through spermatids remain 
connected by slender cytoplasmic processes­
until spermiogenesis is complete and individual 
spermatozoa are released. See text for explanation 
of steps  1   to  5   (2n = diploid cells, n = haploid cells). 
 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      649  

Sperm
The spermatozoon (sperm cell) has two parts: a pear-shaped head and a long fla-
gellum, or tail (fig. 19.13). The head is filled mostly by two structures: a nucleus 
and acrosome. The most important of these is the nucleus, which fills most of the 
head and contains a haploid set of condensed chromosomes. The acrosome33 is a 
lysosome in the form of a thin cap covering the apical half of the nucleus. It contains 
enzymes that a successful sperm later uses to penetrate the egg.
The tail, about 50 µm long, is divided into three regions called the midpiece, 
principal piece, and endpiece. The midpiece is the thickest part. It contains large 
mitochondria coiled around the core of the flagellum. They produce the ATP needed 
for sperm movement. The principal piece constitutes most of the tail 
and consists of the axoneme surrounded by a sheath of supportive fibers, 
which stiffen the tail and enhance its propulsive power. The principal 
piece provides most propulsion of the sperm. It tapers to a short endpiece 
composed of axoneme only. You could think of the sperm midpiece as the 
“motor,” the principal piece as the “propeller,” and the head or its nucleus 
as the “cargo.”
Semen
The fluid expelled in orgasm is called semen34 (seminal fluid). A typical 
ejaculation is 2 to 5 mL of semen, composed mainly of seminal vesicle 
fluid (60%), prostatic fluid (30%), and sperm (10%), with a trace of other 
secretions. Most sperm emerge in the first one or two jets of semen. The 
semen usually has a sperm count of 50 to 120 million sperm/mL. A 
sperm count lower than 20 to 25 million sperm/mL is usually associated 
with infertility (sterility), the inability to fertilize an egg.
The prostate contributes a thin, milky white fluid containing calcium 
and other ions; a clotting enzyme; and a protein-hydrolyzing enzyme 
called serine protease (also known as prostate-specific antigen, PSA; see 
Clinical Application 19.1). The seminal vesicles contribute a viscous yel-
lowish fluid. This is the last component of the semen to emerge, and it 
flushes remaining sperm from the urethra. It contains fructose and other 
carbohydrates, as well as prostaglandins (discovered in and named for the 
prostate, but more abundant in the seminal vesicle secretion).
A well-known property of semen is its stickiness. This is due to a 
fibrinlike protein, semenogelin, that entangles the sperm, sticks to the walls of the 
 3	 Now safely isolated from blood-borne antibodies, the primary spermatocyte 
undergoes meiosis I, dividing into two equal-size, haploid and genetically 
unique secondary spermatocytes. 
 4	 Each secondary spermatocyte undergoes meiosis II, dividing into two 
spermatids—a total of four for each spermatogonium. 
	 5	 A spermatid divides no further, but transforms into a single sperm cell. This 
transformation, called spermiogenesis, consists essentially of sprouting a 
tail (flagellum) and shedding excess cytoplasm, making the sperm a light-
weight, mobile, self-propelled cell. It will not move under its own power, 
however, until ejaculation. 
When fully formed, the sperm depart from their supportive nurse cells and are 
washed down the seminiferous tubule by a slow flow of fluid. After division of the 
spermatogonium, it takes about 74 days for the one daughter cell to become mature 
sperm.
Figure 19.13 The Mature Spermatozoon. 
(a) Head and part of the tail of a spermatozoon 
(electron micrograph). (b) Sperm structure.
a: © BSIP SA/Alamy RF
Head
Midpiece
of tail
Principal
piece of
tail
Acrosome
Nucleus
Basal body
Mitochondrion
Core
(a)
(b)
2 μm
Endpiece
of tail
33acro = tip, peak; some = body 
34semen = seed
650      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

vagina and cervix, and ensures that the semen doesn’t simply drain back out of the 
vagina. It may also promote the uptake of sperm-laden clots of semen into the uterus.
About 20 to 30 minutes after ejaculation, the serine protease of the prostatic 
fluid breaks down semenogelin and liquifies the semen. The sperm, which lay still 
until then, now become very active, thrashing with their tails and crawling up the 
mucosa of the vagina and uterus. Their motility depends on ATP, which is made in 
the midpiece mitochondria by oxidizing the fructose in the semen. 
Oogenesis and the Ovarian–Menstrual Cycle
In the absence of pregnancy, women have two interrelated monthly cycles con-
trolled by shifting patterns of hormone secretion: the ovarian cycle, consisting of 
events in the ovaries, and the menstrual cycle, consisting of parallel changes in the 
uterus. The ovarian cycle is concerned with oogenesis, the production of eggs, and 
folliculogenesis, the parallel developments in the follicles that enclose them.
Oogenesis
Oogenesis35 (OH-oh-JEN-eh-sis), like spermatogenesis, produces a haploid gamete 
by means of meiosis. A major difference, however, is that whereas males produce 
sperm continually, oogenesis is conspicuously cyclic and usually produces only one 
mature egg per month. It is accompanied by cyclic changes in hormone secretion 
and in the histological structure of the ovaries and uterus; the uterine changes result 
in the monthly menstrual flow. Oogenesis occurs in the following stages (fig. 19.14):
	 1.	 Stem cells called oogonia (OH-oh-GO-nee-uh) multiply by mitosis in the 
ovaries of a female fetus. Most of them degenerate and die before she is born. 
	 2.	 Shortly before birth, the surviving oogonia transform into primary oocytes 
and proceed as far as early meiosis I, but then go into developmental arrest 
until puberty. No oogonia remain after birth. The term egg, or ovum, applies 
loosely to any stage from the primary oocyte to the time of fertilization. Most 
of a girl’s primary oocytes degenerate and die during childhood, until only 
about 200,000 remain at the onset of puberty. This is her lifetime supply of 
eggs, but it is ample. Even if a female ovulated every 28 days from age 14 
to 50, she would ovulate at most 480 times. All of the other eggs degenerate 
without ovulating between puberty and menopause. 
	 3.	 Oogenesis resumes in adolescence, when FSH stimulates monthly cohorts of 
about two dozen oocytes to complete meiosis I. Each primary oocyte divides 
into two haploid daughter cells of unequal size and different destinies. It is im-
portant to produce an egg with as much cytoplasm as possible, because if fertil-
ized, it must divide repeatedly and produce numerous daughter cells. Splitting 
each oocyte into four equal but small parts would run counter to this purpose. 
Therefore, meiosis I produces a large daughter cell called the secondary  
oocyte and a much smaller one called the first polar body. The polar body 
disintegrates; it is merely a means of discarding the extra set of chromosomes. 
The secondary oocyte proceeds as far as metaphase II, then arrests until after 
ovulation. If it is not fertilized, it dies and never finishes meiosis.
	 4.	 If fertilized, it completes meiosis II and casts off a second polar body, which 
disposes of one chromatid from each chromosome. The chromosomes of 
the large remaining egg unite with those of the sperm, resulting in a diploid 
zygote. Further development of the zygote is discussed in chapter 20.
Folliculogenesis
As an egg undergoes oogenesis, the follicle around it undergoes as many as five 
stages of growth, collectively called folliculogenesis.
35oo = egg; genesis = production
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      651  

Figure 19.14 Oogenesis (Left) and Corresponding Development of the Follicle (Right). 
 
1–2: © Ed Reschke; 3: © McGraw-Hill Education/Al Telser, photographer; 4: © Ed Reschke/Getty Images; 5: © Petit Format/Science Source; 6: © McGraw-Hill Education/Al 
Telser, photographer
•	 How many eggs are produced per primary oocyte? How does this compare to the number of sperm per primary spermatocyte? What 
is the functional importance of this difference? 
Development of egg (oogenesis)
Development of follicle (folliculogenesis)
2n
2n
2n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
2n
Multiplication
of oogonia
Mitosis
Primary oocyte
(begins meiosis I)
Primary oocyte
(unchanged)
Secondary oocyte
Meiosis I
completed
First polar 
body (dies)
Secondary oocyte
(ovulated)
If fertilized
If not fertilized
Meiosis II
Zygote
Embryo
Second polar
body (dies)
Before birth
Adolescence to menopause
Primordial follicle
No change
Granulosa cells
Primary follicle
Tertiary follicle
Secondary follicle
Ovulation of 
mature 
(graaﬁan)
follicle
Corpus luteum
Dies
Ovulated
oocyte
Oocyte
Nucleus
Follicular
cells
Follicular ﬂuid
Granulosa cells
Zona pellucida
Theca
Antrum
Theca
Bleeding into
antrum
652      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

	 1.	 Primordial follicles. A primordial follicle consists of a primary oocyte sur-
rounded by a single layer of squamous follicular cells (fig. 19.14). Primordial 
follicles begin to appear in the fetus as early as the twelfth week. They persist 
into adulthood, with most of them waiting at least 13 years and some as long 
as 50 years before they develop any further. 
	 2.	 Primary follicles. The follicular cells become cuboidal but still form just one 
layer around the now larger primary oocyte. 
	 3.	 Secondary follicles. The follicular cells divide and pile on top of each other 
in layers; the follicular cells are now called granulosa cells. They secrete a 
layer of clear gel around the oocyte called the zona pellucida, while the con-
nective tissue around the follicle condenses to form a fibrous husk, or theca. 
	 4.	 Tertiary follicles. Next, the follicle cells secrete a fluid that accumulates in little 
pools in the follicle wall. As they enlarge, the pools merge and become a single 
fluid-filled cavity, the antrum. On one side of the antrum, a mound of granu-
losa cells covers the oocyte and secures it to the follicle wall. The innermost 
layer of cells around the egg creates a barrier that ensures that nothing from the 
bloodstream can get to the oocyte except by going through (not between) these 
cells. The granulosa cells selectively allow nutrients and hormones to pass 
through to the egg, while screening out antibodies and other potentially harmful 
chemicals. The theca develops a rich supply of blood vessels and collaborates 
with the follicle cells to secrete sex hormones, especially estrogen. The theca 
absorbs cholesterol from the blood and converts it to androgens (androstenedi-
one and a lesser amount of testosterone). These diffuse inward to the granulosa 
cells, and they convert the androgens to estrogens, especially estradiol. After 
ovulation, they will also transform into the ovary’s progesterone-secreting cells, 
as we will see shortly. Thus, you can see that the ovarian follicles are a woman’s 
main source of her dominant sex hormones. 
	 5.	 Mature (graafian36) follicles. Normally only one follicle in each monthly co-
hort becomes a mature follicle, destined to ovulate while the rest degenerate. 
The Ovarian Cycle
We can now relate oogenesis and folliculogenesis to the timetable of events in the 
monthly sexual cycle (fig. 19.15). The cycle varies from 20 to 45 days in length, 
differing from person to person and from month to month in the same person, but 
it averages 28 days, so we will use this as a basis for discussion. As you study this 
cycle, bear in mind that hormones of the hypothalamus regulate the pituitary gland; 
pituitary hormones regulate the ovaries; and the ovaries, in turn, secrete hormones 
that regulate the uterus. That is, the basic hierarchy of control can be represented: 
hypothalamus → pituitary → ovaries → uterus. However, the ovaries also exert 
feedback control over the hypothalamus and pituitary.
We begin with a brief preview of the cycle. It starts with a 2-week follicular 
phase. The first 3 to 5 days are marked by menstruation, in which blood and endo-
metrial tissue are discharged vaginally. While this is going on, a cohort of ovar-
ian follicles grows until one of them ovulates around day 14. Endometrial tissue is 
regenerated and thickens between the end of menstruation and ovulation. After ovu-
lation, the remainder of that follicle becomes a body called the corpus luteum. Over 
the next 2 weeks, called the luteal phase, the corpus luteum stimulates endometrial 
secretion, making the endometrium thicken still more. If pregnancy does not occur, 
the endometrium breaks down again in the last 2 days. As loose tissue and blood 
accumulate, menstruation begins and the cycle starts over. Now the details.
	 1.	 Follicular phase. This phase, from day 1 typically through day 13, is marked by 
the growth of a cohort of follicles stimulated by follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH). As they grow, these follicles secrete estradiol  (ESS-tra-DI-ol)  
36Reijnier de Graaf (1641−73), Dutch physiologist and histologist
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      653  

(one of the estrogens). By unknown means, one follicle has already been se-
lected during the previous month’s cycle to become the dominant follicle—
the one destined to ovulate in this cycle. The dominant follicle is the most 
sensitive of all of them to FSH, luteinizing hormone (LH), and estradiol, so 
it races ahead of the others toward the day of ovulation. At the same time, 
estradiol and inhibin from the ovaries indirectly suppress pituitary FSH se-
cretion. Therefore, FSH levels decline but the dominant follicle heightens its 
own sensitivity to the FSH that remains, so all of the less sensitive follicles 
degenerate while the dominant follicle continues to grow. It reaches a diam-
eter of about 20 mm and bulges from the ovarian surface like a great blister, 
ready to ovulate. It is now considered a mature follicle. Unfortunately, the 
follicular phase is the most variable part of the cycle in length. This makes it 
almost impossible to reliably predict the date of ovulation for the purposes of 
family planning or pregnancy avoidance. 
 	2.	 Ovulation. Ovulation, typically around day 14, is the rupture of the mature 
follicle and the release of its egg and some of the surrounding cells. Dramatic 
changes over the preceding day signify its imminence. During the preceding 
Figure 19.15 The Female Sexual Cycle. 
(a) The ovarian cycle (events in the ovary). (b) The 
menstrual cycle (events in the uterus). 
 
Days
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
1
Days
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
1
(b) Menstrual cycle
(a) Ovarian cycle
LH
Developing follicles
Primary
Tertiary
Secondary
Ovulation
Luteal phase
Follicular phase
Corpus luteum
Involution
Corpus
albicans
New primordial
follicles
Menstrual
ﬂuid
Menstrual phase
Proliferative phase
Secretory phase
Premenstrual
phase
Thickness of endometrium
Ovarian hormone secretion
Ovarian events
Gonadotropin secretion
Estradiol
Progesterone
FSH
654      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

events, the pituitary secretes steadily rising levels of luteinizing hormone 
(LH), but on the day just before ovulation, there is an especially sharp spike 
in LH output (fig. 19.15a). This induces several momentous events. The pri-
mary oocyte completes meiosis I, giving off the first polar body and be-
coming a haploid secondary oocyte. Follicular fluid builds rapidly and the 
follicle swells to as much as 25 mm in diameter—more than twice the usual 
thickness of the whole ovary. The follicular wall and adjacent ovarian tissue 
weaken by inflammation. With mounting internal pressure and a weaken-
ing wall, the mature follicle approaches rupture. Meanwhile, the uterine tube 
prepares to catch the oocyte. It swells with edema; its fimbriae envelop and 
caress the ovary in synchrony with the woman’s heartbeat; and its cilia create 
a gentle current in the nearby peritoneal fluid.
	
	 	 Ovulation itself takes only 2 or 3 minutes. A nipplelike protrusion appears 
over the follicle; it seeps fluid for 1 or 2 minutes; and then the follicle bursts. 
The remaining fluid oozes out, carrying the oocyte and its companion cells 
(see photo in figure 19.14). These are normally swept up by the ciliary cur-
rent and taken into the uterine tube.
	
	 	 Follicle maturation and ovulation normally occur in only one ovary per 
cycle, and the ovaries usually alternate from month to month. Some 
women can feel the moment of ovulation as a slight twinge of abdominal 
pain. 
	 3.	 Luteal phase. Days 15 to 28, from just after ovulation to the onset of men-
struation, are called the luteal (postovulatory) phase. When the follicle 
ruptures, it collapses and bleeds into the antrum. As the clotted blood is ab-
sorbed, follicular and theca cells multiply and fill the antrum, and a dense 
bed of blood capillaries grows amid them. The follicle is now called the 
corpus luteum,37 named for a yellow lipid that accumulates in its cells.
	 	 	 LH stimulates this transformation from ruptured follicle to corpus luteum, 
as well as its continued growth. The corpus luteum secretes rising levels of 
estrogen and especially progesterone. As we’ll see in the next section, pro-
gesterone prepares the uterus for the possibility of pregnancy (and is named 
for this fact38). At the same time, hormones from the corpus luteum exert 
negative feedback inhibition on the pituitary and suppress its output of FSH 
and LH. (This is the basis for hormonal birth control pills.)
	 	 	 In the absence of pregnancy, the corpus luteum begins shrinking around day 
22 (8 days after ovulation) and eventually becomes an inactive bit of scar tis-
sue. The shrinkage is called involution39 and the resulting scar is the corpus 
albicans.40 With the waning of ovarian steroid secretion, the pituitary is no 
longer inhibited and FSH levels begin to rise again, ripening a new cohort of 
follicles. 
The Menstrual Cycle
The menstrual cycle consists of uterine changes in parallel with the ovarian events—
a buildup of endometrium through most of the cycle, followed by its breakdown 
and vaginal discharge. The menstrual cycle is divided into a proliferative phase, 
secretory phase, premenstrual phase, and menstrual phase (fig. 19.16). The men-
strual phase averages 5 days long, and the first day of noticeable vaginal discharge 
is defined as day 1 of the sexual cycle. But menstruation is best understood after you 
become acquainted with the buildup of endometrial tissue that precedes it. Thus, we 
begin our survey of the cycle with the proliferative phase.
37corpus = body; lute = yellow 
38pro = favoring, promoting; gest = pregnancy; sterone = steroid hormone 
39in = inward; volution = turning 
40corpus = body; albicans = white
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      655  

	 1.	 Proliferative phase. In this phase, the uterus rebuilds the layer of tissue lost 
in the last menstruation. At day 5 (or the end of menstruation), the endome-
trium is about 0.5 mm thick and consists only of the permanent basal layer 
of tissue that is never shed. As a new cohort of follicles develops in the ova-
ries, they secrete more and more estrogen. Estrogen stimulates mitosis in the 
basal layer as well as a prolific regrowth of blood vessels, thus regenerating 
the functional layer that was lost at menstruation (fig. 19.16a). By day 14, 
the endometrium is 2 to 3 mm thick. Estrogen also stimulates endometrial 
cells to produce progesterone receptors, priming them for the progesterone-
dominated phase to follow. 
 	2.	 Secretory phase. In this phase, the endometrium thickens still more, but 
because of secretion and fluid accumulation rather than mitosis. This phase 
extends from day 15 (after ovulation) to day 26 of a typical cycle. After ovu-
lation, the corpus luteum secretes mainly progesterone, which stimulates the 
endometrial glands to secrete glycogen. The glands grow wider, longer, and 
more coiled, and the endometrium swells with tissue fluid (fig. 19.16b). By 
the end of this phase, the endometrium is 5 to 6 mm thick—a soft nutritious 
bed available for embryonic development in the event of pregnancy. 
 	3.	 Premenstrual phase. If there is no pregnancy, the last 2 days of the cycle are 
marked by endometrial degeneration. This comes about because the dying 
corpus luteum secretes less and less progesterone. The loss of progesterone 
triggers spasmodic contractions of the spiral arteries of the endometrium. 
The interrupted blood flow leads to tissue necrosis and sometimes menstrual 
cramps. As the endometrial glands, stroma, and blood vessels degenerate, 
pools of blood accumulate in the tissue. Pieces of dying endometrium fall 
away from the uterine wall, mix with blood and serous fluid in the lumen, 
and form the menstrual fluid (fig. 19.16c). Eventually, all of the functional 
layer is lost in the menstrual fluid and only the basal layer remains. 
 	4.	 Menstrual phase (menses). This phase begins when enough fluid has 
accumulated in the uterus to be discharged from the vagina. The first day of 
discharge marks day 1 of the menstrual cycle. The average woman expels 
about 40 mL of blood and 35 mL of serous fluid over a 5-day period. 
Figure 19.16 Endometrial Changes Through 
the Menstrual Cycle. (a) Late proliferative phase. 
The endometrium is 2 to 3 mm thick and has rela­
tively straight, narrow endometrial glands. Spiral 
arteries penetrate upward between the endome­
trial glands. (b) Secretory phase. The endometrium 
has thickened to 5 to 6 mm by accumulating glyco­
gen and mucus. The endometrial glands are much 
wider and more distinctly coiled, showing a zigzag 
or “sawtooth” appearance in histological sections. 
(c) Menstrual phase. Dying tissue has begun to fall 
away from the uterine wall, with bleeding from bro­
ken blood vessels and pooling of blood in the tissue 
and uterine lumen.
Secretion
Endometrial
gland
Functional
layer
Spiral artery
Basal layer
Myometrium
(a) Proliferative phase
(b) Secretory phase
(c) Menstrual phase
656      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

To summarize the integration of the ovarian and uterine cycles: The ovaries 
go through a follicular phase characterized by growing follicles, then ovulation, 
and then a postovulatory (mostly luteal) phase dominated by the corpus luteum. 
The uterus, in the meantime, goes through a menstrual phase in which it dis-
charges its functional layer; then a proliferative phase in which it replaces that 
tissue by mitosis; then a secretory phase in which the endometrium thickens by 
the accumulation of secretions; and finally, a premenstrual phase in which the 
functional layer breaks down again. The first half of the cycle is governed largely 
by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary and estradiol from the 
ovaries. Ovulation is triggered by luteinizing hormone (LH) from the pituitary, 
and the second half of the cycle is governed mainly by LH from the pituitary and 
progesterone from the ovaries.
The timetable of ovulation and menstruation, especially the menstrual 
period starting so conspicuously every 28 days or so, easily creates a mis-
conception that it takes 28 days for an egg and follicle to mature and ovulate. 
The reality is that it can take anywhere from roughly 12 to 50 years for each 
one to develop—from development of the primary oocytes before a girl is 
born to ovulation of the last secondary oocyte in menopause. Most of this 
time, the follicles lie dormant, with their eggs in early meiosis I, waiting for 
a “wake-up call” from the pituitary in the form of follicle-stimulating hor-
mone. Starting in puberty, about a dozen follicles each month respond to this 
and resume their development. But even then, it takes about 290 days for one 
member of this cohort, the dominant follicle, to mature and ovulate. So any 
egg released from its follicle began its meiosis before the girl was born, “went 
to sleep” for many years, then “woke up” and resumed its development 290 
days before ovulation. The reason for the 28-day periodicity of ovulation is 
that these cohorts mature in overlapping waves, with one cohort each month 
finally producing its mature follicle and its candidate for fertilization, the 
ovulated secondary oocyte.
Uniting the Gametes 
 
We have seen how the sperm and eggs are produced; the purpose of reproduc-
tion is to get them together. The physiology of sexual intercourse (coitus) was a 
taboo subject for many decades until, in the 1950s, William Masters and Virginia 
Johnson daringly launched the first physiological studies of sexual response in the 
laboratory. Thanks to their pioneering work and those who have followed, sexual 
response is now studied on a level as matter-of-fact as the physiology of digestion 
or respiration.
Anatomical Foundations
To understand sexual function, we must give closer attention to the blood cir-
culation and nerve supply to the genitalia. Each internal iliac artery of the male 
gives off a penile artery that enters the root of the penis and divides in two. One 
branch, the dorsal artery, travels dorsally along the penis not far beneath the 
skin (see fig. 19.4), supplying blood to the skin, fascia, and corpus spongiosum. 
The other branch, the deep artery, travels through the core of the corpus cav-
ernosum and gives off smaller arteries that penetrate the trabeculae and empty 
into the lacunae. When the deep artery dilates, the lacunae fill with blood and 
the penis becomes erect. Blood drains from the penis through a median deep 
dorsal vein, which runs between the two dorsal arteries near the penile surface. 
The blood supply to the female’s clitoris is essentially the same except that there 
is no corpus spongiosum.
The penis and clitoris are richly innervated by sensory and motor nerve fibers. 
The glans of each has an abundance of tactile, pressure, and temperature receptors. 
Signals travel out of the penis or clitoris by way of a pair of prominent dorsal nerves 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      657  

that lead to the sacral spinal cord. Sensory fibers of the penile shaft and scrotum of 
the male and the labia and vestibule of the female are also highly important to sexual 
stimulation.
Both autonomic and somatic motor fibers carry impulses from the spinal cord 
to the genitalia. Sympathetic fibers from spinal cord levels T12 to L2 innervate 
the arteries of the penis and clitoris, the accessory glands, and the male spermatic 
ducts. They dilate the arteries and can induce erection even when the sacral region 
of the spinal cord is damaged. The arteries also receive parasympathetic fibers from 
spinal cord segments S2 to S4 of the spinal cord. These nerves are involved in an 
autonomic reflex arc that causes erection in response to direct stimulation of the 
genitalia and perineal region.
Sexual Response
At the onset of sexual arousal, the genitalia become swollen with blood, muscle 
tension rises throughout the body, and the heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory 
rate rise. The bulbourethral glands of the male and greater vestibular glands of the 
female secrete their fluids during this phase, with the female secretion, especially, 
providing lubrication for intercourse. The vagina contains no glands but becomes 
moistened by seepage of serous fluid from its wall.
The most obvious and necessary manifestation of male sexual arousal is  
erection of the penis. This is an autonomic reflex mediated mainly by parasympa-
thetic nerve fibers from the spinal cord. These nerve fibers dilate the deep arteries 
of the corpora cavernosa, causing rapid inflow of blood. As lacunae nearest the deep 
arteries fill with blood, they compress lacunae closer to the periphery of the erectile 
tissue. This is where blood leaves the erectile tissues, so compression blocks the out-
flow of blood. Each corpus cavernosum is wrapped in a tight fibrous tunic or sleeve. 
This tunic cannot expand very much laterally, so it contributes to the tension and 
firmness of the corpus cavernosum and forces the penis to expand more in length 
than in width. Once entry into the vagina is achieved, tactile and pressure sensations 
produced by vaginal massaging of the penis further accentuate the erection reflex. 
In the female, the clitoris becomes similarly engorged and erect, swelling to two or 
three times its usual size. But since the clitoris cannot swing upward away from the 
body like the penis, it tends to withdraw beneath the prepuce.
The male corpus spongiosum has neither a central artery nor a fibrous tunic. 
It swells and becomes more visible as a cordlike ridge along the ventral surface of 
the penis, but it doesn’t become nearly as engorged and hardened as the corpora 
cavernosa.
Apply What You Know
Why is it important that the corpus spongiosum not become as engorged as the 
corpora cavernosa? What might be the consequence if it did so?
Orgasm41  (climax) is a short but intense reaction that lasts from 3 to 15 
­seconds; it is usually marked by the discharge of semen in males and by vaginal 
and uterine contractions in females. From the standpoint of producing offspring, 
the most significant aspect of male orgasm is the ejaculation42 of semen into the 
vagina. It occurs in two stages called emission and expulsion. In emission, the sym-
pathetic nervous system induces peristalsis in the ductus deferens, which propels 
sperm from the epididymis to the prostatic urethra. The prostate expels its own fluid 
into the urethra, followed quickly by the seminal vesicles. The contractions and fluid 
flow in this phase create an urgent sensation that ejaculation is inevitable.
41orgasm = swelling 
42e = ex = out; jacul = to throw
658      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
16.	Why is meiosis necessary in sexual reproduction? At 
what stages in meiosis do we see a change in the number 
of chromosomes per cell and the number of chromatids per 
chromosome? 
17.	 List the stages of spermatogenesis; identify which stages in-
volve mitosis, meiosis I, and meiosis II; and state the chromo-
some number at each stage. Then do the same for oogen-
esis. 
18.	Identify the main parts of a mature spermatozoon and the 
function of each part. 
19.	Spermatogenesis produces four functional gametes per sper-
matogonium, and oogenesis produces only one gamete per 
oogonium. Why? 
20.	Name the five kinds of ovarian follicles and identify the es-
sential features that distinguish one from another. 
21.	 Describe the changes occurring in the ovaries and uterus in 
the 2 weeks before ovulation and in the 2 weeks after. 
22.	What is a corpus luteum? Where does it come from and what 
purpose does it serve? 
23.	Describe some similarities and differences in the physiology 
of intercourse and orgasm between the male and female. 
Semen in the urethra activates both somatic and sympathetic reflexes that result 
in its expulsion. Sensory signals travel to an integrating center in the upper lumbar 
region of the spinal cord. Sympathetic signals return to the prostate and seminal 
vesicles, causing them to expel more fluid into the urethra. The internal urethral 
sphincter constricts so urine cannot enter the urethra and semen cannot enter the 
bladder. Somatic motor signals from the spinal cord stimulate the bulbospongiosus 
muscle, which ensheaths the root of the penis (see fig. 19.1). In five or six spasmodic 
contractions, this muscle compresses the urethra and forcibly expels the semen. Most 
sperm emerge in the first milliliter of semen, mixed primarily with prostatic fluid. 
The seminal vesicle secretion follows and flushes most remaining sperm from the 
urethra.
In female orgasm, the lower end of the vagina gives three to five strong 
contractions about 0.8 seconds apart, while the cervix plunges spasmodically 
into the vagina and into the pool of semen, should this be present. The uterus 
exhibits peristaltic waves of contraction, which might help to draw semen from 
the vagina.
Following orgasm, sympathetic stimulation constricts the arteries and reduces 
the flow of blood into the penis and clitoris. It also causes contraction of the smooth 
muscle in the trabeculae of the erectile tissues, which squeezes blood from the 
lacunae. The penis may remain semierect long enough to continue intercourse, but 
gradually it becomes soft and flaccid again. In men, this is usually followed by a 
refractory period of anywhere from 10 minutes to a few hours, in which it is usually 
impossible to attain another erection and orgasm. Women do not have a refractory 
period and may quickly experience additional orgasms.
Sperm can make it well into the uterine tubes in half an hour or less after ejacu-
lation. For reasons explained in section 20.1, however, it is about 10 hours before 
they become capable of penetrating an egg and initiating a pregnancy.
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      659  

43herp = to creep
PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
S
exually transmitted diseases (STDs) have been well known at 
least since the writings of Hippocrates. Here we discuss three 
bacterial STDs—gonorrhea, chlamydia, and syphilis—and three 
viral STDs—genital herpes, genital warts, and hepatitis. AIDS is dis­
cussed in chapter 14 in Perspectives on Health.
All of these STDs have an incubation period in which the 
pathogen multiplies without symptoms, and a communicable 
period in which one can transmit the disease to others even in the 
absence of symptoms. Aside from recent advances with human 
papillomavirus (HPV), there are few vaccines for STDs, because 
the bacteria and viruses live inside host cells and go undetected 
by the immune system. STDs can cause fetal deformity, stillbirth, 
and neonatal death (see section 20.3).
Gonorrhea (GON-oh-REE-uh) is caused by the bacterium Neis-
seria gonorrhoeae. Galen, thinking the pus discharged from the 
penis was semen, named the disease gonorrhea (“flow of seed”). 
Symptoms include abdominal discomfort, genital pain and discharge, 
painful urination, and abnormal uterine bleeding. Most infected 
women are asymptomatic, but it can cause scarring of the uterine 
tubes, resulting in infertility. Gonorrhea is treated with antibiotics.
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) is any urethral inflamma­
tion caused by agents other than the gonorrhea bacterium. NGU 
often produces pain or discomfort on urination. The most common 
bacterial NGU is infection by Chlamydia trachomatis. Most chla­
mydia infections are asymptomatic, but they may cause urethral 
discharge and pain in the testes or pelvic region. Gonorrhea and 
chlamydia frequently occur together.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is bacterial infection of the 
female pelvic organs, usually with Chlamydia or Neisseria. It often 
results in sterility and may require surgical removal of infected uter­
ine tubes or other organs. PID is responsible for many cases of 
ectopic pregnancy (see Clinical Application 20.1).
Syphilis is caused by a corkscrew-shaped bacterium named 
Treponema pallidum. After an incubation period of 2 to 6 weeks, a 
small, hard lesion called a chancre (SHAN-kur) appears at the site 
of infection—in males, usually on the penis and therefore notice­
able, but in females, sometimes out of sight in the vagina. It disap­
pears in 4 to 6 weeks, ending the first stage of syphilis and often 
creating an illusion of recovery. A second stage ensues, however, 
with a widespread pink rash, other skin eruptions, fever, joint pain, 
and hair loss. This subsides in 3 to 12 weeks, but symptoms can 
come and go for up to 5 years. A person is contagious even when 
symptoms are not present. The disease may progress to a third 
stage, tertiary syphilis (neurosyphilis), with cardiovascular damage 
and brain lesions that can cause paralysis and dementia. Syphilis is 
treatable with antibiotics.
Genital herpes is one of the most common STDs in the United 
States, with 20 to 40 million infected people at a given time. It is 
usually caused by the herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2). After 
an incubation period of 4 to 10 days, the virus causes blisters on 
the penis of the male; on the labia, vagina, or cervix of the female; 
and sometimes on the thighs and buttocks of either sex. Over 
2 to 10 days, these blisters rupture, seep fluid, and begin to form 
scabs. The initial infection may be painless or it may cause intense 
pain, urethritis, and watery discharge from the penis or vagina. The 
lesions heal in 2 to 3 weeks and leave no scars.
During this time, however, HSV-2 colonizes sensory nerves 
and ganglia. Here the virus can lie dormant for years, later migrat­
ing along the nerves and causing epithelial lesions anywhere on 
the body. The movement from place to place is the basis of the 
name herpes.43 Most infected persons have five to seven recur­
rences, ranging from several years apart to several times a year. An 
infected person is contagious to a sexual partner when the lesions 
are present and sometimes even when they are not. HSV-2 may 
increase the risk of cervical cancer and AIDS.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common sexually trans­
mitted infection in the United States. An HPV infection may resolve 
on its own without causing any health problems; yet nearly all cases 
of cervical cancer are caused by HPV, and it is also linked to can­
cers of the oropharynx, penis, vagina, and anus. In addition, HPV can 
cause genital warts (condylomas). In the male, lesions usually appear 
on the penis, perineum, or anus; in the female, they are usually on the 
cervix, vaginal wall, perineum, or anus. Lesions are sometimes small 
and almost invisible. Genital warts are sometimes treated with cryo­
surgery (freezing and excision), laser surgery, or interferon. An HPV 
vaccine became available in 2006, and there is evidence that infec­
tion rates in young people are declining as a result of vaccinations.
Hepatitis B and C, introduced in Clinical Application 18.1, are 
inflammatory liver diseases caused by the hepatitis B and C viruses 
(HBV, HCV). Although they can be transmitted by means other than 
sex, they are becoming increasingly common as STDs. Hepatitis C 
threatens to become a major epidemic of the twenty-first century. 
It already far surpasses the prevalence of AIDS and is the leading 
reason for liver transplants in the United States.
Sexual l y Tr a ns mi tted  D i s e a s e s
660      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

This section treats pregnancy from the maternal standpoint—adjustments of 
the woman’s body to pregnancy and the mechanism of childbirth—­followed 
by the physiology of lactation. Development of the fetus is described in 
­chapter 20.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy (gestation) lasts an average of 266 days from conception (fertil-
ization of the egg) to childbirth; however, the gestational calendar is usually 
measured from the first day of the woman’s last menstrual period (LMP), since 
a woman is more likely to know that date than when she conceived. Thus, the 
birth is predicted to occur 280 days (40 weeks) from the LMP. The duration of 
pregnancy, called its term, is commonly described in 3-month intervals called 
trimesters.
Pregnancy places considerable stress on a woman’s body and requires 
adjustments in nearly all the organ systems. Some of these effects are as 
­follows:
Integumentary system. The skin grows to accommodate expansion of the abdo-
men and breasts and the added fat deposition in the hips and thighs. Stretching of the 
dermis often tears the connective tissue and causes stretch marks (striae). Increased 
melanin synthesis commonly darkens the areola of the breast, making the nipple a 
more easily seen target for a nursing infant.  
Circulatory system. A woman gains 1 to 2 liters of blood over the course of a 
pregnancy, with about 625 mL/min. going to supply the placenta. Another effect of 
pregnancy is that the growing uterus puts pressure on the large pelvic blood vessels, 
thus interfering with venous return from the lower body. This can result in hemor-
rhoids, varicose veins, and edema of the feet. 
Respiratory system. Breathing also becomes more labored as the growing uterus 
puts pressure on the diaphragm from below. In the last month, however, the fetus 
drops lower in the abdominopelvic cavity, taking some pressure off the diaphragm 
and allowing the woman to breathe more easily. 
Urinary system. A pregnant woman’s urine output is slightly elevated, enabling her 
to dispose of both her own and the fetus’s metabolic wastes. As the pregnant uterus 
compresses the bladder and reduces its capacity, urination becomes more frequent.  
19.5  Pregnancy, Childbirth, and Lactation
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	itemize the major hormones of pregnancy and describe their 
effects; 
b.	describe the effects of pregnancy on a woman’s body; 
c.	explain what happens in each stage of childbirth; 
d.	discuss the hormonal control of lactation; and 
e.	discuss the composition of colostrum and breast milk. 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      661  

Digestive system. For many women, one of the first signs of pregnancy is morning 
sickness—nausea, especially after rising from bed, in the first few months of gesta-
tion. This sometimes progresses to vomiting, occasionally severe enough to require 
hospitalization to stabilize a woman’s fluid and electrolyte balance. 
Metabolism and nutritional needs. Pregnancy raises a woman’s metabolic rate 
and stimulates appetite. Even in the last trimester, however, a woman needs only an 
extra 300 kcal/day. A healthy average weight gain is 11 kg (24 pounds) but some 
women gain as much as 34 kg (75 pounds). About 3 kg (7 pounds) of the healthy 
weight gain is the fetus; the rest is the placenta, fetal membranes, amniotic fluid, 
uterus, breasts, maternal body fluids, and fat. Pregnancy warrants taking supple-
mental iron, vitamin D, and vitamin K. Extra folic acid can prevent the risk of neu-
rological disorders in the fetus such as spina bifida, but it has to be taken even before 
pregnancy. By the time a woman is aware she is pregnant, it is too late for extra folic 
acid to be effective (see Clinical Application 8.2). 
Childbirth
The uterus weighs about 50 g when a woman is not pregnant and about 900 g 
(2 pounds) by full term. Most of this increase is due to muscle growth in preparation 
for childbirth. Ancient authorities thought that the fetus kicked against the uterus 
and pushed itself out head first. The fetus, however, is a rather passive player in its 
own birth; its expulsion is achieved only by the contractions of the mother’s uterine 
and abdominal muscles.
During gestation, the uterus exhibits relatively weak Braxton Hicks44 
contractions. These become stronger in late pregnancy and often send women 
rushing to the hospital with “false labor.” At full term, however, these contrac-
tions transform suddenly into the more powerful labor contractions. True labor 
contractions mark the onset of parturition (PAR-too-RISH-un), the process of 
giving birth.
The increasing contractility of the uterus may stem from the rising ratio 
of estrogen to progesterone toward the end of pregnancy. Also, as the preg-
nancy nears full term, the posterior lobe of the pituitary releases increasing 
amounts of oxytocin (OT), while progesterone stimulates the uterine muscle to 
develop more OT receptors. Oxytocin directly stimulates the uterine contrac-
tions. Stretching of the uterus by the growing fetus also plays a role in initiating 
labor contractions. This is probably why twins are born an average of 19 days 
earlier than solitary infants.
Labor contractions typically begin about 30 minutes apart, then become more 
frequent and intense, eventually occurring every 1 to 3 minutes. It is important that 
they be intermittent rather than one long, continual contraction. Each contraction 
compresses blood vessels and reduces blood flow to the placenta, so the uterus must 
periodically relax to restore flow and oxygen delivery to the fetus. Contractions are 
strongest in the fundus and body of the uterus and weaker near the cervix, thus push-
ing the fetus downward.
According to the positive feedback theory of labor, contractions are 
induced by stretching of the cervix. This triggers a reflex contraction of the 
uterine body that pushes the fetus downward and stretches the cervix still 
more. Thus, there is a self-amplifying cycle of stretch and contraction. In 
addition, stretching triggers a reflex through the spinal cord, hypothalamus, 
and posterior pituitary. The pituitary releases oxytocin, which is carried in 
the blood and stimulates the uterine muscle. This, too, is a positive feedback 
44John Braxton Hicks (1823−97), British gynecologist 
662      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

cycle: cervical stretching → oxytocin secretion → uterine contraction → 
cervical stretching (see fig. 1.5).
As labor progresses, a woman feels a growing urge to “bear down.” A 
somatic reflex arc extends from the uterus to the spinal cord and back to 
the skeletal muscles of the abdomen. Contraction of these muscles—partly 
reflexive and partly voluntary—aids in expelling the fetus, especially when 
combined with breath holding (the Valsalva maneuver) for increasing intra-
abdominal pressure.
Labor occurs in three stages (fig. 19.17), each lasting longer in a woman giving 
birth for the first time (a primipara) than in a woman who has given birth before 
(multipara).
	 1.	 Dilation stage. This stage is marked by the dilation (widening) of the cervi-
cal canal and effacement (thinning) of the cervix. The cervix dilates to about 
10 cm (the diameter of the baby’s head), and usually the fetal membranes 
rupture and discharge the amniotic fluid (the “breaking of the waters”). This 
stage typically lasts 8 to 24 hours in a primipara but as little as a few minutes 
in a multipara. 
	 2.	 Expulsion (second) stage. This stage typically lasts 30 to 60 minutes in a 
primipara and as little as 1 minute in a multipara. It begins when the baby’s 
head enters the vagina and lasts until the baby is entirely expelled. Delivery 
of the head is the most difficult part, with the rest of the body following much 
more easily. 
	 3.	 Placental (third) stage. The uterus continues to contract after expulsion 
of the baby. The placenta, however, is a nonmuscular organ that cannot 
contract, so it buckles away from the uterine wall. The placenta and fetal 
membranes (afterbirth) are then expelled by uterine contractions. The 
membranes must be carefully inspected to be sure everything has been 
expelled. If any of these structures remain in the uterus, they can cause 
postpartum hemorrhaging. About 350 mL of blood is typically lost in the 
placental stage, but uterine contractions compress the blood vessels and 
prevent more extensive bleeding. 
Postpartum Changes
Over the first 6 weeks postpartum (after birth), the mother’s anatomy and 
physiology stabilize and her reproductive organs return nearly to their condi-
tion prior to pregnancy. The shrinkage of the uterus during this period is called 
involution (the same word as for the shrinkage of the corpus luteum described 
earlier). It is achieved through the autolysis (self-digestion) of uterine cells by 
their own enzymes. For about 10 days, this produces a vaginal discharge called 
lochia45 (LO-kee-ah), which is bloody at first and then turns clear and serous. 
Breast-feeding hastens involution because (1) it suppresses estrogen secretion, 
which would otherwise cause the uterus to remain more flaccid; and (2) it stimu-
lates oxytocin secretion, which causes the myometrium to contract and firm up 
the uterus sooner.
Lactation
Lactation is the synthesis and ejection of milk from the mammary glands. It 
lasts for as little as a week in women who don’t breast-feed their infants, but 
it can continue for many years as long as the breast is stimulated by a nurs-
ing child or mechanical device (breast pump). Numerous studies conducted 
45lochos = childbirth
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      663  

Umbilical
cord
Placenta
Uterus
Cervix
Vagina
Pubic 
symphysis
Late dilation
stage
Early dilation
stage
Expulsion
stage
Placental
stage
Uterus
Placenta
(detaching)
Umbilical
cord
Crowning
Expulsion
stage
Afterbirth
Figure 19.17 Stages of Childbirth. 
top, middle: © D. Van Rossum/Science Source; bottom: © Medicshots/Alamy 
664      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

before the widespread marketing of artificial infant formulas suggest that 
worldwide, women traditionally nursed their infants until a median age of 
about 2.8 years.
Development of the Mammary Glands in Pregnancy
In nonpregnant, non-nursing women, the mammary gland is represented by 
only a few milk ducts that penetrate from the nipple only a short way into the 
breast tissue. In pregnancy, the high estrogen level causes the ducts to grow and 
branch extensively. Growth hormone, prolactin, and other hormones also con-
tribute to this development. Once the ducts are complete, progesterone stimu-
lates the budding and development of acini at the ends of the ducts. The acini 
are organized into grapelike clusters (lobules) within each lobe of the breast 
(see fig. 19.10).
Colostrum and Milk Synthesis
In late pregnancy, the mammary acini and ducts are distended with a secretion 
called colostrum. This is similar to breast milk in protein and lactose content 
but has about one-third less fat. It is the infant’s only natural source of nutrition 
for the first 1 to 3 days postpartum. Colostrum has a thin watery consistency 
and a cloudy yellowish color. The daily volume of colostrum is at most 1% 
of the volume of milk secreted later. A major benefit of colostrum is that it 
contains antibodies that protect the infant from infection and gastrointestinal 
inflammation.
The pituitary secretes prolactin beginning 5 weeks into the pregnancy, 
but no milk is synthesized until after birth. Placental steroids inhibit milk 
synthesis, but when the placenta is discharged in the afterbirth, this inhibi-
tion is removed and prolactin begins to exert its effect. Milk is synthesized 
in increasing quantity over the following week. Each time the infant nurses, 
there is a spike in prolactin level. This stimulates the synthesis of milk for the 
next feeding.
If the mother doesn’t nurse, she stops lactating in about a week. Even if she 
does nurse, milk production declines after 7 to 9 months. Breast-feeding has a mild 
(although unreliable) contraceptive effect. In women who don’t breast-feed, the 
ovarian cycle resumes in a few weeks, whereas it may be delayed for several months 
in women who do. For the first 6 months, however, the cycles are usually anovula-
tory (no egg is released).
Milk Ejection
Milk is continually secreted into the mammary acini, but it doesn’t easily flow 
into the ducts. Its flow, called milk ejection, is controlled by a neuroendocrine 
reflex. The infant’s suckling stimulates nerve endings of the nipple and areola, 
which in turn signal the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary to release oxytocin. 
Oxytocin stimulates contractile myoepithelial cells around the acini (see fig. 
19.10d) to squeeze milk down into the ducts and lactiferous sinuses, where the 
suction of the infant’s mouth can draw it out.
Apply What You Know
When a woman is nursing her baby at one breast, would you expect only that 
breast, or both breasts, to eject milk? Explain why.
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      665  

Table 19.1  A Comparison of Colostrum, Human Milk, and Cow’s Milk
Constituents
Human 
Colostrum
Human Milk
Cow’s Milk
Total protein (g/L)
22.9
10.6
30.9
  Lactalbumin (g/L) 
–
 3.7
25.0
  Casein (g/L) 
–
  3.6
  2.3
  Immunoglobulins (g/L) 
 19.4
      0.09
  0.8
Fat (g/L)
29.5
                45.4
38.0
Lactose (g/L)
             57
              71
              47
Calcium (mg/L)
             481
          344
          1,370
Phosphorus (mg/L)
             157
            141
           910
Breast Milk
Breast milk changes composition over the first 2 weeks, varies from one time 
of day to another, and changes even during the course of a single feeding. For 
example, at the end of a feeding there is less lactose and protein in the milk, but 
six times as much fat, as there is at the beginning. Therefore, a baby may not 
receive complete nourishment if its feeding is interrupted. A woman nursing one 
baby eventually produces about 1.5 L of milk per day; women with twins produce 
more. Lactation places a great demand on the mother for calcium, phosphate, pro-
tein, fat, and other nutrients, and requires appropriate dietary adjustments so that 
mineralization of the infant’s skeleton doesn’t come at the expense of the mother’s 
bone tissue.
It used to be common to feed infants with cow’s milk, but this is a poor substi-
tute for colostrum and breast milk. Table 19.1 compares their composition. Calves 
and babies have different patterns of growth and different nutritional requirements. 
Cow’s milk is more difficult for an infant to digest because of its excessive protein 
content; it causes more diaper rash; and it fails to provide the immunity and other 
benefits of breast-feeding.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the preceding section if 
there are too many you don’t know.
24.	What are the roles of oxytocin, prostaglandins, and uterine 
stretching in childbirth? 
25.	In childbirth, what are dilation, effacement, and crowning? In 
what stage of childbirth does each one occur? 
26.	How does colostrum differ from breast milk? What purposes 
does it serve? 
27.	Contrast the roles of prolactin and oxytocin in breast-
feeding. 
666      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
M i d w i f e
A midwife is a person who provides prenatal counseling and care to ex-
pectant mothers, attends the birth, and provides postpartum care to the 
mother and infant. Midwives encourage natural birth with minimal tech-
nological intervention. They work with relatively healthy women and low-
risk pregnancies, but are trained to recognize complications and to refer 
these to obstetricians for advanced care. Midwives often attend births in 
the home or at a birthing center, but in some hospitals today, the majority 
of babies are delivered by midwives. The term midwife derives from Old 
English “with (mid) woman (wif),” referring to the pregnant woman and not 
the practitioner; both women and men work as midwives.
The best career opportunities and salaries go to certified nurse midwives (CNMs), who must earn a nursing degree and then 
pursue about 2 years of specialized training in midwifery, often leading to a master’s degree. CNMs must pass a national board 
exam, and can then be licensed in any of the 50 states. Most CNM programs are given at universities, and most CNMs practice 
in hospitals.
There also are direct-entry midwives who do not hold nursing degrees but have more limited employment opportunities. 
These range from lay midwives (LMs), educated through self-study and apprenticeship, to certified professional midwives (CPMs), 
who complete formal programs of study. Prerequisites for such programs vary by state but may include general biology, microbi-
ology, human anatomy and physiology, mathematics, English, and social science. Many states do not recognize or license direct-
entry midwives. Where licensed, these midwives usually practice outside of hospitals and sometimes establish their own birthing 
centers.
See appendix B for further information on careers in midwifery.
© Science Source
Aging of the Reproductive System
Male reproductive function changes relatively gradually after middle 
age, with declining testosterone secretion, sperm count, and libido. 
Men remain fertile (able to father children) well into old age, but by 
age 65, sperm count is about one-third of what it was in a man’s 
20s. Erectile dysfunction (ED)—the inability to maintain an erection 
long enough to complete intercourse—becomes more common for 
a variety of reasons, including atherosclerosis, medications, and psy­
chological factors. About 20% of men in their 60s and 50% of men 
in their 80s experience some degree of ED. Nearly all men with ED, 
however, remain able to ejaculate.
In women, the changes in reproductive function are more 
abrupt and pronounced. Over the course of menopause, game­
togenesis ceases, active follicles are depleted, and the ovaries 
stop secreting sex hormones. This can result in vaginal dryness, 
genital atrophy, and reduced libido. With the loss of ovarian ste­
roids, postmenopausal women have elevated risks of athero­
sclerosis and osteoporosis. Women who become pregnant in 
their 30s and 40s or beyond have an increasing risk of having 
infants with chromosomal birth defects such as Down syndrome, 
for a reason explained in the next chapter (see “Birth Defects” 
in section 20.3).
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      667  

CONNECTIVE ISSUES
Ways in Which the REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM Affects Other Organ Systems
Nervous System
Androgens stimulate libido; hormones from the 
gonads and placenta exert negative feedback 
control of the hypothalamus. 
Endocrine System
The gonads and placenta are 
part of the endocrine system 
Digestive System
The fetus crowds digestive organs, contributing to 
heartburn and constipation; pregnancy and  
lactation increase nutritional requirements. 
Urinary System
Sexual arousal constricts the internal urethral 
sphincter; prostatic hyperplasia may impede urine 
flow; pregnancy crowds the urinary bladder. 
Respiratory System
Pulmonary ventilation 
increases in response to sexual 
arousal and in pregnancy. 
Integumentary System
Androgens of puberty stimulate growth of body 
hair and apocrine glands and increased secretion 
by sebaceous glands; estrogens stimulate fat 
deposition and breast development in females; 
pregnancy may cause stretch marks and pigmen-
tation changes in skin. 
© iconogenic/Getty Images RF
Circulatory System
Androgens stimulate erythropoiesis; estrogens 
may inhibit atherosclerosis in females; preg-
nancy increases blood volume and cardiac 
output and sometimes causes varicose veins. 
© Getty Images
© Mediscan/Alamy
© Medical Body Scans/Science Source
© Eraxion/Getty Images RF
Skeletal System
Androgens and estrogens stimulate 
adolescent skeletal growth and maintain 
bone density in adulthood; pregnancy 
and lactation can draw calcium and 
phosphorus from bones if dietary intake 
is inadequate to meet these needs. 
© U.H.B. Trust/Tony Stone Images/
Getty Images
Muscular System
Androgens and estrogens stimulate 
muscle growth. 
© angelhell/Getty Images RF
© Monika Wisniewska/Getty Images RF
Lymphatic and Immune Systems
The blood–testis barrier in testes and 
zona pellucida in ovaries isolate sperm 
and eggs from the immune system. 
Sexually transmitted diseases present 
many challenges to the immune system, 
and AIDS undermines immunity. 
© Russell Kightley/Science Source
668
© mevans/Getty Images RF
and exert negative feedback control of the anterior 
pituitary gland; pregnancy reduces a woman’s insulin 
sensitivity and sometimes causes gestational diabe-
tes; the onset of labor stimulates oxytocin secretion 
by the posterior pituitary; nursing an infant stimulates 
prolactin secretion by the anterior pituitary. 

Study Guide
	 7.	 The locations and functions of the vestibular bulbs, greater and 
lesser vestibular glands, and paraurethral glands 
	 8.	 External regions and internal structure of the nonlactating 
breast 
	 9.	 Hormonal events that bring on puberty, and the bodily changes 
that these hormones produce 
	10.	 The hormonal events of female climacteric and menopause and 
the effects of these changes experienced by some women 
19.4  The Production and Union  
of Sex Cells 
	 1.	 The homologous pairs of human chromosomes, the sex 
chromosomes, and the distinction between diploid and 
­haploid cells 
	 2.	 The reason that meiosis is integral to sexual reproduction, how 
it converts diploid cells to haploid cells, and how it contributes 
to genetic diversity 
	 3.	 Similarities and differences between mitosis and meiosis 
	 4.	 The stages of meiosis and principal events that characterize 
each stage 
	 5.	 The stages of spermatogenesis, the points at which mitosis and 
meiosis are involved, and the point at which the chromosome 
number changes from diploid to haploid 
	 6.	 Structure of the mature spermatozoon and the functions of 
its parts 
	 7.	 Constituents of semen, their sources, and their functions 
	 8.	 The stages of oogenesis, and the similarities and differences 
between oogenesis and spermatogenesis 
	 9.	 The stages of folliculogenesis, the features that distinguish 
ovarian follicles of each type, the correlation between 
­folliculogenesis and oogenesis, and the structure of a 
­mature follicle 
	10.	 The phases and events of the ovarian cycle, how they relate to 
changes in the follicles, and the hormones that dominate each 
phase 
	11.	 The phases of the menstrual cycle, the endometrial changes 
that occur in each, and how these relate to events in the ovaries 
and their hormonal output 
	12.	 Circulatory anatomy, erectile tissues, and innervation 
of the penis and clitoris and how these relate to erectile 
function
	13.	 The mechanism of erection, physiology of orgasm and ejacula-
tion, and processes that follow orgasm in both sexes 
 Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
19.1  Essentials of Sexual  
Reproduction 
	 1.	 The meanings of gamete and zygote, and why sexual reproduc-
tion employs two different kinds of gametes 
	 2.	 The meanings of gonads, primary and secondary sex organs, 
and external and internal genitalia 
19.2  The Male Reproductive System 
	 1.	 Gross anatomy of the testis and the internal organization of its 
tissues 
	 2.	 Structure of the seminiferous tubules and the functions of its 
germ cells and nurse cells 
	 3.	 Anatomy and functions of the epididymis and ductus 
­deferens 
	 4.	 Structure of the scrotum and especially the components of the 
spermatic cord 
	 5.	 The mechanisms by which the scrotum and spermatic cord 
regulate the temperature of the testes, and the reason why this 
temperature regulation is so important 
	 6.	 The locations and structure of the seminal vesicles and pros-
tate, and their contributions to the semen 
	 7.	 The location and function of the bulbourethral glands 
	 8.	 Gross anatomy of the penis and the microscopic anatomy of its 
three erectile tissues 
	 9.	 Hormonal events that bring on puberty, and the bodily changes 
that these hormones produce 
	10.	 The hormonal events of andropause and the effects of these 
changes experienced by some men 
19.3  The Female Reproductive System 
	 1.	 Location, gross anatomy, and internal structure of the 
­ovaries 
	 2.	 The regions and internal histology of the uterine tubes 
	 3.	 The regions and shape of the uterus 
	 4.	 The three layers of the uterine wall and two subdivisions of the 
endometrium 
	 5.	 The gross anatomy and histology of the vagina 
	 6.	 Anatomy of the vulva, including the locations and structures of 
the mons pubis, labia majora and minora, clitoris, prepuce, and 
vaginal orifice 
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      669  

19.5  Pregnancy, Childbirth, and  
Lactation 
	 1.	 The timetable of pregnancy 
	 2.	 Adaptations to pregnancy seen in a woman’s integumentary, 
circulatory, respiratory, urinary, and digestive systems, and in 
her metabolism and nutritional needs 
	 3.	 Factors responsible for the increase in uterine contractility 
toward the end of pregnancy, for the onset of true labor, and for 
its progression 
	 4.	 The stages of labor and the defining events of each stage 
	 5.	 Changes in the maternal body over the first 6 weeks after 
childbirth 
	 6.	 Development of the mammary glands during pregnancy and 
the hormones that regulate this 
	 7.	 The nature of colostrum, how it differs from milk, and what 
purposes it serves 
	 8.	 The influence of breast-feeding on ovarian cycling and 
fertility 
	 9.	 The roles of prolactin and oxytocin in lactation, and the mecha-
nism by which oxytocin stimulates milk ejection 
	10.	 The composition of breast milk and reasons why it is superior 
to cow’s milk for infant nutrition 
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 Thinning of the cervical tissue in childbirth is called
a.	 climacteric. 
b.	 effacement. 
c.	 lochia. 
d.	 involution. 
e.	 dilation. 
	 2.	 Prior to ejaculation, sperm are stored mainly in
a.	 the seminiferous tubules. 
b.	 the seminal vesicles. 
c.	 the ejaculatory ducts. 
d.	 the epididymis. 
e.	 the prostate. 
	 3.	 The hormone that triggers the onset of puberty in both 
sexes is
a.	 gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 
b.	 human chorionic gonadotropin. 
c.	 follicle-stimulating hormone. 
d.	 testosterone. 
e.	 estrogen. 
	 4.	 The 46 chromosomes of a diploid set separate into two haploid 
sets at
a.	 prophase I. 
b.	 prophase II. 
c.	 anaphase I. 
d.	 anaphase II. 
e.	 telophase II. 
	 5.	 Sperm motility requires ATP, which is produced in the sperm’s
a.	 acrosome. 
b.	 nucleus. 
c.	 midpiece. 
d.	 polar body. 
e.	 zona pellucida. 
	 6.	 Menstruation is brought on by a drop in the level of
a.	 progesterone. 
b.	 estrogen. 
c.	 oxytocin. 
d.	 FSH. 
e.	 LH. 
	 7.	 The ovaries secrete all of the following except
a.	 estrogen. 
b.	 progesterone. 
c.	 androgen. 
d.	 follicle-stimulating hormone. 
e.	 inhibin. 
	 8.	 The greatest fraction of the volume of the semen comes from
a.	 the testes. 
b.	 the epididymis. 
c.	 the prostate. 
d.	 the corpus cavernosum. 
e.	 the seminal vesicles. 
	 9.	 The tissue lost in menstruation is
a.	 the functional layer of the endometrium. 
b.	 the basal layer of the endometrium. 
c.	 the myometrium. 
d.	 the infundibulum. 
e.	 the corpus luteum. 
	10.	 Testosterone is secreted by
a.	 the hypothalamus. 
b.	 the anterior pituitary. 
c.	 the posterior pituitary. 
d.	 interstitial endocrine cells of the testis. 
e.	 germ cells of the testis. 
	11.	 A fertilized egg is called a/an 
 . 
	12.	 Meiosis I produces two secondary spermatocytes in a male, but 
produces a secondary oocyte and 
 in the ­female.
670      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

	13.	 A tertiary follicle is defined by the appearance of a cavity 
called the 
 .
	14.	 Days 15 to 28 of the ovarian cycle are called the 
 
phase.
	15.	 The male ejaculatory duct is formed by the convergence of a 
ductus deferens and the duct from a 
 .
	16.	 The hormone that stimulates both labor contractions and milk 
ejection is 
 .
	17.	 Sperm develop in microscopic ducts called 
 in the 
testes.
	18.	 In the first 1 to 3 days postpartum, the mammary glands 
secrete 
 rather than milk.
	19.	 Ovulation is triggered by a spike in the secretion of 
 
around day 13 of a typical ovarian cycle. 
	20.	 In males and females, the prepuce covers part of the penis or 
clitoris, respectively, called the 
 .  
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Testosterone is secreted by the nurse cells of the testes. 
	 2.	 A sperm carries its DNA in the thick midpiece region at the 
base of the tail. 
	 3.	 More than half of the volume of the semen comes from the 
prostate. 
	 4.	 Like the penis, the clitoris has three erectile tissues—a corpus 
spongiosum and a pair of corpora cavernosa. 
	 5.	 Androgens play a significant role in puberty only in males. 
	 6.	 The vagina is lubricated by an abundance of mucous glands in 
its wall. 
	 7.	 Usually, there are no lactiferous ducts in the breast; these begin 
to develop only in pregnancy. 
	 8.	 Climacteric is a midlife change after which men and women 
are no longer fertile. 
	 9.	 Spermiogenesis is a stage in which the male sex cells complete 
meiosis II and become mature sperm cells. 
	10.	 Orgasm is also known as climacteric in both males and females. 
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 A breast-feeding mother leaves her baby at home and goes 
grocery shopping. She hears someone else’s baby crying in 
another aisle, and notices her blouse becoming wet with a little 
exuded milk. Explain the physiological connection between 
hearing that sound and the ejection of milk. 
	 2.	 Explain why sperm and eggs cannot be produced by mitosis 
alone. Why is meiosis also necessary? 
	 3.	 What cells in the ovary perform essentially the same function as 
the interstitial endocrine cells of the testis? Explain your answer. 
Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
CHAPTER 19   The Reproductive System      671  

A new life in the making (MRI scan).
© Simon Fraser/Science Source
Before ascending to the next level, be sure you’re 
properly equipped with a knowledge of these 
concepts from earlier chapters.
• Anatomy and histology of the uterus (see 
“The Uterus” in section 19.3) 
• Structure of the spermatozoon (see “Sperm” 
in section 19.4) 
B A S E  C A M P
Chapter Outline
20.1 Fertilization and Preembryonic Development
• Sperm Migration and Capacitation 
• Fertilization and Meiosis II 
• Major Stages of Prenatal Development 
• The Preembryonic Stage 
20.2 The Embryonic and Fetal Stages
• Prenatal Nutrition 
• Embryonic Membranes 
• Embryonic Folding and Organ Development 
• Fetal Development 
20.3 The Neonate
• Adapting to Life Outside the Womb 
• Premature Infants 
• Birth Defects 
20.4 Aging, Senescence, and Death
• Exercise and Rates of Senescence 
• Theories of Senescence 
• Life Expectancy and Death 
Clinical Applications/Perspectives on Health
• Clinical Application 20.1: Ectopic Pregnancy 
• Clinical Application 20.2: The Thalidomide 
­Tragedy
• Perspectives on Health 
End of Chapter
• Career Spotlight: Genetic Counselor
• Study Guide
Human  
Development  
and Aging
20
Chapter
Module 14: Reproductive System
672	

20.1  Fertilization and Preembryonic 
­Development
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe the processes of sperm migration and fertilization; 
b.	explain how an egg prevents fertilization by more than one 
sperm; 
c.	outline the timetable of prenatal development from the two 
­perspectives of clinical trimesters and developmental stages; 
d.	describe the major events that transform a fertilized egg into an 
embryo; and 
e.	describe the implantation of the preembryo in the uterine wall. 
P
erhaps the most dramatic, miraculous aspect of human life 
is the transformation of a one-celled fertilized egg into an 
independent, fully developed individual. From the beginning of 
recorded thought, people have pondered how a baby forms in the 
mother’s body and how two parents can produce another human 
being who, although unique, possesses characteristics of each. In 
his quest to understand prenatal development, Aristotle speculated 
that the hereditary traits of a child resulted from the mixing of the 
male’s semen with the female’s menstrual blood. In the seventeenth 
century, some scientists thought that the head of the sperm had a 
miniature human curled up in it, while others thought that the min-
iature person existed in the egg and the sperm were parasites in the 
semen. The modern science of embryology—the study of prena-
tal development—was not born until the nineteenth century when 
advances in microscope technology allowed for better study of the 
early stages. In the last part of the twentieth century, and continuing 
today, studies of regulatory genes that control prenatal development 
and evolution have tremendously deepened our insight into human 
development.
Embryology can be viewed as one aspect of developmental biology, 
a broader science that embraces changes in form and function from fertil-
ized egg through old age. Human development from conception to death 
is the scope of this chapter.
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      673  

Authorities attach different meanings to the word embryo. Some use it to denote 
stages beginning with the fertilized egg or at least with the two-celled stage pro-
duced by its first division. Others first apply the word to an individual 16 days 
old, when it consists of three tissue layers called the ectoderm, mesoderm, and 
endoderm. The events leading up to that stage are called embryogenesis, and the 
first 16 days after fertilization are thus called the preembryonic stage. This is the 
sense in which we will use such terms in this book. We begin with the process of 
­fertilization (­conception), in which an egg and sperm unite and their chromosomes 
are combined.
Sperm Migration and Capacitation
A human egg survives only 12 to 24 hours after ovulation if it is not fertilized; 
yet it takes about 72 hours to reach the uterus. Therefore, sperm must travel well 
up the uterine tube to meet the egg before it dies. The vast majority of them 
never make it that far—they are destroyed by vaginal acidity, fail to get through 
the cervical canal, succumb to attack by leukocytes in the uterus, or travel up 
the wrong uterine tube. The average ejaculation discharges about 200 million 
sperm into the vagina, yet only about 200 of these—1 in a million—make it to 
the vicinity of an egg.
Sperm can reach the distal region of the uterine tube in half an hour 
or less, but they cannot fertilize an egg for about 10 hours. First they must 
undergo a ­process called capacitation that makes it possible to penetrate an 
egg. This happens as fluids of the female reproductive tract dilute inhibitory 
factors in the semen and weaken the membrane covering the head of the 
sperm.
Sperm survive for up to 6 days after ejaculation, so there is little chance 
of pregnancy from intercourse occurring more than a week before ovulation. 
Fertilization also is unlikely if intercourse takes place more than 14 hours after 
ovulation, because the egg would no longer be viable by the time the sperm 
became capacitated. For those wishing to conceive a child, the optimal window 
of opportunity is therefore from a few days before ovulation to 14 hours after. 
Those wishing to avoid pregnancy, however, should allow a wider margin of 
safety for variations in sperm and egg longevity, capacitation time, and time of 
ovulation.
Fertilization and Meiosis II
When the sperm approach the egg, proteins on the egg’s extracellular coat, the 
zona pellucida, recognize and bind them. This initiates the acrosomal reaction 
in which enzymes released from the acrosome allow the sperm to tunnel through 
the zona pellucida. However, the first sperm to reach an egg is not the one to 
fertilize it. It requires many sperm to clear a path through the barriers around the 
egg (fig. 20.1). Ultimately, one sperm reaches the egg surface and fuses to its 
plasma membrane, initiating reactions in the egg that prevent more sperm from 
passing through.
The sperm head enters the egg and adds its haploid (n) set of sperm chro-
mosomes to the haploid set of egg chromosomes, producing a diploid (2n) set. 
Fertilization by two or more sperm, called polyspermy, would produce a trip-
loid (3n) or larger set of chromosomes and the egg would die of a “gene over-
dose.” Thus, it is important for the egg to prevent this, and it has two mecha-
nisms for doing so. First, the binding of a sperm to the egg triggers a rapid 
inflow of Na+ that depolarizes the egg membrane; this inhibits the attachment of 
any more sperm. Second, the egg undergoes a cortical reaction, in which secre-
tory vesicles just beneath the egg membrane undergo exocytosis. They release 
674      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Nucleus
Acrosome
Follicle cells
Zona pellucida
Acrosomal reaction
Extracellular space
Sperm
Follicle cells
Zona pellucida
First polar body
Egg
Cortical reaction
Fertilization membrane
2
3
Rejected sperm
4
1
Egg membrane
Secretory vesicles
Fusion of egg
and sperm plasma
membranes
Sperm nucleus
fertilizing egg
a secretion that swells with water, pushes any remaining sperm away from the 
egg, and creates an impenetrable fertilization membrane between the egg and 
zona pellucida.
A secondary oocyte begins meiosis II before ovulation and completes 
it only if fertilized. Through the formation of a second polar body, the fer-
tilized egg discards one chromatid from each chromosome. The sperm and 
egg nuclei then swell and rupture, spilling their chromosomes into a sin-
gle ­diploid set. The fertilized egg, now called a zygote, is ready for its first 
mitotic division.
We will use the term conceptus for everything that arises from this zygote—not 
only the future fetus but also the placenta, umbilical cord, and membranes associ-
ated with it.
Major Stages of Prenatal Development
Clinically, the course of a pregnancy is divided into 3-month intervals called 
trimesters:
	 1.	 The first trimester extends from fertilization through 12 weeks. This is a 
precarious stage in which more than half of all embryos die. The concep-
tus is most vulnerable to stress, drugs, and nutritional deficiencies during 
this time. 
Figure 20.1 Fertilization and Prevention of 
Polyspermy. 
 
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      675  

	 2.	 The second trimester (weeks 13 through 24) is a period in which the organs 
complete most of their development. It becomes possible with sonography 
to see details of anatomy in the fetus. By the end of this trimester, the fetus 
looks distinctly human and, with intensive care, infants born at the end of the 
second trimester have a chance of survival. 
	 3.	 In the third trimester (week 25 to birth), the fetus grows rapidly and the 
organs develop enough to support life outside the womb. At 35 weeks 
from fertilization, the fetus typically weighs about 2.5 kg (5.5 pounds). 
It is considered mature at this weight, and usually survives if born ear-
ly. Most twins are born at about 35 weeks and solitary infants around 
38 weeks. 
From a more biological than clinical standpoint, human development is divided 
into the preembryonic, embryonic, and fetal stages. The timetable and landmark 
events that distinguish these are outlined in table 20.1 and described in the follow-
ing pages.
The Preembryonic Stage
The preembryonic stage comprises the first 16 days of development, leading to the 
existence of an embryo. It involves three major processes: cleavage, implantation, 
and embryogenesis.
Table 20.1  The Stages of Prenatal Development
Stage
Age*
Major Developments and 
Defining Characteristics
Preembryonic Stage 
Zygote
0–30 hours
A single diploid cell formed by the 
union of egg and sperm
Cleavage
30–72 hours
Mitotic division of the zygote into 
smaller, identical cells called 
­blastomeres
Morula
3–4 days
A spheroidal stage consisting of 16 
or more blastomeres
Blastocyst
4–16 days
A fluid-filled, spheroidal stage with 
an outer mass of trophoblast cells 
and inner mass of embryoblast 
cells; becomes implanted in the 
endometrium; inner cell mass forms 
an ­embryonic disc and differenti-
ates into the three primary 
germ layers
Embryonic Stage
16 days–8 weeks
A stage in which the primary germ 
layers differentiate into organs and 
organ systems; ends when all organ 
systems are present
Fetal Stage
8–38 weeks
A stage in which organs grow and 
mature to the point of being capa-
ble of supporting life independently 
of the mother
*From the time of fertilization
676      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

8-celled stage
4-celled stage
2-celled stage
(30 hours)
Zygote
Egg nucleus
Second polar
body
Sperm nucleus
Sperm cell
Fertilization
(0 hours)
Secondary
oocyte
Ovulation
First polar body
Ovary
Implanted
blastocyst
(6 days)
Blastocyst
Morula
(72 hours)
Cleavage
Zona pellucida
Blastomeres
Cleavage
Cleavage refers to mitotic divisions that occur in the first 3 days while the conceptus 
migrates down the uterine tube (fig. 20.2). The first cleavage occurs about 30 hours 
after fertilization and produces the first two daughter cells, or blastomeres.1 These 
divide simultaneously at shorter and shorter time intervals, doubling the number of 
blastomeres each time. By the time the conceptus arrives in the uterus, about 72 hours 
after ovulation, it consists of 16 or more cells and somewhat resembles a mulberry—
hence, it is called a morula.2 The morula is no larger than the zygote; cleavage merely 
produces smaller and smaller blastomeres. This increases the ratio of cell surface area 
to volume, which favors rapid nutrient uptake and waste removal, and it produces a 
larger number of cells from which to form different embryonic tissues.
The morula lies free in the uterine cavity for 4 to 5 days and divides into 100 
cells or so. Meanwhile, the zona pellucida disintegrates and releases the concep-
tus, which is now at a stage called the blastocyst—a hollow sphere with an outer 
layer of squamous cells called the trophoblast3 and an inner cell mass called the 
embryoblast (fig. 20.3a). The trophoblast is destined to form part of the placenta 
and play an important role in nourishment of the embryo, whereas the embryoblast 
is destined to become the embryo itself.
In some cases, the embryoblast splits into two cell masses, resulting in 
identical monozygotic twins, which usually share the same placenta. Non-
identical dizygotic twins and most other multiple births occur when two or 
more eggs are ovulated in the same month and fertilized by separate sperm. 
Figure 20.2 Migration of the Conceptus. The 
egg is fertilized in the distal end of the uterine tube, 
and the preembryo begins cleavage as it migrates 
to the uterus.
•	 Why can’t the egg be fertilized in the uterus? 
1blasto = bud, precursor; mer = segment, part 
2mor = mulberry; ula = little 
3tropho = food, nourishment; blast = producing
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      677  

Amnion
Amniotic 
cavity
Chorionic villi
Germ layers:
Trophoblast
Trophoblast
Embryoblast
Trophoblast
rootlets
Endometrium
Endometrial
gland
Endoderm
Mesoderm
Ectoderm
Yolk sac
Maternal 
blood 
vessel
(a)  8 days
(b)  16 days
They are no more or less genetically similar than other siblings. They attach 
separately to the uterine wall and each forms its own placenta.
Apply What You Know
Your friend John says that he and his sister Beth are identical twins. Even though 
they do look strikingly similar, you are skeptical of his claim. Other than tactful 
­silence, how might you respond?
Implantation
About 6 days after ovulation, the blastocyst adheres to the endometrium and 
becomes embedded in it—a process called implantation. The trophoblast cells on 
the attached side proliferate and grow into the uterus like little roots, digesting endo-
metrial cells along the way. The endometrium reacts to this injury by growing over 
the blastocyst and eventually covering it (fig. 20.3). Implantation takes about a week 
and is completed about the time the next menstrual period would have occurred if 
the woman had not become pregnant.
Another role of the trophoblast is to secrete the hormone human chorionic 
gonadotropin (HCG) (CORE-ee-ON-ic go-NAD-o-TROPE-in). HCG stimu-
lates the corpus luteum to secrete estrogen and progesterone, and progesterone 
prevents menstruation. Pregnancy tests are based on detecting HCG in a wom-
an’s urine. The level of HCG in the mother’s blood rises until the end of the 
Figure 20.3 Implantation. (a) Early implantation 
about 8 days after ovulation. The trophoblast has 
begun growing rootlets, which penetrate the endo-
metrium. (b) By 16 days, the conceptus is completely 
covered by endometrial tissue. The embryo is now 
flanked by a yolk sac and amnion and is composed 
of three primary germ layers.
678      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

second month. During this time, the trophoblast develops into a membrane called 
the chorion, which takes over the role of the corpus luteum and makes HCG 
unnecessary. The ovaries then become inactive for the rest of the pregnancy, but 
estrogen and progesterone levels rise dramatically as they are secreted by the 
ever-growing chorion.
Embryogenesis
During implantation, the embryoblast undergoes embryogenesis—arrangement of 
the blastomeres into the three primary germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and 
endoderm. At the beginning of this phase, the embryoblast separates slightly from 
the trophoblast, creating a narrow space between them called the amniotic cavity 
lined by a membrane, the amnion. The embryoblast flattens into an embryonic disc 
composed of two cell layers—a deep layer facing the amniotic cavity and a super-
ficial layer facing away. The superficial layer produces a fluid-filled yolk sac. Now 
the embryonic disc is flanked by two spaces: the amniotic cavity on one side and 
the yolk sac on the other.
Meanwhile, the disc elongates and a thickened ridge forms along the midline, 
with a primitive groove down its middle. These events make the embryo bilaterally 
symmetric and define its future right and left sides, dorsal and ventral surfaces, and 
head and tail ends.
The next step is gastrulation—multiplying cells migrate medially toward the 
primitive groove and down into it (fig. 20.4). They become a layer called endoderm, 
which will become the inner lining of the digestive tract among other things. A day 
later, migrating cells form a third layer between the first two, called ­mesoderm. 
Once this is formed, the upper surface is called ectoderm. The ectoderm and endo-
derm are epithelia composed of tightly joined cells, but the mesoderm is a more 
loosely organized tissue. Mesoderm gives rise to skeletal muscle as well as a loose, 
gelatinous, fetal connective tissue called mesenchyme. Mesenchyme in turn gives 
rise to such tissues as smooth and cardiac muscle, bone, blood, and adipose tissue. 
Precise control of these embryonic cell migrations is crucial, because any misplace-
ment of cells at this stage results in gross deformities of the embryo and a likelihood 
of prenatal death.
Clinical Application 20.1
ECTOPIC PREGNANCY
In about 1 out of 300 pregnancies, the blastocyst implants somewhere other 
than the uterus, producing an ectopic4 pregnancy. Most cases are tubal preg-
nancies, implantation in the uterine tube. This usually occurs because the 
conceptus encounters an obstruction resulting from earlier pelvic inflamma-
tory disease, tubal surgery, previous ectopic pregnancies, or other causes. The 
uterine tube cannot expand enough to accommodate the growing conceptus 
for long; unless detected and treated early, the tube usually ruptures within 
12 weeks, with potentially fatal hemorrhaging. Occasionally, a conceptus im-
plants in the abdominopelvic cavity, producing an abdominal pregnancy. It 
can grow anywhere it finds an adequate blood supply—for example, on the 
outside of the uterus, colon, or bladder. About 1 pregnancy in 7,000 is abdomi-
nal. This is a serious threat and usually requires aborting the pregnancy to save 
the woman’s life, but about 9% of abdominal pregnancies go full term and end 
in delivery by cesarean section.
4ec = out of; top = place
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      679  

Amnion
Yolk sac
Future mesoderm
Future endoderm
Primitive groove
Future ectoderm
Once the three primary germ layers are formed, embryogenesis is complete 
and the individual is considered an embryo. It is about 2 mm long and 16 days old 
at this point.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
1.	 How soon can a sperm reach an egg after ejacula-
tion? How soon can it fertilize an egg? What accounts for the 
difference? 
2.	Describe two ways a fertilized egg prevents the entry of 
­excess sperm. 
3.	In the blastocyst, what are the cells called that eventually 
give rise to the embryo? What are the cells that carry out 
implantation? 
4.	In which clinical trimester does a conceptus reach the 
­embryonic stage? The fetal stage? 
5.	What defines a true embryo and at what age is this stage 
reached? 
Figure 20.4 Formation of the Primary Germ 
Layers (Gastrulation). The embryonic disc at 
16 days, corresponding to the center of figure 20.3b. 
Surface cells migrate into the primitive groove, first 
forming a layer of endoderm beneath, then filling 
the space between these first two layers with me-
soderm. Upon completion of this process, the up-
permost layer is considered ectoderm.
•	 Name any three adult organs that develop 
from the red cells in the middle. 
20.2  The Embryonic and Fetal Stages
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	identify the major tissues derived from the primary germ layers; 
b.	explain how the conceptus is nourished before the placenta 
takes over this function; 
c.	describe the formation of the placenta and list its multiple func-
tions; 
d.	describe the four embryonic membranes and their functions; 
e.	describe the conversion of a flat embryonic disc into a cylindrical 
form enclosing a primitive gut; and 
f.	 describe how the fetal circulatory system differs from that of a 
neonate. 
680      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Sixteen days after conception, the germ layers are present and the embryonic 
stage of development begins. Over the next 6 weeks, a placenta forms on the uterine 
wall and becomes the embryo’s primary means of nutrition, while the germ lay-
ers differentiate into organs and organ systems—a process called organogenesis 
(table 20.2). Although these organs are still far from functional, it is their presence 
at 8 weeks that marks the transition from the embryonic stage to the fetal stage. 
Here we will see how the embryo becomes a fetus, how the membranes collectively 
known as the “afterbirth” develop around the fetus, and how the conceptus is nour-
ished throughout its gestation.
Prenatal Nutrition
Over the course of gestation, the conceptus is nourished in three different, overlap-
ping ways. As it travels down the uterine tube and lies free in the uterine cavity 
before implantation, it is nourished by a glycogen-rich secretion of the uterine tubes 
and endometrial glands called uterine milk.
As it implants, the conceptus shifts to trophoblastic nutrition, in which it 
consumes so-called decidual5 cells of the endometrium. Progesterone from the 
corpus luteum stimulates these cells to proliferate and accumulate a store of gly-
cogen, protein, and lipid. As the conceptus burrows into the endometrium, the 
trophoblast digests them and relays the nutrients to the embryoblast. This is the 
only mode of nutrition for the first week after implantation. It remains the domi-
nant source of nutrients through the end of week 8; the period from implantation 
through week 8 is therefore called the trophoblastic phase of the pregnancy. Tro-
phoblastic nutrition wanes as placental nutrition takes over, and ceases entirely by 
the end of week 12.
In placental nutrition, nutrients diffuse from the mother’s blood through the 
placental wall into the fetal blood. The placenta6 is a disc-shaped organ attached to 
the uterus on one side and, on the other side, attached by way of an ­umbilical cord 
to the fetus (fig. 20.5). The uterine surface of the placenta bears shaggy ­chorionic 
villi (CORE-ee-ON-ic VILL-eye) embedded in the endometrium. When fully 
developed, the placenta is about 20 cm in diameter, 3 cm thick, and weighs about 
one-sixth as much as the newborn infant.
Table 20.2  Derivatives of the Three Primary Germ Layers
Germ Layer
Major Derivatives
Ectoderm
Epidermis; hair follicles and piloerector muscles; cutaneous 
glands; nervous system; adrenal medulla; pineal and pituitary 
glands; lens, cornea, and intrinsic muscles of the eye; internal and 
external ear; salivary glands; epithelia of the nasal cavity, oral 
­cavity, and anal canal
Mesoderm
Skeleton; skeletal, cardiac, and most smooth muscle; cartilage; 
adrenal cortex; middle ear; dermis; blood; blood and lymphatic 
vessels; bone marrow; lymphoid tissue; epithelium of kidneys, 
ureters, gonads, and genital ducts; mesothelium of the abdominal 
and thoracic cavities
Endoderm
Most of the mucosal epithelium of the digestive and respiratory 
tracts; mucosal epithelium of urinary bladder and parts of urethra; 
epithelial components of accessory reproductive and digestive 
glands (except salivary glands); thyroid and parathyroid glands; 
thymus
5decid = falling off 
6placenta = flat cake
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      681  

Yolk sac
Amniotic ﬂuid
in amniotic cavity
Umbilical cord
Allantois
Chorion
Lumen of uterus
(a)   
Amnion
Placenta
Maternal artery
Myometrium
of uterus
Placental sinus
Umbilical vein
Umbilical arteries
Umbilical cord
Maternal blood
Chorionic villus
(b)
Maternal vein
(c)
(d)
Figure 20.5 The Placenta and Embryonic Membranes. 
(a) A 12-week fetus. The placenta is completely formed. (b) A 
portion of the mature placenta and umbilical cord, showing 
the relationship between fetal and maternal circulation. (c) The 
fetal side of the placenta, showing blood vessels, the umbili-
cal cord, and some of the amniotic sac attached to the lower 
left margin. (d) The maternal (uterine) side, where chorionic villi 
give the placenta a rougher texture.
c and d: © Dr. Kurt Benirschke
682      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

The placenta begins to develop about 11 days after conception, becomes the 
dominant mode of nutrition around the beginning of week 9, and is the sole mode 
of nutrition from the end of week 12 until birth. The period from week 9 until birth 
is called the placental phase of the pregnancy.
The development of the placenta begins during implantation, as extensions of 
the trophoblast penetrate more and more deeply into the endometrium, like the roots 
of a tree penetrating into the nourishing soil of the uterus. These roots are the early 
chorionic villi. As they invade uterine blood vessels, they become surrounded by 
pools of maternal blood. These pools eventually merge to form a single blood-filled 
sinus. Maternal blood stimulates rapid growth of the villi, which become branched 
and treelike. Mesoderm grows into the villi and gives rise to the blood vessels that 
connect to the embryo by way of the umbilical cord.
The umbilical cord contains two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein. 
Pumped by the fetal heart, blood flows to the placenta by way of the umbilical arter-
ies and then returns to the fetus by way of the umbilical vein. The chorionic villi are 
thus filled with fetal blood and surrounded by maternal blood (fig. 20.5b); the two 
bloodstreams do not mix unless there is damage to the placental barrier. The barrier, 
however, is only 3.5 µm thick—half the diameter of one red blood cell. As devel-
opment progresses, this barrier becomes more and more permeable to chemicals. 
Oxygen and nutrients pass from the maternal blood, through the barrier, into the fetal 
blood, while fetal wastes pass the other way to be eliminated by the mother. Unfortu-
nately, the placenta is also permeable to nicotine, alcohol, and most other drugs that 
may be present in the maternal bloodstream and harmful to the embryo.
Table 20.3 describes the many functions of the placenta.
Apply What You Know
What basic law of diffusion determines that at the placenta, fetal wastes pass from 
the fetal blood into the maternal blood, and oxygen passes from the ­maternal 
blood into the fetal blood, rather than in the opposite directions? (See “Transport 
Through Cellular Membranes” in section 3.2.) 
Embryonic Membranes
The placenta is only one of several accessory organs that develop alongside 
the embryo; there are also four embryonic membranes called the amnion, yolk 
sac, allantois, and chorion (figs. 20.5a and 20.6). The amnion is a ­transparent 
Table 20.3  Functions of the Placenta
Nutritional roles
Permits nutrients such as glucose, amino acids, fatty acids, minerals, 
and vitamins to diffuse from the maternal blood to the fetal blood; 
stores nutrients such as carbohydrates, protein, iron, and calcium in 
early pregnancy and releases them to the fetus later, when fetal 
demand is greater than the mother can absorb from the diet
Excretory roles
Permits nitrogenous wastes such as ammonia, urea, uric acid, and 
creatinine to diffuse from the fetal blood to the maternal blood
Respiratory roles
Permits O2 to diffuse from mother to fetus and CO2 from fetus to 
mother
Endocrine roles
Secretes estrogens, progesterone, human chorionic gonadotropin, 
and other hormones; allows hormones synthesized by the concep-
tus to pass into the mother’s blood and maternal hormones to pass 
into the fetal blood
Immune roles
Transfers maternal antibodies (especially IgG) into fetal blood to 
­confer passive immunity on fetus
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      683  

20–21 days
Age
Longitudinal sections
Cross sections
22–24 days
28 days
Ectoderm
Ectoderm
Endoderm
Endoderm
Amnion
Tail
Head
Amniotic 
cavity
Allantois
Allantois
Neural tube
Neural tube
Yolk sac
Yolk sac
Yolk sac
Lung
Liver
Heart
Heart
Primitive gut
Amniotic cavity
Amnion
Amnion
Ectoderm
Neural groove
Mesoderm
Mesoderm
Primitive gut
Primitive gut
Peritoneal cavity
Mesentery
sac that encloses the embryo and is penetrated only by the umbilical cord. 
It is filled with amniotic fluid (see fig. 20.7d), which protects the embryo 
from trauma, infection, and temperature fluctuations; allows the freedom of 
movement important to muscle development; enables the embryo to develop 
symmetrically; prevents body parts from adhering to each other, such as an 
arm to the trunk; and stimulates lung development as the fetus “breathes” the 
fluid. The fetus also repeatedly swallows amniotic fluid and urinates it back 
into the amniotic sac. At term, the amnion contains 700 to 1,000 mL of fluid, 
released vaginally when the amnion ruptures during labor (the “breaking of 
the waters”).
The yolk sac, named for its role in egg-laying vertebrates, is a small bag 
suspended from the underside of the embryo. It encloses the egg yolk in reptiles 
and birds, but in humans and other mammals, it contributes to the ­formation of 
Figure 20.6 Embryonic Folding. The right-hand figures are cross sections cut about midway along the figures on the left. From 
22 to 28 days, the two ends of the embryo curl toward each other (left-hand figures) until the embryo assumes a C shape, and the 
flanks of the ­embryo fold laterally (right-hand figures), converting the flat embryonic disc into a more cylindrical body and eventually 
enclosing a body cavity.
684      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

(b) 4 weeks
Future lens
Heart bulge
Pharyngeal
arches
Leg bud
Tail
Arm bud
Somites
0.3 cm
(c) 7 weeks
Eye
Digital rays
Liver bulge
Umbilical
cord
Foot plate
Tail
Ear
1.0 cm
Neural
plate
Amnion
(cut edge)
Neural
groove
Somites
(a) 3 weeks
0.1 cm
(d) 8 weeks
2.0 cm
Umbilical
cord
Amnion
Yolk sac
Figure 20.7 The Developing Human. Parts (a) through (c) are early 
and late embryos. The individual in part (d ), at 8 weeks, has just begun the 
fetal stage. The fetus in part (f) is at a stage where the mother can begin to 
feel its movements, but is still at least 8 weeks from being marginally viable 
if born prematurely, and is 18 weeks short of full term.
a: Source: the Human Developmental Anatomy Center, National Museum of Health and Medi-
cine, Silver Spring, MD, USA; b and c: © Anatomical Travelogue/Science Source; d: © Dr G. 
Moscoso/Science Source; e: © Science Source; f: © Biophoto Associates/Science Source
(continued on next page)
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      685  

(f) 20 weeks
(e) 12 weeks
2.0 cm
5.0 cm
Uterus
Chorion
Amnion
the digestive tract and produces the first blood cells and the stem cells that will 
become future eggs or sperm.
The allantois (ah-LON-toe-iss) begins as an outgrowth of the caudal end of the 
gut. It forms the foundation for the umbilical cord and becomes part of the urinary 
bladder.
The chorion is the outermost membrane, enclosing all the others and the 
embryo. Initially, it has shaggy chorionic villi around its entire surface (see 
fig. 20.3b), but as the pregnancy advances, the villi of the placental region grow 
and branch while the rest of them degenerate. The chorion thus becomes smooth 
surfaced away from the placental region (fig. 20.5a). The chorion secretes 
­pregnancy-regulating hormones and, through its role in the placenta, provides 
an avenue of fetal nutrition.
Embryonic Folding and Organ Development
One of the major transformations in the embryonic stage is conversion of the flat 
embryonic disc into a somewhat cylindrical form. This occurs during week 4 as 
the embryo rapidly grows and folds around the yolk sac (see fig. 20.6). As the head 
and tail ends curve around the ends of the yolk sac, the embryo becomes C-shaped, 
with the head and tail almost touching. At the same time, the lateral margins of the 
disc fold around the sides of the yolk sac to form the ventral surface of the embryo. 
This lateral folding encloses a longitudinal channel, the primitive gut, which later 
becomes the digestive tract.
As a result of embryonic folding, the entire surface becomes covered with 
ectoderm, which later produces the epidermis of the skin. In the meantime, the 
Figure 20.7 (continued)
686      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

mesoderm splits into two layers. One of them adheres to the ectoderm and the 
other to the endoderm, thus opening a body cavity between them. This cavity is 
soon subdivided by a diaphragm, giving rise to the thoracic cavity and peritoneal 
cavity. By the end of week 5, the thoracic cavity further divides into pleural and 
pericardial cavities.
Two more significant events in organogenesis are the appearance of a 
neural tube, which later becomes the brain and spinal cord, and segmenta-
tion of the mesoderm into blocks of tissue called somites (fig. 20.7a, b), 
which later give rise to the vertebral column, skeletal muscles, and dermis of 
the skin.
We cannot delve at greater length into development of all the organ systems 
here, but this description is at least enough to see how some of them begin to form. 
By the end of 8 weeks, all of the organ systems are present, the individual is about 
3 cm long, and it is now considered a fetus (fig. 20.7d). The bones have just begun to 
calcify and the skeletal muscles exhibit weak spontaneous contractions. The heart, 
beating since the fourth week, now circulates blood. The head is nearly half the total 
body length.
Fetal Development
The fetus is the final stage of prenatal development, from the start of the ninth week 
until birth. The organs that formed during the embryonic stage now undergo growth 
and cellular differentiation, acquiring the functional capability to support life out-
side the mother.
The circulatory system shows the most conspicuous changes from the prena-
tal state to the neonatal (newborn) state (figure 20.8). The unique aspects of fetal 
circulation are the umbilical–placental circuit and the presence of three circula-
tory shortcuts called shunts. The internal iliac arteries give rise to the two umbili-
cal arteries, which pass into the umbilical cord. The arterial blood discharges its 
wastes in the placenta, loads oxygen and nutrients coming from the mother, and 
returns to the fetus by way of a single umbilical vein, which leads toward the liver. 
The umbilical vein is depicted in red because of its well-oxygenated blood. A 
little venous blood filters through the liver to nourish it, but most of it bypasses 
the liver by way of a shunt called the ductus venosus, which leads to the inferior 
vena cava.
In the inferior vena cava, placental blood mixes with venous blood from the 
fetus’s body and flows to the right atrium of the heart. After birth, the right ven-
tricle pumps all of its blood into the lungs, but there is little need for this in the 
fetus because the lungs are not yet functional. Therefore, most fetal blood bypasses 
the pulmonary circuit. Some goes directly from the right to left atrium through a 
hole in the interatrial septum called the foramen ovale. Some also goes into the 
right ventricle and is pumped into the pulmonary trunk, but most of this is shunted 
directly into the aorta by way of a short passage called the ductus arteriosus. The 
lungs receive only a trickle of blood, sufficient to meet their metabolic needs dur-
ing development. Blood leaving the left ventricle enters the general systemic cir-
culation. This circulatory pattern changes dramatically at birth, when the neonate 
is cut off from the placenta and the lungs expand with air. Those changes will be 
described later.
Fetal growth is charted by weight and body length. Body length is customar-
ily measured from the crown of the head to the curve of the buttocks in a sitting 
position (crown-to-rump length, CRL), thus excluding the lower limbs. Full-term 
fetuses have an average CRL of about 36 cm (14 in.) and average weight of about 
3.0 to 3.4 kg (6.6–7.5 pounds). The fetus gains about 50% of its birth weight in the 
last 10 weeks. Additional aspects of embryonic and fetal development are listed in 
table 20.4 and depicted in figure 20.7.
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      687  

4
Ductus
arteriosus
Ligamentum
arteriosum
Ductus
venosus
Round 
ligament
Urinary
bladder
Foramen
ovale
Fossa
ovalis
Umbilicus
Umbilical
vein
Ligamentum
venosum
Abdominal aorta
Inferior vena cava
Umbilical
arteries
Common iliac artery
Umbilical
cord
Oxygen content of blood
Median
umbilical
ligaments
Low
High
(a) Fetal circulation
(b) Neonatal circulation
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
7
6
Liver
Placenta
Lung
Kidney
Lung
Liver
Kidney
Blood bypasses the lungs by ﬂowing directly from the 
right atrium through the foramen ovale into the left atrium.
Blood also bypasses the lungs by ﬂowing from the 
pulmonary trunk through the ductus arteriosus into the aorta.
Oxygen-poor, waste-laden blood ﬂows through two umbilical 
arteries to the placenta.
The placenta disposes of CO2 and other wastes and 
reoxygenates the blood.
5 Oxygenated blood returns to the fetus through the umbilical vein.
6 Placental blood bypasses the liver by ﬂowing through the 
ductus venosus into the inferior vena cava (IVC).
7 Placental blood from the umbilical vein mixes with fetal blood 
from the IVC and returns to the heart.
1
2
3
4
Foramen ovale closes and becomes fossa ovalis.
Ductus arteriosus constricts and becomes 
ligamentum arteriosum.
Umbilical arteries degenerate and become median
umbilical ligaments.
Umbilical vein constricts and becomes round
ligament of liver.
5 Ductus venosus degenerates and becomes 
ligamentum venosum of liver.
6 Blood returning to the heart is now oxygen-poor,
systemic blood only.
Urinary bladder
Figure 20.8 Blood Circulation in the Fetus and Newborn. Boldfaced terms in (a) indicate the three shunts in the fetal circulation, which 
allow most blood to bypass the liver and lungs. Boldfaced terms in (b) indicate the postpartum vestiges of fetal structures.
688      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
6.	Name three mature structures that develop from the 
ectoderm, three from the mesoderm, and three from 
the endoderm. 
7.	 How is trophoblastic nutrition different from placental nutrition? 
8.	Identify the two sources of blood to the placenta. Where do 
these two bloodstreams come closest to each other? What 
keeps them separated? 
9.	State the functions of the placenta, amnion, chorion, yolk sac, 
and allantois. 
10.	What developmental characteristic distinguishes a fetus from 
an embryo? At what gestational age is this attained? 
11.	Identify the three circulatory shunts of the fetus. Why does the 
blood take these “shortcuts” before birth? 
Table 20.4  Major Events of Prenatal Development
End of 
Week
Crown-to-Rump 
Length (CRL) 
and Weight
Developmental Events
First Trimester
4
0.6 cm; <1 g
Vertebral column and central nervous system begin to form; limbs represented by small limb buds; heart begins 
beating around day 22; no visible eyes, nose, or ears
8
3 cm; 1 g
Eyes form, eyelids fused shut; nose flat, nostrils evident but plugged with mucus; head nearly as large as the 
rest of the body; brain waves detectable; bone calcification begins; limb buds form paddlelike hands and feet 
with ridges called digital rays, which then separate into distinct fingers and toes; blood cells and major blood 
vessels form; genitals present but sexes not yet distinguishable
12
9 cm; 45 g
Eyes well developed, facing laterally; eyelids still fused; nose develops bridge; external ears present; limbs well 
formed, digits exhibit nails; fetus swallows amniotic fluid and produces urine; fetus moves, but too weakly for 
mother to feel it; liver is prominent and produces bile; palate is fusing; sexes can be distinguished
Second Trimester
16
14 cm; 200 g
Eyes face anteriorly, external ears stand out from head, face looks more human; body larger in proportion to head; 
skin is bright pink, scalp has hair; joints forming; lips exhibit sucking movements; kidneys well formed; digestive 
glands forming and meconium7 (fetal feces) accumulating in intestine; heartbeat can be heard with a stethoscope
20
19 cm; 460 g
Body covered with fine hair called lanugo8 and cheeselike sebaceous secretion called vernix caseosa,9 which pro-
tects it from amniotic fluid; skin bright pink; brown fat forms and will be used for postpartum heat production; fetus is 
now bent forward into “fetal position” because of crowding; quickening occurs—mother can feel fetal movements
24
23 cm; 820 g
Eyes partially open; skin wrinkled, pink, and translucent; lungs begin producing surfactant; rapid weight gain
Third Trimester
28
27 cm; 1,300 g
Eyes fully open; skin wrinkled and red; full head of hair present; eyelashes formed; fetus turns into upside-down 
vertex position; testes begin to descend into scrotum; marginally viable if born at 28 weeks
32
30 cm; 2,100 g
Subcutaneous fat deposition gives fetus a more plump, babyish appearance, with lighter, less wrinkled skin; 
testes descending; twins usually born at this stage
36
34 cm; 2,900 g
More subcutaneous fat deposited, body plump; lanugo is shed; nails extend to fingertips; limbs flexed; firm 
hand grip
38
36 cm; 3,400 g
Prominent chest, protruding breasts; testes in inguinal canal or scrotum; fingernails extend beyond fingertips
7mecon = poppy juice, opium; refers to an appearance similar to black tar opium 
8lan = down, wool 
9vernix = varnish; case = cheese; osa = full of
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      689  

PERSPECTIVES ON   H E A LT H
C
 ontraception means any procedure or device intended to pre-
vent pregnancy (the presence of an implanted conceptus in 
the uterus). This essay summarizes the most popular methods and 
some issues involved in choosing among them.
Behavioral Methods
Abstinence (refraining from intercourse) is, obviously, a completely 
reliable method if used consistently. The fertility awareness-based 
method relies on avoiding intercourse near the time of expected ovu-
lation. Among typical users, it has a 25% failure rate, partly due to lack 
of restraint and partly because it is difficult to predict the exact date 
of ovulation. Intercourse must be avoided for at least 7 days before 
ovulation so there will be no surviving sperm in the reproductive tract 
when the egg is ovulated, and for at least 2 days after ovulation so 
there will be no fertile egg present when sperm are introduced.
Withdrawal (coitus interruptus) requires the male to withdraw 
the penis before ejaculation. This often fails because of lack of 
willpower, because some sperm are present in the preejaculatory 
fluid, and because sperm ejaculated anywhere in the vulva can 
potentially get into the reproductive tract.
Barrier and Spermicidal Methods
Barrier methods are designed to prevent sperm from getting into or 
beyond the vagina. They are most effective when used with chemical 
spermicides, available as nonprescription foams, creams, and jellies. 
Second only to birth-control pills in popularity is the male condom, a 
sheath usually made of latex, worn over the penis. Female condoms 
that cover the vulva and line the vagina are also available. Condoms 
are the only contraceptive methods that also protect against disease 
transmission. Condoms have the advantages of being inexpensive 
and requiring no medical examination or prescription.
The diaphragm is a latex dome worn over the cervix to block 
sperm migration. It requires a physical examination and prescrip-
tion to ensure proper fit, but is otherwise comparable to the con-
dom in convenience and reliability, provided it is used with a sper-
micide. Without a spermicide, it is not very effective. Unlike the 
male and female condoms, the diaphragm and other methods that 
follow offer no protection from sexually transmitted diseases.
The sponge is a concave foam disc inserted before inter-
course to cover the cervix. It is coated with spermicide and acts by 
absorbing semen and killing the sperm. It requires no prescription 
or fitting. The sponge provides protection for up to 12 hours, and 
must be left in place for 6 hours after intercourse.
Hormonal Methods
Most hormonal methods of contraception are aimed at preventing 
ovulation. They mimic the negative feedback effect of ovarian hor-
mones on the pituitary gland, inhibiting FSH and LH secretion so 
follicles do not mature. For most women, they are highly effective 
and present minimal complications.
The oldest and still the most widely used hormonal method in 
the United States is the combined oral contraceptive (birth-control 
pill). It is composed of estrogen and progestin, a synthetic proges-
terone. It must be taken daily, at the same time of day, for 21 days 
each cycle. The 7-day withdrawal allows for menstruation. Side 
effects include an elevated risk of heart attack or stroke in smokers 
and in women with a history of diabetes, hypertension, or clotting 
disorders.
Other hormonal methods avoid the need to remember a daily 
pill. One option is a skin patch that releases estrogen and progestin 
transdermally. It is changed at 7-day intervals (three patches per 
month and 1 week without). The NuvaRing is a soft flexible vaginal 
ring that releases estrogen and progestin for absorption through 
the vaginal mucosa. It must be worn continually for 3 weeks and 
removed for the fourth week of each cycle. Medroxyprogesterone 
(trade name Depo-Provera) is a progestin administered by injec-
tion every 3 months. It provides highly reliable, long-term contra-
ception, although in some women it causes headaches, nausea, 
or weight gain.
Some drugs can be taken orally after intercourse to prevent 
implantation of a conceptus. These are called emergency contra-
ceptive pills (ECPs), or “morning-after pills." An ECP is a high dose 
of estrogen and progestin or a progestin alone. It can be taken 
within 72 hours after intercourse and induces menstruation within 
2 weeks. ECPs inhibit ovulation, inhibit sperm or egg transport in 
the uterine tube, and prevent implantation. They do not work if a 
blastocyst is already implanted.
Intrauterine Devices
Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are springy, often T-shaped devices 
inserted through the cervical canal into the uterus. Some IUDs 
act by releasing a synthetic progesterone, but most have a 
copper wire wrapping or copper sleeve. IUDs irritate the uter-
ine lining and interfere with blastocyst implantation, and cop-
per IUDs also inhibit sperm motility. An IUD can be left in place 
for 5 to 12 years.
M e t h o d s  o f  C o n t r a c e p t i o n
(continued on next page)
690      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Surgical Methods
People who are confident that they do not want more children (or 
any) often elect to be surgically sterilized. This entails the cutting 
and tying or clamping of the genital ducts, thus blocking the pas-
sage of sperm or eggs. Surgical sterilization has the advantage 
of convenience, since it requires no further attention. Its initial 
cost is higher, however, and for people who later change their 
minds, surgical reversal is much more expensive than the original 
procedure and is often unsuccessful. Vasectomy is the severing 
of the male’s ductus (vas) deferens, done through a small incision 
in the back of the scrotum. In tubal ligation, the uterine tubes are 
tied or cut. This can be done through small abdominal incisions 
to admit a cutting instrument and laparoscope (viewing device).
Issues in Choosing a Contraceptive
We have not considered all the currently available methods of 
contraception or all the issues important to the choice of a con-
traceptive. No one method can be recommended as best for all 
people. Many issues enter into one’s choice, including personal 
preference, pattern of sexual activity, medical history, religious 
views, convenience, initial and ongoing costs, and disease pre-
vention. For most people, however, the two primary issues are 
safety and reliability. Further information necessary to a sound 
choice and proper use of contraceptives should be sought from 
a health department, college health service, physician, reliable 
Internet sites, or other such sources.
(continued from previous page)
20.3  The Neonate
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	describe how the respiratory and circulatory systems change 
and affect each other at birth; 
b.	explain why the neonate faces unique challenges in immunity, 
thermoregulation, and fluid balance; 
c.	describe the most critical physiological problems of a premature 
infant; and 
d.	discuss and classify several common causes of birth defects. 
Development is by no means complete at birth. For example, the liver and kidneys 
still are not fully functional, most joints are not yet ossified, and myelination of the 
nervous system is not completed until adolescence. Indeed, humans are born in a 
very immature state compared with other mammals—a fact necessitated by the nar-
row outlet of the female pelvis.
Adapting to Life Outside the Womb
The first 4 weeks of postpartum life constitute the neonatal period. This period is 
a time in which the neonate must adapt to life outside the mother’s body. Here we 
consider some of the major adjustments of the neonate to this new way of life.
Respiration
The most obvious adaptation to external life is that the infant must breathe on its own. 
It is an old misconception that a neonate must be spanked to stimulate it to breathe. 
During birth, CO2 accumulates in the baby’s blood and strongly stimulates the respira-
tory chemoreceptors. Unless the infant is depressed by oversedation of the mother, it 
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      691  

normally begins breathing spontaneously. It requires a great effort, however, to take the 
first few breaths and inflate the collapsed alveoli. For the first 2 weeks, a baby takes 
about 45 breaths per minute, but subsequently stabilizes at about 12 breaths per minute.
Circulation
When the lungs expand with air, resistance and blood pressure in the pulmonary 
circulation drop rapidly and pressure in the right side of the heart falls below that 
in the left. Blood flows briefly from the left atrium to the right through the foramen 
ovale, pushing two flaps of tissue into place to close this shunt. Usually these flaps 
fuse and permanently seal the foramen during the first year, leaving a depression, 
the fossa ovalis, in the interatrial septum. Pressure changes in the pulmonary trunk 
and aorta also cause the ductus arteriosus to collapse. It closes permanently around 
3 months of age, leaving a permanent cord, the ligamentum arteriosum, between the 
two vessels. After the umbilical cord is clamped and cut, the umbilical arteries and 
vein collapse and become fibrotic (fig. 20.8).
Immunity
Cellular immunity begins early in fetal development, but the immune responses of 
the neonate are still weak. Fortunately, an infant is born with a near-adult level of 
antibodies in the IgG class acquired from the mother through the placenta. Maternal 
IgG breaks down rapidly after birth, but its level remains high enough for 6 months 
to protect the infant from measles, diphtheria, polio, and most other infectious dis-
eases (but not whooping cough). By 6 months, the infant’s own IgG reaches about 
half the typical adult level. The lowest total (maternal + infant) level of IgG exists 
around 5 to 6 months of age, and respiratory infections are especially common at 
that age. A breast-fed neonate also acquires protection from the IgA present in the 
colostrum.
Thermoregulation
Thermoregulation is another critical aspect of neonatal physiology. An infant has 
a large ratio of surface area to volume, so it loses heat easily. One of its defenses 
against hypothermia is brown fat, a special adipose tissue deposited from weeks 7 
to 20 of fetal development. The mitochondria of brown fat release all the energy of 
fatty acids as heat rather than using it to make ATP; thus, this is a heat-generating 
tissue. Nevertheless, body temperature is more variable in infants and children than 
in adults.
Fluid Balance
The kidneys are not fully developed at birth and cannot concentrate the urine as 
much as a mature kidney can. Consequently, infants have a relatively high rate of 
water loss and require more fluid intake, relative to body weight, than adults do.
Premature Infants
Neonates weighing under 2.5 kg (5.5 pounds) are generally considered premature. 
They have multiple difficulties with respiration, thermoregulation, excretion, diges-
tion, and liver function. Most neonates weighing 1.5 to 2.5 kg are viable, but only 
with neonatal intensive care. Neonates weighing under 500 g rarely survive.
Infants born before 7 months commonly suffer infant respiratory distress 
syndrome (IRDS), the most common cause of death in premature babies. It occurs 
because the lungs have not produced enough pulmonary surfactant (see “The 
Alveoli” in section 15.1). Consequently, when the infant exhales, the alveoli do not 
692      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

remain open but collapse like sheets of wet paper clinging together. A great deal of 
effort is needed to reinflate them. The infant becomes exhausted by the high energy 
demand of breathing. IRDS can be treated by ventilating the lungs with oxygen-
enriched air at a positive pressure to keep the lungs inflated between breaths, and by 
administering surfactant as an inhalant.
A premature infant has an incompletely developed hypothalamus and therefore 
cannot thermoregulate effectively. Body temperature must be controlled by placing 
the infant in a warmer.
It is difficult for premature infants to ingest milk because of their small stomach 
volume and undeveloped sucking and swallowing reflexes. Some must be fed by 
nasogastric or nasoduodenal tubes.
The liver is also poorly developed, and bearing in mind its very diverse func-
tions (see table 18.4), you can probably understand why this would have several 
serious consequences. The liver synthesizes insufficient albumin, so the baby suf-
fers hypoproteinemia. This upsets the osmotic balance between capillary filtra-
tion and reabsorption, leading to edema. The infant bleeds easily because of a 
deficiency of the clotting factors synthesized by the liver. Jaundice is common in 
neonates, especially premature babies, because the liver cannot dispose of bile pig-
ments efficiently.
Birth Defects
A birth defect, or congenital anomaly,10 is the abnormal structure or position of an 
organ at birth, resulting from a defect in prenatal development. The study of birth 
defects is called teratology.11 Birth defects are the single most common cause of 
infant mortality in North America. Some congenital defects aren’t detected until 
months to years after birth. Thus, by the age of 2 years, 6% of children are diagnosed 
with congenital anomalies, and by age 5 the incidence is 8%. The following sections 
discuss some known causes of congenital anomalies, but in many cases, the cause 
is unknown.
Mutations and Genetic Anomalies
Genetic errors are the most common cause of birth defects, accounting for one-third 
of all cases and 85% of those with identifiable causes. Some defects stem from 
mutations, or changes in DNA structure—for example, achondroplastic dwarfism, 
microcephaly (abnormal smallness of the head), stillbirth, and some childhood can-
cer. Mutations can occur through errors in DNA replication during the cell cycle or 
under the influence of environmental agents called mutagens, including viruses, 
radiation, and some chemicals.
Some of the most common genetic disorders result, however, from the fail-
ure of homologous chromosomes to separate during meiosis. Homologous chro-
mosomes pair up during prophase I and normally separate from each other at 
anaphase I (see fig. 19.11). This separation, called disjunction, produces daugh-
ter cells with 23 chromosomes each. In nondisjunction, a pair of chromosomes 
fails to separate. Both chromosomes of that pair then go to the same daughter 
cell, which receives 24 chromosomes while the other daughter cell receives 22. 
­Aneuploidy12 (AN-you-PLOY-dee), the resulting presence of an extra chromo-
some or lack of one, accounts for about 50% of spontaneous abortions. Aneu-
ploidy can be detected prior to birth by amniocentesis—the examination of cells 
in a sample of amniotic fluid—or by chorionic villus sampling (CVS), the biopsy 
of cells from the chorion.
10con = with; gen = born; a = without; nomaly = evenness, symmetry 
11terato = monster; logy = study of 
12an = not, without; eu = true, normal; ploid, from diplo = double, paired
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      693  

One example of aneuploidy involving the sex chromosomes is 
­Klinefelter13 syndrome. This occurs when the two X chromosomes of the 
female fail to separate in oogenesis, and the resulting XX egg is fertilized by 
a Y-bearing sperm. The resulting XXY zygote develops into a sterile male, 
usually of average intelligence, but with undeveloped testes, sparse body 
hair, unusually long arms and legs, and enlarged breasts (gynecomastia). The 
aneuploidy often goes undiagnosed until puberty, when failure to develop 
the typical sex characteristics may result in referral to a genetic counselor or 
medical geneticist.
The other 22 pairs of chromosomes (the autosomes) are also subject to nondis-
junction. An individual with three copies of an autosome is said to exhibit ­trisomy. 
Only three trisomies are survivable: those involving chromosomes 13, 18, and 21. 
The reason is that these three chromosomes have fewer genes compared to other 
chromosomes. In all other trisomies, the embryo gets a lethal “gene overdose.” 
Nearly all fetuses with trisomy-13 (Patau syndrome) and trisomy-18 (Edward syn-
drome) die before birth. Infants born with these trisomies are severely deformed, 
and fewer than 5% survive for 1 year.
Trisomy-21 (Down14 syndrome) is the most survivable of the three, and 
therefore the most common among children and adults. Its signs include impaired 
physical development; short stature; a relatively flat face with a flat nasal bridge; 
low-set ears; epicanthal folds at the medial corners of the eyes; an enlarged, often 
protruding tongue; stubby fingers; and a short broad hand with only one palmar 
crease (fig. 20.9). People with Down syndrome tend to have outgoing, affec-
tionate personalities. Cognitive challenges are common and sometimes severe, 
but are not inevitable. About 75% of fetuses with trisomy-21 die before birth, 
but it occurs in about 1 out of 700 to 800 live births in the United States. Many 
persons born with it die by age 10 from such causes as immune deficiency and 
abnormalities of the heart or kidneys, but for those who survive beyond that age, 
modern medical care has extended life expectancy to about 60 years. After age 
40, however, many of these develop early-onset Alzheimer disease, linked to a 
gene on chromosome 21.
Aneuploidy is far more common in humans than in any other species, and 90% 
of cases are of maternal rather than paternal origin. These facts seem to result from 
the extraordinarily long time it takes for human oocytes to complete meiosis—
as long as 50 years (see “Folliculogenesis” in section 19.4). For various reasons 
including defects in the mitotic spindle and in chromosomal crossing over, aging 
eggs become less able to separate their chromosomes into two identical sets. This 
is evident in the statistics of Down syndrome: The chance of having a child with 
Down syndrome is about 1 in 3,000 for a woman under 30, 1 in 365 by age 35, and 
1 in 9 by age 48.
Teratogens
Environmental agents that cause birth defects are called teratogens. They fall 
into three major categories: radiation, infectious diseases, and chemicals. For 
this reason, diagnostic X-rays should be avoided by pregnant women. Several 
microorganisms can cross the placenta and cause serious congenital anoma-
lies, stillbirths, or neonatal death. Teratogenic viruses include herpes simplex, 
rubella, cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency virus. Congenital bac-
terial infections include gonorrhea and syphilis. Toxoplasma, a protozoan con-
tracted from meat, unpasteurized milk, and housecats, is another common cause 
13Harry F. Klinefelter Jr. (1912−90), American physician 
14John Langdon H. Down (1828−96), British physician
694      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

(a)
A
1
2
3
4
5
B
Incurved
ﬁnger
Single palmar
crease
Short broad
hands
Epicanthal fold
(c)
(d)
(b)
D
13
14
15
F
19
20
F
21
22
X X
E
16
17
18
C
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Figure 20.9 Down Syndrome. (a) A child with 
Down syndrome (right) and her sister. (b) The 
chromosomes of a person with Down syn-
drome, showing the trisomy of chromo-
some 21. (c) Characteristics of the hand 
in Down syndrome. (d) The epicanthal 
fold over the medial commissure (can-
thus) of the left eye.
a: © Science Source; b: Courtesy Mihaly Bartalos, 
from Bartalos 1967: Medical Cytogenetics, fig 10.2, 
pg. 154, Waverly, a division of Williams & Wilkins
•	 What was the sex of the person 
from whom the karyotype in part (b) 
was obtained? How do you know? 
of fetal deformity. Fetuses are more vulnerable 
than adults to these infectious agents because 
of their immature immune systems.
Alcohol causes more birth defects than any other drug. Alcohol abuse dur-
ing pregnancy can cause fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), characterized by a small 
head, malformed facial features, cardiac and central nervous system defects, 
stunted growth, and behavioral symptoms such as hyperactivity, nervousness, and 
poor attention span. Even one drink a day can have noticeable effects on fetal and 
childhood development, some of which are not noticed until a child begins school. 
Cigarette smoke also contains potent teratogens that contribute to fetal and infant 
mortality, ectopic pregnancy, anencephaly (failure of the cerebrum to develop), 
cleft palate and lip, and cardiac ­abnormalities. 
The effect of a teratogen depends on the genetic susceptibility of the embryo, 
the dosage of the teratogen, and the time of exposure. Teratogen exposure during the 
first 2 weeks usually doesn’t cause birth defects; it’s more likely to abort the embryo. 
The period of greatest vulnerability is 3 to 8 weeks. Different organs have different 
critical periods for vulnerability to teratogenesis. For example, limb abnormalities 
are most likely to result from teratogen exposure at 24 to 36 days, and brain abnor-
malities from exposure at 3 to 16 weeks.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
12.	How does inflation of the lungs at birth affect the 
route of blood flow through the heart? 
13.	How is an infant protected from infection up to the time when 
it produces enough antibodies of its own? 
14.	Why is the regulation of body temperature so challenging for 
an infant, and even more so for a premature infant? 
15.	Why is respiratory distress syndrome common in premature 
infants? 
16.	Why does immaturity of the liver of a premature infant lead to 
such a broad spectrum of problems? 
17.	 Genetic birth defects can result from either mutation or non-
disjunction. Explain the difference and give examples of each. 
18.	What is a teratogen? What are the three classes of terato-
gens? Give examples of each. 
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      695  

20.4  Aging, Senescence, and Death
Expected Learning Outcomes
When you have completed this section, you should be able to
a.	distinguish between aging and senescence; 
b.	discuss the relationship of exercise to senescence; 
c.	summarize some current theories of senescence; 
d.	explain why evolution is unlikely to eliminate genes for the dis-
eases of old age; and 
e.	distinguish between life expectancy and life span. 
Like Ponce de Le´on searching for the legendary fountain of youth in Florida, people 
yearn for a way to preserve their youthful appearance and function. Our real con-
cern, however, is not aging but senescence. The term aging is used in various ways, 
but is taken here to mean all changes that occur in the body with the passage of 
time—including the growth, development, and increasing functional efficiency that 
occur from childhood to adulthood, as well as the degenerative changes that occur 
later in life. Senescence is the degeneration that occurs in an organ system after the 
age of peak functional efficiency. It includes a gradual loss of reserve capacities, 
reduced ability to repair damage and compensate for stress, and increased suscep-
tibility to disease.
Figure 20.10 Schoolboy Showing the Effect 
of Thalidomide on Upper Limb Development.
© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images
Clinical Application 20.2
THE THALIDOMIDE TRAGEDY
Perhaps the most notorious teratogenic drug is thalidomide, a seda-
tive first marketed in West Germany in 1957. Thalidomide was taken 
by many women in early pregnancy, even before they knew they were 
pregnant, as a sleeping aid or to relieve morning sickness. By the time 
it was removed from the world market in 1961, it had affected an esti-
mated 10,000 to 20,000 babies worldwide, many of them born with un-
formed arms or legs (fig. 20.10) and often with defects of the ears, heart, 
and intestines. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration never approved 
thalidomide for market, but many American women obtained it by par-
ticipation in clinical drug trials or from foreign sources. Thalidomide 
has recently been reintroduced and used under tightly controlled condi-
tions for more limited purposes such as treating leprosy. In some Third 
World countries, however, people take it in a misguided attempt to treat 
AIDS and other diseases, resulting in an upswing in severe birth defects. 
A general lesson to be learned from the thalidomide tragedy and other 
cases is that pregnant women should avoid all sedatives, barbiturates, 
and opiates. Even the acne medicine isotretinoin (Accutane) has caused 
severe birth defects.
696      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Senescence is an issue of paramount importance for health-care providers. 
One in seven Americans is 65 or older. As the average age of the population rises, 
health-care professionals find themselves increasingly occupied by the prevention 
and treatment of the diseases of older age. The leading causes of death change 
markedly with age. Accidents, homicide, suicide, and AIDS figure prominently 
in the deaths of people 18 to 34 years old, whereas the major causes of death after 
age 55 are clearly related to senescence of the organ systems: heart disease, cancer, 
stroke, diabetes, and lung disease. The causes of senescence, however, remain 
as much a scientific mystery today as cancer was 50 years ago and heredity was 
100 years ago. The scientific and clinical study of aging is called gerontology,15 
and the clinical diagnosis and management of the medical conditions of old age is 
called ­geriatrics.16
This subject also raises many points relevant to personal health and fitness 
choices that can lessen the rate and effects of senescence. In addition, the study 
of senescence calls renewed attention to the multiple interactions among organ 
systems. As we have already seen in earlier chapters, the senescence of one organ 
system typically contributes to the senescence of others.
Exercise and Rates of Senescence
The organ systems don’t all degenerate at the same rate or to the same extent. 
For example, from ages 30 to 80, the speed of nerve conduction declines only 
10% to 15%, but the number of functional glomeruli in the kidneys declines 
about 60%. Some physiological functions show only moderate changes at rest 
but more pronounced differences when tested under exercise conditions. The 
organ systems also vary widely in the age at which senescence becomes notice-
able. There are forerunners of atherosclerosis, for example, even in infants, and 
visual and auditory sensitivity begin to decline soon after puberty. By con-
trast, the female reproductive system shows no conspicuous senescence until 
menopause, and then declines relatively abruptly. Aside from these unusual 
examples, most physiological measures of performance peak between the late 
teens and age 30 and then decline at a rate influenced by the level of use of 
the organs.
The rate of senescence depends on one’s habits of use or abuse of an 
organ system. Other than the mere passage of time, senescence results from 
obesity and insufficient exercise more than from any other causes. Con-
versely, good nutrition and exercise are the best ways to slow its progress. 
There is clear evidence that exercise improves the quality of life in old age. 
It maintains endurance, strength, and joint mobility; it also reduces the inci-
dence and severity of hypertension, osteoporosis, musculoskeletal pain, obe-
sity, and diabetes mellitus. It improves cognitive function and reduces the risk 
of Alzheimer disease. The greatest benefit derives from beginning a program 
of regular exercise early in life and making a lasting habit of it. If you stop 
exercising regularly, the body rapidly becomes deconditioned; appreciable 
reconditioning can be achieved, however, even when an exercise program is 
begun late in life. A person in his or her 90s can increase muscle strength 
two- or threefold in 6 months with as little as 40 minutes of isometric exercise 
a week. The improvement results from a combination of muscle hypertrophy 
and neural efficiency.
Resistance training may be the most effective way of reducing accidental 
injuries such as bone fractures, whereas endurance training reduces body fat and 
15geronto = old age; logy = study of 
16ger = old age; iatr = treatment of
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      697  

17pro = before; ger = old age 
18telo = end; mer = piece, part, segment
increases cardiac output, maximum oxygen uptake, and insulin sensitivity. Ideal 
endurance training requires three to five periods of aerobic exercise per week, each 
20 to 60 minutes long and vigorous enough to reach 60% to 90% of your maximum 
heart rate. The maximum is best determined by a stress test but averages about 220 
beats per minute minus your age in years.
An exercise program should ideally be preceded by a complete physical exam-
ination and stress test. Warm-up and cool-down periods are important in avoiding 
soft tissue injuries. Because of their lower capacity for thermoregulation, older 
people must be careful not to overdo exercise, especially in hot weather. At the 
outset of a new exercise program, it is best to “start low and go slow.”
Theories of Senescence
Why do our organs wear out? Why must we die? There still is no general theory 
on this. The question actually comes down to two issues: (1) What are the mecha-
nisms that cause the organs to deteriorate with age? (2) Why hasn’t natural selection 
­eliminated these and produced bodies capable of longer life?
Mechanisms of Senescence
Numerous theories have been proposed and discarded to explain why organ func-
tion degenerates with age. Some authorities maintain that senescence is governed 
by inevitable or even preprogrammed changes in cellular function. Others attribute 
senescence to environmental factors that progressively damage our cells over the 
course of a lifetime.
There is good evidence of a hereditary component to life expectancy. Unusu-
ally long and short lives tend to run in families. Monozygotic twins are more 
likely than dizygotic twins to die at a similar age. Some genetic diseases such as 
progeria17 (fig. 20.11) are associated with rapid, early senescence and premature 
death. Such syndromes differ from normal senescence, but nevertheless dem-
onstrate that many changes associated with old age can be brought on by a 
genetic anomaly.
Knowing that senescence is partially hereditary doesn’t answer the ques-
tion about why tissues degenerate. Quite likely, no one theory explains all forms 
of senescence, but we can briefly examine some of them.
Replicative Senescence Normal organ function depends on a rate of cell 
­renewal that keeps pace with cell death. There is a limit, however, to how many 
times cells can divide. Cultured human fibroblast cells divide 80 to 90 times 
if taken from a fetus, but only 20 to 30 times if taken from older people. After 
their maximum number of divisions, the cells degenerate and die. This decline 
in mitotic potential with age is called replicative senescence.
The reason for this may lie in the telomere,18 a “cap” on the end of each 
chromosome analogous to the plastic tip of a shoelace. In humans, it consists of 
a noncoding nucleotide sequence CCCTAA repeated 1,000 times or more. The 
enzymes that replicate DNA can’t reach the very ends of the molecule. If there 
were functional genes at the end, they would not get duplicated. The telomere 
may therefore provide a bit of “disposable” DNA at the end. Every time DNA 
is replicated, 50 to 100 bases are lost from the telomeres. Once the telomere 
is used up, the terminal genes may fail to replicate, making old chromosomes 
more vulnerable to damage and causing old cell lines to be increasingly dys-
functional. The “immortality” of cancer cells results from an enzyme, lacking 
from healthy cells, that repairs telomere damage and enables the cells to escape 
the limit on number of cell divisions.
Figure 20.11 Progeria. This is a genetic disorder in 
which senescence appears to be greatly accelerated. The 
individuals here, from left to right, are 15, 12, and 26 years 
old. Few people with progeria live as long as the woman 
on the right.
© Bettmann/Corbis
698      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

DNA Damage Theory Telomere damage and replicative senescence are clearly not 
the entire answer to why organs degenerate. Skeletal muscle fibers and brain neu-
rons exhibit pronounced senescence, yet these cells are nonmitotic. Their senes-
cence obviously is not a result of repeated mitosis and cumulative telomere damage. 
Another leading theory of senescence is unrepaired damage to the coding regions 
of DNA. Our DNA suffers 10,000 to 100,000 damaging events per day, especially 
oxidative stress from free radicals generated by the cell itself. Most of this is fixed 
by DNA repair enzymes, but this isn’t 100% efficient. Some damage persists and 
accumulates as cells age, especially in nondividing cells like neurons, cardiomyo-
cytes, and skeletal muscle fibers. Such cumulative damage has been shown to cause 
age-related declines in liver and kidney function, cardiac and muscular strength, and 
brain functions related to neuron survival, synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. 
Protein Abnormalities Collagen and many other proteins exhibit increasingly 
­abnormal structure in older tissues and cells. The changes are not in amino acid 
sequence—therefore not attributable to DNA mutations—but lie in the way the pro-
teins are folded, cross-linked with each other through disulfide bridges, or bound 
to components such as carbohydrates. This is another reason that cells accumulate 
more dysfunctional proteins as they age. Collagen cross-linking makes proteins less 
soluble and more stiff, and is thought to be a factor in several of the most noticeable 
changes of the aging body such as stiffening of the joints, lenses, and arteries.
Autoimmune Theory Some of the altered macromolecules described previously 
may be recognized as foreign antigens, stimulating lymphocytes to mount an im-
mune response against the body’s own tissues. Autoimmune diseases such as rheu-
matoid arthritis do, in fact, become more common in old age. 
Evolution and Senescence
If certain genes contribute to senescence, why doesn’t natural selection eliminate 
them, much as it tends to eliminate other harmful genes from the population? Biolo-
gists once postulated that senescence and death were for the good of the species—a 
way for older, worn-out individuals to make way for younger, healthier ones. We can 
see the importance of death by imagining that science had put an end to senescence 
and people of all ages died at the same rate that 18-year-olds do now: 1 per 1,000 
per year. If so, the median age of the population would be 163, and 13% of us would 
live to be 2,000 years old. The implications for world population and competition 
for resources would be staggering. Thus, it is easy to understand why scientists once 
interpreted death as a self-sacrificing phenomenon for the good of the species.
But this hypothesis has several weaknesses. One is the fact that natural selec-
tion works exclusively through the effects of genes on the reproductive rates of 
individuals. A species evolves only because some members reproduce more than 
others. A gene that doesn’t affect reproductive rate can be neither eliminated nor 
favored by natural selection. Genes for many disorders of old age have little or no 
effect until a person is past reproductive age. Our prehistoric and even fairly recent 
ancestors usually died of accidents, predation, starvation, weather, and infectious 
diseases at an early age. Few people were affected by colon cancer, atherosclerosis, 
or Alzheimer disease, diseases associated with both age and the modern lifestyle. 
Natural selection is “blind” to such death-dealing genes, which escape the selection 
process and remain with us today.
Life Expectancy and Death
Life expectancy, the average length of life in a given population, has increased 
impressively in industrialized countries. People born in the United States at the 
beginning of the twentieth century had a life expectancy of only 45 to 50 years; 
nearly half of them died of infectious disease. The average boy born today can 
expect to live 76 years and the average girl 81 years. This is due mostly to victories 
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      699  

over infant and child mortality, not to advances at the other end of the life span. Life 
span, the maximum age attainable by humans, has not increased significantly for 
many centuries and there seems to be little prospect that it ever will. There is no 
verifiable record of anyone living past the age of 122 years.
Ninety-nine percent of us will die before age 100, and there is little chance 
that this outlook will change within our lifetimes. We don’t presently foresee any 
“cure for old age” or significant extension of the human life span. The real issue is 
to maintain the best possible quality of life, and when the time comes to die, to be 
entitled and able to do so with dignity and comfort.
Before You Go On
Answer these questions from memory. Reread the 
preceding section if there are too many you don’t know.
19.	Define and distinguish between aging and 
­senescence. 
20.	Explain why both endurance and resistance exercises are 
important in old age. Support your argument with specific 
examples. 
21.	Summarize five mechanisms that may be responsible for 
senescence. 
22.	Explain why natural selection tends to remove many harmful 
genes from a population, but is unlikely to affect genes for 
the diseases of old age. 
23.	Distinguish between life expectancy and life span, and 
explain why one of these has changed significantly over the 
past century while the other one has not. 
C A R E E R  SPOTLIGHT
Genetic counselors provide information, support, and advocacy for families 
with members who have genetic disorders or birth defects and couples con-
cerned about their probability of transmitting genetic disorders. They trace 
family histories of disease, identify risk factors, interpret information for their 
clients, advise them on testing and prevention options and coping strategies, 
and refer affected individuals to community support services. Among the nu-
merous disorders studied by genetic counselors are cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell 
disease, breast cancer, Down syndrome, cleft palate, and hemophilia. Genetic 
counselors also advise women who are pregnant or planning to become so, 
and who are concerned about their age or exposure to risk factors such as cer-
tain drugs, infectious agents, or radiation. Genetic counselors come from backgrounds as diverse as biology, nursing, and social 
work, and work in hospitals, clinics for pediatric care and adult genetics, diagnostic laboratories and biotechnology companies, 
research institutions, private practice, and government agencies.
To become a certified genetic counselor, one must first earn a bachelor’s degree in a relevant biological or social science, then 
gain a master’s degree and pass a board examination. See appendix B for links to further information.
G e n e t i c  C o u n s e l o r
© MCT/Getty Images
700      PART 6  Human Life Cycle

Study Guide
Assess Your Learning Outcomes
To test your knowledge, discuss the following topics with a study 
partner or in writing, ideally from memory.
20.1  Fertilization and Preembryonic  
Development 
1.	 The distinction between a preembryo and embryo, and the 
age of transition from one to the next 
2.	 Where the sperm and egg meet, why the sperm must travel 
most of the distance, how many sperm make it, and why so 
many of them do not 
3.	 Why a freshly ejaculated sperm cannot fertilize an egg, and 
what must happen to make it capable of doing so 
4.	 The time frame around ovulation and ejaculation when fertil-
ization is possible 
5.	 How a sperm enters the egg and how the egg usually prevents 
more than one sperm from doing so 
6.	 Events that occur between the moment of sperm penetration 
and the existence of a true zygote 
7.	 Distinguishing aspects of the three clinical trimesters of 
­pregnancy 
8.	 The three major processes that occur in the preembryonic 
stage of development 
9.	 Distinctions between a zygote, blastomere, morula, and blas-
tocyst; the two cell masses of the blastocyst; and the destiny 
of each of those cell masses 
10.	 The two functions of the trophoblast 
11.	 The two ways in which twins are produced and the distinction 
between monozygotic and dizygotic twins 
12.	 The mechanism of implantation of a conceptus in the 
­uterine wall 
13.	 The defining processes of embryogenesis—how the three 
primary germ layers are created and how the embryoblast 
becomes an embryo 
20.2  The Embryonic and Fetal Stages 
1.	 The term for the overall process that transforms an embryo 
into a fetus; how we define when a fetus exists; and at what 
gestational age this is attained 
2.	 The three modes of prenatal nutrition; what distinguishes the 
trophoblastic from the placental phases of nutrition; and the 
timetable on which these develop and overlap 
3.	 How the placenta is produced, and its five functions in ­pregnancy 
4.	 The anatomy of the placenta and umbilical cord, ­including 
the origin of the umbilical arteries and destination of the 
­umbilical vein 
5.	 The anatomy and functions of the amnion, yolk sac, allantois, 
and chorion; and the functions of amniotic fluid 
6.	 How the flat embryonic disc becomes a cylindrical body; how 
its primitive gut, thoracic cavity, peritoneal cavity, neural tube, 
and somites come into being; and what mature tissues arise 
from the somites 
7.	 How the route of blood flow in the fetus differs from its route 
after birth, including the names and anatomy of the three 
circulatory shunts 
8.	 The meanings of the following features of the fetus—­digital 
rays, meconium, lanugo, and vernix caseosa—and the mean-
ings of quickening and the vertex position of the fetus 
20.3  The Neonate 
1.	 The time frame of the neonatal period 
2.	 How the neonate’s respiratory and circulatory systems change 
and influence each other at birth 
3.	 What gives the neonate immunity to pathogens until it can 
form its own antibodies 
4.	 Why a neonate is at risk of hypothermia and fluid loss; how its 
body is adapted to minimize heat loss; and the implications of 
these risks for neonatal care 
5.	 The criterion for a premature infant and the reasons why 
­premature infants have such problems with respiration, 
­thermoregulation, feeding, and liver functions 
6.	 The subject of teratology and why it is of such public-health 
importance 
7.	 The importance of mutation as a cause of birth defects, and 
some examples of genetic birth defects 
8.	 The meaning of nondisjunction and aneuploidy; the role of 
aneuploidy in producing birth defects; and methods for the 
prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidy 
9.	 Examples of birth defects related to the nondisjunction of sex 
chromosomes and autosomes 
10.	 The causation, characteristics, and prognosis for persons with 
Down syndrome 
11.	 The three basic categories of teratogens; examples of each; 
and why the effects of a teratogen can vary according to the 
gestational age at exposure 
20.4  Aging, Senescence, and Death 
1.	 The distinction between aging and senescence; why senes-
cence is so relevant to the health-care professional’s work; and 
why it has such personal relevance 
   CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      701  

702      PART 6  Human Life Cycle
2.	 Examples of variation in the rate of senescence from one organ 
system to another 
3.	 The extent to which regular exercise can have an impact on 
senescence and life expectancy 
4.	 Evidence for a hereditary influence on longevity 
5.	 The possible role of telomere damage in replicative senes-
cence, and the limitations of the telomere theory 
6.	 Other theories of senescence related to molecular cross-linking, 
other changes in protein structure, free radical damage, and 
autoimmunity 
7.	 The theory of why evolution by natural selection has not elimi-
nated genes for the diseases of old age, even though it does 
tend to eliminate other harmful genes from a population 
8.	 The difference between life expectancy and life span, and why 
one of these has changed so much and the other has changed so 
little over the past century or more 
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 A 32-celled stage that has developed from a fertilized egg is 
best classified as
a.	 a morula. 
b.	 a blastocyst. 
c.	 a zygote. 
d.	 an embryo. 
e.	 an embryoblast. 
	 2.	 Which of these tissues does not exist prior to embryonic ­folding?
a.	 the trophoblast 
b.	 the mesoderm 
c.	 the endoderm 
d.	 the epidermis 
e.	 the ectoderm 
	 3.	 A newly ejaculated sperm cannot fertilize an egg because it has 
not yet undergone
a.	 polyspermy. 
b.	 capacitation. 
c.	 the mobilization reaction. 
d.	 quickening. 
e.	 cleavage. 
	 4.	 The fertilization membrane around a zygote is a product of
a.	 the acrosome. 
b.	 the zona pellucida. 
c.	 the cortical reaction. 
d.	 gastrulation. 
e.	 embryogenesis. 
	 5.	 All of these occur in the preembryonic stage except
a.	 cleavage. 
b.	 implantation. 
c.	 trophoblastic nutrition. 
d.	 organogenesis. 
e.	 embryogenesis. 
	 6.	 Early in pregnancy, the corpus luteum remains active under the 
influence of 
 from the conceptus.
a.	 estrogen 
b.	 progesterone 
c.	 meconium 
d.	 lanugo 
e.	 human chorionic gonadotropin 
	 7.	 The lanugo is
a.	 fetal hair. 
b.	 a sperm enzyme used to penetrate the egg. 
c.	 contents of the fetal colon at full term. 
d.	 a form of neonatal respiratory distress. 
e.	 a circulatory shunt that bypasses the liver. 
	 8.	 Fetal alcohol syndrome results from
a.	 a mutagen. 
b.	 a teratogen. 
c.	 a carcinogen. 
d.	 nondisjunction. 
e.	 aneuploidy. 
	 9.	 One theory of replicative senescence is that it ­results 
from depletion of the 
 at the ends of the 
­chromosomes.
a.	 telomeres 
b.	 sarcomeres 
c.	 centromeres 
d.	 somites 
e.	 acrosomes 
	10.	 Another theory of senescence is that we suffer more and more 
tissue damage from 
 as our antioxidant levels decline 
with age.
a.	 autoimmune disease 
b.	 cross-linking 
c.	 polyspermy 
d.	 nondisjunction 
e.	 free radicals 
	11.	 Endoderm and mesoderm are formed by the migration of cells 
down into the 
 of the embryonic disc. 
	12.	 The process of migration described in question 11, resulting in 
three primary germ layers, is called 
. 
	13.	 Muscle, bone, and blood arise from the primary germ layer 
called 
. 
	14.	 The oldest verifiable age to which any human being has lived 
is called the human 
. 
	15.	 Prior to implantation, a blastocyst is nourished by a secretion 
from the 
 glands. 
	16.	 In trophoblastic nutrition, the conceptus digests and consumes 
 cells of the endometrium. 

Improve Your Grade
Connect Interactive Questions  Reinforce your 
knowledge using multiple types of questions: 
interactive, animation, classification, labeling, 
sequencing, composition, and traditional multiple 
choice and true/false.
SmartBook  Proven to help students improve 
grades and study more efficiently, SmartBook 
contains the same content within the print book 
but actively tailors that content to the needs of 
the individual.
Anatomy & Physiology REVEALED®  Dive into 
the human body by peeling back layers of 
cadaver imaging. Utilize this world-class cadaver 
dissection tool for a closer look at the body 
anytime, from anywhere.
CHAPTER 20   Human Development and Aging      703  
	17.	 Treelike processes called 
 contain fetal blood and 
project into the placental sinus, where they are surrounded by 
maternal blood. 
	18.	 The “breaking of the waters” as a woman goes into labor is a 
release of the 
 fluid in which the fetus has been sus-
pended for most of its gestation. 
	19.	 In the fetus, a shunt between the pulmonary trunk and the aorta 
called the 
 diverts blood from the ­nonfunctional lungs. 
	20.	 Any chemical, infectious organism, or radiation capable of 
causing a birth defect is called a/an 
. 
Answers in Appendix A
What’s Wrong with These 
­Statements?
Briefly explain why each of the following statements is false, or 
reword it to make it true.
	 1.	 Most birth defects result from exposure to teratogens in the 
first two weeks of gestation. 
	 2.	 Cleavage divides a morula into more and more blastomeres, so 
the morula grows several times as large as the zygote. 
	 3.	 Twins result from disjunction, the separation of cells of the 
morula into two masses that each produce an embryo. 
	 4.	 By the time implantation is complete, the blastocyst is attached 
to the mother by a placenta and umbilical cord. 
	 5.	 Trophoblastic nutrition of the embryo must end before placen-
tal nutrition can begin. 
	 6.	 An ovulated secondary oocyte must complete meiosis II before 
it can be fertilized. 
	 7.	 The ductus venosus allows most fetal blood to bypass the lungs. 
	 8.	 Gerontologists are optimistic that the human life span will 
increase significantly in the twenty-first century. 
	 9.	 Freshly ejaculated sperm are more capable of fertilizing an egg 
than are sperm 5 or 6 hours old. 
	10.	 The developing individual is not considered a fetus until it 
enters the third trimester of pregnancy. 
Answers in Appendix A
Testing Your Comprehension
	 1.	 Some health-supplement vendors market the enzyme su-
peroxide dismutase (SOD) as an oral antioxidant to retard 
senescence. Explain why it would be a waste of your money 
to buy it. 
	 2.	 In some children, the ductus arteriosus fails to close after 
birth—a condition that eventually requires surgery. Predict 
how this condition would affect (a) pulmonary blood pressure, 
(b) systemic diastolic pressure, and (c) the right ventricle of 
the heart. 
	 3.	 Only one sperm is needed to fertilize an egg, yet a man who 
ejaculates fewer than 10 million sperm is usually infertile. Ex-
plain this apparent contradiction. Supposing 10 million sperm 
were ejaculated, predict how many would come within close 
range of the egg. How likely is it that any one of these sperm 
would fertilize it? 

ANSWER KEYS
Appendix A
This appendix provides answers to questions in the figure leg-
ends and in the end-of-chapter “Testing Your Recall” and 
“What’s Wrong with These Statements?” sections. 
Chapter 1
Figure Legend Questions
	1.1	 A PET scan requires an injection of radioisotopes, which is an invasion of 
the body surface. No invasive procedure is needed for an MRI.
	1.2	 Radiography uses X-rays, a high-energy radiation that can cause mutations 
and birth defects. Sonography uses only sound waves, not known to cause 
any harm to a fetus.
	1.5	 Yes, childbirth could be regarded as a homeostatic response to pregnancy 
that culminates in ending the pregnancy and returning the body to its more 
usual state.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 b
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 e
	 5.	 c
	 6.	 a
	 7.	 c
	 8.	 b 
	 9.	 e
	10.	 c
	11.	 palpation
	12.	 computed 
tomography
	13.	 homeostasis
	14.	 organ
	15.	 wrist, ankle
	16.	 medial
	17.	 parietal, visceral
	18.	 negative feedback 
loop
	19.	 anatomical position
	20.	 proximal
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 A median section of the head would pass vertically between the eyes, but 
not through both eyes at once.
	 2.	 The diaphragm is inferior to the lungs.
	 3.	 A PET scan requires an injection of radioactive glucose and is therefore 
invasive.
	 4.	 The pleural and pericardial cavities are lined by serous membranes.
	 5.	 Abnormal skin color or dryness is one piece of information that could be 
obtained by inspection.
	 6.	 Sonography is simpler than CT and is safer for a fetus because it does not 
involve ionizing radiation.
	 7.	 Histopathology is a subdiscipline of histology.
	 8.	 Negative feedback is usually beneficial because it corrects deviations from 
a physiological set point.
	 9.	 There are more organelles than cells in the human body.
	10.	 The pericardial sac is external to the heart, separated from it by the space 
of the pericardial cavity.
Chapter 2
Figure Legend Questions
	2.6	 Relatively little energy is required to make an N2 molecule vaporize 
because it has no attraction to other molecules in the liquid state. Thus, N2 
boils at a low temperature.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 c
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 a
	 6.	 e
	 7.	 b
	 8.	 c
	 9.	 b
	10.	 d
	11.	 cation
	12.	 free radicals
	13.	 catalyst, enzymes
	14.	 anabolism
	15.	 dehydration  
synthesis
	16.	 -ose, -ase
	17.	 phospholipids
	18.	 ATP
	19.	 catabolism
	20.	 substrate
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 The monomers of a polysaccharide are monosaccharides.
	 2.	 Water molecules are polar.
	 3.	 ATP is a very short-lived molecule, not a long-term energy-storage molecule.
	 4.	 Nonpolar covalent bonds are stronger than polar covalent bonds.
	 5.	 Proteins are polymers formed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds.
	 6.	 A saturated fat is defined as a fat to which no more hydrogen can be added.
	 7.	 Anabolism is an energy-storing oxidation process that combines small, 
low-energy molecules into large, high-energy molecules.
	 8.	 Humans cannot digest cellulose and therefore get no calories from it.
	 9.	 Two isomers do not have identical chemical properties. Ethanol and ether, 
for example, are isomers with very different properties.
	10.	 A solution of pH 7 has 10 times the hydrogen ion concentration of a ­solution 
with pH 8.
Chapter 3
Figure Legend Questions
	  3.2	 The phospholipid heads are hydrophilic and thus attracted to the water 
inside and outside the cell.
	  3.4	 The photo shows an intestinal absorptive cell, which has prominent micro-
villi for nutrient absorption and a glycocalyx for protection from acid and 
enzymes of the digestive tract.
	  3.7	 Gap junctions
	  3.8	 Simple diffusion
	3.13	 The nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, and Golgi complex participate direct-
ly in protein synthesis; mitochondria participate indirectly since protein 
synthesis requires the ATP that they provide.
	3.19	 Chromatids are also composed of protein.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 e
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 b
	 5.	 e
	 6.	 a
	 7.	 d
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 d
	10.	 b
	11.	 micrometers
	12.	 receptor
	13.	 gates
	14.	 glycocalyx
	15.	 anaphase
	16.	 phospholipids
	17.	 nucleus, 
mitochondria
	18.	 smooth ER, 
peroxisomes
	19.	 phagocytosis
	20.	 pseudopods
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 A cell specialized for absorption would be expected to have a high density 
of microvilli on its surface.
	 2.	 DNA replication occurs in the S phase, not during mitosis.
	 3.	 A cell releases secretory products by exocytosis, not phagocytosis or 
­pinocytosis.
	 4.	 In the plasma membrane, it is the fatty acid tails of the phospholipid 
­molecules that cluster together in the middle of the membrane, not the 
phosphate heads, which are pointed toward the ICF and ECF.
	 5.	 Cells of the digestive glands release enzymes by the process of exocytosis 
into the digestive tract when needed to digest food and do not store them 
in lysosomes.
	 6.	 Movement of substances down a concentration gradient requires no ATP.
	 7.	 Osmosis is a passive process, not active transport.
	 8.	 White blood cells can move about in the tissues by means of pseudopods, 
not cilia.
	 9.	 Desmosomes are just spots of intercellular attachment; they have no chan-
nels for transferring material from cell to cell.
	10.	 Ribosomes synthesize proteins whereas proteasomes degrade them.
A-1	

Chapter 4
Figure Legend Questions
	4.12	 Exfoliation of squamous cells also occurs in the epidermis, oral cavity, 
esophagus, anal canal, vagina, and a few other places.
	4.29	 Holocrine glands require a high rate of stem-cell mitosis to replace the 
cells that continually disintegrate to become the secretion.
	4.30	 Mucous membranes are also found throughout the digestive, reproductive, 
and urinary tracts and other regions of the respiratory tract in addition to 
the trachea cited. Serous membranes are also found in the pericardium, 
pleurae, parietal peritoneum, mesenteries, and serosae of many other 
abdominal organs in addition to the small intestine cited.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 b
	 3.	 d
	 4.	 e
	 5.	 c
	 6.	 e
	 7.	 b
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 b
	10.	 c
	11.	 necrosis
	12.	 simple squamous
	13.	 lacunae
	14.	 periosteum
	15.	 collagen
	16.	 glial cells
	17.	 basement 
­membrane
	18.	 matrix
	19.	 holocrine
	20.	 simple
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 The esophageal epithelium is nonkeratinized.
	 2.	 Mucus-secreting goblet cells are only found in simple epithelia.
	 3.	 Not all skeletal muscle attaches to bones. For example, muscles of facial 
expression attach to skin.
	 4.	 Ground substance and fibers make up the matrix of a connective tissue.
	 5.	 Adipose tissue is an exception to this rule.
	 6.	 Adipocytes also occur in areolar connective tissue.
	 7.	 A single exocrine gland can be both serous and mucous.
	 8.	 Weight lifting creates new muscle tissue by the process of hypertrophy.
	 9.	 All living cells are electrically excitable, but nerve and muscle cells have 
this developed to the highest degree.
	10.	 The tissue degeneration that occurs in gangrene is an example of necrosis, 
not apoptosis.
Chapter 5
Figure Legend Questions
	5.3	 Keratinocytes
	5.4	 Basal cell carcinoma is the more common of the two but melanoma is the 
more dangerous.
	5.5	 Shampoo only contacts the dead shafts of the hairs, which therefore can-
not be nourished. The only nourishment a hair can receive is from the der-
mal papilla at the base of the hair root, from blood-borne nutrients.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 d
	 2.	 b
	 3.	 d
	 4.	 a
	 5.	 e
	 6.	 c
	 7.	 c
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 a
	10.	 e
	11.	 insensible 
perspiration
	12.	 piloerector
	13.	 dermato-, cutane-
	14.	 cyanosis
	15.	 dermal papillae
	16.	 earwax
	17.	 sebaceous glands
	18.	 keratin, collagen
	19.	 vitamin D
	20.	 keratinocytes
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Exfoliation is the flaking off of dead cells from epithelial surfaces, such as 
occurs in the stratum corneum.
	 2.	 The term integumentary system refers to the skin, hair, nails, and 
­cutaneous glands.
	 3.	 The dermis is mostly collagen; keratin occurs in the epidermis.
	 4.	 Vitamin D is synthesized by collaboration of epidermal keratinocytes, the 
liver, and the kidneys.
	 5.	 Cells of the stratum basale multiply rapidly to produce the thick stratum 
corneum of the skin surface.
	 6.	 Hair growth results from the mitosis of cells in the hair matrix. Hair cells 
die as they are pushed upward away from the blood supply in the dermal 
papilla.
	 7.	 The hypodermis is not part of the skin.
	 8.	 People of all ethnicities have about equal densities of melanocytes.
	 9.	 Pallor is a temporary paleness, not a genetic lack of pigment.
	10.	 Merocrine sweat glands help cool the body; apocrine sweat glands are 
activated at puberty and produce pheromones.
Chapter 6
Figure Legend Questions
	  6.1	 Bone marrow
	  6.2	 Osteoblasts engage actively in synthesizing the collagen of the bone 
matrix and require a lot of rough endoplasmic reticulum to carry this out. 
Osteogenic cells do not synthesize proteins for export from the cell.
	   6.3	 Spongy bone has more surface area and is therefore more strongly affected 
by osteoclasts.
6.10	 The appendicular skeleton includes the pectoral and pelvic girdles, which 
are within the axial region of the body.
	6.13	 The temporal bone articulates with the occipital, parietal, frontal, sphe-
noid, and zygomatic bones and the mandible.
	6.21	 Rupture of this ligament could allow the head and atlas to slip posteriorly 
and thus cause the dens of the axis to rip through the cervical spinal cord.
	6.22	 Transverse foramina and a forked spinous process
	6.34	 Interphalangeal joints are not subject to shock or pressure like the jaw and 
knee joints, and therefore require no pressure-absorbing menisci.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 e
	 2.	 a
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 d
	 5.	 b
	 6.	 a
	 7.	 d
	 8.	 e
	 9.	 a
	10.	 c
	11.	 temporal
	12.	 canaliculi
	13.	 ligament
	14.	 synovial fluid
	15.	 osteopenia
	16.	 osteoblasts
	17.	 kinesiology
	18.	 menisci
	19.	 sutures
	20.	 anulus fibrosus
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 There are eight carpal bones and seven tarsal bones.
	 2.	 The growth zone of a child’s bone is the metaphysis (or epiphyseal plate).
	 3.	 The zygomatic bones do not articulate with the parietal bones.
	 4.	 It is not possible to palpate the muscles in the subscapular fossa but in a 
living person one may palpate those of the supraspinous fossa.
	 5.	 This action involves hyperextension of the shoulder.
	 6.	 The cranial bones that enclose the brain develop from fetal membranous 
tissue, not from cartilage.
	 7.	 The bursae contain synovial fluid but do not secrete it; the synovial 
­membrane does.
	 8.	 The arm contains only one bone (the humerus), but the leg contains two 
(tibia and fibula).
	 9.	 Parathyroid hormone causes osteoclasts to break down bone mineral rather 
than stimulating bone deposition.
	10.	 Climbing a flight of stairs requires strong, alternating flexion and 
­extension of the hip joint.
Chapter 7
Figure Legend Questions
  	7.1	 Skeletal muscle cells are long and threadlike; cardiac and smooth myo-
cytes are not.
	  7.4	 A bands are a region of thick and thin filament overlap, so there is a 
­greater density of protein here than in the I bands, which have only thin 
filaments.
	   7.9	 I bands would be absent because there is no region of the sarcomere 
­occupied by thin filaments only.
	7.13	 For the peristaltic contractions of swallowing
APPENDIX A  Answer Keys      A-2 

	7.15	 The triceps brachii would be the prime mover whereas the biceps brachii 
and brachialis muscles would exert a braking action.
	7.17	 The pterygoid muscles approach the mandible obliquely and pull it from 
side to side, whereas the temporalis muscles approach it from directly 
above and can only pull the mandible upward.
	7.20	 The hip and the knee
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 b
	 3.	 e
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 b
	 6.	 c
	 7.	 a
	 8.	 d
	 9.	 c
	10.	 d
	11.	 myosin
	12.	 acetylcholine
	13.	 muscle tone 
(tonus)
	14.	 fascicle
	15.	 calcium
	16.	 involuntary
	17.	 sphincter
	18.	 quadriceps femoris
	19.	 latissimus dorsi
	20.	 gastrocnemius
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 A motor neuron branches out to anywhere from 3 to 1,000 muscle fibers 
or so.
	 2.	 Calcium binds to troponin, not to myosin.
	 3.	 Slow-twitch fibers resist fatigue; fast-twitch fibers fatigue relatively quickly.
	 4.	 Myofilaments slide over each other; they do not shorten.
	 5.	 Compared to other muscle types, cardiac muscle has the largest and most 
numerous mitochondria, which makes cardiac muscle more resistant to 
fatigue.
	 6.	 The zygomaticus major and minor muscles attach to the zygomatic bone 
and the orbicularis oris at the corner of the mouth.
	 7.	 The serratus anterior is the prime mover in forward thrusts and pushing, 
whereas the trapezius retracts the scapulae.
	 8.	 In isometric contraction, a muscle does not shorten or lengthen, even 
though it develops tension.
	 9.	 The zygomaticus major lifts the corner of the mouth, as in smiling, where-
as the depressor anguli oris draws it downward, as in frowning. They have 
opposite actions so are not synergists.
	10.	 The brachialis muscles are the prime mover of elbow flexion, and provide 
more power than the biceps brachii muscles do.
Chapter 8
Figure Legend Questions
	8.5	 Schwann cells
	8.10	 Proximal to the action potential, the axon is in its refractory period and 
cannot be stimulated immediately to fire again.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 c
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 e
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 b
	 7.	 e
	 8.	 b
	 9.	 c
	10.	 e
	11.	 dura mater
	12.	 central
	13.	 muscle spindles
	14.	 brachial
	15.	 node of Ranvier
	16.	 bipolar
	17.	 ependymal
	18.	 action potential
	19.	 neurotransmitters
	20.	 gray matter
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Motor signals travel the spinal cord by way of its descending, not 
­ascending, tracts.
	 2.	 The arachnoid mater lies between the dura mater and pia mater.
	 3.	 The outermost layer of a nerve is the epineurium.
	 4.	 There are no spinal nerve plexuses in the thoracic region.
	 5.	 Some somatic reflex arcs pass through the brainstem.
	 6.	 Nerve signals slow down slightly at the nodes of Ranvier. The signal 
­travels faster in myelinated axons because the signal travels more quickly 
along the internodes.
	 7.	 A neuron at rest has a negative internal charge relative to the charge 
­outside its plasma membrane.
	 8.	 A nerve fiber is just the axon of a neuron, not a synonym for neuron, the 
entire cell.
	 9.	 The myelin sheath in the brain is produced by oligodendrocytes.
	10.	 A bipolar neuron has one axon and one dendrite.
Chapter 9
Figure Legend Questions
	 9.3	 The cranial dura mater is pressed against the surrounding bone, and even 
attached to it at places, with no intervening epidural space or fat; it has 
two layers, separated in some places by dural sinuses; and it folds inward 
to form partitions between parts of the brain.
	 9.8	 The amygdala
 	 9.9	 One would lose somatosensory sensations such as touch and pain from 
the lower limb on the opposite side of the body.
	 9.17	 Such an injury could prevent the heart from accelerating in response to 
fear because it would disrupt the conduction of signals from the brain 
(fear centers) down the spinal cord to the origins of the cardiac nerves. It 
would not affect gastric secretion, because that is mediated through the 
vagus nerves, which originate above the point of injury.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 c
	 2.	 c
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 e
	 5.	 a
	 6.	 b
	 7.	 d
	 8.	 d
	 9.	 e
	10.	 e
	11.	 corpus callosum
	12.	 ventricles, 
­cerebrospinal
	13.	 arbor vitae
	14.	 cholinergic
	15.	 choroid plexus
	16.	 precentral
	17.	 proprioceptors
	18.	 association
	19.	 occipital
	20.	 Broca area
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 The longitudinal fissure separates the cerebral (not cerebellar) hemispheres.
	 2.	 Cerebrospinal fluid is produced not only by the choroid plexuses but also 
by filtration through the brain surface and by the ependymal cells that line 
the ventricles. 
	 3.	 The limbic system is associated with emotions, memory, and learning, 
whereas the medulla oblongata regulates respiratory and cardiac rhythms.
	 4.	 Each half of the brain has its own thalamus, but the hypothalamus and 
­epithalamus are single, median structures.
	 5.	 The sympathetic nervous system inhibits digestion.
	 6.	 Hearing is a function of the temporal lobe; the occipital lobe is visual.
	 7.	 The white matter is organized into tracts.
	 8.	 The parasympathetic division has long cholinergic preganglionic fibers.
	 9.	 Cranial nerve X (the vagus) innervates numerous thoracic and abdominal 
organs.
	10.	 The optic nerve does not move the eye; the oculomotor, abducens, and 
trochlear nerves do.
Chapter 10
Figure Legend Questions
	 10.1	 Small receptive fields; the lips are very sensitive to fine two-point dis-
crimination.
	 10.6	 Vestibulocochlear, CN VIII
	10.12	 Inner hair cells. The outer hair cells tune the cochlea to enable the brain 
to better discriminate one pitch of sound from another.
	10.14	 The eyes would be more prone to watering because the tears could not 
drain away into the nasal cavity.
	10.17	 It is the subject’s right eye. The optic disc is medial to the fovea (the 
optic nerves converge medially from the two eyes), so the subject’s nose 
would be toward page right, making this the subject’s right eye.
10.20	 The inner segment, because this is where the mitochondria are concen-
trated.
10.22	 By tracing fibers from the upper optic radiation in this figure to the reti-
nas, it can be seen that one would lose vision from the lateral retina of 
the right eye and medial retina of the left eye. These two retinal areas 
cover the left peripheral vision, so the effect would be blindness in the 
left half of the visual field.
A-3     APPENDIX A  Answer Keys

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 e
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 b
	 6.	 d
	 7.	 b
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 d
	10.	 d
	11.	 lamellar corpuscle
	12.	 fovea centralis
	13.	 optic chiasm
	14.	 lacrimal
	15.	 saccule
	16.	 accommodation
	17.	 olfactory bulbs
	18.	 hair cells
	19.	 cone
	20.	 proprioceptors
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Pain has its own specialized receptors (nociceptors) and is not the result of 
overstimulation of touch receptors.
	 2.	 The olfactory hairs in the nose are modified cilia, whereas the hairs on 
cochlear hair cells are modified microvilli.
	 3.	 Differences in the color of light depend on which cones are stimulated and 
the pitch of a sound depends on which part of the basilar membrane 
vibrates; differences in the firing frequencies of the sensory nerve fibers 
determine the sense of stimulus intensity such as brightness or loudness, 
not color or pitch.
	 4.	 A hair receptor is a nerve fiber associated with a hair follicle, not to be 
confused with hair cells of the inner ear.
	 5.	 Most refraction occurs when light rays pass from air into the cornea.
	 6.	 The right and left occipital lobes receive visual input from both eyes 
because some of the fibers of the optic nerve cross to the opposite side of 
the brain at the optic chiasma.
	 7.	 Deep bass tones stimulate different cochlear hair cells than high treble 
tones. 
	 8.	 The auditory tube lets air into the middle ear, not the inner ear.
	 9.	 After passing across the eye, tears drain into the nasal cavity via the naso-
lacrimal duct.
	10.	 Lingual papillae are visible bumps on the tongue. Most types contain taste 
buds, but they are not the same as the taste buds.
Chapter 11
Figure Legend Questions
	  11.1	 Liver, kidneys, stomach, heart, skin, small intestine, bones, adipose 
­tissue, placenta
	  11.4	 Mechanism (b), since testosterone is a steroid
	  11.6	 The posterior lobe
	  11.8	 The C cells secrete calcitonin.
	11.10	 The exocrine cells secrete digestive enzymes.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 c
	 6.	 b
	 7.	 e
	 8.	 b
	 9.	 e
	10.	 d
	11.	 cortisol
	12.	 hypothalamus, 
­posterior pituitary 
gland
	13.	 leptin
	14.	 ghrelin
	15.	 anterior pituitary 
gland
	16.	 interstitial 
­endocrine cells
	17.	 ovaries, testes
	18.	 pineal
	19.	 thymus
	20.	 oxytocin
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Increased percentage of body fat is associated with greater risk of insulin 
insensitivity.
	 2.	 Follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone target both the ova-
ries and the testes.
	 3.	 Blockage of this system would cut off the hypothalamic stimulus for the 
pituitary to secrete FSH and LH, and without those gonadotropins, the 
ovaries and testes could not function.
	 4.	 The pineal gland and thymus shrink (involute) with age.
	 5.	 The adrenal cortex secretes steroids.
	 6.	 Insulin is released immediately after you have eaten a meal.
	 7.	 The second stage of the stress response is dominated by the hormone cortisol.
	 8.	 The infundibulum is not a duct and no hormones are secreted through ducts.
	 9.	 Thyroxine raises metabolic rate and heat production.
	10.	 A steroid hormone can freely enter a target cell, but a peptide hormone 
cannot.
Chapter 12
Figure Legend Questions
	   12.1	 Nuclei
	  12.3	 The nucleus of the stem cell line was here; the cell caves in at the center 
when the nucleus is lost.
	  12.4	 To the iron atom at the center of the heme group
	12.11	 Although superabundant, these cells are immature and unable to perform 
their defensive roles.
	12.13	 Hemophilia affects the intrinsic pathway because it usually involves a 
lack of factor VIII, part of the intrinsic pathway.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 e
	 2.	 a
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 d
	 5.	 e
	 6.	 c
	 7.	 b
	 8.	 c
	 9.	 d
	10.	 a
	11.	 hemopoiesis
	12.	 hematocrit
	13.	 macrophages
	14.	 hemostasis
	15.	 serum
	16.	 hemophilia
	17.	 leukopenia
	18.	 albumin
	19.	 polycythemia
	20.	 erythropoiesis
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Blood plasma typically constitutes about 55% of the volume.
	 2.	 An elevated albumin concentration raises the osmolarity of blood, causing 
osmotic retention or absorption of water into the bloodstream and raising 
the blood pressure. 
	 3.	 A low blood oxygen level is the result of anemia, not the cause.
	 4.	 Neutrophils are the most important bacteria-fighting WBCs.
	 5.	 Erythrocytes and platelets lack nuclei.
	 6.	 The most abundant WBCs are neutrophils.
	 7.	 Coagulation and agglutination are entirely different processes. Coagulation 
is the formation of sticky fibrin threads and entrapment of RBCs, platelets, 
and WBCs in the mesh. Agglutination is a process in which RBCs or 
­foreign cells become stuck together by antibody molecules.
	 8.	 Lymphocytes arise in the red bone marrow from the same hemopoietic 
stem cells as other formed elements, although they also proliferate in other 
sites such as the thymus and lymph nodes after leaving the bone marrow.
	 9.	 RBCs live longer than most granulocytes in spite of their lack of a nucleus.
	10.	 Leukemia is the malignant overproduction of WBCs.
Chapter 13
Figure Legend Questions
	  13.1	 Both; they receive pulmonary blood from the pulmonary arteries and 
systemic blood from the bronchial arteries.
  13.2	 The pericardial cavity is the space between the parietal and visceral 
­pericardium and contains nothing but a thin film of pericardial fluid. 
The cavity wraps around the heart but does not contain it.
	  13.7	 The right atrium begins contracting a little sooner than the left because 
the pacemaker is in the right atrium, so cardiomyocytes of the right atri-
um are first to receive its signal.
	  13.9	 Phase 4 is the point at which the aortic valve opens and the left ventricle 
begins ejecting blood into the aorta.
	13.10	 Being closer to the heart, the arteries are subjected to greater blood 
­pressure surges and must be more elastic to withstand this.
	13.13	 Vasodilation lowers blood pressure.
	13.20	 Aorta, left common carotid artery, left external carotid artery
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 c
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 b
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 c
APPENDIX A  Answer Keys      A-4 

	 7.	 b
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 e
	10.	 e
	11.	 systole, diastole
	12.	 sphygmomanometer
	13.	 celiac trunk
	14.	 vagus
	15.	 cerebral 
arterial 
­circle
	16.	 hypertension
	17.	 baroreceptors
	18.	 myocardial 
­infarction
	19.	 T wave
	20.	 left coronary 
artery
­What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 The systemic circuit includes the coronary circulation.
	 2.	 It is the brachiocephalic trunk.
	 3.	 Aldosterone causes salt retention and tends to sustain or raise blood 
­pressure rather than lowering it.
	 4.	 The pulmonary veins carry blood from the lungs to the heart.
	 5.	 Valves are found in medium veins, not in arteries.
	 6.	 A doubling of vessel radius increases blood flow 16-fold.
	 7.	 It passes through two capillary beds—one in the digestive tract and one in 
the liver.
	 8.	 An ECG is a composite recording from all cardiomyocytes of the heart, 
and is not an individual action potential.
	 9.	 The first heart sound is concurrent with the QRS complex and the second 
heart sound with the T wave.
	10.	 The cords attach to the AV valves; there are no tendinous cords attached to 
the semilunar (pulmonary and aortic) valves.
Chapter 14
Figure Legend Questions
	  14.2	 Lymphatic capillaries have larger gaps between their endothelial cells 
than blood capillaries do.
	  14.4	 Axillary lymph nodes are the first place where cells metastasizing 
from a breast tumor would lodge. The absence of malignant cells here 
may ­indicate that the cancer was diagnosed and treated before it had 
metastasized.
  14.5	 Without lymphatic valves, there could be no steady one-way flow of 
lymph toward the subclavian veins.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 c
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 c
	 7.	 b
	 8.	 e
	 9.	 a
	10.	 d
	11.	 pathogen
	12.	 lacteals
	13.	 regulatory T  
(TR) cells
	14.	 interferons
	15.	 plasma
	16.	 antigen-presenting 
cells
	17.	 palatine tonsils
	18.	 thymus
	19.	 neutrophils
	20.	 histamine
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 TC cells are involved only in adaptive immunity.
	 2.	 Perforins are employed both in innate immunity by NK cells and in adap-
tive immunity by TC cells.
	 3.	 Lymphatic capillaries are more permeable than most blood capillaries 
because of large gaps between their endothelial cells.
	 4.	 Helper T (TH) cells are involved in both humoral and cellular immunity.
	 5.	 Neutrophils kill more bacteria by means of the toxic respiratory burst than 
they do by phagocytosis.
	 6.	 Both B and T cells reside in lymph nodes.
	 7.	 HIV infects primarily helper T (TH) cells.
	 8.	 Most plasma cells develop in the lymph nodes.
	 9.	 Complement proteins are produced by the liver.
	10.	 The thymus and spleen do not have lymphatic nodules.
Chapter 15
Figure Legend Questions
  15.2	 The line would be drawn across the upper end of the trachea.
  15.5	 The right main bronchus is wider and more vertical than the left, so it is 
easier for aspirated objects to fall into the right one.
  15.8	 The presence of hyaline cartilage in the wall identifies it as a bronchus; 
this is absent from bronchioles.
15.12	 Without a nose clip, much of the air would flow through the nose 
rather than the spirometer mouthpiece and therefore would not be 
recorded.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 b
	 3.	 e
	 4.	 b
	 5.	 e
	 6.	 d
	 7.	 d
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 d
	10.	 c
	11.	 spirometry
	12.	 ventral respiratory 
group
	13.	 thyroid
	14.	 alveolar 
­macrophages
	15.	 parietal pleura
	16.	 carbonic acid
	17.	 chemoreceptors
	18.	 mucociliary  
escalator
	19.	 hilum
	20.	 asthma
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Tidal volume averages about 500 mL.
	 2.	 This passage describes obstructive lung diseases.
	 3.	 Most CO2 transport is in the form of carbonic acid and bicarbonate ions.
	 4.	 The palatine tonsils are located at the fauces where the oral cavity opens 
into the oropharynx.
	 5.	 Each lung has about 150 million alveoli.
	 6.	 Surfactant is produced by the great (type II) alveolar cells.
	 7.	 PO2 normally has very little effect on breathing rate and depth.
	 8.	 Acidosis increases respiratory rate and depth as a mechanism for blowing 
off excess CO2 and raising the pH.
	 9.	 Freshly inspired alveolar air has a PO2 of about 104 mm Hg.
	10.	 Air intake depends on intrapulmonary pressure falling below atmospheric 
pressure.
Chapter 16
Figure Legend Questions
  16.5	 The afferent arteriole is larger than the efferent arteriole. Because it has 
a large inlet and small outlet, the glomerulus has an unusually high 
blood pressure (BP) compared to other capillaries. This high BP drives 
the glomerular filtration process.
16.12	 This sphincter serves to prevent reflex of semen into the bladder during 
ejaculation, and is thus limited to males.
16.13	 The urine volume would decrease.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 b
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 e
	 7.	 e
	 8.	 d
	 9.	 c
	10.	 a
	11.	 CO2
	12.	 glomerular 
­filtration rate
	13.	 ureters
	14.	 macula densa
	15.	 podocytes
	16.	 nephron
	17.	 water, salt
	18.	 internal urethral
	19.	 sodium, potassium
	20.	 fibrous capsule
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 The DCT is the most significant target of aldosterone.
	 2.	 The skin also loses water by cutaneous transpiration.
	 3.	 Many nephrons drain into each collecting duct, so nephrons outnumber the 
collecting ducts.
	 4.	 Sodium is reabsorbed in the PCT, nephron loop, and DCT.
	 5.	 Natriuretic peptides promote sodium excretion and lower blood volume.
	 6.	 Dilation of the afferent arteriole increases blood flow into the glomerulus 
and thus increases glomerular filtration rate.
	 7.	 Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor and this effect raises overall 
blood pressure.
	 8.	 Urine can be as dilute as 50 mOsm/L.
	 9.	 The events described, causing urination, are effects of the parasympathetic 
nervous system.
	10.	 The normal GFR is about 105 mL/min. in women and 125 mL/min. 
in men.
A-5     APPENDIX A  Answer Keys

Chapter 17
Figure Legend Questions
	 17.5	 The two premolars and the third molar of each side of the jaw are not 
yet present at age 3.
	 17.7	 The root of the tongue blocks the oral cavity and the soft palate rises to 
block the nasal cavity so food cannot be forced into either one from the 
pharynx.
	 17.8	 The muscularis externa has three layers in the stomach, only two in the 
esophagus. The esophagus lacks the oblique layer. The addition of a 
layer in the stomach is related to the intense churning contractions that 
occur in this organ.
	17.17	 Sugars and amino acids are absorbed into the blood, which goes from 
the small intestine directly to the liver via the hepatic portal system. 
Dietary fat is absorbed by the intestinal lacteals and travels the route: 
lacteal → lymphatic trunk → thoracic duct → left subclavian vein → left 
brachiocephalic vein → superior vena cava → right side of heart → 
lungs → left side of heart → aorta → celiac trunk → common hepatic 
artery → liver.
17.18	 The internal anal sphincter is controlled by the autonomic nervous 
­system because it is composed of smooth muscle. The external anal 
sphincter is composed of skeletal muscle and therefore controlled by 
the somatic nervous system.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 a
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 b
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 a
	 7.	 e
	 8.	 c
	 9.	 b
	10.	 a
	11.	 dentin
	12.	 duodenum, 
­jejunum, ileum
	13.	 falciform 
ligament
	14.	 chief
	15.	 colon
	16.	 enteric
	17.	 amylase, saliva
	18.	 parotid, 
­submandibular, 
sublingual
	19.	 palate
	20.	 peristalsis
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Chylomicrons are absorbed into lacteals; micelles remain in the small 
intestine.
	 2.	 Taeniae coli are features of the large intestine.
	 3.	 The pyloric valve regulates the passage of chyme from stomach to 
­duodenum; the ileocecal valve regulates the passage from small intestine 
to large intestine (ileum to cecum).
	 4.	 Vitamin D promotes absorption of calcium, not iron.
	 5.	 The small intestine absorbs glucose, fructose, and galactose.
	 6.	 Proteases digest proteins and smaller peptides.
	 7.	 Swallowing begins with the oral phase.
	 8.	 Most of the water is absorbed by the colon. 
	 9.	 Intrinsic factor enables the absorption of vitamin B12.
	10.	 The jejunum is a segment of the small intestine.
Chapter 18
Figure Legend Questions
	 18.1	 HDLs remove excess cholesterol from the tissues whereas LDLs deliver 
it to the tissues to be deposited. A high HDL level therefore indicates a 
high rate of clearance of excess cholesterol from the body.
	 18.3	 Niacin and riboflavin, because they are the dietary precursors of the 
coenzymes NAD+ and FAD, the coenzymes that import electrons into 
the mitochondrial pathways of aerobic respiration.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 c
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 e
	 5.	 b
	 6.	 d
	 7.	 e
	 8.	 a
	 9.	 d
	10.	 d
	11.	 incomplete
	12.	 high-density 
­lipoproteins, low-
density lipoproteins
	13.	 gluconeogenesis
	14.	 urea
	15.	 liver
	16.	 insulin
	17.	 core temperature
	18.	 hypothalamus
	19.	 lactate
	20.	 kilocalorie, kcal
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Leptin inhibits the appetite.
	 2.	 Water is classified as a nutrient because it is absorbed, becomes part of 
the body’s tissues, and performs necessary metabolic roles.
	 3.	 Fat contains 9 kcal/g and sugar contains 4 kcal/g.
	 4.	 Most of the body’s cholesterol is made by the body itself.
	 5.	 Most liver functions are nondigestive; only the secretion of bile acids and 
lecithin aids digestion.
	 6.	 The mitochondria cannot produce ATP without oxygen.
	 7.	 Shell temperature extends to a depth that varies according to environmental 
temperature, rather than being defined by fixed anatomical boundaries.
	 8.	 Gluconeogenesis occurs in the fasting state.
	 9.	 Ketone bodies come from fatty acid oxidation and are thus more likely to 
occur in excess in someone on a high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet.
	10.	 At a comfortable air temperature, the body loses most of its heat by 
radiation.
Chapter 19
Figure Legend Questions
19.11	 Crossing-over in prophase I exchanges portions of the paternal and 
maternal chromosomes of each pair and thus creates genetically novel 
chromosomes to be passed to the offspring.
19.14	 One egg per primary oocyte; four sperm per primary spermatocyte. It is 
important to produce a large egg with adequate nutrients to support early 
development and cytoplasm to be divided among multiple blastomeres, 
so the oocyte should not be divided into small cells.
Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 b
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 a
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 c
	 6.	 a
	 7.	 d
	 8.	 e
	 9.	 a
	10.	 d
	11.	 zygote
	12.	 first polar body
	13.	 antrum
	14.	 luteal 
­(postovulatory)
	15.	 seminal vesicle
	16.	 oxytocin
	17.	 seminiferous 
tubules
	18.	 colostrum
	19.	 luteinizing 
­hormone
	20.	 glans
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Interstitial endocrine cells secrete testosterone; nurse cells secrete inhibin.
	 2.	 Sperm carry the DNA in the nucleus, located in the head.
	 3.	 The seminal vesicles produce about 60% of the semen.
	 4.	 The clitoris has no corpus spongiosum.
	 5.	 Androgens are also responsible for development of the pubic and axillary 
hair and apocrine glands in girls and for the libido of both sexes.
	 6.	 The vagina has no mucous glands.
	 7.	 Lactiferous ducts exist even in the nonlactating breast.
	 8.	 Men remain fertile after climacteric.
	 9.	 Spermiogenesis is the postmeiotic transformation of spermatids to mature 
sperm; it does not include meiosis II. 
	10.	 Climacteric is a midlife change in reproductive function, not to be con-
fused with climax (orgasm).
Chapter 20
Figure Legend Questions
	 20.2	 An unfertilized oocyte would already be dead by the time it arrived in 
the uterus; it does not live long enough to survive the 3-day migration.
	 20.4	 Answers may vary but could include bones, muscles, and blood vessels 
(any mesodermal derivative).
	 20.9	 The chromosomes shown came from a female, as we can see from the 
presence of two X chromosomes.
APPENDIX A  Answer Keys      A-6 

Testing Your Recall
	 1.	 a
	 2.	 d
	 3.	 b
	 4.	 c
	 5.	 d
	 6.	 e
	 7.	 a
	 8.	 b
	 9.	 a
	10.	 e
	11.	 primitive groove
	12.	 gastrulation
	13.	 mesoderm
	14.	 life span
	15.	 uterine
	16.	 decidual
	17.	 chorionic villi
	18.	 amniotic
	19.	 ductus arteriosus
	20.	 teratogen
What’s Wrong with These Statements?
	 1.	 Teratogen exposure at that early stage is more likely to cause embryonic 
death (abortion) than a defect that would persist until birth.
	 2.	 A morula is about the same size as the zygote, but divided into smaller 
and more numerous cells.
	 3.	 Disjunction refers to chromosomal separation in meiosis, not the 
­separation of morula cells into two embryos.
	 4.	 Implantation occurs on day 3; the placenta doesn’t begin to form until 
day 11, and the umbilical cord still later.  
	 5.	 Trophoblastic and placental nutrition overlap until about week 12.
	 6.	 Fertilization triggers the completion of meiosis II; if unfertilized, an 
oocyte never completes meiosis.
	 7.	 The ductus venosus bypasses the fetal liver.
	 8.	 Despite significant improvements in life expectancy, there is little 
­expectation of significantly increasing life span.
	 9.	 The sperm’s ability to fertilize an egg increases in the hours after 
­ejaculation because of capacitation.
	10.	 The transition from embryo to fetus does not correspond to the trimesters 
of pregnancy. It occurs around the end of week 8 whereas the third 
­trimester doesn’t begin until week 25. 
A-7     APPENDIX A  Answer Keys

Further information is available from the following organizations 
and websites for each of the health-science careers featured in the 
Career Spotlight essays. These URLs were last confirmed as of 
press time for this book, and will be reconfirmed and updated as 
needed with each 3-year revision. However, if any of them should 
be found inactive, relevant information may be found by entering 
the organizational names and a key word such as careers or jobs 
in any search engine, or by going to the organization’s home page 
and looking for a career or job link. Education and licensing 
requirements vary from state to state, so you may also wish to 
search by career title and your own state for specific information 
on what may be required of you to enter one of these careers.
This chapter-by-chapter list is followed by some general 
sources of health-career information and a list of many more 
career ideas than the ones addressed in the chapter Career 
Spotlight essays.
Chapter 1—Radiologic Technologist
American Society of Radiologic Technologists
www.asrt.org/main/careers/careers-in-radiologic-technology
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook 
Handbook
www.bls.gov/ooh/Healthcare/Radiologic-technologists.htm
Chapter 2—Medical Technologist
American Medical Technologists
www.americanmedtech.org/GetCertified/MTEligibility.aspx
American Society for Clinical Laboratory Science
www.ascls.org/careers-ascls/how-do-i-become-a-laboratory-
professional
Chapter 3—Cytotechnologist
American Society for Cytotechnology
www.asct.com/content/profession-cytotechnology
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/27/
Cytotechnologist
Chapter 4—Histotechnician
Explore Medical Careers
www.exploremedicalcareers.com/medical-technologist-
technician/
National Society for Histotechnology
www.nsh.org/what-histotechnology
Chapter 5—Dermatology Nurse
GapMedics
www.gapmedics.com/blog/2015/02/23/becoming-a-
dermatology-nurse
Johnson & Johnson Services, The Campaign for Nursing’s 
Future
www.discovernursing.com/specialty/dermatology-nurse#
Chapter 6—Orthopedic Nurse
Graduate Nursing EDU.org
www.graduatenursingedu.org/orthopedic-nurse/
Johnson & Johnson Services, The Campaign for Nursing’s 
Future
www.discovernursing.com/specialty/orthopaedic-nurse#
Chapter 7—Massage Therapist
American Massage Therapy Association
www.amtamassage.org/professional_development/starting.
html
ExploreHealthCareers.org  
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/86/Massage_
Therapist
Chapter 8—Occupational Therapist
American Occupational Therapy Association
www.aota.org/Education-Careers/Considering-OT-Career.
aspx
Study.com
http://study.com/articles/Occupational_Therapist_How_
Do_I_Become_an_Occupational_Therapy_Professional.html
Chapter 9—Electroneurodiagnostic Technologist
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/137/
Electroneurodiagnostic_Technologist/
Mississippi Hospital Association, Health Careers Center
www.mshealthcareers.com/careers/
electroneurodiagnostictechnologist.htm
Chapter 10—Optician
Opticians Association of America
www.oaa.org/opticianry-defined/becoming-an-optician
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/13/Optician_
Dispensing
HEALTH SCIENCE CAREERS
Appendix B
	
A-8

Chapter 11—Diabetes Educator
American Association of Diabetes Educators
www.diabeteseducator.org/education-career/becoming-a-
diabetes-educator
National Certification Board for Diabetes Educators
www.ncbde.org/certification_info/what-is-a-cde
Chapter 12—Phlebotomist
Colleges & Degrees
www.collegesanddegrees.com/programs/phlebotomy
American Medical Technologists
www.americanmedtech.org/GetCertified/RPTEligibility.
aspx
Chapter 13—Electrocardiographic Technician
Explore Medical Careers
www.exploremedicalcareers.com/ekg-technician/
Radiology-Schools.com
www.radiology-schools.com/how-to-become-ekg-
technician.html
Chapter 14—Public Health Nurse
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/149/Public_
Health_Nurse
Johnson & Johnson Services, The Campaign for Nursing’s 
Future
www.discovernursing.com/specialty/public-health-nurse#
Chapter 15—Respiratory Therapist
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook 
Handbook
www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/respiratory-therapists.htm
American Association for Respiratory Care
www.aarc.org/career/be_an_rt
Chapter 16—Dialysis Technician
Explore Medical Careers
www.exploremedicalcareers.com/dialysis-technician
National Kidney Foundation
www.kidney.org/professionals/CNNT/techcnnt
Chapter 17—Dental Hygienist
Explore Medical Careers
www.exploremedicalcareers.com/dental_hygienist
American Dental Association
www.ada.org/357.aspx
Chapter 18—Dietitian
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
www.eatright.org/BecomeanRDorDTR
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook 
Handbook
www.bls.gov/ooh/Healthcare/Dietitians-and-nutritionists.htm
NutritionED.org
www.nutritioned.org/registered-dietitian.html
Chapter 19—Midwife
American College of Nurse Midwives
www.midwife.org/Become-a-Midwife
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org/en/Career/71/Nurse_
Midwife
Chapter 20—Genetic Counselor
National Society of Genetic Counselors
http://nsgc.org/page/aboutgeneticcounselors
The American Board of Genetic Counseling
www.abgc.net/Certification/become_a_genetic_counselor.asp
Additional Careers
Numerous other health-science and health-care professions are 
available, going far beyond the 20 that we have described in con-
nection with individual chapters. Here we list some sources of 
general information that cover many more of these professions, 
and a list of professions you may wish to explore. The require-
ments for entering these professions range from programs that 
extend only 1 to 2 years beyond high school, to associate degrees, 
bachelor’s degrees, and graduate degrees. We have not listed 
doctoral-level careers (physician, dentist, etc.) or the many spe-
cialties within registered nursing, which generally require a 
B.S.N. degree followed by experience and specialized training. 
An Internet search of any of these career names plus a search 
term such as careers, jobs, or programs should yield useful infor-
mation on training and entry requirements. In some cases, we 
combine two similar careers on one line with designations such 
as “technologist/technician” and “assistant/aide.” Your career 
research will show the differences between the two.
General Sources
ExploreHealthCareers.org
http://explorehealthcareers.org
Explore Medical Careers
www.exploremedicalcareers.com
Mississippi Hospital Association, Health Careers Center
www.mshealthcareers.com
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook 
Handbook, Healthcare Occupations
www.bls.gov/ooh/Healthcare
WikiProfessional.org 
www.wikiprofessional.org/Category:Careers_A-Z
A-9         APPENDIX B  Health Science Careers

Careers
Acupuncturist
Allied dental educator
Anesthesiologist assistant
Athletic trainer
Biomedical equipment technician
Blood bank technology specialist
Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation specialist
Cardiovascular technologist/technician
Clinical assistant
Clinical laboratory technologist/technician
Community health worker
Cytogenetic technologist
Cytotechnologist
Dental assistant
Dental biller
Dental informatics specialist
Dental laboratory technician
Diagnostic medical sonographer
Diagnostic molecular scientist
Dietetic technician
Dosimetrist
Electrocardiograph technician
Emergency medical dispatcher
Emergency medical technician/paramedic
Environmental health specialist
Health-care administrator
Health-care documentation specialist
Health-care interpreter
Health counselor
Health educator
Health information technician
Health unit coordinator
Home care assistant/aide
Hospital biller
Kinesiotherapist
Licensed practical nurse
Licensed vocational nurse
Lymphedema therapist
Long-term care specialist
Mammographer
Medical animation specialist
Medical assistant
Medical biller
Medical coder
Medical dosimetrist
Medical illustrator
Medical insurance specialist
Medical laboratory technician
Medical librarian
Medical office administrator
Medical photographer
Medical transcriptionist
Music therapist
Nuclear medicine technologist
Nurses aide/assistant
Nursing informatics specialist
Nutritionist
Occupational health and safety specialist
Occupational therapy assistant/aide
Ophthalmic medical technician
Optical laboratory technician
Optometric technician
Orientation and mobility specialist
Orthopedic technician
Orthoptist
Orthotist/prosthetist
Pathologists’ assistant
Perfusionist
Pharmacy technician
Physical therapist assistant
Physician assistant
Psychiatric technician/aide
Radiation therapist
Radiographer
Radiologic technologist
Recreational therapist
Rehabilitation counselor
Sleep technologist
Sonographer
Speech–language therapist
Surgical technologist
Vascular technologist
X-ray technologist
   APPENDIX B   Health Science Careers      A-10 

UNITS OF LENGTH
m	
meter
cm	
centimeter (10–2 m)
mm	
millimeter (10–3 m)
µm	
micrometer (10–6 m)
nm	
nanometer (10–9 m)
UNITS OF MASS
g	
gram
kg	
kilogram (103 g)
mg	
milligram (10–3 g)
UNITS OF VOLUME
L	
liter
dL	
deciliter (10–1 L) (= 100 mL)
mL	
milliliter (10–3 L)
µL	
microliter (10–6 L) (= 1 mm3)
GREEK LETTERS
α	
alpha (as in α helix)
β	
beta (as in β hemoglobin)
γ	
gamma (as in γ globulin)
∆	
delta (uppercase)
δ	
delta (lowercase) (as in a small positive 
charge, δ+)
µ	
mu (as in micrometer, µm)
CONVERSION FACTORS
1 cm = 0.394 in	
1 in = 2.54 cm
1 mL = 0.034 fl oz	
1 fl oz = 29.6 mL
1 L = 1.057 qt	
1 qt = 0.946 L
1 g = 0.0035 oz	
1 oz = 28.38 g
1 kg = 2.2 lb	
1 lb = 0.45 kg
°C = (5/9)(°F–32)	
°F = (9/5)(°C) + 32
UNITS OF CONCENTRATION
Chemical concentrations—the amounts of solute in a given 
volume of solution—are expressed in different ways for different 
scientific or clinical purposes. Some of these are explained here, 
particularly those used in this book.
Weight per Volume
A simple way to express concentration is the weight of solute in 
a given volume of solution. For example, intravenous (I.V.) saline 
typically contains 8.5 grams of NaCl per liter of solution 
(8.5 g/L). For many biological purposes, however, we deal with 
smaller quantities such as milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). For 
example, a typical serum cholesterol concentration may be 
200 mg/dL, also expressed as 200 mg/100 mL or 200 milligram-
percent (mg-%).
Percentages
Percentage concentration is also simple to compute, but it is nec-
essary to specify whether the percentage refers to the weight or 
to the volume of solute in a given volume of solution. For exam-
ple, if we begin with 5 g of dextrose (an isomer of glucose) and 
add enough water to make 100 mL of solution, the resulting 
concentration will be 5% weight per volume (w/v). A commonly 
used intravenous fluid is D5W, which stands for 5% w/v dextrose 
in distilled water.
If the solute is a liquid, such as ethanol, percentages refer to 
volume of solute per volume of solution. Thus, 70 mL of ethanol 
diluted with water to 100 mL of solution produces 70% volume 
per volume (70% v/v) ethanol.
Percentage concentrations are easy to prepare, but that unit 
of measurement is inadequate for many purposes.
Molarity
The physiological effect of a chemical depends on how many 
molecules of it are present in a given volume, not the weight of 
the chemical. Five percent glucose, for example, contains almost 
twice as many sugar molecules as the same volume of 5% 
sucrose. Each solution contains 50 g of sugar per liter, but glu-
cose has a molecular weight (MW) of 180 and sucrose has a MW 
of 342. Since each molecule of glucose is lighter, 50 g of glucose 
contains more molecules than 50 g of sucrose.
To produce solutions with a known number of molecules per 
volume, we must factor in the molecular weight. If we know the 
MW and weigh out that many grams of the substance, we have a 
quantity known as its gram molecular weight, or 1 mole. One 
mole of glucose is 180 g and 1 mole of sucrose is 342 g. Each 
quantity contains the same number of molecules of the respective 
sugar—a number known as Avogadro’s number, 6.023 × 1023 
molecules per mole.
Molarity (M) is the number of moles of solute per liter of 
solution. A one-molar (1.0 M) solution of glucose contains 
180 g/L, and a 1.0 M solution of sucrose contains 342 g/L. Both 
have the same number of solute molecules in a given volume. 
Body fluids and laboratory solutions usually are less concen-
trated than 1 M, so biologists and clinicians more often work 
with millimolar (mM, 10–3 M) and micromolar (µM, 10–6 M) 
concentrations.
SYMBOLS, WEIGHTS, AND MEASURES
Appendix C
A-11	

Osmolarity and Osmolality
The osmotic concentration of body fluids has a great effect on 
cellular function. If it is greater than the osmotic concentration 
within cells, cells lose water and shrivel; if it is less, cells absorb 
water and swell. Either of these can cause potentially fatal cel-
lular breakdown or dysfunction. Osmotic concentration differ-
ences also influence such things as intestinal nutrient absorption, 
the sense of thirst, urinary water loss, total body water volume, 
and blood pressure. Thus, it is important to quantify osmotic 
concentrations in physiology and in clinical practice (as when 
giving I.V. fluid therapy).
One osmole is 1 mole of dissolved particles. If a solute does 
not ionize in water, then 1 mole of the solute yields 1 osmole 
(osm) of dissolved particles. A solution of 1 M glucose, for 
example, is also 1 osm/L. If a solute does ionize, it yields two or 
more dissolved particles in solution. A 1 M solution of NaCl, for 
example, contains 1 mole/L of sodium ions and 1 mole/L of chlo-
ride ions. Both ions equally affect osmosis and must be sepa-
rately counted in a measure of osmotic concentration. Thus, 1 M 
NaCl = 2 osm/L. Calcium chloride (CaCl2) would yield three 
ions if it dissociated completely (one Ca2+ and two Cl–), so 1 M 
CaCl2 = 3 osm/L.
Osmolality is the number of osmoles of solute per kilogram 
of water, and osmolarity is the number of osmoles per liter of 
solution. Most clinical calculations are based on osmolarity, 
since it is easier to measure the volume of a solution than the 
weight of water it contains. The difference between osmolality 
and osmolarity can be important in experimental work, but at the 
concentrations of human body fluids, there is less than 1% differ-
ence between the two, and the two are essentially interchangeable 
for clinical purposes.
All body fluids and many clinical solutions are mixtures of 
many chemicals. The osmolarity of such a solution is the total 
osmotic concentration of all of its dissolved particles.
A concentration of 1 osm/L is substantially higher than we 
find in most body fluids, so physiological concentrations are 
usually expressed in terms of milliosmoles per liter (mOsm/L) 
(1 mOsm/L = 10–3 osm/L). Blood plasma, tissue fluid, and intra-
cellular fluid measure about 300 mOsm/L.
Milliequivalents per Liter
Electrolyte 
concentrations 
are 
typically 
expressed 
in 
­milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L). Electrolytes are important 
for their chemical, physical (osmotic), and electrical effects on 
the body. Their electrical effects, which determine such things as 
nerve, heart, and muscle actions, depend not only on their con-
centration but also on their electrical charge. A calcium ion 
(Ca2+) has twice the electrical effect of a sodium ion (Na+), for 
example, because it carries twice the charge. In measuring elec-
trolyte concentrations, one must take the charges into account.
One equivalent (Eq) of an electrolyte is the amount that 
would electrically neutralize 1 mole of hydrogen ions (H+) or 
hydroxide ions (OH–). For example, 1 mole (58.4 g) of NaCl 
yields 1 mole, or 1 Eq, of Na+ in solution. Thus, an NaCl solution 
of 58.4 g/L contains 1 equivalent of Na+ per liter (1 Eq/L). One 
mole (98 g) of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) yields 2 moles of positive 
charges (H+). Thus, 98 g of sulfuric acid per liter would be a solu-
tion of 2 Eq/L.
The electrolytes in human body fluids have concentrations 
less than 1 Eq/L, so we more often express their concentrations 
in milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L). If you know the millimolar 
concentration of an electrolyte, you can easily convert this to 
mEq/L by multiplying it by the charge on the ion:
1 mM Na+ = 1 mEq/L,
1 mM Ca2+ = 2 mEq/L,
1mM Fe3+ = 3 mEq/L.
Acidity and Alkalinity (pH)
Acidity is expressed in terms of pH, a measure derived from the 
molarity of H+. Molarity is represented by square brackets, so the 
molarity of H+ is symbolized [H+]. pH is the negative logarithm 
of hydrogen ion molarity; that is, pH = –log [H+].
In pure water, 1 in 10 million molecules of H2O ionizes into 
hydrogen and hydroxide ions: H2O ⇋ H+ + OH–. Pure water has 
a neutral pH because it contains equal amounts of H+ and OH–. 
Since 1 in 10 million molecules ionize, the molarity of H+ and 
the pH of water are as follows:
[H+]= 0.0000001 molar = 10−7 M,
log [H+] = −7,
pH = −log [H+] = 7.
The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14 and is logarithmic, so each 
integer up or down the scale represents a 10-fold difference in 
[H+]. This is exemplified by the following three strongly acidic 
pH values:
If [H+] = 0.1 M	
pH = −log 10−1 = 1.0,
If [H+] = 0.01 M	
pH = −log 10−2 = 2.0, 
If [H+] = 0.001 M	 pH = −log 10−3 = 3.0.
The less concentrated the H+, the higher the pH. pH values 
below 7.0 are considered acidic. Above 7.0, they are basic or alka-
line. The following three values lie at the basic end of the pH scale:
If [H+] = 0.000000000001 M	
pH = −log 10−12 = 12.0,
If [H+] = 0.0000000000001 M	 pH = −log 10−13 = 13.0,
If [H+] = 0.00000000000001 M	 pH = −log 10−14 = 14.0.
   APPENDIX C  Symbols, Weights, and Measures      A-12 

BIOMEDICAL WORD ROOTS, PREFIXES, AND SUFFIXES
Appendix D
a- no, not, without (atom, agranulocyte)
ab- away (abducens, abduction)
acetabulo- small cup (acetabulum)
acro- tip, extremity, peak (acromion, acromegaly)
ad- to, toward, near (adsorption, adrenal)
adeno- gland (lymphadenitis, adenohypophysis)
aero- air, oxygen (aerobic)
af- toward (afferent)
ag- together (agglutination)
-al pertaining to (parietal, pharyngeal)
ala- wing (ala nasi)
albi- white (albicans, linea alba, albino)
algi- pain (analgesic, myalgia)
aliment- nourishment (alimentary)
allo- other, different (allele)
amphi- both, either (amphipathic, amphiarthrosis)
an- without (anaerobic, anemic)
ana- 1. up, buildup (anabolic, anaphylaxis). 2. apart (anaphase, 
anatomy). 3. back (anastomosis)
andro- male (androgen, andropause)
angi- vessel (angiogram, hemangioma)
ante- before, in front (antebrachium)
antero- forward (anterior, anterograde)
anti- against (antidiuretic, antibody, antagonist)
apo- from, off, away, above (apocrine, aponeurosis)
arbor- tree (arborization, arbor vitae)
artic- 1. joint (articulation). 2. speech (articulate)
-ary pertaining to (axillary, coronary)
-ase enzyme (polymerase, amylase)
ast-, astro- star (aster, astrocyte)
-ata plural of -a (carcinomata, chiasmata)
-ate possessing, like (hamate, cruciate)
athero- fat (atheroma, atherosclerosis)
atrio- entryway (atrium, atrioventricular)
auri- ear (auricle, binaural)
auto- self (autorhythmic, autoimmune)
axi- axis, straight line (axial, axoneme, axon)
baro- pressure (baroreceptor, hyperbaric)
bene- good, well (benign, beneficial)
bi- two (bipedal, biceps)
bili- bile (biliary, bilirubin)
bio- life, living (biology, biopsy, microbial)
blasto- precursor, producer (fibroblast, blastomere)
brachi- arm (brachium, brachial)
brady- slow (bradycardia, bradypnea)
bucco- cheek (buccal, buccinator)
burso- purse (bursa, bursitis)
calc- calcium, stone (calcaneus, hypocalcemia)
callo- thick (callus, callosum)
calori- heat (calorie, calorigenic)
calvari- bald, skull (calvaria)
calyx cup, chalice (glycocalyx, renal calyx)
capito- head (capitis, capitulum)
capni- smoke, CO2 (hypocapnia)
carcino- cancer (carcinogen, carcinoma)
cardi- heart (cardiology, pericardium)
carot- 1. carrot (carotene). 2. stupor (carotid)
carpo- wrist (carpus, metacarpal)
case- cheese (caseosa, casein)
cata- down, break down (catabolism)
cauda- tail (cauda equina, caudate lobe)
-cel little (pedicel)
celi- belly, abdomen (celiac)
centri- middle (centromere, centriole)
cephalo- head (cephalic, encephalitis)
cervi- neck, narrow part (cervix, cervical)
chiasm- cross, X (optic chiasm)
choano- funnel (choana)
chole- bile (cholecystokinin)
chondro- 1. grain (mitochondria). 2. cartilage, gristle 
­(chondrocyte)
chromo- color (chromatin, cytochrome)
chrono- time (chronotropic, chronic)
cili- eyelash (cilium, supraciliary)
circ- about, around (circumduction)
cis- cut (incision, incisor)
clast- break down, destroy (osteoclast)
clavi- hammer, key (clavicle, supraclavicular)
-cle little (tubercle, ossicle)
cleido- clavicle (sternocleidomastoid)
cnemo- leg (gastrocnemius)
co- together (coenzyme, cotransport)
collo- 1. hill (colliculus). 2. glue (colloid, collagen)
contra- opposite (contralateral)
corni- horn (cornified, corniculate)
corono- crown (coronary, corona)
corpo- body (corpus luteum)
corti- bark, rind (cortex, cortical)
costa- rib (intercostal, subcostal)
coxa- hip (os coxae, coxal)
crani- helmet (cranium, epicranius)
cribri- sieve, strainer (cribriform plate)
crino- separate, secrete (holocrine, endocrine)
crista- crest (crista ampullaris, crista galli)
crito- to separate (hematocrit)
cruci- cross (cruciate ligament)
A-13	

-cul small (canaliculus, trabecula)
cune- wedge (cuneiform, cuneatus)
cutane-, cuti- skin (subcutaneous, cuticle)
cysto- bladder (cystitis, polycystic)
cyto- cell (cytology, monocyte)
de- down (defecate, dehydration)
demi- half (demifacet, demilune)
den-, denti- tooth (dentition, dens)
dendro- tree, branch (dendrite, oligodendrocyte)
dermo- skin (dermatology, hypodermic)
desmo- band, bond, ligament (desmosome, syndesmosis)
dia- across, through, separate (diaphragm, dialysis)
dis- 1. apart (dissect, dissociate). 2. opposite, absence (disinfect, 
disability)
diure- pass through, urinate (diuretic)
dorsi- back (dorsal, latissimus dorsi)
duc- to carry (duct, adduction, abducens)
dys- bad, abnormal, painful (dyspnea, dystrophy)
e- out (ejaculate, eversion)
-eal pertaining to (hypophyseal, pineal)
ec-, ecto- out, external (ectopic, ectoderm, splenectomy)
ef- out of (efferent, effusion)
-el, -elle small (fontanel, organelle)
electro- electricity (electrocardiogram, electrolyte)
em- in, within (embolism, embedded)
emesi-, emeti- vomiting (emetic, hyperemesis)
-emia blood condition (anemia, hypoxemia)
en- in, into (enzyme, parenchyma)
encephalo- brain (encephalitis, electroencephalogram)
enchymo- poured in (mesenchyme, parenchyma)
endo- within, into, internal (endocrine, endocytosis)
entero- gut, intestine (mesentery, myenteric)
epi- upon, above (epidermis, epiphysis, epididymis)
ergo- work, energy, action (allergy, adrenergic)
eryth-, erythro- red (erythema, erythrocyte)
esthesio- sensation, feeling (anesthesia, somesthetic)
eu- good, true, normal, easy (eupnea, aneuploidy)
exo- out (exocytosis, exocrine)
facili- easy (facilitated)
fasci- band, bundle (fascia, fascicle)
fenestr- window (fenestrated)
fer- to carry (efferent, uriniferous)
ferri- iron (ferritin, transferrin)
fibro- fiber (fibroblast, fibrosis)
fili- thread (myofilament)
flagello- whip (flagellum)
foli- leaf (folic acid, folia)
-form shape (cuneiform, fusiform)
fove- pit, depression (fovea)
funiculo- little rope, cord (funiculus)
fusi- 1. spindle (fusiform). 2. pour out (perfusion)
gamo- marriage, union (gamete, monogamy)
gastro- belly, stomach (digastric, gastrointestinal)
-gen, -genic, -genesis producing, giving rise to (pathogen, 
­carcinogenic, glycogenesis)
germi- 1. sprout, bud (germ cell). 2. microbe (germicide)
gero- old age (geriatrics, gerontology)
gesto- 1. to bear, carry (ingest). 2. pregnancy (gestation, 
­progesterone)
glia- glue (neuroglia, glioma)
globu- ball, sphere (globulin, hemoglobin)
glom- ball (glomerulus)
glosso- tongue (hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal)
glyco- sugar (glycogen, hypoglycemia)
gono- 1. angle, corner (trigone). 2. seed, sex cell, generation 
(gonad, oogonium, gonorrhea)
gradi- walk, step (retrograde, gradient)
-gram recording of (sonogram, electrocardiogram)
-graph recording instrument (sonograph, electrocardiograph)
-graphy recording process (sonography, radiography)
gravi- severe, heavy (gravid, myasthenia gravis)
gyro- turn, twist (gyrus)
hallu- great toe (hallux, hallucis)
hemi- half (hemidesmosome, hemisphere)
-hemia blood condition (polycythemia)
hemo- blood (hemoglobin, hematology)
hetero- different, other, various (heterozygous, heterograft)
histo- tissue, web (histology, histone)
holo- whole, entire (holistic, holocrine)
homeo- constant, unchanging, uniform (homeostasis, 
­homeothermic)
homo- same, alike (homologous, homozygous)
hyalo- clear, glassy (hyaline, hyaluronic acid)
hydro- water (dehydration, hydrolysis, hydrophobic)
hyper- above, above normal, excessive (hyperkalemia, 
­hypertonic)
hypo- below, below normal, deficient (hypodermis, hyponatre-
mia)
-ia condition (anemia, hypocalcemia)
-ic pertaining to (isotonic, antigenic)
-icle, -icul small (ossicle, canaliculus, reticular)
ilia- flank, loin (ilium, iliac)
-illa, -illus little (bacillus)
-in protein (trypsin, fibrin, globulin)
infra- below (infraspinous, infrared)
insulo- island (insula, insulin)
inter- between (intercellular, intervertebral)
intra- within (intracellular, intraocular)
iono- ion (ionotropic, cationic)
ischi- to hold back (ischium, ischemia)
-ism process, state, condition (metabolism, rheumatism)
iso- same, equal (isometric, isotonic, isomer)
-issimus most, greatest (latissimus, longissimus)
-ite little (dendrite, somite)
-itis inflammation (dermatitis, gingivitis)
jug- to join (conjugated, jugular)
juxta- next to (juxtamedullary, juxtaglomerular)
kali- potassium (hypokalemia)
karyo- seed, nucleus (megakaryocyte, karyotype)
kerato- horn (keratin, keratinocyte)
   APPENDIX D  Biomedical Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes      A-14 

kine- motion, action (kinetic, kinase, cytokinesis)
labi- lip (labia majora, levator labii)
lacera- torn, cut (laceration)
lacrimo- tear, cry (lacrimal gland, nasolacrimal)
lacto- milk (lactose, lactation, prolactin)
lamina- layer (lamina propria)
latero- side (bilateral, ipsilateral)
lati- broad (fascia lata, latissimus dorsi)
-lemma husk (sarcolemma, neurilemma)
lenti- lens (lentiform)
-let small (platelet)
leuko- white (leukocyte, leukemia)
levato- to raise (levator labii, elevation)
ligo- to bind (ligand, ligament)
line- line (linea alba, linea aspera)
litho- stone (otolith, lithotripsy)
-logy study of (histology, hematology)
lucid- light, clear (stratum lucidum, zona pellucida)
lun- moon, crescent (lunate, lunule, semilunar)
lute- yellow (macula lutea, corpus luteum)
lyso-, lyto- split apart, break down (lysosome, hydrolysis, 
­electrolyte, hemolytic)
macro- large (macromolecule, macrophage)
macula- spot (macula lutea, macula densa)
mali- bad (malignant, malformed)
malle- hammer (malleus, malleolus)
mammo- breast (mammary, mammillary)
mano- hand (manus, manipulate)
manubri- handle (manubrium)
masto- breast (mastoid, mastectomy)
medi- middle (medial, mediastinum)
medullo- marrow, pith (medulla)
mega- large (megakaryocyte, hepatomegaly)
melano- black (melanin, melanocyte)
meno- month (menstruation, menopause)
mento- chin (mental, mentalis)
mero- part, segment (isomer, centromere)
meso- in the middle (mesoderm, mesentery)
meta- beyond, next in a series (metaphase, metacarpal)
metabolo- change (metabolism, metabolite)
-meter measuring device (spirometer, sphygmomanometer)
metri- 1. length, measure (isometric, emmetropic). 2. uterus 
(endometrium)
micro- small (microscopic, microglia)
mito- thread, filament (mitochondria, mitosis)
mono- one (monocyte, monogamy)
morpho- form, shape, structure (morphology, amorphous)
muta- change (mutagen, mutation)
myelo- 1. spinal cord (poliomyelitis, myelin). 2. bone marrow 
(myeloid, ­myelocytic)
myo-, mysi- muscle (myosin, epimysium)
natri- sodium (hyponatremia, natriuretic)
neo- new (neonatal, gluconeogenesis)
nephro- kidney (nephron)
neuro- nerve (aponeurosis, neurosoma)
nucleo- nucleus, kernel (nucleolus, nucleic acid)
ob- 1. life (aerobic, microbe). 2. against, toward, before 
­(obstetrics, obturator, obstruction)
oculo- eye (oculi, oculomotor)
odonto- tooth (odontoblast, periodontal)
-oid like, resembling (colloid, sigmoid)
-ole small (arteriole, bronchiole)
oligo- few, a little, scanty (oligopeptide, oliguria)
-oma tumor, mass (carcinoma, hematoma)
omo- shoulder (omohyoid, acromion)
onycho- nail, claw (hyponychium)
oo- egg (oogenesis, oocyte)
op- vision (optics, myopia, photopic)
-opsy viewing, to see (biopsy, rhodopsin)
or- mouth (oral, orbicularis oris)
orbi- circle (orbicularis, orbit)
organo- tool, instrument (organ, organelle)
ortho- straight (orthodontics, orthopedics)
-ose 1. full of (adipose). 2. sugar (sucrose, glucose)
-osis 1. process (osmosis, exocytosis). 2. condition, disease 
(cyanosis, thrombosis). 3. increase (leukocytosis)
osmo- push (osmosis)
osse-, oste- bone (osseous, osteoporosis)
oto- ear (otolith, otitis, parotid)
-ous 1. full of (nitrogenous, edematous). 2. pertaining to 
(mucous, nervous). 3. like, characterized by (squamous, 
­filamentous)
ovo- egg (ovum, ovary, ovulation)
oxy- 1. oxygen (oxyhemoglobin, hypoxia). 2. sharp, quick 
­(oxytocin)
palli- pale (pallor, globus pallidus)
palpebro- eyelid (palpebrae)
pan- all (pancreas, panhysterectomy)
papillo- nipple (papilla, papillary)
par- birth (postpartum, parturition)
para- next to (parathyroid, parotid)
parieto- wall (parietal)
patho- 1. disease (pathology, pathogen). 2. feeling (sympathetic)
pecto- 1. chest (pectoralis). 2. comblike (pectineus)
pedi- 1. foot (bipedal, pedicle). 2. child (pediatrics)
pelvi- basin (pelvis, pelvic)
-penia deficiency (leukopenia, osteopenia)
penna- feather (unipennate, bipennate)
peri- around (periosteum, peritoneum, periodontal)
phago- eat (phagocytosis, macrophage)
philo- loving, attracted (hydrophilic)
phobo- fearing, repelled (hydrophobic)
phragm- partition (diaphragm)
phreno- diaphragm (phrenic nerve)
physio- nature, natural cause (physiology, physician)
-physis growth (diaphysis, hypophysis)
pilo- hair (piloerector)
pino- drink, imbibe (pinocytosis)
planto- sole of foot (plantaris, plantar wart)
plasi- growth (hyperplasia)
A-15       APPENDIX D  Biomedical Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes

plasm- shaped, molded (cytoplasm, endoplasmic)
plasti- form (thromboplastin)
platy- flat (platysma)
pnea- breath, breathing (eupnea, dyspnea)
pneumo- air, breath, lung (pneumonia, pneumothorax)
podo- foot (pseudopod, podocyte)
poies- forming (hemopoiesis, erythropoietin)
poly- many, much, excessive (polypeptide, polyuria)
primi- first (primary, primipara)
pro- 1. before, in front, first (prokaryote, prophase, prostate). 
2. promote, favor (progesterone, prolactin)
pseudo- false (pseudopod)
ptero-, pterygo- wing (pterygoid)
-ptosis dropping, falling, sagging (apoptosis, nephroptosis)
puncto- point (puncta)
pyro- fire (pyrogen, antipyretic)
quadri- four (quadriceps, quadratus)
quater- fourth (quaternary)
radiat- radiating (corona radiata)
rami- branch (ramus)
recto- straight (rectus abdominis, rectum)
reno- kidney (renal, renin)
reti- network (reticular, rete testis)
retinac- retainer, bracelet (retinaculum)
retro- behind, backward (retroperitoneal, retrovirus)
rhombo- rhombus (rhomboideus)
rubo-, rubro- red (bilirubin)
rugo- fold, wrinkle (ruga, corrugator)
sacculo- little sac (saccule)
sarco- flesh, muscle (sarcoplasm, sarcomere)
scala- staircase (scala tympani, scalene)
sclero- hard, tough (sclera, sclerosis)
scopo- see (microscope, endoscopy)
secto- cut (section, dissection)
semi- half (semilunar, semimembranosus)
sepsi- infection (asepsis, septicemia)
-sis process (diapedesis, amniocentesis)
sole- sandal, sole of foot (sole, soleus)
soma-, somato- body (somatic, somatotropin)
spheno- wedge (sphenoid)
spiro- breathing (inspiration, spirometry)
spleno- 1. bandage (splenius capitis). 2. spleen (splenic artery)
squamo- scale, flat (squamous, desquamation)
stasi-, stati- put, remain, stay the same (hemostasis, homeostatic)
steno- narrow (stenosis)
ster-, stereo- solid, three-dimensional (steroid, stereoscopic)
sterno- breast, chest (sternum, sternocleidomastoid)
stria- stripe (striated, corpus striatum)
sub- below (subcutaneous, subclavicular)
sulc- furrow, groove (sulcus)
supra- above (supraspinous, supraclavicular)
sura- calf of leg (triceps surae)
sym- together (sympathetic, symphysis)
syn- together (synostosis, synovial)
tachy- fast (tachycardia, tachypnea)
tarsi- ankle (tarsus, metatarsal)
tecto- roof, cover (tectorial membrane)
telo- last, end (telophase, telencephalon)
tempo- time (temporal)
terti- third (tertiary)
theli- nipple, female, tender (epithelium, thelarche)
thermo- heat (thermogenesis, hypothermia)
thrombo- blood clot (thrombosis, thrombin)
thyro- shield (thyroid, thyrotropin)
-tion process (circulation, pronation)
toci- birth (oxytocin)
tomo- 1. cut (tomography, atom, anatomy). 2. segment 
­(dermatome, myotome, sclerotome)
tono- force, tension (isotonic, tonus, myotonia)
topo- place, position (isotope, ectopic)
trabo- plate (trabecula)
trans- across (transpiration, transdermal)
trapezi- 1. table, grinding surface (trapezium). 2. trapezoid 
­(trapezius)
tri- three (triceps, triglyceride)
tricho- hair (trichosiderin, hypertrichosis)
trocho- wheel, pulley (trochlea)
troph- 1. food, nourishment (trophic, trophoblast). 2. growth 
(dystrophy, hypertrophy)
tropo- to turn, change (metabotropic, gonadotropin)
tunica coat (tunica intima, tunica vaginalis)
tympano- drum, eardrum (tympanic, tensor tympani)
-ul small (tubule, capitulum, glomerulus)
-uncle, -unculus small (homunculus, caruncle)
uni- one (unipennate, unipolar)
uri- urine (glycosuria, urinalysis, diuretic)
utriculo- little bag (utriculus)
vagino- sheath (tunica vaginalis)
vago- wander (vagus)
vaso- vessel (vascular, vas deferens)
ventro- belly, lower part (ventral, ventricle)
vermi- worm (vermis)
vertebro- spine (vertebrae, intervertebral)
vesico- bladder, blister (vesical, vesicular)
villo- hair, hairy (microvillus)
vitre- glass (in vitro, vitreous humor)
zygo- union, join, mate (zygomatic, zygote, azygos)
   APPENDIX D  Biomedical Word Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes      A-16

PERIODIC TABLE OF THE ELEMENTS
Appendix E
Nineteenth-century chemists discovered that when they arranged 
the known elements by atomic weight, certain properties reap-
peared periodically. In 1869, Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev 
published the first modern periodic table of the elements, leaving 
gaps for those that had not yet been discovered. He accurately 
predicted properties of the missing elements, which helped other 
chemists discover and isolate them.
Each row in the table is a period and each column is a group 
(family). Each period has one electron shell more than the period 
above it, and as we progress from left to right within a period, each 
element has one more proton and electron than the one before. The 
dark steplike line from boron (5) to astatine (85) separates the met-
als to the left of it (except hydrogen) from the nonmetals to the 
right. Each period begins with a soft, light, highly reactive alkali 
metal, with one valence electron, in family IA. Progressing from 
left to right, the metallic properties of the elements become less 
and less pronounced. Elements in family VIIA are highly reactive 
gases called halogens, with seven valence electrons. Elements in 
family VIIIA, called noble (inert) gases, have a full valence shell 
of eight electrons, which makes them chemically unreactive. 
Ninety-one of the elements occur naturally on earth. 
Physicists have created elements up to atomic number 118 in the 
laboratory, but the International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry has established formal names only through element 
112 to date.
The 24 elements with normal roles in human physiology are 
color-coded according to their relative abundance in the body 
(see chapter 2). Others, however, may be present as contaminants 
with very destructive effects (such as arsenic, lead, and radiation 
poisoning). 
98.5% (6 elements)
0.8% (6 elements) 
0.7% (12 trace 
elements) 
Not found naturally
on earth
1
Hydrogen
H
1.0079
IA
IIA
IIIB
IVB
VB
VIB
VIIB
VIIIB
IB
IIB
IIIA
IVA
VA
VIA
VIIA
VIIIA
1
57–71, Lanthanides
Transition metals
89–103, Actinides
2
3
4
Period
5
6
7
3
Lithium
Li
6.941
11
Sodium
Na
22.989
37
Rubidium
Rb
85.468
55
Cesium
Cs
132.905
87
Francium
Fr
(223)
4
Beryllium
Be
9.0122
12
Magnesium
Mg
24.305
20
Calcium
Ca
40.08
38
Strontium
Sr
87.62
56
Barium
Ba
137.34
88
Radium
Ra
(226)
21
Scandium
Sc
44.956
39
Yitrium
Y
88.905
22
Titanium
Ti
47.90
40
Zirconium
Zr
91.22
72
Hafnium
Hf
178.49
104
Rutherfordium
Rf
(261)
23
Vanadium
V
50.942
41
Niobium
Nb
92.906
73
Tantalum
Ta
180.948
105
Hahnium
Ha
(262)
24
Chromium
Cr
51.996
42
Molybdenum
Mo
95.94
74
Tungsten
W
183.85
106
Seaborgium
Sg
(263)
25
Manganese
Mn
54.938
43
Technetium
Tc
(99)
75
Rhenium
Re
186.2
107
Neilsbohrium
Ns
(261)
26
Iron
Fe
55.847
44
Ruthenium
Ru
101.07
76
Osmium
Os
190.2
108
Hassium
Hs
(265)
27
Cobalt
Co
58.933
45
Rhodium
Rh
102.905
77
Iridium
Ir
192.2
109
Meitnerium
Mt
(266)
28
Nickel
Ni
58.71
46
Palladium
Pd
106.4
78
Platinum
Pt
195.09
29
Copper
Cu
63.546
47
Silver
Ag
107.868
79
Gold
Au
196.967
30
Zinc
Zn
65.38
48
Cadmium
Cd
112.40
80
Mercury
Hg
200.59
5
Boron
B
10.811
13
Aluminum
Al
26.9815
31
Gallium
Ga
69.723
49
Indium
In
114.82
81
Thallium
Ti
204.37
6
Carbon
C
12.0112
14
Silicon
Si
28.086
32
Germanium
Ge
72.59
50
Tin
Sn
118.69
82
Lead
Pb
207.19
7
Nitrogen
N
14.0067
15
Phosphorus
P
30.9738
33
Arsenic
As
74.992
51
Antimony
Sb
121.75
83
Bismuth
Bi
208.980
60
Neodymium
Nd
144.24
59
Praseodymium
Pr
140.907
58
Cerium
Ce
140.12
 57
Lanthanum
La
138.91
61
Promethium
Pm
144.913
62
Samarium
Sm
150.35
63
Europium
Eu
151.96
64
Gadolinium
Gd
157.25
65
Terbium
Tb
158.925
66
Dysprosium
Dy
162.50
67
Holmium
Ho
164.930
68
Erbium
Er
167.26
69
Thulium
Tm
168.934
70
Ytterbium
Yb
173.04
71
Lutetium
Lu
174.97
8
Oxygen
O
15.9994
16
Sulfur
S
32.064
34
Selenium
Se
78.96
52
Tellurium
Te
127.60
84
Polonium
Po
(209)
9
Fluorine
F
18.9984
17
Chlorine
Cl
35.453
35
Bromine
Br
79.904
53
Iodine
I
126.904
85
Astatine
At
(210)
2
Helium
He
4.0026
10
Neon
Ne
20.179
18
Argon
Ar
39.948
36
Krypton
Kr
83.80
54
Xenon
Xe
131.30
86
Radon
Rn
(222)
92
Uranium
U
238.03
91
Protactinium
Pa
(231)
90
Thorium
Th
232.038
 89
Actinium
Ac
(227)
93
Neptunium
Np
(237)
94
Plutonium
Pu
244.064
95
Americium
Am
(243)
96
Curium
Cm
(247)
97
Berkelium
Bk
(247)
98
Californium
Cf
242.058
99
Einsteinium
Es
(254)
100
Fermium
Fm
257.095
101
Mendelevium
Md
258.10
102
Nobelium
No
259.10
103
Lawrencium
Lr
260.105
1
Hydrogen
H
1.0079
Key
Percent of human
body (by weight)
Atomic number
Name
Symbol
Atomic weight
19
Potassium
K
39.098
A-17	

Glossary
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (ah-DEN-oh-seen 
tri-FOSS-fate)    A molecule composed of 
adenine, ribose, and three phosphate groups 
that functions as a universal energy-transfer 
molecule; yields adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP) and an inorganic phosphate group (Pi) 
upon hydrolysis. (fig. 2.19)
adipocyte (AD-ih-po-site)    A fat cell.
adipose tissue    A connective tissue composed 
predominantly of adipocytes; fat.
aerobic respiration    Oxidation of organic 
­compounds in a reaction series that requires 
oxygen and produces ATP.
afferent (AFF-uh-rent)    Carrying toward, as in 
afferent neurons, which carry signals toward 
the central nervous system, and afferent 
­arterioles, which carry blood toward a tissue.
agglutination (ah-GLUE-tih-NAY-shun) 
Clumping of cells or molecules by antibodies. 
(fig. 14.22)
agranulocyte    Either of the leukocyte types 
(­lymphocytes and monocytes) that lack 
­specific granules and thus have a relatively 
clear cytoplasm. (fig. 12.9)
albumin (al-BYU-min)    A class of small 
­proteins constituting about 60% of the protein 
fraction of the blood plasma; plays roles in 
blood viscosity, osmosis, and solute transport.
aldosterone (AL-doe-steh-RONE, al-DOSS-teh-
rone)    A steroid hormone secreted by the 
adrenal cortex that acts on the kidneys to 
­promote sodium retention and potassium 
excretion; indirectly promotes water retention 
and thereby opposes a drop in blood pressure.
alkalosis    An acid–base imbalance in which the 
blood pH is higher than 7.45.
alveolus (AL-vee-OH-lus)    1. A microscopic air 
sac of the lung. 2. A tooth socket.
amino acids    Small organic molecules with an 
amino group and a carboxyl group; the 
­monomers of which proteins are composed.
anabolism (ah-NAB-oh-lizm)    Any metabolic 
reactions that consume energy and construct 
more complex molecules with higher free 
­energy from less complex molecules with lower 
free energy; for example, the synthesis of 
­proteins from amino acids. Compare ­catabolism.
anaerobic fermentation (AN-err-OH-bic)    A 
reduction reaction independent of oxygen that 
converts pyruvate to lactate and enables 
­glycolysis to continue under anaerobic 
­conditions.
anatomical position    A reference posture that 
allows for standardized anatomical termi­
nology. A subject in anatomical position is 
­standing with the feet flat on the floor, arms 
down to the sides, and the palms and eyes 
directed forward. (fig. 1.7)
androgen (AN-dro-jen)    Testosterone or a relat-
ed steroid hormone. Stimulates body changes 
at puberty in both sexes, adult libido in both 
sexes, development of male anatomy in the 
fetus and adolescent, and spermatogenesis.
angiotensin II (AN-jee-oh-TEN-sin)    A 
­hormone produced from angiotensinogen 
(a plasma protein) by the kidneys and lungs; 
raises blood pressure by stimulating 
­vasoconstriction and stimulating the adrenal 
cortex to secrete aldosterone.
anion (AN-eye-on)    An ion with more electrons 
than protons and consequently a net negative 
charge.
antagonistic effect    Effect in which two hor-
mones, or both divisions of the autonomic 
nervous system, produce opposite effects on 
the same target organ or cell.
antebrachium (AN-teh-BRAY-kee-um)    The 
region from elbow to wrist; the forearm.
anterior    Pertaining to the front (facial–abdominal 
aspect) of the body; ventral.
anterior root    The branch of a spinal nerve that 
emerges from the anterior side of the spinal 
cord and carries efferent (motor) nerve fibers; 
often called ventral root. (fig. 8.17)
antibody    A protein of the gamma globulin 
class that reacts with an antigen and aids in 
protecting the body from its harmful effect; 
found in the blood plasma, in other body 
­fluids, and on the surfaces of certain 
­leukocytes and their derivatives.
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) (AN-tee-DYE-you-
RET-ic)    A hormone released by the ­posterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland in response to low 
blood pressure; promotes water retention by the 
kidneys. Also known as vasopressin.
antigen (AN-tih-jen)    Any large molecule 
­capable of binding to an antibody or immune 
cell and triggering an immune response; 
­usually a protein, polysaccharide, glycopro-
tein, or glycolipid.
antigen-presenting cell (APC)    A cell that 
phagocytizes an antigen and displays 
­fragments of it on its surface for recognition 
by other cells of the immune system; chiefly 
macrophages and B lymphocytes.
apical surface    The uppermost surface of an 
epithelial cell, usually exposed to the lumen of 
an organ. (fig. 3.1)
A
abdominal cavity    The body cavity between the 
diaphragm and pelvic brim. (fig. 1.12)
abduction (ab-DUC-shun)    Movement of a 
body part away from the median plane, as in 
raising an arm away from the side of the body. 
(fig. 6.37)
absorption    1. Process in which a chemical 
passes through a membrane or tissue surface 
and becomes incorporated into a body fluid or 
tissue. 2. Any process in which one substance 
passes into another and becomes a part of it.
acetylcholine (ACh) (ASS-eh-till-CO-leen)    A 
neurotransmitter released by somatic motor 
fibers, parasympathetic fibers, and some other 
neurons, composed of choline and an acetyl 
group.
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) (ASS-eh-till-CO-
lin-ESS-ter-ase)    An enzyme that breaks 
down acetylcholine, thus halting signal trans-
mission at a synapse.
acid    A proton (H+) donor; a chemical that 
releases protons into solution.
acidosis    An acid–base imbalance in which the 
blood pH is lower than 7.35.
acinus (ASS-ih-nus)    A sac of secretory cells at 
the inner end of a gland duct. (fig. 4.28)
actin    A filamentous intracellular protein that 
provides cytoskeletal support and interacts 
with other proteins, especially myosin, to 
cause cellular movement; important in muscle 
contraction and membrane actions such as 
phagocytosis, ameboid movement, and 
­cytokinesis.
action    The movement produced by the 
­contraction of a particular muscle.
action potential    A rapid voltage change in 
which a plasma membrane briefly reverses 
electrical polarity; has a self-propagating 
effect that produces a traveling wave of excita-
tion in nerve and muscle cells.
active site    The region of a protein that binds to 
another molecule, such as the substrate-­
binding site of an enzyme or the ­hormone- 
binding site of a receptor.
active transport    Transport of particles through 
a selectively permeable membrane, up their 
concentration gradient, with the aid of a 
­carrier that consumes ATP.
adduction (ah-DUC-shun)    Movement of a 
body part toward the median plane, such as 
bringing the feet together from a 
­spread-legged position. (fig. 6.37)
G-1

apocrine    1. A mode of secretion in which the 
cell product is produced in the cytosol, 
migrates to the cell surface without an 
­enclosing membrane (vesicle), and buds from 
the surface coated with a thin layer of 
­cytoplasm and plasma membrane. (fig. 4.29b) 
2. A term that persists for certain glands, such 
as axillary sweat glands, that have unusually 
large lumens and relatively thick secretions, 
formerly thought to employ the apocrine mode 
of secretion. (fig. 5.7a)
apoptosis (AP-oh-TOE-sis)    Programmed cell 
death; the normal death of cells that have 
completed their function. 
appendicular (AP-en-DIC-you-lur)    Pertaining 
to the limbs and their supporting skeletal 
­girdles. (fig. 6.10)
areolar tissue (AIR-ee-OH-lur)    A fibrous con-
nective tissue with loosely organized, widely 
spaced fibers and cells and an abundance of 
fluid-filled space; found under nearly every 
epithelium, among other places. (fig. 4.14)
arteriole (ar-TEER-ee-ole)    A small artery that 
empties into a metarteriole or capillary.
arteriosclerosis (ar-TEER-ee-oh-sclare-OH-sis)    
Stiffening of the arteries correlated with age 
or disease processes, caused primarily by 
cumulative free radical damage and tissue 
deterioration. Compare atherosclerosis.
articular cartilage    A thin layer of hyaline 
­cartilage covering the articular surface of a 
bone at a synovial joint, serving to reduce 
friction and ease joint movement. (fig. 6.34)
articulation    A skeletal joint; any point at 
which two bones meet; may or may not be 
movable.
atherosclerosis (ATH-ur-oh-skleh-ROE-sis)    A 
degenerative disease of the blood vessels char-
acterized by the presence of atheromas, often 
leading to calcification of the vessel wall and 
obstruction of coronary, cerebral, or other 
vital arteries. Compare ­arteriosclerosis.
atrophy (AT-ro-fee)    Shrinkage of a tissue due 
to age, disuse, or disease.
autoantibody    An antibody that fails to distin-
guish the body’s own molecules from foreign 
molecules and thus attacks host tissues, caus-
ing autoimmune diseases.
autoimmune disease    Any disease in which 
antibodies fail to distinguish between foreign 
and self-antigens and attack the body’s own 
tissues; for example, rheumatoid arthritis and 
type 1 diabetes mellitus.
autonomic nervous system (ANS) (AW-toe-
NOM-ic)    A motor division of the nervous 
­system that innervates glands, smooth muscle, 
and cardiac muscle; consists of sympathetic 
and parasympathetic divisions; and functions 
largely without voluntary control. Compare 
somatic nervous system.
axial (AC-see-ul)    Pertaining to the head, neck, 
and trunk; the part of the body excluding the 
appendicular portion. (fig. 6.10)
axillary (ACK-sih-LERR-ee)    Pertaining to the 
armpit.
axon    A fibrous extension of a neuron that 
transmits action potentials; also called a nerve 
fiber. There is only one axon to a neuron, and 
it is usually much longer and less branched 
than the dendrites. (fig. 8.2)
axon terminal    The swollen tip at the distal end 
of an axon; the site of synaptic vesicles and 
neurotransmitter release. (figs. 8.2, 8.12)
B
B lymphocyte    A lymphocyte that functions as 
an antigen-presenting cell and, in humoral 
immunity, differentiates into an antibody-­
producing plasma cell; also called a B cell.
baroreceptor (BAR-oh-re-SEP-tur)    Pressure 
sensor located in the heart, aortic arch, or 
carotid sinus that triggers autonomic ­reflexes 
in response to fluctuations in blood pressure.
base    1. A chemical that binds protons from 
solution; a proton acceptor. 2. Any of the 
purines or pyrimidines of a nucleic acid 
­(adenine, thymine, guanine, cytosine, or 
­uracil) serving in part to code for protein 
structure. 3. The broadest part of a tapered 
organ such as the uterus or heart, or the 
­inferior aspect of an organ such as the brain.
basophil (BASE-oh-fill)    A granulocyte with 
coarse cytoplasmic granules that produces 
heparin, histamine, and other chemicals 
involved in inflammation.
body    1. Part of a cell, such as a neuron, 
­containing the nucleus and most other 
­organelles. 2. The largest or principal part of 
an organ such as the stomach or uterus; also 
called the corpus.
brachial (BRAY-kee-ul)    Pertaining to the arm 
proper, the region from shoulder to elbow.
brainstem    The stalklike lower portion of the 
brain, composed of all of the brain except the 
cerebrum and cerebellum. (Many authorities 
also exclude the diencephalon and regard only 
the medulla oblongata, pons, and midbrain as 
the brainstem.) (fig. 9.5)
bronchiole (BRONK-ee-ole)    A pulmonary air 
passage that is usually 1 mm or less in diame-
ter and lacks cartilage but has relatively abun-
dant smooth muscle, elastic tissue, and a sim-
ple cuboidal, usually ciliated, epithelium.
bronchus (BRONK-us)    A relatively large pul-
monary air passage with supportive cartilage 
in the wall; any passage beginning with the 
main bronchus at the fork in the trachea and 
ending with segmental bronchi, from which 
air continues into the bronchioles.
brush border    A fringe of microvilli on the 
­apical surface of an epithelial cell, serving to 
enhance surface area and promote absorption. 
(fig. 3.4)
C
calorie    The amount of thermal energy that will 
raise the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C. 
Also called a small calorie.
Calorie    See kilocalorie.
capillary (CAP-ih-LERR-ee)    The narrowest 
type of vessel in the cardiovascular and lym-
phatic systems; engages in fluid exchanges 
with surrounding tissues.
capillary exchange    The process of fluid ­transfer 
between the bloodstream and tissue fluid.
capsule    The fibrous covering of a structure 
such as the spleen or a synovial joint.
carbohydrate    A hydrophilic organic compound 
composed of carbon and a 2:1 ratio of 
­hydrogen to oxygen; includes sugars, starch, 
glycogen, and cellulose.
carcinogen (car-SIN-oh-jen)    An agent capable 
of causing cancer, including certain ­chemicals, 
viruses, and ionizing radiation.
cardiovascular system    An organ system 
­consisting of the heart and blood vessels, 
serving for the transport of blood. This term 
does not include the blood. 
carpal    Pertaining to the wrist (carpus).
carrier    A protein in a cellular membrane that 
performs carrier-mediated transport.
carrier-mediated transport    Any process of 
transporting materials through a cellular 
­membrane that involves reversible binding to 
a transport protein; includes active transport 
and facilitated diffusion.
catabolism (ca-TAB-oh-lizm)    Any metabolic 
reactions that release energy and break 
­relatively complex molecules with high free 
energy into less complex molecules with 
lower free energy; for example, digestion and 
glycolysis. Compare anabolism.
cation (CAT-eye-on)    An ion with more protons 
than electrons and consequently a net positive 
charge.
caudal (CAW-dul)    1. Pertaining to a tail 
or narrow tail-like part of an organ. 2. 
Relatively distant from the forehead, 
­especially in ­reference to structures of the 
brain and spinal cord; for example, the 
medulla oblongata is caudal to the pons. 
Compare rostral.
central nervous system (CNS)    The brain and 
spinal cord.
centriole (SEN-tree-ole)    An organelle com-
posed of a short cylinder of nine triplets of 
microtubules, usually paired with another 
G-2      GLOSSARY

­centriole perpendicular to it; origin of the 
mitotic spindle; identical to the basal body of 
a cilium or flagellum. (fig. 3.13)
cephalic (seh-FAL-ic)    Pertaining to the head.
cerebellum (SER-eh-BEL-um)    A large portion 
of the brain posterior to the brainstem and 
inferior to the cerebrum, responsible for 
­equilibrium, motor coordination, certain 
­perceptual abilities, and memory of learned 
motor skills. (fig. 9.6)
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (SERR-eh-bro-SPY-
nul, seh-REE-bro-SPY-nul)    A liquid that 
fills the ventricles of the brain, the central 
canal of the spinal cord, and the space 
between the CNS and dura mater.
cerebrum (seh-REE-brum, SER-eh-brum)    The 
largest and most superior part of the brain, 
divided into two convoluted cerebral 
­hemispheres separated by a deep longitudinal 
fissure.
cervical (SUR-vih-cul)    Pertaining to the neck 
or any cervix.
cervix (SUR-vix)    1. The neck. 2. A narrow or 
necklike part of an organ such as the uterus 
and gallbladder. (fig. 19.6)
channel protein    A protein in the plasma 
­membrane that has a pore through it for the 
passage of materials between the cytoplasm 
and extracellular fluid. (fig. 3.3)
chemoreceptor    An organ or cell specialized to 
detect chemicals, as in the carotid bodies and 
taste buds.
cholecystokinin (CCK) (CO-leh-SIS-toe-KY-nin) 
A polypeptide employed as a hormone and 
neurotransmitter, secreted by some brain neu-
rons and cells of the small intestine. In the 
digestive system, stimulates contraction of the 
gallbladder, release of bile, and secretion of 
pancreatic enzymes.
cholesterol (co-LESS-tur-ol)    A steroid that 
functions as part of the plasma membrane and 
as a precursor for all other steroids in the 
body.
chondrocyte (CON-dro-site)    A cartilage cell. 
(fig. 4.19)
chronic    1. Long-lasting. 2. Pertaining to a dis-
ease that progresses slowly and has a long 
duration. Compare acute.
chronic bronchitis    A chronic obstructive 
­pulmonary disease characterized by damaged 
and immobilized respiratory cilia, excessive 
mucus secretion, infection of the lower 
­respiratory tract, and bronchial inflammation; 
caused especially by cigarette smoking. See 
also chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)    Certain lung diseases (chronic 
bronchitis and emphysema) that result in 
long-term ­obstruction of airflow and 
­substantially reduced ­pulmonary ventilation; 
one of the leading causes of death in old age.
cilium (SIL-ee-um)    A hairlike process, with an 
axoneme, projecting from the apical surface of 
an epithelial cell; often motile and serving to 
propel matter across the surface of an epitheli-
um, but sometimes nonmotile and serving a 
sensory role. (fig. 3.5)
circulatory shock    A state of cardiac output 
inadequate to meet the metabolic needs of 
the body.
circulatory system    An organ system consisting 
of the heart, blood vessels, and blood; the 
­cardiovascular system plus the blood. 
cisterna (sis-TUR-nuh)    A fluid-filled space or 
sac, such as the cisterna chyli of the lymphatic 
system and a cisterna of the endoplasmic 
reticulum or Golgi complex. Also called a 
­cistern. (figs. 3.13, 7.2)
clone    A population of cells that are mitotically 
descended from the same parent cell and are 
identical to each other genetically or in other 
respects.
coagulation (co-AG-you-LAY-shun)    The 
­clotting of blood, lymph, tissue fluid, or 
semen.
collagen (COLL-uh-jen)    The most abundant 
protein in the body, forming the fibers of 
many connective tissues in places such as the 
dermis, tendons, and bones.
columnar    A cellular shape that is significantly 
taller than wide. (fig. 4.2)
commissure (COM-ih-shur)    A bundle of nerve 
fibers that crosses from one side of the brain 
or spinal cord to the other.
complement    1. To complete or enhance the 
structure or function of something else, as in 
the coordinated action of two hormones. 2. A 
system of plasma proteins involved in defense 
against pathogens.
concentration gradient    A difference in 
­chemical concentration from one point to 
another, as on two sides of a plasma 
­membrane.
conception    The fertilization of an egg, 
­producing a zygote.
conceptus    All products of conception, ranging 
from a fertilized egg to the full-term fetus 
with its embryonic membranes, placenta, and 
umbilical cord. Compare embryo, fetus, 
­preembryo.
condyle (CON-dile)    An articular surface on a 
bone, usually in the form of a knob (as on the 
mandible), serving to smooth the motion of a 
joint. (fig. 6.9)
conformation    The three-dimensional structure 
of a protein that results from interaction 
among its amino acid side groups, its interac-
tions with water, and the formation of 
disulfide bonds.
congenital    Present at birth; for example, an 
anatomical defect, a syphilis infection, or a 
hereditary disease.
connective tissue    A tissue usually composed of 
more extracellular than cellular volume and 
usually with a substantial amount of extracel-
lular fiber; forms supportive frameworks and 
capsules for organs, binds structures together, 
holds them in place, stores energy (as in 
­adipose tissue), or transports materials (as in 
blood).
cooperative effect    Effect in which two 
­hormones, or both divisions of the autonomic 
nervous system, work together to produce a 
single overall result.
coronal plane    See frontal plane.
coronary circulation    A system of blood 
­vessels that serves the wall of the heart. 
(fig. 13.5)
corpus    Body or mass; the main part of an 
organ, as opposed to such regions as a head, 
tail, or cervix.
cortex (plural, cortices)    The outer layer of 
some organs such as the adrenal gland, cere-
brum, lymph node, and ovary; usually covers 
or encloses tissue called the medulla.
costal (COSS-tul)    Pertaining to the ribs.
cranial (CRAY-nee-ul)    Pertaining to the ­cranium 
of the skull.
cranial nerve    Any of 12 pairs of nerves con-
nected to the base of the brain and passing 
through foramina of the cranium.
cranium    The complex of 8 bones that enclose 
the brain; together with 14 facial bones, these 
form the skull.
crista    An anatomical crest or ridge, such as the 
crista galli of the ethmoid bone or the crista of 
a mitochondrion.
cross section    A cut perpendicular to the long 
axis of the body or an organ.
cuboidal (cue-BOY-dul)    A cellular shape 
that is roughly like a cube or in which 
the height and width are about equal; 
­typically looks squarish in tissue sections. 
(fig. 4.2)
current    A moving stream of charged particles 
such as ions or electrons.
cutaneous (cue-TAY-nee-us)    Pertaining to the 
skin.
cyanosis    (SY-uh-NO-sis) A bluish color of the 
skin and mucous membranes due to ischemia 
or hypoxemia.
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)    
A cyclic molecule produced from ATP by the 
removal of two phosphate groups; serves as a 
second messenger in many hormone and 
­neurotransmitter actions.
cytoplasm    The contents of a cell between its 
plasma membrane and its nuclear envelope, 
consisting of cytosol, organelles, inclusions, 
and the cytoskeleton.
cytoskeleton    A system of protein microfila-
ments, intermediate filaments, and microtu-
bules in a cell, serving in physical support, 
   GLOSSARY      G-3  

cellular ­movement, and the routing of mole-
cules and organelles to their destinations 
­within the cell. (fig. 3.12)
cytosol    A clear, featureless, gelatinous colloid 
in which the organelles and other internal 
structures of a cell are embedded.
cytotoxic T cell    A T lymphocyte that directly 
attacks and destroys infected body cells, cancer-
ous cells, and the cells of transplanted tissues.
D
daughter cells    Cells that arise from a parent 
cell by mitosis or meiosis.
decomposition reaction    A chemical reaction in 
which a larger molecule is broken down into 
smaller ones. Compare synthesis ­reaction.
decussation (DEE-cuh-SAY-shun)    The cross-
ing of nerve fibers from the right side of the 
central nervous system to the left or vice 
versa, especially in the spinal cord, medulla 
oblongata, and optic chiasm.
deep    Relatively far from the body surface; 
opposite of superficial. For example, most 
bones are deep to the skeletal muscles.
denaturation    A change in the ­three-­dimensional 
conformation of a protein that destroys its 
­enzymatic or other functional properties, ­usually 
caused by extremes of temperature or pH.
dendrite    Extension of a neuron that receives 
information from other cells or from 
­environmental stimuli and conducts signals to 
the soma. Dendrites are usually shorter, more 
branched, and more numerous than the axon 
and are incapable of producing action 
­potentials. (fig. 8.2)
dendritic cell    An antigen-presenting cell of the 
epidermis and mucous membranes. (fig. 5.2)
dense connective tissue    A connective tissue 
with a high density of fiber, relatively little 
ground substance, and scanty cells; seen in 
tendons and the dermis, for example.
depolarization    A shift in the electrical poten-
tial across a plasma membrane toward a value 
less negative than the resting membrane 
potential, associated with excitation of a nerve 
or muscle cell.
dermis    The deeper of the two layers of the 
skin, underlying the epidermis and composed 
of fibrous connective tissue.
desmosome (DEZ-mo-some)    A patchlike inter-
cellular junction that mechanically links two 
cells together. (fig. 3.7)
diabetes mellitus (DM) (mel-EYE-tus)    A form 
of diabetes that results from hyposecretion of 
insulin or from a deficient target cell response 
to it; signs include hyperglycemia and 
­glycosuria.
diaphysis (dy-AF-ih-sis)    The shaft of a long 
bone. (fig. 6.4)
diarthrosis (DY-ar-THRO-sis)    See synovial 
joint.
diastole (dy-ASS-toe-lee)    A period in which a 
heart chamber relaxes and fills with blood; 
especially ventricular relaxation.
differentiation    Development of a relatively 
unspecialized cell or tissue into one with a 
more specific structure and function.
diffusion    Spontaneous net movement of parti-
cles from a place of high concentration to a 
place of low concentration (down a concentra-
tion gradient).
diploid (2n)    In humans, having 46 chromo-
somes in 23 homologous pairs; in any organ-
ism or cell, having paired chromosomes of 
maternal and paternal origin.
disaccharide (dy-SAC-uh-ride)    A carbohydrate 
composed of two simple sugars (monosaccha-
rides) covalently bonded together; for exam-
ple, lactose, sucrose, and maltose. (fig. 2.9b)
distal    Relatively distant from a point of origin 
or attachment; for example, the wrist is distal 
to the elbow. Compare proximal.
disulfide bond    A covalent bond that links two 
cysteine residues through their sulfur atoms 
(—S—S—), serving to link one peptide chain 
to another or to hold a single chain in its 
three-dimensional conformation.
diuretic (DY-you-RET-ic)    A chemical that 
increases urine output.
dorsal    Toward the back (spinal) side of the 
body; in humans, usually synonymous with 
posterior.
dorsal root    See posterior root.
dorsiflexion (DOR-sih-FLEC-shun)    A move-
ment of the ankle that reduces the joint angle 
and raises the toes. (fig. 6.42)
duodenum (dew-ODD-eh-num, DEW-oh-DEE-
num)    The first portion of the small intestine 
extending for about 25 cm from the pyloric 
valve of the stomach to a sharp bend called 
the duodenojejunal flexure; receives chyme 
from the stomach and secretions from the liver 
and pancreas. (fig. 17.14)
E
edema (eh-DEE-muh)    Abnormal accumulation 
of tissue fluid resulting in swelling of the ­tissue.
effector    A molecule, cell, or organ that carries 
out a response to a stimulus.
efferent (EFF-ur-ent)    Carrying away or out, 
such as a blood vessel that carries blood away 
from a tissue or a nerve fiber that conducts 
signals away from the central nervous system.
elastic fiber    A connective tissue fiber, com-
posed of the protein elastin, that stretches 
under tension and returns to its original length 
when released; responsible for the resilience 
of organs such as the skin and lungs.
elasticity    The tendency of a stretched structure 
to return to its original dimensions when ten-
sion is released.
electrolyte    A salt that ionizes in water and 
­produces a solution that conducts electricity; 
loosely speaking, any ion that results from 
the dissociation of such salts, such as 
­sodium, potassium, calcium, chloride, and 
bicarbonate ions.
electron micrograph    A photograph made 
with a scanning or transmission electron 
microscope rather than with a light micro-
scope.
elevation    A joint movement that raises a body 
part, as in hunching the shoulders or closing 
the mouth.
embolism (EM-bo-lizm)    The obstruction of a 
blood vessel by an embolus.
embolus (EM-bo-lus)    Any abnormal traveling 
object in the bloodstream, such as agglutinat-
ed bacteria or blood cells, a blood clot, or an 
air bubble.
embryo    A developing individual from the 
­sixteenth day of gestation when the three 
­primary germ layers have formed, through the 
end of the eighth week when all of the organ 
systems are present. Compare conceptus, 
fetus, preembryo.
endocardium    All tissue deep to the muscle of 
the heart wall, lining the heart chambers and 
valve surfaces; consists of a simple squamous 
epithelium and thin layer of areolar tissue, and 
is coated with prostacyclin, which repels 
blood platelets and prevents clotting within 
the heart.
endochondral ossification (EN-doe-CON-drul 
OSS-ih-fih-CAY-shun)    A process in which 
a hyaline cartilage precursor (model) is 
replaced by calcified tissue to form a bone; 
employed for the production of most bones 
of the body except for flat bones of the skull 
and part of the clavicle. 
endocrine gland (EN-doe-crin)    A ductless 
gland that secretes hormones into the blood-
stream; for example, the thyroid and adrenal 
glands. Compare exocrine gland.
endocytosis (EN-doe-sy-TOE-sis)   Any process 
in which a cell forms vesicles from its plasma 
membrane and takes in large particles, mole-
cules, or droplets of fluid; for example, phago-
cytosis and pinocytosis.
endometrium (EN-doe-MEE-tree-um)    The 
mucosa of the uterus; the site of implantation 
and source of menstrual discharge.
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (EN-doe-PLAZ-
mic reh-TIC-you-lum)    An extensive 
­system of interconnected cytoplasmic 
tubules or channels; classified as rough ER 
or smooth ER depending on the presence  
or absence of ribosomes on its membrane. ­ 
(fig. 3.13)
G-4      GLOSSARY

endothelium (EN-doe-THEEL-ee-um)    A simple 
squamous epithelium that lines the lumens of 
the blood vessels, heart, and lymphatic vessels.
enteric (en-TERR-ic)    Pertaining to the small 
intestine, as in enteric hormones.
eosinophil (EE-oh-SIN-oh-fill)    A granulocyte 
with a large, often bilobed nucleus and coarse 
cytoplasmic granules that stain with eosin; 
phagocytizes antigen–antibody complexes, 
allergens, and inflammatory chemicals and 
secretes enzymes that combat parasitic 
­infections.
epicardium    All tissue of the heart wall superfi-
cial to its muscle, the myocardium. Consists 
of a simple squamous epithelium and thin 
layer of areolar tissue, collectively equivalent 
to the visceral pericardium; in some places 
also has an adipose layer, considered by some 
to be subepicardial fat and not part of the epi-
cardium proper.
epidermis    A stratified squamous epithelium 
that constitutes the superficial layer of the 
skin, overlying the dermis. (fig. 5.1)
epinephrine (EP-ih-NEFF-rin)    A catechola-
mine that functions as a neurotransmitter in 
the sympathetic nervous system and as a hor-
mone secreted by the adrenal medulla; also 
called adrenaline.
epiphysis (eh-PIF-ih-sis)    1. The head of a long 
bone. (fig. 6.4) 2. The pineal gland (epiphysis 
cerebri). 
epithelium    A type of tissue consisting of one 
or more layers of closely adhering cells with 
little intercellular material and no blood ves-
sels; forms the coverings and linings of many 
organs and the secretory tissue and ducts of 
the glands.
erectile tissue    A tissue that functions by 
swelling with blood, as in the penis and 
­clitoris.
erythrocyte (eh-RITH-ro-site)    A red blood 
cell.
erythropoiesis (eh-RITH-ro-poy-EE-sis)    The 
production of erythrocytes.
erythropoietin (eh-RITH-ro-POY-eh-tin)    A 
hormone that is secreted by the kidneys and 
liver in response to hypoxemia and stimulates 
erythropoiesis.
estrogen (ESS-tro-jen)    Collective name of three 
similar steroid sex hormones (estriol, estrone, 
estradiol) known especially for producing 
female secondary sex characteristics and regu-
lating various aspects of the menstrual cycle 
and pregnancy.
excitability    The ability of a cell to respond 
to stimuli, especially the ability of nerve 
and muscle cells to produce membrane 
­voltage changes in response to stimuli; 
­irritability.
excitation–contraction coupling    Events that 
link the synaptic stimulation of a muscle cell 
to the onset of contraction.
excretion    1. A waste product produced by the 
body, including feces, urine, and sweat. 2. The 
process of eliminating metabolic waste 
­products from a cell or from the body. 
Compare secretion.
exocrine gland (EC-so-crin)    A gland that 
secretes its products into another organ or 
onto the body surface, usually by way of a 
duct; for example, salivary and gastric glands. 
Compare endocrine gland.
exocytosis (EC-so-sy-TOE-sis)    A process in 
which a vesicle in the cytoplasm of a cell 
fuses with the plasma membrane and releases 
its contents from the cell; used in the elimina-
tion of cellular wastes and in the release of 
gland products and neurotransmitters.
expiration    1. Exhaling. 2. Dying.
extension    Movement of a joint that increases 
the angle between articulating bones 
(straightens the joint). (fig. 6.36) Compare 
flexion.
extracellular fluid (ECF)    Any body fluid that 
is not contained in the cells; for example, 
blood, lymph, and tissue fluid.
extrinsic (ec-STRIN-sic)    1. Originating exter-
nally, such as extrinsic blood-clotting factors; 
exogenous. 2. Not fully contained within an 
organ but acting on it, such as the extrinsic 
muscles of the hand and eye. Compare ­intrinsic.
F
facilitated diffusion    The process of transport-
ing a chemical through a cellular membrane, 
down its concentration gradient, with the aid 
of a carrier that does not consume ATP; ena-
bles substances to diffuse through the mem-
brane that would do so poorly, or not at all, 
without a carrier.
fascia (FASH-ee-uh)    A layer of connective 
­tissue between the muscles or separating the 
muscles from the skin. (fig. 7.14)
fascicle (FASS-ih-cul)    A bundle of muscle or 
nerve fibers ensheathed in connective tissue; 
multiple fascicles bound together constitute a 
muscle or nerve as a whole. (figs. 7.14, 8.17)
fat    1. A triglyceride molecule. 2. Adipose 
­tissue.
fatty acid    An organic molecule composed of a 
chain of an even number of carbon atoms with 
a carboxyl group (—COOH) at one end and a 
methyl group (—CH3) at the other; one of the 
structural subunits of triglycerides and 
­phospholipids.
fenestrated (FEN-eh-stray-ted)    Perforated with 
holes or slits, as in fenestrated blood capillar-
ies and the elastic sheets of large arteries.
fetus    In human development, an individual 
from the beginning of the ninth week when all 
of the organ systems are present, through the 
time of birth. Compare conceptus, embryo, 
preembryo.
fibrin (FY-brin)    A sticky fibrous protein 
formed from fibrinogen in blood, tissue fluid, 
and lymph; forms the matrix of a blood clot.
fibroblast    A connective tissue cell that 
­produces collagen fibers and ground 
­substance; the only type of cell in tendons 
and ligaments.
fibrosis    Replacement of damaged tissue with 
fibrous scar tissue rather than by the ­original 
tissue type; scarring. Compare ­regeneration.
fibrous connective tissue    Any connective 
­tissue with a preponderance of fiber, such as 
areolar, reticular, dense regular, and dense 
irregular connective tissues.
filtrate    A fluid formed by filtration, as at the 
renal glomerulus and other capillaries.
filtration    A process in which hydrostatic ­pressure 
forces a fluid through a selectively permeable 
membrane (especially a capillary wall).
fire    To produce an action potential, as in nerve 
and muscle cells.
fix    To hold a structure in place, for example, by 
fixator muscles that prevent unwanted joint 
movements.
flexion    A joint movement that, in most cases, 
decreases the angle between two bones. 
(fig. 6.36) Compare extension.
fluid balance    A state in which the average 
daily gain and loss of water are equal and 
water is properly distributed among the body’s 
fluid compartments.
fluid compartment    Any of the major 
­categories of fluid in the body, separated by 
selectively permeable membranes and 
­differing from each other in chemical 
­composition. Primary ­examples are the 
­intracellular fluid, tissue fluid, blood, and 
lymph.
follicle (FOLL-ih-cul)    A small space, such as 
a hair follicle, thyroid follicle, or ovarian 
­follicle.
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)    A hor-
mone secreted by the anterior pituitary gland 
that stimulates development of the ovarian 
­follicles and egg cells in females and promotes 
sperm production in males.
foramen (fo-RAY-men)    A hole through a bone 
or other organ, in many cases providing 
­passage for blood vessels and nerves.
fossa (FOSS-uh)    A depression in an organ or 
tissue, such as the fossa ovalis of the heart or 
a cranial fossa of the skull.
fovea (FOE-vee-uh)    A small pit, such as the 
fovea capitis of the femur or fovea centralis of 
the retina.
free radical    A particle derived from an atom 
or molecule, having an unpaired electron 
that makes it highly reactive and destructive 
to cells; produced by intrinsic processes 
such as aerobic respiration and by extrinsic 
agents such as chemicals and ionizing 
­radiation.
   GLOSSARY      G-5  

frontal plane    An anatomical plane that passes 
through the body or an organ from right to left 
and superior to inferior, such as a vertical 
plane that separates the anterior portion of the 
chest from the back; also called a coronal 
plane. (fig. 1.7)
fundus    The base, the broadest part, or the part 
farthest from the opening of certain organs 
such as the stomach and uterus.
fusiform (FEW-zih-form)    Spindle-shaped; 
elongated, thick in the middle, and tapered at 
both ends, such as the shape of a smooth mus-
cle cell or a muscle spindle. 
G
gamete (GAM-eet)    An egg or sperm cell.
ganglion (GANG-glee-un)    A cluster of nerve 
cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system, 
often resembling a knot in a string.
gangrene    Tissue necrosis usually resulting 
from ischemia and often involving infection.
gap junction    A junction between two cells 
­consisting of a pore surrounded by a ring of 
­proteins in the plasma membrane of each cell; 
allows solutes to diffuse from the cytoplasm 
of one cell to the next, thereby serving for 
cell-to-cell electrical and chemical communi-
cation in tissues such as cardiac and smooth 
muscle. (fig. 3.7)
gastric    Pertaining to the stomach.
gate    A protein channel in a cellular membrane 
that can open or close in response to chemical, 
electrical, or mechanical stimuli, thus 
­controlling when substances are allowed to 
pass through the membrane.
gene    An information-containing segment of DNA 
that codes for the production of a molecule of 
RNA, which in most cases goes on to play a 
role in the synthesis of one or more proteins.
germ cell    An egg or sperm cell (gamete) or 
any precursor cell destined to become a 
gamete.
gestation (jess-TAY-shun)    Pregnancy.
globulin (GLOB-you-lin)    A globular protein 
such as an enzyme, antibody, or albumin; 
especially a family of proteins in the blood 
plasma that includes albumin, antibodies, 
fibrinogen, and prothrombin.
glucagon (GLUE-ca-gon)    A hormone secreted 
by alpha cells of the pancreatic islets in 
response to hypoglycemia; promotes 
­glycogenolysis and other effects that raise 
blood glucose concentration.
glucocorticoid (GLUE-co-COR-tih-coyd)    Any 
hormone of the adrenal cortex that affects 
­carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism; 
chiefly cortisol and corticosterone.
gluconeogenesis (GLUE-co-NEE-oh-JEN-eh-sis)    
The synthesis of glucose from noncarbohy-
drates such as fats and amino acids.
glucose    A monosaccharide (C6H12O6) also 
known as blood sugar. Glycogen, starch, 
­cellulose, and maltose are made entirely of glu-
cose, and glucose constitutes half of a sucrose 
or lactose molecule. The isomer involved in 
human physiology is also called dextrose.
glycocalyx (GLY-co-CAY-licks)    A layer of car-
bohydrate molecules covalently bonded to the 
phospholipids and proteins of a plasma mem-
brane; forms a surface coat on all human cells.
glycogen (GLY-co-jen)    A glucose polymer syn-
thesized by liver, muscle, uterine, and vaginal 
cells that serves as an energy-storage polysac-
charide.
glycogenesis (GLY-co-JEN-eh-sis)    The synthe-
sis of glycogen.
glycogenolysis (GLY-co-jeh-NOLL-ih-sis)    The 
hydrolysis of glycogen, releasing glucose.
glycolipid (GLY-co-LIP-id)    A phospholipid 
­molecule with a carbohydrate covalently 
bonded to it, found in the plasma membranes 
of cells.
glycolysis (gly-COLL-ih-sis)    A series of 
­anaerobic oxidation reactions that breaks a 
glucose molecule into two molecules of pyru-
vate and produces a small amount of ATP.
glycoprotein (GLY-co-PRO-teen)    A protein 
molecule with a smaller carbohydrate cova-
lently bonded to it; found in mucus and the 
glycocalyx of cells, for example.
goblet cell    A mucus-secreting gland cell, 
shaped somewhat like a wineglass, found in 
the ­epithelia of many mucous membranes. 
(fig. 4.6)
Golgi complex (GOAL-jee)    An organelle 
­composed of several parallel cisternae, some-
what like a stack of saucers, that modifies and 
packages newly synthesized proteins and syn-
thesizes carbohydrates. (fig. 3.13)
Golgi vesicle    A membrane-bounded vesicle 
pinched from the Golgi complex, containing 
its chemical product; may be retained in the 
cell as a lysosome or become a secretory vesi-
cle that releases the product by exocytosis.
gonad    An organ that produces gametes; the 
ovary or testis.
gonadotropin (go-NAD-oh-TRO-pin)    A 
­pituitary hormone that stimulates the gonads; 
specifically FSH and LH.
gradient    A difference or change in any varia-
ble, such as pressure or chemical concentra-
tion, from one point in space to another; pro-
vides a basis for molecular movements such as 
gas exchange, osmosis, and facilitated diffu-
sion, and for bulk movements such as blood 
flow and air flow.
granulocyte    Any of the leukocyte types (neutro-
phils, eosinophils, basophils) that possess spe-
cific granules and thus have a relatively coarse-
grained cytoplasm. (fig. 12.9)
gray matter    A zone or layer of tissue in the cen-
tral nervous system where the neuron cell bod-
ies, dendrites, and synapses are found; forms 
the cerebral cortex and basal nuclei; cerebellar 
cortex and deep nuclei; nuclei of the brainstem; 
and core of the spinal cord. (figs. 9.3, 9.4)
gross anatomy    Bodily structure that can be 
observed without magnification.
growth factor    A chemical messenger that 
­stimulates mitosis and differentiation of 
­target cells that have receptors for it; 
­important in such processes as fetal 
­development, tissue maintenance and repair, 
and hemopoiesis; sometimes a contributing 
factor in cancer.
growth hormone (GH)    A hormone of the 
­anterior pituitary gland with multiple effects 
on many tissues, generally promoting tissue 
growth; also called somatotropin.
gustation (gus-TAY-shun)    The sense of taste.
gyrus (JY-rus)    A wrinkle or fold in the cortex 
of the cerebrum or cerebellum.
H
hair cell    Sensory cell of the cochlea, semicircu-
lar ducts, utricle, and saccule, with a fringe of 
surface microvilli that respond to the relative 
motion of a gelatinous membrane at their tips; 
responsible for the senses of hearing, body 
position, and motion.
hair follicle    An epithelial pit that contains 
a hair and extends into the dermis or 
­hypodermis.
haploid (n)    In humans, having 23 unpaired 
chromosomes instead of the usual 46 chromo-
somes in homologous pairs; in any organism 
or cell, having half the normal diploid (2n) 
number of chromosomes for that species. 
Compare diploid.
helper T cell    A type of lymphocyte that 
­performs a central coordinating role in 
­humoral and cellular immunity; target of the 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
hematocrit (he-MAT-oh-crit)    The percentage 
of blood volume that is composed of erythro-
cytes; also called packed cell volume.
hematoma (HE-muh-TOE-muh)    A mass of 
clotted blood in the tissues; forms a bruise 
when visible through the skin.
heme (pronounced “heem”)    The nonprotein, 
iron-containing component of a hemoglobin 
or myoglobin molecule; oxygen binds to its 
iron atom. (fig. 12.4)
hemoglobin (HE-mo-GLO-bin)    The red 
­gas-transport pigment of an erythrocyte.
hemopoiesis (HE-mo-poy-EE-sis)    Production 
of any of the formed elements of blood.
hemopoietic stem cell    A cell of the red bone 
marrow that can give rise, through a series 
of intermediate cells, to leukocytes, erythro-
cytes, platelets, and various kinds of 
­macrophages.
G-6      GLOSSARY

heparin (HEP-uh-rin)    A polysaccharide secret-
ed by basophils and mast cells that inhibits 
blood clotting.
hepatic (heh-PAT-ic)    Pertaining to the liver.
hepatic portal system    A network of blood 
­vessels that connect capillaries of the 
­intestines to capillaries (sinusoids) of the liver, 
thus delivering newly absorbed nutrients 
directly to the liver.
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)    A lipoprotein 
of the blood plasma that is about 50% lipid 
and 50% protein; functions to transport phos-
pholipids and cholesterol from other organs to 
the liver for disposal. A high proportion of 
HDL to low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is 
desirable for cardiovascular health.
hilum (HY-lum)    A point on the surface of an 
organ where blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, 
or nerves enter and leave, usually marked by a 
depression and slit; the midpoint of the con-
cave surface of any organ that is roughly bean-
shaped, such as the lymph nodes, kidneys, and 
lungs. (fig. 15.6b)
histamine    An amino acid derivative secreted by 
basophils, mast cells, and some neurons; func-
tions as a neurotransmitter or local ­chemical 
signal to stimulate effects such as gastric secre-
tion, bronchoconstriction, and ­vasodilation.
histology    1. The microscopic structure of 
­tissues and organs. 2. The study of such 
­structure.
homeostasis (HO-me-oh-STAY-sis)    The ten-
dency of a living body to maintain relatively 
stable internal conditions in spite of changes 
in its external environment.
hormone    A chemical messenger that is 
­secreted by an endocrine gland or isolated 
gland cell, travels in the bloodstream, and 
­triggers a physiological response in distant 
cells with receptors for it.
host cell    Any cell belonging to the human 
body, as opposed to foreign cells introduced to 
it by such causes as infections and tissue 
transplants.
human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) (CORE-
ee-ON-ic go-NAD-oh-TROPE-in)    A hor-
mone of pregnancy secreted by the chorion 
that stimulates continued growth of the corpus 
luteum and secretion of its hormones. HCG in 
urine is the basis for pregnancy testing.
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)    A 
virus that infects human helper T cells and 
other cells, suppresses immunity, and causes 
AIDS.
hyaline cartilage (HY-uh-lin)    A form of carti-
lage with a relatively clear matrix and fine 
collagen fibers but no conspicuous elastic fib-
ers or coarse collagen bundles as in other 
types of cartilage; the most widespread type 
of cartilage in the human body.
hydrogen bond    A weak attraction between a 
slightly positive hydrogen atom on one molecule 
and a slightly negative oxygen or nitrogen atom 
on another molecule, or between such atoms on 
different parts of the same molecule; responsible 
for the cohesion of water and the coiling of pro-
tein and DNA molecules, for example.
hydrolysis (hy-DROL-ih-sis)    A chemical reac-
tion that breaks a covalent bond in a molecule 
by adding an —OH group to one side of the 
bond and —H to the other side, thus consum-
ing a water molecule.
hydrophilic (HY-dro-FILL-ic)    Pertaining to 
molecules that attract water or dissolve in it 
because of their polar nature.
hydrophobic (HY-dro-FOE-bic)    Pertaining to 
molecules that do not attract water or dissolve 
in it because of their nonpolar nature; such 
molecules tend to dissolve in lipids and other 
nonpolar solvents.
hydrostatic pressure    The physical force 
­generated by a liquid such as blood or tissue 
fluid, as opposed to osmotic and atmospheric 
­pressures.
hypercalcemia (HY-pur-cal-SEE-me-uh)    An 
excess of calcium ions in the blood.
hyperextension    A joint movement that increas-
es the angle between two bones beyond 180°. 
(fig. 6.36)
hyperglycemia (HY-pur-gly-SEE-me-uh)    An 
excess of glucose in the blood.
hyperkalemia (HY-pur-ka-LEE-me-uh)    An 
excess of potassium ions in the blood.
hypernatremia (HY-pur-na-TREE-me-uh)    An 
excess of sodium ions in the blood.
hyperplasia (HY-pur-PLAY-zhuh)    The growth 
of a tissue through cellular multiplication, not 
cellular enlargement. Compare hypertrophy.
hypertension    Excessively high blood pressure; 
criteria vary but it is often considered to be a 
condition in which resting systolic pressure 
exceeds 140 mm Hg or diastolic pressure 
exceeds 90 mm Hg.
hypertonic    Having a higher osmotic pressure 
than human cells or some other reference 
solution and tending to cause osmotic shrink-
age of cells.
hypertrophy (hy-PUR-truh-fee)    The growth of 
a tissue through cellular enlargement, not cel-
lular multiplication; for example, the growth 
of muscle under the influence of exercise. 
Compare hyperplasia.
hypocalcemia (HY-po-cal-SEE-me-uh)    A defi-
ciency of calcium ions in the blood.
hypodermis (HY-po-DUR-miss)    A layer of 
connective tissue deep to the skin; also called
superficial fascia, subcutaneous tissue, or when 
it is predominantly adipose, subcutaneous fat.
hypoglycemia (HY-po-gly-SEE-me-uh)    A defi-
ciency of glucose in the blood.
hypokalemia (HY-po-ka-LEE-me-uh)    A defi-
ciency of potassium ions in the blood.
hyponatremia (HY-po-na-TREE-me-uh)    A 
deficiency of sodium ions in the blood.
hypothalamic thermostat (HY-po-thuh-LAM-ic)    
A nucleus in the hypothalamus that monitors 
body temperature and sends afferent signals to 
hypothalamic heat-promoting or heat-losing 
centers to maintain thermal homeostasis.
hypothalamus (HY-po-THAL-uh-mus)    The 
inferior portion of the diencephalon of the 
brain, forming the walls and floor of the third 
ventricle and giving rise to the posterior pitui-
tary gland; controls many fundamental physi-
ological functions such as appetite, thirst, and 
body temperature, and exerts many of its 
effects through the endocrine and autonomic 
nervous systems. (fig. 9.2)
hypothesis    An informed conjecture that is 
capable of being tested and potentially falsi-
fied by experimentation or data collection.
hypotonic    Having a lower osmotic pressure 
than human cells or some other reference 
solution and tending to cause osmotic ­swelling 
and lysis of cells.
hypoxemia (HY-pock-SEE-me-uh)    A deficiency 
of oxygen in the blood.
hypoxia (hy-POCK-see-uh)    A deficiency of 
oxygen in any tissue. 
I
immunity    The ability to ward off a specific 
infection or disease, usually as a result of 
prior exposure and the body’s production of 
antibodies or lymphocytes against a 
­pathogen. 
immunoglobulin (IM-you-no-GLOB-you-lin)    
An antibody; a protein of the globulin class 
that is produced by plasma cells; found in 
blood plasma, other body fluids, and lympho-
cyte plasma membranes; and functions in 
humoral immunity.
implantation    The attachment of a conceptus to 
the endometrium of the uterus.
inclusion    Any visible object in the cytoplasm 
of a cell other than an organelle or cytoskel-
etal element; usually a foreign body or a 
stored cell product, such as a virus, dust 
­particle, lipid droplet, glycogen granule, or 
­pigment.
infarction (in-FARK-shun)    1. The sudden 
death of tissue from a lack of blood perfusion. 
2. An area of necrotic tissue produced by this 
process; also called an infarct.
inferior    Lower than another structure or point 
of reference from the perspective of anatomi-
cal position; for example, the stomach is infe-
rior to the diaphragm.
inflammation    A complex of tissue responses to 
trauma or infection serving to ward off a path-
ogen and promote tissue repair; recognized by 
the cardinal signs of redness, heat, swelling, 
and pain.
inguinal (IN-gwih-nul)    Pertaining to the groin.
   GLOSSARY      G-7  

innervation (IN-ur-VAY-shun)    The nerve sup-
ply to an organ.
inspiration    1. Inhaling. 2. The stimulus that 
resulted in this book.
integral protein    A protein that extends through 
a plasma membrane and contacts both the 
extracellular and intracellular fluid. (fig. 3.2)
intercalated disc (in-TUR-kuh-LAY-ted)    A 
complex of mechanical and electrical junc-
tions that joins two cardiac muscle cells end 
to end, microscopically visible as a dark line 
that helps to histologically distinguish this 
muscle type; functions as a mechanical and 
electrical link between cells. (fig. 13.6)
intercellular    Between cells.
intercostal (IN-tur-COSS-tul)    Between the ribs, 
as in the intercostal muscles, arteries, veins, 
and nerves.
interdigitate (IN-tur-DIDJ-ih-tate)    To fit together 
like the fingers of two folded hands; for exam-
ple, at the dermal–epidermal ­boundary, interca-
lated discs of the heart, and foot processes of 
the podocytes in the kidney. (fig. 16.8)
interleukin (IN-tur-LOO-kin)    A hormonelike 
chemical messenger from one leukocyte to 
another, serving as a means of communication 
and coordination during immune responses.
interneuron (IN-tur-NOOR-on)    A neuron that 
is contained entirely in the central nervous 
system and, in the path of signal conduction, 
lies anywhere between an afferent pathway 
and an efferent pathway.
interosseous membrane (IN-tur-OSS-ee-us)    A 
fibrous membrane that connects the radius to 
the ulna and the tibia to the fibula along most 
of the shaft of each bone. (fig. 6.28)
interphase    That part of the cell cycle between 
one mitotic phase and the next, from the end of 
cytokinesis to the beginning of the next mitosis.
interstitial (IN-tur-STISH-ul)    1. Pertaining to 
the extracellular spaces in a tissue. 2. Located 
between other structures, as in the interstitial 
endocrine cells of the testis.
intervertebral disc    A cartilaginous pad 
between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae.
intracellular    Within a cell.
intracellular fluid (ICF)    The fluid contained in 
the cells; one of the major fluid compartments.
intramembranous ossification (IN-tra-MEM-
bruh-nus OSS-ih-fih-CAY-shun)    A process 
in which a sheet of mesenchyme becomes cal-
cified to form a bone, employed primarily for 
the production of flat bones such as those of 
the cranium.
intravenous (I.V.)    1. Present or occurring 
­within a vein, such as an intravenous blood 
clot. 2. Introduced directly into a vein, such as 
an intravenous injection or I.V. drip.
intrinsic (in-TRIN-sic)    1. Arising from within, 
such as intrinsic blood-clotting factors; endog-
enous. 2. Fully contained within an organ, 
such as the intrinsic muscles of the hand and 
eye. Compare extrinsic.
involuntary    Not under conscious control, 
including tissues such as smooth and cardiac 
muscle and events such as reflexes.
involution (IN-vo-LOO-shun)    Shrinkage of a 
tissue or organ by autolysis, such as involution 
of the thymus after childhood and of the 
­uterus after pregnancy.
ion    A chemical particle with unequal numbers 
of electrons or protons and consequently a net 
negative or positive charge; it may have a sin-
gle atomic nucleus as in a sodium ion or a few 
atoms as in a bicarbonate ion, or it may be a 
large molecule such as a protein.
ionic bond    The force that binds a cation to an 
anion.
ionizing radiation    High-energy electromagnet-
ic rays that eject electrons from atoms or mol-
ecules and convert them to ions, frequently 
causing cellular damage; for example, X-rays 
and gamma rays.
ischemia (iss-KEE-me-uh)    Insufficient blood 
flow to a tissue, typically resulting in 
­metabolite accumulation and sometimes ­tissue 
death.
isometric contraction    A form of contraction in 
which a muscle develops increasing tension 
but does not shorten because of an overriding 
external resistance; a normal phenomenon at 
the beginning of any muscle contraction work-
ing against an external load. 
isotonic    Having the same osmotic pressure as 
human cells or some other reference solution.
J
jaundice (JAWN-diss)    A yellowish color of 
the skin, corneas, mucous membranes, and 
body fluids due to an excessive concentration 
of ­bilirubin; usually indicative of a liver dis-
ease, obstructed bile secretion, or hemolytic 
disease.
K
ketone (KEE-tone)    Any organic compound 
with a carbonyl (C
O) group covalently 
bonded to two other carbons; ketones are 
­produced by fat oxidation and are a cause of 
diabetic acidosis.
ketonuria (KEE-toe-NEW-ree-uh)    The 
abnormal presence of ketones in the urine; 
a sign of diabetes mellitus but also occur-
ring in other conditions that entail rapid fat 
oxidation.
kilocalorie    The amount of heat energy needed 
to raise the temperature of 1 kg of water by 
1°C; 1,000 calories. Also called a 
Calorie (with a capital C). See also calorie.
L
labium (LAY-bee-um)    A lip, such as those of 
the mouth and the labia majora and minora of 
the vulva.
lactate    A small organic acid produced as an 
end product of the anaerobic fermentation of 
pyruvate; also called lactic acid.
lacuna (la-CUE-nuh)    A small cavity or depres-
sion in a tissue such as bone, cartilage, and 
the erectile tissues.
lamella (la-MELL-uh)    A little plate or layer, 
such as the lamellae of bone. (fig. 6.3)
lamina (LAM-ih-nuh)    A thin layer, such as the 
lamina of a vertebra or the lamina propria of a 
mucous membrane. (fig. 6.20)
lamina propria (PRO-pree-uh)    A thin layer of 
areolar tissue immediately deep to the epithe-
lium of a mucous membrane. (fig. 17.2)
larynx (LAIR-inks)    A cartilaginous chamber in 
the neck containing the vocal cords; colloqui-
ally called the voice box.
lateral    Away from the midline of an organ or 
median plane of the body; toward the side. 
Compare medial.
law    A verbal or mathematical description of a 
predictable natural phenomenon or of the rela-
tionship between variables; for example, the 
law of complementary base pairing.
leukocyte (LOO-co-site)    A white blood cell.
leukopoiesis (LOO-co-poy-EE-sis)    The produc-
tion of white blood cells.
libido (lih-BEE-do)    Sex drive; the psychologi-
cal motivation to seek and engage in sexual 
activity.
ligament    A cord or band of tough collagenous 
tissue binding one organ to another, especially 
one bone to another, and serving to hold organs 
in place; for example, the cruciate ­ligaments of 
the knee and falciform ligament of the liver.
linea (LIN-ee-uh)    An anatomical line, such as 
the linea aspera of the femur.
lingual (LING-gwul)    Pertaining to the tongue, 
as in lingual papillae.
lipase (LY-pace)    An enzyme that hydrolyzes a 
triglyceride into fatty acids and glycerol.
lipid    A hydrophobic organic compound 
­composed mainly of carbon and a high ratio of 
hydrogen to oxygen; includes fatty acids, fats, 
phospholipids, steroids, and ­prostaglandins.
lipoprotein (LIP-oh-PRO-teen)    A protein-­
coated lipid droplet in the blood plasma or 
lymph, serving as a means of lipid transport; 
for example, chylomicrons and high- and 
low-density lipoproteins.
load    1. To pick up a gas for transport in the 
bloodstream. 2. The resistance acted upon by 
a muscle.
lobule (LOB-yool)    A small subdivision of an 
organ or of a lobe of an organ, especially of a 
gland.
G-8      GLOSSARY

long bone    A bone such as the femur or humer-
us that is markedly longer than wide and that 
generally serves as a lever.
longitudinal    Oriented along the longest dimen-
sion of the body or of an organ.
loose connective tissue    A type of fibrous con-
nective tissue characterized by a seemingly 
random array of fibers of different types (col-
lagenous, elastic, and reticular), with abundant 
ground substance between them, and widely 
scattered cells.
low-density lipoprotein (LDL)    A blood-
borne droplet of about 20% protein and 
80% lipid (mainly cholesterol) that trans-
ports cholesterol from the liver to other tis-
sues for their use.
lumbar    Pertaining to the lower back and sides, 
between the thoracic cage and pelvis.
lumen (LOO-men)    The internal space of a hol-
low organ such as a blood vessel or the esoph-
agus, or a space surrounded by cells as in a 
gland acinus.
lymph    The fluid contained in lymphatic vessels 
and lymph nodes, produced by the absorption 
of tissue fluid.
lymph node    A small organ found along the 
course of a lymphatic vessel that filters the 
lymph and contains lymphocytes and mac-
rophages, which respond to antigens in the 
lymph. (fig. 14.9)
lymphatic system (lim-FAT-ic)    An organ 
­system consisting of lymphatic vessels, lymph 
nodes, tonsils, spleen, red bone marrow, and 
thymus; functions include tissue fluid 
­recovery and immunity.
lymphocyte (LIM-fo-site)    A relatively small 
agranulocyte with numerous types and roles in 
nonspecific defense, humoral immunity, and 
cellular immunity.
lysosome (LY-so-some)    A membrane-bounded 
organelle containing a mixture of enzymes 
with a variety of intracellular and extracellular 
roles in digesting foreign matter, pathogens, 
and expired organelles.
lysozyme (LY-so-zime)    An enzyme found in 
tears, milk, saliva, mucus, and other body 
­fluids that destroys bacteria by digesting their 
cell walls. 
M
macromolecule    Any molecule of large size 
and high molecular weight, such as a 
­protein, nucleic acid, polysaccharide, or 
­triglyceride.
macrophage (MAC-ro-faje)    Any cell of the 
body, other than a leukocyte, that is special-
ized for phagocytosis; usually derived from a 
blood monocyte and often functioning as an 
antigen-presenting cell.
macula (MAC-you-luh)    A patch or spot, such 
as the macula lutea of the retina.
malignant (muh-LIG-nent)    Pertaining to a cell 
or tumor that is cancerous; capable of metas-
tasis.
mast cell    A connective tissue cell, similar to a 
basophil, that secretes histamine, heparin, and 
other chemicals involved in inflammation; 
often concentrated along the course of blood 
capillaries.
matrix    1. The extracellular material of a ­tissue. 
2. The fluid within a mitochondrion contain-
ing enzymes of the citric acid cycle. 3. The 
­substance or framework within which other 
structures are embedded, such as the fibrous 
matrix of a blood clot. 4. A mass of epidermal 
cells from which a hair root or nail root 
­develops.
medial    Toward the midline of an organ or 
median plane of the body. Compare lateral.
median plane    The sagittal plane that divides 
the body or an organ into equal right and left 
halves; also called midsagittal plane. (fig. 1.7)
mediastinum (ME-dee-ah-STY-num)    The thick 
median partition of the thoracic cavity that 
separates one pleural cavity from the other 
and contains the heart, great blood vessels, 
esophagus, trachea, and thymus. (fig. 1.12) 
medulla (meh-DULE-uh, meh-DULL-uh)    
Tissue deep to the cortex of certain two-­
layered organs such as the adrenal glands, 
lymph nodes, hairs, and kidneys.
medulla oblongata (meh-DULL-uh OB-­long-
GAH-ta)    The most caudal part of the brain-
stem, immediately superior to the foramen 
magnum of the skull, connecting the spinal 
cord to the rest of the brain. (figs. 9.2, 9.5)
meiosis (my-OH-sis)    A form of cell division in 
which a diploid cell divides twice and produc-
es four haploid daughter cells; occurs only in 
gametogenesis.
melanocyte    A cell of the stratum basale of the 
epidermis that synthesizes melanin and 
­transfers it to the keratinocytes.
memory T cells    T lymphocytes descended from 
cytotoxic T cells, serving to remember a specif-
ic antigen and enable the body to respond more 
quickly  upon later exposures to it.
memory T cells    A class of lymphocytes descend-
ed from cytotoxic T cells, serving to remember 
a specific antigen and enable the body to 
respond more quickly to it upon reexposure.
meninges (meh-NIN-jeez) (singular, meninx)    
Three fibrous membranes between the central 
nervous system and surrounding bone: the 
dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater. 
(fig. 9.3)
menstruation (men-STRAY-shun, MEN-stru-
AY-shun)    Periodic vaginal discharge of 
blood and tissues from the functional layer of 
the endometrium of the nonpregnant uterus.
merocrine gland (MERR-oh-crin)    A gland that 
releases its product by exocytosis.
mesentery (MESS-en-tare-ee)    A serous 
­membrane that binds the intestines together 
and suspends them from the abdominal wall; 
the visceral continuation of the peritoneum. 
(figs. 1.14, 17.18)
mesoderm (MES-oh-durm)    The middle layer of 
the three primary germ layers of an embryo; 
gives rise to muscle and connective tissue.
metabolism (meh-TAB-oh-lizm)    The sum of all 
chemical reactions in the body.
metabolite (meh-TAB-oh-lite)    Any chemical 
produced by metabolism, especially a break-
down product or waste.
microtubule    An intracellular cylinder of pro-
tein, forming centrioles, the axonemes of cilia 
and flagella, and part of the cytoskeleton.
microvillus    An outgrowth of the plasma mem-
brane that increases the surface area of a cell 
and functions in absorption and some sensory 
processes; distinguished from cilia and flagella 
by its smaller size and lack of an axoneme.
milliequivalent    One-thousandth of an equiva-
lent, which is the amount of an electrolyte that 
would neutralize 1 mole of H+ or OH–. 
Electrolyte concentrations are commonly 
expressed in milliequivalents per liter 
(mEq/L). See appendix C.
mitochondrion (MY-toe-CON-dree-un)    An 
organelle specialized to synthesize ATP, 
enclosed in a double unit membrane with 
infoldings of the inner membrane called 
cristae.
mitosis (my-TOE-sis)    A form of cell division in 
which a cell divides once and produces two 
genetically identical daughter cells; sometimes 
used to refer only to the division of the genet-
ic material or nucleus and not to include 
­cytokinesis, the subsequent division of the 
cytoplasm.
molarity    A measure of chemical concentration 
expressed as moles of solute per liter of solu-
tion. See appendix C.
mole    The mass of a chemical equal to its molec-
ular weight in grams, containing 6.023 × 1023 
molecules. See appendix C.
monocyte    An agranulocyte specialized to 
migrate into the tissues and transform into a 
macrophage.
monomer (MON-oh-mur)    1. One of the identi-
cal or similar subunits of a larger molecule in 
the dimer to polymer range; for example, the 
­glucose monomers of starch, the amino acids 
of a protein, or the nucleotides of DNA. 
2. One subunit of an antibody molecule, 
­composed of four polypeptides.
monosaccharide (MON-oh-SAC-uh-ride)    A 
simple sugar, or sugar monomer; chiefly 
­glucose, fructose, and galactose.
motor end plate    See neuromuscular junction.
   GLOSSARY      G-9  

motor neuron    A neuron that transmits signals 
from the central nervous system to any 
­effector (muscle or gland cell); its axon is an 
efferent nerve fiber, carrying signals away 
from the CNS.
motor protein    Any protein that produces 
movements of a cell or its components owing 
to its ability to undergo quick repetitive 
changes in conformation and to bind reversi-
bly to other molecules; for example, myosin.
motor unit    One motor neuron and all the skele-
tal muscle fibers innervated by it.
mucosa (mew-CO-suh)    A membrane that lines 
an anatomical tract that is open to the exterior 
(the respiratory, digestive, urinary, and repro-
ductive tracts) and that secretes mucus. Also 
called a mucous membrane. (fig. 4.30a)
muscle fiber    One skeletal muscle cell.
muscle tone    A state of continual, partial con-
traction of resting skeletal or smooth muscle.
muscular system    An organ system composed 
of the skeletal muscles, specialized mainly for 
maintaining postural support and producing 
movements of the bones.
muscularis externa    The external muscular wall 
of certain viscera such as the esophagus and 
small intestine. (fig. 17.2)
mutagen (MEW-tuh-jen)    Any agent that causes 
a mutation, including viruses, chemicals, and 
ionizing radiation.
mutation    Any change in the structure of a chro-
mosome or a DNA molecule, often resulting in 
a change of organismal structure or function.
myelin (MY-eh-lin)    A lipid sheath around a 
nerve fiber, formed from closely spaced spiral 
layers of the plasma membrane of a Schwann 
cell or oligodendrocyte. (fig. 8.6)
myocardium (MY-oh-CAR-dee-um)    The 
­middle, muscular layer of the heart.
myocyte    A muscle cell, especially a cell of 
­cardiac or smooth muscle.
myoepithelial cell    An epithelial cell that has 
become specialized to contract like a muscle 
cell; important in dilation of the pupil and 
ejection of secretions from gland acini.
myofilament    A protein microfilament responsi-
ble for the contraction of a muscle cell, com-
posed mainly of myosin or actin. (fig. 7.3)
myoglobin (MY-oh-GLO-bin)    A red 
­oxygen-storage pigment of muscle; supple-
ments hemoglobin in providing oxygen for 
aerobic muscle metabolism.
myosin    A motor protein that constitutes the thick 
myofilaments of muscle and has ­globular, 
mobile heads that bind to actin molecules.
N
necrosis (neh-CRO-sis)    Pathological tissue 
death due to such causes as infection, trauma, 
or hypoxia. Compare apoptosis.
negative feedback    A self-corrective mecha-
nism that underlies most homeostasis, in 
which a bodily change is detected and 
responses are activated that reverse the change 
and restore stability and preserve normal body 
function.
negative feedback inhibition    A mechanism for 
limiting the secretion of a pituitary hormone. 
The pituitary hormone stimulates another 
endocrine gland to secrete its own hormone, 
and that hormone inhibits further release of 
the pituitary hormone.
neonate (NEE-oh-nate)    An infant up to 6 
weeks old. 
neoplasia (NEE-oh-PLAY-zhuh)    Abnormal 
growth of new tissue, such as a tumor, with no 
useful function.
nephron    One of approximately 1 million 
blood-filtering, urine-producing units in each 
kidney; consists of a glomerulus, glomerular 
capsule, proximal convoluted tubule, nephron 
loop, and distal convoluted tubule. (fig. 16.6)
nerve    A cordlike organ of the peripheral nerv-
ous system composed of multiple nerve fibers 
ensheathed in connective tissue.
nerve fiber    The axon of a single neuron.
nerve impulse    A wave of self-propagating 
action potentials traveling along a nerve fiber.
nervous tissue    A tissue composed of neurons 
and neuroglia.
neural pool    A group of interconnected neurons 
of the central nervous system that performs a 
single collective function; for example, the 
vasomotor center of the brainstem and speech 
centers of the cerebral cortex.
neural tube    A dorsal hollow tube in the 
embryo that develops into the central nervous 
system. (fig. 20.6)
neuroglia (noo-ROG-lee-uh)    All cells of nervous 
tissue except neurons; cells that perform various 
supportive and protective roles for the neurons.
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)    A synapse 
between a nerve fiber and a muscle fiber; also 
called a motor end plate. (fig. 7.6)
neuron (NOOR-on)    A nerve cell; an electrically 
excitable cell specialized for producing and 
transmitting action potentials and secreting 
chemicals that stimulate adjacent cells.
neurotransmitter    A chemical released at the 
distal end of an axon that stimulates an adja-
cent cell; for example, acetylcholine, norepi-
nephrine, or serotonin.
neutrophil (NEW-tro-fill)    A granulocyte, usu-
ally with a multilobed nucleus, that serves 
especially to destroy bacteria by means of 
phagocytosis, intracellular digestion, and bac-
tericidal secretions.
nitrogenous base (ny-TRODJ-eh-nus)    An 
organic molecule with a single or double 
­carbon–nitrogen ring that forms one of the 
building blocks of ATP, other nucleotides, and 
nucleic acids; the basis of the genetic code. 
(fig. 2.17)
nitrogenous waste    Any nitrogen-containing 
substance produced as a metabolic waste and 
excreted in the urine; chiefly ammonia, urea, 
uric acid, and creatinine.
nociceptor (NO-sih-SEP-tur)    A nerve ending 
specialized to detect tissue damage and 
­produce a sensation of pain; pain receptor.
norepinephrine (nor-EP-ih-NEF-rin)    An 
organic molecule that functions as a 
­neurotransmitter secreted by neurons, 
­especially in the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem, and as a hormone secreted by the adre-
nal gland.
nuclear envelope (NEW-clee-ur)    A pair of 
membranes enclosing the nucleus of a cell, 
with prominent pores allowing traffic of 
­molecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm. 
(fig. 3.13)
nucleic acid (new-CLAY-ic)    An acidic polymer 
of nucleotides found or produced in the nucleus, 
functioning in heredity and protein synthesis; of 
two types, DNA and RNA.
nucleotide (NEW-clee-oh-tide)    An organic 
molecule composed of a nitrogenous base, a 
monosaccharide, and a phosphate group; 
examples include ATP and the monomers of 
nucleic acids.
nucleus (NEW-clee-us)    1. A cell organelle 
containing DNA and surrounded by a double 
membrane. 2. A mass of neurons (gray mat-
ter) surrounded by white matter of the brain, 
including the basal nuclei and brainstem 
nuclei. 3. The positively charged core of an 
atom, consisting of protons and neutrons. 
4. A central structure, such as the nucleus 
pulposus of an intervertebral disc.
O
olfaction (ole-FAC-shun)    The sense of smell.
oocyte (OH-oh-site)    In the development of an 
egg cell, any haploid stage between meiosis 
I and fertilization.
oogenesis (OH-oh-JEN-eh-sis)    The production 
of a fertilizable egg cell through a series of 
mitotic and meiotic cell divisions; female 
gametogenesis.
opposition    A movement of the thumb in which 
it approaches or touches any fingertip of the 
same hand.
orbit    The eye socket of the skull.
organ    Any anatomical structure that is com-
posed of at least two tissue types, has recog-
nizable structural boundaries, and has a dis-
crete function different from the structures 
around it. Many organs are microscopic and 
many organs contain smaller organs, such as 
the skin containing numerous microscopic 
sense organs.
G-10      GLOSSARY

organelle    Any structure within a cell that car-
ries out one of its metabolic roles, such as 
mitochondria, centrioles, endoplasmic reticu-
lum, and the nucleus; an intracellular structure 
other than the cytoskeleton and inclusions.
osmolarity (OZ-mo-LERR-ih-tee)    The molar 
concentration of dissolved particles in a ­solution. 
osmosis (oz-MO-sis)    The net flow of water 
through a selectively permeable membrane, 
resulting from either a chemical concentration 
difference or a mechanical force across the 
membrane.
osseous (OSS-ee-us)    Pertaining to bone.
osteoblast    Bone-forming cell that arises from 
an osteogenic cell, deposits bone matrix, and 
eventually becomes an osteocyte.
osteoclast    Macrophage of the bone surface that 
dissolves the matrix and returns minerals to 
the extracellular fluid.
osteocyte    A mature bone cell formed when an 
osteoblast becomes surrounded by its own 
matrix and entrapped in a lacuna.
osteon    A structural unit of compact bone con-
sisting of a central canal surrounded by con-
centric cylindrical layers of matrix. (fig. 6.3)
osteoporosis (OSS-tee-oh-pore-OH-sis)    A 
degenerative bone disease characterized by a 
loss of bone mass, increasing susceptibility to 
spontaneous fractures, and sometimes deform-
ity of the vertebral column; causes include 
aging, estrogen hyposecretion, and insufficient 
resistance exercise.
ovulation    The release of a mature oocyte by 
the bursting of an ovarian follicle.
ovum    Any stage of the female gamete from the 
conclusion of meiosis I until fertilization; a 
primary or secondary oocyte; an egg.
oxidation    A chemical reaction in which one or 
more electrons are removed from a molecule, 
lowering its energy content; opposite of reduc-
tion and always linked to a reduction reaction.
P
pancreatic islet (PAN-cree-AT-ic EYE-let)    A 
small cluster of endocrine cells in the pancreas 
that secretes insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, 
and other intercellular messengers; also called 
islet of Langerhans. (fig. 11.10)
papilla (pa-PILL-uh)    A conical or nipplelike 
structure, such as a lingual papilla of the 
tongue or the papilla of a hair bulb.
papillary (PAP-ih-lerr-ee)    1. Pertaining to or 
shaped like a nipple, such as the papillary 
muscles of the heart. 2. Having papillae, such 
as the papillary layer of the dermis.
parasympathetic nervous system (PERR-uh-
SIM-pa-THET-ic)    A division of the auto-
nomic nervous system that issues efferent fib-
ers through the cranial and sacral nerves and 
exerts cholinergic effects on its target organs.
parathyroid hormone (PTH)    A hormone 
secreted by the parathyroid glands that raises 
blood calcium concentration by stimulating 
bone resorption by osteoclasts, promoting 
intestinal absorption of calcium, and inhibit-
ing urinary excretion of calcium.
parietal (pa-RY-eh-tul)    1. Pertaining to a 
wall, as in the parietal cells of the gastric 
glands and parietal bone of the skull. 2. The 
outer or more superficial layer of a two-­
layered membrane such as the pleura, peri-
cardium, or glomerular capsule. Compare 
visceral. (fig. 1.13)
pathogen    Any disease-causing microorganism.
pedicle (PED-ih-cul)    A small footlike process, 
as in the vertebrae and the renal podocytes; 
also called a pedicel.
pelvic cavity    The space enclosed by the true 
(lesser) pelvis, containing the urinary bladder, 
rectum, and internal reproductive organs.
pelvic girdle    A ring of three bones—the 
sacrum and two hip bones—that enclose the 
pelvis and link the lower limbs to the vertebral 
column. (fig. 6.30)
pelvis    1. The basinlike enclosure of the inferior 
abdominopelvic cavity, composed of the 
­pelvic girdle and its associated body-wall 
­ligaments and muscles. 2. A basinlike 
­structure such as the urine-collecting funnel 
near the hilum of the kidney. (fig. 16.2)
peptide    Any chain of two or more amino acids. 
See also polypeptide, protein.
peptide bond    A group of four covalently 
­bonded atoms (a —C
O group bonded to an 
—NH group) that links two amino acids in a 
protein or other peptide. (fig. 2.14)
perfusion    The amount of blood supplied to a 
given mass of tissue in a given period of time.
perichondrium (PERR-ih-CON-dree-um)    A 
layer of fibrous connective tissue covering the 
surface of hyaline or elastic cartilage.
perineum (PERR-ih-NEE-um)    The region 
between the thighs bordered by the coccyx, 
pubic symphysis, and ischial tuberosities; con-
tains the orifices of the urinary, reproductive, 
and digestive systems. (fig. 19.9)
periosteum (PERR-ee-OSS-tee-um)    A layer of 
fibrous connective tissue covering the surface 
of a bone. (fig. 6.3)
peripheral (peh-RIF-eh-rul)    Away from 
the center of the body or of an organ, as 
in peripheral vision and peripheral blood 
vessels.
peripheral nervous system (PNS)    A subdivi-
sion of the nervous system composed of all 
nerves and ganglia; all of the nervous system 
except the central nervous system.
peristalsis (PERR-ih-STAL-sis)    A wave of 
constriction traveling along a tubular organ 
such as the esophagus or ureter, serving to 
propel its contents.
peritoneum (PERR-ih-toe-NEE-um)    A serous 
membrane that lines the peritoneal cavity of 
the abdomen and covers the mesenteries and 
viscera.
phagocytosis (FAG-oh-sy-TOE-sis)    A form of 
endocytosis in which a cell surrounds a for-
eign particle with pseudopods and engulfs it.
pharynx (FAIR-inks)    A muscular passage in 
the throat at which the respiratory and diges-
tive tracts cross.
phospholipid    An amphipathic molecule com-
posed of two fatty acids and a phosphate-­
containing group bonded to the three carbons 
of a glycerol molecule; composes most of the 
molecules of the plasma membrane and other 
cellular membranes.
piloerector    A bundle of smooth muscle cells 
associated with a hair follicle, responsible for 
erection of the hair; also called a pilomotor 
muscle. (fig. 5.5)
pinocytosis (PIN-oh-sy-TOE-sis)    A form of 
endocytosis in which the plasma membrane 
sinks inward and imbibes droplets of extracel-
lular fluid.
plantar (PLAN-tur)    Pertaining to the sole of 
the foot.
plaque    A small scale or plate of matter, such as 
dental plaque, the fatty plaques of atheroscle-
rosis, and the amyloid plaques of Alzheimer 
disease.
plasma    The noncellular portion of the blood.
plasma membrane    The membrane that enclos-
es a cell and controls the traffic of molecules 
into and out of the cell. (fig. 3.2)
platelet    A formed element of the blood known 
especially for its role in stopping bleeding, but 
with additional roles in dissolving blood clots, 
stimulating inflammation, promoting tissue 
growth and maintenance, and destroying 
­bacteria.
pleura (PLOOR-uh)    A double-walled serous 
membrane that encloses each lung.
plexus    A network of blood vessels, lymphatic 
vessels, or nerves, such as a choroid plexus of 
the brain or brachial plexus of nerves.
polymer    A molecule that consists of a long 
chain of identical or similar subunits, such as 
protein, DNA, or starch.
polypeptide    Any chain of more than 10 or 
15 amino acids. See also protein.
polysaccharide (POL-ee-SAC-uh-ride)    A 
­polymer of simple sugars; for example, glyco-
gen, starch, and cellulose.
polyuria (POL-ee-YOU-ree-uh)    Excessive 
­output of urine.
popliteal (po-LIT-ee-ul)    Pertaining to the 
­posterior aspect of the knee.
positron emission tomography (PET)    A 
method of producing a computerized image of 
the physiological state of a tissue using 
­injected radioisotopes that emit positrons.
   GLOSSARY      G-11  

posterior    Near or pertaining to the back or spi-
nal side of the body; dorsal.
posterior root    The branch of a spinal nerve 
that enters the posterior side of the spinal 
cord and carries afferent (sensory) nerve fib-
ers; often called dorsal root. (fig. 8.17)
postganglionic (POST-gang-glee-ON-ic)    
Pertaining to a neuron that conducts signals 
from a ganglion to a more distal target 
organ.
postsynaptic    Pertaining to a neuron or other 
cell that receives signals from the presynaptic 
neuron at a synapse. (fig. 8.12)
potential    A difference in electrical charge from 
one point to another, especially on opposite 
sides of a plasma membrane; usually meas-
ured in millivolts.
preembryo    A developing individual from the 
time of fertilization to the time, at 16 days, 
when the three primary germ layers have 
formed. Compare  conceptus, embryo, fetus.
preganglionic (PRE-gang-glee-ON-ic)    
Pertaining to a neuron that conducts signals 
from the central nervous system to a ganglion.
presynaptic (PRE-sih-NAP-tic)    Pertaining to a 
neuron that conducts signals to a synapse. 
(fig. 8.12)
primary germ layers    The ectoderm, meso-
derm, and endoderm; the three tissue layers of 
an early embryo from which all later tissues 
and organs arise.
prime mover    The muscle that produces the 
most force in a given joint action; also called 
the agonist.
programmed cell death    See apoptosis.
pronation (pro-NAY-shun)    A rotational move-
ment of the forearm that turns the palm down-
ward or posteriorly. (fig. 6.41)
proprioception (PRO-pree-oh-SEP-shun)    The 
nonvisual perception, usually subconscious, 
of the position and movements of the body, 
resulting from input from proprioceptors and 
the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear.
proprioceptor (PRO-pree-oh-SEP-tur)    A sen-
sory receptor of the muscles, tendons, and 
joint capsules that detects muscle contractions 
and joint movements.
prostaglandin (PROSS-ta-GLAN-din)    A modi-
fied fatty acid with a five-sided carbon ring in 
the middle of a hydrocarbon chain, playing a 
variety of roles in inflammation, neurotrans-
mission, vasomotion, reproduction, and 
metabolism.
prostate (PROSS-tate)    A male reproductive 
gland that encircles the urethra immediately 
inferior to the bladder and contributes to the 
semen. (fig. 19.1)
protein    A large polypeptide; while criteria for a 
protein are somewhat subjective and variable, 
polypeptides over 50 amino acids long are 
generally classified as proteins.
proximal    Relatively near a point of origin or 
attachment; for example, the shoulder is proxi-
mal to the elbow. Compare distal.
pseudopod (SOO-doe-pod)    A temporary cyto-
plasmic extension of a cell used for locomo-
tion (ameboid movement) and phagocytosis. 
(fig. 3.6)
pseudostratified columnar    A type of epitheli-
um with tall columnar cells reaching the free 
surface and shorter basal cells that do not 
reach the surface, but with all cells resting on 
the basement membrane; creates a false 
appearance of stratification. (fig. 4.7)
pulmonary circuit    A route of blood flow that 
supplies blood to the pulmonary alveoli for 
gas exchange and then returns it to the heart; 
all blood vessels between the right ventricle 
and the left atrium of the heart.
pyrogen (PY-ro-jen)    A fever-producing agent.
R
ramus (RAY-mus)    An anatomical branch, as in 
a nerve or of the pubis.
receptor    1. A cell or organ specialized to 
detect a stimulus, such as a taste cell or the 
eye. 2. A protein molecule that binds and 
responds to a chemical such as a hormone, 
neurotransmitter, or odor molecule.
receptor-mediated endocytosis    A process in 
which certain molecules in the extracellular 
fluid bind to receptors in the plasma mem-
brane, these receptors gather together, the 
membrane sinks inward at that point, and the 
molecules become incorporated into vesicles 
in the cytoplasm.
reduction    A chemical reaction in which one 
or more electrons are added to a molecule, 
raising its energy content; opposite of oxi-
dation and always linked to an oxidation 
reaction. 
reflex    A stereotyped, automatic, involuntary 
response to a stimulus; includes somatic 
reflexes, in which the effectors are skeletal 
muscles, and visceral (autonomic) reflexes, in 
which the effectors are usually visceral mus-
cle, cardiac muscle, or glands.
reflex arc    A simple neural pathway that 
mediates a reflex; involves a receptor, an 
afferent nerve fiber, usually one or more 
interneurons, an efferent nerve fiber, and an 
effector.
refractory period    1. A period of time after a 
nerve or muscle cell has responded to a 
­stimulus in which it cannot be reexcited by a 
threshold stimulus. 2. A period of time after 
male orgasm when it is not possible to reattain 
erection or ejaculation.
regeneration    Replacement of damaged tissue 
with new tissue of the original type. Compare  
fibrosis.
regulatory T cells    A class of T lymphocytes that 
moderate the activity of cytotoxic T cells to 
reduce the immune response after a pathogen is 
defeated and to prevent autoimmune diseases.
renin (REE-nin)    An enzyme secreted by the 
kidneys in response to hypotension; converts 
the plasma protein angiotensinogen to angio-
tensin I, leading indirectly to a rise in blood 
pressure.
repolarization    Reattainment of the resting 
membrane potential after a nerve or muscle 
cell has depolarized.
residue    Any one of the amino acids in a protein 
or other peptide.
resistance    1. A nonspecific ability to ward off 
infection or disease regardless of whether the 
body has been previously exposed to it. 
Compare immunity. 2. A force that opposes 
the flow of a fluid such as air or blood. 3. A 
force, or load, that opposes the action of a 
muscle or lever.
resting membrane potential (RMP)    A stable 
voltage across the plasma membrane of an 
unstimulated nerve or muscle cell.
reticular cell (reh-TIC-you-lur)    A delicate, 
branching phagocytic cell found in the retic-
ular connective tissue of the lymphatic 
organs.
reticular fiber    A fine, branching collagen fiber 
coated with glycoprotein, forming part of the 
framework of lymphatic organs and some 
other tissues and organs.
reticular tissue    A connective tissue composed 
of reticular cells and reticular fibers, found in 
bone marrow, lymphatic organs, and in lesser 
amounts elsewhere.
ribosome    A granule found free in the ­cytoplasm 
or attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum 
and nuclear envelope, composed of ribosomal 
RNA and enzymes; ­specialized to read the 
nucleotide sequence of messenger RNA and 
assemble a corresponding sequence of amino 
acids to make a ­protein.
risk factor    Any environmental factor or charac-
teristic of an individual that increases one’s 
chance of developing a particular disease; 
includes such intrinsic factors as age, sex, and 
race and such extrinsic factors as diet, smok-
ing, and occupation.
rostral    Relatively close to the forehead, 
­especially in reference to structures of the 
brain and spinal cord; for example, the frontal 
lobe is rostral to the parietal lobe. Compare  
caudal.
ruga (ROO-ga)    1. An internal fold or wrinkle 
in the mucosa of a hollow organ such as the 
stomach and urinary bladder; typically present 
when the organ is empty and relaxed but not 
when the organ is full and stretched. 2. Tissue 
ridges in such locations as the hard palate and 
vagina. (fig. 17.8)
G-12      GLOSSARY

S
saccule (SAC-yule)    A saclike receptor in the inner 
ear with a vertical patch of hair cells, the macula 
sacculi; senses the orientation of the head and 
responds to vertical acceleration, as when riding 
in an elevator or standing up. (fig. 10.9)
sagittal plane (SADJ-ih-tul)    Any plane that 
extends from anterior to posterior and cephalic 
to caudal and that divides the body into right 
and left portions. Compare median plane.
sarcomere (SAR-co-meer)    In skeletal and 
­cardiac muscle, the portion of a myofibril 
from one Z disc to the next, constituting one 
contractile unit. (fig. 7.4)
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)    The smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum of a muscle cell, 
­serving as a calcium reservoir. (fig. 7.2)
scanning electron microscope (SEM)    A 
microscope that uses an electron beam in 
place of light to form high-resolution, 
three-dimensional images of the surfaces of 
objects; capable of much higher magnifica-
tions than a light microscope.
sclerosis (scleh-RO-sis)    Hardening or stiffening 
of a tissue, as in multiple sclerosis of the cen-
tral nervous system or atherosclerosis of the 
blood vessels.
sebum (SEE-bum)    An oily secretion of the 
sebaceous glands that keeps the skin and hair 
pliable.
second messenger    A chemical that is produced 
within a cell (such as cAMP) or that enters a 
cell (such as calcium ions) in response to the 
binding of a messenger to a membrane recep-
tor, and that triggers a metabolic reaction in 
the cell.
secondary active transport    A mechanism in 
which solutes are moved through a plasma 
membrane by a carrier that does not itself use 
ATP but depends on a concentration gradient 
established by an active transport pump 
­elsewhere in the cell.
secretion    1. A chemical released by a cell to 
serve a physiological function, such as a hor-
mone or digestive enzyme. 2. The process of 
releasing such a chemical, often by exocytosis. 
Compare excretion.
selectively permeable membrane    A mem-
brane that allows some substances to pass 
through while excluding others; for example, 
the plasma membrane and dialysis mem-
branes.
semicircular ducts    Three ring-shaped, 
­fluid-filled tubes of the inner ear that detect 
angular acceleration of the head; each is 
enclosed in a bony passage called the semicir-
cular canal. (fig. 10.10)
semilunar valve    A valve that consists of cres-
cent-shaped cusps, including the aortic and 
pulmonary valves of the heart. (fig. 13.4)
senescence (seh-NESS-ense)    Degenerative 
changes that occur with age.
sensation    Conscious perception of a stimulus; 
pain, taste, and color, for example, are not 
stimuli but sensations resulting from stimuli.
sensory nerve fiber    An axon that conducts 
information from a receptor to the central 
­nervous system; an afferent nerve fiber.
sensory neuron    A neuron that transmits signals 
from a sense organ or other receptor to the 
brain or spinal cord; its axon is an afferent 
nerve fiber, carrying signals toward the CNS.
serosa (seer-OH-sa)    A membrane such as the 
peritoneum, pleura, or pericardium that lines a 
body cavity or covers the external surfaces of 
the viscera; composed of a simple squamous 
epithelium and a thin layer of areolar connec-
tive tissue. Also called a serous membrane. 
(fig. 4.30b)  
serous fluid (SEER-us)    A watery, low-protein 
fluid similar to blood serum, formed as a fil-
trate of the blood or tissue fluid or as a secre-
tion of serous gland cells; moistens the serous 
membranes.
sex chromosomes    The X and Y chromosomes, 
which determine a person’s sex.
shock    In the circulatory sense, a state of ­cardiac 
output that is insufficient to meet the body’s 
physiological needs, with ­consequences rang-
ing from fainting to death.
sign    An objective manifestation of illness that 
any observer can see, such as cyanosis or 
edema. Compare symptom.
simple epithelium    An epithelium in which all 
cells rest directly on the basement membrane; 
includes simple squamous, cuboidal, and 
columnar types, and pseudostratified colum-
nar. (fig. 4.3)
sinus    1. An air-filled space in the cranium. 2. A 
modified, relatively dilated vein that lacks 
smooth muscle and is incapable of vasomo-
tion, such as the dural sinuses of the cerebral 
circulation and coronary sinus of the heart. 3. 
A small fluid-filled space in an organ such as 
the spleen and lymph nodes. 4. Pertaining to 
the sinoatrial node of the heart, as in sinus 
rhythm.
somatic    1. Pertaining to the body as a whole. 
2. Pertaining to the skin, bones, and skeletal 
muscles as opposed to the viscera. 
3. Pertaining to cells other than germ cells.
somatic nervous system    A division of the 
nervous system that includes afferent fibers 
mainly from the skin, muscles, and skeleton 
and efferent fibers to the skeletal muscles. 
Compare autonomic nervous system.
somatosensory    1. Pertaining to widely distrib-
uted general senses in the skin, muscles, ten-
dons, joint capsules, and viscera, as opposed 
to the special senses found in the head only. 
2. Pertaining to the cerebral cortex of the 
postcentral gyrus, which receives input from 
such receptors. Also called somesthetic.
somite    One segment in a linear series of meso-
dermal masses that form on each side of the 
embryonic neural tube and give rise to trunk 
muscles, vertebrae, and dermis. (fig. 20.7a, b)
spermatogenesis (SPUR-ma-toe-JEN-eh-sis)    
The production of sperm cells through a series 
of mitotic and meiotic cell divisions; male 
gametogenesis.
spermatozoon (SPUR-ma-toe-ZOE-on)    A 
sperm cell. 
sphincter (SFINK-tur)    A ring of muscle that 
opens or closes an opening or passageway; 
found, for example, in the eyelids, inferior to 
the urinary bladder, and at the beginning of a 
blood capillary.
spinal nerve    Any of the 31 pairs of nerves that 
arise from the spinal cord and pass through 
the intervertebral foramina.
spindle    1. An elongated structure that is thick in 
the middle and tapered at the ends ­(fusiform). 
2. A football-shaped complex of microtubules 
that guide the movement of chromosomes in 
mitosis and meiosis. (fig. 3.18) 3. A stretch 
receptor in the skeletal muscles.
spine    1. The vertebral column. 2. A pointed pro-
cess or sharp ridge on a bone, such as the styloid 
process of the cranium and spine of the scapula.
squamous (SKWAY-mus)    Having a flat, scaly 
shape; pertains especially to a class of epithe-
lial cells. (figs. 4.2–4.4)
stem cell    Any undifferentiated cell that can divide 
and differentiate into more functionally specific 
cell types such as blood cells and germ cells.
stenosis (steh-NO-sis)    The narrowing of a pas-
sageway such as a heart valve or uterine tube; 
a permanent, pathological constriction as 
opposed to normal physiological constriction 
of a passageway.
steroid (STERR-oyd, STEER-oyd)    A lipid mole-
cule that consists of four interconnected carbon 
rings; cholesterol and several of its derivatives.
stimulus    A chemical or physical agent in a 
cell’s surroundings that is capable of creating 
a physiological response in the cell; especially 
agents detected by sensory cells, such as 
chemicals, light, and pressure.
stratified epithelium    A type of epithelium in 
which some cells rest on top of others instead 
of on the basement membrane; includes strati-
fied squamous, cuboidal, and columnar types, 
and transitional epithelium. (fig. 4.3)
stress    1. A mechanical force applied to any part 
of the body; important in stimulating bone 
growth, for example. 2. A condition in which 
any environmental influence disturbs the 
homeostatic equilibrium of the body and stim-
ulates a physiological response, especially 
involving the increased secretion of certain 
adrenal hormones.
   GLOSSARY      G-13  

stroke volume    The volume of blood ejected by 
one ventricle of the heart in one contraction.
subcutaneous (SUB-cue-TAY-nee-us)    Beneath 
the skin.
substrate    1. A chemical that is acted upon and 
changed by an enzyme. 2. A chemical used as 
a source of energy, such as glucose and fatty 
acids.
sulcus (SUL-cuss)    A groove in the surface of 
an organ, as in the cerebrum or heart.
summation    A phenomenon in which multiple 
muscle twitches occur so closely together that 
a muscle fiber cannot fully relax between 
twitches but develops more tension than a sin-
gle twitch produces. (fig. 7.10)
superficial    Relatively close to the surface; 
opposite of deep. For example, the ribs are 
superficial to the lungs.
superior    Higher than another structure or point 
of reference from the perspective of anatomi-
cal position; for example, the lungs are superi-
or to the diaphragm.
supination (SOO-pih-NAY-shun)    A rotational 
movement of the forearm that turns the palm 
so that it faces upward or forward. (fig. 6.41)
surfactant (sur-FAC-tent)    A chemical that 
reduces the surface tension of water and ena-
bles it to penetrate other substances more 
effectively. Examples include pulmonary 
­surfactant and bile acids.
sympathetic nervous system    A division of the 
autonomic nervous system that issues efferent 
fibers through the thoracic and lumbar nerves 
and usually exerts adrenergic effects on its 
­target organs; includes a chain of ganglia 
­adjacent to the vertebral column, and the 
­adrenal medulla.
symphysis (SIM-fih-sis)    A joint in which two 
bones are held together by fibrocartilage; for 
example, between bodies of the vertebrae and 
between the right and left pubic bones.
symptom    A subjective manifestation of illness 
that only the ill person can sense, such as 
­dizziness or nausea. Compare sign.
synapse (SIN-aps)    1. A junction at the end of an 
axon where it stimulates another cell. 2. A gap 
junction between two cardiac or smooth muscle 
cells at which one cell electrically stimulates 
the other; called an electrical ­synapse.
synaptic cleft    A narrow space between the 
axon terminal and the adjacent cell, 
across which a neurotransmitter diffuses. 
(fig. 8.12)
synaptic vesicle    A spheroid organelle in an 
axon terminal containing neurotransmitter. 
(fig. 8.12)
syndrome    A suite of related signs and symp-
toms stemming from a specific pathological 
cause.
synergist (SIN-ur-jist)    A muscle that works 
with the prime mover (agonist) to contribute 
to the same overall action at a joint.
synergistic    An effect in which two agents 
working together (such as two hormones) 
exert an effect that is greater than the sum of 
their separate effects. For example, neither 
follicle-stimulating hormone nor testosterone 
alone stimulates significant sperm production, 
but the two of them together stimulate produc-
tion of vast numbers of sperm.
synovial fluid (sih-NO-vee-ul)    A lubricating 
fluid similar to egg white in consistency, 
found in the synovial joint cavities and bursae.
synovial joint    A point where two bones are 
separated by a narrow, encapsulated space 
filled with lubricating synovial fluid; most 
such joints are relatively mobile. Also called a 
diarthrosis.
systemic (sis-TEM-ic)    Widespread or pertain-
ing to the body as a whole, as in the systemic 
circulation.
systemic circuit    All blood vessels that convey 
blood from the left ventricle to all organs of 
the body and back to the right atrium of the 
heart; all of the cardiovascular system except 
the heart and pulmonary circuit.
systole (SIS-toe-lee)    The contraction of any 
heart chamber; ventricular contraction unless 
otherwise specified.
systolic pressure (sis-TOLL-ic)    The peak arte-
rial blood pressure measured during ventricu-
lar systole.
T
target cell    A cell acted upon by a nerve fiber, 
hormone, or other chemical messenger.
tarsal    Pertaining to the ankle (tarsus).
T cell    A type of lymphocyte involved in non-
specific defense, humoral immunity, and 
­cellular immunity; occurs in several forms 
including helper, cytotoxic, and regulatory T 
cells and natural killer cells.
T lymphocyte    A lymphocyte that matures in the 
thymus and functions in innate immunity, cel-
lular immunity, and humoral immunity; 
includes cytotoxic, helper, and memory T cells.
tendon    A collagenous band or cord associated 
with a muscle, usually attaching it to a bone 
and transferring muscular tension to it.
tetanus    1. A state of sustained muscle contrac-
tion produced by summation as a normal part 
of contraction; also called tetany. 2. Spastic 
muscle paralysis produced by the toxin of the 
bacterium Clostridium tetani.
thalamus (THAL-uh-muss)    The largest part of 
the diencephalon, located immediately inferior 
to the corpus callosum and bulging into each 
lateral ventricle; a point of synaptic relay of 
nearly all signals passing from lower levels of 
the CNS to the cerebrum. (figs. 9.2, 9.5)
theory    An explanatory statement, or set of 
statements, that concisely summarizes the 
state of knowledge on a phenomenon and pro-
vides direction for further study; for example, 
the fluid-mosaic theory of the plasma mem-
brane and the sliding filament theory of 
­muscle contraction.
thermogenesis    The production of heat, for 
example, by shivering or by the action of thy-
roid hormones.
thermoreceptor    A neuron specialized to 
respond to heat or cold, found in the skin and 
mucous membranes, for example.
thermoregulation    Homeostatic regulation of 
the body temperature within a narrow range 
by adjustments of heat-promoting and 
heat-losing mechanisms.
thorax    A region of the trunk between the neck 
and the diaphragm; the chest.
threshold    The minimum voltage to which the 
plasma membrane of a nerve or muscle cell 
must be depolarized before it produces an 
action potential.
thrombosis (throm-BO-sis)    The formation or 
presence of a thrombus.
thrombus    A clot that forms in a blood vessel 
or heart chamber; may break free and travel in 
the bloodstream as a thromboembolus. 
Compare embolus.
thyroid hormone    Either of two similar hor-
mones, thyroxine and triiodothyronine, syn-
thesized from iodine and tyrosine.
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)    A hor-
mone of the anterior pituitary gland that 
­stimulates the thyroid gland; also called 
­thyrotropin.
thyroxine (thy-ROC-seen)    The thyroid hor-
mone secreted in greatest quantity, with four 
iodine atoms; also called tetraiodothyronine.
tight junction    A region in which adjacent 
cells are bound together by fusion of the 
outer phospholipid layer of their plasma 
membranes; forms a zone that encircles each 
cell near its apical pole and reduces or 
­prevents flow of material between cells. 
(fig. 3.7)
tissue    An aggregation of cells and extracellular 
materials, usually forming part of an organ 
and performing some discrete function for it; 
the four primary classes are epithelial, con-
nective, muscular, and nervous tissue.
trabecula (tra-BEC-you-la)    A thin plate or 
layer of tissue, such as the calcified trabeculae 
of spongy bone or the fibrous trabeculae that 
subdivide a gland. (fig. 6.3)
trachea (TRAY-kee-uh)    A cartilage-supported 
tube from the inferior end of the larynx to the 
origin of the main bronchi; conveys air to and 
from the lungs; colloquially called the 
­windpipe.
translation    The process in which a ribosome 
reads an mRNA molecule and synthesizes the 
protein specified by the genetic code.
G-14      GLOSSARY

transmission electron microscope (TEM)    A 
microscope that uses an electron beam in 
place of light to form high-resolution, 
­two-dimensional images of ultrathin slices of 
cells or tissues; capable of extremely high 
magnification.
triglyceride (try-GLISS-ur-ide)    A lipid com-
posed of three fatty acids joined to a glycerol; 
also called a neutral fat. (fig. 2.10)
trunk    1. That part of the body excluding the 
head, neck, and appendages. 2. A major blood 
vessel, lymphatic vessel, or nerve that goes for 
only a short distance and gives rise to smaller 
branches; for example, the pulmonary trunk 
and spinal nerve trunks.
T tubule    Transverse tubule; a tubular extension of 
the plasma membrane of a muscle cell that con-
ducts action potentials into the sarcoplasm and 
excites the sarcoplasmic reticulum. (fig. 7.2)
tunic (TOO-nic)    A layer that encircles or 
encloses an organ, such as the tunics of a 
blood vessel or eyeball.
tympanic membrane    The eardrum.
U
ultraviolet radiation    Invisible, ionizing, 
­electromagnetic radiation with shorter 
­wavelength and higher energy than violet 
light; causes skin cancer and photoaging of 
the skin but is required in moderate amounts 
for the synthesis of vitamin D.
unmyelinated (un-MY-eh-lih-nay-ted)    Lacking 
a myelin sheath.
urea (you-REE-uh)    A nitrogenous waste pro-
duced from two ammonia molecules and car-
bon dioxide; the most abundant nitrogenous 
waste in the blood and urine.
uterine tube    A duct that extends from the 
ovary to the uterus and conveys an egg or 
conceptus to the uterus; also called fallopian 
tube or oviduct.
utricle (YOU-trih-cul)    A saclike receptor in the 
inner ear with a nearly horizontal patch of hair 
cells, the macula utriculi; senses the orienta-
tion of the head and responds to horizontal 
acceleration, as when riding in a car at 
­varying speeds. (fig. 10.9)
V
varicose vein    A vein that has become perma-
nently distended and convoluted due to a loss 
of competence of the venous valves; especially 
common in the lower limb, esophagus, and anal 
canal (where they are called hemorrhoids).
vas (vass) (plural, vasa)    A vessel or duct.
vascular    Pertaining to blood vessels.
vasoconstriction (VAY-zo-con-STRIC-shun)    
The narrowing of a blood vessel due to mus-
cular constriction of its tunica media.
vasodilation (VAY-zo-dy-LAY-shun)    The wid-
ening of a blood vessel due to relaxation of 
the muscle of its tunica media and the out-
ward pressure of the blood exerted against the 
wall.
vasomotion (VAY-zo-MO-shun)    Collective 
term for vasoconstriction and vasodilation.
vasomotor center    A nucleus in the medulla 
oblongata that transmits efferent signals to the 
blood vessels and regulates vasomotion.
ventral    Pertaining to the front of the body, the 
regions of the chest and abdomen; anterior.
ventral root    See anterior root.
ventricle (VEN-trih-cul)    A fluid-filled chamber 
of the brain or heart.
venule (VEN-yool)    The smallest type of vein, 
receiving drainage from capillaries.
vertebra (VUR-teh-bra)    One of the bones of 
the vertebral column.
vertebral column (VUR-teh-brul)    A posterior 
series of usually 33 vertebrae; encloses the 
spinal cord, supports the skull and thoracic 
cage, and provides attachment for the limbs 
and postural muscles. Also called the spine 
or spinal column.
vesicle (VESS-ih-cul)    A fluid-filled tissue sac 
or an organelle such as a synaptic or secretory 
vesicle.
vesicular transport    The movement of particles 
or fluid droplets through the plasma mem-
brane by the process of endocytosis or 
­exocytosis.
viscera (VISS-er-uh) (singular, viscus)    The 
organs contained in the body cavities, such as 
the brain, heart, lungs, stomach, intestines, 
and kidneys.
visceral (VISS-er-ul)    1. Pertaining to the vis-
cera. 2. The inner or deeper layer of a two-­
layered membrane such as the pleura, 
­pericardium, or glomerular capsule. Compare 
parietal. (fig. 1.13)
visceral muscle    A form of smooth muscle 
found in the walls of blood vessels and the 
digestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproduc-
tive tracts.
viscosity    The resistance of a fluid to flow; the 
thickness or stickiness of a fluid.
voluntary muscle    Muscle that is usually under 
conscious control; skeletal muscle.
vulva    The female external genitalia; the mons, 
labia majora, and all superficial structures 
between the labia majora.
W
water balance    See fluid balance.
white matter    White myelinated nervous tissue 
deep to the cortex of the cerebrum and cere-
bellum and superficial to the gray matter of 
the spinal cord. (figs. 9.3, 9.4)
X
X chromosome    The larger of the two sex chro-
mosomes; males have one X chromosome, 
and females have two, in each somatic cell.
X-ray    1. A high-energy, penetrating electro-
magnetic ray with wavelengths in the range 
of 0.1 to 10 nm; used in diagnosis and 
­therapy. 2. A photograph made with X-rays; 
­radiograph.
Y
Y chromosome    Smaller of the two sex chromo-
somes, found only in males and having little 
genetic function except development of the 
testis.
yolk sac    An embryonic membrane that encloses 
the yolk in vertebrates that lay eggs; serves in 
humans as the origin of the first blood and 
germ cells.
Z
zygomatic arch    An arch of bone anterior to the 
ear, formed by the zygomatic processes of the 
temporal, frontal, and zygomatic bones; origin 
of the masseter muscle.
zygote    A single-celled, fertilized egg.
   GLOSSARY      G-15  

Index
Note: Page numbers in italics indicate 
illustrations and their captions; page 
­numbers followed by t indicate material 
in tables.
A
A band, 204, 206–207
ABCD rule, of skin cancer, 134
Abdominal aorta, 448, 449, 455, 455, 688
Abdominal cavity, 19, 19, 19t
Abdominal contents, expulsion of, 500
Abdominal lymph nodes, 468
Abdominal muscles, 231–232
Abdominal pregnancy, 679
Abdominal region, 16, 18
arteries of, 455, 455– 456
quadrants of, 16, 17
regions of, 16, 17
veins of, 456– 458, 457
Abdominopelvic cavity, 19, 19–21, 19t
Abduction, 188–189, 189
ABO blood group, 398, 398
Abscess, 479
Absorption, 583–587
lipid, 469, 560, 584, 585–586
mineral (electrolyte), 560, 586
nutrient, 559, 560, 583–587, 584, 590
transdermal, 131
vitamin, 560, 586
Absorptive cells, of small intestine, 581
Absorptive state, 614–615
Abstinence, 690
Accessory organs
of digestive system, 560
of skin, 129, 136–140
Accessory pancreatic duct, 577
Acclimatization, 518
Accommodation, visual, 349, 350
Accutane, 696
Acetabulum, 180, 181
Acetylcholine (ACh), 207
in Alzheimer disease, 269
in autonomic nervous system, 314, 
314t
in cardiac physiology, 429, 432
in digestion, 571–572, 578
drugs affecting, 317–318, 318
in muscle excitation, 210–211, 211
in muscle relaxation, 213
in neuromuscular junction, 207–209, 
208
as neurotransmitter, 267
in pancreatic regulation, 578
in paralysis, 209
in Parkinson disease, 270
Acetylcholine (ACh) receptors, 207, 314, 
317
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 207–209, 213
Acetyl groups, 611
Achondroplastic dwarfism, 693
Acid(s), 40, 40– 41. See also specific acids
Acid–base balance, 551–552
chemical buffers and, 551–552
renal regulation of, 527, 540, 552
respiratory regulation of, 500, 519, 552
vomiting and, 571
Acidic solutions, 40
Acidosis, 432, 519, 551, 552
Acid reflux, 566, 590
Acinus (acini)
of exocrine gland, 118, 118
of mammary glands, 644, 645, 665
Acne medication, 696
Acoustic (spiral) organ, 341, 342
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS), 489, 493
Acromial end, of clavicle, 175, 175
Acromial region, 18
Acromion, 175, 176, 192
Acrosomal reaction, 674, 675
Acrosome, 650, 650, 674
Actin, 76, 205, 206, 210–213, 211–212
Actin–myosin cross-bridge, 212, 212
Action, of skeletal muscle, 225
Action potentials, 262–267, 263
in cardiac muscle, 428
in nerve signal conduction, 264,  
264–266, 265
in retina (vision), 352
in skeletal muscle excitation, 210, 211
Active immunity, 492
Active site, 50
Active transport, 71, 73
Acute gastrointestinal illness, 574
Acute leukemia, 403– 404
Adam’s apple, 450, 503, 504
Adaptation
bipedalism, 168, 181, 193, 195
neonatal, 691–692
sensory, 327
Adaptive immunity, 477, 482– 487
antibodies in, 485
antigen-presenting cells in, 485– 486, 
486
antigens in, 482– 483
cellular (cell-mediated), 482, 487– 489
disorders of, 483
humoral (antibody-mediated), 482, 487, 
489– 492
lymphocytes in, 483– 485, 487– 489
memory in, 482, 488, 488, 489, 
491– 492
Addictive drugs, 317–318
Adduction, 189, 189
Adenine, 51
Adenocarcinoma, 61
Adenosine, 318, 318
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 53, 606, 
606–609
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 53, 53
in cardiac muscle, 427
as energy currency, 53
as energy-transfer molecule, 609
in erythrocytes, 395
in exercise, 215–216, 216
in membrane transport, 73, 74
in metabolic states, 614–615
in mitochondria, 81, 596, 608, 608–609
production of, 81, 215–216, 216, 596, 
606, 606–609, 608
in skeletal muscle, 212, 212–213, 
215–217
in sperm motility, 651
ADHD, 296
Adhesion, 39
cell-adhesion molecules, 66, 66, 479
leukocyte, in inflammation, 479, 480
water, 39
Adipocytes, 25, 107, 110, 110, 611
Adipose tissue, 45, 107, 110–111, 600
aging and, 247, 383
appetite hormones in, 618
breast, 110, 644, 644–645
brown fat, 111, 622, 692
endocrine function of, 380
hypertrophy of, 121
lipid metabolism and, 611
obesity, 605, 617, 697
orbital, 345
perirenal, 528
subcutaneous, 132
white fat, 111
Adolescence, 637
Adrenal cortex, 377–379, 378
hormones of, 377–379
layers of, 377–378, 378
Adrenal glands, 312, 362, 377–379
embryonic development of, 377
gross anatomy of, 377, 378
histology of, 377, 378
Adrenaline. See Epinephrine
Adrenal medulla, 377, 378
embryonic development of, 377
hormones of, 312
sympathetic innervation of, 312
Adrenergic fiber, 314, 314t
Adrenergic receptors, 314, 317, 318
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
370, 372, 378
aging and, 383
in stress response, 382
Adult stem cells, 117
Adventitia, 561, 561
of esophagus, 566
Aerobic exercise, 218
Aerobic respiration, 215–216, 216, 606, 
606, 607–609, 608
matrix reactions in, 607–608, 608
membrane reactions in, 607, 608, 
608–609
Afferent arterioles, 529, 530, 530, 532, 
533, 538
Afferent lymphatic vessels, 475, 475
Afferent (sensory) nerve fibers, 278
Afferent (sensory) neurons, 257, 257, 326, 
326
Afterbirth, 663, 664
Age, as physiological variation, 13
Agglutination, 398, 407, 491
Aggregated lymphoid nodules, 579
Aging, 696–700
and autoimmunity, 699
definition of, 696
and digestive system, 590
and DNA damage, 699
and endocrine system, 383
and exercise, 697–698
and female reproductive system,  
645, 667
and immune system, 494
and integumetary system, 141
and lymphatic system, 494
and male reproductive system, 637, 
667
and muscular system, 247
and nervous system, 318
and protein abnormalities, 699
and replicative senescence, 698
and respiratory system, 520
and sensory organs, 356
and skeletal system, 196
study of (gerontology), 697
theories of, 698–699
and urinary system, 553
and vision, 349–350
Agonist muscles, 225
Agranulocytes, 400, 400– 402, 402
AIDS, 489, 493
Air, composition of, 516–517
Air cells, 164
Airflow, pulmonary, 510–513, 511
Alarm reaction, 382
Albinism, 135
Albumin, 391–392, 440
Alcohol, fetal effects of, 695
Aldosterone, 378
in blood pressure control, 441
in electrolyte balance, 551
in renal regulation, 378, 536, 537, 
540, 551
in stress response, 382
Alimentary canal. See Digestive tract
Alkaline solutions, 40
Alkalosis, 519, 551, 552
Allantois, 682, 683, 684, 686
Allergens, 483
Alpha (α) cells, of pancreatic islets, 376, 
376
Alpha (α) chains, of hemoglobin, 
­394–395, 395
Alpha (α) helix, 49, 49
α-tocopherol (vitamin E), 35, 586, 603, 604t
Alpha waves, 306
Altitude, 518
Alveolar cells, 508, 509
Alveolar ducts, 508
Alveolar gas exchange, 517
Alveolar macrophages, 508, 509
Alveolar sacs, 445, 499, 508, 509
Alveolus (alveoli)
of lung, 499, 508, 509
of tooth, 564
Alzheimer disease, 269, 269, 318, 694
Amacrine cells, 351, 352
Amino acid(s), 48, 48– 49
absorptive state, 615
essential, 602
free, 584
metabolism of, 611–612, 612, 613t
monoamine synthesis from, 364, 364
Amino acid sequence, 49, 82–84
Amino group, 48
I-1	

Aminopeptidase, 584, 585
Ammonia, 40, 548t, 552, 611–612
Ammonium chloride, 552
Amniocentesis, 693
Amnion, 678, 680, 682, 683–684, 684–686
Amniotic cavity, 678, 679, 682, 684
Amniotic fluid, 663, 682, 684
Amoeba, 69
Amphetamines, 317, 430
Amphiarthrosis. See Cartilaginous joints
Amphipathic substances, 46
Amplitude, 342
Ampulla
of ear, 338, 339–340, 340
hepatopancreatic, 577, 577
Amygdala, 299, 299
in emotion, 299
in memory, 301
Amylase, 50
pancreatic, 578, 583, 584
salivary, 565, 583, 584
Anabolic reactions. See Anabolism
Anabolic steroids, 52
Anabolism, 56, 56t, 606
glucose, 610t
Anaerobic fermentation, 215–216, 216
in carbohydrate metabolism, 606, 606
in erythrocytes, 395
Anal canal, 560, 588, 588
Anaphase
anaphase I, in meiosis, 648
anaphase II, in meiosis, 648
in mitosis, 87–89, 88
Anaphylactic shock, 483
Anaphylaxis, 483
Anastomoses, 437– 438
arterial, 437– 438
arteriovenous, 436, 437, 437
cerebral, 450
venous, 437
Anatomical planes, 15, 15, 16
Anatomical position, 15
Anatomical terminology, 24–27
analyzing, 25–26
directional, 26–27, 26t
planes, 15, 15, 16
precision in, importance in, 25
singular and plural forms in, 26, 26t
Anatomy, 2–8
comparative, 3
definition of, 3
gross, 3
hierarchy of complexity in, 14, 14–15
radiologic, 4
regional, 3
surface, 3
systemic, 3
variations in, 6, 7, 9
Androgen(s), 379, 645
Androgen-insensitivity syndrome (AIS), 381
Andropause, 637
Anemia, 403
hemolytic, 403
hemorrhagic, 403
iron-deficiency, 403
pernicious, 403
sickle-cell, 396, 396
Anesthesia, epidural, 274
Aneuploidy, 693–694
Angina pectoris, 424
Angiogenesis, 440
Angiography, 4, 414
Angioplasty, 424
Angiotensin I, 536, 537
Angiotensin II, 380, 441, 536, 537, 549
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 
441, 536, 537
Angiotensinogen, 536, 537
Angle (bone)
mandible, 166
sternal, 173
Angular gyrus, 304, 304
Anions, 34, 550
Ankle, 17, 18
bones of, 181, 182–184, 183
joint (talocrural), 187
Ankylosis, 158, 158
Anosmia, 334
Anovulatory cycles, 645
Antagonistic effects
of ANS, 315
of hormones, 365
Antagonistic pair of muscles, 213, 
225, 226
Antebrachial region (antebrachium), 17, 
18. See also Forearm
Anterior, 15, 26–27, 26t
Anterior chamber, of eye, 346, 347, 347
Anterior fontanel, 167, 167
Anterior interventricular sulcus, 419, 421
Anterior pituitary gland
anatomy of, 368, 369
embryonic development of, 368, 368
hormones of, 369, 370
hypothalamic control of, 371, 372
Antibodies, 390, 485
agglutination by, 491, 491
attack by, 491
blood type, 398, 398
classes of, 485, 486t
neutralization by, 491
precipitation by, 491, 491
structure of, 485, 485
Antibody-mediated immunity, 482, 487, 
489– 492
aging and, 494
attack phase of, 491
memory in, 491– 492
primary response in, 491, 491
recognition phase of, 489, 490
secondary response in, 491, 491– 492
Anticodon, 84
Antidepressants, 317
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 368, 369, 
371
in blood pressure control, 441
in fluid balance, 549
in renal function, 536, 537, 542, 549
Antigen(s), 482– 483
binding of, 489, 490
blood type, 398, 398
cellular immunity and, 487– 489, 488
definition of, 482
humoral immunity and, 489– 492, 490
lymph node monitoring for, 476
neutralization of, 491
presentation of, 489, 490
primary response to, 491, 491
prostate-specific, 635, 650
recognition of, 488, 488, 489, 490
secondary response to, 491, 491– 492
Antigen–antibody complex, 491
Antigen-binding site, 485
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 476, 
485– 486, 486, 488, 488– 489, 
490
Antihemophiliac factor, 407
Antioxidants, 35, 269, 603
Antrum, of ovarian follicles, 652, 653
Anuclear cells, 78
Anulus fibrosus, 170, 173
Anus, 560, 640, 643
Aorta, 416, 416, 417, 419, 420, 446, 
448– 449
abdominal, 448, 449, 455, 455, 688
anatomical variations in, 7
aortic arch, 419, 446, 448, 448– 449, 
452
ascending, 419, 448, 448
descending, 448, 449, 452, 455, 455
thoracic, 449, 449, 452
Aortic hiatus, 448, 455
Aortic valve, 420, 421
Apex
of heart, 416, 417, 419
of lung, 505, 506
of patella, 181, 182
Aphasia, 301, 304, 306
Apical surface, of epithelial tissue, 100
Apocrine glands, 119, 119
Apocrine sweat glands, 119, 129, 137, 
138, 139, 139–140
Aponeurosis, 224
abdominal, 232
palmar, 238
Apoptosis (programmed cell death), 81, 
122–123, 478, 478
Appendages. See Lower limb; Upper limb; 
specific anatomy
Appendages (accessory organs), of skin, 
129, 136–140
Appendicular muscles, 234–244, 
244t–246t
Appendicular region, 16, 16–17
blood vessels of, 454– 455
Appendicular skeleton, 160, 160, 175–184
Appendix, 9, 560, 587, 588
Appetite, 617–618
aging and, 590
gut–brain peptide in, 617–618, 619
hormones and, 605, 617–618, 619
hypothalamic regulation of, 618
quality (food type) in, 618
Aquaporins, 542
Aqueous humor, 347, 347
Arachnoid granulations, 290, 292
Arachnoid mater
brain, 289, 290
spinal cord, 271, 272, 275
Arbor vitae, 296, 296
Arches
aortic, 419, 446, 448, 448– 449, 452
foot, 184
pharyngeal, 685
vertebral, 169, 170, 171
zygomatic, 163, 164, 166, 229–230, 
230
Areola, 644, 644–645
Areolar glands, 644, 644
Areolar tissue, 107, 108, 108t
Arginine, 48
Aristotle, 8, 286, 415
Arm, 17–18, 18
bone of, 176, 176–177
muscles acting on, 234–235, 235–236, 
244t
Arm bud, 685
Armpit, 18
Arrhythmias, 430, 460
Arterial anastomosis, 437– 438
Arterial blood gases, 519
Arteries, generally, 433, 435
abdominopelvic region, 455, 455– 456
blood flow in, 436
blood pressure in, 439
branches of, 448
conducting, 434, 435
disorders of
arteriosclerosis, 424, 460
atherosclerosis, 381, 424, 460
coronary artery disease, 424, 460
distributing, 434, 435
elastic, 435
exercise and health of, 460
fetal, 682, 683, 687, 688
great, 416
head and neck, 449, 449– 450
large, 434, 435
lower limb, 458– 459
major systemic, 446
medium, 434, 435
muscular, 435
neonatal, 688, 692
nomenclature for, 448
resilience of, 435
resistance (small), 435
systemic circuit, 416, 416, 446, 
446– 460
thorax, 452, 452
tunics of, 433– 434
upper limb, 452, 454
Arteries, specific
aorta and branches (See Aorta)
arcuate, 529, 530, 531
axillary, 446, 449, 452, 452, 454
basilar, 449, 450
brachial, 446, 448, 452, 454
bronchial, 445, 445, 452, 509
carotid
common, 446, 449, 449, 450, 452
common, left, 448, 448, 449
common, right, 448, 448, 449
external, 446, 449, 450
internal, 164, 292, 446, 449, 450
central, of retina, 346
cerebral, 450
anterior, 449, 450
arterial circle, 449, 450
middle, 449, 450
posterior, 449, 450
coronary, 423, 448, 448
angiogram of, 414
anterior interventricular branch of, 
422, 423
circumflex branch of, 422, 423
left, 422, 423
left anterior descending branch of, 
422
left marginal branch of, 422, 423
posterior interventricular branch 
of, 423, 423
right, 422– 423, 423
right marginal branch of, 
422– 423, 423
cortical radiate, 529, 530, 531
dorsal pedal, 446, 458
femoral, 446, 448, 458
femoral, deep, 446
fibular, 446
gastric, left, 455, 456
gonadal, 446, 455, 456
hepatic
common, 455, 456
proper, 576
iliac
common, 446, 455, 455– 456, 458, 
474, 688
external, 446, 456, 458
internal, 446, 455, 456, 458, 657, 
687
   INDEX      I-2  

mesenteric
inferior, 446, 455, 456
superior, 446, 455, 456, 588
ovarian, 456, 641
penile, 657
deep, 657
deep dorsal, 657
dorsal, 636, 657
popliteal, 446, 458
pulmonary, 416, 416, 445, 506, 507, 
508–509
left, 419, 420, 445, 445
right, 419, 445, 445
radial, 446, 452, 454
renal, 6, 446, 455, 456, 527, 529, 529, 
530
spiral, 641, 656
splenic, 455, 456, 474, 474
subclavian, 446, 449, 452, 454
left, 448, 449, 452, 454
right, 448, 448, 452, 454
testicular, 456
thyroid, superior, 374
tibial
anterior, 446, 458
posterior, 446, 458
ulnar, 446, 448, 452, 454
umbilical, 682, 683, 687, 688
vertebral, 172, 292, 446, 449, 450, 
452
Arterioles, 434, 435, 436
afferent, 529, 530, 530, 532, 533, 538
efferent, 529, 530–533, 538
pulmonary, 509
renal, 525, 529, 530, 530, 532, 533, 
538
Arteriosclerosis, 424, 460
Arteriovenous anastomosis, 436, 437, 437
Arthritis, 157–158, 158, 479
gouty, 158
osteoarthritis, 157–158
rheumatoid, 158, 158, 699
Arthrology, 147
Arthroscope, 195
Arthroscopic surgery, 195
Arthroscopy, 195
Articular cartilage, 151, 152, 154, 185
Articular disc, 186
Articular facets
inferior, 171, 172
patellar, 181, 182
radial, 177
superior, 170, 170, 171, 172
Artificial immunity, 492
Artificial kidney, 543
Ascending aorta, 419, 448, 448
Ascending colon, 560, 562, 587, 588
Ascending limb, of nephron loop, 531, 
533, 540
Ascending tracts, of spinal cord, 273
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), 35, 156, 603, 
604t
Aspiration, 571
Aspirin, 41, 481, 573
Association areas
cognitive, 301
motor, 302, 303
sensory, 301, 302, 303
visual, 353–354
Asthma, 483, 508, 514
Astigmatism, 355
Astrocytes, 258, 258
Atheromas, 424
Atherosclerosis, 381, 424, 460
Atherosclerotic plaques, 423, 424, 460
Athletes
bone density and mass in, 155
Marfan syndrome in, 110
muscles of, 217
steroid use by, 52
Athletic injuries, 224, 242
Atlas (C1 vertebra), 168, 170, 171
Atmospheric pressure, 510, 511, 518
Atom(s), 15, 33–34
Atomic structure, 33–34
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
ATP synthase, 608, 608–609
Atria, of heart, 419, 420, 420– 421
blood flow through, 420, 422
contraction and relaxation of, 
430– 432, 431
Atrial diastole, 431, 432
Atrial flutter, 430
Atrial systole, 431, 431
Atrioventricular (AV) bundle, 427, 428
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 427, 428
Atrioventricular (AV) valves, 420, 421, 
431– 432
Atropa belladonna, 317
Atrophy, 122
Atropine, 317
Attack phase, of immunity, 488, 489,  
491
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 296
Auditory association area, 302
Auditory cortex, primary, 302, 304, 344
Auditory projection pathway, 343–344
Auditory tube, 336, 336–337, 337, 502, 
503
Aura, 330
Auricle, of ear, 335–336, 336
Auscultation, 4, 432
Autoimmune disease, 699
Autoimmune theory, of senescence, 699
Autoimmunity, 483
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 
­309–316
aging and, 318
antagonistic effects in, 315
blood vessel control by, 441
cooperative effects in, 315
definition of, 310
drugs affecting, 317–318
dual innervation by, 315, 315
effects of, 316t
higher-level regulation of, 315
neural pathways of, 310–311, 311
neurotransmitters and receptors of, 
314, 314t
reflexes of, 310, 310
somatic nervous system vs., 310, 311
subdivisions of, 311–314, 313, 316t
Autoregulation, renal, 536–538
Autorhythmicity, 220, 427
Autosomes, 694
Aversion centers, 299
Axial muscles, 229–232, 233t
Axial region, 16, 16
Axial skeleton, 158–174, 160
Axillary lymph nodes, 468, 470, 475
Axillary region, 18
Axillary tail, of breast, 643
Axis (C2 vertebra), 168, 170, 171
Axon(s), 115, 115, 254, 255
myelinated, 258, 259, 265, 265–266
signal conduction in, 264, 264–267, 265
unmyelinated, 259, 264, 264
Axon hillock, 254, 255
Axon terminal, 207, 208, 254, 255, 266
Azygos system, 453– 454
B
Baby (deciduous) teeth, 564
Back, muscles of, 232, 233t
Bacteria
gastrointestinal illness from, 574
intestinal, 589
in normal flora, 467, 589
pathogenic, immune response to, 467, 
468, 477
Balance. See Equilibrium (sense)
Balloon angioplasty, 424
Barometric pressure, 510, 511, 518
Baroreceptors, 11, 310, 310, 441, 441
Baroreflex, 310, 310, 441, 441
Barrier methods, of contraception, 690
Basal body, of sperm, 650
Basal cell(s)
in olfaction, 333, 334
in taste, 331
Basal cell carcinoma, 134, 134
Basal laminae, of muscle, 207, 208
Basal layer, of endometrium, 641, 656, 656
Basal metabolic rate (BMR), 616
Basal surface, of epithelial tissue, 100
Base
anatomical
of heart, 416, 417
of lung, 505, 506
of metacarpal bone, 178, 179
of metatarsal bone, 183
of patella, 181, 182
of phalanges (foot), 183
of phalanges (hand), 179, 179
of sacrum, 180
chemical, 40– 41 (See also Acid–base 
balance)
nitrogenous, 50, 51, 86
Basement membrane, 63, 77, 99–100
blood vessel, 434
glomerular, 535, 535
seminiferous tubule, 649
Base pairs, 51
Basic (alkaline) solutions, 40
Basilar membrane, 341, 342–343, 343
Basophils, 391, 400, 400– 401
in innate immunity, 478
production of, 402, 402
B cells. See B lymphocytes
Bed sore, 122
Behavioral methods, of contraception, 690
Behavioral thermoregulation, 622
Belly of muscle, 225
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 635
Benign tumor, 90
Beta (β)-adrenergic agonists, 508
Beta (β)-amyloid protein, 269, 269
Beta-blockers, 317
Beta (β) cells, of pancreatic islets, 376, 376
Beta (β) chains, of hemoglobin, 394–395, 
395
Beta waves, 306
Bicarbonate, 550–552
Bicuspid valve. See Mitral valve
Bile, 575, 577–578, 586
Bile acids (bile salts), 46, 578, 586
Bile duct, 560, 576, 577, 577
Bile passages, 577, 577–578
Bilirubin, 397, 577–578
Binaural hearing, 343–344
Biochemistry, 42
Biotin, 604t
Bipedalism, 168, 181, 193, 195
Bipolar cells, of retina, 350–352, 351
Bipolar neurons, 256, 256
Birth. See Childbirth
Birth control, 690–691
Birth-control pill, 690
Birth defects, 693–696
Bitter taste, 333
Bladder. See Gallbladder; Urinary bladder
Blagden, Charles, 12
Blastocyst, 676t, 677, 677–678
Blastomeres, 677, 677, 679
Bleaching, of visual pigment, 352
Blindness
aging and, 356
color, 353
night, 351
Blind spot, 346, 348–349
Blink reflex, 138, 328
Blister, 132
Blood, 113, 388– 413
centrifuging, 391, 391
circulation of (See Circulation)
coagulation (See Coagulation)
components of, 390–392, 391
composition of, 113, 113
deoxygenated, 416, 422
disorders of, 403– 404
anemia, 403
coagulation, 408– 409
hemophilia, 408– 409
leukemia, 403– 404
sickle-cell disease, 396, 396
thrombosis, 409, 460
effects on other systems, 409
flow (See Blood flow)
formed elements of, 113, 113, 388, 
391, 391
disorders of, 403– 404
as percentage of whole blood, 
391, 391
production of, 392–393
separation from plasma, 391, 391
functions of, 113, 390
general properties of, 390–391, 390t
historical and cultural view of, 389, 
415
osmolarity of, 392
oxygenated, 416, 422
pH of, 40– 41, 390t, 432, 500, 519
plasma (See Plasma)
pregnancy and increase in, 661
production of, 392–393
regulatory function of, 390
study of (hematology), 389
thermoregulation by, 390, 621, 622
transport in, 113, 390
carbon dioxide, 390, 393, 
­517–519
lipid, 601, 602
oxygen, 390, 393, 517, 518–519
viscosity of, 392, 440
volume of, 390t, 391, 439
Blood–brain barrier, 258, 292
Blood flow, 438– 441
blood pressure and, 439
blood viscosity and, 392, 440
hormonal control of, 441
inflammatory response, 479
local control of, 440
neural control of, 441
pregnancy and, 661
regulation of, 440– 441
resistance to, 439– 440
Arteries, specific (continued)
I-3      INDEX

thermoregulation in, 390, 621, 622
variations in routes, 437, 437– 438
vessel length and, 440
vessel radius and, 440
Blood gases, 519. See also Gas exchange
Bloodletting, 389
Blood pressure, 439– 441
aging and, 318, 460
definition of, 439
diastolic, 439
elevated (hypertension), 73, 317, 439, 
536
exercise and, 460
glomerular, 535–536
low, 439
measurement of, 439
normal, 439
regulation of, 440– 441
baroreflexes/baroreceptors in, 11, 
11, 310, 310, 441, 441
hormonal, 441
local, 440
negative feedback in, 11, 11
neural, 441, 441
renal, 441, 526, 536–537, 537
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
system and, 536, 537
resistance and, 439– 440
systolic, 439
Blood smear, 113, 399
Blood sugar, 599. See also Glucose
Blood–testis barrier, 649
Blood–thymus barrier, 473
Blood transfusions
blood type in, 398–399
exchange, in hemolytic disease of 
newborn, 399
Blood types, 67, 398, 398–399
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 543
Blood vessels. See also Arteries; 
Capillaries; Veins
aging and, 460
constriction and dilation of, 440
endothelium of, 420, 433– 434, 434
evolution of, 389
general anatomy of, 433– 438
histology of, 433– 434, 434
historical and cultural view of, 415
length of, 440
nomenclature for, 448
physiology of, 438– 445
radius of, 440
regulation of, 440– 441
tunics of, 433– 434, 434
wall of, 433– 434
B lymphocytes, 483– 485, 484
clonal selection of, 489, 490
differentiation of, 490, 490
in humoral immunity, 489– 492
life history of, 484
maturation of, 484, 484, 485
memory, 490, 490, 491– 492
migration of, 484, 485
Body (corpus)
of breast, 643
of stomach, 567–568, 568
of tongue, 564
of uterus, 640, 640, 641
Body cavities, 1t, 18–21, 19. See also 
­specific cavities
Body heat, 620–624. See also 
Thermoregulation
distribution in hot and cold, 621, 622
hair and retention of, 136–138
loss of, 620–621
muscles and generation of, 203
production of, 620
Body mass index (BMI), 605
Body of bone
mandible, 166
metacarpal, 178, 179
metatarsal, 183
phalangeal (foot), 183
phalangeal (hand), 179, 179
sternum, 173, 174
vertebra, 169, 170, 171
Body of nail, 138
Body regions, 16–18, 16–18. See also 
specific regions
Body temperature
aging and, 141
core, 620, 622
daily fluctuations in, 620
disturbances in, 623
negative feedback and, 11, 621
neonatal, 692, 693
regulation of, 11, 129, 390, 480– 481, 
620–624
set point of, 11, 481, 481
shell, 620, 622
Body weight
energy balance and, 617
obesity, 605, 617, 697
pregnancy, 662
weight loss and, 605
Bolus, 566, 566
Bond(s). See Chemical bond(s)
Bone(s), generally, 111
adaptations to bipedalism, 168,  
181
aging and, 196
appendicular skeleton, 160, 160,  
175–184
axial skeleton, 158–174, 160
calcification of, 153
composition of, 111
development of, 147, 153–155
flat, 152, 152
functions of, 111, 147–148
gross anatomy of, 151, 151–152
growth of, 155
histology of (See Bone tissue)
irregular, 152
lower limb, 160, 181–184
markings of, 159, 159, 159t
metabolism of, 155–156
mineral homeostasis in, 155–156
number of, 160
ossification of, 153–155, 154
remodeling of, 155
sesamoid, 179, 183
short, 152
skull, 160, 161–167
study of (osteology), 147
upper limb, 175–179
Bone(s), specific
auditory ossicles, 167, 336, 336, 342, 
343
calcaneus, 182, 183
capitate, 178, 179
carpal, 160, 176, 178, 179
clavicle, 160, 173, 175, 175
coccyx, 160, 168, 172, 173, 180
cranial, 153, 161
cuboid, 183, 183
cuneiforms, 183, 183
ethmoid, 162, 164–165, 165
cribriform plate of, 333, 334,  
502
facial, 161, 165
femur, 151, 151–152, 160, 181, 
­181–182
epicondyles of, 181, 181–182
head of, 159, 181, 181
markings of, 159
muscles acting on, 240–241,  
240–241, 245t
neck of, 181, 181
patellar surface of, 181
trochanters of, 159, 181, 181
fibula, 160, 181, 182, 182
head of, 182, 182
lateral malleolus of, 182, 182
frontal, 160, 162, 163, 165, 167
hamate, 178, 179
hip (os coxae), 160, 179, 180, 180–181
humerus, 160, 176, 176–177
epicondyles of, 159, 176, 177
head of, 159, 176, 177
markings of, 159
muscles acting on, 234–235,  
235–236, 244t
hyoid, 167, 503
ilium, 180, 180–181
anterior superior spine of, 16
crest, 180, 181
incus, 336, 336
ischium, 180, 180–181
lunate, 178, 179
malleus, 336, 336
mandible, 160, 162, 166, 502, 565
angle of, 166
body of, 166
infant, 167
movements of, 229
muscles acting on, 229–231
ramus of, 162, 166
teeth of, 564
maxillae, 160, 162, 163, 165, 165
infant, 167
teeth of, 564
metacarpal, 154–155, 155, 160, 176, 
178, 179
metatarsal, 160, 181, 183, 183–184
nasal, 162, 166, 167
navicular, 182, 183
occipital, 160, 161–164, 162, 163, 
165, 167
orbit, 161, 345
palatine, 162, 163, 166
parietal, 160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 167
patella, 160, 181, 181, 182
pectoral girdle, 160, 173, 173, 175, 
175–176
pelvic girdle, 179–181, 180
phalanges
of foot, 160, 181, 183, 183
of hand, 160, 176, 178–179, 179
pisiform, 178, 179
pubis, 180, 180–181
radius, 160, 176, 177, 177–178
head of, 177, 177–178
muscles acting on, 236–237,  
238–239, 244t–245t
ribs, 160, 173–174
attachments of, 172, 174, 185
false, 173, 174
floating, 173, 174
pulmonary ventilation and, 511
true, 173, 174
sacrum, 160, 168, 172, 172–173, 180
scaphoid, 178, 179
scapula, 160, 173, 175, 175–176
lateral border of, 175, 175–176
markings of, 159
medial border of, 175, 175–176
muscles acting on, 234–235,  
234–235, 244t
spine of, 159, 175, 176
superior border of, 175, 175–176
skull, 159–167, 160
sphenoid, 163, 164, 165
infant, 167
pterygoid plates of, 230, 230–231
wings of, 164
stapes, 336, 336, 342, 343
sternum, 160, 173, 173–174
angle of, 173
body of, 173, 174
manubrium of, 173, 174
pulmonary ventilation and, 511
xiphoid process of, 173, 174
talus, 182, 183
tarsal, 160, 181, 182–184, 183
temporal, 163, 164, 165, 338
infant, 167
styloid process of, 162
thoracic cage, 173–174
tibia, 160, 181, 182, 182
trapezium, 178, 179
trapezoid, 178, 179
triquetrum, 178, 179
ulna, 160, 176, 177, 178
head of, 177, 178
muscles acting on, 236–237,  
238–239, 244t–245t
vertebrae (See Vertebrae)
vomer, 162, 163, 166
zygomatic, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167
Bone cells, 111, 148, 148–149. See also 
specific types
Bone markings, 159, 159, 159t
Bone marrow, 147, 150, 152
B lymphocyte maturation in, 484
cancer of, 403
distribution of, 152, 152
hemopoiesis in, 393
long bone, 111
red (See Red bone marrow)
sinusoids of, 406
yellow, 151, 152, 152
Bone mass, 155, 196
Bone tissue, 148–151
cells of, 111, 148, 148–149
compact, 111, 113, 148, 150, 150, 
152, 154
endocrine function of, 380
histology of, 111, 113, 148, 148–151, 
150
homeostasis in, 155–156
matrix of, 149, 155
spongy, 111, 148, 149, 150, 152
Bone tumors, 156
Bony collar, 154, 154
Bony labyrinth, 337
Bony palate. See Hard palate
Brachial region (brachium), 17, 18, 177
Brachiocephalic trunk, 446, 448, 448, 
449, 452
Brain, 254, 286–306. See also specific 
parts
aging and, 318
autonomic regulation by, 315
barrier around, 258, 292
blood supply of, 292
cadaver, 288
circulation in, 449, 449– 452, 451
cognitive function of, 301, 460
development of, 684, 687
electrophysiology of, 305, 306
   INDEX      I-4  

exercise and health of, 460
gray matter of, 260, 290, 290, 291, 
293, 296, 297
imaging of, 296
language function of, 304, 304
lateralization of functions, 304–305, 
305
lateral view of, 287
lobes of, 287, 288, 291, 297–298, 298
major landmarks of, 286–289, 287, 288
medial aspect of, 288
meninges of, 161, 289, 290
motor control function of, 302–303, 
303
multiregional functions of, 300–306
mystique of, 286
overview of, 286–292
principal divisions of, 293–300
projection pathways of
for equilibrium, 340–341
for hearing, 343–344
for olfaction, 333
for taste, 333
for vision, 353–354, 354
sensation functions of, 301
superior view of, 287
surface anatomy of, 287
traumatic injury of, 289
ventricles of, 288, 290–292, 291, 294, 
296
white matter of, 260, 285, 290, 290, 
291, 296, 296, 297
Brain cancer, 292
Brain death, 9
Brainstem, 287, 289, 293–296, 294. See 
also Medulla oblongata
respiratory centers of, 514, 514
swallowing center of, 566, 566, 571
Brain waves, 305, 306
Branches, of arteries, 448
Braxton Hicks contractions, 662
Breast(s), 643–645, 644
adipose tissue of, 110, 644, 644–645
aging and, 645
axillary tail of, 643
blood supply to, 452
body of, 643
development of, 643, 645
enlarged male, 52, 694
lactating, 643, 644, 663–665
lymphatics of, 470
menstrual cycle and, 645
nonlactating, 644, 644–645
pregnancy and, 645
Breast bud, 645
Breastfeeding, 663–666
Breast milk, 665–666, 666t
Breast pump, 663
Breathing. See Pulmonary ventilation
Brittle bone disease, 52
Broca area, 303, 304, 304, 306
Bronchial tree, 499, 506–508
Bronchioles, 507, 507–508, 509
respiratory, 508, 509
terminal, 507, 509
Bronchitis, chronic, 514, 520
Bronchoconstriction, 507
Bronchodilation, 507
Bronchus (bronchi)
histology of, 507
hyaline cartilage of, 507, 507
lobar, 506
main, 499, 501, 505, 506, 506–507
segmental, 507
Brown fat, 111, 622, 692
Brush border, 67, 539, 575, 581, 581
Brush border enzymes, 581
Buccal cavity. See Oral cavity
Buffers, 41, 551–552
Buffy coat, 391, 391
Bulb(s)
hair, 129, 136, 137
olfactory, 297–298, 333, 334
penis, 631, 637
vestibular, of vagina, 643, 643
Bulbourethral glands, 631, 635, 658
Bulimia, 571
Bundle branches, 427, 428
Bunion, 186
Burns, 134
Bursae, 186
olecranon, 193
shoulder, 192
subdeltoid, 192
Bursitis, 186, 193
C
Cadaver, 3
Caffeine, 318, 318
Calcaneal region, 18
Calcification of bone, 153
Calcitonin, 156, 375
Calcitriol, 135, 156, 380, 527, 586, 604t
Calcium
absorption of, 586, 590
body content of, 32, 33t
in cardiac physiology, 432
in coagulation, 407, 408
deficiency of, 155
dietary, 603, 604t
excess of, 155
homeostasis of, 155–156, 527, 550
parathyroid hormone and, 156, 375
in rigor mortis, 214
in skeletal muscle excitation,  
210–211, 211
in skeletal muscle relaxation, 213
storage in bones, 148
urine content of, 548t
Calcium channel blockers, 73
Calcium chloride, 35t
Callus, 157
Calorie (cal), 39, 598
Calvaria, 165
Calyces of kidney, 529, 529, 533
Campylobacter, 574
Canal(s), 159t
alimentary (See Digestive tract)
anal, 560, 588, 588
auditory, 163, 164, 336, 336
carotid, 163, 164
central
of bone, 111, 113, 150, 150
of spinal cord, 273, 291
cervical, 641, 641
hypoglossal, 162
inguinal, 633
optic, 164, 165
root, 564, 565
sacral, 172, 173
uterine (See Uterine tubes)
vertebral, 19, 19, 19t, 169
Canaliculi
bone, 113, 149, 150
platelet, open system of, 405, 406
Cancellous bone. See Spongy bone
Cancer, 90
adenocarcinoma, 61
blood, 403– 404
bone, 156
bone marrow, 403
brain, 292
cervical, 642, 642, 660
immune attack on, 466
leukemia, 403– 404, 404
liver, 612
lung, 515, 515
lymph node, 474
metastasis of, 90, 474, 475
prostate, 635
skin, 134, 134, 141
Canine teeth, 564, 564
Cannon, Walter, 11
Capacitation of sperm, 674
Capillaries, blood, 433, 434, 435– 437, 436
alveolar, 445
blood flow in, 436
continuous, 435
fenestrated, 435– 436, 535
glomerular, 532, 535, 535–536
peritubular, 529, 530, 531, 534
vasa recta, 529, 530, 531, 542
walls of, 434, 434
Capillaries, lymphatic, 469, 469– 471
Capillary beds, 436, 436– 437
Capillary exchange, 71, 435, 442, 
442– 443
Capitulum, 176, 177
Capsular space, renal, 530, 532, 535, 535
Capsule
articular (joint), 185, 186
gland, 118, 118
lymph node, 475, 475
renal, 533
fibrous, 528
glomerular, 530, 531, 532, 533
perirenal fat, 528
thymus, 473
Carbohydrates, 42– 43
absorption and digestion of, 583, 584
absorptive state, 614
dietary, 599
calories from, 598
requirements for, 598t
functions of, 43, 44t
hydrophilic nature of, 42
metabolism of, 606–610
in aerobic respiration, 606, 606, 
607–609, 608
in anaerobic fermentation, 606, 
606, 607
in glycolysis, 606, 606, 607
liver’s role in, 613t
naming of, 42
postabsorptive state, 615
structure of, 43
Carbon
atomic structure of, 33
body percentage of, 32, 33t
isotopes of, 34
Carbon-12, 34
Carbon (organic) compounds, 41–54. See 
also specific types
Carbon dioxide
acid–base balance and, 552
air content of, 516–517
loading of, 518–519
molecule, 36
partial pressure of, 517
respiratory exchange of, 500, 516–519
transport in blood, 390, 393, 517–519
unloading of, 517
Carbonic acid, 517–518, 552
Carbonic acid reaction, 55
Carbonic anhydrase, 50, 518
Carboxyl group, 48
Carboxypeptidase, 584, 585
Carcinogens, 90
Carcinoma, 642. See also Cancer
Cardiac arrest, 551
Cardiac arrhythmias, 430, 460
Cardiac conduction system, 427, 427– 428
Cardiac cycle, 430– 432, 431
Cardiac impression, 505, 506
Cardiac muscle, 115, 116, 116t, 219–220, 
425– 427, 426
action potentials in, 428
aging and, 460
autorhythmicity of, 220, 427
cells of, 425– 427, 426
contraction of, 220, 428, 430– 431, 
431
electrical activity of, 428
function of, 219–220
histology of, 219, 220
metabolism of, 220, 427
relaxation of, 430– 431, 431
striations of, 115, 116, 219, 220, 425, 
426
Cardiac orifice, 566
Cardiac output (CO), 432, 439
Cardial glands, 569
Cardial part, of stomach, 567, 568
Cardinal signs, of inflammation, 479
Cardiology, 415
Cardiomyocytes, 219, 425– 427, 426
Cardiovascular system, 389, 415– 418. 
See also Blood; Blood vessels; 
Heart
components of, 389, 415
disorders of
angina pectoris, 430
arrhythmias, 430, 460
arteriosclerosis, 424, 460
atherosclerosis, 381, 424, 460
cardiac arrest, 551
congestive heart failure, 443
coronary artery disease, 424, 460
heart murmurs, 432
Marfan syndrome, 110
myocardial infarction, 13, 122, 
460
valvular prolapse, 421
effects on other systems, 462
pulmonary circuit in, 416, 416, 445, 
445
systemic circuit in, 416, 416, 
446– 447, 446– 460
Career spotlight
cytotechnologist, 91
dental hygienist, 590
dermatology nurse, 141
diabetes educator, 383
dialysis technician, 553
dietitian, 624
electrocardiographic technician, 461
electroneurodiagnostic (END) 
­technologist, 319
genetic counselor, 700
histotechnician, 123
massage therapist, 247
medical technologist, 57
midwife, 667
occupational therapist, 281
optician, 356
orthopedic nurse, 196
phlebotomist, 409
Brain (continued)
I-5      INDEX

public health nurse, 494
radiologic technologist, 27
respiratory therapist, 520
Caries, dental, 590
Carotene, 133, 603
Carotenoids, 35
Carotid sinus, 449
Carpal region, 17, 18
Carpal tunnel, 238
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 238
Carrier-mediated transport, 73
Carrier proteins, 73
Cartilage, generally, 111, 112, 112t
articular, 151, 152, 154, 185
chondrosarcoma, 156
elastic, 111, 112, 112t
endochondral ossification in, 154, 
154–155
fibrocartilage, 111, 112, 112t
functions of, 111
hyaline, 111, 112, 112t
articular, 154
of bronchus, 507, 507
endochondral ossification in, 154, 
154–155
of trachea, 505
tumor of, 156
Cartilage, specific
costal, 16, 160, 173, 174
cricoid, 503, 504, 505, 506
glenoid labrum, 192
laryngeal, 503, 504, 505, 506
thyroid, 373, 374, 503, 504, 505, 506
tracheal, 503
Cartilaginous joints, 185
Catabolism, 56, 56t, 606, 606–609, 610t
Catalysts, enzyme, 50–51
Cataracts, 355, 356
Cations, 34, 550
Cauda equina, 271, 271, 277
Caudate lobe, of liver, 575, 576
Cavities. See also specific cavities
body, 18–21, 19
medullary, 152, 154, 154
skull, 161
C (clear) cells, 375
Cecum, 560, 587, 588
Celiac trunk, 446, 455, 456
Cell(s), 14, 14–15
basic components of, 63
as characteristic of life, 9–10
components of, 62–63
cytoskeleton of, 63, 76–78, 77
interior of, 76–84, 77
life cycle of, 84–89
microscopy of, 62
organelles of, 15, 63, 78–82, 79 (See 
also specific organelles)
shapes of, 98, 98–99, 100
size of, 63–64
structure of, 62–64, 63
study of (cytology), 14, 62
surface extensions of, 67–69
surface of, 63, 64–75
Cell-adhesion molecules, 66, 66, 479
Cell body, 115, 115, 254, 255
Cell counters, electronic, 404
Cell cycle, 84–86, 86, 86–87
Cell death, programmed, 81, 122–123, 
478, 478
Cell division
cytokinesis, 86, 89, 648
meiosis, 87, 647, 648
in fertilization, 675
in oogenesis, 651, 652
in spermatogenesis, 647–650, 649
mitosis, 87–89, 88, 221
preembryonic (cleavage), 676t, 
677–678
in spermatogenesis, 647, 649
Cell-identity markers, 66, 66
Cell junctions, 69–70, 70
Cell membrane. See Plasma (cell) 
­membrane
Cell nests, 111, 112
Cells per cubic millimeter, 394
Cell suicide, 81. See also Apoptosis
Cellular (cell-mediated) immunity, 482, 
487– 489
aging and, 494
attack phase of, 488, 489
memory phase of, 488, 488, 489
reaction phase of, 488, 488
recognition phase of, 488, 488
Cellulose, 43, 44t, 583, 599–600
Cementum, 564, 565
Center, integrating, 11
Central nervous system (CNS), 254, 254. 
See also Brain; Spinal cord
aging and, 318
cells of, 254–258
drugs affecting, 317–318
myelin/myelination in, 259, 259–260
Central pattern generators, 271
Central sulcus, 287, 288, 297, 302
Centrioles, 63, 76, 79, 82, 86, 88, 89
Centromeres, 87–89, 88, 647, 648
Centrosomes, 63, 77, 82
Cephalic phase, of gastric function, 571, 
572
Cephalic region, 16, 18. See also Head 
(cephalic region)
Cerebellar hemispheres, 296, 296
Cerebellar peduncles, 295
Cerebellum, 287, 288, 289, 296, 296–297
equilibrium function of, 341
lesions of, 296
memory function of, 301
motor control by, 303
sensation function of, 301
Cerebral angiogram, 4
Cerebral arterial circle, 449, 450
Cerebral cortex, 290, 291, 297
Cerebral hemispheres, 286–287, 287, 297, 
304–305, 305, 353
Cerebral infarction, 122
Cerebral peduncles, 294, 295
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 257, 258,  
290–292
Cerebrum, 286–287, 287, 291, 297–299
cognitive function of, 301
cortex of (See Cerebral cortex)
gray matter of, 297
language function of, 304, 304
lateralization of functions, 304–305, 
305
lobes of, 297–298, 298
motor control function of, 302–303, 303
sensation functions of, 302
species comparisons, 297
tissues of, 297
visual function of, 353
white matter of, 297
Cerumen, 140, 336
Ceruminous glands, 138, 140
Cervical curvature, 168, 169
Cervical enlargement, 271, 271
Cervical lymph nodes, 468, 475
Cervical region, 16, 18, 271. See also 
Neck (cervical region)
Cervix of uterus, 640, 640, 641
cancer of, 642, 642, 660
dilation, in childbirth, 662–663, 664
effacement, in childbirth, 663
sexual response of, 659
Chancre, 660
Channel proteins, 65, 66, 66
Cheek, 563
Chemical bond(s), 36–38, 38t
covalent, 36, 36–37, 38t
hydrogen, 36, 37–38, 38t
ionic, 35, 36, 38t
peptide, 48, 48– 49
Chemical buffers, 551–552
Chemical digestion, 560, 567, 579, 583–587
Chemical equation, 55
Chemical reactions
in body (metabolism), 9–10, 54, 56
classes of, 55, 55
definition of, 55
energy and, 54–56, 56t
equilibrium in, 55
reversible, 55
water’s reactivity in, 39
Chemical senses, 331–335
Chemoreceptor(s), 331, 514
Chemotaxis, 479, 480
Chest tube, 506
Chewing, muscles of, 229–231, 230, 233t
Chief cells, 569, 569, 570t
Childbirth, 662–663
midwife for, 667
positive feedback in, 12, 12, 662–663
stages of, 663, 664
Chlamydia, 660
Chlamydia trachomatis, 660
Chloride
balance of, 550–551
dietary, 604t
renal reabsorption of, 539, 541
urine content of, 548t
Chlorine, body percentage of, 33t
Chlorine ions, 34, 34–35
Chlorpromazine, 317
Choanae, 163, 164, 501, 501
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 572, 572, 578, 
615, 618, 619
Cholesterol, 44, 46– 47, 47
absorption and digestion of, 560, 584
cardiovascular effects of, 47, 424
dietary, 47, 600–601
in plasma membrane, 65, 66
steroid synthesis from, 364, 364
transport and processing of, 601, 602
Cholinergic fiber, 314, 314t
Cholinergic receptors, 314, 317
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 209, 270
Chondrocytes, 111, 112, 505
in bone growth, 155
in endochondral ossification, 154, 154
Chondrosarcoma, 156
Chordae tendineae, 421
Chorion, 679, 682, 683, 686, 686
Chorionic villi, 678, 681–683, 682
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS), 693
Choroid, 346, 346, 351
Choroid plexus, 288, 291, 292
Chromatids, 87–89, 88, 89, 647, 648
Chromatin, 78
Chromium, 33t
Chromosomal disorders, 693–694
Chromosome(s), 78, 647
diploid number of, 647, 648, 674
disjunction of, 693
haploid number of, 647, 648, 674
homologous, 647, 693
meiosis and, 647, 648
mitosis and, 87–89, 88, 89
nondisjunction of, 693
sex, 647
Chronic bronchitis, 514, 515, 520
Chronic leukemia, 403– 404
Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases 
(COPDs), 515, 520
Chyle, 586
Chylomicrons, 584, 586
Chyme, 567, 571, 582
Chymotrypsin, 578, 584, 585
Cigarette smoking, 515
Cilia, 67, 68
defects in, 69
olfactory, 333
primary, 67
tracheal, 505
uterine tube, 67, 68, 95, 640, 641
Ciliary body, 346, 346, 347
Cingulate gyrus, 299
Circadian rhythms, 373
Circular folds, of small intestine, 580
Circular muscle(s). See Sphincters
Circulation
abdominopelvic region, 455, 455– 458, 
457
coronary, 422– 424, 423, 446
fetal, 682, 683, 687, 688
head and neck, 449, 449– 452, 451
lower limb, 458– 459
maternal–fetal, 683, 687
neonatal, 688, 692
physiology of, 438– 445
pulmonary, 416, 416, 445, 445
renal, 455, 456, 457, 529, 530
systemic, 416, 416, 446– 447, 
446– 460
thoracic, 452, 452– 454, 453
upper limb, 452, 453, 454– 455
variations in routes, 437, 437– 438
Circulatory shock, 444
Circulatory system, 22, 24. See also 
Blood; Blood vessels; Heart
aging and, 460
autonomic effects in, 316t
components of, 389, 415
effects on other systems, 409, 462
evolution of, 389–390
functions of, 389–390
pregnancy and, 661
Circumduction, 189–190
Cirrhosis, 612
Cisternae, 78–80, 79
Citric acid (Krebs) cycle, 607–608, 608
Clathrin-coated vesicle, 85
Clavicular notches, 173, 174
Clear (C) cells, 375
Cleavage, 676t, 677, 677–678
Cleavage furrow, 88, 89
Climacteric
female, 645
male, 637
Climax (orgasm)
female, 659
male, 658–659
Clitoris, 640, 643, 643
blood supply of, 657
innervation of, 657–658
sexual response of, 659
Clonal selection, 488, 488, 489, 490
Closed reduction of fracture, 157
Clotting, 407– 409, 408
Clotting factors, 405, 407– 409, 408
   INDEX      I-6  

Coagulation, 407– 409
agglutination vs., 407
disorders of, 408– 409
pathways of, 407, 408
Cobalt, 33t
Cocaine, 317–318
Cochlea
anatomy of, 336, 338, 338, 341, 
­341–342
evolution of, 335
frequency response of, 342–343, 343
hearing function of, 341–343
Cochlear duct, 341, 341–342, 343
Codons, 83, 84
Coenzymes, 603, 606
Cognition, 301, 460
Cohesion, 39
Coitus, 657
Coitus interruptus, 690
Cold receptors, 328
Collagen, 49, 50, 107, 107
aging and, 141
in bone tissue, 149, 150, 152, 153
in cartilage, 111, 112
in ligaments, 147
in skin, 117, 131–132
in tendons, 224
Collagen diseases, 52, 149
Collagenopathies, 52
Collecting ducts
in lymphatic system, 471
in urinary system, 531, 531–532, 533, 
541–542, 542
Collecting vessels, 468, 471
Colliculi, 295
inferior, 294, 296, 344
superior, 294, 296, 354
Colon, 587–590, 588
ascending, 560, 562, 587, 588
descending, 560, 562, 587, 588
epithelial tissue of, 589
mesentery of, 562, 588
sigmoid, 560, 562, 588, 588
transverse, 560, 562, 587, 588
Colony-forming units (CFUs), 397, 397, 
402, 402
Color blindness, 353
Color vision, 351, 353, 353
Colostrum, 665, 666t
Column(s)
renal, 528, 529
spinal cord, 272, 273
vertebral (See Vertebral column)
Columnar cells, 98, 98, 100
Coma, hepatic, 612
Combined oral contraceptive, 690
Commissures, gray, 272, 272–273
Common pathway, of coagulation, 407, 408
Communicable period, 660
Communication
nonverbal, 129
respiratory functions in, 500
Compact bone, 111, 113, 148, 150, 150, 
152, 154
Compaction, in digestive system, 560
Comparative anatomy, 3
Comparative physiology, 8
Compartments
fluid, 549
muscle, 222, 223
Compartment syndrome, 222, 224
Complement system, 478, 491
Complete blood count (CBC), 404
Complete proteins, 602
Complete tetanus, 214
Compliance, pulmonary, 513–514
Compound(s), 36
inorganic, 42
organic, 41–54
Computed tomography (CT), 4, 5, 5, 16
Concentration, solution, 40
Concentration gradients, 71, 71–73
Concentric contractions, 215
Concentric lamellae, 150
Conception, 661, 674. See also 
Fertilization
Conceptus, 675
Conchae, nasal, 165, 166, 502
Condensed structural formula, 36
Conditioning, muscle, 218
Conducting arteries, 434, 435
Conducting zone, of respiratory system, 
507
Conduction, body heat loss via, 621
Conduction system, of heart, 427, 
427– 428
Conductive deafness, 355, 356
Condyles, 159, 159t
femoral, 159, 181, 182
humeral, 159
mandibular, 166
occipital, 163, 164
tibial, 182, 182
Condylomas, 660
Cones, 350–353, 351–353
Conformation, 50
Congenital anomaly, 693–696
Congenital infections, 694–695
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 443
Conjunctiva, 345, 345
Connective tissue, 96, 97t, 106–114
areolar, 107, 108, 108t
dense, 107
irregular, 109, 109t
regular, 109, 109t
fibrous, 107, 108–109, 108t–109t
functions of, 106
loose, 107
muscle, 222–225, 223
overview of, 106–107
proper, 107
reticular, 107, 108, 108t
supportive, 111
Connective tissue disease, 110
Consolidation, of memory, 301
Constant (C) region, of antibody, 485, 485
Constipation, 590
Continuous capillaries, 435
Continuous conduction, 264, 264
Contraception, 690–691
Contractions, 211. See also Muscle 
­contraction
Control center, in negative feedback, 11
Contusion, 224
Convection, 621
Convergence
eyes, 349, 350
neural, 268, 268, 352
Converging circuit, 268, 268
Convoluted tubules, renal, 531, 531–532, 
532, 533
Cooperative effects, of ANS, 315
COPDs (chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases), 515, 520
Copper, 33t
Core temperature, 620, 622
Cornea, 346, 346, 347
Corn syrup, high-fructose, 599
Coronal plane, 15, 15, 16
Coronary angiogram, 414
Coronary arteries, 422– 423, 423, 448, 448
angiogram of, 414
anterior interventricular branch of, 
422, 423
circumflex branch of, 422, 423
left, 422, 423
left anterior descending branch of, 422
left marginal branch of, 422, 423
posterior interventricular branch of, 
423, 423
right, 422– 423, 423
right marginal branch of, 422– 424, 423
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 424, 460
Coronary bypass surgery, 424
Coronary circulation, 422– 424, 423, 446
Coronary sinus, 419, 423, 423
Coronary sulcus, 419, 421
Corpus albicans, 639, 654, 655
Corpus callosum, 287, 288, 291, 297, 299
Corpus cavernosum, 631, 636, 636
Corpus luteum, 370, 639, 652, 653, 654, 
655
Corpus spongiosum, 631, 636, 636, 658
Corrective lenses, 355, 356
Cortex
of adrenal glands (See Adrenal cortex)
of cerebrum (See Cerebral cortex)
of hair, 136, 137
of kidney, 528, 529, 531, 533
of lymph node, 475, 475
of ovary, 639, 639
of thymus, 473, 473
Cortical nephrons, 533
Cortical reaction, 674–675, 675
Corticomedullary junction, 531
Corticosteroids, 377–379
Corticotropin. See Adrenocorticotropic 
hormone
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 
372
Cortisol, 46, 378, 382, 615
Costal facets, 171, 172, 173, 174
Costal margin, 173
Costal surface, of lung, 505, 506
Cough reflex, 504
Countercurrent multiplier, 542
Covalent bonds, 36–37, 36–37, 38t
Cow’s milk, human milk vs., 666, 666t
Coxal region, 18
Cramps, 224, 623
Cranial cavity, 19, 19, 19t, 161
Cranial nerves, 307–309, 307t, 308
abducens (VI), 294, 307t, 308
accessory (XI), 294, 307, 307t, 308
anatomic courses of, 307t
facial (VII), 294, 307t, 308, 313, 314, 
333
functions of, 307t
glossopharyngeal (IX), 294, 307t, 308, 
313, 314, 333
hypoglossal (XII), 294, 307t, 308
mnemonic for, 309
numbering of, 307
oculomotor (III), 294, 307t, 308, 313, 
314
olfactory (I), 307–309, 307t, 308
optic (II), 294, 307–309, 307t, 308, 346, 
346, 348, 353–354, 354
pathways of, 308
trigeminal (V), 294, 307t, 308
trochlear (IV), 294, 307t, 308
vagus (X), 294, 307, 307t, 308, 313, 
314
in digestion control, 571–572, 572
in taste, 333
vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII), 294, 
307t, 308, 338, 340, 343
Craniosacral division, of ANS. See 
Parasympathetic division, of 
ANS
Cranium, 161
Creatine phosphate, 216–217
Creatinine, 527, 548t
Crest, of bone, 159, 159t
iliac, 180, 181
lateral sacral, 172, 173
median sacral, 172, 172–173
Cribriform plate, 333, 334, 502
Crista ampullaris, 339–340, 340
Cristae, of mitochondria, 79, 81
Crista galli, 162, 163, 165
Cross-bridge, actin–myosin, 212, 212
Crossed-extension reflex, 280
Cross-training, 218
Crown, of tooth, 564, 565
Crown-to-rump length (CRL), 687, 689t
Crural muscles, 242
Crural region, 17, 18, 182
Cryptorchidism, 634
Crypts
intestinal, 581, 581
tonsillar, 472, 472
CT scans, 4, 5, 5, 16
Cubital region, 18
Cuboidal cells, 98, 98, 100
Cupula, of ear, 340
Curare, 209
Curvatures, of vertebral column, 168–169, 
169
Cusps, of heart valves, 421
Cutaneous glands, 138–140, 139
Cutaneous transpiration, 549, 549
Cuticle
of hair, 136
of nail, 138
Cyanide, 53
Cyanosis, 133
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 365, 365
Cysteine, 602
Cystic duct, 577, 577
Cystitis, 546
Cytokinesis, 86, 89, 648
Cytology, 14, 62
Cytology, exfoliate, 103
Cytoplasm, 63
Cytosine, 51
Cytoskeleton, 63, 76–78, 77
Cytosol, 63, 76
Cytotechnologist, 91
Cytotoxic T cells, 487– 489
D
Dander, 131
Dartos fascia, 634
Daughter cells, 86, 86–87, 88, 647, 693
Daughter chromosome, 88, 89
Day vision, 352
Deafness, 355, 356
Deamination, 611–612
Death, 9, 699–700
Deciduous teeth, 564
Decomposition reactions, 55, 55, 56, 56t
Decubitus ulcers, 122
Decussation, 273
Deep, 26t
Defecation, 560, 590
Defecation reflexes, 590
I-7      INDEX

Defibrillator, 430
Degenerative joint disease, 157–158
Deglutition (swallowing), 566, 566
Dehydration, 542, 549, 550
Dehydration synthesis, 39, 42, 42
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 379
Delayed-onset muscle soreness, 224
Delta waves, 306
Denaturation, 51
Dendrites, 115, 115, 254, 255, 328
Dendritic cells, 130, 130, 473, 485
Dens, 170, 171
Dense (compact) bone, 111, 113, 148, 
150, 150, 152, 154
Dense connective tissue, 107
irregular, 109, 109t
regular, 109, 109t
Dental caries, 590
Dental hygienist, 590
Dentin, 564, 565
Dentition, 564, 564–565. See also Teeth
Dentures, 590
Deoxygenated blood, 416, 422
Deoxyribonuclease, 578
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA
Deoxyribose, 51
Depolarization, of membrane, 263
Depo-Provera, 690
Deposition of minerals, 155
Depression, mood, 317
Depression, movement, 189
mandibular, 189
scapular, 234–235
Dermal papillae, 129, 130, 132, 136, 137, 
328–329
Dermatitis, 479
Dermatology, 134
Dermatology nurse, 141
Dermis, 128, 129, 131–132
collagenous fibers of, 107
dense connective tissue of, 109, 109t
development of, 687
Descending aorta, 448, 449, 452, 455, 455
Descending colon, 560, 562, 587, 588
Descending limb, of nephron loop, 531, 
533, 540
Descending tracts, of spinal cord, 273
Desmosomes, 63, 69–70, 70, 77, 426, 427
Detoxification, 527
Deuterium, 34
Development, 10, 673–696
embryonic stage, 673, 676t, 680–687, 
685
fertilization, 674–675, 675, 677
fetal stage, 676t, 685–686, 687
germ layers and, 674, 678, 679–680, 
680, 681t, 684, 686–687
neonatal, 691–695
organogenesis in, 681, 686–687
preembryonic stage, 674, 676–680, 
676t
prenatal, 673, 674–689, 676t, 689t
Developmental biology, 673
Dextrocardia, 9
Diabetes educator, 383
Diabetes insipidus, 381
Diabetes mellitus, 381
aging and, 383
ketoacidosis in, 611
type 1, 381
type 2, 366, 381, 605
Diabetic neuropathy, 381
Dialysis, 543, 553
Dialysis machine, 543
Dialysis technician, 553
Diapedesis, 479, 480
Diaphoresis, 139
Diaphragm (contraceptive), 690
Diaphragmatic surface, of lung, 506
Diaphysis, 151, 151–152
Diarrhea, 574
Diastole, 430– 432, 431
Diastolic pressure, 439
Diencephalon, 294, 295–296
Diet. See Nutrition
Dietary fiber, 43, 599–600
Dietetic technician, registered (DT, R), 
624
Dietitian, 624
Differential WBC count, 403
Diffusion
capillary, 442
facilitated, 71, 73
respiratory, 517
simple, 71, 71
Digestion, 560
aging and, 590
carbohydrate, 583, 584
cephalic phase of, 571, 572
chemical, 560, 567, 579, 583–587
chyme in, 567, 571, 582
fat (lipid), 560, 584, 585–586
gastric function in, 571–572, 572
gastric phase of, 571, 572
intestinal phase of, 572, 572
liver’s role in, 613t
mechanical, 560
mineral, 586
nucleic acid, 560, 578
peristalsis in, 571, 582, 582
polysaccharide, 560, 583, 584
protein, 559, 560, 583–585, 584
small intestinal function in, 579, 582
starch, 50
vitamin, 586
water, 586
Digestive system, 21, 22, 24, 558–595
accessory organs of, 560
aging and, 590
autonomic effects in, 316t
blood supply to, 455, 455– 456
development of, 684, 686
disorders of
acute gastrointestinal illness, 574
bulimia, 571
constipation, 590
diarrhea, 574
gallstones, 578
gastritis, 573
heartburn, 566, 590
lactose intolerance, 585
peptic ulcer, 573, 573
peritonitis, 573
effects on other systems, 590
enzymes of, 560, 583–587
epithelial tissue of, 560–561, 561
functions of, 560
general anatomy of, 560, 560–562
hormones of, 570
liver, gallbladder, and pancreas, 
­575–578
mesenteries of, 562, 562, 588
mouth through esophagus, 563–567
nerve supply to, 313, 314
nervous system of, 561, 561–562, 
571, 572
overview of, 559–563
pregnancy and, 662
study of (gastroenterology), 559
venous drainage of, 456– 458, 457
Digestive tract, 560–561
epithelial tissue of, 560–561, 561
mesenteries of, 562, 562, 588
tissue layers of, 560–561, 561
Digit(s), 17
fingers, 17, 178–179, 179
toes, 17, 183, 183
Digital rays, 685
Digital rectal examination (DRE), 635
Dilation stage, of labor, 663, 664
Dipeptidase, 584, 585
Dipeptides, 48
Diploid cell, 647, 648, 674
Directional terms, 26–27, 26t
Disaccharides, 43, 43, 44t
Disjunction, 693
Disodium phosphate, 35t
Dissection, 3– 4
Distal, 26t
Distal convoluted tubule (DCT), 531, 
531–532, 533, 540, 541
Distance vision, 350
Distributing arteries, 434, 435
Disulfide bridges, 50
Diuresis, 542, 547
Diverging circuit, 267–268, 268
Dizygotic twins, 677–678
DNA, 51
aging and, 698–699
digestion of, 578
double helix of, 51, 51
errors in, 90
functions of, 51
genetic code in, 49
hydrogen bonds of, 37–38
mitochondrial, 81–82
mutations of, 10, 90, 693
nucleotides of, 50, 51
replication of, 86, 87
transcription of, 82, 83
DNA damage theory, 699
DNA polymerase, 86, 87
Dominant ovarian follicles, 654
Dopamine, 267, 270, 295, 317–318, 362
Dorsal, 15, 26t
Dorsiflexion, 191, 191, 242
Double covalent bonds, 37, 38t
Double helix, of DNA, 51, 51
Down syndrome, 269, 318, 667, 695
Drugs
aging and metabolism of, 590
autonomic targets of, 310
blood–brain barrier and, 292
detoxification of, 527
metabolism of, 613t
neuropharmacology of, 317–318
pH and, 40– 41
pharmacogenetics of, 90
renal clearance of, 540–541
transdermal, 131
weight-control, 605
Dual innervation, autonomic, 315, 315
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), 224
Ducts, 118, 118. See also specific ducts
Ductus arteriosus, 687, 688
Ductus deferens, 631, 632, 633, 691
Ductus venosus, 687, 688
Duodenal glands, 579
Duodenal papillae, 577, 577
Duodenum, 562, 577, 579–580, 580
Dural sheath, spinal cord, 274
Dural sinuses, 289, 290, 450, 451
Dura mater
brain, 289, 290
spinal cord, 271, 272, 274
Duration, of stimulus, 327
Dwarfism, 366, 693
Dynamic equilibrium, 11, 338
Dysplasia, 642
Dyspnea, 515
E
Ear, 335–344
aging and, 356
development of, 685
disorders of
hearing loss, 355, 356
infection, 337, 503
elastic cartilage of, 112, 112t
equilibrium function of, 335, ­338–341, 
339, 340
evolution of, 335
general anatomy of, 335–338, 336
hair cells of, 335, 338–341, 339, 340, 
341, 342, 342
hearing function of, 335, 341–343
as mechanoreceptor, 335
tissue engineering of, 117
Eardrum. See Tympanic membrane
Earlobe, 335–336, 336
Earwax, 140, 336
Eccentric contractions, 215
Echocardiography, 6
Ectoderm, 674, 678, 679, 680, 681t, 684, 
686–687
Ectopic pregnancy, 679
Edema, 443, 470, 471
in inflammation, 479– 480
in pregnancy, 661
in premature infants, 693
Edward syndrome, 694
Effacement of cervix, 663
Effector, 11, 279
Efferent arterioles, 529, 530–533, 538
Efferent lymphatic vessels, 475, 475
Efferent (motor) nerve fibers, 207, 208, 
257, 257, 279
Efferent (motor) neurons, 207, 254, 256, 
257, 257
Eggs (ova), 629
cortical reaction in, 674–675, 675
fertilization of, 628, 661, 674–675, 
675, 677
production of, 639, 651, 652
release of, 639, 645, 652, 653, 
­654–655, 657, 677
timetable for development, 657
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (EDS), 52
Einthoven, Willem, 429– 430
Ejaculation, 650–651, 658–659, 674
Ejaculatory duct, 631, 633
Elastic arteries, 435
Elastic cartilage, 111, 112, 112t
Elastic fibers, 107, 112, 131
Elastic filaments, 206
Elastic tissue, 107
Elastin, 107, 141
Elbow, 17–18, 18, 187, 192–193, 193
bursitis, 193
muscles acting on, 234–235, 236–237
Electrocardiogram (ECG, EKG), 429, 
429– 432, 431, 461
Electrocardiographic technician, 461
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 305, 306
Electrolyte(s), 35, 35t
absorption of, 586
definition of, 550
gastrointestinal illness and, 574
   INDEX      I-8  

renal reabsorption of, 539–541
vomiting and, 571
Electrolyte balance, 550–551
Electron(s), 33, 33–34
sharing, in covalent bonds, 36, 36–37
transfer, in ionic bonds, 36
valence, 34
Electron acceptor (oxidizing agent), 56
Electron donor (reducing agent), 56
Electroneurodiagnostic (END) technologist, 
319
Electron microscopes, 62
Electron shells, 34
Electron-transport chain, 608, 608–609
Elements, 32–33, 33, 33t
Elevation, 189
mandibular, 189, 229
scapular, 189, 234–235
Elongation of bone, 155
Embolus/embolism, 409, 424
Embryo, 652, 674, 680
Embryoblast, 677–678, 678, 679
Embryogenesis, 674, 679–680, 680
Embryology, 673
Embryonic disc, 679, 684, 686–687
Embryonic folding, 684, 686–687
Embryonic membranes, 682, 683–686
Embryonic stage, of development, 673, 
676t, 680–687, 685
Embryonic stem cells, 117
Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), 690
Emetic center, 571
Emission, 637, 658
Emmetropia, 349
Emotion, limbic system and, 299
Emphysema, 514, 515, 520
Emulsification, 585–586
Emulsification droplets, 585–586
Enamel, of teeth, 564, 565
Endergonic reactions, 56, 56t
Endocannabinoids, 618
Endocardium, 417, 418– 420
Endochondral ossification, 154, 154–155
Endocrine cells, interstitial, 379, 379, 632, 
633
Endocrine disorders, 361, 381. See also 
specific disorders
androgen-insensitivity syndrome, 381
diabetes insipidus, 381
diabetes mellitus (See Diabetes mellitus)
hypo- and hypersecretion, 381
pheochromocytoma, 381
thyroid disorders, 374, 381
Endocrine glands, generally, 118, 118–119, 
361. See also specific ­endocrine 
glands
exocrine glands vs., 361
major, 362
Endocrine system, 22, 24, 360–387. See 
also specific glands
aging and, 383
communication in, 362, 363
components of, 361, 362
effects on other systems, 384
embryonic development of, 368, 368
negative feedback in, 366
negative feedback inhibition in, 371
nervous system vs., 362–363, 362t, 363
overview of, 361–362
physiology of, 364–367
positive feedback in, 366, 371
Endocrinology, 8
Endocytosis, 74, 74–75
Endoderm, 674, 678, 679, 680, 681t, 684
Endolymph, 337–338, 340, 342
Endometrial gland, 656, 678
Endometrium, 641, 641
implantation in, 678, 678–679
menstrual cycle and, 655–657, 656
Endomysium, 222, 223
Endoneurium, 259, 275, 276
Endoplasmic reticulum, 78–80, 79
protein processing and secretion in, 
84, 85
rough, 63, 78–80, 79
smooth, 63, 80
smooth, of muscle fiber, 204, 204–205
Endorphins, 330, 618
Endosteum, 151, 152
Endothelial cells, 436, 469– 471, 480
Endothelium
of blood vessels, 420, 433– 434, 434
of glomerular capillaries, 535
of lymphatic capillaries, 469, 469– 471
Endotracheal intubation, 504
Endpiece, of sperm, 650, 650
Endurance, muscle, 216
Endurance exercise, 218
Energy, 54–57
ATP as currency of, 53
carbohydrates as source of, 43
in chemical reactions, 54–56, 56t
definition of, 54, 598
fat storage of, 600
kinetic, 55
measurement of, 598
in muscle metabolism, 215–217
potential, 54–55
transfer in body (metabolism), 9–10, 
54, 56
Energy balance, 617
Energy levels (electron shells), 34
Enkephalins, 330
Enteric hormones, 380
Enteric nervous system (ENS), 561, 
­561–562, 571, 572
Enteroendocrine cells, 569, 570, 570t
Enzymes, 50–51. See also specific 
enzymes
active site of, 50
brush border, 581
coenzymes for, 603, 606
digestive, 560, 583–587
lock-and-key model of, 51
lysosomal, 81
naming of, 50
pH and, 51, 551
in plasma membrane, 66, 66
reaction products of, 50
substrate of, 50
temperature and, 51
Eosinophils, 391, 400, 400– 401, 402, 402, 
477
Ependymal cells, 257, 258, 292
Epicanthal folds, 694, 695
Epicardium, 416, 417, 418
Epicondyles, 159, 159t
femoral, 159, 181, 181–182
humeral, 159, 176, 177
Epidermal cells, 127
Epidermal water barrier, 129
Epidermis, 103, 128, 129, 130, 130–131, 
686
Epididymis, 631, 632, 633
Epidural anesthesia, 274
Epidural space, 271, 272, 274
Epigastric region, 16, 17
Epiglottis, 501, 502, 503, 504, 504
Epimysium, 222, 223
Epinephrine, 364, 364
adrenal secretion of, 312, 377
in blood pressure control, 441
in bronchial function, 508
in cardiovascular function, 432
in lipid metabolism, 611
in postabsorptive state, 615
in stress response, 382
Epineurium, 275, 276
Epiphyseal closure, 155
Epiphyseal lines, 151, 152
Epiphyseal plate, 154, 154–155
Epiphysis, 151, 151–152
Epithalamus, 295–296
Epithelial cells, 473
cortical, 473
gastric, 573
intestinal, 581
medullary, 473
renal corpuscle, 530
renal tubule, 531–532
Epithelial tissue, 96, 97t, 99–105
apical surface of, 100
avascularity of, 99
basal surface of, 100
of colon, 589
of digestive tract, 560–561, 561
of esophagus, 566
histology of, 99–105
keratinized, 103, 104, 104t
of kidney, 105, 105t
lateral surfaces of, 100
nonkeratinized, 103, 104, 104t
olfactory, 503
of pharynx, 503
pigment, of retina, 350, 351
pseudostratified columnar, 100, 100, 
102, 102t
of renal tubules, 101, 101t
respiratory, 503
simple, 100, 100, 101–102, 101t–102t
columnar, 100, 102, 102t
cuboidal, 100, 101, 101t
squamous, 100, 101, 101t
of small intestine, 101, 101t, 102, 102t
sole of foot, 104, 104t
squamous
simple, 100, 101, 101t
stratified, 103, 104, 104t
of stomach, 568–569, 569
stratified, 100, 100, 103, 104–105, 
104t–105t
columnar, 103
cuboidal, 103, 105, 105t
squamous, 103, 104, 104t
of tongue, 563–564
of trachea, 102, 102t, 505
transitional, 103, 105, 105t, 544
of ureters, 544
of urinary bladder, 544
of uterine tubes, 640
of vagina, 104, 104t, 642
Epithelium. See Epithelial tissue
Equilibrium
in chemical reactions, 55
dynamic, 11
in internal state of body, 10–13
Equilibrium (sense), 301, 335, 338–341, 
339, 340
Erectile dysfunction, 667
Erectile tissue, male, 636. See also Penis
Erection of penis, 315, 658
Errors, in DNA, 90
Eruption, of teeth, 564
Erythema, 133
Erythroblastosis fetalis, 398–399
Erythrocyte(s), 113, 113, 388, 391, 391, 
393–399
agglutination of, 398, 407
anaerobic fermentation in, 395
antigens, in blood types, 398, 398–399
anuclear, 78
death and disposal of, 397, 474
deficiency of, 393, 403
disorders of, 403
functions of, 393
gas exchange and, 517–518
hemolysis of, 397, 398
life cycle of, 397, 397
as percentage of whole blood, 391, 
391
production of, 392–393, 397, 397
quantities of, 390t, 394, 404
sickle-cell disease and, 396, 396
structure of, 394, 394
tonicity and, 72, 72
viscosity and, 440
Erythropoietin (EPO), 380, 397, 403, 518, 
527, 543
Escherichia coli, 546
Esophageal hiatus, 561, 566
Esophageal phase, of swallowing, 566, 
566
Esophagus, 501, 502, 560, 560, 566
aging and, 590
epithelial tissue of, 566
nerve supply to, 314
smooth muscle of, 566
tissue layers of, 566
Essential amino acids, 602
Essential fatty acids, 600
Essential nutrients, 598
Estradiol, 364, 364, 653–654, 654
Estrogen(s), 46, 379, 639, 645, 653
in bone physiology, 156, 157
in contraception, 690
in implantation, hCG and, 678–679
in menstrual cycle, 654, 656–657
in ovarian cycle, 653–654, 654
permissive effect with progesterone, 
365
Estrogen receptors, 366
Ethanol, structural isomer of, 36, 36
Ethmoid sinus, 161, 161, 164
Ethyl ether, structural isomer of, 36, 36
Eumelanin, 137
Eustachian tube, 336, 336–337, 337, 502, 
503
Evaporation, 621
Eversion, of foot, 191, 191–192
Evolution, 10
as characteristic of life, 10
of circulatory system, 389–390
of ear, 335
and senescence, 699
Evolutionary medicine, 10
Excess postexercise oxygen consumption 
(EPOC), 217
Exchange transfusion, for hemolytic 
­disease of newborn, 398
Exchange vessels, capillaries as, 435. See 
also Capillary exchange
Excitability, 10
Excitable tissues, 114
Excitation, 210
of neurons, 262, 262–263
of skeletal muscle, 210–211, 211
Excretion, 118, 527, 540
Excursion, of mandible, 229
Exercise
Electrolyte(s) (continued)
I-9      INDEX

aerobic, 218
aging and, 247, 697–698
ATP production during, 215–216, 216
cardiovascular health and, 460
cognitive function and, 460
endurance, 218
fatigue and endurance in, 216
recovery period in, 217
resistance, 218, 697–698
Exergonic reactions, 56, 56t
Exfoliate cytology, 103
Exfoliation, 103, 106, 131
Exhaustion stage, in stress response, 382
Exocrine glands, 118–119, 118–119, 361
Exocytosis, 74, 74–75
Exophthalmia, 374
Expiration, 510–513, 511, 512
Expiratory neurons, 514
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 513, 
513
Explicit memory, 297
Exploratory surgery, 4
Expulsion, in ejaculation, 658–659
Expulsion stage, of labor, 663, 664
Extension, 188, 188
Extensor retinaculum, 237, 239, 242, 243
External genitalia. See Genitalia, external
External respiration, 517
Extracellular compartment, 549
Extracellular face, of plasma membrane, 
65
Extracellular fluid (ECF), 63, 72, 96, 390, 
549
Extracellular material (matrix), 96
Extrinsic pathway, of coagulation, 407, 
408
Extrinsic proteins. See Peripheral proteins
Eye(s), 344–354
accommodation of, 349, 350
aging and, 349–350, 356
anatomy of (eyeball), 346, 346–348
autonomic innervation/effects in, 312, 
313, 315, 315, 316t
chambers of, 346, 347, 347
convergence of, 349, 350
development of, 685
disorders of, 355
extrinsic muscles of, 346
fibrous layer of, 346
fundus of, 348
image formation in, 349–350
intrinsic muscles of, 346
neural layer of, 346
optical components of, 347
as photoreceptors, 344
recognition systems for, 324
vascular layer of, 346
vision function of, 349–354
Eyebrows, 345
Eyelashes, 345
Eyelids, 345
F
Facet, of bone, 159t
articular (See Articular facets)
costal, 171, 172, 173, 174
Facial bones, 161, 165
Facial expression, 129, 138, 203, 229, 230
Facial muscles, 229, 230, 233t
Facial region, 18
Facilitated diffusion, 71, 73
Factor III, 407, 408
Factor VIII, 407– 409, 408
Factor X, 407, 408
Factor XII, 407, 408
FAD, 607
Fallen arches, 184
Fallopian tubes. See Uterine tubes
“False labor,” 662
False pelvis, 179
False ribs, 173, 174
Farsightedness, 355
Fasciae, 222
breast, 644
dartos, 634
penis, 636
superficial (hypodermis), 129
Fascicles
muscle, 222, 223
nerve, 275, 276
nerve, olfactory, 334
Fasting (postabsorptive) state, 614, 615
Fast-twitch fibers, 217
Fat(s), 44– 45
absorption and digestion of, 560, 584, 
585–586
absorptive state, 615
body (See Adipose tissue)
dietary, 600–601
calories from, 598, 600
sources of, 600
energy storage in, 600
metabolism of, 611, 612, 613t
polyunsaturated, 45
postabsorptive state, 615
saturated, 45, 600
trans, 46, 46, 600
transport of, 601, 602
unsaturated, 45, 600
Fat cells (adipocytes), 25, 107, 110, 110, 
611
Fatigue, muscle, 216
Fat-soluble vitamins, 584, 586, 603–604, 
604t
Fat (adipose) tissue, 45
Fatty acids, 44– 45
essential, 600
free, 584
metabolism of, 611, 612
omega-3, 600
polyunsaturated, 45
saturated, 44– 45, 45, 601
structure of, 45
unsaturated, 45, 45
Fecal incontinence, 315, 590
Feces, 590
Fed (absorptive) state, 614–615
Feedback loops, 11–13. See also 
Negative feedback; Positive 
feedback
Female(s)
body composition of, 549
erythrocytes in, 394
pelvic structure of, 179–180
puberty in, 637
urethra of, 545, 546
Female reproductive system, 21, 22, 24, 
638–646
aging and, 667
anatomy of, 639–645, 640, 641
childbirth in, 662–663
complexity of, 638
effects on other systems, 668
functions of, 638
menopause in, 157, 645, 667
menstrual cycle in, 645, 654, 655–657
ovarian cycle in, 653–655, 654, 657
physiology of, 645
pregnancy in, 661–662
puberty in, 637, 643, 645
Female sexual cycle, 653, 654. See also 
Menstrual cycle; Ovarian cycle
Female sexual response, 657–659
anatomical foundation of, 657–658
orgasm in, 659
Femoral region, 17, 18, 201
Femoral triangle, 458
Fenestrated capillaries, 435– 436, 535
Fermentation, 56
Fermentation, anaerobic, 215–216, 216, 395
Fertility awareness-based method, of 
­contraception, 690
Fertilization, 661, 674–675, 675, 677
Fertilization membrane, 675, 675
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), 695
Fetal sonogram, 6
Fetal stage, of development, 676t, 
­685–686, 687
Fetus, 687
circulation of, 682, 683, 687, 688
expulsion, in childbirth, 663, 664
expulsion of (See Childbirth)
growth of, 687, 689t
hyaline cartilage of, 112, 112t
MRI of, 672
ultrasound of, 676
Fever, 12, 480– 481, 481
Fiber, dietary, 43, 599–600
Fibrillin, 110
Fibrin, 392, 407, 408
Fibrinogen, 392, 407, 408
Fibroblasts, 107
Fibrocartilage, 111, 112, 112t
Fibrosis, 122
Fibrous capsule, renal, 528
Fibrous cells, 98, 99
Fibrous connective tissue, 107, 108–109, 
108t–109t
Fibrous layer, of eye, 346
Fibrous proteins, 49, 49–50
Fibrous skeleton, of heart, 420
Fight-or-flight reaction, 311, 312
Filiform papillae, 331, 332
Filtration, 71, 71
capillary, 71, 442
glomerular (renal), 526, 534, 
­534–538, 535
Filtration membrane, glomerular, 535, 535
Filtration pores, 436, 535
Filtration pressure, 535–536
Filtration slits, 535, 535
Fimbriae, of uterine tube, 639, 640, 641
Finger(s), 17
bones of, 178–179, 179
Fingerprints, 132
First-degree burns, 134
First gap phase, in cell cycle, 86, 86
First heart sound, 431, 432
First messenger, 365
First polar body, 651, 652, 674, 677
First trimester, of pregnancy, 675, 689t
Fissures, 159t
horizontal, of lung, 506
inferior orbital, 165, 165
longitudinal, 287, 287, 291, 297
oblique, of lung, 506
superior orbital, 164, 165
transverse cerebral, 287
Fixator muscles, 226
Flaccid paralysis, 209, 274
Flagella, 68
defects in, 69
of sperm, 68, 632, 650, 650
Flat bones, 152, 152
Flat feet, 184
Flatus, 589
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), 607
Flavor, 333
Flexion, 188, 188
Flexion, plantar, 191, 191
Flexor reflex, 280, 280
Flexor retinaculum, 237, 238
Floating ribs, 173, 174
Fluent aphasia, 306
Fluid(s). See also specific fluids
extracellular, 63, 72, 96, 390, 549
intracellular, 63, 72, 549
Fluid balance, 549, 549, 550
definition of, 549
digestive function in, 586
kidneys and, 526, 541–542, 542
lymphatic system and, 469– 471, 470
neonatal, 692
water gains and losses in, 549, 549
Fluid compartments, 549
Fluoride, 604t
Fluorine, 33t
Fluoxetine, 317
Focusing, visual, 349–350, 350
Folia, 289, 296, 296
Foliate papillae, 331, 332
Folic acid, 590, 603, 604t, 662
Follicle(s)
hair, 129, 136–137, 137
ovarian (See Ovarian follicles)
thyroid, 373–374, 374
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 
370, 372
inhibin and, 379
in males, 637
in oogenesis, 651
in ovarian cycle, 653–655, 654, 657
in puberty (female), 645
synergism with testosterone, 366
Follicular cells, 373–374, 374, 379, 652, 
653
Follicular fluid, 652
Follicular phase, of ovarian cycle, 
­653–655, 654
Folliculogenesis, 651–653, 652
Fontanels, 153, 167, 167
Food, 597. See also Nutrient(s); Nutrition
Food allergies, 483
Foot, 17, 18
arches of, 184
bones of, 160, 181, 182–184, 183
movements of, 191, 191–192, 
­242–243
muscles acting on, 242–243, 243, 246t
sole, epithelium of, 104, 104t
Foot plate, 685
Foot processes, of glomerulus, 535, 535
Foramina, 159, 159t
carotid, 292
intervertebral, 170
jugular, 162, 163, 164, 450
magnum, 161–164, 163
obturator, 180, 181
optic, 163
ovale, 687, 688
sacral (pelvic), 172, 172
of skull, 161
transverse, 170–172, 171
vertebral, 169, 170, 171
Forearm, 17, 18
bones of, 176, 177, 177–178
muscles acting on, 236–237, 238–239, 
244t–245t
   INDEX      I-10  

supination and pronation of, 190–191, 
191, 236–237
Foreign antigens, 488
Foreskin (prepuce), 631, 635–636, 636
Formed elements, of blood, 113, 113, 388, 
391, 391. See also specific 
elements
disorders of, 403– 404
as percentage of whole blood, 
391, 391
production of, 392–393
separation from plasma, 391, 391
Fornix, 299
Fossae, 159, 159t
coronoid, 176, 177
cubital, 455
iliac, 180, 181
infraspinous, 175, 176, 236
mandibular, 163, 164
nasal, 165
olecranon, 176, 177
ovalis, 688, 692
popliteal, 241, 242
radial, 176, 177
subscapular, 175, 176, 236
supraspinous, 175, 176, 236
Fourth ventricle, 288, 290, 291, 294, 296
Fovea centralis, 346, 348, 348
Fractures, 157
Free amino acids, 584
Free edge, of nail, 138, 138
Free fatty acids, 584
Free nerve endings, 328
Free radicals, 35, 269
Free ribosomes, 63
Frenulum
lingual, 563, 564
penis, 636, 636
Frequency of sound, 342–343, 343
Freud, Sigmund, 317
Friction rub, 416
Frontal association area. See Prefrontal 
cortex
Frontal lobe, 287, 288, 291, 297–298, 
298, 301
Frontal plane, 15, 15, 16
Frontal sinus, 161, 161, 162, 502
Frostbite, 623
Fructose, 42, 44t, 583, 584, 599
Fuel, 598
Full-thickness burns, 134
Functional layer, of endometrium, 641, 
656, 656
Functional morphology, 3
Functional MRI (fMRI), 5, 296
Fundus
of eye, 348
of stomach, 568
of uterus, 640, 640, 641
Fungiform papillae, 331, 332
Fusiform cells, 98, 99
G
Galactose, 42, 44t, 583, 584, 599
Galanin, 618
Galen, Claudius, 173
Gallbladder, 560, 560, 562, 575, 577, 
577–578
aging and, 590
anatomical variations in, 9
blood supply to, 455, 456
venous drainage of, 457
Gallstones, 578
Gametes (sex cells), 629–630. See also 
Eggs; Sperm
production of, 646–657
uniting of
fertilization in, 674–675, 675
sexual function for, 657–659
Gametogenesis, 647
Gamma (γ) globulins, 485
Ganglia, 254, 275
autonomic, 311
collateral, 313
parasympathetic, 311, 561
posterior root, 271, 272, 275, 276
sympathetic chain, 312, 313
terminal, 314
Ganglion cells, 350–352, 351
Gangrene, 122
Gap junctions, 70, 70, 426, 427
Gap phases of cell cycle, 86, 86
Gas, intestinal (flatus), 589
Gases. See also specific gases
blood, 519
composition of air, 516–517
partial pressure of, 516–517
pressure gradients of, 517
Gas exchange, 500, 516–519
altitude and, 518
alveolar, 517
pressure gradients and, 517
systemic, 518–519
Gas transport, 517–519
Gastrectomy, 570
Gastric glands, 569, 569
Gastric juice, 570
Gastric lipase, 569, 570, 570t
Gastric motility, 571
Gastric phase, of gastric function, 571, 572
Gastric pits, 569, 569, 573
Gastric regulation, 571–572, 572
Gastric rugae, 568, 568, 569
Gastric secretions, 570, 570t
Gastrin, 380, 569, 570, 570t, 571–572, 
572, 615
Gastritis, 573
Gastrocolic reflex, 590
Gastroenterology, 26, 559
Gastrointestinal illness, acute, 574
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 560
Gastrulation, 679–680, 680
Gates (gated channels), 66, 66
G cells, of stomach, 569, 569
General senses, 301, 327–331
Gene sequencing, 90
Gene-substitution therapy, 90
Genetic(s), 86–90
Genetic anomalies, 693–694
Genetic code, 49, 82–84
Genetic counselor, 700
Genetic diversity, sexual reproduction  
and, 647
Genetic engineering, 117
Genital herpes, 660
Genitalia, external, 630
blood supply of, 657
female, 643
innervation of, 657–658
male (See Penis; Scrotum)
sexual response of, 658
Genitalia, internal, 630
Genital warts, 660
Genitourinary system, 526
Genomic medicine, 90
Geriatrics, 697
Germ cells, 379, 632, 633, 647
Germ layers, 674, 678, 679–680, 680, 
681t, 684, 686–687
Gerontology, 697
Gestation. See Pregnancy
Ghrelin, 380, 569, 570t, 605, 617, 619
Gingiva, 564, 565
Gingivitis, 479
Glands, 118–119. See also specific glands
cutaneous, 138–140, 139
endocrine (See Endocrine glands)
exocrine (See Exocrine glands)
secretions of, 118–119, 119
Glans of clitoris, 643, 643, 657
Glans of penis, 631, 635–636, 636, 657
Glaucoma, 347, 355, 356
Glenoid cavity, 175, 176, 192, 192
Glenoid labrum, 192
Glial cells (neuroglia), 115, 115,  
257–258, 258
Globins, 394–395
Globular proteins, 49–50
Globulins, 392
Glomerular capillaries, 532, 535
Glomerular capsule, 530, 531, 532, 533
Glomerular filtrate, 534
Glomerular filtration, 534, 534–538, 535
pressure in, 535–536
regulation of, 536–538
Glomerular filtration membrane, 535, 535
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 536
Glomerulus, 525, 530, 531, 532, 533
Glottis, 504, 504
Glucagon, 363, 365, 376, 377, 578, 615
Glucocorticoids, 378
Gluconeogenesis, 376, 377, 609, 610t, 615
Glucose, 42, 43, 44t
anabolism of, 610t
blood levels of, 203, 376, 377, 381, 599
catabolism of, 606, 606–609, 608, 610t
dietary, 599
digestion and absorption, 583, 584
metabolic states and, 614–615
regulation of, 363, 365, 376, 377, 381
renal reabsorption of, 539–540
synthesis and use of, 609–610, 610t, 
615
Gluteal region, 18
Glycemic control, 203
Glycerol, 44, 45
Glycocalyx, 67, 67
Glycogen, 42, 43, 43, 44t, 204
Glycogenesis, 609, 610t
Glycogen–lactate system, 216, 216
Glycogenolysis, 376, 377, 609, 610t, 615
Glycolipids, 65, 66, 67
Glycolysis, 606, 607
Glycoproteins, 65, 66, 66, 67, 364
Glycosuria, 381
Goblet cells, 100, 102, 503, 505, 581
Goiter, toxic, 374
Golgi complex, 63, 79, 80, 84, 85
Golgi vesicles, 63, 79, 80
Gonad(s), 362, 379, 630. See also 
Ovaries; Testes
Gonadotropin(s), 370
in male reproductive function, 637
in ovarian cycle, 653–655, 654, 657
in puberty (female), 645
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 
372, 637, 645
Gonorrhea, 660, 694
Gouty arthritis, 158
Graafian (mature) follicle, 639, 652, 653
Granular cells, 537–538, 538
Granules, 400, 405, 406
Granulocytes, 400, 400– 402, 402
Granulosa cells, 639, 652, 653
Granzymes, 489
Gratification centers, 299
Graves disease, 374
Gray matter, 260
brain, 260, 290, 290, 291, 293, 
296, 297
spinal cord, 260, 272, 273
Great alveolar cells, 508, 509
Greater omentum, 20, 562, 562, 568
Greater pelvis, 179
Greater sciatic notch, 180, 181
Greater trochanter, 181, 181
Greater tubercle, of humerus, 176, 177
Greater vestibular gland, 643, 643, 658
Great vessels, 416
Gross anatomy, 3
Ground substance, 96, 107
Growth, 10
bone, 155
hair, 137
Growth factors, 156, 258, 269, 405, 407
Growth hormone (GH), 156, 366, 370, 
372
clearance of, 366
in female reproductive function, 645
in lipid metabolism, 611
in mammary gland development, 665
Growth hormone-releasing hormone 
(GHRH), 372
Guanine, 51
Guard hairs, 138, 336, 501, 502
Gum (gingiva), 564, 565
Gustation (taste), 301, 331–333, 332, 356
Gustatory cortex, primary, 302
Gut, primitive, 684, 686
Gut–brain peptides, 570, 617–618, 619
Gut microbes, 589
Gynecomastia, 52, 694
Gyrus (gyri), 286–287, 287, 291, 297
angular, 304, 304
cingulate, 299
postcentral, 287, 301, 304
precentral, 287, 302–303, 303, 304
H
Hair(s), 129, 136–138
aging and, 141
functions of, 137–138
growth and loss of, 137
guard, 138, 336, 501, 502
microscopy of, 127
structure of, 136–137, 137
taste, 331–332
Hair bulb, 129, 136, 137
Hair cells of ear, 335, 338, 342
equilibrium function of, 338–341, 
339, 340
hearing function of, 341, 342
Hair color, 137
Hair follicle, 129, 136–137, 137
Hair matrix, 136, 137
Hair receptors, 129, 136–137, 137, 328, 
328
Hair root, 136, 137
Hair shaft, 136, 137
Hand, 17, 18
bones of, 160, 176, 178–179, 179
muscles acting on, 237–239, 245t
Haploid cells, 647, 648, 674
Haptens, 483
Hard callus, 157
Forearm (continued)
I-11      INDEX

“Hardening of the arteries,” 424. See also 
Atherosclerosis
Hard palate, 165, 501, 501, 502, 563, 564
Hashimoto disease, 374
Haustra, 588, 588
Haustral contractions, 589
Head
of bone, 151, 151–152
of femur, 159, 181, 181
of fibula, 182, 182
of humerus, 159, 176, 177
of metacarpal bone, 178, 179
of metatarsal bone, 183
of phalanges (foot), 183
of phalanges (hand), 179, 179
of radius, 177, 177–178
of tibia, 182
of ulna, 177, 178
of muscle (origin), 225, 232
of myosin molecule, 205, 206, 212–213
of pancreas, 376
of phospholipids, 46, 47, 65
of sperm, 650, 650
Head (cephalic region), 16, 18
arteries of, 449, 449– 450
muscles moving, 231, 233t
radiologic images of, 4
veins of, 450– 452, 451
Headaches, 330
Healing, 123, 157
Hearing, 335, 341–344
aging and, 356
binaural, 343–344
brain function in, 301
cochlear function in, 341–344
definition of, 341
disorders of, 355
frequency and, 342–343, 343
loudness and, 343
projection pathway of, 343–344
Heart
aging and, 460
anatomical variations in, 7, 9
atria of, 419, 420, 420– 421, 422, 
430– 432
autorhythmicity of, 427
blood flow through, 416, 416, 422
cardiac cycle in, 430– 432, 431
chambers of, 420– 421, 422
conduction system of, 427, 427– 428
coronary circulation of, 422– 424, 423, 
446
development of, 684, 685
electrical and contractile activity of, 
428
electrocardiogram of, 429, 429– 432
endocrine function of, 379
energy for, 427
evolution of, 389–390
exercise and health of, 460
external anatomy of, 419
fetal, 687
fibrous skeleton of, 420
gross anatomy of, 418– 425, 419, 420
historical and cultural view of, 415
internal anatomy of, 420
nerve supply to, 312, 313, 314, 429
physiology of, 425– 434, 438– 445
position of, 416, 417
shape of, 416
size of, 416
sonographic examination of, 6
study of (cardiology), 415
venous drainage of, 423– 424
venous return to, 443, 443– 444
ventricles of, 417, 419, 420, 421, 422, 
430– 432
Heart attack (myocardial infarction), 13, 
122, 460
Heart bulge, 685
Heartburn, 566, 590
Heart disorders
angina pectoris, 430
arrhythmias, 430, 460
cardiac arrest, 551
congestive heart failure, 443
coronary artery disease, 424, 460
heart murmurs, 432
myocardial infarction, 13, 122, 460
valvular prolapse, 421
Heart rate (HR), 430, 432
Heart sounds, 431– 432
Heart valves, 420, 421
blood flow through, 422
cusps (leaflets) of, 421
operation of, 421, 431– 432
prolapse of, 421
repair or replacement of, 432
Heart wall, 418– 420, 419
Heat
body (See Body heat)
in inflammation, 479– 480
Heat cramps, 623
Heat exhaustion, 623
Heat-losing center, 621
Heat loss, 620–621
Heat production, 620
Heat-promoting center, 621
Heatstroke, 623
Heavy chains, of antibody, 485, 485
Helicobacter pylori, 573, 573
Helper T cells, 487– 489, 488, 489, 493
Hematocrit, 390t, 391, 394, 404
Hematology, 389
Hematoma, 133–135
Hematoma, fracture, 157
Hematuria, 545, 547
Heme, 395, 395
Heme group, 49, 49
Hemidesmosomes, 63, 77
Hemiplegia, 274
Hemispheres, cerebellar, 296, 296
Hemispheres, cerebral, 286–287, 287, 
297, 304–305, 305, 353
Hemodialysis, 543
Hemoglobin, 49, 49, 133, 390t, 394–395, 
517–519
sickle-cell (HbS), 396
structure of, 394–395, 395
Hemoglobin concentration, 395, 404
Hemoglobin S (HbS), 396
Hemolysis, 397, 398
Hemolytic anemia, 403
Hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN), 
398–399
Hemophilia, 408– 409
Hemopoiesis, 148, 392–393
aging and, 494
erythrocyte, 397, 397
leukocyte, 402, 402
lymphocyte, 484, 484, 484– 485
platelet, 406, 406
Hemopoietic stem cells (HSCs), 393, 397, 
397, 402, 402, 484, 484
Hemorrhagic anemia, 403
Hemorrhoids, 460, 588, 588–589, 661
Hemostasis, 406– 409, 408
Heparin, 401, 407, 478
Hepatic coma, 612
Hepatic ducts, common, 577, 577
Hepatic lobules, 575, 576
Hepatic macrophages, 575
Hepatic portal system, 456– 458
Hepatic sinusoids, 458, 575, 576
Hepatitis, 612–613
Hepatitis A, 613
Hepatitis B, 613, 660
Hepatitis C, 613, 660
Hepatocytes, 575, 576, 612
Hepatopancreatic ampulla, 577, 577
Hepcidin, 380, 586
Herniated disc, 170, 173, 196
Herpes simplex virus, 660
Hiatus
aortic, 448, 455
esophageal, 561, 566
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs), 601, 602
High-fructose corn syrup, 599
Hilum
of kidney, 528, 529
of lung, 505, 506
of lymph node, 475, 475
of spleen, 474, 474
Hip, 18
bones of (os coxae), 160, 179, 180, 
180–181
joint, 186, 193, 193
muscles acting on, 240–241, 240–241, 
245t
Hippocampus, 299, 299, 301
Hippocrates, 90, 286
Histamine, 401, 478, 570, 570t, 571–572, 
572
Histological sections, 97, 97–98
Histology, 3, 95–126
blood vessel, 433– 434, 434
bone tissue (See Bone tissue)
connective tissue, 106–114
definition of, 96
epithelial tissue, 99–105
gland, 118–119
liver, 575–577, 576
lung, 507
lymphatic system, 469, 471– 472
membrane, 120, 120
muscular tissue, 115, 116, 116t
nervous tissue, 115, 115
retina, 350–351, 351
small intestine, 580–581
stem cell, 117
stomach, 568–569, 569
tissue growth, 121
Histopathology, 3
Histotechnician, 123
HIV/AIDS, 489, 493
Holocrine glands, 119, 119, 140
Homeostasis, 10–13. See also specific 
substances and processes
blood’s role in, 390
definition of, 10
hormonal control of, 361, 366
negative feedback in, 11
positive feedback in, 12
renal regulation of, 526
Homologous chromosomes, 647, 693
Homunculus
motor, 302–303
sensory, 301
“Honeymoon cystitis,” 546
Hooke, Robert, 62
Horizontal cells, of retina, 351, 352
Hormonal methods, of contraception, 690
Hormone(s), 118–119, 361–367. See also 
specific hormones
action and effects of, 365, 365
aging and, 383
antagonistic effects of, 365
in bone physiology, 156
clearance of, 366
definition of, 361
digestive system, 570
enteric, 380
as first messenger, 365
function of, 365
in homeostasis, 361, 366
hypersecretion of, 381
hyposecretion of, 381
inaction of, 381
inhibiting, 371
interactions of, 365–366
metabolism of, 613t
negative feedback inhibition of, 371
negative feedback of, 366
permissive effects of, 365
positive feedback of, 366
releasing, 371, 372
renal regulation by, 536
secretion of, 361–363, 363
structure of, 364, 364
synergistic effects of, 366
transport of, 390
Hormone receptors, 365, 365–366
Horns, of spinal cord, 273, 273
Horseshoe kidney, 7
Host (self) antigens, 488
Hot flashes, 645
Human body, generally. See also specific 
anatomy
anatomical planes of, 15, 15, 16
anatomical position of, 15
anatomical variations in, 6, 7, 9
anatomy of, 2–8
characteristics of life, 9–10
examination of, 3– 4
homeostasis in, 10–13
MRI full-body image of, 1
negative feedback in, 11
physiological variations in, 13
physiology of, 8–13
plan of, 13–24
positive feedback in, 12
regions of, 16–18, 16–18
sections of, 15, 16
structural hierarchy of, 14, 14–15
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), 
678–679
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
489, 493, 493
Human (breast) milk, 665–666, 666t
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 642, 660
Humoral immunity, 482, 487, 489– 492
aging and, 494
attack phase of, 491
memory in, 491– 492
primary response in, 491, 491
recognition phase of, 489, 490
secondary response in, 491, 491– 492
Hunchback, 169
Hunger, 617–618
Hunger contractions, 618
Hyaline cartilage, 111, 112, 112t
articular, 154
of bronchus, 507, 507
endochondral ossification in, 154, 
154–155
of trachea, 505
tumor of, 156
Hydration, 549, 550
Hydrochloric acid, 569, 570, 570t, ­572–573
Hydrocortisone. See Cortisol
   INDEX      I-12  

Hydrogen
body percentage of, 32, 33t
covalent bonds of, 36, 36
isotopes of, 34
Hydrogen bonds, 36, 37–38, 38t
Hydrogen ions, 40
Hydrolysis, 39, 42, 42
Hydrophilic heads, of phospholipids, 46, 
47, 65
Hydrophilic substances, 39, 42
Hydrophobic substances, 39, 44
Hydrophobic tails, of phospholipids, 46, 
47, 65
Hydroxide ions, 40
Hyman, Flo, 110
Hymen, 643, 643
Hyper-, 551
Hypercalcemia, 155
Hyperextension, 188, 188
Hyperglycemia, 381
Hyperkalemia, 432, 551
Hypernatremia, 551
Hyperopia, 355
Hyperplasia, 121
Hypersecretion, of hormones, 381
Hypersensitivity, 483
Hypertension, 73, 317, 439, 536
Hyperthermia, 623
Hyperthyroidism, 374, 381
Hypertonic solutions, 72, 72
Hypertrophy, 121
Hypo-, 551
Hypocalcemia, 155
Hypochondriac region, 16, 17
Hypodermis, 128, 129, 132
Hypogastric region, 16, 17, 18
Hypoglycemia, 599
Hypokalemia, 551
Hyponatremia, 25, 551
Hypophyseal portal system, 368, 369
Hyposecretion, of hormones, 381
Hypotension, 439
Hypotension, orthostatic, 318
Hypothalamus, 288, 295–296, 362
anatomy of, 368, 369
in childbirth, 662
embryonic development of, 368
functions of, 367
in gastric regulation, 571
hormones of, 369
in hunger and satiety, 618
in male sexual development, 637
osmoreceptors of, 549, 550
in ovarian cycle, 653
in pituitary regulation, 367, 371, 372
in premature infant, 693
in respiratory control, 514
in thermoregulation, 621
Hypothermia, 623
Hypothyroidism, 374
Hypotonic solutions, 72, 72
Hypoxemia, 520
Hypoxia, 403, 515, 520
I
I bands, 204, 206–207
Ibuprofen, 481
Ileocecal junction, 580
Ileocecal valve, 580, 580, 588
Ileum, 579–580, 580, 588
Iliac region, 16
Iliotibial tract, 228, 240
Image formation, in vision, 349–350
Imaging, 4–6
Immune clearance, 491
Immune serum, 492
Immune system, 476– 495
aging and, 494
composition of, 467, 477
disorders of, 483
effects on other systems, 495
neonatal, 692
response to pathogens, 467, 468
study of (immunology), 467
Immunity
active, 492
adaptive, 477, 482– 487
aging and, 494
artificial, 492
attack phase of, 488, 489, 491
barrier defenses in, 477
cellular (cell-mediated), 482, 487– 489
connective tissue and, 106
humoral (antibody-mediated), 482, 
487, 489– 492
inflammatory response in, 479– 480
innate, 476– 481
lymphatic system and, 469
memory in, 482, 488, 488, 489, 
491– 492
natural, 492
neonatal, 692
passive, 492
reaction phase of, 488, 488
recognition phase of, 488, 488, 489, 
490
self vs. non-self in, 482– 483
skin and, 128–129
Immunization, 492, 494
Immunocompetent lymphocytes, 484, 484
Immunoglobulin(s) (Ig), 485, 486t
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 485, 486t
Immunoglobulin D (IgD), 485, 486t
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 485, 486t
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), 485, 486t, 491, 
491– 492, 692
Immunoglobulin M (IgM), 485, 486t, 491, 
491
Immunology, 467
Implantation, 678, 678–679
Incisors, 564, 564
Inclusions, cellular, 63, 76, 78
Incomplete proteins, 602
Incomplete tetanus, 214
Incontinence
fecal, 315, 590
urinary, 315, 553
Incubation period, 660
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS), 117
Infant(s). See Neonate
Infant respiratory distress syndrome 
(IRDS), 692–693
Infarction, 122, 409
cerebral, 122
myocardial, 13, 122, 460
Inferior, 26t
Inflammation, 479– 480, 480
Infrared radiation, 620
Infundibulum, of uterine tubes, 640, 641
Ingestion, 560
Inguinal lymph nodes, 468, 475
Inguinal region, 16, 17, 18
Inhibin, 379, 633, 637, 645, 654
Inhibiting hormones, 371
Innate immunity, 476– 481, 478
Inner ear
anatomy of, 336, 337–338
equilibrium function of, 338–341, 339
hearing function of, 341–343
infection of, 337, 503
Inner-ear cavity, 161
Inner hair cells of ear, 341, 342, 342
Inner segment, of photoreceptors, 351, 
351, 352
Inorganic compounds, 42
Inorganic phosphate, 53
Input neurons, 268, 268
Insensible perspiration, 139
Insertion, of muscle, 225
Inspection, 3
Inspiration, 510–512, 511, 512
Inspiratory neurons, 514
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), 513, 
513
Insula, 291, 298, 298
Insulin, 364, 364, 365, 376, 377, 578
in absorptive state, 615
aging and, 383
in appetite regulation, 618, 619
in bone physiology, 156
in diabetes mellitus, 366, 381
in obesity, 605
in postabsorptive state, 615
receptor-mediated endocytosis of, 75
in stress response, 382
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), 380
Insulin receptors, 365, 366
Insulin resistance, 381
Integral proteins, 65
Integrating (control) center, 11
Integrating center, in reflex arc, 278
Integration, neural, 270
Integrative function, of nervous system, 
253
Integumentary system, 21, 23, 24, 127–
145. See also Hair; Nail; Skin
aging of, 141
autonomic effects in, 316t
components of, 128
diagnostic value of, 128
effects on other organ systems, 142
pregnancy and, 661
study and treatment of (dermatology), 
134, 141
Intensity, sensory, 327
Intercalated discs, 219, 220, 426, 426– 427
Intercellular clefts, 435, 436
Intercellular space, 63
Interferons, 478, 489
Interleukins, 486, 488, 489
Intermediate filaments, 63, 76–78, 77
Internal genitalia, 630
Internal respiration, 518–519
Interneurons, 257, 257
Internodal conduction, cardiac, 427
Internodes, 255, 260
Interosseous membrane (IM), 177, 178, 
182, 223
Interphase, 86, 86
Interpubic disc, 180, 181
Interscapular region, 18
Intersegmental reflex arc, 280
Interstitial endocrine cells, 379, 379, 632, 
633
Interstitial (tissue) fluid, 63, 549
Intertubercular line, 16, 17
Interventricular sulcus, 419, 421
Intervertebral discs, fibrocartilage of, 
112, 112t, 168, 170,  
173, 185
aging and, 196
herniated, 170, 173, 196
Intestinal crypts, 581, 581
Intestinal gas, 589
Intestinal juice, 582
Intestinal lymph nodes, 468, 475
Intestinal phase, of gastric function, 572, 
572
Intestinal trunks, 468, 470
Intestines. See Large intestine; Small 
intestine
Intracellular compartment, 549
Intracellular face, of plasma membrane, 
65
Intracellular fluid (ICF), 63, 72, 549
Intramembranous ossification, 153
Intraperitoneal organs, 21, 562, 580
Intrapulmonary pressure, 510–513, 511
Intrauterine device (IUD), 690
Intrinsic defecation reflex, 590
Intrinsic factor, 403, 569, 570, 570t, 586
Intrinsic pathway, of coagulation, 407, 
408
Intubation, endotracheal, 504
Invasive imaging techniques, 4
Inversion, of foot, 191, 191–192
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 117
Involuntary muscle, 115, 220
Involuntary reflexes, 278
Involution
of corpus luteum, 654, 655
of uterus, 663
Iodine, 33t, 604t
Ion(s), 34–35. See also specific ions
in action potential generation, 
­262–263, 263
formation of, 34, 34–35, 35t
in membrane polarization/potentials, 
261–262, 262
valence of, 34
Ionic bonds, 35, 36, 38t
Ionization, 34, 34–35
Ionizing radiation, 34
Ion trapping, 41
Iris, 324, 346, 346
Iron
absorption of, 586, 590
body percentage of, 33t
dietary, 603, 604t
oxidation of, 56
in pregnancy, 662
Iron-deficiency anemia, 403
Irregular bones, 152
Irritant receptors, 514
Ischiadic notch. See Sciatic notch
Islets, pancreatic, 376, 376, 578
Islets of Langerhans. See Pancreatic islets
Isoleucine, 602
Isomers, 36, 36
Isometric contractions, 215
Isotonic contractions, 215
Isotonic solutions, 72, 72
Isotopes, 34
Isotretinoin, 696
Isthmus, of thyroid gland, 373, 374
IUD (intrauterine device), 690
Ivar the Boneless, 52
IVF. See In vitro fertilization
J
Jaundice, 135, 397, 613
Jejunum, 562, 577, 579–580, 580
Johnson, William, 657
Joint(s), generally, 184–192
ball-and-socket, 186, 187
biaxial, 186
I-13      INDEX

capsule of, 185, 186
cartilaginous, 185
classification of, 185–188
condylar (ellipsoid), 186, 187
degenerative disease of, 157–158
fibrous, 185
hinge, 187, 187
monaxial, 186
multiaxial, 186
pivot, 187, 187
plane (gliding), 187, 187
saddle, 186–187, 187
study of (arthrology), 147
sutures, 152, 161, 162, 163, 165, 167
synovial, 185–188
accessory structures of, 186
classes of, 186–187, 187
movements of, 188–192
structure of, 185, 185–186
zero position, 188
Joint(s), specific
atlantoaxial, 171
elbow, 187, 192–193, 193
hip, 186, 193, 193
humeroscapular, 187
humeroulnar, 187
intercarpal, 187
interphalangeal, 187
knee, 187, 194, 194–195
metacarpophalangeal, 186, 187
metatarsophalangeal, 186
radioulnar, 187
sacroiliac, 180
shoulder, 187, 192, 193
temporomandibular (TMJ), 166, 188
trapeziometacarpal, 187
Joint cavity
glenoid, 175, 176, 192, 192
synovial, 185, 185–186
Juxtaglomerular apparatus, 537–538, 538
Juxtamedullary nephrons, 533
K
Kartagener syndrome, 69
Keloids, 122, 122
Keratin, 76, 103, 128–131
Keratinized epithelium, 103, 104, 104t
Keratinocytes, 130, 130–133
Ketoacidosis, 381, 611
Ketone(s), diabetes mellitus and, 381
Ketone bodies, 611
Ketonuria, 381
Kidney(s), 526, 527
aging and, 553
anatomical variations in, 6, 7, 9
anatomy of, 528–533
artificial, 543
autoregulation of, 536–538
blood pressure and, 441, 526, 
­536–537, 537
circulation of, 455, 456, 457, 529, 530
endocrine function of, 380, 527
epithelial tissue of, 101, 101t, 105, 
105t
excretion by, 526, 527
filtration in, 526, 534, 534–538, 535
functional unit of, 530–532
functions of, 526–528
gross anatomy of, 528–529, 529
hormones affecting, 536, 537
infection of, 546
lobes of, 528, 529
local control of, 536–538
neonatal, 692
neural control of, 536
pH (acid–base) control by, 527, 540, 
552
physiology of, 534, 534–553
position of, 528
reabsorption in, 534, 534, 539–541
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
and, 378, 536, 537
secretion in, 534, 534, 552
venous drainage of, 456, 457, 529, 530
water conservation in, 534, 534, 
­541–542, 542
Kidney disease
anemia in, 403
kidney stones, 545
nephrosclerosis, 536
pyelitis, 546
pyelonephritis, 546
renal insufficiency, 543
Kidney stones, 545
Kilocalorie (kcal), 39, 598
Kinesin, 77
Kinesiology, 147, 188
Kinetic energy, 55
Klinefelter syndrome, 694
Knee, 18, 187, 194, 194–195
adaptation to bipedalism, 195
arthroscopy of, 195
injury to, 194–195
menisci of, 194, 195
muscles acting on, 194, 194–195, 242, 
243, 245t
Knee-jerk reflex, 279, 279–280
Krebs cycle, 607–608, 608
Kyphosis, 157, 169, 169
L
Labia majora, 640, 643, 643
Labia minora, 640, 643, 643
Labor, 662–663
Labor contractions, 641, 662–663
Labyrinth, of ear, 337, 338
Lacrimal apparatus, 345
Lacrimal (tear) glands, 345, 345
Lacrimal sac, 345, 345
Lactase, 583, 584
Lactate (lactic acid), 607
Lactation, 663–666, 666t
Lacteals, 581, 584, 586
Lactiferous ducts, 644, 645
Lactiferous sinus, 644, 645
Lactose, 43, 44t, 583, 584, 599
Lactose intolerance, 585
Lacunae
of bone, 111, 113, 149–150, 150
of cartilage, 111, 112
of penis, 636, 636
Lamella(e), 111, 113, 150, 150
Lamellar corpuscles, 129, 329
Lamina, 169, 170, 171
Lamina propria, 560, 561, 568, 569
Langerhans, islets of. See Pancreatic islets
Language, 304, 304
Language deficits (aphasia), 301, 304, 306
Large arteries, 434, 435
Large intestine, 560, 580, 587–590
absorption in, 589
anatomy of, 587–589, 588
bacteria of, 589
blood supply to, 455, 456
endocrine function of, 380
motility of, 589
nerve supply to, 314
venous drainage of, 457
Large veins, 434, 437
Laron dwarfism, 366
Laryngeal prominence, 450, 503, 504
Laryngopharynx, 502, 503, 565
Laryngospasm, 155
Larynx, 501, 502, 503, 503–504, 505, 506
cartilages of, 503, 504, 505, 506
endoscopic view of, 504
Last menstrual period (LMP), 661
Lateral, 26t
Lateral excursion, of mandible, 229
Lateralization, cerebral, 304–305, 305
Lateral longitudinal arch of foot, 184
Lateral sulcus, 287, 291, 298
Lateral surfaces, of epithelial tissue, 100
Lateral ventricles, 288, 290, 291
Law of complementary base pairing, 51, 86
L cones, 353, 353
Leaflets, of heart valves, 421
Lean body mass, aging and, 247
Lecithin, 586
Leeuwenhoek, Antony van, 62
Left atrioventricular valve, 421, 422
Left atrium, 419, 420, 420, 422
“Left-brained,” 304–305, 305
Left bundle branch, 428
Left lower quadrant (LLQ), 16, 17
Left rotation, 190
Left upper quadrant (LUQ), 16, 17
Left ventricle, 419, 420, 421, 422
Leg, 17–18, 18. See also Lower limb
bones of, 181, 182, 182
definition of, 182
muscles acting on, 242, 243
Leg bud, 685
Lens, 346, 347
accommodation of, 349, 350
aging and, 349–350, 356
Leptin, 380, 605, 618, 619
Lesser omentum, 20, 562, 562, 568
Lesser pelvis, 179
Lesser sciatic notch, 180
Lesser trochanter, 181, 181
Lesser tubercle, of humerus, 176, 177
Lesser vestibular glands, 643
Leukemia, 403– 404, 404
Leukocyte(s), 107, 113, 113, 391, 391, 
399– 405. See also specific 
types
diapedesis of, 479
disorders of, 403– 404
in fever, 480– 481
functions of, 390, 399– 400
in inflammation, 479, 480
in innate immunity, 477– 478
life cycle of, 402
as percentage of whole blood, 391
phagocytosis by, 74
production of, 392–393, 402, 402
pseudopods of, 69, 69
quantities (count) of, 390t, 403, 404
structure of, 400, 400
types of, 400– 401, 401
Leukocytosis, 403
Leukopenia, 403
Levodopa, for Parkinson disease, 270
Leydig cells, 379
Libido, 637, 667
Life
characteristics of, 9–10
defining, 8
end of (death), 9, 699–700
essential functions of, 8–10
Life expectancy, 699–700
Life span, 700
Ligaments, generally, 107, 147
Ligaments, specific
anterior cruciate, 194, 195
extensor retinaculum, 237, 239, 242, 
243
falciform, 575, 576
flexor retinaculum, 237, 238
inguinal, 232
ligamentum arteriosum, 688, 692
ligamentum venosum, 688
ovarian, 639, 641
patellar, 194, 242
posterior cruciate, 194, 195
pulmonary, 506
round, of liver, 575, 576, 688
suspensory
of eye, 346, 347
of ovary, 639
Ligand(s), 262, 262
Ligand-gated channel, 262
Light and vision, 344, 349–350, 350
Light chains, of antibody, 485, 485
Lignin, 599–600
Limbic system, 299, 299, 514
Lincoln, Abraham, 110
Lines of bone, 159
epiphyseal, 151, 152
intertubercular, 16, 17
linea aspera, 181, 181
midclavicular, 16, 17
subcostal, 16, 17
transverse, 172, 172
Lingual frenulum, 563, 564
Lingual lipase, 565, 570, 584, 585–586
Lingual papillae, 331, 332, 563–564
Lingual tonsils, 332, 472, 472, 502
Linoleic acid, 45, 45
Lip(s), 502, 563, 563
Lipase
gastric, 569, 570, 570t
lingual, 565, 570, 584, 585–586
pancreatic, 578, 584, 586
Lipid(s), 42, 44– 47
absorption and digestion of, 469, 560, 
584, 585–586
absorptive state, 615
composition of, 44
dietary, 600–601
calories from, 598, 600
requirements for, 598t
sources of, 600
emulsification of, 585–586
energy storage in, 600
functions of, 44t
metabolism of, 611, 612, 613t
in plasma membrane, 65, 65–66
postabsorptive state, 615
transport of, 601, 602
Lipid bilayer, 65, 65
Lipolysis, 611
Lipoprotein(s), 601, 602
Liquid nitrogen, 39
Lithotripsy, 545
Liver, 560, 560, 575–577
aging and, 590
bile secretion by, 575, 577
blood supply of, 455, 456, 575
development of, 684, 685
endocrine function of, 380
functions of, 612, 613t
gross anatomy of, 575, 576
inflammation of (hepatitis), 612–613
lobes of, 575, 576
   INDEX      I-14  

metabolic role of, 612, 613t
microscopic anatomy of, 575–577, 576
nerve supply to, 314
position of, 562, 562, 575, 576
in premature infant, 693
sinusoids of, 458, 575, 576
venous drainage of, 456– 458, 457
Liver bulge, 685
Liver cancer, 612
Liver disease, 612–613
Lobar bronchi, 506
Lobes
of brain, 287, 288, 291, 297–298, 298 
(See also specific lobes)
of breast, 644, 645
of glands, 118
of kidney, 528, 529
of liver, 575, 576
of lung, 505, 506
of pituitary gland, 368, 369
Lobules
of breast, 644
of ear, 335–336, 336
of liver, 575
of testis, 632, 632–633
of thymus, 473, 473
Local potentials, 263
Location, sensory information on, 326
Lochia, 663
Lock-and-key model, 51, 365
Lockjaw (tetanus), 209
Long bones, 111, 151, 151–152
Longitudinal arches, of foot, 184
Long-wavelength (L) cones, 353, 353
Loose connective tissue, 107
Lordosis, 169, 169
Loudness, 342
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), 601, 
602
Lower limb, 17–18, 18
adaptations to bipedalism, 181
arteries of, 458– 459
bones of, 160, 181–184
development of, 685
muscles acting on, 240–243
veins of, 459
Lower respiratory tract, 501, 505, 505–509
Lubb-dupp, 432
Lumbar curvature, 168, 169
Lumbar enlargement, 271, 271, 277
Lumbar region, 16, 17, 18, 201, 271
Lumbar trunks, 468, 470, 471
Lumen, 99
of blood vessels, 434
of esophagus, 566
of stomach, 569
of trachea, 505
of ureter, 544
of uterus, 641, 682
Lung(s), 501, 505–509
aging and, 520
altitude and, 518
alveoli of, 499, 508, 509
blood supply of, 416, 416,  
508–509
bronchial tree of, 499, 506–508
compliance of, 513–514
costal surface of, 505, 506
development of, 684
diaphragmatic surface of, 506
disorders of
chronic bronchitis, 514, 515
COPD, 515, 520
emphysema, 514, 515
obstructive, 513–514, 515, 520
restrictive, 513–514
gas exchange in, 500, 516–519
gross anatomy of, 505–506, 506
heart’s anatomic relationship to, 416, 
417
histology of, 507
lobes of, 505, 506
mediastinal surface of, 505, 506
neonatal, 691–693
nerve supply to, 312, 313, 314
neural control of, 514, 514
physiology of, 510–519
position of, 505, 507
right vs. left, 505
smoking and, 515
ventilation in, 510–516
volumes and capacities of, 513, 
­513–514, 520
Lung cancer, 515, 515
Luteal phase, of ovarian cycle, 653, 654, 
655
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 370, 372
in males, 637
in ovarian cycle, 654, 654–655, 655, 
657
in puberty (female), 645
Lymph, 468– 471, 469, 475, 476, 549
Lymphatic capillaries, 469, 469– 471
Lymphatic ducts, 468, 470, 471
Lymphatic nodules, 472, 472, 475
Lymphatic organs, 469, 472– 476. See also 
specific organs
Lymphatic system, 23, 24, 467– 476, 468
aging and, 494
components of, 468, 468– 469
effects on other systems, 495
fluid regulation by, 469– 471, 470
functions of, 469
histology of, 469, 471– 472
inflammatory response of, 479– 480
response to pathogens, 468
Lymphatic tissue, 469, 471– 472
Lymphatic trunks, 470, 471
Lymphatic vessels, 468– 471, 475
Lymph node(s), 468, 470, 475– 476
and metastatic cancer, 474, 475
structure of, 475, 475
swollen, 475
Lymphoblasts, 402, 402
Lymphocytes, 113, 388, 391, 400, 
400– 401. See also B lympho-
cytes; T lymphocytes
in adaptive immunity, 483– 485, 
487– 489
in cellular immunity, 482, 487– 489
in HIV/AIDS, 493, 493
in humoral immunity, 489– 492
immunocompetent, 484, 484
in innate immunity, 478
life history and migration of, 484, 
484– 485
in lymphatic tissue, 471– 472
production of, 402, 402
self-tolerant, 484
Lymphoid leukemia, 403– 404
Lymphoid nodules, aggregated, 579
Lymphoid tissue, mucosa-associated, 
471– 472, 561
Lymphoma, 474
Lysine, 602
Lysosomal enzymes, 81
Lysosomes, 63, 77, 79, 80, 81, 85, 400, 
400, 405
Lysozymes, 477
M
Macromolecules, 42
Macronutrients, 598, 598t
Macrophages, 107, 401, 477
alveolar, 508, 509
as antigen-presenting cells, 476, 485, 
486
in erythrocyte disposal, 397
in fever, 480– 481
hepatic, 575
in inflammation, 479
in lymphatic nodules, 472
phagocytosis by, 74, 476, 477, 477, 478
pseudopods of, 69, 69, 477
in thymus, 473
Macula, 338–339, 339
Macula densa, 537–538, 538
Macula lutea, 346, 348, 348
Magnesium, 33t, 539, 548t, 603, 604t
Magnesium chloride, 35t
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),  
4, 5, 5
colorized scan of muscles, 201
fetal, 672
full-body scan, 1
functional, 5, 296
transverse sections in, 16
Main bronchus, 499, 501, 505, 506, 
­506–507
Major calyx, 529, 529
Major duodenal papilla, 577, 577
Male(s)
erythrocytes in, 394
hemophilia in, 408– 409
pelvic structure of, 179
puberty in, 637
urethra of, 545, 545–546, 631, 633, 
636
Male climacteric, 637
Male reproductive system, 21, 22, 24, 
630–638
aging and, 637, 667
anatomy of, 630–637, 631
physiology of, 637–638
puberty and adolescence, 637
Male sexual response, 657–659
anatomical foundation of, 657–658
orgasm in, 658–659
refractory period of, 659
Malignant tumor, 90
Malleoli, 182, 182
Malnutrition, 590
Maltase, 583, 584
Maltose, 43, 44t, 583, 584, 599
Mammary glands, 119, 119, 138, 
­643–645, 663–665
Manganese, 33t
Manubrium, 173, 174
Marfan syndrome, 110
Marrow. See Bone marrow
Marrow cavity, 151, 154, 154
Massage therapist, 247
Mass movements, 589
Mast cells, 479
Masters, William, 657
Mastication, muscles of, 229–231, 230, 233t
Mastoid fontanel, 167, 167
Matrix
of bone tissue, 149, 155
of cartilage, 111, 112
extracellular, 96
of hair, 136, 137
of mitochondria, 79, 81
of nail, 138
Matrix reactions, in aerobic respiration, 
607–608, 608
Mature ovarian follicle, 639, 652, 653
Maxillary sinus, 161, 161
M cones, 353, 353
Mechanical digestion, 560
Mechanoreceptors, 335
Medial, 26t
Medial longitudinal arch of foot, 184
Median plane, 15
Mediastinal lymph nodes, 475
Mediastinal surface, of lung, 505, 506
Mediastinum, 19, 19, 505
Medical excursion, of mandible, 229
Medical imaging, 4–6
Medical technologist (MT), 57
Medical terminology, 24–27, 26t
Medium arteries, 434, 435
Medium veins, 434, 437
Medium-wavelength (M) cones, 353, 353
Medroxyprogesterone, 690
Medulla
of adrenal glands (See Adrenal medul-
la)
of hair, 136, 137
of kidney, 528, 529, 531, 533
of lymph node, 475, 475
of ovary, 639, 639
of thymus, 473, 473
Medulla oblongata, 287, 288, 293–295, 
294, 296
in blood pressure control, 441, 441
in digestion control, 571
emetic center of, 571
functions of, 295
in respiratory control, 502, 514, 514
swallowing center of, 566, 566, 571
vasomotor center of, 441, 441
Medullary cavity, 152, 154, 154
Medullary cone, 271, 271, 277
Medullary cords, of lymph node,  
475, 475
Medullary sinus, of lymph node, 475
Megakaryocytes, 405, 406, 406
Megavitamins, 604
Meiosis, 87, 647, 648
in fertilization, 675
mitosis vs., 647
in oogenesis, 651, 652
in spermatogenesis, 647–650, 649
Meiosis I, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651
Meiosis II, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
675
Melanin, 130, 132–133, 133, 137
Melanocortin, 618
Melanocytes, 130, 130–133
Melanoma, 134, 134
Melatonin, 373
Membrane(s), 18–21, 120, 120. See also 
specific types
Membrane proteins, 65, 66, 66
Membrane reactions, in aerobic respira-
tion, 607, 608, 608–609
Membrane skeleton (terminal web), 63, 
76, 77
Membrane transport, 70–75, 71
active, 71, 73
carrier-mediated, 73
by filtration, 71, 71
by osmosis, 71–72, 72
by simple diffusion, 71, 71
tonicity in, 72, 72
vesicular, 73–75, 74
Membranous labyrinth, 337, 338
Membranous urethra, 545, 546, 631, 633
Liver (continued)
I-15      INDEX

Memory
aging and, 318
Alzheimer disease and, 269
explicit, 297
frontal lobe and, 297
immune, 482, 487– 489, 488, 491– 492
limbic system and, 299
multiregional brain function in, 301
storage of, 301
Memory B cells, 490, 490, 491– 492
Memory consolidation, 301
Memory T cells, 487– 489, 488
Menarche, 645
Meningeal branch, of spinal nerve, 277
Meninges, 19
brain, 161, 289, 290
inflammation of, 289, 337
spinal cord, 271, 272, 274–275
Meningitis, 289, 337
Meniscal injuries, 195
Meniscus (menisci), 186, 194, 195
Menopause, 157, 645, 667
Menstrual cycle, 379, 654, 655–657, 656
anovulatory, 645
breast changes in, 645
integration with ovarian cycle, 657
phases of, 654, 655–656, 656
Menstrual fluid, 656
Menstrual phase, 654, 656
Menstruation, 653. See also Menstrual 
cycle
Merocrine glands, 119, 119
Merocrine sweat glands, 129, 138–139, 139
Mesenchyme, 679
Mesenteric lymph nodes, 475
Mesenteries, 20, 20–21, 108, 108t, 562, 
562, 588
Mesoderm, 674, 678, 679, 680, 681t, 684, 
687
Messenger RNA (mRNA), 82
DNA transcription to, 82, 83
translation of, 82–84, 83
Metabolic rate, 616, 621–622
Metabolic states, 614–615
Metabolic waste, 527
Metabolism, 9–10, 54, 56. See also specific 
processes
bone, 155–156
carbohydrate, 606–610, 613t
definition of, 606
lipid, 611, 612
liver’s role in, 612, 613t
muscle, 215–217
pregnancy and, 662
protein, 611–612, 612
Metaphase
in meiosis, 648
in mitosis, 87–89, 88
Metastasis, 90, 474, 475
Metchnikoff, Elie, 467
Methionine, 602
Micelles, 584, 586
Microbiota, 589
Microcephaly, 693
Microfilaments, 63, 76–78, 77
Microfilaments (thin filaments), 63, 77
Microglia, 257, 258
Micrometer (μm), 63–64
Microscopes, 62
Microscopic anatomy, 3
Microtubules, 63, 67–68, 68, 76, 77, 79
Microvilli, 63, 67, 67, 77, 581
Micturition, 546–547
Micturition center, 546–547
Micturition reflex, 546–547
Midbrain, 288, 294, 295, 296
in auditory projection pathway, 344
in equilibrium, 341
Midclavicular line, 16, 17
Middle ear
anatomy of, 336, 336–337
evolution of, 335
hearing function of, 341
infections of, 336–337
Middle-ear cavity, 161
Midpiece, of sperm, 650, 650
Midsagittal plane, 15
Midwife, 667
Migraine headaches, 330
Milk production. See Lactation
Mineral(s), 33
absorption of, 560, 586
deposition of, 155
dietary, 603, 604t
homeostasis, in bone, 155–156
metabolism of, 613t
resorption of, 155
storage in bones, 148
trace, 604t
Mineralocorticoids, 378
Minor calyx, 529, 529, 533
Minor duodenal papilla, 577
Mitochondria, 63, 77, 79, 81–82
ATP production in, 81, 596, 608, 
­608–609
Mitochondrial DNA, 81–82
Mitochondrial electron-transport chain, 
608, 608–609
Mitochondrial matrix, 79, 81
Mitosis, 87–89, 88
meiosis vs., 647
preembryonic (cleavage), 676t, 677, 
677–678
in smooth muscle, 221
in sperm, 647, 649
Mitotic phase of cell cycle, 86, 86
Mitotic spindle, 76, 88, 89
Mitral valve, 420, 421, 422
Mixed glands, 119
Mixed nerves, 309
M line, 206
Modality, sensory, 326
Molars, 564, 564–565
Molecular formula, 36
Molecules, 15, 36–38
Monoamines, 317, 364, 364
Monoblasts, 402, 402
Monochromatic vision, 352
Monocytes, 113, 391, 400, 400– 402, 402
in inflammation, 479
in innate immunity, 478
Monoglyceride, 586
Monomers, 42
Monosaccharides, 42, 43, 44t
Monosynaptic reflex arcs, 279, 279–280
Monozygotic twins, 677
Mons pubis, 640, 643, 643
Morning-after pills, 690
Morning sickness, 662
Morphology, functional, 3
Morula, 676t, 677, 677
Motor areas, 302
Motor association area, 302, 303
Motor control. See Movement; specific 
anatomy
Motor cortex, primary, 303, 304
Motor division
somatic, 302
visceral, 302, 310 (See also Autonomic 
nervous system)
voluntary vs. involuntary, 302
Motor function, of nervous system, 253
Motor homunculus, 302–303
Motor (efferent) nerve fibers, 207, 208, 
257, 257, 279
Motor (efferent) neurons, 207, 254, 256, 
257, 257
Motor proteins, 256
Motor units, 207, 207
Mouth (oral cavity), 560, 560, 563, 
­563–565
Mouthfeel, 331
Movement
brain function in, 302–303, 303
muscles and, 203
sensation of, 328
spinal cord and, 271
study of (kinesiology), 147, 188
synovial joint, 188–192
MRI, 4, 5, 5
colorized scan of muscles, 201
fetal, 672
full-body scan, 1
functional, 5, 296
transverse sections in, 16
Mucin, 119
Mucociliary escalator, 505
Mucosa. See Mucous membranes
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT), 471– 472, 561
Mucous cells, of stomach, 569, 569, 570t
Mucous glands, 119
Mucous membranes, 19, 120, 120
of bronchus, 507
of digestive tract, 560–561, 561
of esophagus, 566
of immune system, 477
olfactory, 333, 334
of stomach, 568–569, 569, 572, 590
of trachea, 102, 505
of uterine tubes, 640, 641
of uterus, 641
of vagina, 104, 104t
Mucus, 100, 119, 503, 505, 570t
Multipara, 663
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 260
Multipolar neurons, 256, 256
Multiregional brain functions, 300–306
Mumps, 565
Murmurs, heart, 432
Muscle(s), generally, 222–228
abdominal, 231–232, 233t
action of, 225
aging and, 247
antagonist, 213, 225, 226
anterior group (leg), 242
appendicular, 234–244, 244t–246t
attachments of, 222–225, 223, 232
axial, 229–232, 233t
belly of, 225
cardiac (See Cardiac muscle)
chewing, 229–231, 230, 233t
circular (See Sphincters)
colorized MRI scan of, 201
connective tissue of, 222–225, 223
contraction (See Muscle contraction)
coordinated action of groups, 225–226
extrinsic, of eye, 346
facial, 229, 230, 233t
fixator, 226
functions of, 203
head and neck, 231, 233t
injuries to, 224
insertion of, 225
intrinsic, of eye, 346
involuntary, 115, 220
lower limb, 240–243
metabolism of, 215–217
naming of, 226
nerve relationship with, 207, 207–209, 
208
origin of, 225, 232
pectoral girdle, 234, 234–235
posterior group (leg), 243
prime mover (agonist), 225
red, 217
rigor mortis of, 214
skeletal (See Skeletal muscle)
slang terms for, 226, 226t
smooth (See Smooth muscle)
strength and conditioning of, 218
striations of, 115, 116, 203, 203, 206, 
206–207, 219, 220, 425, 426
synergist, 225, 225–226
trunk, 231–232, 233t
upper limb, 234, 234–239
visceral, 115, 221
voluntary, 115, 203
white, 217
Muscle(s), specific
abdominal oblique, 513
external, 227, 228, 231–232, 233t, 
512
internal, 227, 231–232, 233t
abductors (thigh), 241
adductor, 181, 227, 240, 240–241
adductor brevis, 240, 240–241, 245t
adductor longus, 227, 240, 240–241, 
245t
adductor magnus, 228, 240, 240, 241, 
246t
arrector pili, 129, 137, 137
biceps brachii, 192, 213, 217, 225, 
225–226, 227, 234, ­236–237, 
238, 244t
biceps femoris, 228, 241, 242, 245t
brachialis, 225, 225–226, 227, 234–
235, 236–237, 238, 244t
brachioradialis, 227, 234–235, 236–237, 
238, 239, 245t
buccinator, 229, 230, 233t, 563
bulbospongiosus, 631, 637, 659
coracobrachialis, 227, 234–235
cremaster, 634
deltoid, 192, 227, 234, 236, 244t
depressor anguli oris, 229, 230, 233t
detrusor, 544, 545, 546
diaphragm, 19, 19, 501, 512, 
­512–513, 560
erector spinae, 228, 232, 233t
extensor carpi radialis brevis, 238, 
239, 239, 245t
extensor carpi radialis longus, 238, 
239, 239, 245t
extensor carpi ulnaris, 228, 239, 239, 
245t
extensor digiti minimi, 239, 239
extensor digitorum, 228, 239, 239, 
245t
extensor digitorum longus, 242, 243, 
246t
extensor indicis, 239
fibularis brevis, 243, 243, 246t
fibularis longus, 227, 228, 243, 243, 
246t
flexor carpi radialis, 227, 237, 238, 
245t
flexor carpi radialis brevis, 226
flexor carpi ulnaris, 228, 237, 238, 
239, 245t
   INDEX      I-16  

flexor digitorum longus, 228, 243, 
243, 246t
flexor digitorum profundus, 227, 238
flexor digitorum superficialis, 
­237–238, 238–239, 245t
flexor hallucis longus, 228
frontalis, 227, 229, 230, 233t
gastrocnemius, 217, 227, 228, 241, 
243, 243, 246t
gluteals, 240
gluteus maximus, 228, 240, 241, 
245t
gluteus medius, 228, 240, 241, 
245t
gluteus minimus, 228, 240, 241, 
245t
gracilis, 227, 228, 240, 240–241, 241, 
245t
hamstrings, 194, 224, 226t, 241, 242
iliacus, 181, 240, 240
iliopsoas, 240, 240, 245t
infraspinatus, 228, 234, 235, 236, 244t
intercostal, 644
external, 512, 512
internal, 512, 512, 513
lateral rotator, 228, 241, 241
latissimus dorsi, 228, 232, 234, 235, 
244t
levator anguli oris, 229
levator labii superioris, 229, 230
levator palpebrae superioris, 345
levator scapulae, 228, 230, 234, 
­234–235, 244t
masseter, 227, 230, 230, 233t, 565
orbicularis oculi, 227, 229, 230, 233t, 
345, 345
orbicularis oris, 227, 229, 230, 233t, 
563
palmaris longus, 6, 237, 238
papillary, 421
pectineus, 240, 240–241, 245t
pectoralis major, 227, 234, 234, 244t, 
644
pectoralis minor, 244t, 644
pharyngeal constrictor, 565
piloerector, 129, 137, 137
plantaris, 6
popliteus, 195
pronator quadratus, 227, 236–237, 
239, 244t
pronator teres, 235, 236–237, 
­238–239, 244t
psoas major, 240, 240
pterygoid, 230, 230–231, 233t
pupillary constrictor, 349
pupillary dilator, 349
quadratus femoris, 240, 242, 245t
quadriceps femoris, 194
rectus, of eye, 345
rectus abdominis, 227, 231–232, 233t, 
512, 513
rectus femoris, 227, 240, 242
rhomboids, 226, 228, 235, 244t
rotator, thigh, 241
rotator cuff, 176, 192, 224, 235, 236, 
244t
sartorius (“tailor’s muscle”), 227, 240, 
242, 245t
semimembranosus, 194, 228, 241, 
242, 245t
semispinalis capitis, 228, 231
semitendinosus, 228, 241, 242, 245t
serratus anterior, 227, 228, 234, 244t
soleus, 217, 227, 228, 243, 243, 246t
splenius capitis, 228, 231
stapedius, 337, 343
sternocleidomastoid, 227, 228, 230, 
231, 233t, 234
subscapularis, 235, 236, 244t
supinator, 227, 235, 236–237, 244t
supraspinatus, 192, 228, 234, 235, 
236, 244t
temporalis, 229, 233t
tensor tympani, 336, 337, 343
teres major, 228, 234, 236, 244t
teres minor, 228, 234, 235, 244t
tibialis anterior, 227, 242, 243, 246t
tibialis posterior, 228, 243, 246t
transverse abdominal, 227, 231–232, 
233t, 513
trapezius, 227, 228, 231–232, 233t, 
234, 244t
triceps brachii, 213, 225, 226, 234, 
236–237, 238, 239, 245t
triceps surae, 243
vastus intermedius, 227, 242
vastus lateralis, 227, 240, 241, 242
vastus medialis, 227, 240, 242
zygomaticus major, 227, 229, 230, 
233t
zygomaticus minor, 229, 230, 233t
Muscle compartments, 222, 223
Muscle contraction
cardiac muscle, 220
skeletal muscle, 211–217
concentric, 215
eccentric, 215
energy for, 215–217
isometric, 215
isotonic, 215
sarcomere appearance in, 213, 213
sliding filament model of, 
­211–213, 212
stimulus intensity and, 214, 215
whole-muscle, 214–215
smooth muscle, 221
Muscle endurance, 216
Muscle fatigue, 216
Muscle fibers, 115, 116, 203, 203–207
bundles of, 222, 223
of cardiac muscle, 425– 427
fast-twitch, 217
physiological classes of, 217
shape of, 204
slow-twitch, 217
structure of, 204, 204–205
Muscle fibers, of cardiac muscle, 219, 220
Muscle pain, 224
Muscle soreness, delayed-onset, 224
Muscle spindles, 279
Muscle tone
skeletal muscle, 213
smooth muscle, 221
Muscle twitch, 214, 217
Muscular arteries, 435
Muscular disorders
athletic injuries, 224
carpal tunnel syndrome, 238
compartment syndrome, 222, 224
cramps, 224
delayed-onset soreness, 224
muscular dystrophy, 224
paralysis (See Paralysis)
Muscular dystrophy, 224
Muscularis externa, 561, 561
aging and, 590
of colon, 588
of esophagus, 566
of stomach, 568, 569
Muscular system, 23, 24, 201–251, 
­227–228. See also Muscle(s)
aging and, 247
anatomy of, 222–240
definition of, 203
effects on other systems, 248
functions of, 203
Muscular tissue, 96, 97t, 202–209. See 
also specific types
excitability of, 114
histology of, 115, 116, 116t, 203, 
203–207
myofilaments of, 204, 205, 205–207
nerve relationship with, 207, 207–209, 
208
striations of, 115, 116, 203, 203, 206, 
206–207, 219, 220, 425, 426
structure of muscle fibers, 204, 204–
205
Musculoskeletal system, 24
Mutagens, 90, 693
Mutations, 10, 90, 693
Myelin, 258, 259–260
Myelinated axon, 258, 259, 265, 265–266
Myelination, 259–260
Myelin sheath, 255, 257, 258, 259–260, 276
Myeloblasts, 402, 402
Myeloid leukemia, 403– 404
Myocardial infarction, 13, 122, 460
Myocardium, 417, 418
Myocytes, 115, 116
Myoepithelial cells, 644, 665
Myofibrils, 204, 204–205, 219
Myofilaments, 204, 205, 205–207, 206, 
208
Myoglobin, 204
Myometrium, 641, 641, 655
Myopia, 355
Myosin, 205, 206, 210–213, 211–212, 559
N
NAD+, 606, 607
Nail(s), 138, 138
Nail bed, 138
Nail body, 138
Nail fold, 138, 138
Nail matrix, 138
Nail plate, 138, 138
Nares, 501, 501, 502
Nasal apertures, posterior, 163, 164, 501, 
501
Nasal cavity, 161, 501, 501–503
Nasal conchae, 165, 501
inferior, 165, 166, 502
middle, 165, 502
superior, 165, 502
Nasolacrimal duct, 345, 345
Nasopharynx, 502, 503, 565
Natriuretic peptides, 379, 441, 540
Natural immunity, 492
Natural killer (NK) cells, 466, 478, 478
Near point of vision, 349–350
Nearsightedness, 355
Near vision, 350
Neck (cervical region), 16, 18, 271
arteries of, 449, 449– 450
muscles moving, 231, 233t
veins of, 450– 452, 451
Necrosis, 122
Negative feedback, 11
in blood pressure control, 11, 11
in endocrine system, 366
in thermoregulation, 11, 621
Negative feedback inhibition, 371, 655
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 660
Neonatal period, 691–692
Neonate, 691–695
adaptations of, 691–692
birth defects in, 693–696
circulation of, 688, 692
premature, 692–693
respiration of, 691–692
skull of, 167, 167
thermoregulation in, 692, 693
thymus of, 375, 375
Neoplasia, 121
Neoplasm, 90. See also Cancer; Tumors
Nephron(s), 530–532, 531, 533
Nephron loop, 531, 531–532, 533, 538
reabsorption in, 540, 541
secretion in, 540–541
Nephrosclerosis, 536
Nerve(s), generally, 254
definition of, 275
mixed, 309
regeneration of, 252, 258
Nerve(s), specific
cardiac, 429
cervical, 271, 277
coccygeal, 277
cochlear, 336, 340, 341, 342, 343
cranial (See Cranial nerves)
dorsal, of clitoris, 657–658
dorsal, of penis, 636, 657–658
intercostal, 277, 277, 514
lumbar, 271, 277
median, 238
phrenic, 514, 514
sacral, 271, 277
sciatic, 277
spinal (See Spinal nerve(s))
thoracic, 271, 277
vestibular, 336, 339, 340
Nerve cells. See Neurons
Nerve deafness, 355, 356
Nerve endings
free, 328
receptive field of, 326
simple, as sensory receptors, 325, 328, 
328–329
Nerve fibers. See Axon(s)
Nerve growth factors, 269
Nerve–muscle relationship, 207, 207–209, 
208
Nerve plexuses
brachial, 277, 277, 278t
cervical, 277, 277, 278t
coccygeal, 277, 277, 278t
lumbar, 277, 277, 278t
sacral, 277, 277, 278t
Nerve signal
conduction of, 264, 264–266, 265
synaptic transmission of, 266, 266–
267
Nervous system, 22, 24
aging and, 318
autonomic (See Autonomic nervous 
system)
cells of, 254–258, 254–261 (See also 
Neuroglia; Neurons)
central (See Central nervous system)
drug effects on, 317–318
effects on other systems, 320
endocrine system vs., 362–363, 363, 
363t
enteric, 561, 561–562, 571, 572
integrative function of, 253
motor function of, 253
Muscle(s), specific (continued)
I-17      INDEX

parasympathetic (See Parasympathetic 
division, of ANS)
peripheral (See Peripheral nervous 
system)
sensory function of, 253
subdivisions of, 254, 254
sympathetic (See Sympathetic 
­division, of ANS)
Nervous tissue, 96, 97t, 253–261
action potentials in (See Action 
­potentials)
cells of, 254–261
excitability of, 114
forms of, 260
histology of, 115, 115
supporting cells (See Neuroglia)
synapses (See synapses)
Neural convergence, 268, 268, 352
Neural groove, 684, 685
Neural integration, 270
Neural layer, of eye, 346
Neural plate, 685
Neural pools, 267–268, 293
Neural tube, 684, 687
Neurilemma, 255, 258, 259
Neuroendocrine cells, 362–363
Neurofibrillary tangles, 269, 269, 318
Neuroglia, 115, 115, 257–258, 258
Neuromuscular junction, 207–209, 208
Neuromuscular toxins, 209
Neurons, 115, 115, 254–257, 258
action potentials of, 262–267, 263
aging and, 318
bipolar, 256, 256
circuits of, 267–268, 268
enteric system, 562
excitation of, 262, 262–263
expiratory, 514
“firing” of, 263
functional classes of, 257, 257
input, 268, 268
inspiratory, 514
motor (efferent), 207, 254, 256, 257, 
257
multipolar, 256, 256
output, 268, 268
physiology of, 261–268
pools of, 267–268, 293
postganglionic, 311, 312, 313
postsynaptic, 266, 267
preganglionic, 310–311, 312, 313
presynaptic, 266, 266–267
receptive field of, 326, 326
resting membrane potential of, 
­261–262, 262
sensory (afferent), 257, 257, 326, 326
signal conduction in, 264, 264–267, 
265
size of, 254–256
spinal motor, 254
structural classes of, 256, 256
structural variations in, 256, 256
structure of, 254–256, 255
unipolar, 256, 256
Neuropathy, diabetic, 381
Neuropeptide Y, 618
Neuropharmacology, 317–318
Neurophysiology, 8
Neurosoma, 115, 115, 254, 255
Neurosyphilis, 660
Neurotransmitters, 207, 266, 267
in autonomic nervous system, 314, 
314t
deficiencies of, 269–270
in hearing, 342
Neutralization of antigen, 491
Neutral solution, 40
Neutrons, 33, 33–34
Neutrophil(s), 113, 391, 400, 400– 401
adhesion of, 479, 480
chemotaxis of, 479, 480
in fever, 480– 481
in inflammation, 479, 480
in innate immunity, 477
production of, 402, 402
pseudopods of, 69
Niacin, 604t
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NAD+), 607
Night blindness, 351
Night vision, 351, 353, 356
Nipple, 644, 644–645
Nitrogen, 32, 33t
Nitrogen, liquid, 39
Nitrogenous bases, 50, 51, 86
Nitrogenous wastes, 527, 539, 543, 547
Nitroglycerine patches, 131
Nociceptors, 328, 329–330
Nocturnal emissions, 637
Nodes of Ranvier, 255, 259–260, 265–266
Nondisjunction, 693
Nonfluent aphasia, 306
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), 660
Noninvasive imaging, 4
Nonpolar covalent bonds, 37, 37, 38t
Nonspecific granules, 400
Nonspecific immunity. See Innate 
­immunity
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 573
Nonverbal communication, 129
Noradrenaline. See Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine
adrenal secretion of, 312, 377
aging and, 318
in appetite, 618
in autonomic nervous system, 314, 
314t
in blood pressure control, 441
cardiovascular effects of, 432
as hormone, 362–363
in lipid metabolism, 611
as neurotransmitter, 267, 362
in stress response, 382
Normal flora, 467
Nose, 501–503
nerve supply to, 313, 314
Nostrils, 501, 501, 502
Nuchal region, 18
Nuclear envelope, 63, 78, 79
Nuclear medicine, 6
Nuclear pores, 78, 79
Nuclei
of atoms, 33
of brain, 260, 290, 293, 295
basal, 270, 291, 298, 299, 303
hypothalamic group, 370, 371
lateral geniculate, 354
respiratory control, 502
thalamic group, 299, 354
of cells, 63, 78, 79
of neuron, 254, 255
of Schwann cell, 255
of photoreceptors, 351, 351
of sperm and egg (pronuclei), 650, 
650, 677
Nucleic acids, 42, 51. See also DNA; 
RNA
digestion of, 560, 578
Nucleolus, 63, 78, 79
Nucleotides, DNA, 50, 51
Nucleus pulposus, 170, 173
Nurse cells, 379, 379, 632, 633, 649, 649–
650
Nurse midwives, 667
Nutrient(s), 598–605
aging and, 590
daily requirements of, 598, 598t
definition of, 598
digestion and absorption of, 558, 559, 
560, 583–587
essential, 598
prenatal, 662
Nutrition, 597–605
calories in, 598
guidelines and requirements for, 598, 
598t
lack of (starvation or malnutrition), 
590
placental, 681–683, 683t
premature infant, 693
prenatal, 662, 681–683
trophoblastic, 681
NuvaRing, 690
O
Oat-cell carcinoma, 515
Obesity, 605, 617, 697
Obstructive lung disorders, 513–514, 515
Occipital lobe, 287, 288, 291, 298, 298, 
301
Occipital protuberance, 231
Occupational therapist, 281
Odontoid process. See Dens
Odor, urine, 547
Odorants, 333
Oils, 44– 45
Olecranon, 177, 178
Olecranon bursitis, 193
Oleogustus, 333
Olfaction, 333–334
aging and, 356
anatomy of, 333, 334
brain function in, 297–298, 301
loss of (anosmia), 334
projection pathways of, 333
respiratory function and, 500
Olfactory association area, 302
Olfactory bulb, 297–298, 333, 334
Olfactory cortex, primary, 333
Olfactory epithelium, 503
Olfactory glands, 333, 334
Olfactory hairs, 333, 334
Olfactory mucosa, 333, 334
Olfactory tract, 333, 334
Oligodendrocytes, 257, 258, 259, 259–260
Oligosaccharides, 583
Oliguria, 547
Omega-3 fatty acids, 600
Omentum
greater, 20, 562, 562, 568
lesser, 20, 562, 562, 568
Oncogenes, 90
Oocyte(s), 639, 652
primary, 651, 652
secondary, 651, 652, 675, 677
Oogenesis, 651, 652
Oogonia, 651, 652
Open canalicular system, of platelets, 405, 
406
Open reduction of fracture, 157
Ophthalmoscope, 347, 348, 348
Opposition, of thumb, 187, 191
Opsin, 351
Optic chiasm, 288, 353, 354
Optic disc, 346, 348, 348–349
Optician, 356
Optic pressure, 347
Optic radiation, 353, 354
Optic tracts, 294, 353–354, 354
Oral cavity, 161, 560, 560, 563, 563–565
Oral contraceptives, 690
Oral phase, of swallowing, 566, 566
Ora serrata, 346, 348
Orbit, 161
Orbital fat, 345
Orbital region, 165, 345, 345–346
Orbitofrontal cortex, 299
Organ(s), 14, 14
development of, 681, 686–687
intraperitoneal, 21, 562, 580
retroperitoneal, 20, 21, 528, 562
Organelles, 15, 63, 76, 78–82, 79. See 
also specific organelles
Organic chemistry, 42
Organic compounds, 41–54
Organism, 14, 14
Organization, 9
Organogenesis, 681, 686–687
Organ systems, 14, 14, 21–24, 22–23. See 
also specific systems
Orgasm
female, 659
male, 658–659
Origin, of muscle, 225, 232
Oropharynx, 502, 503, 565
Orthopedic nurse, 196
Orthostatic hypotension, 318
Osmolarity
blood, 392
urine, 547, 548t
Osmoreceptors, 549, 550
Osmosis, 71–72, 72
capillary, 71, 442, 442– 443
in digestion, 586
imbalances in, 72
Osseous tissue. See Bone tissue
Ossification, 153–155, 154
Ossification center
primary, 154, 154
secondary, 154, 154
Osteoarthritis (OA), 157–158
Osteoblasts, 148, 149, 154, 155, 157, 196, 
380
Osteocalcin, 380
Osteochondroma, 156
Osteoclasts, 148, 149, 154, 156, 157, 196
Osteocytes, 111, 148, 149, 150
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), 52
Osteogenic cells, 148, 148–149
Osteoid tissue, 153
Osteology, 147
Osteomalacia, 149
Osteon(s), 113, 150, 150–151
Osteopenia, 196
Osteoporosis, 157, 196
Osteosarcoma, 156
Otitis media, 337, 503
Otolith(s), 338–339, 339
Otolithic membrane, 338–339, 339
Outer ear
anatomy of, 335–336, 336
evolution of, 335
hearing function of, 341
Outer hair cells of ear, 341, 342, 342
Outer segment, of photoreceptors, 351, 
351, 352
Output neurons, 268, 268
   INDEX      I-18  

Oval window, 336, 338
Ovarian cycle, 379, 653–655, 654
integration with uterine cycle, 657
phases of, 653–655, 654
Ovarian follicles, 639, 639
aging and, 645, 667
development and stages, 639, 645, 
651–653, 652
dominant, 654
mature, 639, 652, 653
ovarian cycle and, 653–655, 654, 657
primary, 639, 652, 653, 654
primordial, 639, 652, 653, 654
secondary, 639, 652, 653, 654
tertiary, 653, 654
timetable for, 657
Ovaries, 362, 630, 639, 639
aging and, 645, 667
blood supply to, 456
endocrine function of, 379, 639, 
645, 653
histology of, 379, 379
structure of, 639, 639
venous drainage of, 456, 457
Ovoid cells, 99
Ovulation, 639, 645, 652, 653, 654–655, 
657, 677
Ovum (ova). See Eggs
Oxidation, 56, 56t
Oxidizing agent, 56
Oxygen
in aerobic respiration, 607–609, 608
air content of, 516–517
altitude and, 518
body content of, 32, 33t
loading of, 517
molecule, 36
partial pressure of, 516–517
postexercise consumption of, 217
respiratory exchange of, 500, 516–519
transport in blood, 390, 393, 517, 
518–519
unloading of, 518–519
Oxygenated blood, 416, 422
Oxygen debt, 217
Oxyhemoglobin, 517, 518
Oxytocin, 12, 49, 364, 364, 368, 369, 
370–371, 662–663
P
Pacemaker, 427, 427– 428
Pacinian (lamellar) corpuscles, 129, 329
Packed cell volume (hematocrit), 390t, 
391, 394
Paganini, Nicolò, 52
Pain, 329–330
definition of, 329
in inflammation, 479– 480
phantom, 329–330
referred, 329, 330
somatic, 329
spinal gating of, 330
visceral, 329
Pain receptors, 328, 329–330
Palate, 501, 564
hard, 165, 501, 501, 502, 563, 564
soft, 501, 501, 563, 564
Palatine tonsils, 332, 468, 472, 472, 
502, 563
Pallor, 135
Palmar aponeurosis, 238
Palmar region, 18
Palmitic acid, 45
Palpation, 4
Palpebrae (eyelids), 345
Pancreas, 376, 560, 560, 577, 578
aging and, 590
blood supply to, 455, 456
endocrine function of, 376, 578
exocrine function of, 376, 578
gross anatomy of, 376, 376
histology of, 376, 376
nerve supply to, 314
position of, 562, 578
Pancreatic amylase, 578, 583, 584
Pancreatic ducts, 376, 577, 578
Pancreatic islets, 376, 376, 578
Pancreatic juice, 578
Pancreatic lipase, 578, 584, 586
Pantothenic acid, 604t
Papillae
dermal, 129, 130, 132, 136, 137, 
­328–329
duodenal, 577, 577
filiform, 331, 332
foliate, 331, 332
fungiform, 331, 332
lingual, 331, 332, 563–564
renal, 528–529, 533
tongue, 331, 332, 563–564
vallate, 331, 332
Papillary layer, of dermis, 132
Pap smear, 103, 642, 642
Parafollicular cells, 374, 375
Paralysis
flaccid, 209, 274
neuromuscular toxins and, 209
spastic, 209, 274
spinal cord injury and, 274
Paranasal sinuses, 161, 503
Paraplegia, 274
Parasagittal planes, 15
Parasympathetic defecation reflex, 590
Parasympathetic division, of ANS, 
­311–312, 313, 314–315
anatomy of, 314
cardiac innervation/regulation by, 
429, 432
drugs affecting, 317–318
in dual innervation, 315, 315
effects of, 316t
functions of, 312
neural pathway of, 311, 313
Parathyroid glands, 9, 362, 375
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 156, 375
Paraurethral glands, 643, 643
Parietal cells, of stomach, 569, 569, 570, 
570t
Parietal lobe, 287, 288, 298, 298, 301
Parietal pericardium, 416, 417
Parietal peritoneum, 20, 20, 562
Parietal pleura, 507
Parieto-occipital sulcus, 288, 298
Parkinson disease, 270, 295
Parotid duct, 565
Parotid gland, 560, 565, 565
Partially hydrogenated oils, 600
Partial-pressure gradient, 517
Partial pressure of gases, 516–517
Partial-thickness burns, 134
Parturition, 662. See also Childbirth
Passive immunity, 492
Patau syndrome, 694
Patellar reflex, 279, 279–280
Patellar region, 18
Patellar surface, of femur, 181
Pathogens
definition of, 468, 477
immune response to, 467, 468, 477
inflammatory response to, 479
Pathological fracture, 157
Pathophysiology, 8
Pectin, 599
Pectoral girdle
bones of, 160, 173, 173, 175, 175–176
muscles acting on, 234–235, 234–235
Pectoral region, 18
Pedal region, 18
Pedicels, of glomerulus, 535, 535
Pedicle, 169, 170, 171
Pelvic brim, 179
Pelvic cavity, 19, 19, 19t
Pelvic curvature, 168, 169
Pelvic girdle
bones of, 179–181, 180
muscles of, 240, 240–241
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 660
Pelvic inlet, 180
Pelvic outlet, 179
Pelvic region, 16, 201
arteries of, 455, 455– 456
veins of, 456– 458, 457
Pelvis, 160, 179–181
comparative anatomy of, 3
greater (false), 179
lesser (true), 179
sexual dimorphism of, 179–180
Pemphigus vulgaris, 70
Penicillin, 41
Penile urethra, 545, 546, 631, 633
Penis, 631, 635–637, 636
aging and, 667
blood supply of, 657
bulb of, 631, 637
erectile tissues of, 636
erection of, 315, 658
flaccid, measurements of, 635
function of, 635
glans of, 631, 635–636, 636, 657
innervation of, 657–658
root of, 631, 637
sexual response of, 658
shaft of, 631, 635
Pepsin, 50, 570, 579, 584
Pepsinogen, 569, 570, 570t
Peptic ulcer, 573, 573
Peptide(s), 48– 49
gut–brain, 570, 617–618, 619
natriuretic, 379, 441, 540
Peptide bonds, 48, 48– 49
Peptide hormones, 364–365, 364–365
Peptide YY (PYY), 380, 617–618, 619
Percussion, 4
Perforins, 478, 478, 489
Perfusion, 438, 440
Pericardial cavity, 19, 19, 19t, 416, 
417, 507
Pericardial fluid, 416
Pericardial sac, 416, 417
Pericarditis, 416
Pericardium, 19, 416, 417
parietal, 416, 417
visceral, 416, 417, 418
Perichondrium, 111, 112, 154
Pericytes, 435, 436
Perilymph, 337, 342
Perimetrium, 641, 641
Perimysium, 222, 223
Perineal region, 18
Perineum, 630, 643
Perineurium, 275, 276
Periodontitis, 590
Periosteum, 111, 150, 151, 152, 154
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 254, 
254. See also Autonomic 
­nervous system
cells of, 254–258
myelin/myelination in, 259, 259–260
regeneration in, 258
Peripheral proteins, in plasma membrane, 
65
Peripheral resistance (PR), 439– 440
Peripheral vision, 353
Perirenal fat capsule, 528
Peristalsis
in esophagus, 566
in small intestine, 582, 582
in stomach, 571
Peritoneal cavity, 20, 20–21, 687
Peritoneum, 20–21
parietal, 20, 20, 562
visceral, 20, 20–21
Peritonitis, 21, 573
Peritubular capillaries, 529, 530, 531, 534
Perivascular feet, 258, 258
Permanent teeth, 564
Permeability, membrane, 70
Permissive effects, of hormones, 365
Pernicious anemia, 403
Peroxisomes, 81
Persistent vegetative state, 9
Personalized medicine, 90
Perspectives on health
acute gastrointestinal illness, 574
AIDS, 493
Alzheimer disease, 269, 269
anabolic steroids, 52
arthritis, 157–158, 158
atherosclerosis, 424
blood disorders, 403– 404
burns, 134
cancer, 90
collagen diseases, 52
contraception, 690–691
diabetes mellitus, 381
drugs and nervous system, 317–318
endocrine disorders, 381
fractures, 157
genomic medicine, 90
hearing disorders, 355
muscle pain, 224
obesity, 605
osteoporosis, 157
Parkinson disease, 270
renal insufficiency and dialysis, 543
situs inversus and anatomical 
­variations, 9
skin cancer, 134
smoking and respiratory health, 515
stem-cell controversy, 117
tissue engineering, 117
vision disorders, 355
Perspiration, 621
Pes planus, 184
PET scans, 4, 5, 6, 34, 296
Peyer patches, 579
pH, 40
balance in, 551–552
of blood, 390t, 432, 500, 519
buffers and, 41
and drug action, 40– 41
and enzyme action, 51
of extracellular fluid, 390
homeostasis in, 551–552
partitioning, 41
and physiology, 40– 41
renal control of, 527, 540, 552
respiratory regulation of, 500, 519, 552
I-19      INDEX

scale, 40, 40
of urine, 547, 548t
of vagina, 642
Phagocytes, 467, 477
Phagocytosis, 74, 74, 467, 476– 477, 
477– 478, 479, 480
Phagosome, 74
Phalanx (phalanges)
foot, 160, 181, 183, 183
hand, 160, 176, 178–179, 179
Phantom pain, 329–330
Pharmacogenetics, 90
Pharyngeal phase, of swallowing, 566, 
566
Pharyngeal tonsils, 472, 472, 502
Pharyngotympanic tube. See Auditory 
tube
Pharynx, 501, 502, 503, 560, 560, 565
muscles of, 565
regions of, 502, 503, 565
Phenobarbital, 41
Phenylephrine, 317
Pheochromocytoma, 381
Pheomelanin, 137
Pheromones, 140
Phlebotomist, 409
Phosphagen system, 216
Phosphate, 53, 539, 548t, 550–552
Phosphate buffer system, 552
Phospholipids, 44, 46, 47, 600
absorption and digestion of, 584
in plasma membrane, 65, 65–66
transport and processing of, 601, 602
Phosphorus, 32, 33t, 148, 603, 604t
Photoaging, 141
Photopia, 330
Photopic vision, 352
Photopsin, 350, 351, 353
Photopupillary reflex, 349
Photoreceptors, 344, 350–353, 351–353, 
356
Phylloquinone. See Vitamin K
Physical barriers, immune, 477
Physiology, 8–13. See also specific 
­processes
characteristics of life in, 9–10
comparative, 8
definition of, 3, 8
essential life functions in, 8–10
homeostasis in, 10–13
negative feedback in, 11
positive feedback in, 12
subdisciplines of, 8
variations in, 13
Pia mater
brain, 289, 290
spinal cord, 272, 275
Pigment epithelium, of retina, 350, 351
Pilocarpine, 317
Pineal gland, 288, 296, 296, 362, 373
Pineal sand, 373
Pinna (auricle), 335–336, 336
Pinocytic vesicles, 74, 75, 436
Pinocytosis, 74, 74–75
Pitch, 342–343
Pituitary dwarfism, 366
Pituitary gland, 288, 362, 367–372
anatomy of, 367–368, 369
in childbirth, 662–663
embryonic development of, 368, 368
hormones of, 369, 370–371
hypothalamic control of, 367,  
371, 372
in lactation, 665
lobes of, 368, 369
negative feedback inhibition of, 371
in ovarian cycle, 653–655
positive feedback control of, 371
Pituitary stalk, 294, 368, 368, 369
Placenta, 641, 681–683, 682
blood flow of, 683
development of, 683
endocrine function of, 683t
expulsion of, 663, 664
functions of, 683t
Placental nutrition, 681–683, 683t
Placental phase, of pregnancy, 683
Placental sinus, 682, 683
Placental stage
of childbirth, 664
of labor, 663
Planes, anatomical, 15, 15, 16
Planes of section, 97–98
Plantar flexion, 191, 191
Plaques
atherosclerotic, 423, 424, 460
senile, 269, 269
Plasma, 113, 390–392, 391, 549
composition of, 391–392, 392t
as percentage of whole blood, 391
proteins in, 391–392, 392t, 613t
separation form formed elements, 391, 
391
viscosity of, 392
Plasma cells, 484, 485, 490, 490
Plasma (cell) membrane, 14, 63, 63, 65, 
65–66
extracellular face of, 65
functions of, 65
intracellular face of, 65
lipids of, 65–66
muscle fiber (sarcolemma), 204, 204
permeability of, 70
proteins of, 65, 66, 66
transport across, 70–75, 71
Plasmin, 407
Plate(s)
cribriform, 333, 334, 502
epiphyseal, 154, 154–155
nail, 138, 138
pterygoid, 230, 230–231
Platelet(s), 113, 113, 388, 391, 391, 
405– 409
functions of, 390, 405
in hemostasis, 405, 406– 409
in inflammation, 480
open canalicular system of, 405, 406
as percentage of whole blood, 391
production of, 392–393, 406, 406
structure of, 405, 406
Platelet count, 390t, 404
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), 407
Platelet plugs, 405, 407
Pleura, 19, 501, 505–506, 507
Pleural cavity, 19, 19t, 501, 506, 507
Pleural fluid, 506
Pleurisy, 506
Plexuses. See Nerve plexuses; Vascular 
plexuses; specific types
Plural forms, of medical terms, 26, 26t
Pluripotent stem cells, 117
Pneumonia, 520
Pneumothorax, 506
Podocytes, 530, 532, 535, 538
Polar body
first, 651, 652, 674, 677
second, 651, 652, 677
Polar covalent bonds, 37, 37, 38t
Polarized membrane, 262
Polycythemia, 403
Polydipsia, 381
Polygonal cells, 98, 98
Polymer(s), 42
nucleic acids as, 51
protein as, 48
Polymerization, 42, 42
Polyphagia, 381
Polysaccharides, 43, 43, 44t
Polyspermy, 674–675, 675
Polysynaptic reflex arc, 280
Polyunsaturated fats, 45
Polyunsaturated fatty acids, 45
Polyuria, 381, 547
Pons, 287, 288, 294, 295, 296
in auditory pathway, 343–344
in equilibrium, 340–341
micturition center of, 546–547
in respiratory control, 502, 514, 514
Popliteal lymph nodes, 468
Popliteal region, 18
Portal system, 437, 437, 458
hepatic, 456– 458
hypophyseal, 368, 369
Position, anatomical, 15
Positive feedback, 12
in childbirth, 12, 12, 662–663
in endocrine system, 366, 371
in harmful processes, 12
Positron emission tomography (PET), 4, 
5, 6, 34, 296
Postabsorptive state, 614, 615
Postcentral gyrus, 287, 301, 304
Posterior, 15, 26t, 27
Posterior chamber, of eye, 346, 347, 347
Posterior fontanel, 167, 167
Posterior interventricular sulcus, 419, 421
Posterior nasal apertures, 163, 164, 501, 
501
Posterior pituitary gland
anatomy of, 368, 369
embryonic development of, 368, 368
hormones of, 369, 370–371
Postganglionic fibers, 311, 311, 312, 314
Postganglionic neurons, 311, 312, 313
Postovulatory (luteal) phase, 653, 654, 655
Postpartum period, 663
Postsynaptic neuron, 266, 267
Potassium
in action potential, 262–263, 263
balance of, 550–551
body percentage of, 32, 33t
in cardiac physiology, 432, 551
cardiovascular effects of, 432
deficiency of, 551
dietary, 604t
excess of, 432, 551
in membrane polarization/potentials, 
261–262, 262
renal reabsorption of, 539
urine content of, 548t
Potassium chloride, 35t
Potential energy, 54–55
Power stroke, of myosin, 212, 213
Prebone (osteoid) tissue, 153
Precentral gyrus, 287, 302–303, 303, 304
Precipitation, by antibodies, 491
Precision in terminology, 25
Preembryonic stage, 674, 676–680, 676t
cleavage in, 676t, 677, 677–678
embryogenesis in, 679–680, 680
implantation in, 678, 678–679
Prefixes, 25
Prefrontal cortex, 297, 299, 302, 303
Preganglionic fibers, 311, 311, 312, 314
Preganglionic neurons, 310–311, 312, 313
Pregnancy, 661–662
breast changes in, 645
circulatory system in, 661
dating of, 661
digestive system in, 662
ectopic, 679
genetic counseling in, 700
maternal age in, 667
metabolism and nutrition in, 662, 
681–683
placental phase of, 683
postpartum changes after, 663
prevention of, 690–691
respiratory system in, 661
trimesters of, 661, 675–676, 689t
trophoblastic phase of, 681
urinary system in, 661
uterine growth in, 662
weight gain in, 662
Pregnancy test, 678–679
Premature infants, 692–693
Premenstrual phase, 654, 655, 656
Premolars, 564, 564–565
Prenatal development, 674–689
embryonic stage of, 673, 676t, 
­680–687, 685
fetal stage of, 676t, 685–686, 687
major events of, 689t
major stages of, 675–676, 676t
nutrition and, 662, 681–683
preembryonic stage of, 674, 676–680, 
676t
study of (embryology), 673
Prenatal nutrition, 662, 681–683
Prenatal testing, 693
Prepuce
female, 640, 643, 643
male, 631, 635–636, 636
Presbyopia, 349–350, 356
Pressure gradient, and gas exchange, 517
Pressure receptors, 328
Pressure sores, 122
Presynaptic neuron, 266, 266–267
Primary auditory cortex, 302, 304, 344
Primary cilium, 67
Primary gustatory cortex, 302
Primary marrow cavity, 154
Primary motor cortex, 303, 304
Primary olfactory cortex, 333
Primary oocytes, 651, 652
Primary ossification center, 154, 154
Primary ovarian follicles, 639, 652,  
653, 654
Primary response, in humoral immunity, 
491, 491
Primary sensory areas, 301, 302, 303
Primary sex organs, 630
Primary somatosensory cortex, 302, 341
Primary spermatocyte, 649, 649–650
Primary visual cortex, 302, 304,  
353, 354
Prime mover muscles, 225
Primipara, 663
Primitive groove, 679, 680
Primitive gut, 684, 686
Primordial follicles, 639, 652, 653, 654
Principal piece, of sperm, 650, 650
Processes of bone, 159, 159t
condylar, 162, 166
coracoid, 175, 176, 192
coronoid, 162, 166, 177, 178, 193
inferior articular, 170, 171, 172
mastoid, 162, 163, 164
scapular, 159
spinous, 169, 170, 171, 172
   INDEX      I-20  

styloid
of radius, 177, 178
of temporal bone, 162, 163, 164
superior articular, 170, 171, 172, 172
transverse, 169, 170, 171, 172–173
xiphoid, 173
zygomatic, of temporal bone, 162, 164
Products
of chemical reactions, 55
of enzyme reactions, 50
Progeria, 698, 698
Progesterone, 46, 379, 639, 645, 653
in childbirth, 662
in implantation, hCG and, 678–679
in menstrual cycle, 654, 656–657
in ovarian cycle, 655
permissive effect with estrogen, 365
in trophoblastic nutrition, 681
Progestin, 690
Programmed cell death, 81, 122–123, 
478, 478
Projection pathways
for equilibrium, 340–341
for hearing, 343–344
for olfaction, 333
for taste, 333
for vision, 353–354, 354
Prolactin, 370, 372, 665
Prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH), 371
Proliferative phase, of menstrual cycle, 
654, 655–656, 656
Pronation, 190–191, 191, 236–237
Prone, definition of, 15
Prophase
in meiosis, 648
in mitosis, 87–89, 88
Proplatelets, 406, 406
Propranolol, 317
Proprioception, 309
Proprioceptors, 303, 328
Prostaglandin(s), 479
Prostaglandins, 480– 481
Prostate, 631, 635
Prostate cancer, 635
Prostate diseases, 635
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 635, 650
Prostatic fluid, 650
Prostatic hyperplasia, benign, 635
Prostatic urethra, 545, 545–546, 631, 633
Proteasomes, 81
Protein(s), 42, 47–51
absorption and digestion of, 559, 560, 
583–585, 584
absorptive state, 615
aging and, 699
carrier, 73
channel, 65
composition of, 48, 48– 49
conformation of, 50
denaturation of, 51
dietary, 601–603
calories from, 598
complete, 602
incomplete, 602
plant vs. meat, 602–603
requirements for, 598t, 601–602
sources of, 602–603
enzymes as, 50–51 (See also 
Enzymes)
fibrous, 49, 49–50
functions of, 48t, 601
globular, 49–50
hydrogen bonds of, 37–38
integral, 65
membrane, 65, 66, 66
metabolism of, 611–612, 612, 613t
motor, 256
origin of word, 47
peptide bonds of, 48, 48– 49
peripheral, 65
plasma, 391–392, 392t, 613t
postabsorptive state, 615
processing of, 84
protective, 478
receptor, 66, 66
secretion of, 84, 85
shapes of, 49, 49–50
synthesis of, 51, 82–84, 83, 85
Prothrombin, 407, 408
Prothrombin activator, 407, 408
Proton(s), 33, 33–34
Proton acceptor, base as, 40
Proton donor, acid as, 40
Protraction, 189, 189
mandible, 189, 229
scapular, 189, 234–235
Provitamins, 603
Proximal, 26t
Proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), 531, 
531, 532, 533, 539–541
Prozac (fluoxetine), 317
Pseudopods, 69, 69, 74, 405, 406, 477
Psychopharmacology, 317
Pterygoid plates, 230, 230–231
Puberty
definition of, 637
female, 637, 643, 645
male, 637
Pubic region, 16, 17, 18
Pubic symphysis, 180, 181, 185, 631, 
640, 643
Public health nurse, 494
Pulled hamstring, 224, 242
Pulmonary circuit, 416, 416, 445, 445
Pulmonary disorders. See Respiratory 
­disorders
Pulmonary function tests, 513, 513–514
Pulmonary surfactant, 508, 692–693
Pulmonary trunk, 416, 416, 417, 419, 422, 
445, 445
Pulmonary valve, 421, 422
Pulmonary ventilation, 510–516
blood gases and, 519
expiration in, 510–513, 511, 512
inspiration in, 510–512, 511, 512
measurements of, 513, 513–514
mechanics of, 510–513, 511
muscles in, 512, 512–513
neonatal, 691–692
neural control of, 514, 514
pregnancy and, 661
pressure and airflow in, 510, 511
Pulp, of tooth, 564, 565
Pulp cavity, of tooth, 564, 565
Pumps
skeletal muscle, 443, 443– 444, 471
sodium-potassium, 73, 262
thoracic, 444, 471
Pupil, 315, 315, 346, 346, 349
Pupillary constrictor, 349
Pupillary dilator, 349
Purkinje cells, 256
Purkinje fibers, 428
Pus, 479
P wave, 429, 429– 431, 431
Pyelitis, 546
Pyelonephritis, 546
Pyloric glands, 569, 569
Pyloric part, of stomach, 568, 568
Pylorus, 568, 568
Pyramid(s)
of kidney, 528, 529
of medulla oblongata, 293, 294
Pyramidal cells, 256
Pyridoxine, 604t
Pyrogens, 480– 481
Pyruvate, 606, 606–607
Pyuria, 547
Q
QRS complex, 429, 429– 430, 431
Quadrants, of abdomen, 16, 17
Quadrate lobe, of liver, 575, 576
Quadriplegia, 274
Quick reflexes, 278
R
Radial notch, 177, 178
Radiation
heat loss via, 620
infrared, 620
ionizing, 34
as teratogen, 694
ultraviolet (See Ultraviolet radiation)
Radioactive decay, 34
Radioactivity, 34
Radiograph, 4
Radiography, 4, 4–5, 34
Radioisotopes, 34
Radiologic anatomy, 4
Radiologic technologists, 4, 27
Radiologists, 4
Radiotherapy, 34
Ramus (rami)
of mandible, 162, 166
of spinal nerves, 276–277
Ranvier, nodes of, 255, 259–260, 265–266
Reabsorption, tubular (renal), 534, 534, 
539–541
Reactants, 55
Reaction phase, in immunity, 488, 488
Reactions, chemical. See Chemical 
­reactions
Receptive field, 326, 326
Receptor(s), 11. See also specific types
ANS, 314, 314t
hormone, 365, 365
protein, 66, 66
reflex arc, 278
sensory, 325–327
stretch, 514 (See also Stretch 
­receptors)
Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 74, 74–75
Recognition, in immunity, 488, 488,  
489, 490
Recognition systems, for iris, 324
Recommended daily allowance (RDA), 
598, 604t
Recovery stroke, of myosin, 213
Rectal examination, digital, 635
Rectum, 560, 588, 588, 631, 640
Rectus sheath, 232
Red blood cell(s). See Erythrocyte(s)
Red blood cell count, 390t, 404
Red bone marrow, 151, 152
aging and, 494
B-cell maturation in, 484, 485
distribution of, 152
hemopoiesis in, 148, 393
as lymphatic organ, 468
T-cell production in, 484, 484
Red–green color blindness, 353
Red muscles, 217
Redness, in inflammation, 479
Reducing agent, 56
Reduction, 56, 56t
Reduction division. See Meiosis
Referred pain, 329, 330
Reflex(es)
absence, in brain death, 9
blink, 138, 328
cough, 504
crossed-extension, 280
defecation, 590
definition of, 278
flexor (withdrawal), 280, 280
gastrocolic, 590
micturition, 546–547
patellar, 279, 279–280
photopupillary, 349
properties of, 278
somatic, 278–280
spinal, 271, 278
stretch, 279, 279–280
tendon, 280
visceral, 278, 310, 310
Reflex arc, 278–279
autonomic (visceral), 310, 310
intersegmental, 280
monosynapatic, 279, 279–280
polysynaptic, 280
Refraction, 349
Refractory period
in action potential, 264
in male sexual response, 659
Regeneration, 122, 252, 258
Regenerative cells, of stomach, 569
Region(s), of body, 16–18, 16–18
Regional anatomy, 3
Registered dietitian (RD), 624
Rehydration, 549, 550
Relaxation, muscle, 213, 213
Releasing hormones, 371, 372
Remodeling, bone, 155
Renal autoregulation, 536–538
Renal calculus, 545
Renal circulation, 455, 456, 457
Renal clearance, 540–541
Renal columns, 528, 529
Renal corpuscle, 530, 531, 532,  
533, 534
Renal cortex, 528, 529, 531, 533
Renal insufficiency, 543, 553
Renal medulla, 528, 529, 531, 533
Renal papillae, 528–529, 533
Renal pelvis, 529, 529, 544
Renal pyramids, 528, 529
Renal sinus, 528, 529
Renal tubules, 101, 101t, 530, 531–532, 
531–533
reabsorption in, 534, 534, 539–541
secretion in, 534, 534, 540–541, 
552
Renin, 536, 537
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone (RAA) 
system, 378, 536, 537
Repair, tissue, 122
Replication, DNA, 86, 87
Replicative senescence, 698
Repolarization, 263
Reposition, of thumb, 191
Reproduction, 10
sexual
essentials of, 629–630
genetic diversity from, 647
meiosis in, 647, 648
Processes of bone (continued)
I-21      INDEX

Reproductive hormones, 379. See also 
specific hormones
Reproductive system, 21, 22, 24, 628–671
aging and, 667
autonomic effects in, 316t
effects on other systems, 668
female (See Female reproductive 
­system)
functions of, 629
gametogenesis in, 647
male (See Male reproductive system)
meiosis in, 647, 648
sexually transmitted diseases of, 660
sexual response (function) in, 
­657–659
urinary system association with, 526
Reproductive tract, female, 639–645, 641
Residual volume (RV), 513, 513
Resistance, to blood flow, 439– 440
Resistance arteries, 435
Resistance exercise, 218, 697–698
Resistance stage, in stress response, 382
Resorption, 155
Respiration
aerobic (See Aerobic respiration)
neonatal, 691–692
pulmonary (See Pulmonary 
­ventilation)
Respiratory acidosis, 519, 552
Respiratory alkalosis, 519, 552
Respiratory bronchioles, 508, 509
Respiratory control nuclei, 502
Respiratory cycle, 510, 511
Respiratory disorders
asthma, 483, 508, 514
chronic bronchitis, 514, 515
chronic obstructive pulmonary 
­diseases, 515, 520
emphysema, 514, 515
hypoxia, 515, 520
lung cancer, 515, 515
obstructive, 513–514, 515
pneumonia, 520
pneumothorax, 506
restrictive, 513–514
Respiratory distress syndrome, infant, 
692–693
Respiratory epithelium, 503
Respiratory failure, 520
Respiratory membrane, 508, 509, 517
Respiratory muscles, 512, 512–513
Respiratory rhythm, 519
Respiratory system, 21, 23, 24, 499–524
aging and, 520
altitude and, 518
anatomy of, 500–509, 501
autonomic effects in, 316t
cilia of, 67
conducting zone of, 507
effects on other systems, 521
functions of, 500
gas exchange in, 500, 516–519
neural control of, 514, 514
pH (acid–base) control by, 500, 
519, 552
physiology of, 510–519
pregnancy and, 661
pulmonary ventilation in, 510–516
respiratory zone of, 507–508
smoking and, 515
Respiratory therapist, 520
Respiratory volumes and capacities, 513, 
513–514, 520
Respiratory zone, 507–508
Response, in feedback loop, 11
Resting-and-digesting state, 312
Resting membrane potential (RMP), 
­261–262, 262, 428
Restrictive lung disorders, 513–514
Reticular fibers, 107, 108, 108t, 131, 132
Reticular formation, 293
Reticular layer, of dermis, 132
Reticular tissue, 107, 108, 108t
Reticulocytes, 397, 397
Retina, 344, 346, 346, 348, 349–353, 
351, 352
aging and, 356
histology of, 350–351, 351
ophthalmoscopic examination of, 
348, 348
Retinaculum
extensor, 242
flexor, 237, 238
Retinal, 351
Retraction (movement), 189, 189, 229
Retroperitoneal organs, 20, 21, 528, 562
Reversible reactions, 55
Rh blood group, 398–399
Rheumatism, 158
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 158, 158, 699
Rheumatoid factor, 158
Rheumatologist, 158
Rh-negative, 398
Rhodopsin, 350, 351–352
Rh-positive, 398
Riboflavin, 603, 604t
Ribonuclease, 578
Ribonucleic acid. See RNA
Ribose, 51
Ribosomal RNA, 82–84
Ribosomes, 63, 78, 80
Rickets, 135, 149
Right atrioventricular valve, 420, 421, 422
Right atrium, 419, 420, 420, 422
“Right-brained,” 304–305, 305, 353
Right bundle branch, 428
Right lower quadrant (RLQ), 16, 17
Right rotation, 190
Right upper quadrant (RUQ), 16, 17
Right ventricle, 419, 420, 421, 422
Rigor mortis, 214
RNA, 51, 80
digestion of, 578
DNA transcription to, 82, 83
messenger (See Messenger RNA)
ribosomal, 82–84
transfer, 83, 84
translation of, 82–84, 83
Rods, 350–353, 351–352, 356
Root(s)
of hair, 136, 137
of penis, 631, 637
of spinal nerve, 272, 275–276, 
276, 277
of tongue, 564
of tooth, 564, 565
Root, word, 25
Root canal of tooth, 564, 565
Rootlets, of spinal nerve, 271, 275, 276
Root sheath, of hair follicle, 136, 137
Rotation, 190, 190
Rotator cuff, 176, 192, 224, 235, 
236, 244t
Rotavirus, 574
Rough endoplasmic reticulum, 63, 78–80, 
79
Round window, 336
Ruffled border, of osteoclast, 148, 149
Rugae, gastric, 568, 568, 569
Rust, 56
S
Saccule, 338, 338–341, 339
Sacral region, 18, 271
Sagittal plane, 15, 15, 16
Sagittal sinuses, superior, 450
Saliva, 565
Salivary amylase, 565, 583, 584
Salivary duct, 563
Salivary glands, 560, 560, 565, 565
nerve supply to, 314
salivation by, 565
Salmonella, 574
Saltatory conduction, 265, 265–266
Salts, 35
Salty taste, 332
Sarcolemma, 204, 204, 208
Sarcoma, osteosarcoma, 156
Sarcomeres, 205, 206, 207
contraction of, 211–213, 213
relaxation of, 213, 213
Sarcoplasm, 204, 208
Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 204, 204–205
Satellite cells, 258
Satiety (appetite), 617–618
Saturated fats, 45, 600
Saturated fatty acids, 44– 45, 45, 601
Scalae, 341, 341–342, 343
Scapular muscles, 236
Scapular region, 18
Scarification, 122
Scars, 122
Scars, keloid, 122
Schizophrenia, 317
Schwann cells, 255, 258–260, 259, 329
Sciatic notch
greater, 180, 181
lesser, 180
Sclera, 346, 346, 351
Scleral venous sinus, 347, 347
Scoliosis, 169, 169
S cones, 353, 353
Scotopic vision, 351, 353, 356
Scrotum, 631, 632, 633–634, 634
Sebaceous glands, 119, 119, 129, 137, 
138, 139, 140
Sebum, 140
Secondary marrow cavity, 154
Secondary oocyte, 651, 652, 675, 677
Secondary ossification center, 154, 154
Secondary ovarian follicles, 639, 652, 
653, 654
Secondary response, in humoral immunity, 
491, 491– 492
Secondary sex organs, 630
Secondary spermatocyte, 649, 650
Second-degree burns, 134
Second gap phase, in cell cycle, 86, 86
Second heart sound, 432
Second messengers, 365, 365
Second polar body, 651, 652, 677
Second stage, of labor, 663
Second trimester, of pregnancy, 675, 689t
Secretin, 572, 572, 578, 615
Secretion, 118–119, 119. See also specific 
secretions and organs
Secretory cells, of breast, 644
Secretory phase, of menstrual cycle, 654, 
655, 656, 656
Secretory vesicles, 63, 77, 80, 118, 436
Sections, histological, 97, 97–98
Sections, of body, 15, 16
Segment(s), of limb, 18
Segmental bronchi, 507
Segmentation, of small intestine, 582, 582
Selective permeable membrane, 70
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 317
Selenium, 35
Self antigens, 488
Self-tolerant T cells, 484
Self vs. non-self, 482– 483
Sella turcica, 162, 163, 164, 367
Semen, 634, 635, 647, 650–651, 658–659
Semenogelin, 650–651
Semicircular ducts, 336, 338, 338, 
­339–340, 340
Semilunar valves, 421, 431
Seminal fluid (semen), 634, 635, 647, 
650–651
Seminal vesicles, 631, 634, 650
Seminiferous tubules, 379, 379, 632, 
­632–633
cross section of, 649
spermatogenesis in, 647–650, 649
Senescence, 696–700. See also Aging
Senile plaques, 269, 269
Sensation, 325
brain function in, 301
skin, 129
somatic, 298
Sense organs, 324–359. See also specific 
organs
Senses
chemical, 331–335
general, 301, 327–331
special, 301, 327
Sensorineural deafness, 355, 356
Sensory adaptation, 327
Sensory areas, 301, 302, 303
Sensory association areas, 301, 302, 303
Sensory function, of nervous system, 253
Sensory homunculus, 301
Sensory information, types of, 326–327
Sensory (afferent) nerve fibers, 278
Sensory (afferent) neurons, 257, 257, 326, 
326
Sensory receptor(s), 325–327. See also 
specific types
for chemical senses, 331
classification of, 327
for general senses, 328, 328–329
information from, 326–327
simple nerve endings as, 325, 328, 
328–329
Sensory transduction
definition of, 350
vision, 350–353, 351
Septum (septa)
interatrial, 421
intermuscular, 223
interventricular, 417, 420, 421
median, of penis, 636
nasal, 164–165, 501, 502
testicular, 632, 632
Serine protease (PSA), 635, 650
Serotonin, 267, 317, 406, 570, 570t
Serous fluid, 120, 120
Serous glands, 119
Serous membranes (serosa), 18–19, 19t, 
120, 120
digestive tract, 561, 561, 562
esophageal, 566
meninges, 19, 19t
mesenteries, 20, 20–21
pericardial, 19
peritoneal, 19t, 20, 20–21, 562
pleural, 19t, 505–506
small intestine, 580
uterine, 641
   INDEX      I-22  

Serum, 391
Sesamoid bones, 179, 183
Set point, 11, 481, 481
Sex, as physiological variation, 13
Sex cells. See Gametes
Sex chromosomes, 647
Sex drive (libido), 637, 667
Sex hormones, 379. See also specific 
­hormones
Sex organs, 630
Sexual cycle, 653, 654. See also 
Menstrual cycle; Ovarian 
cycle
Sexual dimorphism, of pelvis (skeleton), 
179–180
Sexual intercourse, 657
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), 660
Sexual reproduction. See also Female 
reproductive system; Male 
reproductive system
essentials of, 629–630
genetic diversity from, 647
meiosis in, 647, 648
Sexual response (function), 657–659
female, 657–659
anatomical foundation of, 
­657–658
orgasm in, 659
male, 657–659
anatomical foundation of, 
­657–658
orgasm in, 658–659
refractory period of, 659
Shaban, Nabil, 52
Shaft
of femur, 181, 181
of fibula, 182
of hair, 136, 137
of long bone, 151, 151–152
of penis, 631, 635
of tibia, 182
Shaken baby syndrome, 289
Shell temperature, 620, 622
Shigella, 574
Shinsplints, 224
Shock
anaphylactic, 483
circulatory, 444
spinal, 274
Shock wave lithotripsy, 545
Short bones, 152
Short-wavelength (S) cones, 353, 353
Shoulder
bursae of, 192
joint of, 186, 192, 192
muscles acting on, 234–235, 234–235
Shoulder girdle. See Pectoral girdle
Shunt, 437, 437, 687
Sickle-cell disease, 396, 396
Sight, sense of. See Vision
Sigmoid colon, 560, 562, 588, 588
Signal conduction, in neurons, 264, 
­264–267, 265
Simple diffusion, 71, 71
Simple nerve endings, as sensory receptors, 
325, 328, 328–329
Simple sugars, 42
Single covalent bond, 37, 38t
Singular forms, of medical terms, 26, 26t
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 427, 427– 428
Sinuses, 159, 159t
carotid, 449
coronary, 419, 423, 423
dural, 289, 290, 450, 451
ethmoid, 161, 161, 164
frontal, 161, 161, 162, 502
lactiferous, 644, 645
maxillary, 161, 161
medullary (lymph node), 475
paranasal, 161, 503
placental, 682, 683
renal, 528, 529
sagittal, superior, 450
scleral venous, 347, 347
sphenoid, 161, 161, 162
straight, 451
transverse, 450, 451
Sinusoids
bone marrow, 406
hepatic, 458, 575, 576
Situs inversus, 9
Situs perversus, 9
Skeletal muscle(s), 115, 116, 116t
action of, 225
attachments of, 222–225, 223
compartments of, 222, 223
connective tissue of, 222–225, 223
contractions (See Skeletal muscle 
­contraction)
coordinated action of groups, 225–226
development of, 687
endurance of, 216
excitation of, 210–211, 211
fatigue of, 216
fibers (See Skeletal muscle fibers)
functions of, 203
hypertrophy of, 121
metabolism of, 215–217
nerve relationship with, 207, 207–209, 
208
physiology of, 210–221
relaxation of, 213, 213
rigor mortis of, 214
strength and conditioning of, 218
striations of, 115, 116, 203, 203, 206, 
206–207
Skeletal muscle contraction, 211–217
concentric, 215
eccentric, 215
energy for, 215–217
isometric, 215
isotonic, 215
sarcomere appearance in, 213, 213
sliding filament model of, 211–213, 
212
stimulus intensity and, 214, 215
whole-muscle, 214–215
Skeletal muscle fibers, 203, 203–207
bundles of, 222, 223
fast-twitch, 217
physiological classes of, 217
shape of, 204
slow-twitch, 217
structure of, 204, 204–205
Skeletal muscle pump, 443, 443– 444, 471
Skeletal system, 23, 24, 146–200. See also 
Bone(s)
adaptations to bipedalism, 168, 181, 
193, 195
aging and, 196
bones of, 160, 160
components of, 147
effects on other systems, 197
functions of, 147–148
Skeleton, 160
appendicular, 160, 160, 175–184
axial, 158–174, 160
sexual dimorphism in, 179–180
Skin, 128–135
absorption through, 131
accessory organs of, 129, 136–140
aging and, 141
collagen of, 117, 131–132
development of, 686–687
epithelial tissue of, 103
functions of, 128–129
glands of, 138–140, 139
healing (repair) of, 123
immune function of, 128–129, 477
nonverbal communication by, 129
pregnancy and, 661
sensation in, 129
structure of, 128, 129, 130–132
thermoregulation by, 129
transpiration via, 549, 549
ultraviolet radiation and, 134, 
135, 141
Skin cancer, 134, 134, 141
Skin color, 132–135, 133
Skull, 160–163, 161–167
bone markings of, 159
bones associated with, 167
cavities of, 161
infant, 167, 167
intramembranous ossification of, 153
Skullcap (calvaria), 165
Sleep, melatonin and, 373
Sliding filament model, of muscle 
­contraction, 211–213, 212
Slow-twitch fibers, 217
Small arteries, 435
Small-cell carcinoma, 515
Small intestine, 560, 560, 562, 579–582
absorption in, 558
blood supply to, 455, 456
endocrine function of, 380
epithelial tissue of, 101, 101t, 102, 
102t
gastric regulation by, 572, 572
gross anatomy of, 579–580, 580
length and diameter of, 579
mesenteries associated with, 562, 562
microscopic anatomy of, 580–581, 
581
motility of, 582, 582
nerve supply to, 314
peristalsis in, 582, 582
secretions of, 582
segmentation of, 582, 582
surface area of, 580
venous drainage of, 457
villi of, 580–581, 581
Smallpox vaccine, 492
Small veins, 437
Smell (olfaction), 333–334
aging and, 356
anatomy of, 333, 334
brain function in, 297–298, 301
loss of (anosmia), 334
projection pathways of, 333
respiratory function and, 500
“Smelling salts,” 333
Smoking, 515
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum, 63, 80
of muscle fiber, 204, 204–205
Smooth muscle(s), 115, 116, 116t, 220, 
220–221
esophageal, 566
visceral, 221
Smooth muscle tone, 221
Sodium
in action potential, 262–263, 263
atomic structure of, 33
balance of, 550–551
body percentage of, 33t
deficiency of, 25, 551
dietary, 603, 604t
excess of, 551
in fertilization, 674
in membrane polarization/potentials, 
261–262, 262
plasma concentration of, 551
renal reabsorption of, 378, 539–541, 
551
urine content of, 548t
Sodium bicarbonate, 35t
Sodium chloride (NaCl), 34, 34–36, 35t, 
603
Sodium hydroxide, 40
Sodium ion(s), 34, 34–35. See also 
Sodium
Sodium–potassium pump, 73, 262
Soft callus, 157
Soft palate, 501, 501, 563, 564
Solute, 39– 40
Solution(s)
acidic, 40
basic (alkaline), 40
concentration of, 40
neutral, 40
tonicity of, 72, 72
Solvent, 39
Solvent drag, 442
Soma (cell body), 115, 115, 254, 255
Somatic motor division, 302
Somatic pain, 329
Somatic reflexes, 278–280
Somatic senses, 298
Somatosensory association area, 302
Somatosensory cortex, primary, 302, 341
Somatosensory (general) senses, 301, 
327–331
Somatostatin, 570, 570t
Somatotropin. See Growth hormone
Somites, 685, 687
Sonogram, 6
Sonography, 6, 6
Sonography, fetal, 6, 676
Sound
frequency of, 342–343, 343
loudness of, 342
transmission of (hearing), 341–343
Sour taste, 332
Spastic paralysis, 209, 274
Special senses, 301, 327. See also specific 
senses
Specific granules, 400
Specific gravity of urine, 547, 548t
Specific immunity. See Adaptive 
­immunity
Specificity
of adaptive immunity, 482
of enzyme, 51
of hormone, 365
Speech center, 304
Speech production, 504, 563
Sperm, 629
acrosomal reaction of, 674, 675
acrosome of, 650, 650, 674
capacitation of, 674
fertilization by, 628, 661, 674–675, 
675, 677
head of, 650, 650
maturation of, 633
migration of, 674
nuclei of, 650, 650
production of, 634, 647–650, 649
storage of, 633
structure of, 650, 650
tail of, 68, 632, 650, 650
I-23      INDEX

Spermatic cord, 632, 633, 634
Spermatids, 649, 650
Spermatocytes
primary, 649, 649–650
secondary, 649, 650
Spermatogenesis, 647–650, 649
Spermatogonia, 649, 649
Spermatozoon (sperm cell), 650. See also 
Sperm
Sperm count, 650
Spermicides, 690
Spermiogenesis, 649, 650
Sphenoid fontanel, 167, 167
Sphenoid sinus, 161, 161, 162
Spheroidal cells, 98, 99
Sphincters, 203
anal
external, 588, 589
internal, 588, 589
esophageal, lower, 566
orbicularis oculi, 227, 229, 230, 233t, 
345, 345
precapillary, 436, 436– 437
pyloric, 568, 568
urethral
external, 545, 546
internal, 545, 546
Sphygmomanometer, 439
Spina bifida, 662
Spinal cord, 254, 270–275
anatomy of, 271, 271–273, 272
ascending tracts of, 273
autonomic regulation by, 315
cervical enlargement of, 271, 271
cross-section of, 272, 272–273
descending tracts of, 273
development of, 684, 687
divisions of, 271
equilibrium function of, 341
functions of, 270–271
gray matter of, 260, 272, 273
lumbar enlargement of, 271, 
271, 277
medullary cone of, 271, 271, 277
meninges of, 271, 272, 274–275
neural integration in, 270
white matter of, 260, 272, 273
Spinal cord injuries, 274
Spinal gating, 330
Spinal nerve(s), 271, 272, 275–277
anatomy of, 275, 276
ganglia of, 275, 276
meningeal branch of, 277
nerve plexuses (See Nerve plexuses)
rami of, 276–277
rootlets of, 271, 275, 276
roots of, 272, 275–276, 276, 277
Spinal reflexes, 271, 278
Spinal shock, 274
Spindle fibers, 88, 89
Spine. See Vertebrae; Vertebral column
Spine of bone, 159, 159t
iliac, anterior superior, 16
scapular, 159, 175, 176
Spiral organ, 341, 342
Spirometer, 513, 513
Spirometry, 513–514
Spleen, 468, 474
anatomical variations in, 6, 9
blood supply to, 455, 456
erythrocyte death in, 397, 474
function of, 474
gross anatomy of, 474, 474
position of, 474, 474
reticular tissue of, 108, 108t
ruptured, 474
venous drainage of, 457, 458
Splenectomy, 474
Sponge, contraceptive, 690
Spongy bone, 111, 148, 149, 150, 152
Spongy urethra, 545, 546, 631, 633
Sports injuries, 224
Squamous alveolar cells, 508, 509
Squamous cell(s), 98, 98, 100
Squamous cell carcinoma, 134, 515
Squamous epithelial tissue, simple, 100, 
101, 101t
Stability, muscles for, 203
Stains, 97
Stalk, of pituitary gland, 368, 369
Starch, 42, 43, 44t
dietary intake of, 599
digestion of, 50, 583, 584
Static equilibrium, 338
Stearic acid, 45
Stem (root), 25
Stem cell(s)
adult, 117
controversy over, 117
embryonic, 117
epidermal, 130, 130
hemopoietic, 393, 397, 397, 402, 402, 
484, 484
induced pluripotent, 117
pluripotent, 117
testicular, 649
transport of, 390
Stereocilia, 338–339, 339, 341, 342
Stereotyped reflexes, 278
Sterility, male, 634
Sterilization, 691
Sternal end, of clavicle, 175
Sternal region, 18
Steroid hormones, 364–365, 364–365, 
377–379
Steroids, 44, 46– 47, 47
Steroids, anabolic, 52
Stomach, 560, 560, 567–573
aging and, 590
blood supply to, 455, 456
endocrine function of, 380, 569, 570
epithelial tissue of, 568–569, 569
gross anatomy of, 567–568, 568
historical perspective on, 567
inflammation of, 573
mesenteries associated with,  
562, 562
microscopic anatomy of, 568–569, 569
motility of, 571
nerve supply to, 314
peristalsis in, 571
position of, 562, 562, 567
protection of, 572–573
regulation of, 571–572, 572
secretions of, 570, 570t
tissue layers of, 568, 569
Stop codon, 84
Straight sinus, 451
“The Strangest Viking” (documentary), 52
Stratum basale, 130, 131
Stratum corneum, 130, 131
Stratum granulosum, 130, 131
Stratum lucidum, 130, 131
Stratum spinosum, 130, 131
Strength, muscle, 218
Stress, 382
Stress fracture, 157
Stressors, 382
Stretch marks, 661
Stretch receptors, 328, 514
Stretch reflex, 279, 279–280
Striae, 661
Striations
cardiac muscle, 115, 116, 219, 220, 
425, 426
skeletal muscle, 115, 116, 203, 203, 
206, 206–207
Stroke, 306
Stroke volume (SV), 431, 432
Structural formula, 36
Structural hierarchy, 14, 14–15
Structure–function relationships, 3
Subarachnoid space, 289, 290
Subcostal line, 16, 17
Subcutaneous fat, 132
Subcutaneous tissue (hypodermis), 128, 
129, 132
Subdural space, 289, 290
Subendocardial conducting network, 
427, 428
Sublingual ducts, 563, 565
Sublingual gland, 560, 565, 565
Submandibular duct, 563, 565
Submandibular gland, 560, 565, 565
Submucosa, 561, 561
of esophagus, 566
of stomach, 568, 569
Substance abuse, 317–318
Substantia nigra, 270, 295
Substrate, 50
Sucrase, 584
Sucrose, 43, 43, 44t, 583, 584, 599
Sudoriferous glands. See Sweat glands
Suffixes, 25
Sugar(s), 42– 43
dietary, 599
digestion of, 583, 584
Sulcus (sulci)
of bone, intertubercular, 176, 177
of brain, 286–287, 291, 297
central, 287, 288, 297, 302
lateral, 287, 291, 298
parieto-occipital, 288, 298
of heart, 421
coronary, 419, 421
interventricular, 419, 421
Sulfur, body percentage of, 33t
Summation, 214
Sunstroke, 623
Superficial, 26t
Superior, 15, 26t
Superomedial, definition of, 26
Superoxide anion, 35
Supination, 190–191, 191, 236–237
Supine, definition of, 15
Supporting cells
in ear, 339, 340, 341
in nervous system (See Neuroglia)
in olfaction, 333, 334
in taste, 331–332, 332
of testes, 632, 633, 649, 649–650
Supportive connective tissue, 111
Suprasternal (jugular) notch, 173
Surface anatomy, 3. See also specific 
anatomy
Surfactant, 508, 692–693
Surgery, exploratory, 4
Surgical methods, of contraception, 691
Sustentocytes (nurse cells), 379, 379, 632, 
633, 649, 649–650
Sutures, 152, 161
coronal, 161, 162, 165, 167
lambdoid, 161, 162, 163, 165, 167
sagittal, 161, 165, 167
squamous, 167
Swallowing, 566, 566
Swallowing center, 566, 566, 571
Swayback, 169
Sweat (sweating), 549, 549, 621
Sweat duct, 130
Sweat glands, 105, 105t, 119, 129, 137, 
138–140, 139, 312
Sweat pores, 129, 130
Sweet taste, 332
Swelling. See Edema
Swollen lymph nodes, 475
Sympathetic chain, 312, 313
Sympathetic division, of ANS, 311–312, 
313
aging and, 318
anatomy of, 312
blood vessel control by, 441, 441
cardiac innervation/regulation by, 429, 
432
drugs affecting, 317–318
in dual innervation, 315, 315
effects of, 316t
functions of, 311
neural pathway of, 311, 313
renal innervation/regulation by, 536, 
538
Symphyses, pubic, 180, 181, 185, 631, 
640, 643
Symptomatic headaches, 330
Synapses, 207, 254, 266, 266–267
aging and, 318
in sympathetic division of ANS, 312
Synaptic cleft, 207, 208, 266, 267
Synaptic delay, 267
Synaptic vesicles, 207, 208, 266, 267
Synarthroses, 185
Syncope, 444
Synergistic effects, of hormones, 366
Synergistic muscles, 225, 225–226
Synovial fluid, 185–186
Synovial joints, 185–188
accessory structures of, 186
classes of, 186–187, 187
movements of, 188–192
abduction, 188–189, 189
adduction, 189, 189
circumduction, 189–190
depression, 189
dorsiflexion, 191, 191
elevation, 189
eversion, 191, 191–192
extension, 188, 188
flexion, 188, 188
hyperextension, 188, 188
inversion, 191, 191–192
opposition (thumb), 187, 191
plantar flexion, 191, 191
pronation, 190–191, 191
protraction, 189, 189
reposition, 191
retraction, 189, 189
rotation, 190, 190
supination, 190–191, 191
zero position, 188
structure of, 185, 185–186
Synovial membrane, 185, 186
Synthesis phase of cell cycle, 86, 86
Synthesis reactions, 55, 55, 56t
Syphilis, 660, 694
Systemic anatomy, 3
Systemic circuit, 416, 416, 446– 447, 
446– 460
Systemic gas exchange, 518–519
Systole, 430– 432, 431
Systolic pressure, 439
   INDEX      I-24  

T
T3 (triiodothyronine), 374
T4 (thyroxine), 364, 374
Table salt. See Sodium chloride
Tactile cells, 130, 130, 328
Tactile corpuscles, 129, 328, 328–329
Tactile discs, 328, 328
Taenia coli, 588, 588
Tail
of breast, 643
of embryo, 685
of myosin molecule, 205, 206
of pancreas, 376
of phospholipids, 46, 47, 65
of sperm, 68, 632, 650, 650
Target cells, of hormones, 365, 365
Tarsal glands, 345
Tarsal region, 17, 18
Tastants, 332
Taste, 301, 331–333, 332, 356
Taste buds, 331–332
Taste cells, 331–332, 332
Taste hairs, 331–332
Taste pore, 332, 332
Tau protein, 269
T-cell count, 493
T-cell recall response, 489
T cells. See T lymphocytes
Tear (lacrimal) glands, 345, 345
Tectorial membrane, 341, 342
Teeth, 560, 560, 564, 564–565, 590
Telomere, 698
Telophase
in meiosis, 648
in mitosis, 87–89, 88
Temperature. See Body temperature
Temporal lobe, 287, 288, 291, 298, 298, 
299, 301, 333
Tendinous cords, 421
Tendinous intersections, 232
Tendon(s), generally, 147, 223, 224
aponeurosis, 224
collagenous fibers of, 107, 107
dense connective tissue of, 109, 109t
Tendon(s), specific
biceps brachii, 192, 193
biceps femoris, 242, 243
calcaneal (Achilles), 217, 228, 243, 
243
extensor digitorum, 239
flexor digitorum profundus, 239
flexor digitorum superficialis, 239
gastrocnemius, 243
hamstring, 242, 243
iliotibial band (tract), 228, 240
patellar (quadriceps), 240, 242
quadriceps femoris, 194, 194
rotator cuff, 236
semimembranosus, 242, 243
semitendinosus, 242, 243
subscapularis, 192
supraspinatus, 192, 236
triceps brachii, 193
Tendon reflex, 280
Tendon sheaths, 238
Teratogens, 694–696
Teratology, 693
Terminal bronchioles, 507, 509
Terminal cisterns, 204, 204–205
Terminal web, 63, 76, 77
Terminology, medical, 24–27, 26t
Tertiary (segmental) bronchi, 507
Tertiary ovarian follicles, 639, 653, 654
Tertiary syphilis, 660
Testes, 362, 630, 631, 632, 632–633
associated structures, 632
barrier for, 649
blood supply to, 456
descent of, 634
development of, 634
endocrine function of, 379
histology of, 379, 379
left vs. right, 633
spermatogenesis in, 647–650, 
649
temperature of, 634
undescended, 634
venous drainage of, 456, 457
Testicles. See Testes
Testosterone, 46, 364, 364, 379
in bone physiology, 156
functions of, 637
secretion of, 637
in spermatogenesis, 649
synergism with FSH, 366
Tetanus, muscle, 155, 214, 428
Tetanus toxin (lockjaw), 209
Tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine), 
364, 374
Texture
mouthfeel, 331
sensation of, 328–329
Thalamus, 288, 291, 294, 295
Thalidomide, 696
Theca, 639, 652, 653
Thermal stability of water, 39
Thermoreceptors, 328, 621
Thermoregulation, 620–624
aging and, 141
behavioral, 622
by blood, 390, 621, 622
definition of, 620
disturbances in, 623
by hypothalamus, 480– 481, 621
negative feedback in, 11, 621
neonatal, 692, 693
by skin, 129
Theta waves, 306
Thiamin, 604t
Thick filaments, 205, 206, 206
Thick segment, of nephron loop, 532, 
533, 540
Thigh, 17, 18
muscles acting on, 240–241, 240–241, 
245t
Thin filaments, 63, 77, 205, 206, 206
Thin segment, of nephron loop, 532, 
533, 540
Third-degree burns, 134
Third stage, of labor, 663
Third trimester, of pregnancy, 675, 
689t
Third ventricle, 290, 291
Thirst, 549, 549, 550
Thoracic aorta, 449, 449, 452
Thoracic cage, 160, 173–174
Thoracic cavity, 19, 19, 19t
development of, 687
lung’s position in, 505, 507
ventilation mechanics in, 510–513, 511
Thoracic curvature, 168, 169
Thoracic duct, 468, 470, 471
Thoracic lymph nodes, 470
Thoracic pressure, 510, 511
Thoracic pump, 444, 471
Thoracic region (chest), 16, 18, 271
arteries of, 452, 452– 454
heart position in, 416, 417
veins of, 452– 454, 453
Thoracolumbar division, of ANS. See 
Sympathetic division, of ANS
Three Rs of immunity, 488, 488– 489
Threshold, 263
Throat. See Pharynx
Thrombocytes. See Platelet(s)
Thromboembolism, 409
Thromboplastin, 407
Thrombopoiesis, 406, 406
Thrombosis, 409, 460
Thrombus, 409
Thumb
opposition of, 187, 191
reposition of, 191
Thymine, 51
Thymopoietin, 375
Thymosin, 375, 473, 484
Thymus, 362, 375, 468, 473, 473
hormones of, 375, 473, 484
infant vs. adult, 375, 375
lymphocyte maturation in, 375, 483, 
484, 484
Thyroid disorders, 374, 381
Thyroid follicles, 373–374, 374
Thyroid gland, 360, 362, 373–375
embryonic development of, 368
gross anatomy of, 373, 374
histology of, 373–375, 374
Thyroid hormone (TH), 156, 360, 366, 
371, 373–374, 611
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 370, 
371, 372
Thyrotropin. See Thyroid-stimulating 
­hormone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 
371, 372
Thyroxine, 364, 374
Tidal volume (TV), 513, 513
Tight junctions, 69, 70
in blood–brain barrier, 292
in capillaries, 436
in stomach, 573
in testes, 649, 649
Tinnitus, 355
Tissue(s), 14, 14. See also specific types
definition of, 96
growth of, 121
lymphatic (See Lymphatic tissue)
primary classes of, 96, 97t
repair of, 122
shrinkage and death of, 122–123
study of, 96–99
Tissue engineering, 117
Tissue (interstitial) fluid, 63, 549
Tissue sections, 97, 97–98
T lymphocytes, 473, 473, 483– 484
in cellular immunity, 487– 489
clonal selection of, 488, 488
cytotoxic, 487– 489, 488, 489
helper, 487– 489, 488, 489, 493
in HIV/AIDS, 493, 493
immunocompetent, 484, 484
life history of, 484
maturation of, 375, 483, 484, 484
memory, 487– 489, 488
migration of, 484, 484
number of (T-cell count), 493
production of, 484, 484
recall response of, 489
self-tolerant, 484
Tobacco use, 515
Toe(s), 17
bones of, 183, 183
Tone
muscle (skeletal muscle), 213
smooth muscle, 221
Tongue, 502, 560, 560, 563, 563–564, 565
anatomy of, 563–564
papillae of, 331, 332, 563–564
taste buds of, 331–332, 332
Tonicity, 72, 72
Tonometer, 347
Tonsil(s), 472, 472
lingual, 332, 472, 472, 502
palatine, 332, 468, 472, 472, 502, 563
pharyngeal, 472, 472, 502
Tonsillar crypts, 472, 472
Tonsillectomy, 472
Tonsillitis, 472
Tooth. See Teeth
Total metabolic rate (TMR), 616
Touch, sense of, 326, 326, 328, 328–329
Touch receptor, 129
Toxic goiter, 374
Toxins, metabolism of, 613t
Toxoplasma, 694–695
Trabeculae
of bone, 149, 150, 152
of penis, 636
of thymus, 473
Trace elements, 32–33, 33t
Trace minerals, 604t
Trachea, 501, 502, 503, 504, 504, 
505, 506
epithelial tissue of, 102, 505
mucociliary escalator of, 505
mucosa of, 102
nerve supply to, 313
Tracts. See also specific tracts
brain, 290
digestive (See Digestive tract)
spinal cord, 260, 273
Transcription, 82, 83
Transdermal absorption, 131
Transducers, sensory organs as, 327
Trans fats, 46, 46, 600
Transfer RNA (tRNA), 83, 84
Translation, 82–84, 83
Transpiration, 549, 549
Transport
active, 71, 73
by blood, 113
carrier-mediated, 73
circulatory, 390
by filtration, 71, 71
gas, 517–519
membrane, 70–75, 71
by osmosis, 71–72, 72
by simple diffusion, 71, 71
tonicity in, 72, 72
vesicular, 73–75, 74
Transporters. See Carrier proteins
Transport vesicles, 84, 85
Transverse arch of foot, 184
Transverse colon, 560, 562, 587, 588
Transverse plane, 15, 15–16, 16
Transverse sinus, 450
Transverse (T) tubules, 204, 204–205
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 289
Treponema pallidum, 660
Tributaries, of veins, 448
Trichromatic vision, 353, 353. See also 
Color vision
Tricuspid valve, 420, 421, 422
Triglycerides, 44– 45, 45
absorption and digestion, 584, 
­585–586
metabolism of, 611, 612
trans fats, 46, 46
transport and processing of, 601, 602
I-25      INDEX

Trigone, 544, 545
Triiodothyronine (T3), 374
Trimesters, of pregnancy, 661, 675–676, 
689t
Tripeptides, 48
Trisomy, 694
Trisomy-13, 694
Trisomy-18, 694
Trisomy-21, 269, 318, 667, 694, 695
Tristearin, 44
Tritium, 34
Trochanter, 159
Trochanters, of femur, 159, 181, 181
Trochlea, of humerus, 176, 177
Trochlear notch, 177, 178
Trophoblast, 677–679, 678
Trophoblastic nutrition, 681
Trophoblastic phase, of pregnancy, 681
Tropomyosin, 205, 206, 212, 213
Troponin, 205, 206, 212, 213
True pelvis, 179
True ribs, 173, 174
Trunk (of body), 16
arteries of, 452, 452– 454
muscles of, 231–232
veins of, 452– 454, 453
Trunk, blood vessel, 448
Trunks, lymphatic, 470, 471
Trypsin, 50, 578, 584, 585
Tryptophan, 364, 602
Tubal ligation, 691
Tubal pregnancy, 679
Tubercle, of bone, 159, 159t
humeral, 176, 177
pelvic, 16
vertebral, 171
Tuberosities, 159, 159t
calcaneal, 183
deltoid, 176, 177
ischial, 180, 181
radial, 177, 178
tibial, 182, 182
Tubular fluid, 534
Tubular reabsorption, 534, 534, 539–541
Tubular secretion, 534, 534, 540–541, 552
Tubules
renal, 101, 101t, 530, 531–532, 
­531–533
reabsorption in, 534, 534, 
­539–541
secretion in, 534, 534, 540–541, 
552
seminiferous, 379, 379, 632, 632–633, 
647–650, 649
transverse (T), 204, 204–205
Tumor(s), malignant. See Cancer
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 489
Tumors, 90
benign, 90
bone, 156
malignant, 90
metastasizing, 90, 474, 475
Tumor-suppressor (TS) genes, 90
Tunica albuginea, 636
Tunica externa, 434, 434
Tunica interna, 433– 434, 434
Tunica media, 434, 434
Tunics, of blood vessels, 433– 434, 434
T wave, 429, 429– 430, 431, 432
Twins, 677–678
Twitch, muscle, 214, 217
Tympanic cavity, 336, 336
Tympanic membrane, 335, 336, 336–337, 
343
Tympanostomy, 337
Type 1 diabetes mellitus, 381
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, 366, 381, 605
Tyrosine, 48, 364
U
Ulcer(s)
decubitus, 122
peptic, 573, 573
Ultrasound (sonography), 6, 6
Ultrasound, fetal, 6, 676
Ultraviolet radiation, and skin, 134, 135, 141
Umami, 333
Umbilical cord, 664, 681, 682, 685, 
687, 688
Umbilical region, 16, 17, 18
Umbilicus, 688
Umbrella cells, 103
Undescended testes, 634
Unipolar neurons, 256, 256
Unmyelinated axons, 259, 264, 264
Unsaturated fats, 45, 600
Unsaturated fatty acids, 45, 45
Upper limb, 17–18, 18
arteries of, 452, 454
bones of, 160, 175–179
development of, 685
muscles acting on, 234, 234–239
veins of, 453, 454– 455
Upper respiratory tract, 501–504, 502
Up the gradient, 71, 73
Uracil, 51
Urea, 31, 548t, 611–612
Uremia, 543, 547
Ureters, 6, 526, 527, 544, 545, 631
Urethra, 526, 527, 545, 545–546
female, 545, 546, 640, 643
male, 545, 545–546, 631, 633, 636
Urethral orifice, external, 545, 545
Urethritis, nongonococcal, 660
Uric acid, 527
Urinary bladder, 526, 527, 544–545, 545, 
631, 640
infection of, 544, 546
tissue engineering of, 117
transitional epithelium of, 544
Urinary incontinence, 315, 553
Urinary system, 21, 23, 24, 525–557
aging and, 553
autonomic effects in, 316t
components of, 526, 527
effects on other systems, 554
functions of, 526–528
nerve supply to, 314
pregnancy and, 661
reproductive system association with, 
526
transitional epithelium of, 103
Urinary system disorders
kidney stones, 545
nephrosclerosis, 536
renal insufficiency, 543
urinary tract infection, 544, 546
Urinary tract infection (UTI), 544, 546
Urine, 534
appearance of, 547
chemical composition of, 547, 548t
distal convoluted tubule and, 541
formation of, 534, 534–544
glomerular filtration in, 534, 
­534–538, 535
tubular reabsorption and secretion 
in, 539–541
water conservation in, 541–542, 542
odor of, 547
organs of production, 526
osmolarity of, 547, 548t
output, and fluid balance, 549, 549
pH of, 547, 548t
properties of, 547, 548t
specific gravity of, 547, 548t
storage and elimination of, 544–548
voiding of, 546–547
volume of, 547
Urogenital diaphragm, 545
Urogenital system, 526
Urologists, 526
Uterine milk, 681
Uterine tubes, 640, 640–641, 641
cilia of, 67, 68, 95, 640, 641
fimbriae of, 639, 640, 640, 641
ligation of, 691
Uterus, 640–641
aging and, 645
body of, 640, 640, 641
cervical cancer of, 642, 642
cervix of (See Cervix)
childbirth and, 662–663
contractions of, 641, 662–663
fetal expulsion from (See Childbirth)
function of, 640
fundus of, 640, 640, 641
growth, in pregnancy, 662
implantation in, 678, 678–679
involution of, 663
ligaments supporting, 641
menstrual cycle and, 655–657
ovarian cycle and, 653–655, 654
sexual response of, 658, 659
wall, layers of, 641, 641
Utricle, 338, 338–341, 339
Uvula, 502, 563, 564
V
Vaccination, 492, 494
Vagina, 641, 642–643
aging and, 645, 667
epithelial tissue of, 104, 104t, 642
exfoliation of, 103, 106
fetal passage through, 663, 664
mucosa of, 104, 104t
pH of, 642
sexual response of, 658, 659
Vaginal orifice, 640, 643, 643
Valence, of ions, 34
Valence electrons, 34
Vallate papillae, 331, 332
Valsalva maneuver, 500, 513, 590, 663
Valves
heart (See Heart valves)
ileocecal, 580, 580, 588
lymphatic vessels, 471, 471
venous, 434, 437, 443, 443– 444
Valvular prolapse, 421
Variable (V) region, of antibody, 
485, 485
Varicose veins, 444, 460, 661
Vasa recta, 529, 530, 531, 542
Vasa vasorum, 434
Vascular layer, of eye, 346
Vascular plexuses, pampiniform, 634
Vascular spasm, 406
Vas deferens. See Ductus deferens
Vasectomy, 633, 691
Vasoconstriction, 440, 481, 536,  
621, 622
Vasoconstrictors, 405, 406
Vasodilation, 440, 480, 621, 622
Vasomotor center, 441, 441
Vasopressin. See Antidiuretic hormone
Vegetative state, persistent, 9
Veins, generally, 433, 437
abdominopelvic region, 456– 458, 457
aging and, 460
blood flow in, 437
fetal, 682, 683, 687, 688
great, 416
head and neck, 450– 452, 451
hemorrhoidal, 460, 588, 588–589, 
661
large, 434, 437
lower limb, 459
major systemic, 447
medium, 434, 437
neonatal, 688, 692
nomenclature for, 448
small, 437
thorax, 452– 454, 453
tributaries of, 448
tunics of, 433– 434
upper limb, 453, 454– 455
varicose, 444, 460, 661
Veins, specific
arcuate, 529, 530, 531
axillary, 447, 451, 453, 455
azygos, 453, 453, 470
basilic, 447, 453, 454– 455
brachial, 447, 453, 454, 455
brachiocephalic, 447, 451, 452, 453
bronchial, 509
cardiac
great, 423, 424
middle, 424
central, of liver, 575–577, 576
central, of retina, 346
cephalic, 447, 453, 454– 455
coronary sinus, 419, 423, 423
cortical radiate, 530, 531
dorsal, of penis, 636
femoral, 447, 448, 459
femoral, deep, 447
fibular (peroneal), 459
gonadal, 447, 456, 457
hepatic, 447, 457, 458
hepatic portal, 458, 576
iliac
common, 447, 456, 457, 459
external, 447, 457, 459
internal, 447, 456, 457
intercostal, 453, 453– 454
interventricular, posterior, 423, 424
jugular
external, 447, 450– 452, 451, 453
internal, 164, 447, 450, 451, 453, 
468, 470
lumbar, ascending, 453, 454, 457
marginal, left, 423, 424
median antebrachial, 455
median cubital, 447, 453
mesenteric
inferior, 457, 458
superior, 457, 458
ovarian, 456, 641
pampiniform plexus, 634
popliteal, 447, 459
pulmonary, 416, 416, 445, 445, 
506, 509
left, 419, 420
right, 419, 420
radial, 447, 453, 455
renal, 447, 448, 456, 457, 527, 529, 
529, 530
   INDEX      I-26  

saphenous
great (long), 447, 459
small (short), 459
splenic, 457, 458, 474, 474
subclavian, 447, 451, 452, 453, 455, 
470, 471, 476
testicular, 456
thyroid
inferior, 374
superior, 374
tibial
anterior, 447, 459
posterior, 447, 459
ulnar, 447, 453, 455
umbilical, 682, 683, 687, 688
vena cava
inferior, 416, 416, 419, 420, 422, 
447, 456, 457, 575–577, 576, 
687, 688
superior, 416, 416, 417, 419, 420, 
422, 443, 447, 452, 453
vertebral, 172, 451, 452
Venous anastomosis, 437
Venous drainage, 423– 424
Venous pooling, 444
Venous return, 443, 443– 444. See also 
Veins
Venous sinuses
coronary, 419, 423, 423
dural, 450, 451
scleral, 347, 347
Venous valves, 434, 437, 443, 443– 444
Ventilation. See Pulmonary ventilation
Ventral, 15, 26t, 27
Ventral respiratory group (VRG), 
514, 514
Ventricles
of brain, 288, 290–292, 291, 294, 296
of heart, 417, 419, 420, 421
blood flow through, 420, 422
contraction and relaxation of, 
430– 432, 431
Ventricular diastole, 431, 432
Ventricular ejection, 431– 432
Ventricular fibrillation, 430
Ventricular systole, 431, 431
Venules, 434, 436, 437, 509
Vertebrae, 160, 168, 168–173
articular processes of, 170
attachment to ribs, 172, 174
body (centrum) of, 169, 170, 171
cervical, 168, 168, 170–172, 171
atlas (C1), 168, 170, 171
axis (C2), 168, 170, 171
axis of rotation, 171
coccygeal, 168, 168, 172, 173
fractures of, 157
general structure of, 169–170, 170
lumbar, 168, 168, 171, 172
regional characteristics of, 170–173
sacral, 168, 168, 172, 172–173
spinous process of, 169, 170
thoracic, 168, 168, 171, 172, 173, 173
transverse process of, 169, 170
Vertebral column, 168, 168–173. See also 
Vertebrae
adaptations to bipedalism, 168
bones of, 160, 168–173
curvatures of, 168–169, 169
development of, 687
function of, 168
Vertebral region, 18
Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 
601, 602
Vesicles, 73–74
clathrin-coated, 85
Golgi, 63, 79, 80
pinocytic, 74, 75, 436
secretory, 63, 77, 80, 118, 436
seminal, 631, 634, 650
synaptic, 207, 208, 266, 267
transport, 84, 85
Vesicular transport, 73–75, 74
Vestibular apparatus, 338
Vestibular bulbs, 643, 643
Vestibular glands
greater, 643, 643, 658
lesser, 643
Vestibular sense. See Equilibrium (sense)
Vestibule
of ear, 336, 338, 338
of oral cavity, 563, 563
of vagina, 643, 643
Vibrissae (guard hairs), 138, 336, 
501, 502
Villi
chorionic, 678, 681–683, 682, 693
intestinal, 580–581, 581
microvilli, 63, 67, 67, 77
Viscera, 18–19, 19t
Visceral motor division, 302, 310. 
See also Autonomic nervous 
system
Visceral motor system. See Autonomic 
nervous system
Visceral muscle, 115, 221
Visceral pain, 329
Visceral pericardium, 416, 418
Visceral peritoneum, 20, 20–21
Visceral reflexes, 278, 310, 310
Viscosity
blood/plasma, 392, 440
definition of, 392
Vision, 344–354
accommodation in, 349, 350
aging and, 349–350, 356
brain function in, 301
color, 351, 353, 353
day (photopic), 352
definition of, 344
disorders of, 355
distance, 350
focusing in, 349–350, 350
generating nerve signal in, 350–353
image formation in, 349–350
monochromatic, 352
near, 350
near point of, 349–350
night (scotopic), 351, 353, 356
peripheral, 353
projection pathway of, 353–354, 354
vitamin A and, 351, 603–604
Visual association area, 302, 353–354
Visual cortex, primary, 302, 304, 353, 354
Visual pigments, 350–351
Vital capacity (VC), 513, 513–514, 520
“Vital force,” 389, 415
Vitamin(s), 603–604
absorption of, 560, 586
deficiency of, 603–604
endogenous synthesis of, 603
excess of, 603, 604
fat-soluble, 584, 586, 603–604, 604t
metabolism of, 613t
nomenclature for, 603
in pregnancy, 662
supplements, 604
water-soluble, 586, 603, 604t
Vitamin A, 156, 351, 586, 603–604, 604t
Vitamin B, 589, 603, 604t
Vitamin B1 (thiamin), 604t
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), 604t
Vitamin B3 (niacin), 604t
Vitamin B5 (pantothenic acid), 604t
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), 604t
Vitamin B7 (biotin), 604t
Vitamin B9 (folic acid), 590, 603, 604t, 
662
Vitamin B12, 403, 570, 586
Vitamin C, 35, 156, 603, 604t
Vitamin D, 129, 135, 156, 196, 527, 586, 
603, 604t, 662
Vitamin E, 35, 586, 603, 604t
Vitamin K, 586, 589, 603, 604t, 662
Vitreous body, 346, 347, 348, 351
Vocal cords, 502, 503, 504, 504
Voice, 504
Voice box. See Larynx
Voiding urine, 546–547
Voltage-gated channel, 262–263
Voluntary muscles, 115, 203
Vomiting, 571
Vulva, 643
W
Warm receptors, 328
Warts, genital, 660
Washington, George, 389
Waste
definition of, 527
dialysis for removal of, 543
excretion of, 118, 526, 527, 540
metabolic, 527
nitrogenous, 527, 539, 543, 547
production of, 526
Water, 39– 40
absorption of, 560, 586
adhesion of, 39
air content of, 516
in body fluids, 40
chemical reactivity of, 39
cohesion of, 39
digestion of, 586
gains and losses, in fluid balance, 
549, 549
hydrogen bonds of, 37, 37
loss, control of, 542
as nutrient, 598t
osmosis of, 71–72, 72
properties of, 39
renal reabsorption of, 539, 541
as solvent, 39
taste of, 333
thermal stability of, 39
Water barrier, epidermal, 129
Water conservation, renal, 534, 534, 
­541–542, 542
Water diuresis, 542
Water-insoluble fiber, 600
Water molecule, 37, 37, 39
Water-soluble fiber, 599–600
Water-soluble vitamins, 586, 603, 604t
Weight-control drugs, 605
Wernicke area, 304, 304, 306
“Wet dreams,” 637
White blood cell count, 390t, 403, 404
White blood cells. See Leukocyte(s)
White fat, 111
White matter, 260
brain, 260, 285, 290, 290, 291
cerebellar, 296, 296
cerebral, 297
spinal cord, 260, 272, 273
White muscles, 217
Whole-muscle contraction, 214–215
Windpipe. See Trachea
Wings, of sphenoid bone, 164
The Wisdom of the Body (Cannon), 11
Wisdom teeth, 564
Withdrawal method, of contraception, 690
Withdrawal (flexor) reflex, 280, 280
Work, energy as capacity to do, 54, 598
Wound healing, 123
Wrist, 17, 18
bones of, 176
joint of, 187
muscles acting on, 237–239, 245t
X
X chromosomes, 647
X-linked traits, 353
X-ray(s), 4, 4–5
Y
Y chromosomes, 647
Yellow bone marrow, 151, 152
Yolk sac, 678, 682, 683, 684, 684–686, 
684–686
Z
Z disc, 204, 206, 206–207
Zero position, 188
Zinc, 590, 604t
Zona fasciculata, 378, 378
Zona glomerulosa, 377–378, 378
Zona pellucida, 652, 653, 674, 674, 677, 
677
Zona reticularis, 378, 378
Zygote, 629, 652, 675, 676t
Veins, specific (continued)
I-27      INDEX


