
The more you study, the better the results. Cengage Learning’s Management 
CourseMate helps you make the most of your study time by accessing 
everything you need to succeed in one place. 
 
• An Interactive eBook with 
highlighting, note taking, and an 
interactive glossary.
• Interactive Learning Tools—
read your textbook, take notes, 
review flashcards, watch videos, and 
take practice quizzes—online with 
CourseMate.
• It’s Affordable—about half the cost 
of a traditional printed textbook.
M A K E  T H E  G R A D E  W I T H  C O U R S E M AT E !   
                  features include:
 
To access additional course materials including CourseMate, please visit 
 www.cengagebrain.com. At the CengageBrain.com home page, enter the ISBN of 
your title (from the back cover of your book) using the search box at the top of the 
page. This will take you to the product page where these resources can be found.

This page intentionally left blank 

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Essentials of 
Strategic Management
Charles W. L. Hill
University of Washington
Gareth R. Jones
Texas A&M University
3rd Edition

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

© 2012, 2009 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form 
or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not 
limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web 
distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval 
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 
United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission 
of the publisher.
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. Windows is 
a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation used herein under 
license. Macintosh and Power Macintosh are registered trademarks of 
Apple Computer, Inc. used herein under license. 
© 2008 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
Cengage Learning WebTutor™ is a trademark of Cengage Learning.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011925165
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-52519-4
ISBN-10: 1-111-52519-6
South-Western
5191 Natorp Boulevard
Mason, OH 45040
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com
Unless a credit line states otherwise, content is the property 
of Cengage Learning.
Essentials of Strategic Management, 
Third Edition
Charles W. L. Hill, Gareth R. Jones
Vice President of Editorial, Business: 
Jack W. Calhoun
Acquisitions Editor: Michele Rhoades
Developmental Editor: Suzanna Bainbridge
Senior Editorial Assistant: Ruth Belanger
Marketing Manager: Jon Monahan
Associate Content Project Manager:
Jana Lewis
Media Editor: Rob Ellington
Frontlist Buyer, Manufacturing:
Arethea Thomas
Marketing Communications Manager:
Jim Overly
Production Service: 
S4Carlisle Publishing Services
Art Director:  Tippy McIntosh
Internal Designer: Mike Stratton, 
Stratton Design
Cover Designer: Mike Stratton, 
Stratton Design
Cover Image: © sndr, iStock
Rights Acquisitions Specialist: John Hill
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the Canada
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 15 14 13 12 11

Brief Contents
iii
PART ONE INTRODUCTION TO STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
1 
The Strategy- Making Process 
1
2 
Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics 
27
PART TWO THE NATURE OF COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
3 
External Analysis: The Identifi cation of Opportunities 
and Threats 
55
4 
Building Competitive Advantage 
83
PART THREE  BUILDING AND SUSTAINING LONG-RUN 
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
5 
Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning 
117
6 
Strategy in the Global Environment 
145
7 
Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Profi tability 
172
PART FOUR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION
8 
Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build 
and Develop a Company 
200
9 
Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design 
226

iv  
Contents
Contents
 
Preface 
xi
PART ONE INTRODUCTION TO STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Chapter 1 
The Strategy- Making Process 
1
Competitive Advantage and Superior Performance 2
Running Case: Walmart’s Competitive Advantage 3
Strategic Managers 5
Corporate- Level Managers 6
Business- Level Managers 6
Functional- Level Managers 7
The Strategy- Making Process 7
A Model of the Strategic Planning Process 7
The Feedback Loop 11
Strategy as an Emergent Process 11
Strategy Making in an Unpredictable World 11
Autonomous Action: Strategy Making by Lower- Level Managers 12
Serendipity and Strategy 12
Strategy in Action 1.1: A Strategic Shift at Microsoft 13
Intended and Emergent Strategies 14
Strategic Planning in Practice 15
Scenario Planning 15
Decentralized Planning 16
Strategic Decision Making 17
Cognitive Biases 17
Improving Decision Making 18
Strategic Leadership 19
Vision, Eloquence, and Consistency 19
Commitment 20
Being Well Informed 20
Willingness to Delegate and Empower 20
The Astute Use of Power 21
Emotional Intelligence 21
Practicing Strategic Management 23
Closing Case: Planning for the Chevy Volt 24
iv

 
Contents 
v
Chapter 2 
Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, 
and Business Ethics 
27
Stakeholders 28
The Mission Statement 29
The Mission 30
Vision 31
Values 32
Major Goals 32
Corporate Governance and Strategy 33
The Agency Problem 34
Strategy In Action 2.1: The Agency Problem at Tyco 35
Governance Mechanisms 38
Ethics and Strategy 42
Ethical Issues in Strategy 42
Running Case: Working Conditions at Walmart 45
The Roots of Unethical Behavior 46
Behaving Ethically 47
Final Words 49
Practicing Strategic Management 51
Closing Case: Google’s Mission, Ethical Principles, and Involvement 
in China 52
PART TWO THE NATURE OF COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
Chapter 3 
External Analysis: The Identifi cation 
of Opportunities and Threats 
55
Analyzing Industry Structure 56
Risk of Entry by Potential Competitors 58
Strategy in Action 3.1: Circumventing Entry Barriers into 
the Soft Drink Industry 59
Rivalry among Established Companies 61
The Bargaining Power of Buyers 63
The Bargaining Power of Suppliers 64
Substitute Products 65
Porter’s Model Summarized 66
Strategic Groups within Industries 66
Running Case: Walmart’s Bargaining Power over Suppliers 67
Implications of Strategic Groups 68

vi  
Contents
The Role of Mobility Barriers 69
Industry Life Cycle Analysis 69
Embryonic Industries 70
Growth Industries 70
Industry Shakeout 71
Mature Industries 72
Declining Industries 72
Summary 73
The Macroenvironment 73
Macroeconomic Forces 73
Global Forces 75
Technological Forces 75
Demographic Forces 75
Social Forces 76
Political and Legal Forces 76
Practicing Strategic Management 78
Closing Case: The Pharmaceutical Industry 79
Chapter 4 
Building Competitive Advantage 
83
Competitive Advantage: Value Creation, Low Cost, 
and Differentiation 84
The Generic Building Blocks of Competitive Advantage 86
Effi ciency 87
Quality as Excellence and Reliability 88
Innovation 89
Customer Responsiveness 90
The Value Chain 90
Primary Activities 91
Support Activities 92
Functional Strategies and The Generic Building Blocks of Competitive 
  Advantage 93
Increasing Effi ciency 93
Strategy in Action 4.1: Learning Effects in Cardiac Surgery 95
Running Case: Human Resource Strategy and Productivity 
at Walmart 99
Increasing Quality 100
Increasing Innovation 103
Achieving Superior Customer Responsiveness 106
Distinctive Competencies and Competitive Advantage 108
Resources and Capabilities 108
The Durability of Competitive Advantage 110
Practicing Strategic Management 112
Closing Case: Starbucks 113

 
Contents 
vii
PART THREE  BUILDING AND SUSTAINING LONG-RUN 
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
Chapter 5 
Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning 
117
The Nature of Competitive Positioning 118
Customer Needs and Product Differentiation 118
Customer Groups and Market Segmentation 119
Distinctive Competencies 119
Running Case: Walmart’s Business Model and Competitive 
Positioning 120
Choosing a Business- Level Strategy 120
Cost- Leadership Strategy 121
Differentiation Strategy 122
Cost Leadership and Differentiation 124
Focus Strategy 125
Stuck in the Middle 128
Competitive Positioning in Different Industry Environments 129
Strategies in Fragmented and Growing Industries 129
Strategy in Mature Industries 131
Strategies in Declining Industries 137
Practicing Strategic Management 141
Closing Case: Nike’s Business- Level Strategies 142
Chapter 6 
Strategy in the Global Environment 
145
The Global Environment 146
Increasing Profi tability through Global Expansion 148
Expanding the Market: Leveraging Products and Competencies 148
Realizing Economies of Scale 149
Realizing Location Economies 149
Running Case: Walmart’s Global Expansion 150
Leveraging the Skills of Global Subsidiaries 152
Cost Pressures and Pressures for Local Responsiveness 152
Pressures for Cost Reductions 153
Pressures for Local Responsiveness 154
Choosing a Global Strategy 156
Global Standardization Strategy 156
Localization Strategy 157
Strategy in Action 6.1: The Evolution of Strategy at Procter & 
Gamble 158
Transnational Strategy 159
International Strategy 159
Changes in Strategy Over Time 160

viii  
Contents
Choices of Entry Mode 161
Exporting 161
Licensing 162
Franchising 163
Joint Ventures 164
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries 165
Choosing an Entry Strategy 166
Practicing Strategic Management 169
Closing Case: IKEA— The Global Retailer 169
Chapter 7 
Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Profi tability 
172
Concentration on a Single Industry 173
Horizontal Integration 174
Benefi ts and Costs of Horizontal Integration 175
Running Case: Walmart’s Growing Chain of “Neighborhood 
Markets” 176
Outsourcing Functional Activities 178
Vertical Integration 180
Arguments for Vertical Integration 182
Arguments against Vertical Integration 184
Vertical Integration and Outsourcing 186
Entering New Industries Through Diversifi cation 186
Creating Value Through Diversifi cation 187
Strategy in Action 7.1: Diversifi cation at 3M: Leveraging Technology 190
Related versus Unrelated Diversifi cation 191
Restructuring and Downsizing 192
Why Restructure? 193
Exit Strategies 194
Practicing Strategic Management 196
Closing Case: United Technologies Has an “ACE in Its Pocket” 197
PART FOUR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION
Chapter 8 
Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies 
to Build and Develop a Company 
200
Strategic Change 201
Types of Strategic Change 201
A Model of the Change Process 202
Analyzing a Company as a Portfolio of Core Competencies 205
Fill in the Blanks 206
Premier Plus 10 207

 
Contents 
ix
White Spaces 207
Mega- Opportunities 207
Implementing Strategy Through Internal New Ventures 208
Pitfalls with Internal New Ventures 209
Guidelines for Successful Internal New Venturing 211
Implementing Strategy Through Acquisitions 212
Pitfalls with Acquisitions 213
Guidelines for Successful Acquisition 214
Implementing Strategy Through Strategic Alliances 215
Strategy in Action 8.1: News Corp’s Successful Acquisition Strategy 216
Advantages of Strategic Alliances 217
Disadvantages of Strategic Alliances 217
Making Strategic Alliances Work 218
Practicing Strategic Management 222
Closing Case: Oracle’s Growing Portfolio of Businesses 223
Chapter 9 
Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design 
226
The Role of Organizational Structure 227
Building Blocks of Organizational Structure 228
Vertical Differentiation 229
Problems with Tall Structures 230
Centralization or Decentralization? 232
Strategy in Action 9.1: To Centralize or Decentralize? 
That Is the Question 233
Horizontal Differentiation 234
Functional Structure 234
Product Structure 236
Product- Team Structure 237
Geographic Structure 238
Multidivisional Structure 240
Integration and Organizational Control 244
Forms of Integrating Mechanisms 244
Differentiation and Integration 247
The Nature of Organizational Control 247
Strategic Controls 248
Financial Controls 250
Output Controls 251
Behavior Control 252
Running Case: How Sam Walton Created Walmart’s Culture 255
Practicing Strategic Management 257
Closing Case: Strategy Implementation at Dell Computer 258

x  
Contents
 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study 
and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C1
What Is Case Study Analysis?
Analyzing a Case Study
Writing a Case Study Analysis
The Role of Financial Analysis in Case Study Analysis
Profi t Ratios
Liquidity Ratios
Activity Ratios
Leverage Ratios
Shareholder-Return Ratios
Cash Flow
Conclusion
 
Cases
 
Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis C1
 
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Case 1: Apple in 2008 C13
Case 2: SGI versus Dell: Competition in Server and Cloud 
Computing C27
Case 3: The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong 
to the Nintendo Wii C35
Case 4: McDonald’s and Its Critics: 1973–2009 C53
Case 5: The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 C66
Case 6: General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 C78
 
Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Case 7: IKEA: Furniture Retailer to the World C90
Case 8: The Rise of IBM C98
Case 9: The Fall of IBM C109
Case 10: IBM in 2009 C122
Index 
 
I1

Preface
In framing and writing Essentials of Strategic Management, our goal is to inform 
and familiarize students with what strategic management means to today’s global 
world. Often people are unaware of how the strategy-making process affects them. 
We are all used to going to work and going into companies such as restaurants, 
stores, and banks, and buying the goods and services we need to satisfy our many 
needs. However, the actual strategic management activities and processes that are re-
quired to make these goods and services available to us commonly go unappreciated. 
Similarly, we might know that companies exist to make a “profi t,” but what is profi t, 
how is it created, and what is profi t used for? Moreover, what are the actual strategic 
management activities involved in the creation of goods and services, and why is it 
that some companies seem to be more effective and more “profi table” than others?
Essentials of Strategic Management, Third Edition, has been structured and writ-
ten to address these issues. The goal of this revision is to explain in a clear, com-
prehensive, but concise way why strategic management is important to people, the 
companies they work for, and the society in which they live. Our objective in writing 
this book has been to provide the overall “big picture” of what strategic manage-
ment is, what strategic managers do, and how the strategy-making process affects 
company performance. The book provides a focused, integrated approach that gives 
students a solid understanding of the nature, functions, and main building blocks of 
strategic management.
Organization of the Book
The book presents a broad overview of the nature and functions of strategic man-
agement in nine chapters. Part 1, Introduction to Strategic Management, explains 
what strategic management is and provides a framework to understand what strate-
gic managers do. Chapter 1 discusses the relationship between strategic management 
and strategic leadership and shows how competitive advantage results in superior 
performance. It also describes the plan of this book and discusses the principal func-
tions of strategic managers. Chapter  2 discusses the way companies affect their 
stakeholders, and why it is necessary to create corporate governance mechanisms 
that ensure strategic managers work to further the interests of stakeholders and 
behave ethically.
In Part  2, The Nature of Competitive Advantage, we discuss the factors and 
forces both external and internal to an organization that determine its choice of 
strategies to create a competitive advantage and achieve above-average profi tability. 
Chapter  3 discusses opportunities, threats, and competition in the external envi-
ronment. Chapter 4 examines how a company can build competitive advantage by 
achieving superior effi ciency, quality, innovation, and responsiveness to customers. It 
also discusses how managers can craft functional-level strategies that will allow an 
organization to achieve these goals.
  
 
xi

xii  
Preface
In Part 3, Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage, we provide 
a streamlined discussion of the different level of strategy that must be developed 
to build and sustain a long-term competitive advantage. Chapter 5 discusses how 
to use business-level strategies to optimize competitive positioning and outperform 
industry rivals. Chapter 6 discusses how to strengthen competitive advantage by 
expanding globally into new national markets. Chapter 7 then examines the various 
corporate-level strategies such as vertical integration, diversifi cation, and outsourc-
ing that are used to protect and strengthen competitive advantage and sustain long-
run profi tability.
Part 4, Strategy Implementation, we examine the many operational issues in-
volved in putting all these strategies into action simultaneously. Chapter  8 fi rst 
discusses the importance of strategic change in today’s fast-changing global envi-
ronment and the issues and problems involved in managing the change process ef-
fectively. Then, it outlines how to build and develop a company’s business through 
the use of internal new venturing, acquisitions, and strategic alliances and considers 
the pros and cons of these different methods. Chapter 9 discusses how to implement 
strategy through the design of organizational structure and the operational issues 
involved in selecting structures to match the needs of particular strategies. It also 
discusses the organizational control systems necessary to fi t strategy to structure and 
the role of organizational culture in developing competitive advantage.
And, fi nally, in Part 5 we provide a collection of cases that will appeal to students 
and instructors alike. We selected cases based both on the intrinsically interesting 
and timely topics, such as the global auto industry and the gaming industry, and the 
strategic management issues they illuminate. Through the cases and the guidelines 
on analyzing a case, students can further investigate the successes and challenges 
presented throughout the strategic management process. All ten cases are new to this 
edition and strive to introduce students to well-known global corporations such as 
Apple, Dell, McDonald’s, IKEA, and IBM.
As you can see by perusing the table of contents, our essentials book parallels 
the approach we take in our other book, Strategic Management: An Integrated 
Approach. Our goal is to offer a contemporary, integrated account of strategic man-
agement, but one that is streamlined and focused only on the essentials of this com-
plex and fascinating subject.
Learning Features
Nothing makes the practice of strategic management come alive more than vivid sto-
ries and examples about people and companies that demonstrate clearly the meaning 
of the chapter material. Hands-on exercises offer students the opportunity to ac-
tively think about and engage in strategic management issues and decision making. 
This book pays considerable attention to creating and developing both in-chapter 
and end-of-chapter features and exercises to offer the most learning value to stu-
dents while economizing on their valuable learning time.
Each chapter contains Strategy in Action insight boxes that have been carefully 
selected and written to raise students’ interest and are integrated seamlessly into the 
text so as not to disrupt its fl ow. Many books have examples that disrupt students’ 
thought processes or distract them with enormous amounts of unnecessary detail; 
this book avoids these pitfalls.

 
Preface 
xiii
Each chapter also contains a Running Case featuring Walmart as the focus cor-
poration. In this edition, the Running Case examples illustrating continuous real-
world changes in strategic management practices such as the increased use of cost 
reduction strategies like global outsourcing, ethical issues, and lean production are 
at the heart of the revision.
In midst of ever-present corporate scandals and economic turbulence, educators 
are faced with the critical and diffi cult task of teaching ethical decision-making prac-
tices. As an instructional tool to broach this task, each chapter contains the new mar-
ginal feature—Ethical Dilemma—that asks students to make sound management 
decisions while considering ethical ramifi cations in business.
The end-of-chapter learning features contained in Practicing Strategic 
Management are composed of exercises designed to offer additional insight into the 
chapter material to build students’ learning experience. They are designed to create 
lively discussion either at the level of the whole class, or in small groups, or at the 
individual level. In practice, an instructor will have to decide which of these exercises 
to select and use in any particular class period or which to use as homework assign-
ments. Frequently, instructors fi nd that varying the particular exercises they use over 
the semester is the best way to engage students.
• Discussion Questions. A set of chapter-related questions and points for refl ec-
tion, some of which ask students to research actual management issues and learn 
fi rsthand from practicing managers.
• Small-Group Exercise. This exercise is designed to allow instructors to utilize interac-
tive experiential exercises in groups of three to four students. Each chapter contains 
a chapter-related issue guaranteed to lead to debate among students. The instructor 
calls on students to break up into small groups—simply by turning to people around 
them—and all students participate in the exercise in class. A mechanism is provided 
for the different groups to share what they have learned with each other.
• Exploring the Web. This exercise asks the student to visit the Web site of a com-
pany and then to use the information contained on that Web site to answer a 
series of chapter-related questions.
• Closing Case. Each chapter ends with a short case that can be used for further 
analysis of chapter issues. They have been carefully chosen to refl ect contem-
porary issues and problems in strategic management, and to offer further in-
formation on chapter issues. The accompanying discussion questions encourage 
students to read about and to analyze how managers approach real problems in 
the strategic management world.
Teaching and Learning Aids
For the Instructor
• The Instructor’s Resource Manual (available on the IRCD or via the password-
protected instructor Web site): For each chapter, we provide a clearly focused 
synopsis, a list of teaching objectives, a comprehensive lecture outline, teaching 
notes for the Ethical Dilemma feature, suggested answers to discussion questions, 
and comments on the end-of-chapter activities. Each Opening Case, Strategy in 
Action boxed feature, and Closing Case has a synopsis and a corresponding 
teaching note to help guide class discussion.

xiv  
Preface
• ExamView Test Bank (available on the IRCD) offers a set of comprehensive true/
false, multiple-choice, and essay questions for each chapter in the book. The mix 
of questions has been adjusted to provide fewer fact-based of simple memoriza-
tion items and to provide more items that rely on synthesis or application. Every 
question contains AACSB standardized tags, is keyed to text Learning Objective, 
includes an answer, and text page reference.
• Case Teaching Notes (available on the IRCD or via the password protected instruc-
tor website) include a complete list of case discussion questions as well as a compre-
hensive teaching note for each case, which gives a complete analysis of case issues.
• PowerPoint (available on the IRCD or via the password-protected instructor 
Web site) offer value to enhance your in-class lecture.
• DVD program highlights many issues of interest and can be used to spark class dis-
cussion. It features extensive footage from “The Age of Walmart” series, CNBC’s 
“Innovate or Die,” “The Execution Plan,” as well as other highly valuable seg-
ments that will enrich your students’ understanding and learning experience.
• Online Resources: To access the online course materials, including CourseMate 
(the text-specifi c Web site), visit www.cengagebrain.com. At the CengageBrain
.com home page, search for the ISBN of your title (from the back cover of your 
book) using the search box at the top of the page. This will take you to the prod-
uct page where these resources can be found.
Specifi c online resources to aid instructors include, the Instructor’s Manual, 
a DVD guide, instructor-based PowerPoint, and access to the student protected 
resources.
• WebTutor: Jumpstart your course with customizable, rich text specifi c content 
within your Course Management System! 
• 
Jumpstart—Instructors simply load a WebTutor cartridge or epack into their 
Course Management System.
• 
Content—Rich text specifi c content, media assets, quizzing, Weblinks, discus-
sion topics, interactive games and exercises, and more.
• 
Customizable—Instructor can easily blend, add, edit, reorganize, or delete 
content.
 
Whether you want to Web-enable your class or put an entire course online, 
WebTutor delivers! Visit cengage.com/TeamUp/webtutor to learn more.
• Simulations: Would you like to fi nd a more creative way to have your students ap-
ply the concepts of Strategic Management? Take a moment to review one of our 
simulation options for Strategic Management and see where the rubber meets the 
road! Our simulations offer students the ability to fully run a company by making 
key decisions, experiencing issues, and adjust their strategy based on the competi-
tion and the market. It’s an excellent way to fully immerse them in the content of the 
course by having them experience the challenges and successes of business owners 
everywhere. Contact your Cengage representative for details and a demonstration.
• Write Experience allows instructors to assess written communication skills 
without adding to your workload! Instructors in all areas have told us it’s im-
portant that students can write effectively in order to communicate and think 
critically. Through an exclusive partnership with a technology company, Cengage 
Learning’s Write Experience allows them to do just that! This new product uti-
lizes artifi cial intelligence to not only score student writing instantly and accu-
rately, but also provide students with detailed revision goals and feedback on 
their writing to help them improve.
Find out more at www.cengage.com/writeexperience.

 
Preface 
xv
For the Student
• CourseMate: Engaging, trackable, and affordable, the new Understanding 
Business Strategy CourseMate Web site offers a dynamic way to bring course 
concepts to life with interactive learning, study, and exam preparation tools that 
support this printed edition of the text. Watch comprehension soar with all-new 
fl ash cards, engaging games, streaming videos, and more in this textbook-specifi c 
Web site. A complete e-book provides the choice of an entire online learning 
 experience. CourseMate goes beyond the book to deliver what you need!
• CengageBrain.com: Cengage Learning is excited to offer CengageBrain.com. 
Students can choose to purchase the format that suits them best—print or 
 digital—and experience substantial savings options, including our new textbook 
rental. To access additional course materials and companion resources, please 
visit the home page and enter the ISBN of your title (from the back cover)  using 
the search box at the top of the page. This will take you to the product page 
where these resources can be found.
Acknowledgments
Finding a way to integrate and present an overview of the rapidly changing world 
of strategic management and strategic management activities and make it interesting 
and meaningful for students is not an easy task. In writing Essentials of Strategic 
Management, we have been fortunate to have had the assistance of several people 
who contributed greatly to the book’s fi nal form. 
We are indebted to the many colleagues and reviewers who provided us with 
useful and detailed feedback, perceptive comments, valuable suggestions for improv-
ing the manuscript. As well as those individuals have helped create and shape our 
support package.
Kevin Banning, Auburn University
Robert D’Intino, Rowan University
Scott Droege, Western Kentucky University
Deborah Francis, Brevard College
Sanjay Goel, University of Minnesota
Leslie Haugen, University of St. Thomas
Todd Hostager, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire
John Humphreys, Eastern New Mexico University
Deborah Johnson, Franklin University
Kevin L. Johnson, Baylor University
Elene Kent, Capital University
Subodh Kulkarni, Howard University
Kamalesh Kumar, University of Michigan–Dearborn
Paul Mallette, Colorado State University
Josetta McLaughlin, Roosevelt University
Tom Morris, Radford University
David Olson, California State–Bakersfi eld
William Ritchie, Florida Gulf Coast University
Tim Rogers, Ozarks Technical College
Stuart Rosenberg, Dowling College

xvi  
Preface
Manjula Salimath, University of North Texas
Thomas Sgritta, University of North Carolina–Charlotte
ChanChai Tangpong, North Dakota State University
Michael Wakefi eld, Colorado State University–Pueblo
Edward Ward, St. Cloud State University
Kenneth Wendeln, University of San Diego
Garland Wiggs, Hamline University
Jun Zhao, Governors State University
We are grateful to the individuals at Cengage Learning for their support and com-
mitment to Essentials of Strategic Management, 3rd Edition. Specifi cally, we’d 
like to thank Michele Rhoades, our acquisitions editor, Suzanna Bainbridge, our 
development editor, Jana Lewis, Rob Ellington, Jonathan Monahan, and all the 
other individuals that so ably coordinate the book’s progress. All these people 
have been instrumental in creating a product we hope will meet its goal of helping 
students better understand strategic management and the many ways in which it 
affects companies and the people who work in them.
Charles W. L. Hill, Seattle, Washington
Gareth R. Jones, College Station, Texas

After reading this chapter you should be 
able to:
• Explain what is meant by “competitive 
advantage.”
• Discuss the strategic role of managers 
at different levels in an organization.
• Identify the main steps in a strategic 
planning process.
• Discuss the main pitfalls of planning, 
and how those pitfalls can be avoided.
• Outline the cognitive biases that 
might lead to poor strategic decisions, 
and explain how these biases can be 
 overcome.
• Discuss the role played by strategic 
leaders in the strategy- making process.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Competitive Advantage 
 and Superior Performance
Strategic Managers
Corporate- Level Managers
Business- Level Managers
Functional- Level Managers
The Strategy Making Process
A Model of the Strategic Planning 
Process
The Feedback Loop
Strategy as an Emergent Process
Strategy Making in an Unpredictable 
World
Autonomous Action: Strategy Making 
by Lower- Level Managers
Serendipity and Strategy
Intended and Emergent Strategies
Strategic Planning in Practice
Scenario Planning
Decentralized Planning
Strategic Intent
Strategic Decision Making
Cognitive Biases
Improving Decision Making
Strategic Leadership
Vision, Eloquence, and Consistency
Commitment
Being Well Informed
Willingness to Delegate 
and Empower
The Astute Use of Power
Emotional Intelligence
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
The Strategy- Making Process
1

Strategy
A set of actions 
that managers take 
to increase their 
company’s performance 
relative to rivals.
Proﬁ tability
The return that a 
company makes on 
the capital invested 
in the enterprise.
2  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
OVERVIEW
Why do some companies succeed while others fail? In the fast evolving world of 
the Internet, for example, how is it that companies like Yahoo, Amazon.com, eBay, 
and Google have managed to attract millions of customers, others like online grocer 
Webvan, software retailer Egghead.com, and the online pet supplies retailer, pets.com, 
all went bankrupt? Why has Walmart been able to do so well in the fi ercely competi-
tive retail industry, while others like Kmart have struggled? In the personal computer 
industry, what distinguishes Dell from less successful companies such as Gateway? In 
the airline industry, how is it that Southwest Airlines has managed to keep increasing 
its revenues and profi ts through both good times and bad, while  rivals such as US 
Airways and United Airlines have had to seek bankruptcy  protection? What explains 
the persistent growth and profi tability of Nucor Steel, now the  largest steel market 
in America, during a period when many of its once larger rivals  disappeared into 
bankruptcy?
In this book, we argue that the strategies a company’s managers pursue have 
a major impact on its performance relative to rivals. A strategy is a set of actions 
that managers take to increase their company’s performance relative to rivals. 
If a  company’s strategy does result in superior performance, it is said to have a 
 competitive advantage.
Much of this book is about identifying and describing the strategies that  managers 
can pursue to achieve superior performance. A central aim of this book is to give 
you a thorough understanding of the analytical techniques and skills necessary to 
identify and implement strategies successfully. The fi rst step toward achieving this 
objective is to describe in more detail what superior performance and competitive 
advantage mean.
Competitive Advantage 
and Superior Performance
Superior performance is typically thought of in terms of one company’s  profi tability 
relative to that of other companies in the same or a similar kind of business or 
 industry. The profi tability of a company can be measured by the return that it 
makes on the capital invested in the enterprise.1 The return on invested capital that 
a  company earns is defi ned as its profi t over the capital invested in the fi rm (profi t/
capital invested). By profi t, we mean after- tax earnings. By capital, we mean the 
sum of money invested in the company, that is, stockholders’ equity plus debt owed 
to creditors. This capital is used to buy the resources a company needs to produce 
and sell goods and services. A company that uses its resources effi ciently makes a 
 positive return on invested capital. The more effi cient a company is, the higher are 
its  profi tability and return on invested capital.
A company’s profi tability— its return on invested capital— is determined by the 
strategies its managers adopt. For example, Walmart’s strategy of focusing on 
the realization of cost savings from effi cient logistics and information systems, and 
then passing on the bulk of these cost savings on to customers in the form of lower 
prices, has enabled the company to gain evermore market share, reap signifi cant 
 economies of scale, and further lower its cost structure, thereby boosting  profi tability 
(for  details, see the Running Case on Walmart).

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
3
Walmart is one of the most extraordinary success sto-
ries in business history. Started in 1962 by Sam Walton, 
Walmart has grown to become the world’s largest cor-
poration. In 2008, the discount retailer, whose man-
tra is “everyday low prices,” had sales of $410 billion, 
7,400 stores in 15 countries, and 2 million employees. 
Some 8% of all retail sales in the United States are 
made at a Walmart store. Walmart is not only large; it 
is also very proﬁ table. In 2008, the company earned 
a return on invested capital of 14.5%, better than its 
well- managed rivals Costco and Target, which earned 
11.7% and 9.5% respectively. As shown in the accom-
panying ﬁ gure, Walmart has been consistently more 
proﬁ table than its rivals for years, although, of late, its 
rivals have been closing the gap.
Walmart’s persistently superior proﬁ tability  reﬂ ects 
a competitive advantage that is based upon a number 
of strategies. Back in 1962, Walmart was one of the 
ﬁ rst companies to apply the self- service  supermarket 
business model developed by grocery chains to  general 
merchandise. Unlike its rivals such as Kmart and Target 
who focused on urban and  suburban  locations, Sam 
Walton’s Walmart concentrated on small southern 
towns that were ignored by its rivals. Walmart grew 
quickly by pricing lower than local  retailers, often 
 putting them out of business. By the time its rivals 
 realized that small towns could support large discount 
general merchandise stores, Walmart had already 
 preempted them. These towns, which were large 
enough to support one discount retailer, but not two, 
provided a secure proﬁ t base for Walmart.
The company was also an innovator in informa-
tion systems, logistics, and human resource practices. 
These strategies resulted in higher productivity and 
lower costs than rivals, which enabled the company to 
earn a high proﬁ t while charging low prices. Walmart led 
the way among American retailers in  developing and 
implementing sophisticated product tracking  systems 
using bar code technology and checkout  scanners. 
This information technology enabled Walmart to track 
what was selling and adjust its inventory accordingly 
so that the products found in a store matched local 
demand. By avoiding overstocking, Walmart did not 
have to hold periodic sales to shift unsold inventory. 
Walmart’s Competitive Advantage
R U N N I N G  C A S E
Return on Invested Capital (%)
Walmart
Target
Costco
1994
1997
1999
1998
2000
2003
2004
2005
2006
2002
1995
1996
2001
8
10
12
14
16
18
2
4
0
6
2008
2007
Proﬁ tability of Walmart and Competitors
Source: Value Line Calculations. Data for 2008 are estimates based on three quarters.
(continued )

Competitive 
Advantage
The advantage over 
rivals achieved when a 
company’s proﬁ tability 
is greater than the 
average proﬁ tability of 
all ﬁ rms in its industry.
Sustained 
Competitive 
Advantage
The competitive 
advantage achieved 
when a company is 
able to maintain  above- 
average proﬁ tability for 
a number of years.
4  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Over time, Walmart linked this information system to 
a nationwide network of distribution centers where in-
ventory was stored and then shipped to stores within 
a 400- mile radius on a daily basis. The combination of 
distribution centers and information centers enabled 
Walmart to reduce the amount of inventory it held in 
stores, thereby devoting more of that valuable space 
to selling and reducing the amount of capital it had tied 
up in inventory.
With regard to human resources, the tone was 
set by Sam Walton. He had a strong belief that 
 employees should be respected and rewarded for 
 helping to  improve the proﬁ tability of the company. 
Underpinning this belief, Walton referred to  employees 
as “ associates.” He established a proﬁ t- sharing strat-
egy for all  employees and after the company went 
public in 1970, a program that allowed employees to 
purchase Walmart stock at a discount to its market 
value. Walmart was rewarded for this approach by high 
employee productivity, which translated into lower 
 operating costs and higher proﬁ tability.
As Walmart grew larger, the sheer size and 
 purchasing power of the company enabled it to drive 
down the prices that it paid suppliers, passing on those 
savings to customers in the form of lower prices, 
which enabled Walmart to gain more market share and 
hence demand even lower prices. To take the sting out 
of the persistent demands for lower prices, Walmart 
shared its sales information with suppliers on a daily 
basis, enabling them to gain efﬁ ciencies by conﬁ guring 
their own production schedules to sales at Walmart.
By the 1990s, Walmart was already the largest seller 
of general merchandise in America. To keep its growth 
going, Walmart started to diversify into the grocery 
business, opening 200,000- square- foot super- center 
stores that sold groceries and general  merchandise 
under the same roof. Walmart also diversiﬁ ed into the 
warehouse club business with the establishment of 
Sam’s Club. The company began expanding interna-
tionally in 1991 with its entry into Mexico.
For all its success, however, Walmart is now 
 encountering very real limits to proﬁ table growth. The 
U.S. market is approaching saturation, and growth 
overseas has proved more difﬁ cult than the company 
hoped. The company was forced to exit Germany and 
South Korea after losing money there, and has found it 
tough going into several other developed nations such 
as Britain. Moreover, rivals Target and Costco have 
continued to improve their performances and are now 
snapping at Walmart’s heels.2
A company is said to have a competitive advantage over its rivals when its 
 profi tability is greater than the average profi tability for all fi rms in its industry. The 
greater the extent to which a company’s profi tability exceeds the average  profi tability 
for its industry, the greater is its competitive advantage. A company is said to 
have a  sustained competitive advantage when it is able to maintain  above- average 
 profi tability for a number of years. Companies like Walmart, Southwest, and Dell 
Computers have had a signifi cant and sustained competitive advantage because they 
have  pursued fi rm- specifi c strategies that result in superior performance.
It is important to note that in addition to its strategies, a company’s performance 
is also determined by the characteristics of the industry in which the company com-
petes. Different industries are characterized by different competitive conditions. In 
some, demand is growing rapidly, while in others it is contracting. Some might be 
 beset by excess capacity and persistent price wars, others by strong demand and 
rising prices. In some, technological change might be revolutionizing competition. 
Others might be characterized by a lack of technological change. In some  industries, 
high profi tability among incumbent companies might induce new companies to  enter 
the industry, and these new entrants might depress prices and profi ts in the industry. 
In other industries, new entry might be diffi cult, and periods of high  profi tability 
might persist for a considerable time. Thus, the average profi tability is higher in 
some industries and lower in other industries because competitive conditions vary 
from industry to industry.3

General Managers
Managers who bear 
responsibility for the 
overall performance of 
the company or for that 
of one of its major  self- 
contained subunits or 
divisions.
Functional Managers
Managers responsible for 
supervising a particular 
function— that is, a task, 
activity, or operation, 
like accounting, 
marketing, Research 
& Development, 
information technology, 
or logistics.
Multidivisional 
Company
A company that 
competes in several 
different businesses 
and has created a 
separate, self- contained 
division to manage each 
of them.
 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
5
Strategic Managers
Managers are the lynch pin in the strategy- making process. It is individual  managers 
who must take responsibility for formulating strategies to attain a competitive 
 advantage and putting those strategies into effect. They must lead the  strategy- making 
process. Here we look at the strategic roles of different managers. Later in the 
 chapter we discuss strategic leadership, which is how managers can effectively lead 
the strategy- making process.
In most companies, there are two main types of managers: general managers, 
who bear responsibility for the overall performance of the company or for one of 
its major self- contained subunits or divisions, and functional managers, who are 
 responsible for supervising a particular function, that is, a task, activity, or  operation, 
like accounting, marketing, Research & Development, information technology, or 
logistics.
A company is a collection of functions or departments that work together to 
bring a particular product or service to the market. If a company provides several 
different kinds of products or services, it often duplicates these functions and creates 
a series of self- contained divisions (each of which contains its own set of functions) 
to manage each different product or service. The general managers of these divisions 
then become responsible for their particular product line. The overriding concern 
of general managers is for the health of the whole company or division under their 
direction; they are responsible for deciding how to create a competitive advantage 
and achieve high profi tability with the resources and capital they have at their dis-
posal. Figure 1.1 shows the organization of a multidivisional company, that is, a 
company that competes in several different businesses and has created a separate 
self- contained division to manage each of these. As you can see, there are three main 
levels of management: corporate, business, and functional. General managers are 
found at the fi rst two of these levels, but their strategic roles differ depending on 
their sphere of responsibility.
Corporate Level
   CEO, board of
   directors, and
   corporate staff
Business Level
   Divisional
   managers 
   and staff
Functional Level
   Functional
   managers
Market A
Market B
Market C
Division A
Division C
Business
functions
Business
functions
Head
Office
Division B
Business
functions
Figure 1.1 Levels of Strategic Management

Business Unit
A self- contained 
division that provides a 
product or service for 
a particular market.
6  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Corporate- Level Managers
The corporate level of management consists of the chief executive offi cer (CEO), 
other senior executives, the board of directors, and corporate staff. These individu-
als occupy the apex of decision making within the organization. The CEO is the 
principal general manager. In consultation with other senior executives, the role of 
corporate- level managers is to oversee the development of strategies for the whole 
organization. This role includes defi ning the goals of the organization, determining 
what businesses it should be in, allocating resources among the different  businesses, 
formulating and implementing strategies that span individual businesses, and 
 providing leadership for the entire organization.
Consider General Electric as an example. GE is active in a wide range of busi-
nesses, including lighting equipment, major appliances, motor and transportation 
equipment, turbine generators, construction and engineering services, industrial 
electronics, medical systems, aerospace, aircraft engines, and fi nancial services. The 
main strategic responsibilities of its CEO, Jeffrey Immelt, are setting overall strategic 
goals, allocating resources among the different business areas, deciding whether the 
fi rm should divest itself of any of its businesses, and determining whether it should 
acquire any new ones. In other words, it is up to Immelt to develop strategies that 
span individual businesses; his concern is with building and managing the corporate 
portfolio of businesses to maximize corporate profi tability.
It is not his specifi c responsibility to develop strategies for competing in the indi-
vidual business areas, such as fi nancial services. The development of such strategies 
is the responsibility of the general managers in these different businesses or business- 
level managers. However, it is Immelt’s responsibility to probe the strategic thinking 
of business- level managers to make sure that they are pursuing strategies that will 
contribute toward the maximization of GE’s long- run profi tability, to coach and 
 motivate those managers, to reward them for attaining or exceeding goals, and to 
hold them to account for poor performance.
Corporate- level managers also provide a link between the people who  oversee 
the strategic development of a fi rm and those who own it (the shareholders). 
 Corporate- level managers, and particularly the CEO, can be viewed as the agents 
of shareholders.4 It is their responsibility to ensure that the corporate and business 
strategies that the company pursues are consistent with maximizing profi tability 
and profi t growth. If they are not, then ultimately the CEO is likely to be called to 
 account by the shareholders.
Business- Level Managers
A business unit is a self- contained division (with its own functions— for example, 
fi nance, purchasing, production, and marketing departments) that provides a prod-
uct or service for a particular market. The principal general manager at the  business 
level, or the business- level manager, is the head of the division. The strategic role 
of these managers is to translate the general statements of direction and intent that 
come from the corporate level into concrete strategies for individual businesses. Thus, 
corporate- level general managers are concerned with strategies that span  individual 
businesses, whereas business- level general managers are concerned with strategies 
that are specifi c to a particular business. At GE, a major corporate goal is to be fi rst 
or second in every business in which the corporation competes. Then the general 
managers in each division work out for their business the details of a business model 
that is consistent with this objective.

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
7
Functional- Level Managers
Functional- level managers are responsible for the specifi c business functions or 
operations (human resources, purchasing, product development, customer service, 
etc.) that constitute a company or one of its divisions. Thus, a functional manager’s 
sphere of responsibility is generally confi ned to one organizational activity, whereas 
general managers oversee the operation of a whole company or division. Although 
they are not responsible for the overall performance of the organization, functional 
managers nevertheless have a major strategic role: to develop functional strategies in 
their area that help fulfi ll the strategic objectives set by business-  and corporate- level 
general managers.
In GE’s aerospace business, for instance, manufacturing managers are  responsible 
for developing manufacturing strategies consistent with the corporate objective of 
being fi rst or second in that industry. Moreover, functional managers provide most 
of the information that makes it possible for business-  and corporate- level  general 
 managers to formulate realistic and attainable strategies. Indeed, because they are 
closer to the customer than the typical general manager is, functional  managers 
 themselves may generate important ideas that subsequently may become major 
 strategies for the company. Thus, it is important for general managers to listen 
closely to the ideas of their functional managers. An equally great responsibility 
for managers at the operational level is strategy implementation: the execution of 
corporate- and business- level plans.
The Strategy- Making Process
Now that we know something about the strategic roles of managers, we can turn 
our attention to the process by which managers formulate and implement strat-
egies. Many writers have emphasized that strategy is the outcome of a formal 
planning process and that top management plays the most important role in this 
process.5 Although this view has some basis in reality, it is not the whole story. As 
we shall see later in the chapter, valuable strategies often emerge from deep within 
the  organization without prior planning. Nevertheless, a consideration of formal, 
 rational planning is a useful starting point for our journey into the world of strategy. 
Here we consider what might be described as a typical formal strategic planning 
model for making strategy.
A Model of the Strategic Planning Process
The formal strategic planning process has fi ve main steps:
1. Select the corporate mission and major corporate goals.
2. Analyze the organization’s external competitive environment to identify oppor-
tunities and threats.
3. Analyze the organization’s internal operating environment to identify the organi-
zation’s strengths and weaknesses.
4. Select strategies that build on the organization’s strengths and correct its  weaknesses 
in order to take advantage of external opportunities and counter external threats. 
These strategies should be consistent with the mission and major goals of the 
 organization. They should be congruent and constitute a viable business model.
5. Implement the strategies.

Strategy Formulation
Analyzing the 
organization’s 
external and internal 
environments and then 
selecting appropriate 
strategies.
Strategy 
Implementation
Putting strategies into 
action.
8  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
The task of analyzing the organization’s external and internal environment and 
then selecting appropriate strategies is known as strategy formulation. In contrast, 
strategy implementation involves putting the strategies (or plans) into action. This 
includes taking actions consistent with the selected strategies of the company at 
the corporate, business, and functional level, allocating roles and responsibilities 
among managers (typically through the design of organization structure),  allocating 
resources (including capital and people), setting short- term objectives, and design-
ing the organization’s control and reward systems. These steps are illustrated in 
Figure 1.2 (which can also be viewed as a plan for the rest of this book).
Each step in Figure 1.2 constitutes a sequential step in the strategic planning 
 process. At step 1, each round or cycle of the planning process begins with a  statement 
of the corporate mission and major corporate goals. As shown in Figure 1.2, this 
statement is shaped by the existing business model of the company. The mission 
 statement is followed by the foundation of strategic thinking: external analysis, 
 internal analysis, and strategic choice. The strategy- making process ends with the 
design of the organizational structure, culture, and control systems necessary to 
 implement the organization’s chosen strategy.
Some organizations go through a new cycle of the strategic planning process 
 every year. This does not necessarily mean that managers choose a new strategy 
each year. In many instances, the result is simply to modify and reaffi rm a  strategy 
and structure already in place. The strategic plans generated by the  planning 
 process generally look out over a period of 1 to 5 years, with the plan being 
 updated, or rolled forward, every year. In most organizations, the results of the 
External Analysis:
Opportunities
and Threats
(Chapter 3)
Internal Analysis:
Strengths and
Weaknesses
(Chapter 4)
Strategy
Implementation
(Chapter 9−10)
Progress
Review
(Against Plan)
SWOT Analysis:
 Formulate Strategies
Functional
Business
Corporate
(Chapter 4−8)
Mission, Vision,
Values, and
Goals
(Chapter 2)
FEEDBACK
Figure 1.2 A Model of the Strategic Management Process

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
9
annual strategic planning process are used as input into the budgetary process 
for the coming year so that strategic planning is used to shape resource allocation 
within the organization.
Mission Statement The fi rst component of the strategic management process 
is crafting the organization’s mission statement, which provides the framework or 
context within which strategies are formulated. A mission statement has four main 
components: a statement of the raison d’être of a company or organization— its rea-
son for existence— which is normally referred to as the mission; a statement of some 
desired future state, usually referred to as the vision; a statement of the key values 
that the organization is committed to; and a statement of major goals.
For example, the current mission of Microsoft is to “to enable people and business 
throughout the world to realize their full potential.” The vision of the company— the 
overarching goal— is to be the major player in the software industry. The key values 
that the company is committed to include “integrity and honesty,” “passion for our 
customers, our partners, and out technology,” “openness and respectfulness,” and 
“taking on big challenges and seeing them through.” Microsoft’s mission statement 
has absolutely set the context for strategy formulation within the company. Thus, 
the company’s perseverance fi rst with Windows, and now with X- box, both of which 
took a long time to bear fruit, exemplifi es the idea of “taking on big challenges and 
seeing them through.”6
We shall return to this topic and discuss it in depth in the next chapter.
External Analysis The second component of the strategic management process 
is an analysis of the organization’s external operating environment. The essential 
purpose of the external analysis is to identify strategic opportunities and threats in 
the organization’s operating environment that will affect how it pursues its  mission. 
Three interrelated environments should be examined at this stage: the industry 
 environment in which the company operates, the country or national environment, 
and the wider socioeconomic or macro- environment.
Analyzing the industry environment requires an assessment of the  competitive 
structure of the company’s industry, including the competitive position of the 
 company and its major rivals. It also requires analysis of the nature, stage,  dynamics, 
and history of the industry. Because many markets are now global markets,  analyzing 
the industry environment also means assessing the impact of  globalization on 
 competition within an industry. Such an analysis may reveal that a company should 
move some production facilities to another nation, that it should  aggressively expand 
in emerging markets such as China, or that it should beware of new  competition 
from emerging nations. Analyzing the macro- environment consists of examining 
macroeconomic, social, government, legal, international, and technological factors 
that may affect the company and its industry. We consider these issues in Chapters 3 
and 6 (where we discuss global issues).
Internal Analysis Internal analysis, the third component of the strategic plan-
ning process, serves to pinpoint the strengths and weaknesses of the organization. 
Such issues as identifying the quantity and quality of a company’s resources and 
 capabilities and ways of building unique skills and company- specifi c or distinc-
tive competencies are considered here when we probe the sources of competitive 
 advantage. Building and sustaining a competitive advantage requires a company to 
achieve superior  effi ciency, quality, innovation, and responsiveness to its customers. 
You are the general man-
ager of a home mortgage 
issuing business within a 
large diversiﬁ ed ﬁ nancial 
services ﬁ rm. In the ﬁ rm’s 
mission statement, there 
is a value that emphasizes 
the importance of acting 
with integrity at all times. 
When you asked the CEO 
what this means, she told 
you that you should “do 
the right thing, and not try 
to do all things right.” This 
same CEO has also set 
you challenging proﬁ tability 
and growth goals for the 
coming year. The CEO has 
told you that the goals are 
“nonnegotiable.” If you hit 
those goals, you stand to 
earn a big bonus and may 
get promoted. If you fail to 
hit the goals, it may hurt 
your career at the com-
pany. You know however, 
that hitting those goals will 
require you to lower lend-
ing standards, and it is pos-
sible that your unit will end 
up lending money to some 
people whose ability to 
meet their mortgage pay-
ments is questionable. If 
people do default on their 
loans, however, your com-
pany will be able to seize 
their homes and resell 
them, which mitigates the 
risk. What should you do?
Ethical Dilemma

SWOT Analysis
The comparison of 
strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and 
threats.
10  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Company strengths lead to superior performance in these areas, whereas company 
weaknesses translate into inferior performance. We discuss these issues in Chapter 4.
SWOT Analysis The next component of strategic thinking requires the generation 
of a series of strategic alternatives, or choices of future strategies to pursue, given 
the company’s internal strengths and weaknesses and its external opportunities and 
threats. The comparison of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats is nor-
mally referred to as a SWOT analysis.7 Its central purpose is to identify the strategies 
that will create a company- specifi c business model that will best align, fi t, or match a 
company’s resources and capabilities to the demands of the environment in which it 
operates. Managers compare and contrast the various alternative possible strategies 
against each other with respect to their ability to achieve a competitive advantage. 
Thinking strategically requires managers to identify the set of strategies that will cre-
ate and sustain a competitive advantage:
• Functional- level strategy, directed at improving the effectiveness of  operations 
within a company, such as manufacturing, marketing, materials management, 
product development, and customer service. We consider functional- level 
 strategies in Chapter 4.
• Business- level strategy, which encompasses the business’s overall  competitive 
theme, the way it positions itself in the marketplace to gain a competitive 
 advantage, and the different positioning strategies that can be used in  different 
industry settings— for example, cost leadership, differentiation, focusing on 
a particular niche or segment of the industry, or some combination of these. 
We consider business- level strategies in Chapter 5.
• Global strategy, addressing how to expand operations outside the home country 
to grow and prosper in a world where competitive advantage is determined at a 
global level. We consider global strategies in Chapter 6.
• Corporate- level strategy, which answers the primary questions: What business 
or businesses should we be in to maximize the long- run profi tability and profi t 
growth of the organization, and how should we enter and increase our presence 
in these businesses to gain a competitive advantage? We consider corporate- level 
strategies in Chapters 7 and 8.
The set of strategies identifi ed through a SWOT analysis should be congruent with 
each other. Thus, functional- level strategies should be consistent with, or support, the 
business- level strategy and global strategy of the company. Moreover, as we explain 
later in this book, corporate- level strategies should support business- level strategies.
Strategy Implementation Having chosen a set of congruent strategies to achieve 
a competitive advantage and increase performance, managers must put those 
 strategies into action: strategy has to be implemented. Strategy implementation 
involves taking actions at the functional, business and corporate level to execute 
a strategic plan. Thus implementation can include, for example, putting quality 
 improvement programs into place, changing the way a product is designed, posi-
tioning the  product differently in the marketplace, segmenting the marketing and 
offering  different  versions of the product to different consumer groups, implement-
ing price increases, or decreases, expanding through mergers and acquisitions, or 
downsizing the company by closing down or selling off parts of the company. All of 
this and much more is discussed in detail in Chapters 4–8.

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
11
Strategy implementation also entails designing the best organization structure, 
culture, and control systems to put a chosen strategy into action. We discuss the 
organization structure, culture, and controls required to implement strategy in 
Chapters 8 and 9.
The Feedback Loop
The feedback loop in Figure  1.2 indicates that strategic planning is ongoing: it 
never ends. Once a strategy has been implemented, its execution must be monitored 
to determine the extent to which strategic goals and objectives are actually being 
achieved and to what degree competitive advantage is being created and sustained. 
This information and knowledge is passed back up to the corporate level through 
feedback loops and become the input for the next round of strategy formulation and 
implementation. Top managers can then decide whether to reaffi rm existing strate-
gies, and goals, or suggest changes for the future. For example, a strategic goal may 
prove to be too optimistic, and so the next time a more conservative goal is set. Or 
feedback may reveal that the strategy is not working, so managers may seek ways 
to change it.
Strategy as an Emergent Process
The basic planning model suggests that a company’s strategies are the result of a 
plan, that the strategic planning process itself is rational and highly structured, and 
that the process is orchestrated by top management. Several scholars have  criticized 
the formal planning model for three main reasons: the unpredictability of the real 
world, the role that lower- level managers can play in the strategic  management 
 process, and the fact that many successful strategies are often the result of 
 serendipity, not rational strategizing. They have advocated an alternative view 
of strategy making.8
Strategy Making in an Unpredictable World
Critics of formal planning systems argue that we live in a world in which  uncertainty, 
complexity, and ambiguity dominate, and in which small chance events can have a 
large and unpredictable impact on outcomes.9 In such circumstances, they claim, even 
the most carefully thought- out strategic plans are prone to being rendered  useless 
by rapid and unforeseen change. In an unpredictable world, there is a premium on 
being able to respond quickly to changing circumstances, altering the strategies of 
the organization accordingly.
A dramatic example of this occurred in 1994 and 1995 when Microsoft’s CEO 
Bill Gates shifted the company strategy after the unanticipated emergence of the 
World Wide Web (see the Strategy in Action feature). According to critics of for-
mal systems, such a fl exible approach to strategy making is not possible within the 
framework of a traditional strategic planning process, with its implicit assumption 
that an organization’s strategies need to be reviewed only during the annual strategic 
planning exercise.

Autonomous Action
Action taken by 
lower- level managers 
who, on their own 
initiative, formulate new 
strategies and work 
to persuade top- level 
managers to alter the 
strategic priorities of a 
company.
12  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Autonomous Action: Strategy Making 
by Lower- Level Managers
Another criticism leveled at the rational planning model of strategy is that too 
much importance is attached to the role of top management, and particularly 
the CEO.10 An alternative view now widely accepted is that individual employees 
deep within an organization can and often do exert a profound infl uence over 
the strategic direction of the fi rm.11 Writing with Robert Burgelman of Stanford 
University, Andy Grove, the former CEO of Intel, noted that many important stra-
tegic decisions at Intel were initiated not by top managers but by the autonomous 
action of lower- level managers deep within Intel—  that is, by lower- level managers, 
who on their own initiative, formulated new strategies and worked to persuade 
top- level managers to alter the strategic priorities of the fi rm.12 At Intel, strategic 
decisions that were initiated by the autonomous action of lower- level  managers 
included the decision to exit an important market (the DRAM memory chip 
market) and develop a certain class of microprocessors (RISC- based microproces-
sors) in direct contrast to the stated strategy of Intel’s top managers. The Strategy 
in Action feature tells how autonomous action by two young employees drove the 
evolution of Microsoft’s strategy toward the Internet. In addition, the prototype 
for another Microsoft product, the X- box video game system, was developed by 
four lower- level engineering employees on their own initiative. They subsequently 
successfully lobbied top managers to dedicate resources to commercialize their 
prototype.
Autonomous action may be particularly important in helping established compa-
nies to deal with the uncertainty created by the arrival of a radical new technology 
that changes the dominant paradigm in an industry.13 Top managers usually rise to 
preeminence by successfully executing the established strategy of the fi rm. As such, 
they may have an emotional commitment to the status quo and are often unable to 
see things from a different perspective. In this sense, they are a conservative force 
that promotes inertia. Lower- level managers, however, are less likely to have the 
same commitment to the status quo and have more to gain from promoting new 
technologies and strategies within the fi rm. As such, they may be the ones to fi rst 
recognize new strategic opportunities (as was the case at Microsoft) and lobby for 
strategic change.
Serendipity and Strategy
Business history is replete with examples of accidental events that help to push 
 companies in new and profi table directions. What these examples suggest is that 
many successful strategies are not the result of well- thought- out plans but of 
 serendipity, that is, stumbling across good things unexpectedly. One such example 
 occurred at 3M during the 1960s. At that time, 3M was producing fl uorocarbons 
for sale as  coolant liquid in air- conditioning equipment. One day, a researcher work-
ing with fl uorocarbons in a 3M lab spilled some of the liquid on her shoes. Later 
that day when she spilled coffee over her shoes, she watched with interest as the 
coffee formed into little beads of liquid and then ran off her shoes without leaving 
a stain. Refl ecting on this phenomenon, she realized that a fl uorocarbon- based liq-
uid might turn out to be useful for protecting fabrics from liquid stains, and so the 
idea for Scotch Guard was born. Subsequently, Scotch Guard became one of 3M’s 

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
13
most profi table products and took the company into the fabric protection business, 
an area it had never planned to participate in.15
Serendipitous discoveries and events can open up all sorts of profi table avenues 
for a company. But some companies have missed out on profi table opportunities be-
cause serendipitous discoveries or events were inconsistent with their prior (planned) 
conception of what their strategy should be. In one of the classic examples of such 
myopia, a century ago the telegraph company Western Union turned down an 
 opportunity to purchase the rights to an invention made by Alexander Graham Bell. 
The invention was the telephone, a technology that subsequently made the telegraph 
obsolete.
The Internet has been around since the 1970s, but prior 
to the early 1990s, it was a drab place, lacking the color, 
content, and richness of today’s environment. What 
changed the Internet from a scientiﬁ c tool to a consumer- 
driven media environment was the invention of hypertext 
markup language (HTML) and the related invention of a 
browser for displaying graphics- rich Web pages based 
on HTML. The combination of HTML and browsers ef-
fectively created the World Wide Web (WWW). This was 
a development that was unforeseen.
A young programmer at the University of Illinois 
in 1993, Mark Andreesen, had developed the ﬁ rst 
browser, known as Mosaic. In 1994, he left Illinois and 
joined a start- up company, Netscape, which produced 
an  improved browser, the Netscape Navigator, along 
with software that enabled organizations to create Web 
pages and host them on computer servers. These de-
velopments led to a dramatic and unexpected growth 
in the number of people connecting to the Internet. In 
1990, the Internet had 1 million users. By early 1995, 
the number had exceeded 80 million and was growing 
exponentially.
Prior to the emergence of the Web, Microsoft did 
have a strategy for exploiting the Internet, but it was one 
that emphasized set- top boxes, video on demand, in-
teractive TV, and an online service, MSN, modeled after 
AOL and based on proprietary standards. In early 1994, 
Gates received emails from two young employees, Jay 
Allard and Steve Sinofsky, who argued that Microsoft’s 
current strategy was misguided and ignored the rapidly 
 emerging Web. In companies with a more  hierarchical 
culture, such action might have been ignored, but in 
Microsoft, which operates as a meritocracy in which 
good ideas trump hierarchical position, it produced a 
very different response. Gates convened a meeting of 
senior executives in April 1994, then wrote a memo to 
senior executives arguing that the Internet represented 
a sea change in computing, and that Microsoft had to 
respond.
What ultimately emerged was a 180 degree shift in 
Microsoft’s strategy. Interactive TV was placed on the 
back burner, and MSN was relaunched as a Web service 
based on HTML. Microsoft committed to developing its 
own browser technology and within a few months had 
issued Internet Explorer to compete with Netscape’s 
Navigator (the underlying technology was gained by an 
acquisition). Microsoft licensed Java, a computer lan-
guage designed to run programs on the Web, from a 
major competitor, Sun Microsystems. Internet protocols 
were built into Windows 95 and Windows NT, and Gates 
insisted that henceforth Microsoft’s applications, such as 
the ubiquitous Ofﬁ ce, embrace the WWW and have the 
ability to convert documents into an HTML format. The 
new strategy was given its ﬁ nal stamp on December 7, 
1995, Pearl Harbor Day, when Gates gave a speech argu-
ing that the Internet was now pervasive in everything 
Microsoft was doing. By then, Microsoft had been pur-
suing the new strategy for a year. In short, Microsoft 
quickly went from a proprietary standards approach to 
one that embraced the public standards on the WWW.14
1.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
A Strategic Shift at Microsoft

Emergent Strategies
Strategies that 
“emerge” in the 
absence of planning.
14  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Intended and Emergent Strategies
Henry Mintzberg has proposed a model of strategy development that provides a 
more encompassing view of what strategy actually is. According to this model, illus-
trated in Figure 1.3, a company’s realized strategy is the product of whatever planned 
strategies are actually put into action (the company’s deliberate strategies) and of any 
unplanned, or emergent, strategies.16 In Mintzberg’s view, many planned strategies are 
not implemented due to unpredicted changes in the environment (they are  unrealized). 
Emergent strategies are the unplanned responses to unforeseen  circumstances. They 
arise from autonomous action by individual managers deep within the organization, 
from serendipitous discoveries or events, or from an unplanned strategic shift by 
top- level managers in response to changed circumstances. They are not the prod-
uct of formal top- down planning mechanisms. Mintzberg maintains that emergent 
strategies are often successful and may be more appropriate than intended strategies. 
Moreover, as Mintzberg has noted, strategies can take root virtually wherever people 
have the capacity to learn and the resources to support that capacity.
In practice, the strategies of most organizations are probably a combination of 
the intended (planned) and the emergent. The message for management is that it 
needs to recognize the process of emergence and to intervene when appropriate, 
 killing off bad, emergent strategies but nurturing potentially good ones.17 To make 
such decisions, managers must be able to judge the worth of emergent strategies. 
They must be able to think strategically. Although emergent strategies arise from 
within the organization without prior planning— that is, without going through the 
steps illustrated in Figure  1.3 in a sequential fashion— top management still has 
to evaluate emergent strategies. Such evaluation involves comparing each emergent 
strategy with the organization’s goals, external environmental opportunities and 
threats, and internal strengths and weaknesses. The objective is to assess whether the 
Unrealized
strategy
Deliberate strategy
Emergent
strategy
Unplanned
shift by
top-level
managers
Autonomous
action by
lower-level
managers
Unpredicted
change
Serendipity
Realized
strategy
Planned
strategy
Figure 1.3 Emergent and Deliberate Strategies
Source: Adapted from H. Mintzberg and A. McGugh, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 30. 
No. 2, June 1985.

Scenario Planning
Formulating plans that 
are based on “what 
if” scenarios about the 
future.
 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
15
emergent strategy fi ts the company’s needs and capabilities. In addition, Mintzberg 
stresses that an organization’s capability to produce emergent strategies is a function 
of the kind of corporate culture that the organization’s structure and control systems 
foster. In other words, the different components of the strategic management process 
are just as important from the perspective of emergent strategies as they are from the 
perspective of intended strategies.
Strategic Planning in Practice
Despite criticisms, research suggests that formal planning systems do help  managers 
make better strategic decisions.18 For strategic planning to work, however, it is 
 important that top- level managers plan not just in the context of the current 
 competitive environment but also try to fi nd the strategy that will best allow them to 
achieve a competitive advantage in the future competitive environment. To try to fore-
cast what that future will look like, managers can use scenario planning  techniques 
to plan for different possible futures. They can also involve  operating managers 
in the planning process and seek to shape the future competitive  environment by 
 emphasizing strategic intent.
Scenario Planning
One reason that strategic planning may fail over the long run is that managers, in 
their initial enthusiasm for planning techniques, may forget that the future is inher-
ently unpredictable. Even the best- laid plans can fall apart if unforeseen contingencies 
occur, and that happens all the time in the real world. Scenario planning is based upon 
the realization that the future is inherently unpredictable, and that an organization 
should plan for not just one future, but a range of possible futures. Scenario planning 
involves formulating plans that are based upon “what if” scenarios about the future. 
In the typical scenario planning exercise, some scenarios are optimistic and some pes-
simistic. Teams of managers are asked to develop specifi c strategies to cope with each 
scenario. A set of indicators is chosen which are used as “signposts” to track trends 
and identify the probability that any particular scenario is coming to pass. The idea is 
to get managers to understand the dynamic and complex nature of their environment, 
to think through problems in a strategic fashion, and to generate a range of strategic 
options that might be pursued under different circumstances.19 The scenario approach 
to planning has spread rapidly among large companies. One survey found that over 
50% of the Fortune 500 companies use some form of scenario planning methods.20
The oil company Royal Dutch Shell has perhaps done more than most to pioneer 
the concept of scenario planning, and its experience demonstrates the power of the 
approach.21 Shell has been using scenario planning since the 1980s. Today it uses 
two main scenarios to refi ne its strategic planning, which relate to future demand 
for oil. One, called “Dynamics as Usual,” sees a gradual shift from carbon fuels such 
as oil, through natural gas, to renewable energy. The second scenario, “The Spirit of 
the Coming Age,” looks at the possibility that a technological revolution will lead 
to a rapid shift to new energy sources.22 Shell is making investments that will ensure 
the profi tability of the company whichever scenario comes to pass, and it is carefully 
tracking technological and market trends for signs of which scenario is becoming 
more likely over time.

16  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
The great virtue of the scenario approach to planning is that it can push manag-
ers to think outside of the box, to anticipate what they might have to do in different 
situations, and to learn that the world is a complex and unpredictable place which 
places a premium on fl exibility, rather than infl exible plans based on assumptions 
about the future that may turn out to be incorrect. In many cases, as a result of 
scenario planning organizations might pursue one dominant strategy, related to the 
scenario that is judged to be most likely, but make some investments that will pay off 
if other scenarios come to the fore (see Figure 1.4). Thus the current strategy of Shell 
is based on the assumption that the world will only gradually shift way from carbon- 
based fuels (its “Dynamics as Usual” scenario), but the company is also hedging its 
bets by investing in new energy technologies and mapping out a strategy to pursue 
should its second scenario come to pass.
Decentralized Planning
A mistake that some companies have made in constructing their strategic planning 
process has been to treat planning as an exclusively top management responsibility. 
This ivory tower approach can result in strategic plans formulated in a vacuum by 
top managers who have little understanding or appreciation of current operating 
realities. Consequently, top managers may formulate strategies that do more harm 
than good. For example, when demographic data indicated that houses and families 
were shrinking, planners at GE’s appliance group concluded that smaller appliances 
were the wave of the future. Because they had little contact with homebuilders and 
retailers, they did not realize that kitchens and bathrooms were the two rooms that 
were not shrinking. Nor did they appreciate that when couples both worked, they 
wanted big refrigerators to cut down on trips to the supermarket. GE ended up 
 wasting a lot of time designing small appliances with limited demand.
The ivory tower concept of planning can also lead to tensions between  corporate- , 
business- , and functional- level managers. The experience of GE’s appliance group is 
Identify
different possible
futures(scenarios).
Formulate
plans to deal
with those
futures.
Invest in
one plan
but . . .
Switch
strategy if
tracking of
signposts
shows
alternative
scenarios
becoming 
more likely.
Hedge your
bets by
preparing
for other
scenarios
and. . .
Figure 1.4 Scenario Planning

Cognitive Biases
Systematic errors in 
human decision making 
that arise from the 
way people process 
information.
Prior Hypothesis Bias
A cognitive bias 
that occurs when 
decision- makers who 
have strong prior 
beliefs tend to make 
decisions on the basis 
of these beliefs, even 
when presented with 
evidence that their 
beliefs are wrong.
 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
17
again illuminating. Many of the corporate managers in the planning group were 
 recruited from consulting fi rms or top- fl ight business schools. Many of the  functional 
managers took this pattern of recruitment to mean that corporate  managers 
did not think they were smart enough to think through strategic problems for 
 themselves. They felt shut out of the decision- making process, which they believed 
to be unfairly constituted. Out of this perceived lack of procedural justice grew an 
“us- versus- them” mind- set that quickly escalated into hostility. As a result, even 
when the  planners were right, operating managers would not listen to them. For 
example, the planners correctly recognized the importance of the globalization of the 
appliance market and the emerging Japanese threat. However, operating managers, 
who then saw Sears Roebuck as the competition, paid them little heed.
Finally, ivory tower planning ignores the important strategic role of autonomous 
action by lower- level managers and serendipity.
Correcting the ivory tower approach to planning requires recognizing that 
 successful strategic planning encompasses managers at all levels of the  corporation. 
Much of the best planning can and should be done by business and functional 
 managers who are closest to the facts— planning should be decentralized. The 
role of corporate- level planners should be that of facilitators who help business 
and  functional managers do the planning by setting the broad strategic goals of 
the  organization and providing the resources required to identify the strategies that 
might be required to attain those goals.
Strategic Decision Making
Even the best- designed strategic planning systems will fail to produce the  desired 
 results if managers do not use the information at their disposal effectively. 
Consequently, it is important that strategic managers learn to make better use of 
the information they have and understand the reasons why they sometimes make 
poor decisions. One important way in which managers can make better use of their 
knowledge and information is to understand and manage their emotions during the 
course of decision making.23
Cognitive Biases
The rationality of human decision makers is bounded by our own cognitive 
 capabilities.24 It is diffi cult for us absorb and process large amounts of information 
effectively. As a result, when making decisions we tend to fall back on certain rules 
of thumb, or heuristics, that help us to make sense out of a complex and uncer-
tain world. These heuristics can be quite useful, but sometimes their application can 
result in severe and systematic errors in the decision- making process.25 Systematic 
errors are those that appear time and time again. They seem to arise from a series 
of cognitive biases in the way that human decision makers process information and 
reach decisions. Because of cognitive biases, many managers end up making poor 
decisions, even when they have good information at their disposal and use a good 
decision- making process that is consistent with the rational decision- making model.
Several biases have been verifi ed repeatedly in laboratory settings, so we can 
be reasonably sure that they exist and that we are all prone to them.26 The prior 
 hypothesis bias refers to the fact that decision makers who have strong prior beliefs 

Escalating 
Commitment
A cognitive bias that 
occurs when decision 
makers, having already 
committed signiﬁ cant 
resources to a project, 
commit even more 
resources after 
receiving feedback that 
the project is failing.
Reasoning by Analogy
A cognitive bias that 
involves the use of 
simple analogies to 
make sense out of 
complex problems.
Representativeness
A cognitive bias rooted 
in the tendency to 
generalize from a small 
sample or even a single 
vivid anecdote.
Illusion of Control
A cognitive bias rooted 
in the tendency to 
overestimate one’s 
ability to control events.
Devil’s Advocacy
A technique in which 
one member of a 
decision- making 
group acts as a devil’s 
advocate, bringing out 
all the considerations 
that might make the 
proposal unacceptable.
18  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
about the relationship between two variables tend to make decisions on the basis 
of these beliefs, even when presented with evidence that their beliefs are wrong. 
Moreover, they tend to seek and use information that is consistent with their prior 
beliefs, while ignoring information that contradicts these beliefs. To put this bias in a 
strategic context, it suggests that a CEO who has a strong prior belief that a certain 
strategy makes sense might continue to pursue that strategy, despite evidence that it 
is inappropriate or failing.
Another well- known cognitive bias, escalating commitment, occurs when 
decision- makers, having already committed signifi cant resources to a project, com-
mit even more resources if they receive feedback that the project is failing.27 This 
may be an irrational response; a more logical response would be to abandon the 
project and move on (i.e., to cut your losses and run), rather than escalate commit-
ment. Feelings of personal responsibility for a project apparently induce decision- 
makers to stick with a project despite evidence that it is failing.
A third bias, reasoning by analogy, involves the use of simple analogies to make 
sense out of complex problems. The problem with this heuristic is that the analogy 
may not be valid. A fourth bias, representativeness, is rooted in the tendency to 
 generalize from a small sample or even a single vivid anecdote. This bias violates 
the statistical law of large numbers, which says that it is inappropriate to general-
ize from a small sample, let alone from a single case. In many respects, the dot- com 
boom of the late 1990s was based on reasoning by analogy and representativeness. 
Prospective entrepreneurs saw some of the early dot- com companies such Amazon 
and Yahoo achieve rapid success, at least judged by some metrics. Reasoning by anal-
ogy from a very small sample, they assumed that any dot- com could achieve similar 
success. Many investors reached similar conclusions. The result was a massive wave 
of start- ups that jumped into the Internet space in an attempt to capitalize on the per-
ceived opportunities. That the vast majority of these companies subsequently went 
bankrupt is testament to the fact that the analogy was wrong and the success of the 
small sample of early entrants was no guarantee that other dot- coms would succeed.
Another cognitive bias is known as the illusion of control: this is the tendency 
to overestimate one’s ability to control events. People seem to have tendency to 
attribute their success in life to their own good decision making and their failures 
to bad luck.28 General or top managers seem to be particularly prone to this bias: 
having risen to the top of an organization, they tend to be overconfi dent about their 
ability to succeed.29 According to Richard Roll, such overconfi dence leads to what 
he has termed the hubris hypothesis of takeovers.30 Roll argues that top managers 
are typically overconfi dent about their abilities to create value by acquiring another 
company. Hence, they end up making poor acquisition decisions, often paying far 
too much for the companies they acquire. Subsequently, servicing the debt taken on 
to fi nance such an acquisition makes it all but impossible to make money from the 
acquisition.
Improving Decision Making
The existence of cognitive biases raises the issue of how to bring critical information 
to bear on the decision mechanism so that a company’s strategic decisions are real-
istic and based on thorough evaluation. Two techniques known to enhance strategic 
thinking and counteract groupthink and cognitive biases are devil’s advocacy and 
dialectic inquiry.31 Devil’s advocacy requires the generation of both a plan and a criti-
cal analysis of the plan. One member of the decision- making group acts as the devil’s 

Dialectic Inquiry
The generation of a 
plan (a thesis) and 
a counterplan (an 
antithesis) that reﬂ ect 
plausible but conﬂ icting 
courses of action.
 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
19
advocate, bringing out all the reasons that might make the proposal unacceptable. In 
this way, decision makers can become aware of the possible perils of recommended 
courses of action.
Dialectic inquiry is more complex, for it requires the generation of a plan (a 
thesis) and a counterplan (an antithesis) that refl ect plausible but confl icting courses 
of action.32 Strategic managers listen to a debate between advocates of the plan 
and  counterplan and then make a judgment of which plan will lead to the higher 
 performance. The purpose of the debate is to reveal problems with  defi nitions, 
 recommended courses of action, and assumptions of both plans. As a result of 
this exercise,  strategic managers are able to form a new and more  encompassing 
 conceptualization of the problem, which becomes the fi nal plan (a synthesis). 
Dialectic inquiry can promote thinking strategically.
Another technique for countering cognitive biases, championed by Nobel Prize 
winner Daniel Kahneman and his associates, is known as the outside view.33 The 
outside view requires planners to identify a reference class of analogous past stra-
tegic initiatives, determine whether those initiatives succeeded or failed, and evalu-
ate the project at hand against those prior initiatives. According to Kahneman, this 
technique is particularly useful for countering biases such as the illusion of con-
trol (hubris), reasoning by analogy and representativeness. Thus, for example, when 
considering a potential acquisition planners should look at the track record of ac-
quisitions made by other enterprises (the reference class), determine whether they 
succeeded or failed, and objectively evaluate the potential acquisition against that 
reference class. Kahneman argues that such a “reality check” against a large sample 
of prior events tends to constrain the inherent optimism of planners and produce 
more realistic assessments and plans.
Strategic Leadership
One of the key strategic roles of both general and functional managers is to use all 
their knowledge, energy, and enthusiasm to provide strategic leadership for their 
subordinates and develop a high- performing organization. Several authors have 
identifi ed a few key characteristics of good strategic leaders that do lead to high 
performance: (1) vision, eloquence, and consistency, (2) commitment, (3) being well 
informed, (3) willingness to delegate and empower, (5) astute use of power, and 
(6) emotional intelligence.34
Vision, Eloquence, and Consistency
One of the key tasks of leadership is to give an organization a sense of direction. 
Strong leaders seem to have clear and compelling visions of where their organiza-
tions should go, are eloquent enough to communicate their visions to others within 
their organization in terms that energize people, and consistently articulate their 
 visions until they become part of the organization’s culture.35
Examples of strong business leaders include Microsoft’s Bill Gates, Jack Welch, 
the former CEO of GE and Sam Walton, Walmart’s founder. For years, Bill Gates’ 
 vision of a world in which there would be a Windows- based personal computer on 
every desk was a driving force at Microsoft. More recently, the vision has evolved into 
one of a world in which Windows- based software can be found on any computing 

20  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
device— from PCs and servers to video game consoles (X- Box), cell phones, and 
handheld computers. At GE, Jack Welch was responsible for articulating the simple 
but powerful vision that GE should be fi rst or second in every business in which it 
competed, or exit from that business. Similarly, it was Sam Walton who established 
and articulated the vision that has been central to Walmart’s success— passing on 
cost savings from suppliers and operating effi ciencies to customers in the form of 
everyday low prices.
Commitment
Strong leaders demonstrate their commitment to their vision and business model by 
actions and words, and they often lead by example. Consider Nucor’s former CEO, 
Ken Iverson. Nucor is a very effi cient steelmaker with perhaps the lowest cost struc-
ture in the steel industry. It has turned in 30 years of profi table performance in an 
industry where most other companies have lost money because of a relentless focus 
on cost minimization. In his tenure as CEO, Iverson set the example: he answered 
his own phone, employed only one secretary, drove an old car, fl ew coach class, and 
was proud of the fact that his base salary was the lowest in the Fortune 500 (Iverson 
made most of his money from performance- based pay bonuses). This commitment 
was a powerful signal to employees that Iverson was serious about doing everything 
possible to minimize costs. It earned him the respect of Nucor employees, which 
made them more willing to work hard. Although Iverson has retired, his legacy lives 
on in the cost- conscious organization culture that has been built at Nucor, and, like 
all other great leaders, his impact will go beyond his tenure as a leader.
Being Well Informed
Effective strategic leaders develop a network of formal and informal sources who 
keep them well informed about what is going on within their company. Herb Kelleher 
at Southwest Airlines, for example, was able to fi nd out a lot about the health of 
his company by dropping in unannounced on aircraft maintenance  facilities and 
 helping workers there to perform their tasks; McDonald’s Ray Kroc and Walmart’s 
Sam Walton routinely dropped in unannounced to visit their restaurants and stores. 
Using informal and unconventional ways to gather information is wise because 
 formal channels can be captured by special interests within the organization or by 
 gatekeepers, managers who may misrepresent the true state of affairs within the 
company to the leader, such as may have happened at Enron. People like Kelleher 
who constantly interact with employees at all levels are better able to build informal 
information networks than leaders who closet themselves and never interact with 
lower- level employees.
Willingness to Delegate and Empower
High- performance leaders are skilled at delegation. They recognize that unless they 
learn how to delegate effectively they can quickly become overloaded with respon-
sibilities. They also recognize that empowering subordinates to make decisions is a 
good motivation tool. Delegating also makes sense when it results in decisions being 
made by those who must implement them. At the same time, astute leaders recog-
nize that they need to maintain control over certain key decisions. Thus, although 
they will delegate many important decisions to lower- level employees, they will not 

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
21
delegate those that they judge to be of critical importance to the future success of 
the organization under their leadership— such as articulating the vision and business 
model.
The Astute Use of Power
In a now classic article on leadership, Edward Wrapp noted that effective lead-
ers tend to be very astute in their use of power.36 He argued that strategic leaders 
must often play the power game with skill and attempt to build consensus for their 
ideas rather than use their authority to force ideas through; they act as members 
or democratic leaders of a coalition rather than as dictators. Jeffery Pfeffer has 
 articulated a similar vision of the politically astute manager who gets things done in 
organizations by the intelligent use of power.37 In Pfeffer’s view, power comes from 
control over resources: budgets, capital, positions, information, and  knowledge 
that is important to the organization. Politically astute managers use these re-
sources to  acquire another critical resource: critically placed allies who can help a  
manager attain preferred strategic objectives. Pfeffer stresses that one does not need 
to be a CEO to assemble power in an organization. Sometimes quite junior func-
tional managers can build a surprisingly effective power base and use it to infl uence 
 organizational outcomes.
Emotional Intelligence
Emotional intelligence is a term that Daniel Goldman coined to describe a bundle of 
psychological attributes that many strong and effective leaders exhibit:38
• Self- awareness— the ability to understand one’s own moods, emotions, and 
drives, as well as their effect on others
• Self- regulation— the ability to control or redirect disruptive impulses or moods, 
that is, to think before acting
• Motivation— a passion for work that goes beyond money or status and a 
 propensity to pursue goals with energy and persistence
• Empathy— understanding the feelings and viewpoints of subordinates and taking 
those into account when making decisions
• Social skills— friendliness with a purpose
According to Goldman, leaders who possess these attributes— who exhibit a high 
degree of emotional intelligence— tend to be more effective than those who lack these 
attributes. Their self- awareness and self- regulation help to elicit the trust and confi -
dence of subordinates. In Goldman’s view, people respect leaders who, because they 
are self- aware, recognize their own limitations and because they are self- regulating 
consider decisions carefully. Goldman also argues that self- aware and self- regulating 
individuals tend to be more self- confi dent and therefore better able to cope with 
ambiguity and more open to change. A strong motivation exhibited in a passion for 
work can also be infectious, helping to persuade others to join together in pursuit of 
a common goal or organizational mission. Finally, strong empathy and social skills 
can help leaders earn the loyalty of subordinates. Empathetic and socially adept indi-
viduals tend to be skilled at managing disputes between managers, better able to fi nd 
common ground and purpose among diverse constituencies, and better able to move 
people in a desired direction than leaders who lack these skills. In short, Goldman’s 
arguments are that the psychological makeup of a leader matters.

22  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
1. A strategy is an action that a company takes to 
attain one or more of its goals.
2. A company has a competitive advantage over its 
rivals when it is more profi table than the  average 
for all fi rms in its industry. It has a sustained 
 competitive advantage when it is able to  maintain 
above- average profi tability over a number of 
years. In general, a company with a competitive 
advantage will grow its profi ts more rapidly than 
rivals.
3. General managers are responsible for the overall 
performance of the organization or for one of its 
major self- contained divisions. Their  overriding 
strategic concern is for the health of the total 
 organization under their direction.
4. Functional managers are responsible for a par-
ticular business function or operation. Although 
they lack general management responsibilities, 
they play a very important strategic role.
5. Formal strategic planning models stress that 
an organization’s strategy is the outcome of a 
rational planning process. The major compo-
nents of the strategic management process are 
 defi ning the mission, vision, and major goals of 
the  organization; analyzing the external and in-
ternal environments of the organization; choos-
ing strategies that align or fi t an organization’s 
strengths and weaknesses with external environ-
mental opportunities and threats; and adopting 
organizational structures and control systems to 
implement the organization’s chosen strategy.
 6. Strategy can emerge from deep within an or-
ganization in the absence of formal plans as 
lower- level managers respond to unpredicted 
situations.
 7. Strategic planning often fails because executives 
do not plan for uncertainty and because ivory- 
tower planners lose touch with operating realities.
 8. The fi t approach to strategic planning has been 
criticized for focusing too much on the degree 
of fi t between existing resources and current 
opportunities, and not enough on building new 
resources and capabilities to create and exploit 
future opportunities.
 9. Strategic intent refers to an obsession with 
achieving an objective that stretches the com-
pany and requires it to build new resources and 
capabilities.
10. In spite of systematic planning, companies 
may adopt poor strategies if their decision- 
making processes are vulnerable, if individual 
 cognitive biases are allowed to intrude into the 
 decision- making process.
11. Devil’s advocacy, dialectic inquiry, and the 
outside view are techniques for enhancing the 
 effectiveness of strategic decision making.
12. Good leaders of the strategy- making  process 
have a number of key attributes: vision, elo-
quence, and consistency; commitment;  being 
well informed; a willingness to delegate and 
 empower; political astuteness; and emotional 
intelligence.
Summary of Chapter
1. What do we mean by strategy? How is a business 
model different from a strategy?
2. What do you think are the sources of sustained 
superior profi tability?
3. What are the strengths of formal strategic 
 planning? What are its weaknesses?
4. Discuss the accuracy of this statement: Formal 
strategic planning systems are irrelevant for fi rms 
competing in high- technology industries where 
the pace of change is so rapid that plans are rou-
tinely made obsolete by unforeseen events.
5. Pick the current or a past President of the United 
States and evaluate his performance against the 
leadership characteristics discussed in the text. On 
the basis of this comparison, do you think that the 
President was/is a good strategic leader? Why?
Discussion Questions

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
23
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: 
Designing a Planning System
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people each. 
Appoint one group member as a spokesperson 
for the group, who will communicate your fi nd-
ings to the class when called on to do so by the 
instructor.
You are a group of senior managers working 
for a fast- growing computer software company. 
Your product allows users to play interactive 
role- playing games over the Internet. In the past 
3 years, your company has gone from being a 
start- up enterprise with 10 employees and no 
revenues to a company with 250 employees and 
revenues of $60 million. It has been growing so 
rapidly that you have not had time to create a 
strategic plan, but now your board of directors 
is telling you that they want to see a plan, and 
they want it to drive decision making and re-
source  allocation at the company. They want you 
to  design a planning process that will have the 
following  attributes:
1. It will be democratic, involving as many key 
employees as possible in the process.
2. It will help to build a sense of shared vision 
within the company about how to continue to 
grow rapidly.
3. It will lead to the generation of three to fi ve 
key strategies for the company.
4. It will drive the formulation of detailed action 
plans, and these plans will be subsequently linked 
to the company’s annual operating  budget.
Design a planning process to present to 
your board of directors. Think carefully about 
who should be included in this process. Be sure 
to outline the strengths and weaknesses of the 
 approach you choose and be prepared to justify 
why your approach might be superior to alterna-
tive  approaches.
Visiting 3M
Go to the Web site of 3M (http://www.3m.com) 
and visit the section that describes its history. 
Using the information contained there, map out 
the evolution of strategy at 3M from its establish-
ment to the present day. To what degree do you 
think that this evolution was the result of detailed 
long- term strategic planning, and to what degree 
was it the result of unplanned actions taken in 
 response to unpredictable circumstances?
General Task
Search the Web for a company site with suffi cient 
information to map out the evolution of that com-
pany’s strategy over a signifi cant period of time. 
What drove this evolution? To what degree was 
it the result of detailed long- term  strategic plan-
ning, and to what degree the result of  unplanned 
 actions taken in response to  unpredictable 
 circumstances?
Exploring The Web

24  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
General Motors is a company in deep trouble. As car 
sales in North America collapsed in 2008, GM, which 
had already lost money in 2007, plunged deeply 
into the red. With losses estimated at $14   billion, 
the company was forced to go cap in hand to the 
government to beg for public funds to help it stave 
off bankruptcy. Fearing the economic consequences 
of a collapse of GM, the government agreed to loan 
funds to GM, but it insisted that the company have 
a clear plan charting its way back to profi tability. 
Ironically, such a plan was already in place at GM. 
At the heart of it was a potentially huge gamble on a 
new type of car: the Chevy Volt.
The Chevy Volt, which was introduced in 2010, 
is a compact, four- door electric car with a reserve 
gasoline- powered engine. The primary power source 
is a large lithium ion battery (lithium ion batteries 
are typically found in small electric appliances such 
as cell phones). The battery can be charged by plug-
ging it into a wall socket for 6 hours; when fully 
charged, it will fuel the car for 40 miles, which is 
less than most people’s daily commute. After that, 
a gasoline engine kicks in, providing both drive 
power and recharging the lithium ion battery. GM 
estimated fuel economy will be over 100 miles per 
gallon, and charging the car overnight from a power 
outlet would cost about 80% less than fi lling it with 
gas at $3 per gallon. The car will have a starting 
cost of around $41,000; however, because it uses a 
battery- powered technology, buyers will be able to 
take $7,500 tax credit.
The Volt was the brainchild of two men, Bob 
Lutz, GM’s vice- chairman, and Larry Burns, the 
head of Research & Development and strategic plan-
ning at GM. Although Lutz in particular had always 
championed large gas- hungry muscle cars, GM’s 
planning told them that the market would probably 
move away from the SUVs that had been a profi table 
staple at GM for most of the 1990s. A number of 
trends were coming together to make this scenario 
likely.
First, oil prices, and by extension, gas prices, 
were increasing sharply. Although driving an 
SUV that gets 12 miles to the gallon might make 
economic sense when gas was priced at $1 a gallon, 
it did not for most people when gas was $4 per gal-
lon. GM’s planning suggested that due to growing 
demand in developed nations, including China and 
India, and limited new supplies, the days of cheap 
oil were over. Second, global warming was becom-
ing an  increasing concern, and it seemed possible 
that tighter  regulations designed to limit carbon 
emissions would be introduced in the future. As a 
major source of greenhouses gases, such as carbon 
dioxide, automobiles powered by internal combus-
tion engines could hardly escape this trend. Third, 
the cost of manufacturing lithium ion batteries 
was falling, and new technology was promising to 
make them more powerful. Finally, GM’s major 
competitor, Toyota, with its best selling hybrid, the 
Prius, had demonstrated that there was demand for 
 fuel- effi cient cars that utilized new battery technol-
ogy (the Prius, however, uses a conventional fuel cell 
as opposed to a lithium ion battery).
Despite their analysis, when Lutz and Burns fi rst 
proposed making the Volt in 2003, other managers at 
GM beat them down. For one thing, GM had already 
invested billions in developing fuel cells, and many in 
the company did not want to suddenly switch gears 
and focus on lithium ion batteries instead. Besides, 
said the critics, technologically it would be diffi cult 
to produce a large lithium ion battery. Others were 
skeptical given that GM had already had one failure 
with an electric car, the ill- fated EV1 introduced in 
the 1990s. Powered by a fuel cell, the EV1 had not 
sold well (according to many because the company 
had not put its weight behind it).
By 2006, however, the tide had started to turn. 
Not only were oil prices surging, as predicted by the 
strategic planning group, but also a small Silicon 
Valley start- up, Telsa Motors, had announced that 
it would be bringing a lithium ion sports car to 
market. Lutz’s reaction was, “if a start- up can do it, 
GM can too!” So Lutz and Burns formed a skunk 
works within GM and quickly put together a Chevy 
Volt concept car, which they unveiled at the 2007 
Detroit auto show. The concept car gained a lot of 
positive feedback, and Lutz used this to argue within 
Planning for the Chevy Volt

 
Chapter 1 The Strategy- Making Process 
25
the company that GM needed to commit to the 
 project. Moreover, he argued, Toyota was gaining 
major  benefi ts from its Prius, both in terms of sales 
and the halo effect associated with making a green 
car. This time Lutz and Burns were able to persuade 
other senior managers to back the project, and it was 
 offi cially launched in early 2007 with an aggressive 
goal of market introduction in 2010.
Case Discussion Questions
1. What does the Chevy Volt case tell you about 
the nature of strategic decision making at a large 
complex organization like GM?
2. What trends in the external environment favored 
the pursuit of the Chevy Volt project?
3. What impediments to pursuing this project do 
you think existed within GM?
4. The plan for the Chevy Volt seems to be based 
partly on the assumption that oil prices would 
remain high, and yet, in late 2008, oil prices 
 collapsed in the wake of a sharp global economic 
slowdown.
a. What does this tell you about the nature of 
strategic plans?
b. What do falling oil prices mean for the poten-
tial success of the Chevy Volt?
c. Do you think oil prices will remain low?
5. What will it take for the Chevy Volt to be a suc-
cessful car? In light of your analysis, how risky 
do you think this venture is for GM? What are 
the costs of failure? What are the costs of not 
pursuing the project?
 1. There are several different ratios for measuring prof-
itability, such as return on invested capital, return on 
assets, and return on equity. Although these differ-
ent measures are highly correlated with each other, fi -
nance theorists argue that the return on invested capital 
is the most accurate measure of profi tability. See Tom 
Copeland, Tim Koller, and Jack Murrin, Valuation: 
Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies 
(New York: Wiley, 1996).
 2. “How Big Can it Grow?” The Economist, April 17, 
2004, 4–78; “Trial by Checkout,” The Economist, 
June 26, 2004, 74–76; Walmart 10K, 200; Information 
at Walmart’s Web site (www.walmartstores.com); 
Robert Slater, The Walmart Triumph, Portfolio Trade 
Books, 2004. “The bulldozer from Bentonville slows; 
Wal- Mart,” The Economist, February 17, 2007, 70.
 3. Trying to estimate the relative importance of industry ef-
fects and fi rm strategy on fi rm profi tability has been one 
of the most important areas of research in the strategy 
literature during the past decade. See Y. E. Spanos and 
S. Lioukas, “An Examination of the Causal Logic of Rent 
Generation,” Strategic Management Journal 22, no. 10 
(October 2001): 907–934 and R. P. Rumelt, “How 
Much Does Industry Matter?” Strategic Management 
Journal 12 (1991): 167–185. See also A. J. Mauri and 
M. P. Michaels, “Firm and Industry Effects within 
Strategic Management: An Empirical Examination,” 
Strategic Management Journal 19 (1998): 211–219.
 4. This view is known as “agency theory.” See M. C. Jensen 
and W. H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial 
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” 
Journal of Financial Economics 3 (1976): 305–360 and 
E. F. Fama, “Agency Problems and the Theory of the 
Firm,” Journal of Political Economy 88 (1980): 375–390.
 5. K. R. Andrews, The Concept of Corporate Strategy 
(Homewood, III.: Dow Jones Irwin, 1971); H. I. Ansoff, 
Corporate Strategy (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1965); 
C. W. Hofer and D. Schendel, Strategy Formulation: 
Analytical Concepts (St. Paul, Minn.: West, 1978). Also see 
P. J. Brews and M. R. Hunt, “Learning to Plan and Planning 
to Learn,” Strategic Management Journal 20 (1999): 
889–913; R. W. Grant, “Planning in a Turbulent Environment,” 
Strategic Management Journal 24 (2003): 491–517.
 6. Taken from Micrsoft’s Web site at http://www.micro-
soft.com/mscorp/mission/
 7. Andrews, The Concept of Corporate Strategy; Ansoff, 
Corporate Strategy; Hofer and Schendel, Strategy 
Formulation.
 8. For details, see R. A. Burgelman, “Intraorganizational 
Ecology of Strategy Making and Organizational 
Adaptation: Theory and Field Research,” Organization 
Science 2 (1991): 239–262; H. Mintzberg, “Patterns in 
Strategy Formulation,” Management Science 24 (1978): 
934–948; S. L. Hart, “An Integrative Framework for 
Strategy Making Processes,” Academy of Management 
Review 17 (1992): 327–351; G. Hamel, “Strategy 
as Revolution,” Harvard Business Review, 74, July–
August 1996, 69–83; Grant, “Planning in a Turbulent 
Environment,” and G. Gaveti, D. A. Levinthal, and 
J. W. Rivkin, “Strategy Making in Novel and Complex 
Worlds: The Power of Analogy,” Strategic Management 
Journal 26 (2005): 691–712.
Notes

26  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
 9. This is the premise of those who advocate that 
 complexity and chaos theory should be applied to stra-
tegic management. See S. Brown and K. M. Eisenhardt, 
“The Art of Continuous Change: Linking Complexity 
Theory and Time Based Evolution in Relentlessly 
Shifting 
Organizations,” 
Administrative 
Science 
Quarterly 29 (1997): 1–34; R. Stacey and D. Parker, 
Chaos, Management and Economics (London: Institute 
for Economic Affairs, 1994). See also H. Courtney, 
J. 
Kirkland, 
and 
P. Viguerie, “Strategy 
Under 
Uncertainty,” Harvard Business Review, 75, November–
December 1997, 66–79.
 10. Hart, “Integrative Framework”; Hamel, “Strategy as 
Revolution.”
 11. See 
Burgelman, 
“Intraorganizational 
Ecology 
of 
Strategy Making and Organizational Adaptation,” and 
Mintzberg, “Patterns in Strategy Formulation.”
 12. R. A. Burgelman and A. S. Grove, “Strategic Dissonance,” 
California Management Review (Winter 1996): 8–28.
 13. C. W. L. Hill and F. T. Rothaermel, “The Performance 
of Incumbent Firms in the Face of Radical technologi-
cal Innovation,” Academy of Management Review 28 
(2003): 257–274.
 14. Interviews by Charles Hill.
 15. This story was related to the author by George 
Rathmann, who at one time was head of 3M’s research 
activities.
 16. H. Mintzberg and A. McGugh, Administrative Science 
Quarterly, Vol. 30. No 2, June 1985.
 17. This viewpoint is strongly emphasized by Burgelman 
and Grove, “Strategic Dissonance.”
 18. C. C. Miller and L. B. Cardinal, “Strategic Planning 
and Firm Performance: A Synthesis of More Than Two 
Decades of Research,” Academy of Management Journal 
37 (1994): 1649–1665. Also see P. R. Rogers, A. Miller, 
and W. Q. Judge, “Using Information Processing Theory 
to Understand Planning/Performance Relationships in 
the Context of Strategy,” Strategic Management Journal 
20 (1999): 567–577 and Brews and Hunt, Learning to 
Plan and Planning to Learn.
 19. Courtney, Kirkland, and Viguerie. “Strategy under 
uncertainty.”
 20. P. J. H. Schoemaker, “Multiple Scenario Development: 
Its Conceptual and Behavioral Foundation,” Strategic 
Management Journal 14 (1993): 193–213.
 21. P. Schoemaker, P. J. H. van der Heijden, and A. J. M. 
Cornelius, “Integrating scenarios into strategic plan-
ning at Royal Dutch Shell,” Planning Review 20, no. 3 
(1992): 41–47. I. Wylie, “There is no alternative to......” 
Fast Company, July 2002, 106–111.
 22. “The Next Big Surprise: Scenario Planning,” The 
Economist, October 13, 2001, 71.
 23. See C. R. Schwenk, “Cognitive Simplifi cation Processes 
in Strategic Decision Making,” Strategic Management 
Journal 5 (1984): 111–128 and K. M. Eisenhardt and 
M. Zbaracki, “Strategic Decision Making,” Strategic 
Management Journal 13 (Special Issue, 1992): 17–37.
 24. H. Simon, Administrative Behavior (New York: 
McGraw- Hill, 1957).
 25. The original statement of this phenomenon was made 
by A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment Under 
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” Science 185 (1974): 
1124–1131. Also see D. Lovallo and D. Kahneman, 
“Delusions of Success: How Optimism Undermines 
Executives’ Decisions,” Harvard Business Review, 81, 
July 2003, 56–67; J. S. Hammond, R. L. Keeny, and 
H. Raiffa, “The Hidden Traps in Decision Making,” 
Harvard Business Review, 76, September- October 
1998, 25–34 and N. N. Taleb, Fooled by Randomness 
(New York: Random House, 2005).
 26. Schwenk, 
“Cognitive 
Simplifi cation 
Processes,” 
pp. 111–128.
 27. B. M. Staw, “The Escalation of Commitment to a Course 
of Action,” Academy of Management Review 6 (1981): 
577–587.
 28. Taleb, Fooled by Randomness.
 29. N. J. Hiller and D. C. Hambrick, “Conceptualizing 
Executive Hubris: The Role of (Hyper) Core Self- 
Evaluations in Strategic Decision Making,” Strategic 
Management Journal 26 (2005): 297–320.
 30. R. Roll, “The Hubris Hypotheses of Corporate 
Takeovers,” Journal of Business 59 (1986): 197–216.
 31. See R. O. Mason, “A Dialectic Approach to Strategic 
Planning,” Management Science 13 (1969): 403–414; 
R. A. Cosier and J. C. Aplin, “A Critical View of Dialectic 
Inquiry in Strategic Planning,” Strategic Management 
Journal 1 (1980): 343–356; and I. I. Mintroff and 
R. O. Mason, “Structuring III— Structured Policy Issues: 
Further Explorations in a Methodology for Messy 
Problems,” Strategic Management Journal 1 (1980): 
331–342.
 32. Mason, “A Dialectic Approach,” pp. 403–414.
 33. Lovallo and Kahneman, “Delusions of Success.”
 34. For a summary of research on strategic leadership, see 
D. C. Hambrick, “Putting Top Managers Back into the 
Picture,” Strategic Management Journal 10 (Special Issue, 
1989): 5–15. See also D. Goldman, “What Makes a 
Leader?” Harvard Business Review, November–December 
1998, 92–105; H. Mintzberg, “Covert Leadership,” 
Harvard Business Review, November–December 1998, 
140–148 and R. S. Tedlow, “What Titans Can Teach Us,” 
Harvard Business Review, December 2001, 70–79.
 35. N. M. Tichy and D. O. Ulrich, “The Leadership 
Challenge: A Call for the Transformational Leader,” 
Sloan Management Review (Fall 1984): 59–68 and 
F. Westley and H. Mintzberg, “Visionary Leadership and 
Strategic Management,” Strategic Management Journal 
10 (Special Issue, 1989): 17–32.
 36. E. Wrapp, “Good Managers Don’t Make Policy 
Decisions,” Harvard Business Review, September–
October 1967, 91–99.
 37. J. Pfeffer, Managing with Power (Boston, Mass.: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1992).
 38. Goldman, “What Makes a Leader?”

After reading this chapter you should be 
able to:
• Explain why managers need to take 
stakeholder claims into account.
• Discuss the components of a corporate 
mission statement.
• Explain the role played by corporate 
governance mechanisms in the 
management of a company.
• Review the causes of poor business 
ethics.
• Discuss how managers can ensure that 
the strategic decisions they make are 
consistent with good ethical principles.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Stakeholders
The Mission Statement
The Mission
Vision
Values
Major Goals
Corporate Governance and Strategy
The Agency Problem
Governance Mechanisms
Ethics and Strategy
Ethical Issues in Strategy
The Roots of Unethical Behavior
Behaving Ethically
Final Words
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Stakeholders, 
The Mission, Governance, 
and Business Ethics
2

OVERVIEW
An important part of the strategy making process is ensuring that the company 
maintains the support of the key constituencies—or stakeholders—upon which it 
depends for its functioning and ultimate survival. A company’s stakeholders are in-
dividuals or groups with an interest, claim, or stake in the company, in what it 
does, and in how well it performs.1 We begin by looking at the relationship between 
stakeholders and a company. Then we move on to consider the corporate mission 
statement, which is the fi rst key indicator of how an organization views the claims 
of its stakeholders. The purpose of the mission statement is to establish the guiding 
principles for strategic decision making. As we shall see, these guiding principles 
should recognize the claims of important stakeholder groups. Next we explore the 
issue of corporate governance.
By corporate governance, we mean the mechanisms that exist to ensure that man-
agers pursue strategies that are in the interests of an important stakeholder group—
shareholders. The chapter closes with a discussion of the ethical implications of 
strategic decisions. We consider how managers can make sure that their strategic deci-
sions are founded on strong principles that treat all stakeholders in an ethical manner.
Stakeholders
A company’s stakeholders can be divided into internal stakeholders and external 
stakeholders (see Figure 2.1). Internal stakeholders are stockholders and employ-
ees, including executive offi cers, other managers, and board members. External 
stakeholders are all other individuals and groups that have some claim on the com-
pany. Typically, this group comprises customers, suppliers, creditors (including banks 
and bondholders), governments, unions, local communities, and the general public.
All stakeholders are in an exchange relationship with the company. Each stake-
holder group supplies the organization with important resources (or contribu-
tions), and in exchange each expects its interests to be satisfi ed (by inducements).2 
Stockholders provide the enterprise with risk capital and in exchange expect manage-
ment to try to maximize the return on their investment. Creditors such as bondholders 
provide the company with capital in the form of debt, and they expect to be repaid 
on time with interest. Employees provide labor and skills and in exchange expect 
Stakeholders
Individuals or groups 
with an interest, 
claim, or stake in the 
company, in what it 
does, and in how well 
it performs.
Corporate Governance
The mechanisms 
that exist to ensure 
that managers 
pursue strategies 
in the interests 
of an important 
stakeholder group, 
the shareholders.
Internal Stakeholders
Stockholders and 
employees, including 
executive ofﬁ cers, other 
managers, and board 
members.
External Stakeholders
Individuals and groups 
outside the company 
that have some claim 
on the company.
Figure 2.1 Stakeholders and the Enterprise
The
Company
Contributions
Contributions
Inducements
Inducements
External
Stakeholders
• Customers
• Suppliers
• Creditors
• Governments
• Unions
• Local Communities
• General Public
Internal
Stakeholders
• Stockholders
• Employees
• Managers
• Senior Executives
• Board Members
28  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
29
commensurate income, job satisfaction, job security, and good working conditions. 
Customers provide a company with its revenues and in exchange want high-quality 
reliable products that represent value for money. Suppliers provide a company with 
inputs and in exchange seek revenues and dependable buyers. Governments provide 
a company with rules and regulations that govern business practice and maintain 
fair competition. In exchange they want companies that adhere to these rules and 
pay their taxes. Unions help to provide a company with productive employees and in 
exchange they want benefi ts for their members in proportion to their contributions 
to the company. Local communities provide companies with local infrastructure and 
in exchange want companies that are responsible citizens. The general public pro-
vides companies with national infrastructure and in exchange seeks some assurance 
that the quality of life will be improved as a result of the company’s existence.
A company should take these claims into account when formulating its strate-
gies. If it does not stakeholders may withdraw their support. Stockholders may sell 
their shares, bondholders demand higher interest payments on new bonds, employ-
ees leave their jobs, and customers buy elsewhere. Suppliers may seek more depend-
able buyers. Unions may engage in disruptive labor disputes. Government may take 
civil or criminal action against the company and its top offi cers, imposing fi nes and 
in some cases jail terms. Communities may oppose the company’s attempts to locate 
its facilities in their area, and the general public may form pressure groups, demand-
ing action against companies that impair the quality of life. Any of these reactions 
can have a damaging impact on an enterprise.
Managers cannot always satisfy the claims of all stakeholders. The goals of dif-
ferent groups may confl ict, and in practice few organizations have the resources 
to satisfy all stakeholder claims.3 For example, union claims for higher wages can 
confl ict with consumer demands for reasonable prices and stockholder demands for 
acceptable returns. Often, the company must make choices. To do so, it must iden-
tify the most important stakeholders and give highest priority to pursuing strategies 
that satisfy their needs. Stakeholder impact analysis can provide such identifi cation. 
Typically, stakeholder impact analysis follows these steps:
1. Identify stakeholders
2. Identify stakeholders’ interests and concerns
3. As a result, identify what claims stakeholders are likely to make on the organization
4. Identify the stakeholders who are most important from the organization’s 
perspective
5. Identify the resulting strategic challenges4
Such an analysis enables a company to identify the stakeholders most critical to 
its survival and to make sure that the satisfaction of their needs is paramount. Most 
companies that have gone through this process quickly come to the conclusion that 
three stakeholder groups must be satisfi ed above all others if a company is to survive 
and prosper: customers, employees, and stockholders.5
The Mission Statement
As noted above, a company’s mission statement is a key indicator of how an orga-
nization views the claims of its stakeholders. You will also recall that in Chapter 1 
we stated that the mission statement represented the starting point of the strategic 

Mission
What it is that the 
company exists to do.
Figure 2.2 Deﬁ ning the Business
Source: D. F. Abell, Defining the Business: The Starting Point of Strategic Planning (Englewood Cliffs, 
Prentice-Hall, 1980), 7.
30  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
planning process. Although corporate mission statements vary, the most com-
prehensive include four main elements; the mission, vision, values, and goals of 
a corporation.
The Mission
The mission describes what it is that the company does. For example, the mission 
of Kodak is to provide “customers with the solutions they need to capture, store, 
process, output, and communicate images—anywhere, anytime.”6 Kodak is a com-
pany that exists to provide imaging solutions to consumers. This missions focuses 
on the customer need that the company is trying to satisfy (the need for imaging), 
as opposed to the products that the company produces (fi lm and cameras). This is a 
customer-oriented rather than product-oriented mission.
An important fi rst step in the process of formulating a mission is to come up with 
a defi nition of the organization’s business. Essentially, the defi nition should answer 
these questions: “What is our business? What will it be? What should it be?”7 The re-
sponses guide the formulation of the mission. To answer the question, “What is our 
business?” a company should defi ne its business in terms of three dimensions: who 
is being satisfi ed (what customer groups), what is being satisfi ed (what customer 
needs), and how customers’ needs are being satisfi ed (by what skills, knowledge, or 
competencies).8 Figure 2.2 illustrates these dimensions.
This approach stresses the need for a customer-oriented rather than a product- 
oriented business defi nition. A product-oriented business defi nition focuses on the 
Who is being
satisfied?
Customer groups
What is being
satisfied?
Customer needs
How are 
customer needs
being satisfied?
Distinctive
competences
Business
Definition

Vision
The desired future state 
of a company.
 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
31
characteristics of the products sold and markets served, not on which kinds of cus-
tomer needs the products are satisfying. Such an approach obscures the company’s 
true mission because a product is only the physical manifestation of applying a par-
ticular skill to satisfy a particular need for a particular customer group. In practice, 
that need may be served in many different ways, and a broad customer-oriented 
business defi nition that identifi es these ways can safeguard companies from being 
caught unaware by major shifts in demand.
By helping anticipate demand shifts, a customer-oriented mission statement can 
also assist companies to capitalize on changes in their environment. It can help an-
swer the question, “What will our business be?” Recall that Kodak’s mission em-
phasizes the company’s desire to provide customers with the solutions they need to 
capture, store, process, output, and communicate images. This is a customer-oriented 
mission statement that focuses on customer needs, as opposed to a particular prod-
uct (or solution) for satisfying those needs. This customer-oriented business defi ni-
tion has helped drive Kodak’s investments in digital imaging technologies, since the 
early 1990s, which have replaced much of Kodak’s traditional business based on 
chemical fi lm processing.
The need to take a customer-oriented view of a company’s business has often 
been ignored. History is littered with the wreckage of once-great corporations that 
did not defi ne their business or defi ned it incorrectly so that ultimately they declined. 
In the 1950s and 1960s, there were many offi ce equipment companies such as Smith 
Corona and Underwood that defi ned their businesses as being the production of 
typewriters. This product-oriented defi nition ignored the fact that they were really 
in the business of satisfying customers’ information processing needs. Unfortunately 
for those companies, when a new technology came along that better served customer 
needs for information processing (computers), demand for typewriters plummeted. 
The last great typewriter company, Smith Corona, went bankrupt in 1996, a victim 
of the success of computer-based word processing technology.
In contrast, IBM correctly foresaw what its business would be. In the 1950s, IBM 
was a leader in the manufacture of typewriters and mechanical tabulating equipment 
using punch card technology. However, unlike many of its competitors, IBM defi ned 
its business as providing a means for information processing and storage, rather 
than just supplying mechanical tabulating equipment and typewriters.9 Given this 
defi nition, the company’s subsequent moves into computers, software systems, offi ce 
systems, and printers seem logical.
Vision
The vision of a company lays out some desired future state—it articulates, often 
in bold terms, what the company would like to achieve. For example, Nokia, the 
world’s largest manufacturer of mobile (wireless) phones, has been operating with 
a very simple but powerful vision for some time: “If it can go mobile, it will!” This 
vision implied that not only would voice telephony go mobile, but also a host of 
other services based on data, such as imaging and Internet browsing. This vision led 
Nokia to become one of the early leaders in developing “smart” mobile handsets that 
not only can be used for voice communication but that also take pictures, browse 
the Internet, play games, and manipulate personal and corporate information. Good 
vision statements are meant to stretch a company by articulating some ambitious, 
but attainable future state that will help to motivate employees at all levels and drive 
strategies.10

Values
Statements of 
how managers 
and employees of 
a company should 
conduct themselves, 
how they should do 
business, and what 
kind of organization 
they should build to 
help a company achieve 
its mission.
Organizational Culture
The set of values, 
norms, and standards 
that control how 
employees work 
to achieve an 
organization’s mission 
and goals.
Goal
A precise and 
measurable desired 
future state that a 
company attempts 
to realize.
32  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Values
The values of a company state how managers and employees should conduct them-
selves, how they should do business, and what kind of organization they should build 
to help a company achieve its mission. Insofar as they help drive and shape behavior 
within a company, values are commonly seen as the bedrock of a company’s organi-
zational culture: the set of values, norms, and standards that control how employees 
work to achieve an organization’s mission and goals. An organization’s culture is of-
ten seen as an important source of its competitive advantage.11 (We discuss the issue 
of organization culture in depth in Chapter 9.) For example, Nucor Steel is one of 
the most productive and profi table steel fi rms in the world. Its competitive advantage 
is based in part on the extremely high productivity of its workforce, something, the 
company maintains, that is a direct result of its cultural values, which shape how it 
treats its employees. These values are as follow:
• “Management is obligated to manage Nucor in such a way that employees will 
have the opportunity to earn according to their productivity.”
• “Employees should be able to feel confi dent that if they do their jobs properly, 
they will have a job tomorrow.”
• “Employees have the right to be treated fairly and must believe that they will be.”
• “Employees must have an avenue of appeal when they believe they are being 
treated unfairly.”12
At Nucor, values emphasizing pay for performance, job security, and fair treat-
ment for employees help to create an atmosphere within the company that leads to 
high employee productivity. In turn, this has helped to give Nucor one of the lowest 
cost structures in its industry, which helps to explain the company’s profi tability in a 
very price-competitive business.
Major Goals
Having stated the mission, vision, and key values, strategic managers can take the 
next step in the formulation of a mission statement: establishing major goals. A goal 
is a precise and measurable desired future state that a company attempts to realize. 
In this context, the purpose of goals is to specify with precision what must be done 
if the company is to attain its mission or vision.
Well-constructed goals have four main characteristics:13
1. They are precise and measurable. Measurable goals give managers a yardstick or 
standard against which they can judge their performance.
2. They address crucial issues. To maintain focus, managers should select a limited 
number of major goals to assess the performance of the company. The goals that 
are selected should be crucial or important ones.
3. They are challenging but realistic. They give all employees an incentive to look 
for ways of improving the operations of an organization. If a goal is unrealistic 
in the challenges it poses, employees may give up; a goal that is too easy may fail 
to motivate managers and other employees.14
4. They specify a time period in which they should be achieved when that is 
appropriate. Time constraints tell employees that success requires a goal to be 
attained by a given date, not after that date. Deadlines can inject a sense of urgency 
into goal attainment and act as a motivator. However, not all goals require time 
constraints.

Risk Capital
Equity capital for which 
there is no guarantee 
that stockholders 
will ever recoup their 
investment or earn 
a decent return.
Agency Problem
A problem that arises 
when managers pursue 
strategies that are 
not in the interests 
of stockholders.
 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
33
Well-constructed goals also provide a means by which the performance of man-
agers can be evaluated.
Although most companies operate with a variety of goals, the central goal of 
most corporations is to maximize shareholder returns, and maximizing shareholder 
returns requires high profi tability and profi t growth.15 Thus, most companies oper-
ate with goals for profi tability and profi t growth. However, it is important that top 
managers do not make the mistake of overemphasizing current profi tability to the 
detriment of long-term profi tability and profi t growth.16 The overzealous pursuit 
of current profi tability to maximize short-term performance can encourage such 
misguided managerial actions as cutting expenditures judged to be nonessential in 
the short run—for instance, expenditures for research and development, marketing, 
and new capital investments. Although cutting current expenditure increases current 
profi tability, the resulting underinvestment, lack of innovation, and diminished mar-
keting can jeopardize long-run profi tability and profi t growth. These expenditures 
are vital if a company is to pursue its long-term mission and sustain its competitive 
advantage and profi tability over time. Despite these negative consequences, manag-
ers may make such decisions because the adverse effects of a short-run orientation 
may not materialize and become apparent to shareholders for several years or be-
cause they are under extreme pressure to hit short-term profi tability goals.17
It is also worth noting that pressures to maximize short-term profi tability may 
result in managers’ acting in an unethical manner. This apparently occurred dur-
ing the late 1990s at a number of companies including Enron Corporation, Tyco, 
WorldCom, and Computer Associates. In these companies, profi ts were systemati-
cally infl ated by managers who manipulated fi nancial accounts in a manner that 
misrepresented the true performance of the fi rm to shareholders.
To guard against short-run behavior, managers need to ensure that they adopt 
goals whose attainment will increase the long-run performance and competitiveness 
of their enterprise. Long-term goals are related to such issues as product develop-
ment, customer satisfaction, and effi ciency, and they emphasize specifi c objectives or 
targets concerning such things as employee and capital productivity, product quality, 
and innovation.
Corporate Governance and Strategy
We noted that a central goal of most companies is to provide its stockholders a good 
rate of return on their investment. There are good reasons for this. Stockholders are 
the legal owners of a company and the providers of risk capital. The capital that 
stockholders provide to a company is seen as risk capital because there is no guar-
antee that stockholders will ever recoup their investment or earn a decent return 
(publicly held corporations can and go bankrupt, in which case stockholders will 
lose their capital investment).
In publicly held corporations, stockholders delegate the job of controlling the com-
pany and selecting its strategies to professional managers, who become the agents of the 
stockholders.18 As the agents of stockholders, managers should pursue strategies that 
maximize long-run returns to stockholders (subject to the constraint that they do so in 
a manner that is both legal and ethical). Although most managers are diligent about do-
ing so, not all act in this fashion. This failure gives rise to what is known as the agency 
problem, where managers pursue strategies that are not in the interests of stockholders.
You work for a U.S.-based 
textile company struggling 
with overseas competitors 
that have access to low-
cost labor. While you pay 
your factory workers $14 
an hour plus beneﬁ ts, you 
know that a similar tex-
tile mill in Vietnam is pay-
ing its employees about 
$0.50 an hour, and the mill 
does not have to comply 
with the same safety and 
environmental regulations 
that your company does. 
Although 
your 
mill 
is 
margi nally proﬁ table, the 
Vietnamese factory clearly 
has a cost advantage. Your 
CEO wants to move pro-
duction to Vietnam where 
labor and compliance costs 
are lower, resulting in mill 
closure and employee lay-
offs. Your mill is the only 
large employer in a small 
community. Many of the 
employees have worked 
there their entire working 
lives. What is the right ac-
tion to take for stockhold-
ers? What is the most 
ethical course of action? Is 
there a conﬂ ict here?
Ethical Dilemma

Agency Theory
A theory dealing with 
the problems that can 
arise in a business 
relationship when 
one person delegates 
decision-making 
authority to another.
Agency Relationship
A relationship that 
arises whenever 
one party delegates 
decision-making 
authority or control over 
resources to another.
Principal
A person delegating 
authority to an agent, 
who acts on the 
principal’s behalf.
Agent
A person to whom 
authority is delegated 
by a principal.
Information 
Asymmetry
A situation in which one 
party to an exchange 
has more information 
about the exchange 
than the other party.
34  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
The Agency Problem
A branch of economics known as agency theory looks at the agency problems that 
can arise in a business relationship when one person delegates decision-making 
authority to another. Agency theory offers a way of understanding why managers 
do not always act in the best interests of stakeholders, and also why they might 
sometimes engage in actions that are unethical, and perhaps also illegal.19 Although 
agency theory was originally formulated to capture the relationship between man-
agement and stockholders, the basic principles have also been extended to cover 
the relationship with other key stakeholders, such as employees, as well as between 
different layers of management within a corporation.20 While the focus of attention 
in this section is on the relationship between senior management and stockholders, 
it should not be forgotten that some of the same language can be applied to the 
relationship between other stakeholders and top managers and between top man-
agement and lower levels of management.
The basic propositions of agency theory are relatively straightforward. First, an 
agency relationship is held to arise whenever one party delegates decision-making 
authority or control over resources to another. The principal is the person delegating 
authority, and the agent is the person to whom authority is delegated. The relation-
ship between stockholders and senior managers is the classic example of an agency 
relationship. Stockholders, who are the principals, provide the company with risk 
capital, but they delegate control over that capital to senior managers, and particu-
larly the CEO, who as their agent is expected to use that capital in a manner that is 
consistent with the best interests of stockholders. This means using that capital to 
maximize the company’s long-run profi tability and profi t growth rate.
While agency relationships often work well, problems arise if agents and princi-
pals have different goals, and if agents take actions that are not in the best interests 
of their principals. Agents may be able to do this because there is an information 
asymmetry between the principal and the agent; agents almost always have more 
information about the resources they are managing than the principal does. 
Unscrupulous agents can take advantage of any information asymmetry to mislead 
principals and maximize their own interests at the expense of principals.
In the case of stockholders, the information asymmetry arises because they del-
egate decision-making authority to the CEO, their agent, who by virtue of his or 
her position inside the company is likely to know far more than stockholders do 
about the company’s operations. The information asymmetry between principals 
and agents is not necessarily a bad thing, but it can make it diffi cult for principals to 
measure how well an agent is performing, and thus hold the agent accountable for 
how well he or she is using the entrusted resources. There is a certain amount of per-
formance ambiguity inherent in the relationship between a principal and agent: the 
principal cannot know for sure if the agent is acting in his or her best interests. 
The principal cannot know for sure if the agent is using the resources to which he or 
she has been entrusted as effectively and effi ciently as possible. To an extent, princi-
pal has to trust the agent to do the right thing.
This trust is not blind: principals do put governance mechanisms in place whose 
purpose is to monitor agents, evaluate their performance, and if necessary, take cor-
rective action. As we shall see shortly, the board of directors is one such governance 
mechanism, for in part the board exists to monitor and evaluate senior manag-
ers on behalf of stockholders. Other mechanisms serve a similar purpose. In the 
United States, the requirement that publicly owned companies regularly fi le detailed 

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
35
fi nancial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that are in 
accordance with generally agreed accounting principles (GAAP) exists to give stock-
holders consistent and detailed information about how well management is using 
the capital to which they have been entrusted.
Despite the existence of governance mechanisms and comprehensive measure-
ment and control systems, a degree of information asymmetry will always remain 
between principals and agents, and there is always an element of trust involved in the 
relationship. Unfortunately, not all agents are worthy of this trust. A minority will 
deliberately mislead principals for personal gain, sometimes behaving unethically or 
breaking laws in the process. The interests of principals and agents are not always 
the same; they diverge, and some agents may take advantage of information asym-
metries to maximize their own interests at the expense of principals, and to engage 
in behaviors that the principals would never condone.
For example, some authors have argued that like many other people, senior man-
agers are motivated by desires for status, power, job security, and income.21 By vir-
tue of their position within the company, certain managers, such as the CEO, can 
use their authority and control over corporate funds to satisfy these desires at the 
cost of returns to stockholders. CEOs might use their position to invest corporate 
funds in various perks that enhance their status—executive jets, lavish offi ces, and 
expense-paid trips to exotic locations—rather than investing those funds in ways 
that increase stockholder returns. Economists have termed such behavior on-the-job 
Under the leadership of Dennis Kozlowski, who became 
CEO of Tyco in 1990, the company’s revenues expanded 
from $3.1 billion in 1992 to $38 billion in 2001. Most of 
this growth was due to a series of acquisitions that took 
Tyco into a diverse range of unrelated businesses. Tyco 
ﬁ nance the acquisitions by taking on signiﬁ cant debt 
commitments, which by 2002 exceeded $23 billion. As 
Tyco expanded, some questioned Tyco’s ability to service 
its debt commitments, and claimed that the company 
was engaging in “accounting tricks” to pad its books and 
make the company appear more proﬁ table than it actu-
ally was. These criticisms, which were ignored for several 
years, were ﬁ nally shown to have some validity in 2002 
when Kozlowski was forced out by the board and subse-
quently charged with tax evasion by federal authorities.
Among other charges, federal authorities claimed that 
Kozlowski treated Tyco as his personal treasury, drawing 
on company funds to purchase an expensive Manhattan 
apartment and a world class art collection that he obvi-
ously thought were beﬁ tting of the CEO of a major cor-
poration. Kozlowski even used company funds to help 
pay for an expensive birthday party for his wife—which 
included toga-clad ladies, gladiators, a naked-woman-
with-exploding-breasts birthday cake and a version of 
Michelangelo’s David that peed vodka! Kozlowski was 
replaced by a company outsider, Edward Breen. In 
2003 Tyco took a $1.5 billion charge against earnings 
for accounting errors made during the Kozlowski era 
(i.e., Tyco’s proﬁ ts had been overstated by $1.5  billion 
 during Kozlowski’s tenure). Breen also set about dis-
mantling parts of the empire that Kozlowski had built, 
 divesting several businesses.
After a lengthy criminal trial, in June 2005 Dennis 
Kozlowski and Mark Swartz, the former chief ﬁ nancial 
ofﬁ cer of Tyco, were convicted of 23 counts of grand lar-
ceny, conspiracy, securities fraud, and falsifying business 
records in connection with what prosecutors described 
as the systematic looting of millions of dollars from the 
conglomerate (Kozlowski was found guilty of looting 
$90 million from Tyco). Both were set to serve signiﬁ cant 
jail time. As for Tyco, in 2006 CEO Ed Breen announced 
that the company would be broken up into three parts, a 
testament to the strategic incoherence of the conglom-
erate that Kozlowski built.22
2.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
The Agency Problem at Tyco

36  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
consumption.23 For an example, see Strategy in Action, which describes the on-the-job 
consumption that occurred at Tyco under the leadership of Dennis Kozlowski.
Besides engaging in on-the-job-consumption, CEOs, along with other senior 
managers, might satisfy their desires for greater income by using their infl uence or 
control over the board of directors to get the compensation committee of the board 
to grant them substantial pay increases. Critics of U.S. industry claim that extraordi-
nary pay has now become an endemic problem and that senior managers are enrich-
ing themselves at the expense of stockholders and other employees. They point out 
that CEO pay has been increasing far more rapidly than the pay of average workers, 
primarily because of very liberal stock option grants that enable a CEO to earn 
huge pay bonuses in a rising stock market, even if the company underperforms the 
market and competitors.24 In 1950, when Business Week started its annual survey 
of CEO pay, the highest-paid executive was General Motors CEO Charles Wilson, 
whose $652,156 pay packet translated into $4.7 million in infl ation-adjusted dol-
lars in 2005. In contrast, the highest-paid executive in 2009, Ray Irani of Occidental 
Petroleum earned $31 million.25 However, CEO pay in 2009 was fairly constrained 
compared with earlier years, refl ecting the impact of the global fi nancial crisis and 
public reaction to high CEO pay checks at many struggling fi nancial institutions. 
In 2005, before the crisis, Lee Raymond of Exxon, earned $405 million!26 In 1980, 
the average CEO in Business Week’s survey of CEO’s of the largest 500 American 
companies earned 42 times what the average blue-collar worker earned. By 1990, 
this fi gure had increased to 85 times. By 2005, the average CEO in the survey was 
earning more than 350 times the pay of the average blue-collar worker.27
What rankles critics is the size of some CEO pay packages and their apparent 
lack of relationship to company performance.28 For example, in May 2006, share-
holders of Home Depot complained bitterly about the compensation package for 
CEO Bob Nardelli at the company’s annual meeting. Nardelli, who was appointed 
in 2000, had received $124 million in compensation, despite mediocre fi nancial per-
formance at Home Depot and a 12% decline in the company’s stock price since he 
joined. When unexercised stock options were included, his compensation exceeded 
$250 million.29 Another target of complaints was Pfi zer CEO, Hank McKinnell, who 
garnered an $83 million lump sum pension, and $16 million in compensation in 
2005, despite a 40 plus percentage decline in Pfi zer’s stock price since he took over 
as CEO.30 Critics feel that the size of pay awards such as these is out of all proportion 
to the achievement of the CEOs. If so, this represents a clear example of the agency 
problem. It is of note, however, that CEO pay has dropped in 2009 and 2010, refl ect-
ing the aftermath of the global fi nancial crisis, In 2009, average pay of CEOs in the 
S&P 500 was around $9 million, a 40% drop from 2000 and about 260 times aver-
age pay of blue collar workers (which still represents a major increase since 1990).31
A further concern is that in trying to satisfy a desire for status, security, power, 
and income, a CEO might engage in empire building, buying many new businesses 
in an attempt to increase the size of the company through diversifi cation.32 Although 
such growth may depress the company’s long-run profi tability, and thus stockholder 
returns, it increases the size of the empire under the CEO’s control and, by extension, 
the CEO’s status, power, security, and income (there is a strong relationship between 
company size and CEO pay).
Instead of trying to maximizing stockholder returns by seeking to maximize prof-
itability, some senior managers may trade long-run profi tability for greater company 
growth by buying new businesses. Figure 2.3 graphs long-run profi tability against 
the rate of growth in company revenues. A company that does not grow is probably 

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
37
missing out on some profi table opportunities.33 A moderate revenue growth rate of G* 
allows a company to maximize long-run profi tability, generating a return of ∏*. 
Thus, a growth rate of G 1 in Figure 2.3 (zero growth) is not consistent with maxi-
mizing profi tability (∏1  ∏*). By the same token however, attaining growth greater 
than G* requires diversifi cation into areas that the company knows little about. 
Consequently, it can be achieved only by sacrifi cing profi tability (i.e., past G*, the 
investment required to fi nance further growth does not produce an adequate return 
and the company’s profi tability declines). Yet G2 may be the growth rate favored by 
an empire-building CEO, for it will increase his or her power, status, and income. 
At this growth rate, profi tability is equal only to ∏2. Because ∏*  ∏2, a company 
growing at this rate is clearly not maximizing its long-run profi tability or the wealth 
of its stockholders. However, a growth rate of G2 may be consistent with attaining 
managerial goals of power, status, and income. Tyco International, which is profi led 
in the Strategy in Action feature, provides us with an example of this kind of growth.
Just how serious agency problems can be was emphasized in the early 2000s 
when a series of scandals swept through the corporate world, many of which could 
be attributed to self-interest seeking by senior executives, and a failure of corporate 
governance mechanisms to hold the largest of those executives in check. Between 
2001 and 2004, accounting scandals unfolded at a number of major corporations, 
including Enron, World Com, Tyco, Computer Associates, Health South, Adelphia 
Communications, Dynergy, Royal Dutch Shell, and the major Italian food company, 
Parmalat. At Enron, for example, some $27 billion in debt was hidden from share-
holders, employees, and regulators in special partnership that were kept off the bal-
ance sheet. In all of these cases, the prime motivation seems to have been an effort to 
present a more favorable view of corporate affairs to shareholders than was actually 
the case, thereby securing senior executives signifi cantly higher pay packets.34
Confronted with agency problems, the challenge for principals is to (1) shape the 
behavior of agents so that they act in accordance with the goals set by principals, 
(2) reduce the information asymmetry between agents and principals, and (3) de-
velop mechanisms for removing agents who do not act in accordance with the goals 
Long-Run Profitability 
G1
G*
*
G2
Revenue Growth Rate
1
2
Figure 2.3 The Tradeoff Between Proﬁ tability and Revenue Growth Rates

Governance 
Mechanisms
Mechanisms that 
principals put in place 
to align incentives 
between principals and 
agents and to monitor 
and control agents.
38  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
of principals, and mislead principals. Principals try to deal with these challenges 
through a series of governance mechanisms.
Governance Mechanisms
Governance mechanisms are mechanisms that principals put in place to align incen-
tives between principals and agents and to monitor and control agents. The pur-
pose of governance mechanisms is to reduce the scope and frequency of the agency 
problem: to help ensure that agents act in a manner that is consistent with the best 
interests of their principals.
There are four main types of governance mechanisms for aligning stockholder 
and management interests: the board of directors, stock-based compensation, fi nan-
cial statements, and the takeover constraint.
The Board of Directors The board of directors is the centerpiece of the corporate 
governance system in the United States and the United Kingdom. Board members 
are directly elected by stockholders, and under corporate law they represent the 
stockholders’ interests in the company. Hence, the board can be held legally account-
able for the company’s actions. Its position at the apex of decision-making within 
the company allows it to monitor corporate strategy decisions and ensure that they 
are consistent with stockholder interests. If the board’s sense is that a company’s 
strategies are not in the best interest of stockholders, it can apply sanctions, such as 
voting against management nominations to the board of directors or submitting its 
own nominees. In addition, the board has the legal authority to hire, fi re, and com-
pensate corporate employees, including, most importantly, the CEO.35 The board is 
also responsible for making sure that audited fi nancial statements of the company 
present a true picture of its fi nancial situation. Thus, the board exists to reduce the 
information asymmetry between stockholders and managers and to monitor and 
control management actions on behalf of stockholders, ensuring that managers pur-
sue strategies that are in the best interests of stockholders.
The typical board of directors is composed of a mix of inside and outside direc-
tors. Inside directors are senior employees of the company, such as the CEO. They 
are required on the board because they have valuable information about the com-
pany’s activities. Without such information, the board cannot adequately perform its 
monitoring function. But because insiders are full-time employees of the company, 
their interests tend to be aligned with those of management. Hence, outside directors 
are needed to bring objectivity to the monitoring and evaluation processes. Outside 
directors are not full-time employees of the company. Many of them are full-time 
professional directors who hold positions on the boards of several companies. The 
need to maintain a reputation as competent outside directors gives them an incentive 
to perform their tasks as objectively and effectively as possible.36
There is little doubt that many boards perform their assigned functions admira-
bly, but not all perform as well as they should. The board of now bankrupt energy 
company Enron signed off on that company’s audited fi nancial statements, which 
were later shown to be grossly misleading.
Critics of the existing governance system charge that inside directors often domi-
nate the outsiders on the board. Insiders can use their position within the manage-
ment hierarchy to exercise control over what kind of company-specifi c information 
the board receives. Consequently, they can present information in a way that puts 
them in a favorable light. In addition, insiders have the advantage of intimate 

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
39
knowledge of the company’s operations. Because of their superior knowledge and 
control over information are sources of power, they may be better positioned than 
outsiders to infl uence boardroom decision making. The board may become the cap-
tive of insiders and merely rubber-stamp management decisions instead of guarding 
stockholder interests.
Some observers contend that many boards are dominated by the company CEO, 
particularly when the CEO is also the chairman of the board.37 To support this view, 
they point out that both inside and outside directors are often the personal nominees 
of the CEO. The typical inside director is subordinate to the CEO in the company’s 
hierarchy and therefore unlikely to criticize the boss. Because outside directors are 
frequently the CEO’s nominees as well, they can hardly be expected to evaluate the 
CEO objectively. Thus, the loyalty of the board may be biased toward the CEO, not 
the stockholders. Moreover, a CEO who is also chairman of the board may be able 
to control the agenda of board discussions in such a manner as to defl ect any criti-
cisms of his or her leadership.
In the aftermath of a wave of corporate scandals that hit the corporate world in 
the early 2000s, there are clear signs that many corporate boards are moving away 
from merely rubber-stamping top management decisions and are beginning to play 
a much more active role in corporate governance. In part they have been prompted 
by new legislation, such as the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States which 
tightened rules governing corporate reporting and corporate governance. Also im-
portant has been a growing trend on the part of the courts to hold directors liable 
for corporate misstatements. Powerful institutional investors such as pension funds 
have also been more aggressive in exerting their power, often pushing for more out-
side representation on the board of directors, and for a separation between the roles 
of chairman and CEO, with the chairman role going to an outsider. As a result, 
over 50% of big companies had outside directors in the chairman’s role by the mid-
2000s, up from less than half of that number in 1990.
Stock-Based Compensation According to agency theory, one of the best ways 
to reduce the scope of the agency problem is for principals to establish incentives 
for agents to behave in their best interest through pay-for-performance systems. In 
the case of stockholders and top managers, stockholders can encourage top manag-
ers to pursue strategies that maximize a company’s long-run profi tability and profi t 
growth, and thus the gains from holding its stock, by linking the pay of those manag-
ers to the performance of the stock price.
The most common pay-for-performance system has been to give managers stock 
options: the right to buy the company’s shares at a predetermined (strike) price at 
some point in the future, usually within 10 years of the grant date. Typically, the 
strike price is the price that the stock was trading at when the option was originally 
granted. The idea behind stock options is to motivate managers to adopt strategies 
that increase the share price of the company, for in doing so they will also increase 
the value of their own stock options.
Some research studies suggest that stock-based compensation schemes for execu-
tives, such as stock options, can align management and stockholder interests. For 
instance, one study found that managers were more likely to consider the effects of 
their acquisition decisions on stockholder returns if they themselves were signifi cant 
shareholders.38 According to another study, managers who were signifi cant stock-
holders were less likely to pursue strategies that would maximize the size of the 
company rather than its profi tability.39 More generally, it is diffi cult to argue with the 

40  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
proposition that the chance to get rich from exercising stock options is the primary 
reason for the 14-hour days and 6-day work weeks that many employees of fast-
growing companies put in.
However, the practice of granting stock options in particular has become increas-
ingly controversial. Many top managers often earn huge bonuses from exercising 
stock options that were granted several years previously. While not denying that 
these options do motivate managers to improve company performance, critics claim 
that they are often too generous. A particular cause for concern is that stock options 
are often granted at such low strike prices that senior managers can hardly fail to 
make a signifi cant amount of money by exercising them, even if the company un-
derperforms the stock market by a signifi cant margin. Indeed, serious examples of 
the agency problem emerged in 2005 and 2006 when the Securities and Exchange 
Commission started to investigate a number of companies where stock options 
granted to senior executives had apparently been “backdated” to a time when the 
stock price was lower, enabling the executive to earn more money than if those op-
tions had simply been dated on the day they were granted.40 By 2007, the SEC was 
investigating some 130 companies for possible fraud relating to stock option dating. 
Included in the list were some major corporations including Apple Computer, Jabil 
Circuit, United Health, and Home Depot.41
Other critics of stock options, including the famous investor Warren Buffett, 
complain that huge stock option grants increase the outstanding number of shares in 
a company and therefore dilute the equity of stockholders; accordingly, they should 
be shown in company accounts as an expense against profi ts (a practice that was not 
required until mid-2005).
To summarize, in theory, stock options and other stock-based compensation 
methods are a good idea; in practice, they have been abused. To limit the abuse, ac-
counting rules now require that stock options be treated as an expense that must be 
charged against profi ts. Some companies took matters into their own hands even be-
fore the change in accounting rules. Microsoft, for example, stopped issuing options 
to employees in 2003, replacing them with smaller stock grants. Since 2002, Boeing 
has expensed options in its accounts. The aerospace company has also gone an im-
portant step further in an effort to align management and stockholder interests, issu-
ing what it calls “performance share” units that are convertible into common stock 
only if its stock appreciates at least 10% annually for 5 years. What these companies 
are trying to do in their own way is to limit the free ride that many holders of stock 
options enjoyed during the boom of the 1990s, while continuing to maintain a focus 
on aligning management and stockholder interests through stock-based compensa-
tion schemes.42
Financial Statements and Auditors Publicly trading companies in the United 
States are required to fi le quarterly and annual reports with the SEC that are pre-
pared according to Generally Agreed Accounting Principles (GAAP). The purpose 
of this requirement is to give consistent, detailed, and accurate information about 
how effi ciently and effectively the agents of stockholders, the managers, are run-
ning the company. To make sure that managers do not misrepresent this fi nancial 
information, the SEC also requires that the accounts be audited by an independent 
and accredited accounting fi rm. Similar regulations exist in most other developed 
nations. If the system works as intended, stockholders can have a lot of faith that the 
information contained in fi nancial statements accurately refl ects the state of affairs 

Takeover Constraint
The risk of being 
acquired by another 
company.
 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
41
at a company. Among other things, such information can enable a stockholder to 
calculate the profi tability of a company in which she invests and to compare its prof-
itability against that of competitors.
Unfortunately, in the United States at least, this system has not been working as 
intended. Although the vast majority of companies do fi le accurate information in 
their fi nancial statements and although most auditors do a good job of reviewing 
that information, there is evidence that a minority of companies have abused the 
system, aided in part by the compliance of auditors. This was clearly an issue at 
bankrupt energy trader Enron, where the CFO and others misrepresented the true 
fi nancial state of the company to investors by creating off-balance-sheet partnerships 
that hid the true state of Enron’s indebtedness from public view. Enron’s auditor, 
Arthur Andersen, also apparently went along with this deception in direct violation 
of its fi duciary duty. The complacency of Arthur Andersen with fi nancial fraud at 
Enron appears to have been due to the fact that Arthur Anderson also had lucrative 
consulting contracts with Enron that it did not want to jeopardize by questioning 
the accuracy of the company’s fi nancial statements. The losers in this mutual decep-
tion were shareholders who had to rely upon inaccurate information to make their 
investment decisions.
There have been numerous examples in recent years of managers gaming fi -
nancial statements to present a distorted picture of their company’s fi nances to 
investors. The typical motive has been to infl ate the earnings or revenues of a 
company, thereby generating investor enthusiasm and propelling the stock price 
higher, which gives managers an opportunity to cash in stock option grants for 
huge personal gain, obviously at the expense of stockholders who have been mis-
lead by the reports.
The gaming of fi nancial statements by companies raises serious questions about 
the accuracy of the information contained in audited fi nancial statements. In re-
sponse, in 2002 the United States passed the Sarbanes-Oxley bill into law, which rep-
resents the biggest overall of accounting rules and corporate governance procedures 
since the 1930s. Among other things, Sarbanes-Oxley set up a new oversight board 
for accounting fi rms, required CEOs and CFOs to endorse their company’s fi nancial 
statements, and barred companies from hiring the same accounting fi rm for auditing 
and consulting services.
The Takeover Constraint Given the imperfections in corporate governance 
mechanisms, it is clear that the agency problem may still exist at some companies. 
However, stockholders still have some residual power, for they can always sell their 
shares. If they start doing so in large numbers, the price of the company’s shares will 
decline. If the share price falls far enough, the company might be worth less on the 
stock market than the book value of its assets. At this point, it may become an attrac-
tive acquisition target and runs the risk of being purchased by another enterprise, 
against the wishes of the target company’s management.
The risk of being acquired by another company is known as the takeover 
constraint. The takeover constraint limits the extent to which managers can pursue 
strategies and take actions that put their own interests above those of stockholders. 
If they ignore stockholder interests and the company is acquired, senior manag-
ers typically lose their independence and probably their jobs as well. So the threat 
of takeover can constrain management action and limit the worst excesses of the 
agency problem.

Ethics
Accepted principles 
of right or wrong that 
govern the conduct 
of a person, the 
behavior of members 
of a profession, or 
the actions of an 
organization.
Business Ethics
Accepted principles 
of right or wrong 
governing the conduct 
of business-people.
Ethical Dilemmas
Situations where 
there is no agreement 
over exactly what the 
accepted principles of 
right and wrong are, 
or where none of the 
available alternatives 
seems ethically 
acceptable.
42  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Ethics and Strategy
The term ethics refers to accepted principles of right or wrong that govern the con-
duct of a person, the members of a profession, or the actions of an organization. 
Business ethics are the accepted principles of right or wrong governing the conduct 
of business people. Ethical decisions are those that are in accordance with those ac-
cepted principles of right and wrong, whereas an unethical decision is one that vio-
lates accepted principles. This is not as straightforward as it sounds. Managers may 
be confronted with ethical dilemmas, which are situations where there is no agree-
ment over exactly what the accepted principles of right and wrong are, or where 
none of the available alternatives seems ethically acceptable.
In our society, many accepted principles of right and wrong are not only univer-
sally recognized, but are also codifi ed into law. In the business arena there are laws 
governing product liability (tort laws), contracts and breaches of contract (contract 
law), the protection of intellectual property (intellectual property law), competitive 
behavior (antitrust law), and the selling of securities (securities law). Not only is it 
unethical to break these laws, it is illegal.
It is important to realize, however, that behaving ethically goes beyond staying 
within the bounds of the law. There are many cases of strategies and actions that 
while legal, do not seem to be ethical. For example, in their quest to boost profi t-
ability, during the 1990s managers at Nike contracted out the production of sports 
shoes to producers in the developing world. Unfortunately for Nike, the working 
conditions at several of these producers were very poor and the company was subse-
quently attacked for using “sweatshop labor”. Typical of the allegations were those 
detailed in the CBS news program “48 hours.” The report told of young women at 
a Vietnamese subcontractor who worked 6 days a week, in poor working condi-
tions with toxic materials, for only 20 cents an hour. The report also stated that a 
living wage in Vietnam was at least $3 a day, an income that could not be achieved 
without working substantial overtime. Nike was not breaking any laws, nor were its 
subcontractors, but this report, and others like it, raised questions about the ethics 
of using “sweatshop labor.” It may have been legal. It may have helped the company 
to increase its profi tability. But was it ethical to use subcontractors who by Western 
standards exploited their workforce? Nike’s critics thought not, and the company 
found itself the focus of a wave of demonstrations and consumer boycotts.43
In this section, we take a closer look at the ethical issues that managers may con-
front when developing strategy, and at the steps managers can take to ensure that 
strategic decisions are not only legal, but also ethical.
Ethical Issues in Strategy
The ethical issues that managers confront cover a wide range of topics but most 
arise due to a potential confl ict between the goals of the enterprise, or the goals of 
individual managers, and the fundamental rights of important stakeholders includ-
ing stockholders, customers, employees, suppliers, competitors, communities, and 
the general public. Stakeholders have basic rights that should be respected, and it is 
unethical to violate those rights.
Stockholders have the right to timely and accurate information about their invest-
ment (in accounting statements), and it is unethical to violate that right. Customers 
have the right to be fully informed about the products and services they purchase, 
including the right to information about how those products might cause harm 

Self-Dealing
Occurs when managers 
ﬁ nd a way to feather 
their own nests with 
corporate monies.
Information 
Manipulation
Occurs when managers 
use their control over 
corporate data to distort 
or hide information in 
order to enhance their 
own ﬁ nancial situation 
or the competitive 
position of the ﬁ rm.
Anticompetitive 
Behavior
Actions aimed at 
harming actual or 
potential competitors, 
most often by using 
monopoly power, 
thereby enhancing the 
long-run prospects of 
the ﬁ rm.
 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
43
to them or others, and it is unethical to restrict their access to such information. 
Employees have the right to safe working conditions, fair compensation for the work 
they perform, and to be treated in a just manner by managers. Suppliers have the 
right to expect contracts to be respected, and the fi rm should not take advantage of 
a power disparity between themselves and a supplier to opportunistically rewrite a 
contract. Competitors have the right to expect that the fi rm will abide by the rules of 
competition and not violate the basic principles of antitrust laws. Communities and 
the general public, including their political representatives in government, have the 
right to expect that a fi rm will not violate the basic expectations that society places 
on enterprises—for example, by dumping toxic pollutants into the environment or 
overcharging for work performed on government contracts.
Those who take the stakeholder view of business ethics often argue that it is in 
the enlightened self-interest of managers to behave in an ethical manner that recog-
nizes and respects the fundamental rights of stakeholders, because doing so will en-
sure the support of stakeholders, which ultimately benefi ts the fi rm and its managers. 
Others go beyond this instrumental approach to ethics to argue that in many cases, 
acting ethically is simply the right thing to do. They argue that businesses need to 
recognize their noblesse oblige and give something back to the society that made 
their success possible. Noblesse oblige is a French term that refers to honorable and 
benevolent behavior considered the responsibility of people of high (noble) birth. In 
a business setting, it is taken to mean benevolent behavior that is the moral respon-
sibility of successful enterprises.
Oftentimes, unethical behavior arises in a corporate setting when managers de-
cide to put the attainment of their own personal goals, or the goals of the enterprise, 
above the fundamental rights of one or more stakeholder groups (in other words, 
unethical behavior may arise from agency problems). The most common examples 
of such behavior involve self-dealing, information manipulation, anticompetitive 
behavior, opportunistic exploitation of other players in the value chain in which the 
fi rm is embedded (including suppliers, complement providers, and distributors), the 
maintenance of substandard working conditions, environmental degradation, and 
corruption.
Self-dealing occurs when managers fi nd a way to feather their own nests with 
corporate monies, and we have already discussed several examples in this chap-
ter (e.g., at Tyco and Computer Associates). Information manipulation occurs when 
managers use their control over corporate data to distort or hide information in or-
der to enhance their own fi nancial situation, or the competitive position of the fi rm. 
As we have seen, many of the recent accounting scandals involved the deliberate ma-
nipulation of fi nancial information. Information manipulation can also occur with 
regard to nonfi nancial data. This occurred when managers at the tobacco companies 
suppressed internal research that linked smoking to health problems, violating the 
rights of consumers to accurate information about the dangers of smoking. When 
evidence of this came to light, lawyers bought class action suits against the tobacco 
companies, claiming that they had intentionally caused harm to smokers—they had 
broken tort law by promoting a product that they knew did serious harm to con-
sumers. In 1999, the tobacco companies settled a lawsuit brought by the states who 
sought to recover health care costs associated with tobacco related illnesses; the total 
payout to the states—$260 billion!
Anticompetitive behavior covers a range of actions aimed at harming actual or 
potential competitors, most often by using monopoly power, thereby enhancing the 
long-run prospects of the fi rm. For example, in the 1990s the Justice Department 

Opportunistic 
Exploitation
Occurs when the 
managers of a ﬁ rm 
seek to unilaterally 
rewrite the terms of a 
contract with suppliers, 
buyers, or complement 
providers in a way that 
is more favorable to 
the ﬁ rm, often using 
their power to force the 
revision through.
Substandard working 
conditions
Occurs when managers 
underinvest in working 
conditions, or pay 
employees below 
market rates, in order 
to reduce their costs 
of production.
Environmental 
degradation
Occurs when a ﬁ rm 
takes actions that 
directly or indirectly 
result in pollution 
or other forms of 
environmental harm.
Corruption
Arises in a business 
context when 
managers pay bribes to 
gain access to lucrative 
business contracts.
44  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
claimed that Microsoft used its monopoly in operating systems to force PC manufac-
turers to bundle Microsoft’s Web browser, Internet Explorer, with Windows and to 
display Internet Explorer prominently on the computer desktop (the screen you see 
when you start a personal computer). Microsoft reportedly told PC manufacturers 
that it would not supply them with Windows unless they did this. Since the PC 
manufacturers had to have Windows to sell their machines, this was a powerful 
threat. This alleged action, an example of “tie in sales,” is illegal under antitrust laws, 
and, purportedly, aimed to drive competing browser maker, Netscape, out of business. 
The courts ruled that Microsoft was indeed abusing its monopoly power in this case, 
and under a 2001 consent decree the company agreed to stop the practice.
Putting the legal issues aside, actions such as those allegedly undertaken by man-
agers at Microsoft are unethical on at least three counts—fi rst, they violate the rights 
of end consumers by unfairly limiting their choices; second, they violate the rights of 
downstream participants in the industry value chain, in this case PC manufacturers, 
by forcing them to incorporate a particular product in their design; and third, they 
violate the rights of competitors to free and fair competition.
Opportunistic exploitation of other players in the value chain in which the fi rm 
is embedded is another example of unethical behavior. Opportunistic exploitation of 
this kind typically occurs when the managers of a fi rm seek to unilaterally rewrite the 
terms of a contract with suppliers, buyers, or complement providers in a way that is 
more favorable to the fi rm, often using their power to force the revision through. For 
example, in the late 1990s Boeing entered into a $2 billion contract with Titanium 
Metals Corp to buy certain amounts of titanium annually for 10 years. In 2000, af-
ter Titanium Metals Corp had already spent $100 million to expand its production 
capacity to fulfi ll the contract, Boeing demanded that the contract be renegotiated, 
asking for lower prices and an end to minimum purchase agreements. As a major 
purchaser of titanium, managers at Boeing probably thought they had the power 
to push this contract revision through, and the investment by Titanium meant that 
they would be unlikely to walk away from the deal. Titanium Metals Corp promptly 
sued Boeing for breach of contract. The dispute was settled out of court, and under 
a revised agreement Boeing agreed to pay monetary damages to Titanium Metals 
(reported to be in the $60 million range) and entered into an amended contract to 
purchase titanium. Irrespective of the legality of this action, it is arguably unethical 
since it violates the rights of suppliers to have buyers who deal with them in a fair 
and open way.
Substandard working conditions arise when managers underinvest in working 
conditions, or pay employees below market rates, in order to reduce their costs of 
production. The most extreme examples of such behavior occur when a fi rm estab-
lishes operations in countries that lack the workplace regulations found in devel-
oped nations such as the United States. The example of Nike falls into this category. 
However, examples of substandard working conditions also occur within developed 
nations. As documented in the Running Case, for example, Walmart has been ac-
cused of promoting substandard working conditions in its U.S. operations.
Environmental degradation occurs when the fi rm takes actions that directly or 
indirectly result in pollution or other forms of environmental harm. Environmental 
degradation can violate the rights of local communities and the general public for 
clean air and water, land that is free from pollution by toxic chemicals, excessive de-
forestation that results in land erosion and fl oods (forests absorb rainfall and limit 
fl ooding), and so on.
Finally, corruption can arise in a business context when managers pay bribes to 
gain access to lucrative business contracts. Corruption is clearly unethical since it 

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
45
When Sam Walton founded Walmart, one of his core 
values was that if the company treated employees with 
respect, tied compensation to the performance of the 
enterprise, trusted them with important information 
and decisions, and provided ample opportunities for ad-
vancement, they would repay the company with dedi-
cation and hard work. For years the formula seemed to 
work. Employees were called “associates” to reﬂ ect 
their status within the company; even the lowest hourly 
employee was eligible to participate in proﬁ t-sharing 
plans and could use proﬁ t-sharing bonuses to purchase 
company stock at a discount to its market value. The com-
pany made a virtue of promoting from within (two-thirds 
of managers at Walmart started as hourly employees). 
At the same time, Walton and his successors always 
demanded loyalty and hard work from employees—
managers for example, were expected to move to a 
new store on very short notice—and base pay for hourly 
workers was very low. Still, as long as the up side was 
there, little grumbling was heard from employees.
However, more recently the relationships between 
the company and its employees has been strained by 
a succession of lawsuits claiming that Walmart pres-
sures hourly employees to work overtime without com-
pensating them; systematically discriminates against 
women; and knowingly uses contractors who hire un-
documented immigrant workers to clean its stores, pay-
ing them below minimum wage.
For example, a class-action lawsuit in Washington 
State claimed that Walmart routinely (1) pressured 
hourly employees not to report all their time worked; 
(2) failed to keep true time records, sometimes shaving 
hours from employee logs; (3) failed to give employees 
full rest or meal breaks; (4) threatened to ﬁ re or de-
mote employees who would not work off the clock; and 
(5) required workers to attend unpaid meetings and 
computer training. Moreover, the suit claimed that 
Walmart has a strict “no overtime” policy, punishing 
employees who work more than 40 hours a week, yet 
the company also gives employees more work than can 
be completed in a 40-hour week. The Washington suit is 
one of more than 30 suits that have been ﬁ led around 
the nation in recent years.
With regard to discrimination against women, com-
plaints date back to a 1996, when an assistant manager 
in a California store, Stephanie Odle, came across the 
W-2 of a male assistant manager who worked in the 
same store. The W-2 showed that he was paid $10,000 
more than Odle. When she asked her boss to explain 
the disparity, she was told that her coworker had “a 
wife and kids to support.” When Odle, a single mother, 
protested, she was asked to submit a personal house-
hold budget. She was then granted a $2,080 raise. 
Subsequently, Odle was ﬁ red, she claims for speaking 
up. In 1998, she ﬁ led a discrimination suit against the 
company. Others began to ﬁ le suits around the same 
time, and by 2004 the legal action had evolved into a 
class action suit that covered 1.6 million current and for-
mer female employees at Walmart. The suit claims that 
Walmart did not pay female employees the same as 
their male counterparts and did not provide them with 
equal opportunities for promotion.
In the case of both undocumented overtime and 
discrimination, Walmart admits to no wrongdoing. The 
company does recognize that with more than 2 million 
employees, some problems are bound to arise, but it 
claims that there is no systematic company-wide effort 
to get hourly employees to work without pay or to dis-
criminate against women. Indeed, the company claims 
that this could not be the case because hiring and pro-
motion decisions are made at the store level.
For their part, critics charge that while the company 
may have no policies that promote undocumented over-
time or discrimination, the hard driving cost containment 
culture of the company had created an environment in 
which abuses can thrive. Store managers, for example, 
are expected to meet challenging performance goals, 
and, in an effort to do so, they may be tempted to pres-
sure subordinates to work additional hours without pay. 
Similarly, company policy requiring managers to move 
to different stores at short notice unfairly discriminates 
against women, who lack the ﬂ exibility to uproot their 
families and move them to another state at short notice.
While the lawsuits are ongoing and may take years 
to resolve, Walmart has taken steps to change its em-
ployment practices. For example, the company has cre-
ated a director of diversity, a diversity compliance team, 
and restructured its pay scales to promote equal pay 
regardless of gender. Walmart has also taken action to 
stop employees working overtime without pay. For ex-
ample, it programmed cash registers to shut down after 
an employee had exceeded a certain number of hours, 
and has told managers to make sure that employees 
take lunch and rest breaks.44
Working Conditions at Walmart
R U N N I N G  C A S E

46  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
violates a bundle of rights, including the right of competitors to a level playing fi eld 
when bidding for contracts, and when government offi cials are involved, the right of 
citizens to expect that government offi cials act in the best interest of the local commu-
nity or nation, and not in response to corrupt payments that feather their own nests.
The Roots of Unethical Behavior
Why do some managers behave unethically? Although there is no simple answer to 
this question a few generalizations that can be made. First, it is important to recog-
nize that the business ethics are not divorced from personal ethics—which are the 
generally accepted principles of right and wrong governing the conduct of individuals. 
As individuals, we are taught that it is wrong to lie and cheat—it is unethical—
and that it is right to behave with integrity and honor, and to stand up for what 
we believe to be right and true. The personal ethical code that guides our behavior 
comes from a number of sources, including our parents, our schools, our religion, 
and the media. Our personal ethical code will exert a profound infl uence on the way 
we behave as business people. An individual with a strong sense of personal ethics is 
less likely to behave in an unethical manner in a business setting, and in particularly, 
they are less likely to engage in self-dealing and more likely to behave with integrity.
Second, many studies of unethical behavior in a business setting have come to 
the conclusion that business people sometimes do not realize that they are behaving 
unethically, primarily because they simply fail to ask the relevant question—is this 
decision or action ethical? Instead, they apply a straightforward business calculus to 
what they perceive to be a business decision, forgetting that the decision may also 
have an important ethical dimension. The fault here lies in processes that do not in-
corporate ethical considerations into business decision making. This may have been 
the case at Nike when managers originally made subcontracting decisions. Those 
decisions were probably made on the basis of good economic logic. Subcontractors 
were probably chosen on the basis of business variables such as cost, delivery, and 
product quality, and the key managers simply failed to ask, “How does this subcon-
tractor treat their workforce”? If they thought about the question at all, they prob-
ably reasoned that it was the subcontractor’s concern, not theirs.
Unfortunately, the climate in some businesses does not encourage people to think 
through the ethical consequences of business decisions. This brings us to the third 
cause of unethical behavior in businesses—an organizational culture that deempha-
sizes business ethics, reducing all decisions to the purely economic. A fourth cause 
of unethical behavior that is related to this may be pressure from top management 
to meet performance goals that are unrealistic, and can only be attained by cutting 
corners or acting in an unethical manner. An organizational culture can “legitimize” 
behavior that society would judge as unethical, particularly when this is mixed with 
a focus on unrealistic performance goals, such as maximizing short-term economic 
performance, no matter what the costs. In such circumstances, there is a greater 
than average probability that managers will violate their own personal ethics and 
engage in behavior that is unethical. By the same token, an organization culture can 
do just the opposite and reinforce the need for ethical behavior. At HP, for example, 
Bill Hewlett and David Packard, the company’s founders, propagated a set of values 
known as The HP Way. These values, which shape the way business is conducted 
both within and by the corporation, have an important ethical component. Among 
other things, they stress the need for confi dence in and respect for people, open com-
munication, and concern for the individual employee.

Code of Ethics
A formal statement 
of the ethical principles 
a business adheres to.
 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
47
This brings us to a fi fth root cause of unethical behavior—leadership. Leaders 
help to establish the culture of an organization, and they set the example that others 
follow. Other employees in a business often take their cue from business leaders and 
if those leaders do not behave in an ethical manner, nor might they. It is not what 
leaders say that matters, but what they do.
Behaving Ethically
What is the best way for managers to make sure that the ethical considerations are 
taken into account when making business decisions? There is no easy answers to this 
question, for many of the most vexing ethical problems arise because there are very 
real dilemmas inherent in them and no obvious right course of action. Nevertheless, 
there are many things that managers can and should do to make sure that basic 
ethical principles are adhered to, and that ethical issues are routinely inserted into 
business decisions. However, as discussed below, there are a number of things that 
managers can do to make sure that ethical issues are considered in business decision.
Hiring and Promotion It seems obvious that businesses should strive to hire peo-
ple who have a strong sense of personal ethics, and would not engage in unethical 
or illegal behavior. Similarly, you would rightly expect a business to not promote 
people, and perhaps fi re people, whose behavior does not match generally accepted 
ethical standards. But when you think about it, doing so is actually very diffi cult. 
After all, how do you know that someone has a poor sense of personal ethics? In 
our society, immoral individuals have an incentive to hide a lack of personal ethics 
from public view. Once people realize that you are unethical they will no longer 
trust you.
Is there anything that businesses can do to make sure that they do not hire people 
who subsequently turn out to have poor personal ethics, particularly given that peo-
ple have an incentive to hide this from public view (indeed, the unethical person may 
well lie about their nature)? Businesses can give potential employees psychological 
tests to try and discern their ethical predisposition and they can check with prior 
employees regarding someone’s reputation (e.g., by asking for letters of reference, 
and talking to people who have worked with the prospective employee). The latter 
is certainly not uncommon and does indeed infl uence the hiring process. As for pro-
moting people who have displayed poor ethics, that should not occur in a company 
where the organization culture places a high value on the need for ethical behavior, 
and where leaders act accordingly.
Organization Culture and Leadership To foster ethical behavior, businesses need 
to build an organization culture that places a high value on ethical behavior. Three 
things are particularly important in building an organization culture that emphasizes 
ethical behavior. First, the businesses must explicitly articulate values that place a 
strong emphasis on ethical behavior. Many companies now do this by drafting a code 
of ethics, which is a formal statement of the ethical priorities a business adheres to. 
Others have incorporated ethical statements into documents that articulate the val-
ues or mission of the business. The food and consumer products giant Unilever has a 
code of ethics that includes the following points “We will not use any form of forced, 
compulsory or child labor” and “No employee may offer, give or receive any gift or 
payment which is, or may be construed as being, a bribe. Any demand for, or offer 
of, a bribe must be rejected immediately and reported to management.” Unilever’s 

48  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
principles send a very clear message about the appropriate ethics to managers and 
employees within the organization.
Having articulated values in a code of ethics or some other document, it is im-
portant that leaders in the business give life and meaning to those words by repeat-
edly emphasizing their importance, and then acting on them. This means using every 
relevant opportunity to stress the importance of business ethics and making sure 
that key business decisions not only make good economic sense, but also are ethi-
cal. Many companies have gone a step further, hiring independent fi rms to audit the 
company and make sure that they are behaving in a manner consistent with their 
ethical code. Nike, for example, has in recent years hired independent auditors to 
make sure that subcontractors used by the company are living up to Nike’s code of 
conduct.
Finally, building an organization culture that places a high value on ethical be-
havior requires incentive and promotional systems that reward people who engage 
in ethical behavior and sanction those who do not.
Decision-Making Processes In addition to establishing the right kind of ethical 
culture in an organization, business people must be able to think through the ethical 
implications of decisions in a systematic way. To do this, they need a moral compass. 
Some experts on ethics have proposed a straightforward practical guide—or ethical 
algorithm—to determine whether a decision is ethical. A decision is acceptable on 
ethical grounds if a business person can answer “yes” to each of these questions:
1. Does my decision fall within the accepted values or standards that typically ap-
ply in the organizational environment (as articulated in a code of ethics or some 
other corporate statement)?
2. Am I willing to see the decision communicated to all stakeholders affected by 
it—for example, by having it reported in newspapers or on television?
3. Would the people with whom I have a signifi cant personal relationship, such as 
family members, friends, or even managers in other businesses, approve of the 
decision?
Ethics Ofﬁ cers To make sure that a business behaves in an ethical manner, a num-
ber of fi rms now have ethics offi cers. These are individuals who are responsible for 
making sure that all employees are trained to be ethically aware, that ethical consid-
erations enter the business decision-making process, and that the company’s code of 
ethics is adhered to. Ethics offi cers may also be responsible for auditing decisions to 
make sure that they are consistent with this code. In many businesses, ethics offi cers 
act as an internal ombudsperson with responsibility for handling confi dential inqui-
ries from employees, investigating complaints from employees or others, reporting 
fi ndings and making recommendations for change.
United Technologies, a large aerospace company with worldwide revenues of 
over $28 billion, has had a formal code of ethics since 1990. There are now some 
160 “business practice offi cers” within United Technologies (this is the company’s 
name for ethics offi cers) who are responsible for making sure that the code is ad-
hered to. United Technologies also established an ombudsperson program in 1986 
that lets employees inquire anonymously to business practice offi cers about ethics 
issues. The program has received some 56,000 inquiries since 1986 and 8,000 cases 
have been handled by an ombudsperson.

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
49
Strong Corporate Governance Strong corporate governance procedures are 
needed to make sure that managers adhere to ethical norms, and in particular, to 
make sure that senior managers do not engage in self-dealing or information ma-
nipulation. The key to strong corporate governance procedures is an independent 
board of directors that is willing to hold top managers into account for self-dealing, 
and is able to question the information provided to them by managers. If companies 
like Tyco, WorldCom, and Enron had a strong board of directors, it is unlikely that 
they would have been subsequently racked by accounting scandals, and top man-
agers would not have been able to view the funds of these corporations as their own 
personal treasuries.
Moral Courage It is important to recognize that on occasion, managers may need 
signifi cant moral courage. It is moral courage that enables a manager to walk away 
from a decision that is profi table, but unethical. It is moral courage that gives an 
employee the strength to say no to a superior instructing her to pursue unethical ac-
tions. And, it is moral courage that gives employees the integrity to go public to the 
media and blow the whistle on persistent unethical behavior in a company. Moral 
courage does not come easily—there are well known cases where individuals have 
lost their jobs because they blew the whistle on corporate behaviors they thought 
unethical, telling the media about what was occurring.
Companies can strengthen the moral courage of employees by committing them-
selves to not take retribution on employees that exercise moral courage, say no to 
superiors or otherwise complain about unethical actions. For example, consider the 
following extract from Unilever’s code of ethics:
Any breaches of the Code must be reported in accordance with the procedures 
specifi ed by the Joint Secretaries. The Board of Unilever will not criticize man-
agement for any loss of business resulting from adherence to these principles 
and other mandatory policies and instructions. The Board of Unilever expects 
employees to bring to their attention, or to that of senior management, any 
breach or suspected breach of these principles. Provision has been made for 
employees to be able to report in confi dence and no employee will suffer as a 
consequence of doing so.
This statement gives “permission” to employees to exercise moral courage. 
Companies can also set up ethics hotlines that allow employees to anonymously 
register complaints with a corporate ethics offi cer.
Final Words
All of the steps discussed in this chapter can help to make sure that when managers 
make business decisions, they are fully cognizant of the ethical implications, and do 
not violate basic ethical prescripts. At the same time, it must be recognized that not 
all ethical dilemmas have clean and obvious solutions—indeed, that is why they are 
dilemmas. At the end of the day, there are clearly things that a business should not 
do, and there are things that they should do, but there are also actions that present 
managers with true dilemmas. In these cases, a premium is placed on the ability of 
managers to make sense out of complex messy situations, and make balanced deci-
sions that are as just as possible.

50  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
1. Stakeholders are individuals or groups that have 
an interest, claim, or stake in the company, in 
what it does, and in how well it performs.
2. A company cannot always satisfy the claims of all 
stakeholders. The goals of different groups may 
confl ict. The company must identify the most im-
portant stakeholders and give highest priority to 
pursuing strategies that satisfy their needs.
3. The mission statement can be used to incorpo-
rate stakeholder demands into the strategy mak-
ing process of a company. The mission statement 
includes the mission, and statements of corporate 
vision, values, and goals.
4. A company’s stockholders are its legal owners 
and the providers of risk capital, a major source 
of the capital resources that allow a company to 
operate its business. Maximizing long-run prof-
itability is the route to maximizing returns to 
stockholders.
5. An agency relationship is held to arise whenever 
one party delegates decision-making authority or 
control over resources to another.
6. The essence of the agency problem is that the in-
terests of principals and agents are not always 
the same, and some agents may take advantage 
of information asymmetries to maximize their 
own interests at the expense of principals.
7. A number of governance mechanisms serve 
to limit the agency problem. These include the 
 
board of directors, stock-based compensation 
schemes, and the threat of a takeover.
 8. The term ethics refers to accepted principles 
of right or wrong that govern the conduct of a 
person, the members of a profession, or the ac-
tions of an organization. Business ethics are the 
accepted principles of right or wrong governing 
the conduct of business people, and an ethical 
strategy is one that does not violate these ac-
cepted principles.
 9. Unethical behavior is rooted in poor personal 
ethics, the psychological and geographical dis-
tances of a foreign subsidiary from the home of-
fi ce, a failure to incorporate ethical issues into 
strategic and operational decision making, a 
dysfunctional culture and failure of leaders to 
act in an ethical manger.
10. To make sure that ethical issues are considered in 
business decisions, managers should (a) favor hir-
ing and promoting people with a well grounded 
sense of personal ethics; (b) build an organizational 
culture that places a high value on ethical behavior; 
(c) make sure that leaders within the business not 
only articulate the rhetoric of ethical behavior, 
but also act in a manner that is consistent with 
that rhetoric; (d) put decision-making processes 
in place that require people to consider the ethical 
dimension of business decisions; (e) be morally 
courageous and encourage others to do the same.
Summary of Chapter
1. How prevalent was the agency problem in corpo-
rate America during the late 1990s?
2. Who benefi ted the most from the late 1990s 
boom in initial public offerings of Internet com-
panies: investors (stockholders) in those compa-
nies, managers, or investment bankers?
3. How might a company confi gure its strategy-
making processes to reduce the probability that 
managers will pursue their own self-interest, at 
the expense of stockholders?
4. Under what conditions is it ethically defensible 
to outsource production to producers in the de-
veloping world who have much lower labor costs 
when such actions also involve laying off long-
term employees in the fi rm’s home country?
Discussion Questions

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
51
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small-Group Exercise: 
Evaluating Stakeholder Claims
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people, 
and appoint one group member as a spokesper-
son who will communicate your fi ndings to the 
class when called on by the instructor. Discuss the 
following:
1. Identify the key stakeholders of your educa-
tional institution. What claims do they place 
on the institution?
2. Strategically, how is the institution responding 
to those claims? Do you think the institution 
is pursuing the correct strategies in view of 
these claims? What might it do differently, if 
anything?
3. Prioritize the stakeholders in order of their 
importance for the survival and health of the 
institution. Do the claims of different stake-
holder groups confl ict with each other? If 
claims confl ict, whose should be tackled fi rst?
Visiting Merck
Visit the Web site of Merck, the world’s largest 
pharmaceutical company and read the Mission 
and Values statements posted there (http://www
.merck.com/about/mission.html). Then answer 
the following questions:
1. Evaluate this mission statement in the light of 
the material contained in this chapter. Does 
the mission clearly state what Merck’s basic 
strategic goal is? Do the values listed here pro-
vide a good guideline for managerial action at 
Merck? Do those values recognize stakeholder 
claims?
2. Read the section on Merck’s corporate re-
sponsibility and code of conduct (http://www
.merck.com/cr/). How does Merck attempt to 
balance the goals of providing stockholders 
with an adequate rate of return on their in-
vestment, while at the same time developing 
medicines that benefi t humanity and that can 
be acquired by people in need at an affordable 
price? Do you think that Merck does a good 
job of balancing these goals?
3. In late September 2004, Merck recalled one of 
its best drugs, Celebrex, after research showed 
that people who used Celebrex had an elevated 
risk of suffering a heart attack. To what extent 
do you think that Merck’s values and code of 
conduct played a part in this decision? Do you 
think they pulled the drug from the market 
quickly enough (you may want to take a look 
at press reports on this issue).
General Task
Using the Web, fi nd an example of a company 
where there was overt confl ict between principals 
and agents over the future strategic direction of 
the organization.
Exploring the Web

52  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
Google, the fast growing Internet search engine com-
pany, was established with a clear mission in mind: 
to organize the world’s information and make it 
universally acceptable and useful. This mission has 
driven Google to create a search engine that on the 
basis of key words entered by the user will scan the 
Web for text, images, videos, news articles, books, 
and academic journals, among other things. Google 
has built a highly profi table advertising business on 
the back of its search engine, which is by far the 
most widely used in the world. Under the pay-per-
click business model, advertisers pay Google every 
time a user of its search engine clicks on one of the 
paid links typically listed on the right hand side of 
Google’s results page.
Google has long operated with the mantra “don’t 
be evil!” When this phrase was originally formulated, 
the central message was that Google should never 
compromise the integrity of its search results. For ex-
ample, Google decided not to let commercial consid-
erations bias its ranking. This is why paid links are 
not included in its main search results, but listed on 
the right hand side of the results page. The mantra 
“don’t be evil,” however, has become more than that 
at Google; it has become a central organizing prin-
ciple of the company and an ethical touchstone by 
which managers judge all of its strategic decisions.
Google’s mission and mantra raised hopes among 
human rights activities that the search engine would 
be an unstoppable tool for circumventing govern-
ment censorship, democratizing information, and al-
lowing people in heavily censored societies to gain 
access to information that their governments were 
trying to suppress, including the largest country on 
earth, China.
Google began a Chinese language service in 
2000, although the service was operated from the 
United States. In 2002, the site was blocked by the 
Chinese authorities. Would be users of Google’s 
search engine were directed to a Chinese rival. The 
blocking took Google’s managers totally by surprise. 
Reportedly, cofounder Sergey Brin immediately or-
dered half a dozen books on China and quickly read 
them in an effort to understand this vast country. 
Two weeks later, for reasons that have never been 
made clear, Google’s service was restored. Google 
said that it did not change anything about its service, 
but Chinese users soon found that they could not 
access politically sensitive sites that appeared in 
Google’s search results, suggesting that the govern-
ment was censoring more aggressively. (The Chinese 
government has essentially erected a giant fi rewall 
between the Internet in China and the rest of the 
world, allowing its censors to block sites outside of 
China that are deemed subversive.)
By late 2004, it was clear to Google that China 
was a strategically important market. To exploit the 
opportunities that China offered, however, the com-
pany realized that it would have to establish opera-
tions in China, including its own computer servers 
and a Chinese home page. Serving Chinese users 
from the United States was too slow, and the service 
was badly degraded by the censorship imposed. This 
created a dilemma for the company given the “don’t 
be evil” mantra. Once it established Chinese opera-
tions, it would be subject to Chinese regulations, 
including those censoring information. For perhaps 
18 months, senior managers inside the company de-
bated the pros and cons of entering China directly, 
as opposed to serving the market from its U.S. site. 
Ultimately, they decided that the opportunity was 
too large to ignore. With over 100 million users, 
and that number growing fast, China promised to 
become the largest Internet market in the world and 
a major source of advertising revenue for Google. 
Moreover, Google was at a competitive disadvan-
tage relative to its U.S. rivals, Yahoo and Microsoft’s 
MSN, which had already established operations in 
China, and relative to China’s homegrown company, 
Baidu, which leads the market for Internet search 
in China (in 2006, Baidu had around 40% of the 
market for search in China, compared to Google’s 
30% share).
In mid-2005, Google established a direct sales 
presence in China. In January 2006, Google rolled 
out its Chinese home page, which is hosted on servers 
based in China and maintained by Chinese employees 
in Beijing and Shanghai. Upon launch, Google stated 
Google’s Mission, Ethical Principles, and Involvement in China

 
Chapter 2 Stakeholders, The Mission, Governance, and Business Ethics  
53
that its objective was to give Chinese users “the 
greatest amount of information possible.” It was 
immediately apparent that this was not the same 
as “access to all information.” In accordance with 
Chinese regulations, Google had decided to engage in 
self-censorship, excluding results on such politically 
sensitive topics as democratic reform, Taiwanese in-
dependence, the banned Falun Gong movement, and 
references to the notorious Tiananmen Square mas-
sacre of democratic protestors that occurred in 1989. 
Human rights activists quickly protested, arguing 
that Google had abandoned its principles in order to 
make greater profi ts. For its part, Google’s managers 
claimed that it was better to give Chinese users access 
to a limited amount of information, than to none at 
all, or to serve the market from the United States and 
allow the government to continue proactively censor-
ing its search results, which would result in a badly 
degraded service. Sergey Brin justifi ed the Chinese 
decision by saying that “it will be better for Chinese 
Web users, because ultimately they will get more 
information, though not quite all of it.” Moreover, 
Google argued that it was the only search engine in 
China that let users know if search results had been 
censored (which is done by the inclusion of a bullet at 
the bottom of the page indicating censorship).45
Case Discussion Questions
1. How does Google’s mission drive strategy at the 
company?
2. Is Google’s stance toward Internet search in 
China consistent with its mission?
3. Do you think that Google should have entered 
China and engaged in self-censorship, given the 
company’s long-standing mantra “Don’t be evil”? 
Is it better to engage in self-censorship than have 
the government censor for you?
4. If all foreign search engine companies declined 
to invest directly in China due to concerns over 
censorship, what do you think the results would 
be? Who would benefi t most from this action? 
Who would lose the most?
 1. E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder 
Approach (Boston, Mass.: Pitman Press, 1984).
 2. C. W. L. Hill and T. M. Jones, “Stakeholder-Agency 
Theory,” Journal of Management Studies 29 (1992): 
131–154 and J. G. March and H. A. Simon, Organizations 
(New York: Wiley, 1958).
 3. Hill and Jones, “Stakeholder-Agency Theory.”
 4. I. C. Macmillan and P. E. Jones, Strategy Formulation: 
Power and Politics (St. Paul, Minn.: West, 1986).
 5. John P. Kotter and James L. Heskett, Corporate Culture 
and Performance (New York: Free Press, 1992).
 6. http://www.kodak.com/US/en/corp/careers/why/
newvaluesmission.jhtml?pq-path2217/923/10669/
10677.
 7. These three questions were fi rst proposed by P. F. Drucker, 
Management—Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1974), 74–94.
 8. Derek F. Abell, Defi ning the Business: The Starting Point 
of Strategic Planning (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1980).
 9. P. A. Kidwell and P. E. Ceruzzi, Landmarks in Digital 
Computing (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute, 
1994).
 10. See G. Hamel and C. K. Prahalad, “Strategic Intent,” 
Harvard Business Review, May–June 1989, 64.
 11. J. C. Collins and J. I. Porras, “Building Your Company’s 
Vision,” Harvard Business Review, September–October 
1996, 65–77.
 12. http://www.nucor.com/.
 13. M. D. Richards, Setting Strategic Goals and Objectives 
(St. Paul, Minn.: West, 1986).
 14. E. A. Locke, G. P. Latham, and M. Erez, “The 
Determinants of Goal Commitment,” Academy of 
Management Review 13 (1988): 23–39.
 15. C. Y. Baldwin, “Fundamental Enterprise Valuation: 
Return on Invested Capital,” Harvard Business School 
Note 9-801-125, July 3, 2004; and T. Copeland et al., 
Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of 
Companies (New York: Wiley, 2000).
 16. R. E. Hoskisson, M. A. Hitt, and C. W. L. Hill, 
“Managerial Incentives and Investment in R&D in 
Large Multiproduct Firms,” Organization Science 3 
(1993): 325–341.
 17. Robert H. Hayes and William J. Abernathy, “Managing 
Our Way to Economic Decline,” Harvard Business 
Review, July–August 1980, 67–77.
 18. M. C. Jensen and W. H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: 
Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership 
Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3 (1976): 
305–360.
Notes

54  
Part 1 Introduction to Strategic Management
 19. Jensen and Meckling, “Theory of the Firm.” and E. F. Fama, 
“Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal 
of Political Economy 88 (1980): 375–390.
 20. Hill and Jones, “Stakeholder-Agency Theory.”
 21. For example, See R. Marris, The Economic Theory of 
Managerial Capitalism (London: Macmillan, 1964) 
and J. K. Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Boston, 
Mass.: Houghton Miffl in, 1970).
 22. “Money Well Spent: Corporate Parties,” The Economist, 
November 1, 2003, 79; “Tyco Pair Sentencing Expected 
on September 19th,” Wall Street Journal, August 2, 
2005, 1; “Off the Jail: Corporate Crime in America,” 
The Economist, June 25, 2005, 81; and N. Varchaver, 
“What’s Ed Breen Thinking?,” Fortune, March 20, 
2006, 135–139.
 23. Fama, “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.”
 24. A. Rappaport, “New Thinking on How to Link 
Executive Pay with Performance,” Harvard Business 
Review, March–April 1999, 91–105.
 25. J. S. Greenberg, “CEO Pay Drops but Cash is King,” 
Bloomberg Business Week, March 25, 2010.
 26. R. Kirkland, “The Real CEO Pay Problem,” Fortune, 
July 10, 2006, 78–82.
 27. D. Henry and D. Stead, “Worker vs CEO: Room to 
Run,” Business Week, October 30, 2006, 13.
 28. For academic studies that look at the determinants 
of CEO pay, See M. C. Jensen and K. J. Murphy, 
“Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives,” 
Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990): 225–264; 
Charles W. L. Hill and Phillip Phan, “CEO Tenure as 
a Determinant of CEO Pay,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 34 (1991): 707–717; H. L. Tosi and 
L. R. Gomez-Mejia, “CEO Compensation Monitoring and 
Firm Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 37 
(1994): 1002–1016; and Joseph F. Porac, James B. Wade, 
and Timothy G. Pollock, “Industry Categories and the 
Politics of the Comparable Firm in CEO Compensation,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 44 (1999): 112–144.
 29. Andrew Ward, “Home Depot Investors Stage a Revolt,” 
Financial Times, May 26, 2006, p. 20.
 30. R. Kirklad, “The Real CEO Pay Problem,” Fortune, 
July 10, 2006, 78–82.
 31. Data is from AFLCIO Web site, http://www.afl cio.org/
corporatewatch/paywatch/pay/.
 32. For recent research on this issue, See Peter J. lane, 
A. A. Cannella, and M. H. Lubatkin, “Agency Problems 
as Antecedents to Unrelated Mergers and Diversifi cation: 
Amihud and Lev Reconsidered,” Strategic Management 
Journal 19 (1998): 555–578.
 33. E. T. Penrose, The Theory of the Growth of the Firm 
(London: Macmillan, 1958).
 34. G. Edmondson and L. Cohn, “How Parmalat Went 
Sour,”Business Week, January 12, 2004, 46–50 and 
“Another Enron? Royal Dutch Shell,” The Economist, 
March 13, 2004, 71.
 35. O. E. Williamson, The Economic Institutions of 
Capitalism (New York: Free Press, 1985).
 36. Fama, “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.”
 37. S. Finkelstein and R. D’Aveni, “CEO Duality as a 
Double Edged Sword,” Academy of Management 
Journal 37 (1994): 1079–1108; B. Ram Baliga and 
R. C. Moyer, “CEO Duality and Firm Performance,” 
Strategic Management Journal 17 (1996): 41–53; 
M. L. Mace, Directors: Myth and Reality (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971); and S. C. Vance, 
Corporate Leadership: Boards of Directors and Strategy 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983).
 38. W. G. Lewellen, C. Eoderer, and A. Rosenfeld, “Merger 
Decisions and Executive Stock Ownership in Acquiring 
Firms,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 7 (1985): 
209–231.
 39. C. W. L. Hill and S. A. Snell, “External Control, 
Corporate Strategy, and Firm Performance,” Strategic 
Management Journal 9 (1988): 577–590.
 40. The phenomenon of back dating stock options was un-
covered by academic research, and then picked up by 
the SEC. See Erik Lie, “On the Timing of CEO Stock 
Option Awards,” Management Science 51 (2005): 
802–812.
 41. G. Colvin, “A Study in CEO Greed,” Fortune, June 12, 
2006, 53–55.
 42. D. Henry and M. Conlin, “Too Much of a Good 
Incentive?” Business Week, March 4, 2002, 38–39.
 43. “Boycott Nike” CBS News 48 Hours, October 17, 1996. 
D. Jones, “Critics Tie Sweatshop Sneakers to “Air Jordan,” 
USA Today, June 6, 1996, 1B and S. Greenhouse. “Nike 
Shoeplant in Vietnam is Called Unsafe for Workers,” 
New York Times, November 8, 1997.
 44. S. Holt, “Walmart Workers Suit Wins Class Action 
Status,” Seattle Times, October 9, 2004, E1, E4; 
C. Daniels, “Women versus Walmart,” Fortune, July 21, 
2003, 79–82; C. R. Gentry, “Off the Clock,” Chain Store 
Age, February 2003, 33–36; M. Grimm, “WalMart Uber 
Alles,” American Demographic, October 2003, 38–42; 
and S. Rosenbloom and M. Barbaro, “Green Light 
Specials, Now at Walmart,” New York Times, January 25, 
2009, B1, B4.
 45. Andy Kessler, “Sellout.com,” Wall Street Journal, 
January 31, 2006, A14; D. Henninger, “Wonderland: 
Google in China,” Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2006, 
p. A18; J. Dean, “Limited Search: As Google Pushes 
into China it Faces Clashes with Censors,” Wall Street 
Journal, December 16, 2005, p. A1; and Anonymous, 
“The party, the people, and the power of cyber talk: 
China and the Internet,” The Economist, April 29, 2006, 
28–30.

After reading this chapter you should be 
able to:
• Review the main technique used to ana-
lyze competition in an industry environ-
ment, the ﬁ ve forces model.
• Explore the concept of strategic groups 
and illustrate its implications for industry 
analysis.
• Discuss how industries evolve over 
time, with reference to the industry life 
cycle model.
• Show how trends in the macro- 
environment can shape the nature 
of competition in an industry.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Analyzing Industry Structure
Risk of Entry by Potential 
Competitors
Rivalry Among Established 
Companies
The Bargaining Power 
of Buyers
The Bargaining Power 
of Suppliers
Substitute Products
Porter’s Model Summarized
Strategic Groups within Industries
Implications of Strategic Groups
The Role of Mobility Barriers
Industry Life Cycle Analysis
Embryonic Industries
Growth Industries
Industry Shakeout
Mature Industries
Declining Industries
Summary
The Macroenvironment
Macroeconomic Forces
Global Forces
Technological Forces
Demographic Forces
Social Forces
Political and Legal Forces
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
External Analysis: 
The Identification of 
Opportunities and Threats 3

Opportunities
Opportunities arise 
when a company 
can take advantage 
of conditions in 
its environment 
to formulate and 
implement strategies 
that enable it to 
become more 
proﬁ table.
Threats
Threats arise when 
conditions in the 
external environment 
endanger the integrity 
and proﬁ tability of the 
company’s business.
Industry
A group of companies 
offering products or 
services that are close 
substitutes for each 
other—that is, products 
or services that 
satisfy the same basic 
customer needs.
Competitors
Enterprises that 
serve the same basic 
customer needs.
56  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
OVERVIEW
The starting point of strategy formulation is an analysis of the forces that shape 
competition in the industry in which a company is based. The goal of such an analy-
sis is to gain an understanding of the opportunities and threats confronting the fi rm 
and to use this understanding to identify strategies that will enable the company to 
outperform its rivals. Opportunities arise when a company can take advantage of 
conditions in its environment to formulate and implement strategies that enable it to 
become more profi table. Threats arise when conditions in the external environment 
endanger the integrity and profi tability of the company’s business.
This chapter begins with an analysis of the industry environment. First, it exam-
ines concepts and tools for analyzing the competitive structure of an industry and 
identifying industry opportunities and threats. Second, it analyzes the competitive 
implications that arise when groups of companies within an industry pursue similar 
and different kinds of competitive strategies. Third, it explores the way an industry 
evolves over time and the accompanying changes in competitive conditions. Fourth, 
it looks at the way in which forces in the macroenvironment affect industry struc-
ture and infl uence opportunities and threats. By the end of the chapter, you will 
understand that to succeed, a company must either fi t its strategy to the external 
environment in which it operates or must be able to reshape the environment to its 
advantage through its chosen strategy.
Analyzing Industry Structure
An industry can be defi ned as a group of companies offering products or services 
that are close substitutes for each other, that is, products or services that satisfy the 
same basic customer needs. A company’s closest competitors, its rivals, are those that 
serve the same basic customer needs. For example, carbonated drinks, fruit punches, 
and bottled water can be viewed as close substitutes for each other because they 
serve the same basic customer needs for refreshing and cold nonalcoholic beverages. 
Thus, we can talk about the soft drink industry, whose major players are Coca- Cola, 
PepsiCo, and Cadbury Schweppes. Similarly, desktop computers and notebook com-
puters satisfy the same basic need that customers have for computer hardware on 
which to run personal productivity software; browse the Internet; send e- mail; play 
games; and store, display, and manipulate digital images. Thus, we can talk about the 
personal computer industry, whose major players are Dell, HP, Lenovo (the Chinese 
company that purchased IBM’s personal computer business), and Apple Computer.
The starting point of external analysis is to identify the industry that a company 
competes in. To do this, managers must begin by looking at the basic customer needs 
their company is serving—that is, they must take a customer- oriented view of their 
business as opposed to a product- oriented view (see Chapter 2). The basic customer 
needs that are served by a market defi ne an industry’s boundary. It is important for 
managers to realize this, for if they defi ne industry boundaries incorrectly, they may 
be caught fl at- footed by the rise of competitors that serve the same basic customer 
needs with different product offerings. For example, Coca- Cola long saw itself as 
being in the carbonated soft drink industry, whereas in fact it was in the soft drink 
industry, which includes noncarbonated soft drinks. In the mid- 1990s, Coca- Cola 
was caught by surprise by the rise of customer demand for bottled water and fruit 

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
57
drinks, which began to cut into the demand for sodas. Coca- Cola moved quickly to 
respond to these threats, introducing its own brand of water, Dasani, and acquiring 
orange juice maker Minute Maid. By defi ning its industry boundaries too narrowly, 
Coca- Cola almost missed the rapid rise of the noncarbonated soft drinks segment of 
the soft drinks market.
Once the boundaries of an industry have been identifi ed, the task facing manag-
ers is to analyze competitive forces in the industry environment to identify oppor-
tunities and threats. Michael E. Porter’s well- known framework, known as the fi ve 
forces model, helps managers with this analysis.1 His model, shown in Figure 3.1, 
focuses on fi ve forces that shape competition within an industry: (1) the risk of entry 
by potential competitors, (2) the intensity of rivalry among established companies 
within an industry, (3) the bargaining power of buyers, (4) the bargaining power of 
suppliers, and (5) the closeness of substitutes to an industry’s products.
Porter argues that the stronger each of these forces, the more limited the ability 
of established companies to raise prices and earn greater profi ts. Within Porter’s 
framework, a strong competitive force can be regarded as a threat because it de-
presses profi ts. A weak competitive force can be viewed as an opportunity because it 
allows a company to earn greater profi ts. The strength of the fi ve forces may change 
through time as industry conditions change. The task facing managers is to recog-
nize how changes in the fi ve forces give rise to new opportunities and threats and to 
formulate appropriate strategic responses. In addition, it is possible for a company, 
through its choice of strategy, to alter the strength of one or more of the fi ve forces 
to its advantage.
Figure 3.1 Porter’s Five Forces Model
Threat of
substitutes
Bargaining
power of
buyers
Bargaining
power of
suppliers
Intensity of 
rivalry among
established
firms
Risk of entry
by potential
competitors
Data Source: Adapted and reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. From Michael 
E. Porter, “How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, March/April 1979. 
© 1979 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved.

Potential Competitors
Companies that are not 
currently competing in 
an industry but have 
the capability to do so 
if they choose.
Barriers to Entry
Factors that make it 
costly for companies 
to enter an industry.
Economies of Scale
Reductions in unit costs 
attributed to a larger 
output.
Brand Loyalty
Preference of 
consumers for the 
products of established 
companies.
58  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Risk of Entry by Potential Competitors
Potential competitors are companies that are not currently competing in an industry 
but have the capability to do so if they choose. For example, cable TV companies 
have recently emerged as potential competitors to traditional phone companies. This 
is because new digital technologies have allowed cable companies to offer consumers 
telephone service over the same cables that are used to transmit TV shows.
Established companies already operating in an industry often attempt to discour-
age potential competitors from entering the industry because the more companies 
that enter, the more diffi cult it becomes for established companies to protect their 
share of the market and generate profi ts. A high risk of entry by potential competi-
tors represents a threat to the profi tability of established companies. If the risk of 
new entry is low, established companies can take advantage of this opportunity to 
raise prices and earn greater returns.
The risk of entry by potential competitors is a function of the height of barriers 
to entry, that is, factors that make it costly for companies to enter an industry. The 
greater the costs that potential competitors must bear to enter an industry, the greater 
are the barriers to entry and the weaker this competitive force. High entry barriers 
may keep potential competitors out of an industry even when industry profi ts are 
high. Important barriers to entry include economies of scale, brand loyalty, absolute 
cost advantages, strategic preemption, customer switching costs, and government 
regulation.2 It should be noted that a signifi cant aspect of strategy is about build-
ing barriers to entry (in the case of incumbent fi rms), or fi nding ways to circumvent 
those barriers (in the case of new entrants). We shall discuss this in more detail in 
subsequent chapters.
Economies of Scale Economies of scale arise when unit costs fall as a fi rm ex-
pands its output. Sources of scale economies include (1) cost reductions gained 
through mass- producing a standardized output, (2) discounts on bulk purchases of 
raw material inputs and component parts, (3) the advantages gained by spreading 
fi xed production costs over a large production volume, and (4) the cost savings asso-
ciated with spreading marketing and advertising costs over a large volume of output. 
If the cost advantages from economies of scale are signifi cant, a new company that 
enters the industry and produces on a small scale suffers a signifi cant cost disad-
vantage relative to established companies. If the new company decides to enter on a 
large scale in an attempt to obtain these economies of scale, it has to raise the capital 
required to build large scale production facilities and bear the high risks associated 
with such an investment. A further risk of large- scale entry is that the increased sup-
ply of products will depress prices and result in vigorous retaliation by established 
companies. For these reasons, the threat of entry is reduced when established com-
panies have economies of scale.
Brand Loyalty Brand loyalty exists when consumers have a preference for the 
products of established companies. A company can create brand loyalty through 
continuous advertising of its brand- name products and company name, patent pro-
tection of products, product innovation achieved through company research and 
development programs, an emphasis on high product quality, and good after- sales 
service. Signifi cant brand loyalty makes it diffi cult for new entrants to take market 
share away from established companies. Thus, it reduces the threat of entry by po-
tential competitors since they may see the task of breaking down well- established 

Absolute Cost 
Advantage
A cost advantage that is 
enjoyed by incumbents 
in an industry and that 
new entrants cannot 
expect to match.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
59
customer preferences as too costly. In the market for colas, for example, consumers 
have a strong preference for the products of Coca- Cola and PepsiCo which makes it 
diffi cult for other enterprises to enter this market (despite this, the Cott Corporation 
has succeeded in entering the soft drink market—see the Strategy in Action).
Absolute Cost Advantages Sometimes established companies have an absolute 
cost advantage relative to potential entrants, meaning that entrants cannot expect 
to match the established companies’ lower cost structure. Absolute cost advantages 
arise from three main sources (1) superior production operations and processes due 
to accumulated experience in an industry, patents, or secret processes; (2) control 
of particular inputs required for production, such as labor, materials, equipment, or 
management skills, that are limited in their supply; and (3) access to cheaper funds 
because existing companies represent lower risks than new entrants, and therefore 
The soft drink industry has long been dominated by two 
companies, Coca- Cola and PepsiCo. Both companies 
have historically spent large sums of money on advertis-
ing and promotion, which has created signiﬁ cant brand 
loyalty and made it very difﬁ cult for prospective new 
competitors to enter the industry and take market share 
away from these two giants. When new competitors do 
try and enter, both companies have shown themselves 
capable of responding by cutting prices, forcing the new 
entrant to curtail expansion plans.
However, in the early 1990s, the Cott Corporation, 
then a small Canadian bottling company, worked out a 
strategy for entering the soft drink market. Cott’s strat-
egy was deceptively simple. The company initially fo-
cused on the cola segment of the soft drink market. Cott 
signed a deal with Royal Crown Cola for exclusive global 
rights to its cola concentrate. RC Cola was a small player 
in the U.S. cola market. Its products were recognized as 
having a high quality, but RC Cola had never been able 
to effectively challenge Coke or Pepsi. Next, Cott signed 
a deal with a Canadian grocery retailer, Loblaw’s, to pro-
vide the retailer with its own private label brand of cola. 
Priced low, the Loblaw’s private label brand, known as 
President’s Choice, was very successful, taking share 
from both Coke and Pepsi.
Emboldened by this success, Cott decided to try 
and convince other retailers to carry private label cola. 
To retailers, the value proposition was simple—unlike 
its major rivals, Cott spent almost nothing on advertis-
ing and promotion. This constituted a major source of 
cost savings, which it passed onto retailers in the form of 
lower prices. For their part, the retailers found that they 
could signiﬁ cantly undercut the price of Coke and Pepsi 
colas, and still make better proﬁ t margins on private label 
brands than on branded colas.
Cott’s breakthrough came in 1992 when it signed a 
deal with Walmart to supply the retailing giant with a pri-
vate label cola, called “Sam’s Choice.” Walmart proved to 
be the perfect distribution channel for Cott. The retailer 
was just starting to get into the grocery business, and 
consumers went to the stores not to buy branded mer-
chandise, but to get low prices.
As Walmart’s grocery business grew, so did Cott’s 
sales. Cott soon added other ﬂ avors to its offering, such 
as lemon lime soda that would compete with Seven 
Up and Sprite. Moreover, pressured by Walmart, by the 
late 1990s, other U.S. grocers also started to introduce 
private label sodas, often turning to Cott to supply their 
needs. By 2006, Cott had grown to become a $1.8 billion 
company. Its volume growth in an otherwise stagnant 
U.S. market for sodas has averaged around 12.5% be-
tween 2001 and 2006. Cott captured over 5% of the U.S. 
soda market in 2005, up from almost nothing a decade 
earlier, and held onto a 16% share of sodas in grocery 
stores, its core channel. The losers in this process have 
been Coca- Cola and PepsiCo, who are now facing the 
steady erosion of their brand loyalty and market share as 
consumers increasingly came to recognize the high qual-
ity and low price of private- label sodas.3
3.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
Circumventing Entry Barriers into the Soft Drink Industry

Switching Costs
Costs that consumers 
must bear to switch 
from the products 
offered by one 
established company 
to the products offered 
by a new entrant.
60  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
face a lower cost of capital.4 If established companies have an absolute cost advan-
tage, the threat of entry as a competitive force is weaker.
Customer Switching Costs Switching costs arise when it costs a customer time, 
energy, and money to switch from the products offered by one established company 
to the products offered by a new entrant. When switching costs are high, custom-
ers can be locked in to the product offerings of established companies, even if new 
entrants offer better products.5 A familiar example of switching costs concerns the 
costs associated with switching from one computer operating system to another. If a 
person currently uses Microsoft’s Windows operating system and has a library of re-
lated software applications (e.g., word processing software, spreadsheet, games) and 
document fi les, it is expensive for that person to switch to another computer operat-
ing system. To effect the change, this person would have to buy a new set of software 
applications and convert all existing document fi les to run with the new system. 
Faced with such an expense of money and time, most people are unwilling to make 
the switch unless the competing operating system offers a substantial leap forward 
in performance. Thus, the higher the switching costs are, the higher is the barrier to 
entry for a company attempting to promote a new computer operating system.
Government Regulation Historically, government regulation has constituted a 
major entry barrier into many industries. For example, until the mid- 1990s, U.S. 
government regulation prohibited providers of long- distance telephone service 
from competing for local telephone service and vice versa. Other potential provid-
ers of telephone service, including cable television service companies such as Time 
Warner and Comcast (which could in theory use their cables to carry telephone 
traffi c as well as TV signals), were prohibited from entering the market altogether. 
These regulatory barriers to entry signifi cantly reduced the level of competition in 
both the local and long- distance telephone markets, enabling telephone companies 
to earn higher profi ts than might otherwise have been the case. All this changed in 
1996 when the government deregulated the industry signifi cantly. In the months 
that followed this announcement, local, long- distance, and cable TV companies all 
announced their intention to enter each other’s markets, and a host of new players 
entered the market. The fi ve forces model predicts that falling entry barrier due to 
government deregulation would result in signifi cant new entry, an increase in the 
intensity of industry competition, and lower industry profi t rates. And, indeed, that 
is what occurred.
In summary, if established companies have built brand loyalty for their products, 
have an absolute cost advantage with respect to potential competitors, have signifi -
cant economies of scale, are the benefi ciaries of high switching costs, or enjoy regu-
latory protection, the risk of entry by potential competitors is greatly diminished; it 
is a weak competitive force. Consequently, established companies can charge higher 
prices, and industry profi ts are higher. Evidence from academic research suggests 
that the height of barriers to entry is one of the most important determinants of 
profi t rates in an industry.6 Clearly, it is in the interest of established companies to 
pursue strategies consistent with raising entry barriers to secure these profi ts. By 
the same token, potential new entrants have to fi nd strategies that allow them to 
circumvent barriers to entry. Research suggests that the best way to do this is not to 
compete head- to- head with incumbents, but to look for customers who are poorly 
served by incumbents, and to go after those customers using new distribution chan-
nels and new business models.7

Rivalry
The competitive 
struggle between 
companies in an 
industry to gain market 
share from each other.
Fragmented Industry
An industry that 
consists of a large 
number of small- 
or medium- sized 
companies, none of 
which is in a position 
to determine industry 
prices.
Consolidated Industry
An industry dominated 
by a small number of 
large companies or, 
in extreme cases, by 
just one company, 
which are in a position 
to determine industry 
prices.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
61
Rivalry among Established Companies
The second of Porter’s fi ve competitive forces is the intensity of rivalry among es-
tablished companies within an industry. Rivalry refers to the competitive struggle 
between companies in an industry to gain market share from each other. The com-
petitive struggle can be fought using price, product design, advertising and promo-
tion spending, direct selling efforts, and after- sales service and support. More intense 
rivalry implies lower prices or more spending on non–price- competitive weapons, or 
both. Because intense rivalry lowers prices and raises costs, it squeezes profi ts out of 
an industry. Thus, intense rivalry among established companies constitutes a strong 
threat to profi tability. Alternatively, if rivalry is less intense, companies may have the 
opportunity to raise prices or reduce spending on non–price- competitive weapons, 
which leads to a higher level of industry profi ts. The intensity of rivalry among estab-
lished companies within an industry is largely a function of four factors: (1) industry 
competitive structure, (2) demand conditions, (3) cost conditions, and (4) the height 
of exit barriers in the industry.
Industry Competitive Structure The competitive structure of an industry refers 
to the number and size distribution of companies in it, something that strategic man-
agers determine at the beginning of an industry analysis. Industry structures vary, 
and different structures have different implications for the intensity of rivalry. A 
fragmented industry consists of a large number of small-  or medium- sized com-
panies, none of which is in a position to determine industry price. A consolidated 
industry is dominated by a small number of large companies (an oligopoly), or in 
extreme cases, by just one company (a monopoly) in which companies often are in 
a position to determine industry prices. Examples of fragmented industries are agri-
culture, dry cleaning, video rental, health clubs, real estate brokerage, and sun tan-
ning parlors. Consolidated industries include the aerospace, soft drink, automobile, 
pharmaceutical, and stockbrokerage industries.
Many fragmented industries are characterized by low entry barriers and 
commodity- type products that are hard to differentiate. The combination of these 
traits tends to result in boom- and- bust cycles as industry profi ts rise and fall. Low 
entry barriers imply that whenever demand is strong and profi ts are high, new en-
trants will fl ood the market, hoping to profi t from the boom. The explosion in the 
number of video stores, health clubs, and tanning parlors during the 1980s and 
1990s exemplifi es this situation.
Often the fl ood of new entrants into a booming fragmented industry creates ex-
cess capacity, so companies start to cut prices in order to use their spare capacity. The 
diffi culty companies face when trying to differentiate their products from those of 
competitors can exacerbate this tendency. The result is a price war, which depresses 
industry profi ts, forces some companies out of business, and deters potential new en-
trants. For example, after a decade of expansion and booming profi ts, many health 
clubs are now fi nding that they have to offer large discounts in order to hold onto 
their membership. In general, the more commodity- like an industry’s product is, the 
more vicious will be the price war. This bust part of the cycle continues until overall 
industry capacity is brought into line with demand (through bankruptcies), at which 
point prices may stabilize again.
A fragmented industry structure, then, constitutes a threat rather than an op-
portunity. Most booms are relatively short- lived because of the ease of new entry 
and will be followed by price wars and bankruptcies. Because it is often diffi cult to 

Fixed Costs
Costs that must be 
borne before the ﬁ rm 
makes a single sale.
62  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
differentiate products in these industries, the best strategy for a company is to try to 
minimize its costs so it will be profi table in a boom and survive any subsequent bust. 
Alternatively, companies might try to adopt strategies that change the underlying 
structure of fragmented industries and lead to a consolidated industry structure in 
which the level of industry profi tability is increased. How companies can do this is 
something we shall consider in later chapters.
In consolidated industries, companies are interdependent, because one company’s 
competitive actions or moves (with regard to price, quality, and so on) directly affect 
the market share of its rivals, and thus their profi tability. When one company makes 
a move, this generally “forces” a response from its rivals, and the consequence of such 
competitive interdependence can be a dangerous competitive spiral. Rivalry increases as 
companies attempt to undercut each other’s prices or offer customers more value in their 
products, pushing industry profi ts down in the process. The fare wars that have periodi-
cally created havoc in the airline industry provide a good illustration of this process.
Companies in consolidated industries sometimes seek to reduce this threat by 
following the prices set by the dominant company in the industry.8 However, com-
panies must be careful, for explicit face- to- face price- fi xing agreements are illegal. 
(Tacit, indirect agreements, arrived at without direct or intentional communication, 
are legal). Instead, companies set prices by watching, interpreting, anticipating, and 
responding to each other’s behavior.
Industry Demand The level of industry demand is a second determinant of the 
intensity of rivalry among established companies. Growing demand from new cus-
tomers or additional purchases by existing customers tend to moderate competi-
tion by providing greater scope for companies to compete for customers. Growing 
demand tends to reduce rivalry because all companies can sell more without taking 
market share away from other companies. High industry profi ts are often the result. 
Conversely, declining demand results in more rivalry as companies fi ght to maintain 
market share and revenues. Demand declines when customers are leaving the mar-
ketplace or each customer is buying less. Now a company can grow only by taking 
market share away from other companies. Thus, declining demand constitutes a 
major threat for it increases the extent of rivalry between established companies.
Cost Conditions The cost structure of fi rms in an industry is a third determinant 
of rivalry. In industries where fi xed costs are high, profi tability tends to be highly lev-
eraged to sales volume, and the desire to grow volume can spark off intense rivalry. 
Fixed costs refer to the costs that must be born before the fi rm makes a single sale. 
For example, before they can offer service, cable TV companies have to lay cable in 
the ground—the costs of doing so is a fi xed cost. Similarly, in order to offer air ex-
press service a company like FedEx has to invest in planes, package sorting facilities, 
and delivery trucks. These all represent fi xed costs that require signifi cant capital in-
vestments. In industries where the fi xed costs of production are high, if sales volume 
is low fi rms cannot cover their fi xed costs and they will not be profi table. This creates 
an incentive for fi rms to cut their prices and/or increase promotion spending in order 
to drive up sales volume, thereby covering fi xed costs. In situations where demand is 
not growing fast enough and too many companies are engaged in the same actions, 
cutting prices and/or raising promotion spending in an attempt to cover fi xed costs, 
the result can be intense rivalry and lower profi ts. Research suggests that often the 
weakest fi rms in an industry initiate such actions precisely because they are the ones 
struggling to cover their fi xed costs.9

Exit Barriers
The economic, 
strategic, and emotional 
factors that prevent 
companies from leaving 
an industry.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
63
Exit Barriers Exit barriers are economic, strategic, and emotional factors that 
prevent companies from leaving an industry.10 If exit barriers are high, companies 
become locked into an unprofi table industry where overall demand is static or de-
clining. The result is often excess productive capacity, which leads to even more in-
tense rivalry and price competition as companies cut prices in the attempt to obtain 
the customer orders needed to use their idle capacity and cover their fi xed costs.11 
Common exit barriers include the following:
• Investments in assets such as specifi c machines, equipment, and operating facili-
ties that are of little or no value in alternative uses or cannot be sold off. If a 
company wishes to leave the industry, it has to write off the book value of these 
assets.
• High fi xed costs of exit, such as the severance pay, health benefi ts, and pensions 
that have to be paid to workers who are being made redundant when a company 
ceases to operate.
• Emotional attachments to an industry, as when a company’s owners or employees 
are unwilling to exit from an industry for sentimental reasons or because of pride.
• Economic dependence on an industry because a company relies on a single indus-
try for its revenue and profi t.
• The need to maintain an expensive collection of assets at or above some mini-
mum level in order to participate effectively in the industry.
• Bankruptcy regulations, particularly in the United States, where Chapter  11 
bankruptcy provisions allow insolvent enterprises to continue operating and re-
organize themselves under bankruptcy protection. These regulations can keep un-
profi table assets in the industry, result in persistent excess capacity, and lengthen 
the time required to bring industry supply in line with demand.
As an example of the effect of exit barriers in practice, consider the express mail and 
parcel delivery industry. The key players in this industry such as FedEx and UPS rely 
on the delivery business entirely for their revenues and profi ts. They have to be able 
to guarantee their customers that they will deliver packages to all major localities in 
the United States, and much of their investment is specifi c to this purpose. To meet 
this guarantee, they need a nationwide network of air routes and ground routes, an 
asset that is required in order to participate in the industry. If excess capacity devel-
ops in this industry, as it does from time to time, FedEx cannot incrementally reduce 
or minimize its excess capacity by deciding not to fl y to and deliver packages in, say, 
Miami because that proportion of its network is underused. If it did that, it would 
no longer be able to guarantee that it would be able to deliver packages to all major 
locations in the United States, and its customers would switch to some other carrier. 
Thus, the need to maintain a nationwide network is an exit barrier that can result in 
persistent excess capacity in the air express industry during periods of weak demand. 
Finally, both UPS and FedEx managers and employees are emotionally tied to this 
industry because they both were fi rst movers in the ground and air segments of the 
industry, respectively; their employees are also major owners of their companies’ 
stock; and, they are fi nancially dependent on the fortunes of the delivery business.
The Bargaining Power of Buyers
The third of Porter’s fi ve competitive forces is the bargaining power of buyers. An 
industry’s buyers may be the individual customers who ultimately consume its prod-
ucts (its end users) or the companies that distribute an industry’s products to end 

Bargaining Power 
of Buyers
The ability of buyers to 
bargain down prices 
charged by companies 
in the industry or to 
raise the costs of 
companies in the 
industry by demanding 
better product quality 
and service.
64  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
users, such as retailers and wholesalers. For example, while soap powder made by 
Procter & Gamble and Unilever is consumed by end users, the principal buyers of 
soap powder are supermarket chains and discount stores, which resell the product to 
end users. The bargaining power of buyers refers to the ability of buyers to bargain 
down prices charged by companies in the industry or to raise the costs of companies 
in the industry by demanding better product quality and service. By lowering prices 
and raising costs, powerful buyers can squeeze profi ts out of an industry. Thus, pow-
erful buyers should be viewed as a threat. Alternatively, when buyers are in a weak 
bargaining position, companies in an industry can raise prices, and perhaps reduce 
their costs by lowering product quality and service, and increase the level of industry 
profi ts. Buyers are most powerful in the following circumstances:
• When the industry that is supplying a particular product or service is composed 
of many small companies and the buyers are large and few in number. These 
circumstances allow the buyers to dominate supplying companies.
• When the buyers purchase in large quantities. In such circumstances, buyers can 
use their purchasing power as leverage to bargain for price reductions.
• When the supply industry depends on the buyers for a large percentage of its 
total orders.
• When switching costs are low so that buyers can play off the supplying compa-
nies against each other to force down prices.
• When it is economically feasible for buyers to purchase an input from several 
companies at once so that buyers can play off one company in the industry 
against another.
• When buyers can threaten to enter the industry and produce the product them-
selves and thus supply their own needs, also a tactic for forcing down industry 
prices.
The auto component supply industry, whose buyers are large automobile manufac-
turers such as GM, Ford, and Toyota, has historically been a good example of an 
industry in which buyers have had a strong bargaining power and thus constituted 
a strong competitive threat. Why? The suppliers of auto component are numerous 
and typically small in scale; their buyers, the auto manufacturers, are large in size 
and few in number. Additionally, to keep component prices down, both Ford and 
GM have used the threat of manufacturing a component themselves rather than 
buying it from auto component suppliers. The automakers have used their powerful 
position to play off suppliers against each other, forcing down the price they have 
to pay for component parts and demanding better quality. If a component supplier 
objects, the automaker can use the threat of switching to another supplier as a bar-
gaining tool.
Another issue is that the relative power of buyers and suppliers tends to change 
in response to changing industry conditions. For example, because of changes now 
taking place in the pharmaceutical and health care industries, major buyers of phar-
maceuticals (hospitals and health maintenance organizations) are gaining power 
over the suppliers of pharmaceuticals and have been able to demand lower prices.
The Bargaining Power of Suppliers
The fourth of Porter’s fi ve competitive forces is the bargaining power of suppliers— 
the organizations that provide inputs into the industry, such as materials, services, and 
labor (which may be individuals, organizations such as labor unions, or companies 

Bargaining Power 
of Suppliers
The ability of suppliers 
to raise the price of 
inputs or to raise the 
costs of the industry in 
other ways.
Substitute Products
The products of 
different businesses 
or industries that can 
satisfy similar customer 
needs.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
65
that supply contract labor). The bargaining power of suppliers refers to the ability 
of suppliers to raise input prices, or to raise the costs of the industry in other ways—
for example, by providing poor- quality inputs or poor service. Powerful suppliers 
squeeze profi ts out of an industry by raising the costs of companies in the industry. 
Thus, powerful suppliers are a threat. Alternatively, if suppliers are weak, companies 
in the industry have the opportunity to force down input prices and demand higher- 
quality inputs (e.g., more productive labor). As with buyers, the ability of suppliers 
to make demands on a company depends on their power relative to that of the com-
pany. Suppliers are most powerful in the following situations:
• The product that suppliers sell has few substitutes and is vital to the companies 
in an industry.
• The profi tability of suppliers is not signifi cantly affected by the purchases of 
companies in a particular industry, in other words, when the industry is not an 
important customer to the suppliers.
• Companies in an industry would experience signifi cant switching costs if they 
moved to the product of a different supplier because a particular supplier’s prod-
ucts are unique or different. In such cases, the company depends on a particular 
supplier and cannot play suppliers off against each other to reduce price.
• Suppliers can threaten to enter their customers’ industry and use their inputs to 
produce products that would compete directly with those of companies already 
in the industry.
• Companies in the industry cannot threaten to enter their suppliers’ industry and 
make their own inputs as a tactic for lowering the price of inputs.
An example of an industry in which companies are dependent on a powerful sup-
plier is the personal computer industry. Personal computer fi rms are heavily depen-
dent on Intel, the world’s largest supplier of microprocessors for PCs. The industry 
standard for personal computers runs on Intel’s microprocessor chips. Intel’s com-
petitors, such as Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), must develop and supply chips 
that are compatible with Intel’s standard. Although AMD has developed competing 
chips, Intel still supplies about 85% of the chips used in PCs primarily because only 
Intel has the manufacturing capacity required to serve a large share of the market. 
It is beyond the fi nancial resources of Intel’s competitors, such as AMD, to match 
the scale and effi ciency of Intel’s manufacturing systems. This means that while 
PC manufacturers can buy some microprocessors from Intel’s rivals, most notably 
AMD, they still have to turn to Intel for the bulk of their supply. Because Intel is in 
a powerful bargaining position, it can charge higher prices for its microprocessors 
than would be the case if its competitors were more numerous and stronger (i.e., if 
the microprocessor industry were fragmented).
Substitute Products
The fi nal force in Porter’s model is the threat of substitute products: the products 
of different businesses or industries that can satisfy similar customer needs. For ex-
ample, companies in the coffee industry compete indirectly with those in the tea and 
soft drink industries because all three serve customer needs for nonalcoholic drinks. 
The existence of close substitutes is a strong competitive threat because this limits 
the price that companies in one industry can charge for their product, and thus in-
dustry profi tability. If the price of coffee rises too much relative to that of tea or soft 
drinks, coffee drinkers may switch to those substitutes.

Strategic Groups
Groups of companies 
in which each company 
follows a strategy 
that is similar to that 
pursued by other 
companies in the 
group, but different 
from the strategies 
followed by companies 
in other groups.
You are a strategic analyst 
at a successful hotel enter-
prise that has been gener-
ating substantial excess 
cash ﬂ ow. Your CEO in-
structed you to analyze the 
competitive structure of 
closely related industries to 
ﬁ nd one that the company 
could enter, using its cash 
reserve to build a sustain-
able position. Your analysis, 
using Porter’s ﬁ ve forces 
model, suggests that the 
highest proﬁ t opportunities 
are to be found in the gam-
bling industry. You realize 
that it might be possible to 
add casinos to existing ho-
tels, lowering entry costs 
into this industry. However, 
you personally have strong 
moral objections to gam-
bling. Should your own 
personal beliefs inﬂ uence 
your recommendations to 
the CEO?
Ethical Dilemma
66  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
If an industry’s products have few close substitutes, so that substitutes are a weak 
competitive force, then, other things being equal, companies in the industry have 
the opportunity to raise prices and earn additional profi ts. For example, there is no 
close substitute for microprocessors, which gives companies like Intel and AMD the 
ability to charge higher.
Porter’s Model Summarized
The systematic analysis of forces in the industry environment using the Porter frame-
work is a powerful tool that helps managers to think strategically. It is important to 
recognize that one competitive force often affects the others, so that all forces need 
to be considered and thought about when performing industry analysis. Indeed, in-
dustry analysis leads managers to think systematically about the way their strategic 
choices will both be affected by the forces of industry competition and how their 
choices will affect the fi ve forces and change conditions in the industry. For an ex-
ample of industry analysis using Porter’s framework, see the Running Case.
Strategic Groups within Industries
Companies in an industry often differ signifi cantly from each other with respect to 
the way they strategically position their products in the market in terms of such fac-
tors as the distribution channels they use, the market segments they serve, the quality 
of their products, technological leadership, customer service, pricing policy, advertis-
ing policy, and promotions. As a result of these differences, within most industries, it 
is possible to observe groups of companies in which each company follows a strategy 
that is similar to that pursued by other companies in the group, but different from 
the strategies followed by companies in other groups. These different groups of com-
panies are known as strategic groups.12
Normally, the basic differences between the strategies that companies in different 
strategic groups use can be captured by a relatively small number of strategic fac-
tors. For example, in the pharmaceutical industry, two main strategic groups stand 
out (see Figure 3.2).13 One group, which includes such companies as Merck, Eli Lilly, 
and Pfi zer, is characterized by a business model based on heavy R&D spending and 
a focus on developing new, proprietary, blockbuster drugs. The companies in this 
proprietary strategic group are pursuing a high- risk, high- return strategy. It is a high- 
risk strategy because basic drug research is diffi cult and expensive. Bringing a new 
drug to market can cost up to $800 million in R&D money and a decade of research 
and clinical trials. The risks are high because the failure rate in new drug develop-
ment is very high: only one out of every fi ve drugs entering clinical trials is ultimately 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, the strategy is also 
a high- return one because a single successful drug can be patented, giving the in-
novator a 20- year monopoly on its production and sale. This lets these proprietary 
companies charge a high price for the patented drug, allowing them to earn millions, 
if not billions, of dollars over the lifetime of the patent.
The second strategic group might be characterized as the generic drug strate-
gic group. This group of companies, which includes Forest Labs, Mylan Labs and 
Watson Pharmaceuticals focuses on the manufacture of generic drugs: low- cost 

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
67
copies of drugs that were developed by companies in the proprietary group whose 
patents have now expired. Low R&D spending, production effi ciency, and an em-
phasis on low prices characterize the business models of companies in this strategic 
group. They are pursuing a low- risk, low- return strategy. It is low risk because they 
are not investing millions of dollars in R&D. It is low return because they cannot 
charge high prices.
When Walmart and other discount retailers began 
in the 1960s, they were small operations with little 
purchasing power. To generate store trafﬁ c, they de-
pended in large part on stocking nationally branded 
merchandise from well- known companies such as 
Procter & Gamble and Rubbermaid. Since the dis-
counters did not have high sales volume, the nationally 
branded companies set the price. This meant that the 
discounters had to look for other ways to cut costs, 
which they typically did by emphasizing self- service 
in stripped- down stores located in the suburbs where 
land was cheaper (in the 1960s, the main competitors 
for discounters were full- service department stores 
such as Sears that were often located in downtown 
shopping areas).
Discounters such as Kmart purchased their mer-
chandise through wholesalers, who in turned bought 
from manufacturers. The wholesaler would come into 
a store and write an order, and when the merchan-
dise arrived, the wholesaler would come in and stock 
the shelves, saving the retailer labor costs. However, 
Walmart was located in Arkansas and placed its stores 
in small towns. Wholesalers were not particularly inter-
ested in serving a company that built its stores in such 
out- of- the- way places. They would do it only if Walmart 
paid higher prices.
Walmart’s Sam Walton refused to pay higher 
prices. Instead he took his ﬂ edgling company pub-
lic and used the capital raised to build a distribution 
center to stock merchandise. The distribution cen-
ter would serve all stores within a 300- mile radius, 
with trucks leaving the distribution center daily to 
restock the stores. Because the distribution center 
was serving a collection of stores and thus buying 
in larger volumes, Walton found that he was able to 
cut the whole salers out of the equation and order 
directly from manufacturers. The cost savings gen-
erated by not having to pay proﬁ ts to wholesalers 
were then passed on to consumers in the form of 
lower prices, which helped Walmart continue grow-
ing. This growth increased its buying power and 
thus its ability to demand deeper discounts from 
manufacturers.
Today Walmart has turned its buying process into 
an art form. Since 8% of all retail sales in the United 
States are made in a Walmart store, the company 
has enormous bargaining power over its suppli-
ers. Suppliers of nationally branded products, such 
as Procter & Gamble, are no longer in a position to 
demand high prices. Instead, Walmart is now so 
important to Procter & Gamble that it is able to demand 
deep discounts from them. Moreover, Walmart has 
itself become a brand that is more powerful than 
the brands of manufacturers. People do not go to 
Walmart to buy branded goods; they go to Walmart 
for the low prices. This simple fact has enabled 
Walmart to bargain down the prices it pays, always 
passing on cost savings to consumers in the form of 
lower prices.
Since the early 1990s, Walmart has provided 
suppliers with real- time information on store sales 
through the use of individual Stock Keeping Units 
(SKUs). These have allowed suppliers to optimize 
their own production processes, matching output 
to Walmart’s demands and avoiding under-  or over- 
production and the need to store inventory. The 
efﬁ ciencies that manufacturers gain from such infor-
mation are passed on to Walmart in the form of lower 
prices, which then passes on those cost savings to 
consumers.14
Walmart’s Bargaining Power over Suppliers
R U N N I N G  C A S E

68  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Implications of Strategic Groups
The concept of strategic groups has a number of implications for the identifi cation 
of opportunities and threats within an industry. First, because all the companies 
in a strategic group are pursuing similar business models, customers tend to view 
the products of such enterprises as direct substitutes for each other. Thus, a com-
pany’s closest competitors are those in its strategic group, not those in other strategic 
groups in the industry. The most immediate threat to a company’s profi tability comes 
from rivals within its own strategic group. For example, in the retail industry, there 
is a group of companies that might be characterized as discounters. Included in this 
group are Walmart, Kmart, Target, Costco and Fred Meyer. These companies com-
pete most vigorously with each other, as opposed to with other retailers in different 
groups, such as Nordstrom or The Gap. Kmart, for example, was driven into bank-
ruptcy in the early 2000s, not because Nordstrom or The Gap took business from it, 
but because Walmart and Target gained share in the discounting group by virtue of 
their superior strategic execution of the discounting business model.
A second competitive implication is that different strategic groups can have a 
different standing with respect to each of the competitive forces; thus, each strategic 
group may face a different set of opportunities and threats. The risk of new entry 
by potential competitors, the degree of rivalry among companies within a group, the 
bargaining power of buyers, the bargaining power of suppliers, and the competitive 
force of substitute and complementary products can each be a relatively strong or 
weak competitive force depending on the competitive positioning approach adopted 
by each strategic group in the industry. For example, in the pharmaceutical indus-
try, companies in the proprietary group have historically been in a very powerful 
position in relation to buyers because their products are patented and there are no 
substitutes. Also, rivalry based on price competition within this group has been low 
because competition in the industry revolves around being the fi rst to patent a new 
Figure 3.2 Strategic Groups in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Prices charged
Generic Group
• Forest Labs
• Mylan Labs
• Watson
Proprietary Group
 
• Merck
 
• Pfizer
 
• Eli Lilly
R & D spending
High
Low
Low
High

Mobility Barriers
Within- industry 
factors that inhibit 
the movement of 
companies between 
strategic groups.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
69
drug (so- called patent races), not around drug prices. Thus, companies in this group 
have been able to charge high prices and earn high profi ts. In contrast, companies in 
the generic group have been in much weaker positions because many companies are 
able to produce different versions of the same generic drug after patents expire. In 
the strategic group, products are close substitutes, rivalry has been high, and price 
competition has led to lower profi ts for this group as compared to companies in the 
proprietary group.
The Role of Mobility Barriers
It follows from these two issues that some strategic groups are more desirable than 
others because competitive fi ve forces open up greater opportunities and present 
fewer threats for those groups. Managers, after analyzing their industry, might iden-
tify a strategic group where competitive forces are weaker and higher profi ts can be 
made. Sensing an opportunity, they might contemplate changing their business mod-
els and move to compete in that strategic group. However, taking advantage of this 
opportunity may be diffi cult because of mobility barriers between strategic groups.
Mobility barriers are within- industry factors that inhibit the movement of com-
panies between strategic groups. They include the barriers to entry into a group and 
the barriers to exit from a company’s existing group. For example, Forest Labs would 
encounter mobility barriers if it attempted to enter the proprietary group in the phar-
maceutical industry because it lacks R&D skills, and building these skills would be 
an expensive proposition. Over time, companies in different groups develop differ-
ent cost structures and skills and competencies that give them different pricing op-
tions and choices. A company contemplating entry into another strategic group must 
evaluate whether it has the ability to imitate, and indeed outperform, its potential 
competitors in that strategic group. Managers must determine if it is cost- effective to 
overcome mobility barriers before deciding whether the move is worthwhile.
In summary, an important task of industry analysis is to determine the sources 
of the similarities and differences among companies in an industry and to work out 
the broad themes that underlie competition in an industry. This analysis often reveals 
new opportunities to compete in an industry by developing new kinds of products 
to meet the needs of customers better. It can also reveal emerging threats that can be 
countered effectively by changing competitive strategy.
Industry Life Cycle Analysis
An important determinant of the strength of the competitive forces in an industry 
is the changes that take place in it over time. The strength and nature of each of the 
competitive forces change as an industry evolves, particularly the two forces of risk 
of entry by potential competitors and rivalry among existing fi rms.15
A useful tool for analyzing the effects of industry evolution on competitive forces 
is the industry life cycle model, which identifi es fi ve sequential stages in the evolution 
of an industry that lead to fi ve distinct kinds of industry environment: embryonic, 
growth, shakeout, mature, and decline (see Figure 3.3). The task facing managers is 
to anticipate how the strength of competitive forces will change as the industry envi-
ronment evolves and to formulate strategies that take advantage of opportunities as 
they arise and that counter emerging threats.

Embryonic Industry
An industry that is just 
beginning to develop.
Growth Industry
An industry where 
demand is expanding 
as ﬁ rst- time consumers 
enter the market.
70  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Embryonic Industries
An embryonic industry is just beginning to develop (e.g., personal computers and 
biotechnology in the 1970s, and nanotechnology today). Growth at this stage is slow 
because of buyers’ unfamiliarity with the industry’s product, high prices due to the 
inability of companies to reap any signifi cant scale economies, and poorly developed 
distribution channels. Barriers to entry tend to be based on access to key technologi-
cal know- how rather than cost economies or brand loyalty. If the core know- how 
required to compete in the industry is complex and diffi cult to grasp, barriers to 
entry can be quite high, and established companies will be protected from potential 
competitors. Rivalry in embryonic industries is based not so much on price as on 
educating customers, opening up distribution channels, and perfecting the design of 
the product. Such rivalry can be intense, and the company that is the fi rst to solve 
design problems often has the opportunity to develop a signifi cant market position. 
An embryonic industry may also be the creation of one company’s innovative efforts, 
as happened with microprocessors (Intel) and photocopiers (Xerox). In such circum-
stances, the company has a major opportunity to capitalize on the lack of rivalry and 
build a strong hold on the market.
Growth Industries
Once demand for the industry’s product begins to take off, the industry develops 
the characteristics of a growth industry. In a growth industry, fi rst- time demand 
is expanding rapidly as many new customers enter the market. An industry grows 
when customers become familiar with the product, prices fall because experience 
and scale economies have been attained, and distribution channels develop. The U.S. 
cellular telephone industry was in the growth stage for most of the 1990s. In 1990, 
there were only 5 million cellular subscribers in the nation. By 2006, this fi gure had 
increased to over 160 million, and overall demand was still expanding.
Figure 3.3 Stages in the Industry Life Cycle
Demand
Time
Growth
Embryonic
Shakeout
Mature
Decline

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
71
Normally, the importance of control over technological knowledge as a barrier 
to entry has diminished by the time an industry enters its growth stage. Because 
few companies have yet achieved signifi cant scale economies or built brand loy-
alty, other entry barriers tend to be relatively low as well, particularly early in the 
growth stage. Thus, the threat from potential competitors generally is highest at this 
point. Paradoxically, however, high growth usually means that new entrants can 
be absorbed into an industry without a marked increase in the intensity of rivalry. 
Thus, rivalry tends to be relatively low. Rapid growth in demand enables compa-
nies to expand their revenues and profi ts without taking market share away from 
competitors. A strategically aware company takes advantage of the relatively benign 
environment of the growth stage to prepare itself for the intense competition of the 
coming industry shakeout.
Industry Shakeout
Explosive growth cannot be maintained indefi nitely. Sooner or later, the rate of 
growth slows, and the industry enters the shakeout stage. In the shakeout stage, 
demand approaches saturation levels: most of the demand is limited to replacement 
because there are few potential fi rst- time buyers left.
As an industry enters the shakeout stage, rivalry between companies becomes in-
tense. Typically, companies that have become accustomed to rapid growth continue 
to add capacity at rates consistent with past growth. However, demand is no longer 
growing at historic rates, and the consequence is the emergence of excess productive 
capacity. This condition is illustrated in Figure 3.4, where the solid curve indicates 
the growth in demand over time and the broken curve indicates the growth in pro-
ductive capacity over time. As you can see, past point t1, demand growth becomes 
slower as the industry becomes mature. However, capacity continues to grow until 
time t2. The gap between the solid and the broken lines signifi es excess capacity. In 
an attempt to use this capacity, companies often cut prices. The result can be a price 
war, which drives many of the most ineffi cient companies into bankruptcy, which is 
enough to deter any new entry.
Figure 3.4 Growth in Demand and Capacity
Demand
Time
t1
t2
Excess
capacity  
Capacity
Demand

Mature Stage
The stage in which 
the market is saturated, 
demand is limited to 
replacement demand, 
and growth is slow.
Decline Stage
The stage in which 
primary demand is 
declining.
72  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Mature Industries
The shakeout stage ends when the industry enters its mature stage: the market is 
totally saturated, demand is limited primarily to replacement demand, and growth is 
low or zero. What growth there is comes from population expansion that brings new 
customers into the market or an increase in replacement demand.
As an industry enters maturity, barriers to entry increase, and the threat of entry 
from potential competitors decreases. As growth slows during the shakeout, compa-
nies can no longer maintain historic growth rates merely by holding on to their mar-
ket share. Competition for market share develops, driving down prices. Often the 
result is a price war, as has happened in the airline industry for example. To survive 
the shakeout, companies begin to focus on cost minimization and building brand 
loyalty. The airlines, for example, tried to cut operating costs by hiring nonunion 
labor and to build brand loyalty by introducing frequent- fl yer programs. By the time 
an industry matures, the surviving companies are those that have brand loyalty and 
effi cient low- cost operations. Because both these factors constitute a signifi cant bar-
rier to entry, the threat of entry by potential competitors is greatly diminished. High 
entry barriers in mature industries give companies the opportunity to increase prices 
and profi ts.
As a result of the shakeout, most industries in the maturity stage have consoli-
dated and become oligopolies. In mature industries, companies tend to recognize 
their interdependence and try to avoid price wars. Stable demand gives them the 
opportunity to enter into price leadership agreements. The net effect is to reduce 
the threat of intense rivalry among established companies, thereby allowing greater 
profi tability. Nevertheless, the stability of a mature industry is always threatened by 
further price wars. A general slump in economic activity can depress industry de-
mand. As companies fi ght to maintain their revenues in the face of declining demand, 
price leadership agreements break down, rivalry increases, and prices and profi ts fall. 
The periodic price wars that occur in the airline industry seem to follow this pattern.
Declining Industries
Eventually, most industries enter a decline stage: growth becomes negative for a va-
riety of reasons, including technological substitution (e.g., air travel for rail travel), 
social changes (greater health consciousness hitting tobacco sales), demographics 
(the declining birthrate hurting the market for baby and child products), and inter-
national competition (low- cost foreign competition pushing the U.S. steel industry 
into decline). Within a declining industry, the degree of rivalry among established 
companies usually increases. Depending on the speed of the decline and the height of 
exit barriers, competitive pressures can become as fi erce as in the shakeout stage.16 
The main problem in a declining industry is that falling demand leads to the emer-
gence of excess capacity. In trying to use this capacity, companies begin to cut prices, 
thus sparking a price war. The U.S. steel industry experienced these problems be-
cause steel companies tried to use their excess capacity despite falling demand. The 
same problem occurred in the airline industry in the 1990–1992 period and again 
in 2001–2002, as companies cut prices to ensure that they would not be fl ying with 
half- empty planes (that is, that they would not be operating with substantial excess 
capacity). Exit barriers play a part in adjusting excess capacity. The greater the exit 
barriers, the harder it is for companies to reduce capacity and the greater is the threat 
of severe price competition.

Macroenvironment
The broader economic, 
global, technological, 
demographic, social, 
and political context in 
which an industry is 
embedded.
 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
73
Summary
In summary, a third task of industry analysis is to identify the opportunities and 
threats that are characteristic of different kinds of industry environments in order 
to develop an effective business model and competitive strategy. Managers have to 
tailor their strategies to changing industry conditions. And they have to learn to rec-
ognize the crucial points in an industry’s development so that they can forecast when 
the shakeout stage of an industry might begin or when an industry might be mov-
ing into decline. This is also true at the level of strategic groups, for new embryonic 
groups may emerge because of shifts in customer needs and tastes or some groups 
may grow rapidly because of changes in technology and others will decline as their 
customers defect. Thus, for example, companies in the upscale retail group such as 
Macy’s, Dillard’s, and Nordstrom are facing declining sales as customers defect to 
discount retailers like Target and Walmart and online companies like amazon.com 
and landsend.com.
The Macroenvironment
Just as the decisions and actions of strategic managers can often change an indus-
try’s competitive structure, so too can changing conditions or forces in the wider 
macroenvironment, that is, the broader economic, global, technological, demo-
graphic, social, and political context in which companies and industries are embed-
ded (see Figure 3.5). Changes in the forces in the macroenvironment can have a 
direct impact on any or all of the forces in Porter’s model, thereby altering the rela-
tive strength of these forces and, with it, the attractiveness of an industry.
Macroeconomic Forces
Macroeconomic forces affect the general health and well- being of a nation or the re-
gional economy of an organization, which in turn affect companies’ and industries’ 
ability to earn an adequate rate of return. Four most important factors in the macro-
economic are the growth rate of the economy, interest rates, currency exchange rates, 
and price infl ation. Economic growth, because it leads to an expansion in customer 
expenditures, tends to produce a general easing of competitive pressures within an 
industry. This gives companies the opportunity to expand their operations and earn 
higher profi ts. Because economic decline (a recession) leads to a reduction in cus-
tomer expenditures, it increases competitive pressures. Economic decline frequently 
causes price wars in mature industries.
The level of interest rates can determine the demand for a company’s products. 
Interest rates are important whenever customers routinely borrow money to fi nance 
their purchase of these products. The most obvious example is the housing market, 
where mortgage rates directly affect demand. Interest rates also have an impact on 
the sale of autos, appliances, and capital equipment, to give just a few examples. For 
companies in such industries, rising interest rates are a threat and falling rates an 
opportunity.
Currency exchange rates defi ne the value of different national currencies against 
each other. Movement in currency exchange rates has a direct impact on the com-
petitiveness of a company’s products in the global marketplace. For example, when 

74  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
the value of the dollar is low compared with the value of other currencies, products 
made in the United States are relatively inexpensive and products made overseas 
are relatively expensive. A low or declining dollar reduces the threat from foreign 
competitors while creating opportunities for increased sales overseas. Thus the fall in 
the dollar against the Euro during 2006 and 2007 enabled American companies to 
export more goods and services to Europe. The fall in the value of the dollar against 
the Japanese yen that occurred between 1985 and 1995, when the dollar- to- yen ex-
change rate declined from 240 yen per dollar to 85 yen per dollar, sharply increased 
the price of imported Japanese cars, giving U.S. car manufacturers some protection 
against those imports.
Price infl ation can destabilize the economy, producing slower economic growth, 
higher interest rates, and volatile currency movements. If infl ation keeps increasing, 
investment planning becomes hazardous. The key characteristic of infl ation is that it 
makes the future less predictable. In an infl ationary environment, it may be impos-
sible to predict with any accuracy the real value of returns that can be earned from a 
project 5 years hence. Such uncertainty makes companies less willing to invest. Their 
holding back in turn depresses economic activity and ultimately pushes the economy 
into a slump. Thus, high infl ation is a threat to companies.
Threat of
substitutes
Bargaining
power of
buyers
Bargaining
power of
suppliers
Intensity of 
rivalry among
established
firms
Risk of entry
by potential
competitors
Political and
legal forces
Demographic forces
Global forces
Macroeconomic
forces
Social forces
Technological
forces
Figure 3.5 The Role of the Macroenvironment

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
75
Global Forces
Over the last half of a century there have been enormous changes in the world 
economic system. We review these changes in detail in Chapter 6 when we discuss 
global strategy. For now, the important points to note are that barriers to interna-
tional trade and investment have tumbled, and an increasing number of countries are 
enjoying sustained economic growth. Economic growth in places like Brazil, China 
and India is creating large new markets for the goods and services of companies, and 
gives companies an opportunity to grow their profi ts faster by entering these nations. 
Falling barriers to international trade and investment have made it much easier to 
enter foreign nations. Twenty years ago, it was almost impossible for a Western 
company to set up operations in China. Today, Western and Japanese companies are 
investing over $50 billion a year in China. By the same token, however, falling barri-
ers to international trade and investment have made it easier for foreign enterprises 
to enter the domestic markets of many companies (by lowering barriers to entry), 
thereby increasing the intensity of competition and lowering profi tability. Because of 
these changes, many formally isolated domestic markets have now become part of a 
much larger, and more competitive, global market place, creating a myriad of threats 
and opportunities for companies.
Technological Forces
Since World War II, the pace of technological change has accelerated.17 This has 
unleashed a process that has been called a “perennial gale of creative destruction.”18 
Technological change can make established products obsolete overnight and simul-
taneously create a host of new product possibilities. Thus, technological change is 
both creative and destructive—both an opportunity and a threat.
One of the most important impacts of technological change is that it can affect 
the height of barriers to entry and therefore radically reshape industry structure. The 
Internet, because it is so pervasive, has the potential for changing the competitive 
structure of many industries. It often lowers barriers to entry and reduces customer 
switching costs, changes that tend to increase the intensity of rivalry in an industry 
and lower both prices and profi ts.19 For example, the Internet has lowered barriers 
to entry into the news industry. Providers of fi nancial news now have to compete 
for advertising dollars and customer attention with new Internet- based media orga-
nizations that sprung up during the 1990s such as TheStreet.com, the Motley Fool, 
and Yahoo’s fi nancial section. The resulting increase in rivalry has given advertisers 
more choices, enabling them to bargain down the prices that they must pay to media 
companies.
Demographic Forces
Demographic forces are outcomes of changes in the characteristics of a population, 
such as age, gender, ethnic origin, race, sexual orientation, and social class. Like 
the other forces in the general environment, demographic forces present managers 
with opportunities and threats and can have major implications for organizations. 
Changes in the age distribution of a population are an example of a demographic 
force that affects managers and organizations. Currently, most industrialized nations 
are experiencing the aging of their populations as a consequence of falling birth and 
death rates and the aging of the baby boom generation. In Germany, for example, 

76  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
the percentage of the population over age 65 is expected to rise from 15.4% in 1990 
to 20.7% in 2010. Comparable fi gures for Canada are 11.4 and 14.4%; for Japan, 
11.7 and 19.5%; and for the United States, 12.6 and 13.5%.20
The aging of the population is increasing opportunities for organizations that 
cater to older people; the home health care and recreation industries, for example, 
are seeing an upswing in demand for their services. As the baby boom generation 
from the late 1950s to the early 1960s has aged, it has created a host of opportunities 
and threats. During the 1980s, many baby boomers were getting married and creat-
ing an upsurge in demand for the customer appliances normally bought by couples 
marrying for the fi rst time. Companies such as Whirlpool Corporation and General 
Electric capitalized on the resulting upsurge in demand for washing machines, dish-
washers, dryers, and the like. In the 1990s, many of these same baby boomers were 
starting to save for retirement, creating an infl ow of money into mutual funds and 
creating a boom in the mutual fund industry. In the next 20 years, many of these 
same baby boomers will retire, creating a boom in retirement communities.
Social Forces
Social forces refer to the way in which changing social mores and values affect an 
industry. Like other macroenvironmental forces discussed here, social change cre-
ates opportunities and threats. One major social movement of recent decades has 
been the trend toward greater health consciousness. Its impact has been immense, 
and companies that recognized the opportunities early have often reaped signifi cant 
gains. Philip Morris, for example, capitalized on the growing health consciousness 
trend when it acquired Miller Brewing Company and then redefi ned competition in 
the beer industry with its introduction of low- calorie beer (Miller Lite). Similarly, 
PepsiCo was able to gain market share from its rival, Coca- Cola, by being the fi rst 
to introduce diet colas and fruit- based soft drinks. At the same time, the health trend 
has created a threat for many industries. The tobacco industry, for example, is in 
decline as a direct result of greater customer awareness of the health implications of 
smoking.
Political and Legal Forces
Political and legal forces are outcomes of changes in laws and regulations. They 
result from political and legal developments within society and signifi cantly affect 
managers and companies. Political processes shape a society’s laws, which constrain 
the operations of organizations and managers and thus create both opportunities 
and threats.21 For example, throughout much of the industrialized world, there 
has been a strong trend toward deregulation of industries previously controlled by 
the state and privatization of organizations once owned by the state. In the United 
States, deregulation of the airline industry in 1979 allowed 29 new airlines to enter 
the industry between 1979 and 1993. The increase in passenger carrying capacity 
after deregulation led to excess capacity on many routes, intense competition, and 
fare wars. To respond to this more competitive task environment, airlines have had 
to look for ways to reduce operating costs. The development of hub- and- spoke sys-
tems, the rise of nonunion airlines, and the introduction of no- frills discount service 
are all responses to increased competition in the airlines’ task environment. Despite 
these innovations, the airline industry still experiences intense fare wars, which have 

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
77
lowered profi ts and caused numerous airline company bankruptcies. The global tele-
communications service industry is now experiencing the same kind of turmoil fol-
lowing the deregulation of that industry in the United States and elsewhere.
In most countries, the interplay between political and legal forces, on the one 
hand, and industry competitive structure, on the other, is a two- way process in which 
the government sets regulations that infl uence competitive structure, and fi rms in an 
industry often seek to infl uence the regulations that governments enact by a number 
of means. First, when permitted, they may provide fi nancial support to politicians 
or political parties that espouse views favorable to the industry and lobby govern-
ment legislators directly to shape government regulations. For example, in 2002, the 
United States Steel Industry Association was a prime mover in persuading President 
Bush to enact a 30% tariff on imports of foreign steel into the United States. The 
purpose of the tariff was to protect American steel makers from foreign competitors, 
thereby reducing the intensity of rivalry in the United States steel markets.
1. The main technique used to analyze competi-
tion in the industry environment is the fi ve forces 
model. The fi ve forces are (1) the risk of new 
entry by potential competitors, (2) the extent of 
rivalry among established fi rms, (3) the bargain-
ing power of buyers, (4) the bargaining power of 
suppliers, and (5) the threat of substitute prod-
ucts. The stronger each force is, the more com-
petitive the industry and the lower the rate of 
return that can be earned.
2. The risk of entry by potential competitors is a 
function of the height of barriers to entry. The 
higher the barriers to entry are, the lower is the 
risk of entry and the greater are the profi ts that 
can be earned in the industry.
3. The extent of rivalry among established com-
panies is a function of an industry’s competi-
tive structure, demand conditions, and barriers 
to exit. Strong demand conditions moderate the 
competition among established companies and 
create opportunities for expansion. When de-
mand is weak, intensive competition can develop, 
particularly in consolidated industries with high 
exit barriers.
4. Buyers are most powerful when a company de-
pends on them for business but they themselves 
are not dependent on the company. In such cir-
cumstances, buyers are a threat.
5. Suppliers are most powerful when a company de-
pends on them for business but they themselves 
are not dependent on the company. In such cir-
cumstances, suppliers are a threat.
6. Substitute products are the products of compa-
nies serving customer needs similar to the needs 
served by the industry being analyzed. The more 
similar the substitute products are to each other, 
the lower is the price that companies can charge 
without losing customers to the substitutes.
7. Most industries are composed of strategic 
groups: groups of companies pursuing the same 
or a similar strategy. Companies in different stra-
tegic groups pursue different strategies.
8. Industries go through a well- defi ned life cycle: 
from an embryonic stage, through growth, shake-
out, and maturity, and eventually decline. Each 
stage has different implications for the competi-
tive structure of the industry, and each gives rise 
to its own set of opportunities and threats.
9. The macroenvironment affects the intensity of 
rivalry within an industry. Included in the mac-
roenvironment are the macroeconomic environ-
ment, the global environment, the technological 
environment, the demographic and social envi-
ronment, and the political and legal environment.
Summary of Chapter

78  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
1. Under what environmental conditions are price 
wars most likely to occur in an industry? What 
are the implications of price wars for a com-
pany? How should a company try to deal with 
the threat of a price war?
2. Discuss Porter’s fi ve forces model with reference to 
what you know about the U.S. beer industry (see 
the Opening case). What does the model tell you 
about the level of competition in this industry?
3. Identify a growth industry, a mature indus-
try, and a declining industry. For each industry, 
identify the following: (a) the number and size 
distribution of companies; (b) the nature of bar-
riers to entry; (c) the height of barriers to entry; 
and (d) the extent of product differentiation. 
What do these factors tell you about the nature 
of competition in each industry? What are the 
implications for the company in terms of oppor-
tunities and threats?
4. Assess the impact of macroenvironmental factors 
on the likely level of enrollment at your univer-
sity over the next decade. What are the impli-
cations of these factors for the job security and 
salary level of your professors?
Discussion Questions
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: Competing 
with Microsoft
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people, and 
appoint one group member as a spokesperson 
who will communicate your fi ndings to the class.
You are a group of managers and software 
engineers at a small start- up. You have developed 
a revolutionary new operating system for per-
sonal computers that offers distinct advantages 
over Microsoft’s Windows operating system: it 
takes up less memory space on the hard drive of a 
personal computer; it takes full advantage of the 
power of the personal computer’s microproces-
sor, and in theory can run software applications 
much faster than Windows; it is much easier to 
install and use than Windows; and it responds to 
voice instructions with an accuracy of 99.9%, in 
addition to input from a keyboard or mouse. The 
operating system is the only product offering that 
your company has produced.
Complete the following exercises:
1. Analyze the competitive structure of the mar-
ket for personal computer operating systems. 
On the basis of this analysis, identify what fac-
tors might inhibit adoption of your operating 
system by customers.
2. Can you think of a strategy that your com-
pany might pursue, either alone or in conjunc-
tion with other enterprises, in order to “beat 
Microsoft?” What will it take to execute that 
strategy successfully?
Visiting Boeing and Airbus
Visit the Web sites of the Boeing Corporation (www
.boeing.com) and Airbus Industrie (www.airbus
.com). Go to the news features of both sites, and read 
through the press releases issued by the companies. 
Also look at the annual reports and company 
profi le (or history features) on both sites. With this 
material as your guide, do the following:
1. Use Porter’s fi ve forces model to analyze the 
nature of competition in the commercial jet 
aircraft market.
Exploring The Web

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
79
Historically, the pharmaceutical industry has been a 
profi table one. Between 2002 and 2006 the average 
rate of return on invested capital (ROIC) for fi rms in 
the industry was 16.45%. Put differently, for every 
dollar of capital invested in the industry, the average 
pharmaceutical fi rm generated 16.45 cents of profi t. 
This compares with an average return on invested 
capital of 12.76% for fi rms in the computer hardware 
industry, 8.54% for grocers, and 3.88% for fi rms in 
the electronics industry. However, the average level of 
profi tability in the pharmaceutical industry has been 
declining of late. In 2002, the average ROIC in the 
industry was 21.6%; by 2006, it had fallen to 14.5%.
The profi tability of the pharmaceutical industry 
can be best understood by looking at several aspects 
of its underlying economic structure. First, demand for 
pharmaceuticals has been strong and has grown for 
decades. Between 1990 and 2003, there was a 12.5% 
annual increase in spending on prescription drugs in 
the United States. This growth was driven by favor-
able demographics. As people grow older, they tend to 
need and consume more prescription medicines, and 
the population in most advanced nations has been 
growing older as the post–World War II baby boom 
generation ages. Looking forward, projections suggest 
that spending on prescription drugs will increase at 
between 10 and 11% annually through till 2013.
Second, successful new prescription drugs can be ex-
traordinarily profi table. Lipitor, the cholesterol- lowering 
drug sold by Pfi zer, was introduced in 1997, and by 
2006, this drug had generated a staggering $12.5 bil-
lion in annual sales for Pfi zer. The costs of manufac-
turing, packing, and distributing Lipitor amounted 
to only about 10% of revenues. Pfi zer spent close to 
$500 million on promoting Lipitor and perhaps as 
much again on maintaining a sales force to sell the 
product. That still left Pfi zer with a gross profi t of per-
haps $10 billion. Since the drug is protected from direct 
competition by a 20- year patent, Pfi zer has a temporary 
monopoly and can charge a high price. Once the patent 
expires, which is scheduled to occur in 2010, other fi rms 
will be able to produce “generic” versions of Lipitor and 
the price will fall—typically by 80% within a year.
Competing fi rms can produce drugs that are simi-
lar (but not identical) to a patent- protected drug. Drug 
fi rms patent a specifi c molecule, and competing fi rms 
can patent similar, but not identical, molecules that 
have a similar pharmacological effect. Thus Lipitor 
does have competitors in the market for cholesterol- 
lowering drugs, such as Zocor sold by Merck and 
Crestor sold by AstraZeneca. But these competing 
drugs are also patent protected. Moreover, the high 
costs and risks associated with developing a new drug 
and bringing it to market limit new competition. Out 
of every 5,000 compounds tested in the laboratory 
by a drug company, only fi ve enter clinical trials, and 
only one of these will ultimately make it to the mar-
ket. On average, estimates suggest that it costs some 
$800 million and takes anywhere from 10 to 15 years 
to bring a new drug to market. Once on the market, 
only three out of 10 drugs ever recoup their R&D 
and marketing costs and turn a profi t. Thus the high 
profi tability of the pharmaceutical industry rests on 
a handful of blockbuster drugs. At Pfi zer, the world’s 
largest pharmaceutical company, 55% of revenues 
were generated from just eight drugs.
The Pharmaceutical Industry
2. Assess the likely outlook for the competition 
over the next 10 years in this market. Try to 
establish whether new entry into this industry 
is likely, whether demand will grow or shrink, 
how powerful buyers are likely to become, and 
what the implications of all this are for the na-
ture of competition 10 years out.
General Task
Search the Web for information that allows you 
to assess the current state of competition in the 
market for personal computers. Use that informa-
tion to perform an analysis of the structure of the 
market in the United States. (Hint: Try visiting the 
websites of personal computer companies.)

80  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
To produce a blockbuster, a drug company must 
spend large amounts of money on research, most of 
which fails to produce a product. Only very large 
companies can shoulder the costs and risks of do-
ing this, making it diffi cult for new companies to 
enter the industry. Pfi zer, for example, spent some 
$7.44 billion on R&D in 2005 alone, equivalent to 
14.5% of its total revenues. In a testament to just 
how diffi cult it is to get into the industry, although 
a large number of companies have been started in 
the last 20 years in the hope that they might develop 
new pharmaceuticals, only two of these companies, 
Amgen and Genentech, were ranked among the top 
20 in the industry in terms of sales in 2005. Most 
have failed to bring a product to market.
In addition to R&D spending, the incumbent 
fi rms in the pharmaceutical industry spend large 
amounts of money on advertising and sales promo-
tion. While the $500 million a year that Pfi zer spends 
promoting Lipitor is small relative to the drug’s rev-
enues, it is a large amount for a new competitor to 
match, making market entry diffi cult unless the com-
petitor has a signifi cantly better product.
There are also some big opportunities on the ho-
rizon for fi rms in the industry. New scientifi c break-
throughs in genomics are holding out the promise 
that within the next decade pharmaceutical fi rms 
might be able to bring new drugs to market that 
treat some of the most intractable medical condi-
tions, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s disease, 
cancer, heart disease, stroke, and AIDS.
However, there are some threats to the long- term 
dominance and profi tability of industry giants like 
Pfi zer. First, as spending on health care rises, politi-
cians are looking for ways to limit health care costs, 
and one possibility is some form of price control on 
prescription drugs. Price controls are already in ef-
fect in most developed nations, and although they 
have not yet been introduced in the United States, 
they could be.
Second, between 2006 and 2009, 12 of the top 
35 selling drugs in the industry will lose their pat-
ent protection. By one estimate some 28% of the 
global drug industry’s sales of $307 billion will be 
exposed to generic challenge in America alone, due 
to drugs going of patent between 2006 and 2012. 
It is not clear to many industry observers whether 
the established drug companies have enough new 
drug prospects in their pipelines to replace revenues 
from drugs going off patent. Moreover, generic drug 
companies have been aggressive in challenging the 
patents of proprietary drug companies, and in pric-
ing their generic offerings. As a result, their share of 
industry sales has been growing. In 2005, they ac-
counted for more than half of all drugs prescribed 
by volume in the United States, up from one third 
in 1990.
Third, the industry has come under renewed 
scrutiny following studies which showed that some 
FDA approved prescription drugs, known as COX- 2 
inhibitors, were associated with a greater risk of 
heart attacks. Two of these drugs, Vioxx and Bextra, 
were pulled from the market in 2004.22
Case Discussion Questions
1. Drawing on the fi ve forces model, explain why 
the pharmaceutical industry has historically been 
a very profi table industry.
2. After 2002, the profi tability of the industry, mea-
sured by ROIC, started to decline. Why do you 
think this occurred?
3. What are the prospects for the industry going 
forward? What are the opportunities, what are 
the threats? What must pharmaceutical fi rms 
do to exploit the opportunities and counter the 
threats?
 1. M.  E.  Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York: Free 
Press, 1980).
 2. J.  E.  Bain, Barriers to New Competition (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1956). For a re-
view of the modern literature on barriers to entry, 
see R.  J.  Gilbert, “Mobility Barriers and the Value of 
Incumbency,” in Handbook of Industrial Organization, 
eds. R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig, vol. 1 (Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands: North- Holland, 1989). Also see 
R. P. McAfee, H. M. Mialon, and M. A. Williams, “What 
is a Barrier to Entry?” American Economic Review 94 
(May 2004): 461–468 and A. V. Mainkar, M. Lubatkin, 
Notes

 
Chapter 3 External Analysis: The Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities and Threats 
81
and W.  S.  Schulze, “Towards a Product Proliferation 
Theory of Entry Barriers,” Academy of Management 
Review 31 (2006): 1062–1082.
 3. Sources: A.  Kaplan, “Cott Corporation,” Beverage 
World, June 15, 2004, 32; J.  Popp, “2004 Soft Drink 
Report,” Beverage Industry, March 2004, 13L–18L; 
Sparks, “From Coca- Colinization to Copy Catting: The 
Cott Corporation and Retailers Brand Soft Drinks in 
the UK and US,” Agribusiness 13, no. 2 (March 1997): 
153–127; E. Cherney, “After Flat Sales, Cott Challenges 
Pepsi, Coca- Cola,” Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2003, 
B1, B8; and Anonymous, “Cott Corporation: Company 
Profi le,” Just—Drinks, August 2006, 19–22.
 4. N. Cetorelli and P. E. Strahan, “Finance as a Barrier to 
Entry,” Journal of Finance 61 (2006): 437–456.
 5. A detailed discussion of switching costs and lock in can 
be found in C. Shapiro and H. R. Varian, Information 
Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy 
(Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
 6. Most of this information on barriers to entry can be 
found in the industrial organization economics litera-
ture. See especially the following works: Bain, Barriers 
to New Competition; M. Mann, “Seller Concentration, 
Barriers to Entry and Rates of Return in 30 Industries,” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 48 (1966): 296–307; 
W. S. Comanor and T. A. Wilson, “Advertising, Market 
Structure and Performance,” Review of Economics 
and Statistics 49 (1967): 423–440; Gilbert, “Mobility 
Barriers”; and K.  Cool, L.- H.  Roller, and B.  Leleux, 
“The Relative Impact of Actual and Potential Rivalry 
on Firm Profi tability in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” 
Strategic Management Journal 20 (1999): 1–14.
 7. D.  J.  Bryce and J.  H.  Dyer, “Strategies to crack well 
guarded markets,” Harvard Business Review, 85, May 
2007, 84–95.
 8. For a discussion of tacit agreements, see T. C. Schelling, 
The Strategy of Confl ict (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1960).
 9. M. Busse, “Firm Financial Condition and Airline Price 
Wars,” Rand Journal of Economics 33 (2002): 298–318.
 10. For a review see F.  Karakaya, “Market Exit and 
Barriers to Exit: Theory and Practice,” Psychology and 
Marketing 17 (2000): 651–668. Also see C.  Decker 
and T. Mellewight, “Thirty years after Michael E. Porter: 
What do We Know About Business Exit,” Academy of 
Management Review 21 (2007): 41–60.
 11. P. Ghemawat, Commitment: The Dynamics of Strategy 
(Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1991).
 12. The development of strategic group theory has been 
a strong theme in the strategy literature. Important 
contributions include the following: R.  E.  Caves and 
Michael E.  Porter, “From Entry Barriers to Mobility 
Barriers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 
1977): 241–262; K.  R.  Harrigan, “An Application of 
Clustering for Strategic Group Analysis,” Strategic 
Management Journal 6 (1985): 55–73; K.  J.  Hatten 
and D. E. Schendel, “Heterogeneity Within an Industry: 
Firm Conduct in the U.S. Brewing Industry, 1952–71,” 
Journal of Industrial Economics 26 (1977): 97–113; 
Michael E. Porter, “The Structure Within Industries and 
Companies’ Performance,” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 61 (1979): 214–227. Also see K.  Cool and 
D. Schendel, “Performance Differences among Strategic 
Group Members,” Strategic Management Journal 9 
(1988): 207–233; A. Nair and S. Kotha, “Does Group 
Membership Matter? Evidence from the Japanese 
Steel Industry,” Strategic Management Journal (2001): 
221–235; G.  McNamara, D.  L.  Deephouse, and 
R. A. Luce, “Competitive Positioning Within and Across 
a Strategic Group Structure,” Strategic Management 
Journal (2003): 161–180; and J. C. Short, T. B. Palmer, 
and G. M. Hult, “Firm, Strategic Group, and Industry 
Infl uences on Performance,” Strategic Management 
Journal 28 (2007): 147–165.
 13. For details on the strategic group structure in the 
pharmaceutical industry, see K.  Cool and I.  Dierickx, 
“Rivalry, Strategic Groups, and Firm Profi tability,” 
Strategic Management Journal 14 (1993): 47–59.
 14. “How Big Can It Grow? Walmart,” Economist, April 17, 
2004, 74– 76; H. Gilman, “The Most Underrated CEO 
Ever,” Fortune, April 5, 2004, 242– 247; K.  Schaffner, 
“Psst! Want to Sell to Walmart?” Apparel Industry 
Magazine, August 1996, 18– 20.
 15. Charles W. Hofer argued that life cycle considerations 
may be the most important contingency when for-
mulating business strategy. See Hofer, “Towards a 
Contingency Theory of Business Strategy,” Academy 
of Management Journal 18 (1975): 784–810. There 
is empirical evidence to support this view. See 
C.  R.  Anderson and C.  P.  Zeithaml, “Stages of the 
Product Life Cycle, Business Strategy, and Business 
Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 27 
(1984): 5–24; and D. C. Hambrick and D. Lei, “Towards 
an Empirical Prioritization of Contingency Variables for 
Business Strategy,” Academy of Management Journal 28 
(1985): 763–788. Also see G. Miles, C. C. Snow, and 
M.  P.  Sharfman, “Industry Variety and Performance,” 
Strategic Management Journal 14 (1993): 163–177 
and G.  K.  Deans, F.  Kroeger, and S.  Zeisel, “The 
Consolidation Curve,” Harvard Business Review, 
December 2002, 2–3.
 16. The characteristics of declining industries have been 
summarized by K. R. Harrigan, “Strategy Formulation in 
Declining Industries,” Academy of Management Review 5 
(1980): 599–604. Also see J. Anand and H. Singh, “Asset 
Redeployment, Acquisitions and Corporate Strategy in 
Declining Industries,” Strategic Management Journal 18 
(1997): 99–118.
 17. See M. Gort and J. Klepper, “Time Paths in the Diffusion 
of Product Innovations,” Economic Journal (September 
1982): 630–653. Looking at the history of forty- six 
products, Gort and Klepper found that the length of 
time before other companies entered the markets created 
by a few inventive companies declined from an average 

82  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
of 14.4  years for products introduced before 1930 to 
4.9 years for those introduced after 1949.
 18. The phrase was originally coined by J.  Schumpeter, 
Capitalism, 
Socialism 
and 
Democracy 
(London: 
Macmillan, 1950), 68.
 19. M.  E.  Porter, “Strategy and the Internet,” Harvard 
Business Review, March 2001, 62–79.
 20. Economist, The Economist Book of Vital World 
Statistics (New York: Random House, 1990).
 21. For a detailed discussion of the importance of the struc-
ture of law as a factor explaining economic change 
and growth, see D. C. North, Institutions, Institutional 
Change and Economic Performance (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990).
 22. Sources: Staff Reporter, “Pharm Exec 50,” Pharma-
ceutical Executive, May 2004, 61–68; J.  A.  DiMasi, 
R.  W.  Hansen, and H.  G.  Grabowski, “The Price of 
Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development 
Costs,” Journal of Health Economics 22 (March 2003): 
151–170; Staff Reporter, “Where the Money Is: The 
Drug Industry,” Economist, April 26, 2003, 64–65; Value 
Line Investment Survey, various issues. Staff reporter, 
“Heartburn: Pharmaceuticals,” Economist, August 19, 
2006, 57; and P. B. Ginsberg et al., “Tracking Health 
Care Costs,” Health Affairs, October 3, 2006, published 
online at www.healthaffairs.org.

After reading this chapter you should be 
able to:
• Discuss the source of competitive 
advantage.
• Identify and explore the role of efﬁ -
ciency, quality, innovation, and customer 
responsiveness in building and maintain-
ing a competitive advantage.
• Introduce the concept of the value 
chain.
• Explore how functional level strategies 
can be used to build superior efﬁ ciency, 
quality, innovation and customer 
responsiveness.
• Explain the nature of distinctive 
competencies.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Competitive Advantage: 
Value Creation, Low Cost, 
and Differentiation
The Generic Building Blocks 
of Competitive Advantage
Efﬁ ciency
Quality as Excellence and Reliability
Innovation
Customer Responsiveness
The Value Chain
Primary Activities
Support Activities
Functional Strategies 
and the Generic Building Blocks 
of Competitive Advantage
Increasing Efﬁ ciency
Increasing Quality
Increasing Innovation
Achieving Superior Customer 
Responsiveness
Distinctive Competencies 
and Competitive Advantage
Resources and Capabilities
The Durability of Competitive 
Advantage
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Building Competitive 
Advantage
4

84  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
OVERVIEW
In Chapter  3, we discussed the elements of the external environment that deter-
mine an industry’s attractiveness. However, industry structure is not the only force 
that affects company’s performance. Within any given industry some companies are 
more profi table than others. For example, in the global auto industry, Toyota has 
consistently outperformed General Motors for most of the last 20 years. In the steel 
industry, Nucor has consistently outperformed U.S. Steel. And in the U.S. retail indus-
try, Walmart has consistently outperformed Kmart. The question, therefore, is why 
within a particular industry do some companies outperform others? What is the 
basis of their competitive advantage?
As you will see in this chapter, the answer is that companies which outperform 
their rivals do so because they are more effi cient, have higher product quality, are 
more innovative or are more responsive to their customers than their rivals. We refer 
to effi ciency, quality, innovation, and customer responsiveness as the four generic 
building blocks of competitive advantage. For a company to outperform its rivals, it 
must have unique strengths, or distinctive competencies, in at least one of these build-
ing blocks. Walmart, for example, outperforms its rivals in the discount retail industry 
because it is more effi cient, and more responsive to its customers, than its rivals.
Competitive Advantage: Value Creation, 
Low Cost, and Differentiation
As noted in Chapter 1, a company has a competitive advantage when its profi tability 
is higher than the average for its industry, and it has a sustained competitive advan-
tage when it is able to maintain superior profi tability over a number of years. In the 
U.S. retail industry, for example, Walmart has had a sustained competitive advantage 
that has persisted for decades. This has been translated into higher profi tability.
Two basic conditions determine a company’s profi tability: fi rst, the amount of 
value customers place on the company’s goods or services, and second, the compa-
ny’s costs of production. In general, the more value customers place on a company’s 
products, the higher the price the company can charge for those products. Note, 
however, that the price a company charges for a good or service is typically less than 
the value placed on that good or service by the average customer. This is so because 
the average customer captures some of that value in the form of what economists 
call a consumer surplus.1 The customer is able to do this because the company is 
competing with other companies for the customer’s business, so the company must 
charge lower prices than it could were it a monopoly supplier. Moreover, it is nor-
mally impossible to segment the market to such a degree that the company can 
charge each customer a price that refl ects that individual’s assessment of the value 
of a product— which economist refer to as a customer’s reservation price. For these 
reasons the price that gets charged tends to be less than the value placed on the 
product by many customers.
These concepts are illustrated in Figure 4.1. There you can see that the value of 
a product to a consumer may be V, the price that the company can charge for that 
product given competitive pressures may be P, and the costs of producing that prod-
uct are C. The company’s profi t margin is equal to P – C, while the consumer surplus 
is equal to V – P. The company makes a profi t as long as P  C, and its profi t rate 

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
85
will be greater the lower is C relative to P. Bear in mind that the difference between 
V and P is in part determined by the intensity of competitive pressure in the market 
place. The lower the intensity of competitive pressure, the higher the price that can 
be charged relative to V.2
Note also that the value created by a company is measured by the difference 
between V and C (V – C). A company creates value by converting inputs that cost C 
into a product on which consumers place a value of V. A company can create more 
value for its customers either by lowering C, or by making the product more attrac-
tive through superior design, functionality, quality, and the like, so that consumers 
place a greater value on it (V increases) and, consequently, are willing to pay a high 
price (P increases). This discussion suggests that a company has high profi tability, 
and thus a competitive advantage, when it creates more value for its customers than 
rivals do. Put differently,the concept of value creation lies at the heart of competitive 
advantage.3
For a more concrete example, compare Toyota with General Motors. Consider 
the automobile industry. According to a study by Harbour & Associates, in 2005 
Toyota made $1,200 in profi t on every vehicle it manufactured in North America. 
General Motors, in contrast, lost $2,496 on every vehicle it made.4 What accounts 
for the difference? First, Toyota has the best reputation for quality in the industry. 
According to annual surveys issued by J.D. Power and Associates, Toyota consis-
tently tops the list in terms of quality, while GM cars are at best in the middle of the 
pack. The higher quality translates into a higher utility and allows Toyota to charge 
5%–10% higher prices than General Motors for equivalent cars. Second, Toyota has 
a lower cost per vehicle than General Motors, in part because of its superior labor 
productivity. For example, in Toyota’s North American plants, it took an average 
of 29.40 employee hours to build a car, compared to 33.19 at GM plants in North 
America. That 3.49 hour productivity advantage translates into much lower labor 
costs for Toyota and, hence, a lower overall cost structure. Therefore, as summarized 
in Figure 4.2 Toyota’s advantage over GM derives from greater utility (U), which 
has allowed the company to charge a higher price (P) for its cars, and from a lower 
cost structure (C), which taken together implies signifi cantly greater profi tability per 
vehicle (P – C).
Figure 4.1 Value Creation
P – C
C
C
P
V
V – P = Consumer surplus
P – C = Profit margin
V – C = Value created
(P – C)/Capital = Profitability
as measured
by Return on
Invested Capital
V – P
V = Value to consumer
P = Price
C = Cost of production

86  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Superior value creation does not necessarily require a company to have the lowest 
cost structure in an industry, or to create the most valuable product in the eyes of con-
sumers, but it does require that the gap between perceived value (V) and costs of pro-
duction (C) be greater than the gap attained by competitors. For example, Nordstrom 
has a strong competitive position among apparel retailers. Although Nordstrom has a 
higher cost structure than many of its competitors, it has been able to create more value 
because it successfully differentiated its service by offering a selection of high quality 
merchandise, and by being superior in store customer service. Indeed, Nordstrom is 
legendary for the attention that its sales people devote to individual customers. Thus 
consumers assigned a higher V to products purchased at Nordstrom, which enables 
Nordstrom to charge a higher price (P) for the products it sells than many competing 
full service department stores. The higher price translates into a greater profi t margin 
(P – C) and greater profi tability for Nordstrom relative to many of its rivals.
Michael Porter has argued that low cost and differentiation are two basic strat-
egies for creating value and attaining a competitive advantage in an industry.5 
According to Porter, competitive advantage (and higher profi tability) goes to those 
companies that can create superior value— and the way to create superior value is 
to drive down the cost structure of the business and/or differentiate the product in 
some way so that consumers value it more and are prepared to pay a premium price. 
This is all well and good, but it rather begs the question of exactly how a company 
can drive down its cost structure and differentiate its product offering from that of 
competitors so that it can create superior value. In this chapter and the next we ex-
plain just how companies can do these two things. We shall return to Porter’s notions 
of low cost and differentiation strategies in Chapter 5, when we examine his idea in 
signifi cantly more depth.
The Generic Building Blocks 
of Competitive Advantage
Four factors build competitive advantage: effi ciency, quality, innovation, and cus-
tomer responsiveness. They are the generic building blocks of competitive advantage 
that any company can adopt, regardless of its industry or the products or services it 
Figure 4.2 Comparing Toyota and General Motors
General Motors
Toyota
Toyota creates
more value
Toyota can charge
higher prices
Toyota makes more
profits per unit
Toyota has a 
lower cost structure
C
P
V
P – C
V – P
P – C
V – P
C
C
Your friend manages a 
highly proﬁ table retailer. 
She attributes the prin-
ciple source of competi-
tive advantage to low labor 
costs, which are a result of 
her hiring minimum wage 
workers, denying worker 
beneﬁ ts, and her consistent 
opposition to unionization 
at the company. Although 
she acknowledges that this 
approach leads to high 
employee turnover, she ar-
gues that the jobs are low 
skilled and easily reﬁ lled. 
Is your friend’s approach 
to doing business ethical? 
Are there ways of achiev-
ing low labor costs without 
relying on placement of 
minimum wage workers? 
Would you council your 
friend to use an alternative 
approach?
Ethical Dilemma

Efﬁ ciency
The quantity of inputs 
that it takes to produce 
a given output (that is, 
efﬁ ciency  outputs/
inputs).
Employee Productivity
Output per employee.
Capital Productivity
Output per unit 
of invested capital.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
87
produces (Figure 4.3). Although we discuss them separately below, they are interre-
lated. For example, superior quality can lead to superior effi ciency, while innovation 
can enhance effi ciency, quality, and customer responsiveness.
Efﬁ ciency
In one sense, a business is simply a device for transforming inputs into outputs. 
Inputs are basic factors of production such as labor, land, capital, management, and 
technological know- how. Outputs are the goods and services that the business pro-
duces. The simplest measure of effi ciency is the quantity of inputs that it takes to 
produce a given output, that is, effi ciency  outputs/inputs. The more effi cient a 
company is, the fewer the inputs required to produce a given output. For example, 
if it takes General Motors 30 hours of employee time to assemble a car and it takes 
Ford 25 hours, we can say that Ford is more effi cient than GM. And as long as other 
things are equal, such as wage rates, we can assume from this information that Ford 
will have a lower cost structure than GM. Thus, effi ciency helps a company attain a 
competitive advantage through a lower cost structure.
Two of the most important components of effi ciency for many companies are 
employee productivity and capital productivity. Employee productivity is usually 
measured by output per employee and capital productivity by output per unit of 
invested capital. Holding all else constant, the company with the highest labor and 
capital productivity in an industry will typically have the lowest cost structure and 
therefore a cost- based competitive advantage. The concept of productivity is not lim-
ited to employee and capital productivity. Pharmaceutical companies, for example, 
often talk about the productivity of their R&D spending, by which they mean how 
many new drugs they develop from their investment in R&D. Other companies talk 
about their sales force productivity, which means how many sales they generate from 
every sales call, and so on. The important point to remember is that high productiv-
ity leads to greater effi ciency and lower costs.
Figure 4.3 Generic Building Blocks of Competitive Advantage
Superior
quality
Superior
efficiency
Competitive
Advantage:
Superior
innovation
Superior
customer
responsiveness
• Low cost
• Differentiation

88  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Quality as Excellence and Reliability
A product can be thought of as a bundle of attributes.6 The attributes of many physi-
cal products include the form, features, performance, durability, reliability, style, and 
design of the product.7 A product is said to have superior quality when customers 
perceive that the attributes of a product provide them with higher value than attri-
butes of products sold by rivals. For example, a Rolex watch has attributes— such 
as design, styling, performance, and reliability— that customers perceive as being 
superior to the same attributes in many other watches. Thus, we can refer to a Rolex 
as a high- quality product: Rolex has differentiated its watches by these attributes.
When customers are evaluating the quality of a product they commonly measure 
it against two kinds of attributes; attributes that are related to quality as excellence, 
and attributes that are related to quality as reliability. From a quality as excellence 
perspective, the important attributes are things such as a product’s design and styl-
ing, its aesthetic appeal, its features and functions, the level of service associated with 
the delivery of the product, and so on. For example, a customer can purchase a pair 
of imitation leather boots for $20 from Walmart, or they can buy a handmade pair 
of genuine leather boots from Nordstrom for $500. The boots from Nordstrom will 
have far superior styling, feel more comfortable and look much better than those 
from Walmart. The value a consumer would get from the Nordstrom boots would 
in all probability be much greater than the value derived from the Walmart boots, 
but of course, they have to pay far more for them. That is the point of course; when 
excellence is built into a product offering, consumers have to pay more to own or 
consume them.
With regard to quality as reliability, a product can be said to be reliable when it 
consistently does the job it was designed for, does it well, and rarely, if ever, breaks 
down. As with excellence, reliability increases the value a consumer gets from a 
product, and thus the price the company can charge for that product. Toyota’s cars, 
for example, have the highest reliability ratings in the automobile industry, and as a 
consequence consumers are prepared to pay more for them than cars that are very 
similar with regard to their other attributes.
The position of a product against these two dimensions, reliability and other at-
tributes, can be plotted on a fi gure similar to Figure 4.4. For example, a Lexus has 
attributes— such as design, styling, performance, and safety features— that customers 
perceive as demonstrating excellence in quality, and is viewed as being superior to those 
of most other cars. Lexus is also a very reliable car. Thus, the overall level of quality 
of the Lexus is very high, which means that the car offers consumers signifi cant utility, 
and that gives Toyota the option of charging a premium price for the Lexus. Toyota 
also produces another very reliable vehicle, the Toyota Corolla, but this is aimed at 
less wealthy customers and it lacks many of the superior attributes of the Lexus. Thus, 
although this is also a high- quality car in the sense of being reliable, it is not as high 
quality as a Lexus in the sense of being an excellent product. At the other end of the 
spectrum, we can fi nd poor- quality products that have both low reliability and inferior 
attributes, such as poor design, performance, and styling. An example is the Proton, 
which is built by the Malaysian car fi rm of the same name. The design of the car is over 
a decade old and has a dismal reputation for styling and safety. Moreover, Proton’s 
quality record is one of the worst offerings according to J.D. Power.8
The concept of quality applies whether we are talking about Toyota automobiles, 
clothes designed and sold by the Gap, the customer service department of Citibank, 
or the ability of airlines to arrive on time. Quality is just as relevant to services as it 
is to goods.9

Innovation
The creation of new 
products or processes.
Product Innovation
The development of 
products that are new 
to the world or have 
attributes superior 
to those of existing 
products.
Process Innovation
The development of 
a new process for 
producing products 
and delivering them 
to customers.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
89
The impact of high product quality on competitive advantage is twofold.10 First, 
providing high quality products increase the value those products provide to cus-
tomers which gives the company the option of charging a higher price for them. 
The second impact of high quality on competitive advantage comes from the greater 
effi ciency and the lower unit costs associated with reliable products. When products 
are reliable, less employee time is wasted making defective products or providing 
substandard services and less time has to be spent fi xing mistakes, which translates 
into higher employee productivity and lower unit costs. Thus, high product quality 
not only enables a company to differentiate its product from that of rivals, but if the 
product is reliable, it also lowers costs.
Innovation
Innovation refers to the act of creating new products or processes. There are two 
main types of innovation: product innovation and process innovation. Product 
innovation is the development of products that are new to the world or have supe-
rior attributes to existing products. Examples are Intel’s invention of the micropro-
cessor in the early 1970s, Cisco’s development of the router for routing data over 
the Internet in the mid- 1980s, and Palm’s development of the PalmPilot, the fi rst 
commercially successful hand- held computer, in the mid- 1990s. Process innovation 
is the development of a new process for producing products and delivering them to 
customers. An example would be Toyota which developed a range of new techniques 
collectively known as the Toyota lean production system for making automobiles 
which included just- in- time inventory systems, self- managing teams, and reduced 
setup times for complex equipment.
Product innovation creates value by creating new products, or enhanced versions 
of existing products, that customers perceive as having more value, thus giving the 
company the option to charge a higher price. Process innovation often allows a com-
pany to create more value by lowering production costs. Toyota’s lean production 
Figure 4.4 A Quality Map for Automobiles
Quality as Excellence
Reliability
Proton
Ford Explorer
Toyota Corolla
Lexus
Quality as Reliability
High
Low
Inferior
Superior
Attributes

Customer 
Response Time
The time that it takes 
for a good to be 
delivered or a service 
to be performed.
90  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
system, for example, helped to boost employee productivity, thus giving Toyota a 
cost- based competitive advantage.11
In the long run, innovation of products and processes is perhaps the most im-
portant building block of competitive advantage.12 Competition can be viewed as 
a process driven by innovations. Although not all innovations succeed, those that 
do can be a major source of competitive advantage because, by defi nition, they give 
a company something unique— something its competitors lack (at least until they 
imitate the innovation). Uniqueness can allow a company to differentiate itself from 
its rivals and charge a premium price for its product or, in the case of many process 
innovations, reduce its unit costs far below those of competitors.
Customer Responsiveness
To achieve superior customer responsiveness, a company must be able to do a better 
job than competitors of identifying and satisfying its customers’ needs. Customers 
will then attribute more value to its products, creating a differentiation based on 
competitive advantage. Improving the quality of a company’s product offering is 
consistent with achieving responsiveness, as is developing new products with fea-
tures that existing products lack. In other words, achieving superior quality and 
innovation is integral to achieving superior responsiveness to customers.
Another factor that stands out in any discussion of customer responsiveness is 
the need to customize goods and services to the unique demands of individual cus-
tomers or customer groups. For example, the proliferation of soft drinks and beers 
can be viewed partly as a response to this trend. Similarly, automobile companies 
have become more adept at customizing cars to the demands of individual custom-
ers, often allowing a wide range of colors and options to choose from.
An aspect of customer responsiveness that has drawn increasing attention is 
customer response time: the time that it takes for a good to be delivered or a service 
to be performed.13 For a manufacturer of machinery, response time is the time it 
takes to fi ll customer orders. For a bank, it is the time it takes to process a loan or 
that a customer must stand in line to wait for a free teller. For a supermarket, it is the 
time that customers must stand in checkout lines. Survey after survey have shown 
slow response time to be a major source of customer dissatisfaction.14
Other sources of enhanced customer responsiveness include superior design, 
service, and after- sales service and support. All of these factors enhance customer 
responsiveness and allow a company to differentiate itself from its competitors. In 
turn, differentiation enables a company to build brand loyalty and charge a premium 
price for its products. Consider how much more people are prepared to pay for next- 
day delivery of express mail, as opposed to delivery in 3–4 days. In 2009, a two- page 
letter sent overnight by Express Mail within the United States cost about $13, com-
pared with 44 cents for regular mail. Thus, the price premium for express delivery 
(reduced response time) was $12.60, or a premium of 2.757% over the regular price.
The Value Chain
In this section we will take a look at the role played by the different functions of a 
company— such as production, marketing, R&D, service, information systems, mate-
rials management, and human resources— in the value creation process. Specifi cally, 

Value Chain
The idea that a 
company is a chain 
of activities for 
transforming inputs into 
outputs that customers 
value.
Primary Activities
Activities related to the 
design, creation, and 
delivery of the product, 
its marketing, and its 
support and after- sale 
service.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
91
we shall review how the different functional of a company can help in the process of 
driving down costs and increasing the perception of value through differentiation. 
As a fi rst step toward doing this, consider the concept of the value chain, which is 
illustrated in Figure 4.5.15 The term value chain refers to the idea that a company is 
a chain of activities for transforming inputs into outputs valued by customers’ value. 
The process of transforming inputs into outputs is composed of a number of primary 
activities and support activities. Each activity adds value to the product.
Primary Activities
Primary activities have to do with the design, creation, and delivery of the product, 
its marketing, and its support and after- sales service. In the value chain illustrated in 
Figure 4.5, the primary activities are broken down into four functions: research and 
development, production, marketing and sales, and customer service.
Research and Development Research and development (R&D) is concerned 
with the design of products and production processes. Although we think of R&D 
as being associated with the design of physical products and production processes 
in manufacturing enterprises, many service companies also undertake R&D. For 
example, banks compete with each other by developing new fi nancial products and 
new ways of delivering those products to customers. Online banking and smart debit 
cards are two recent examples of the fruits of new product development in the bank-
ing industry. Earlier examples of innovation in the banking industry were ATM ma-
chines, credit cards, and debit cards.
By superior product design, R&D can increase the functionality of products, 
which makes them more attractive to customers, thereby adding value. Alternatively, 
the work of R&D may result in more effi cient production processes, thereby lower-
ing production costs. Either way, the R&D function can help to lower costs or raise 
the value of a product and permit a company to charge higher prices. At Intel, for 
example, R&D creates value by developing ever more powerful microprocessors and 
helping to pioneer ever more effi cient manufacturing processes (in conjunction with 
equipment suppliers).
Figure 4.5 The Value Chain
Customer
Service
Marketing
and Sales
Production
OUTPUT
INPUT
Support Activities
Primary  Activities
Company Infrastructure
Information Systems      Materials Management     Human Resources
R&D

Support Activities
Activities of the value 
chain that provide 
inputs that allow the 
primary activities to 
take place.
92  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Production Production is concerned with the creation of a good or service. For 
physical products, when we talk about production, we generally mean manufactur-
ing. For services such as banking or retail operations, “production” typically takes 
place when the service is delivered to the customer, as when a bank makes a loan 
to a customer. By performing its activities effi ciently, the production function of a 
company helps to lower its cost structure. For example, the effi cient production op-
erations of Honda and Toyota help those automobile companies achieve higher prof-
itability relative to competitors such as General Motors. The production function 
can also perform its activities in a way that is consistent with high product quality, 
which leads to differentiation (and higher value) and lower costs.
Marketing and Sales There are several ways in which the marketing and sales 
functions of a company can help to create value. Through brand positioning and ad-
vertising, the marketing function can increase the value that customers perceive to be 
contained in a company’s product (and thus the utility they attribute to the product). 
Insofar as these help to create a favorable impression of the company’s product in 
the minds of customers, they increase perceived value. For example, in the 1980s, the 
French company Perrier persuaded U.S. customers that slightly carbonated bottled 
water was worth $1.50 per bottle rather than a price closer to the $0.50 that it cost 
to collect, bottle, and distribute the water. Perrier’s marketing function essentially 
increased the perception of utility that customers ascribed to the product.
Marketing and sales can also create value by discovering customer needs and 
communicating them back to the R&D function of the company, which can then 
design products that better match those needs.
Customer Service The role of the service function of an enterprise is to provide 
after- sales service and support. This function can create superior utility by solving cus-
tomer problems and supporting customers after they have purchased the product. For 
example, Caterpillar, the U.S.- based manufacturer of heavy earthmoving equipment, 
can get spare parts to any point in the world within 24 hours, thereby minimizing the 
amount of downtime its customers have to face if their Caterpillar equipment mal-
functions. This is an extremely valuable support capability in an industry where down-
time is expensive. It has helped to increase the utility that customers associate with 
Caterpillar products, and thus the price that Caterpillar can charge for its products.
Support Activities
The support activities of the value chain provide inputs that allow the primary ac-
tivities to take place. These activities are broken down into four functions: materi-
als management (or logistics), human resources, information systems, and company 
infrastructure (see Figure 4.5).
Materials Management (Logistics) The materials management (or logistics) 
function controls the transmission of physical materials through the value chain, 
from procurement through production and into distribution. The effi ciency with 
which this is carried out can signifi cantly lower cost, thereby creating more value. 
Walmart, for example, has a very effi cient materials management setup. By tightly 
controlling the fl ow of goods from its suppliers through its stores and into the hands 
of customers, Walmart has eliminated the need to hold large inventories of goods. 
Lower inventories mean lower costs, and hence greater value creation.

Company 
Infrastructure
The companywide 
context within which all 
the other value creation 
activities take place: the 
organizational structure, 
control systems, and 
company culture.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
93
Human Resources There are a number of ways in which the human resource 
function can help an enterprise to create more value. This function ensures that the 
company has the right mix of skilled people to perform its value- creation activities 
effectively. It is also the job of the human resource function to ensure that people 
are adequately trained, motivated, and compensated to perform their value- creation 
tasks. If the human resources are functioning well, employee productivity rises 
(which lowers costs) and customer service improves (which raises utility), thereby 
enabling the company to create more value.
Information Systems Information systems refer largely to the electronic systems 
for managing inventory, tracking sales, pricing products, selling products, dealing 
with customer service inquiries, and so on. Information systems, when coupled with 
the communications features of the Internet, are holding out the promise of being 
able to improve the effi ciency and effectiveness with which a company manages its 
other value- creation activities. Walmart uses information systems to alter the way 
it does business. By tracking the sale of individual items very closely, its materials 
management function has enabled it to optimize its product mix and pricing strat-
egy. Walmart is rarely left with unwanted merchandise on its hands, which saves on 
costs, and the company is able to provide the right mix of goods to customers, which 
increases the utility that customers associate with Walmart.
Company Infrastructure Company infrastructure is the companywide context 
within which all the other value creation activities take place: the organizational 
structure, control systems, and company culture. Because top management can ex-
ert considerable infl uence in shaping these aspects of a company, top management 
should also be viewed as part of the infrastructure of a company. Indeed, through 
strong leadership, top management can shape the infrastructure of a company and, 
through that, the performance of all other value- creation activities that take place 
within it.
Functional Strategies 
and The Generic Building 
Blocks of Competitive Advantage
Now that we have reviewed the generic building blocks of competitive advantage and 
discussed how the different functions of a company fi t together into the value chain, 
we can look at some of the functional level strategies managers pursue improve the 
effi ciency, quality, innovation, and customer responsiveness of their organization. 
Since this topic is a vast one worthy of a book in its own right, we not attempt an 
exhaustive review of functional level strategies. Instead, we shall illustrate the role of 
functional level strategies in building competitive advantage by focusing on a limited 
number of important functional level strategies.
Increasing Efﬁ ciency
Actions can be taken by functional managers at every step in the value chain to 
increase the effi ciency of a company.

Learning Effects
Cost savings that come 
from learning by doing.
94  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
R&D and Efﬁ ciency Managers in the R&D function might look for ways to sim-
plify the design of a product, reducing the number of parts it contains. By doing so, 
R&D can dramatically decrease the required assembly time, which translates into 
higher employee productivity, lower costs, and higher profi tability. For example, af-
ter Texas Instruments redesigned an infrared sighting mechanism that it supplies 
to the Pentagon, it found that it had reduced the number of parts from 47 to 12, 
the number of assembly steps from 56 to 13, the time spent fabricating metal from 
757 minutes per unit to 219 minutes per unit, and unit assembly time from 129 min-
utes to 20 minutes. The result was a substantial decline in production costs. Design 
for manufacturing requires close coordination between the production and R&D 
functions of the company, of course. Cross- functional teams that contain production 
and R&D personnel who work jointly on the problem best achieve this.
Production and Efﬁ ciency Managers in the production function of a company 
might look for ways to increase the productivity of capital and labor. One common 
strategy is to pursue economies of scale— driving down unit costs by mass produc-
ing output. A major source of economies of scale is the ability to spread fi xed costs 
over a large production volume. Fixed costs are costs that must be incurred to pro-
duce a product whatever the level of output. For example, Microsoft spends perhaps 
$5 billion to develop its latest Windows operating system. It can realize substantial 
scale economies by spreading the fi xed costs associated with developing the new op-
erating system over the enormous unit sales volume it expects for this system (over 
90% of the world’s personal computers use a Microsoft operating system). These 
scale economies are signifi cant because of the trivial incremental (or marginal) cost 
of producing additional copies of a Windows operating system: once the master 
copy has been produced, additional CDs containing the operating system can be 
produced for a few cents. The key to Microsoft’s effi ciency and profi tability (and that 
of other companies with high fi xed costs and trivial incremental or marginal costs) is 
to increase sales rapidly enough that fi xed costs can be spread out over a large unit 
volume and substantial scale economies can be realized.
Another source of scale economies is the ability of companies producing in large 
volumes to achieve a greater division of labor and specialization. Specialization is 
said to have a favorable impact on productivity, mainly because it enables em-
ployees to become very skilled at performing a particular task. The classic ex-
ample of such economies is Ford’s Model T car. The world’s fi rst mass- produced 
car, the Model T Ford was introduced in 1923. Until then, Ford had made cars 
using an expensive hand- built craft production method. By introducing mass- 
production techniques, the company achieved greater division of labor (it split 
assembly into small, repeatable tasks) and specialization, which boosted employee 
productivity. Ford was also able to spread the fi xed costs of developing a car and 
setting up production machinery over a large volume of output. As a result of these 
economies, the cost of manufacturing a car at Ford fell from $3,000 to less than 
$900 (in 1958 dollars).
In addition to scale effects, production managers might seek to boost effi ciency 
by pursuing strategies that help to maximize learning effects. Learning effects are 
cost savings that come from learning by doing. Labor, for example, learns by repeti-
tion how best to carry out a task. Therefore, labor productivity increases over time, 
and unit costs fall as individuals learn the most effi cient way to perform a particu-
lar task. Equally important, management in new manufacturing facilities typically 
learns over time how best to run the new operation. Hence, production costs decline 
because of increasing labor productivity and management effi ciency.

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
95
Although learning effects are normally associated with the manufacturing pro-
cess, there is every reason to believe that they are just as important in service indus-
tries. For example, one famous study of learning in the context of the health care 
industry found that more experienced medical providers posted signifi cantly lower 
mortality rates for a number of common surgical procedures, suggesting that learn-
ing effects are at work in surgery.16 The authors of this study used the evidence to 
argue for establishing regional referral centers for the provision of highly special-
ized medical care. These centers would perform many specifi c surgical procedures 
(such as heart surgery), replacing local facilities with lower volumes and presumably 
higher mortality rates (for another study showing learning effects in surgery see 
the next Strategy in Action feature). Another recent study found strong evidence of 
learning effects in a fi nancial institution. The study looked at a newly established 
document processing unit with 100 staff and found that over time, documents were 
processed much more rapidly as the staff learned the process. Overall, the study con-
cluded that unit costs fell every time the cumulative number of documents processed 
since the unit was established doubled.17
A study carried out by researchers at the Harvard 
Business School tried to estimate the importance of 
learning effects in the case of a speciﬁ c new technology 
for minimally invasive heart surgery that was approved 
by federal regulators in 1996. The researchers looked 
at 16 hospitals and obtained data on the operations for 
660 patients. They examined how the time required to 
undertake the procedure varied with cumulative experi-
ence. Across the 16 hospitals, they found that average 
time fell from 280 minutes for the ﬁ rst procedure with 
the new technology to 220 minutes by the time a hospi-
tal had performed 50 procedures. (Note that not all of the 
hospitals performed 50 procedures, and the estimates 
represent an extrapolation based on the data.)
Next they looked at differences across hospitals. 
They found evidence of very large differences in learn-
ing effects. One hospital, in particular, stood out. This 
hospital, which they called “Hospital M,” reduced its net 
procedure time from 500 minutes on case 1 to 132 min-
utes by case 50. Hospital M’s 88- minute procedure time 
advantage over the average hospital at case 50 trans-
lated into a cost saving of approximately $2,250 per case 
and allowed surgeons at the hospital to do one more 
revenue- generating procedure per day.
The researchers tried to ﬁ nd out why Hospital M 
was superior. They noted that all hospitals had similar 
state- of- the- art operating rooms and used the same 
set of FDA approved devices. All adopting surgeons 
went through the same training courses, and all sur-
geons came from highly respected training hospitals. 
Follow- up interviews, however, suggested that Hospital 
M differed in how it implemented the new procedure. 
The team was handpicked by the adopting surgeon to 
perform the surgery. It had signiﬁ cant prior experience 
working together (that was apparently a key criterion for 
team members). The team was trained together to per-
form the new surgery. Before undertaking a single pro-
cedure, they met with the operating room nurses and 
anesthesiologists to discuss the procedure. Moreover, 
the adopting surgeon mandated that the surgical team 
and surgical procedure was stable in the early cases. 
The initial team went through 15 procedures, and new 
members were added or substituted 20 cases before 
the procedures were modiﬁ ed. The adopting surgeon 
also insisted that the team meet prior to each of the 
ﬁ rst 10 cases, and they also met after the ﬁ rst 20 cases 
to debrief.
The picture that emerges is one of a core team that 
was selected and managed to maximize the gains from 
learning. Unlike other hospitals in which there was less 
stability of team members and procedures, and less at-
tention to brieﬁ ng, debrieﬁ ng, and learning, surgeons 
at Hospital M both learned much faster, and ultimately 
achieved higher productivity than their peers in other in-
stitutions. Clearly, differences in the implementation of 
the new procedure were very important.18
4.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
Learning Effects in Cardiac Surgery

Flexible 
Manufacturing 
Technology , or Lean 
Production
A range of manufacturing 
technologies designed 
to reduce setup 
times for complex 
equipment, increase 
the use of individual 
machines through 
better scheduling, and 
improve quality control 
at all stages of the 
manufacturing process. 
Also known as lean 
production.
Mass Customization
The ability of 
companies to use 
ﬂ exible manufacturing 
technology to customize 
output at costs normally 
associated with mass 
production.
Marketing Strategy
The position that a 
company takes with 
regard to pricing, 
promotion, advertising, 
product design, 
and distribution.
Customer 
Defection Rate
The percentage of a 
company’s customers 
who defect every year 
to competitors.
96  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
An important source of greater effi ciency has been the introduction of fl exible manu-
facturing technology by managers in the production function of an enterprise. The 
term fl exible manufacturing technology— or lean production, as it is sometimes 
called— covers a range of manufacturing technologies designed to reduce setup 
times for complex equipment, increase the use of individual machines through better 
scheduling, and improve quality control at all stages of the manufacturing process.19 
Flexible manufacturing technologies allow the company to produce a wider variety 
of end products at a unit cost that at one time could be achieved only through the 
mass production of a standardized output. Indeed, research suggests that the adop-
tion of fl exible manufacturing technologies may increase effi ciency and lower unit 
costs relative to what can be achieved by the mass production of a standardized out-
put, while at the same time enabling the company to customize its product offering to 
a much greater extent than was once thought possible. The term mass customization 
has been coined to describe the ability of companies to use fl exible manufacturing 
technology to reconcile two goals that were once thought to be incompatible: low 
cost and differentiation through product customization.20
Marketing and Efﬁ ciency The marketing strategy that a company adopts can 
have a major impact on effi ciency and cost structure. Marketing strategy refers to 
the position that a company takes with regard to pricing, promotion, advertising, 
product design, and distribution. Some of the steps leading to greater effi ciency are 
fairly obvious. For example, attaining economies of scale and learning effects can be 
facilitated by aggressive pricing, promotions, and advertising, all of which build sales 
volume rapidly and allow for the cost reductions that come from scale and learning 
effects. Other aspects of marketing strategy have a less obvious but no less important 
impact on effi ciency. For many companies, one important strategy involves reducing 
customer defection rates.21
Customer defection rates are the percentage of a company’s customers who de-
fect every year to competitors. Defection rates are determined by customer loyalty, 
which in turn is a function of the ability of a company to satisfy its customers. 
Because acquiring a new customer entails certain one- time fi xed costs for advertis-
ing, promotions, and the like, there is a direct relationship between defection rates 
and costs. The longer a company holds on to a customer, the greater the volume of 
unit sales generated by a customer that can be set against customer acquisition costs. 
Thus, lowering customer defection rates allows a company to amortize its customer 
acquisition costs and achieve a lower overall cost structure.
For example, in the wireless telecommunications industry it can cost between 
$300 and $400 to acquire a customer (this includes the costs of advertising and 
promotion, providing a customer with a wireless phone, and the cost of service acti-
vation). With monthly bills in the United States averaging $50- $100, it can take six 
to a year just to recoup the fi xed costs of customer acquisition. If customer defection 
rates are high, costs are driven up by the costs of acquiring customers to replace 
those who left. In fact, many wireless service providers have customer defection 
rates approaching 25% per annum, which drives up their costs and reduces their 
profi tability.
To reduce customer defection rates, marketing managers take steps to build 
brand loyalty, and to make it more expensive for customers to defect. In the wire-
less telecommunications industry Verizon Wireless has invested heavily in customer 
service and coverage to try and build brand loyalty. In addition, it has progres-
sively moved customers toward 2 year contracts, with penalty clauses attached if 

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
97
customers switch to another service provider within 2 years. These strategies have 
been quite successful; at around 17% in 2010, Verizon’s customer defection rate is 
the lowest in the industry.22
Materials Management and Efﬁ ciency The contribution of materials manage-
ment (logistics) to boosting the effi ciency of a company can be just as dramatic as 
the contribution of production and marketing. For a typical manufacturing com-
pany, materials and transportation costs account for 50%–70% of its revenues, so 
even a small reduction in these costs can have a substantial impact on profi tability. 
According to one estimate, for a company with revenues of $1 million, a return 
on invested capital of 5%, and materials management costs that amount to 50% 
of sales revenues (including purchasing costs), increasing total profi ts by $15,000 
would require either a 30% increase in sales revenues or a 3% reduction in materi-
als costs.23 In a typical competitive market, reducing materials costs by 3% is usually 
much easier than increasing sales revenues by 30%.
Improving the effi ciency of the materials management function often requires 
the adoption of a just- in- time (JIT) inventory system, designed to economize on 
inventory holding costs by having components arrive at a manufacturing plant just 
in time to enter the production process or goods at a retail store only when stock is 
almost depleted. The major cost saving comes from increasing inventory turnover, 
which reduces inventory holding costs, such as warehousing and storage costs, and 
the company’s need for working capital.
For example, through effi cient logistics Walmart can replenish the stock in its 
stores at least twice a week; many stores receive daily deliveries if they are needed. 
The typical competitor replenishes its stock every 2 weeks so that they have to carry a 
much higher inventory and need more working capital per dollar of sales. Compared 
to its competitors, Walmart can maintain the same service levels with a lower invest-
ment in investment, a major source of its lower cost structure. Thus, faster inventory 
turnover has helped Walmart achieve an effi ciency- based competitive advantage in 
the retailing industry.24
The drawback of JIT systems is that they leave a company without a buffer 
stock of inventory. Although buffer stocks are expensive to store, they can help tide 
a company over shortages on inputs brought about by disruption among suppliers 
(for instance, a labor dispute at a key supplier) and help a company respond quickly 
to increases in demand. However, there are ways around these limitations. For ex-
ample, to reduce the risks linked to dependence on just one supplier for an important 
input, a company might decide to source inputs from multiple suppliers.
Human Resource Strategy and Efﬁ ciency As noted earlier, employee produc-
tivity is one of the key determinants of an enterprise’s effi ciency, cost structure, and 
profi tability.25 Many companies well known for their productive employees devote 
considerable attention to their hiring strategy. Southwest Airlines hires people who 
have a positive attitude and work well in teams because it believes that people who 
have a positive attitude will work hard and interact well with customers, therefore 
helping to create customer loyalty. Nucor hires people who are self- reliant and goal 
oriented, because its employees work in self- managing teams where they have to be 
self- reliant and goal oriented to perform well. As these examples suggest, it is im-
portant to make sure that the hiring strategy of the company is consistent with its 
own internal organization, culture, and strategic priorities. The people a company 
hires should have attributes that match the strategic objectives of the company. The 

Self- Managing Team
A team wherein 
members coordinate 
their own activities, 
which might include 
making their own 
decisions about hiring, 
training, work, and 
rewards.
98  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Running case looks at the steps Walmart has taken to boost the productivity of its 
workforce through human resource strategy.
Organizing the workforce into self- managing teams is a popular human resource 
strategy for boosting productivity. In a self- managing team, members coordinate 
their own activities, which might include making their own hiring, training, work, 
and reward decisions. The typical team comprises 5 to 15 employees who produce 
an entire product or undertake an entire task. Team members learn all team tasks 
and rotate from job to job. Because a more fl exible work force is one result, team 
members can fi ll in for absent coworkers and take over managerial duties such as 
work and vacation scheduling, ordering materials, and hiring new members. The 
greater responsibility thrust on team members and the empowerment it implies are 
seen as motivators. People often respond well to being given greater autonomy and 
responsibility. Performance bonuses linked to team production and quality targets 
can work as an additional motivator. The effect of introducing self- managing teams 
is reportedly an increase in productivity of 30% or more and also a substantial 
increase in product quality. Further cost savings arise from eliminating supervisors 
and creating a fl atter organizational hierarchy, which also lowers the cost structure 
of the company.26
Implementing pay for performance compensation systems is another common 
human resource strategy for boosting effi ciency. It is hardly surprising that linking 
pay to performance can help increase employee productivity. However, it is impor-
tant to defi ne what kind of job performance is to be rewarded and how. Some of the 
most effi cient companies in the world, mindful that cooperation among employees 
is necessary to realize productivity gains, link pay to group or team (rather than 
individual) performance. Nucor divides its work force into teams of 30 or so, with 
bonus pay, which can amount to 30% of base pay, linked to the ability of the team 
to meet productivity and quality goals. This link creates a strong incentive for indi-
viduals to cooperate with each other in pursuit of team goals; that is, it facilitates 
teamwork.
Information Systems and Efﬁ ciency With the rapid spread of computers, the 
explosive growth of the Internet and corporate intranets (internal corporate com-
puter networks based on Internet standards), and the spread of high- bandwidth fi ber 
optics and digital wireless technology, the information systems function is moving 
to center stage in the quest for operating effi ciencies and a lower cost structure.27 
The impact of information systems on productivity is wide ranging and potentially 
affects all other activities of a company. For example, Cisco Systems has been able 
to realize signifi cant cost savings by moving its ordering and customer service func-
tions online. The company has just 300 service agents handling all of its customer 
accounts, compared to the 900 it would need if sales were not handled online. The 
difference represents an annual saving of $20 million a year. Moreover, without 
automated customer service functions, Cisco calculates that it would need at least 
1,000 additional service engineers, which would cost around $75 million.28
Like Cisco, many companies are using web- based information systems to reduce 
the costs of coordination between the company and its customers and the company 
and its suppliers. By using web- based programs to automate customer and supplier 
interactions, the number of people required to manage these interfaces can be sub-
stantially reduced, thereby reducing costs. This trend extends beyond high- tech companies. 
Banks and fi nancial service companies are fi nding that they can substantially reduce 

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
99
Walmart has one of the most productive workforces 
of any retailer. The roots of Walmart’s high productivity 
go back to the company’s early days and the business 
philosophy of the company’s founder, Sam Walton. 
Walton started off his career as a management trainee 
at JCPenney. There he noticed that all employees were 
called associates, and, moreover, that treating them 
with respect seemed to reap dividends in the form of 
high employee productivity.
When he founded Walmart, Walton decided to call 
all employees “associates” to symbolize their impor-
tance to the company. He reinforced this by emphasiz-
ing that at Walmart, “Our people make the difference.” 
Unlike many managers who have stated this mantra, 
Walton believed it and put it into action. He believed 
that if he treated people well, they would return the 
favor by working hard, and that if he empowered them, 
ordinary people could work together to achieve ex-
traordinary things. These beliefs formed the basis for a 
decentralized organization that operated with an open- 
door policy and open books. This allowed associates to 
see just how their store and the company were doing.
Consistent with the open- door policy, Walton con-
tinually emphasized that management needed to lis-
ten to associates and their ideas. As he noted:
The folks on the front lines— the ones who ac-
tually talk to the customer— are the only ones 
who really know what’s going on out there. 
You’d better ﬁ nd out what they know. This re-
ally is what total quality is all about. To push 
responsibility down in your organization, and 
to force good ideas to bubble up within it, you 
must listen to what your associates are trying 
to tell you.
For all of his belief in empowerment, however, 
Walton was notoriously tight on pay. Walton opposed 
unionization, fearing that it would lead to higher pay 
and restrictive work rules that would sap productiv-
ity. The culture of Walmart also encouraged people to 
work hard. One of Walton’s favorite homilies was the 
“sundown rule,” which stated that one should never 
put off until tomorrow what can be done today. The 
sundown rule was enforced by senior managers, in-
cluding Walton, who would drop in unannounced at a 
store, peppering store managers and employees with 
questions, but at the same time praising them for a job 
well done and celebrating the “heroes” who took the 
sundown rule to heart and did today what could have 
been put off for tomorrow.
The key to getting extraordinary effort out of em-
ployees, while paying them meager salaries, was 
to reward them with proﬁ t- sharing plans and stock- 
ownership schemes. Long before it became fash-
ionable in American business, Walton was placing a 
chunk of Walmart’s proﬁ ts into a proﬁ t- sharing plan for 
associates, and the company put matching funds into 
employee stock- ownership programs. The idea was 
simple: reward associates by giving them a stake in 
the company, and they will work hard for low pay be-
cause they know they will make it up in proﬁ t sharing 
and stock price appreciation.
For years, this formula worked extraordinarily well, 
but there are now signs that Walmart’s very success 
is creating problems. In 2008, the company had a 
staggering 2.1 million associates, making it the larg-
est private employer in the world. As the company 
has grown, it has become increasingly difﬁ cult to hire 
people that Walmart has traditionally relied on— those 
willing to work long hours for low pay based on the 
promise of advancement and reward through proﬁ t 
sharing and stock ownership. The company has come 
under attack for paying its associates low wages and 
pressuring them to work long hours without overtime 
pay. Labor unions have made a concerted but so far 
unsuccessful attempt over time to unionize stores, 
and the company itself is the target of lawsuits from 
employees alleging sexual discrimination. Walmart 
claims that the negative publicity is based on faulty 
data, and perhaps that is right, but if the company has 
indeed become too big to put Walton’s principles into 
practice, the glory days may be over.29
Human Resource Strategy and Productivity at Walmart
R U N N I N G  C A S E

100  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
costs by moving customer accounts and support functions online. Such a move 
reduces the need for customer service representatives, bank tellers, stockbrokers, 
insurance agents, and others. For example, it costs an average of about $1.07 to ex-
ecute a transaction at a bank, such as shifting money from one account to another; 
executing the same transaction over the Internet costs $0.01.30
Infrastructure and Efﬁ ciency A company’s infrastructure— that is, its structure, 
culture, style of strategic leadership, and control system— determines the context 
within which all other value creation activities take place. It follows that improving 
infrastructure can help a company increase effi ciency and lower its cost structure. 
Above all, an appropriate infrastructure can help foster a companywide commit-
ment to effi ciency and promote cooperation among different functions in pursuit of 
effi ciency goals. These issues are addressed at length in later chapters.
For now, it is important to note that strategic leadership is especially important 
in building a companywide commitment to effi ciency. The leadership task is to ar-
ticulate a vision that recognizes the need for all functions of a company to focus on 
improving effi ciency. It is not enough to improve the effi ciency of production, or of 
marketing, or of R&D in a piecemeal fashion. Achieving superior effi ciency requires 
a companywide commitment to this goal that must be articulated by general and 
functional managers. A further leadership task is to facilitate cross- functional co-
operation needed to achieve superior effi ciency. For example, designing products 
that are easy to manufacture requires that production and R&D personnel com-
municate; integrating JIT systems with production scheduling requires close com-
munication between material management and production; designing self- managing 
teams to perform production tasks requires close cooperation between human 
resources and production; and so on.
Summary: Increasing Efﬁ ciency Table 4.1 summarizes the primary roles that 
various functions must take in order to achieve superior effi ciency. Bear in mind that 
achieving superior effi ciency is not something that can be tackled on a function- by- 
function basis. It requires an organization- wide commitment and an ability to ensure 
close cooperation among functions. Top management, by exercising leadership and 
infl uencing the infrastructure, plays a major role in this process.
Increasing Quality
Earlier we noted that quality can be thought of in terms of two dimensions: qual-
ity as reliability and quality as excellence. High- quality products are reliable, in the 
sense that they do the job they were designed for and do it well, and are also per-
ceived by consumers to have superior attributes. Superior quality gives a company 
two advantages; fi rst a strong reputation for quality allows a company to differen-
tiate its products from those offered by rivals, and second, eliminating defects or 
errors from the production process reduces waste, increases effi ciency, and lowers 
the cost structure of the company and increases its profi tability.
Attaining Superior Reliability The principal tool that most managers now use 
to increase the reliability of their product offering is the Six Sigma quality improve-
ment methodology. The Six Sigma methodology is a direct descendent of the Total 
Quality Management (TQM) philosophy that was widely adopted, fi rst by Japanese 

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
101
companies and then American companies during the 1980s and early 1990s.31 The 
basic philosophy underlying quality improvement methodologies is as follows:
1. Improved quality means that costs decrease because of less rework, fewer mis-
takes, fewer delays, and better use of time and materials.
2. As a result, productivity improves.
3. Better quality leads to higher market share and allows the company to raise 
prices.
4. This increases the company’s profi tability and allows it to stay in business.
Among companies that have successfully adopted quality improvement methodolo-
gies, certain imperatives stand out. First, it is important that senior managers buy 
into a quality improvement program and communicate its importance to the orga-
nization. Second, if a quality improvement program is to be successful, individuals 
must be identifi ed to lead the program. Under the Six Sigma methodology, excep-
tional employees are identifi ed and put through a “black belt” training course on the 
Six Sigma methodology. The black belts are taken out of their normal job roles, and 
assigned to work solely on Six Sigma projects for the next 2 years. In effect, the black 
belts become internal consultants and project leaders. Because they are dedicated 
Value Creation Function
Primary Roles
Infrastructure (leadership)
1. Provide companywide commitment to efﬁ ciency.
2. Facilitate cooperation among functions.
Production
1. Where appropriate, pursue economies of scale and learning economics.
2. Implement ﬂ exible manufacturing systems.
Marketing
1.  Where appropriate, adopt aggressive marketing to ride down the experience 
curve.
2. Limit customer defection rates by building brand loyalty.
Materials management
1. Implement JIT systems.
2. Supply chain coordination.
R&D
1. Design products for ease of manufacture.
2. Seek process innovations.
Information systems
1. Use information systems to automate processes.
2. Use information systems to reduce costs of coordination.
Human resources
1. Institute training programs to build skills.
2. Implement self- managing teams.
3. Implement pay for performance.
Table 4.1 Primary Roles of Value Creation Functions in Achieving Superior Efﬁ ciency

102  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
to Six Sigma programs, the black belts are not distracted from the task at hand by 
day- to- day operating responsibilities. To make a black belt assignment attractive, 
many companies now use it as a step in a career path. Successful black belts may 
not return to their prior job after 2 years, but instead are promoted and given more 
responsibility.
Third, quality improvement methodologies preach the need to identify defects 
that arise from processes, trace them to their source, fi nd out what caused them, 
and make corrections so that they do not recur. Production and materials manage-
ment typically have primary responsibility for this task. To uncover defects, quality 
improvement methodologies rely upon the use of statistical procedures to pinpoint 
variations in the quality of goods or services. Once variations have been identifi ed, 
they must be traced to their source and eliminated.
One technique that greatly helps in tracing defects to their source is reducing lot 
sizes for manufactured products. With short production runs, defects show up im-
mediately. Consequently, they can be quickly traced to the source, and the problem 
can be addressed. Reducing lot sizes also means that when defective products are 
produced, their number will not be large, thus decreasing waste. Flexible manufac-
turing techniques can be used to reduce lot sizes without raising costs. JIT inventory 
systems also play a part. Under a JIT system, defective parts enter the manufacturing 
process immediately; they are not warehoused for several months before use. Hence, 
defective inputs can be quickly spotted. The problem can then be traced to the supply 
source and corrected before more defective parts are produced. Under a more tra-
ditional system, the practice of warehousing parts for months before they are used 
may mean that large numbers of defects are produced by a supplier before they enter 
the production process.
Fourth, another key to any quality improvement program is to create a metric 
that can be used to measure quality. In manufacturing companies quality can be 
measured by criteria such as defects per million parts. In service companies, with 
a little creativity suitable metrics can be devised. For example, one of the metrics 
Florida Power & Light uses to measure quality is meter- reading errors per month.
Fifth, once a metric has been devised, the next step is to set a challenging qual-
ity goal and create incentives for reaching it. Under Six Sigma programs the goal is 
3.4 defects per million units. One way of creating incentives to attain such a goal is 
to link rewards, like bonus pay and promotional opportunities, to the goal.
Sixth, shop fl oor employees can be a major source of ideas for improving product 
quality, so their participation needs to be incorporated into a quality- improvement 
program.
Seventh, a major source of poor- quality fi nished goods is poor- quality compo-
nent parts. To decrease product defects, a company has to work with its suppliers to 
improve the quality of the parts they supply.
Eighth, the more assembly steps a product requires, the more opportunities there 
are for making mistakes. Thus, designing products with fewer parts is often a major 
component of any quality improvement program.
Finally, implementing quality- improvement methodologies requires organization- 
wide commitment and substantial cooperation among functions. R&D has to coop-
erate with production to design products that are easy to manufacture; marketing 
has to cooperate with production and R&D so that customer problems identifi ed 
by marketing can be acted on; human resource management has to cooperate with 
all the other functions of the company in order to devise suitable quality- training 
programs; and so on.

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
103
Improving Quality as Excellence As we stated earlier, a product is a bundle of 
different attributes. In addition to reliability, these attributes include the form, fea-
tures, performance, durability, and styling of a product. A company can also create 
quality as excellence by emphasizing attributes of the service associated with the 
product, such as ordering ease, prompt delivery, easy installation, the availability 
of customer training and consulting, and maintenance services. Singapore Airlines, 
for example, enjoys an excellent reputation for quality service, largely because pas-
sengers perceive their fl ight attendants as competent, courteous, and responsive to 
their needs.
For a product to be regarded as high quality on the excellence dimension, its of-
fering must be seen as superior to that of rivals. Achieving a perception of high qual-
ity on key attributes requires specifi c actions by managers. First, it is important for 
managers to collect marketing intelligence indicating which of these attributes are 
most important to customers. Second, once the company has identifi ed important 
attributes, it needs to design its products, and the associated services, so that those 
attributes are embodied in the product, and it needs to make sure that personnel in 
the company are appropriately trained so that the correct attributes are emphasized. 
This requires close coordination between marketing and product development, and 
the involvement of the human resource management function in employee selection 
and training.
Third, the company must decide which of the signifi cant attributes to promote 
and how best to position them in the minds of consumers, that is, how to tailor the 
marketing message so that it creates a consistent image in the minds of customers.32 
At this point, it is important to recognize that although a product might be differen-
tiated on the basis of six attributes, covering all of those attributes in the company’s 
communication messages may lead to an unfocused message. Many marketing ex-
perts advocate promoting only one or two central attributes to customers. For ex-
ample, Volvo consistently emphasizes the safety and durability of its vehicles in all 
marketing messages, creating the perception in the minds of consumers (backed by 
product design) that Volvo cars are safe and durable. Volvo cars are also very reliable 
and have high performance, but the company does not emphasize these attributes in 
its marketing messages.
Finally, it must be recognized that competition does not stand still, but instead 
produces continual improvement in product attributes and often the development 
of new product attributes. This is obvious in fast- moving high- tech industries where 
product features that were considered leading edge just a few years ago are now ob-
solete, but the same process is also at work in more stable industries. For example, 
the rapid diffusion of microwave ovens during the 1980s required food companies 
to build new attributes into their frozen food products: they had to maintain their 
texture and consistency while being microwaved. A product could not be considered 
high quality unless it could do that. This speaks to the importance of having a strong 
R&D function in the company that can work with marketing and manufacturing 
to continually upgrade the quality of the attributes that are designed into the com-
pany’s product offerings.
Increasing Innovation
In many ways, innovation is the most important source of competitive advantage. 
This is because innovation can result in new products that better satisfy customer 
needs, can improve the quality (attributes) of existing products, or can reduce the 

Positioning Strategy
The speciﬁ c set of 
options a company 
adopts for a product on 
four main dimensions 
of marketing: price, 
distribution, promotion 
and advertising, and 
product features.
104  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
costs of making products that customers want. The ability to develop innovative new 
products or processes gives a company a major competitive advantage that allows it 
to (1) differentiate its products and charge a premium price and/or (2) lower its cost 
structure below that of its rivals. Competitors, however, attempt to imitate success-
ful innovations and often succeed. Therefore, maintaining a competitive advantage 
requires a continuing commitment to innovation.
Successful new product launches are major drivers of superior profi tability. 
Robert Cooper looked at more than 200 new product introductions and found that 
of those classifi ed as successes, some 50% achieve a return on investment in excess of 
33%, half have a payback period of 2 years or less, and half achieve a market share 
in excess of 35%.33 Many companies have established a track record for successful 
innovation. Among them Sony, whose successes include the Walkman, the Compact 
Disc, and the PlayStation; Nokia, which has been a leader in the development of 
wireless phones; Pfi zer, a drug company that during the 1990s and early 2000s pro-
duced eight blockbuster new drugs; 3M, which has applied its core competency in 
tapes and adhesives to developing a wide range of new products; Intel, which has 
consistently managed to lead in the development of innovative new microprocessors 
to run personal computers; and Cisco Systems, whose innovations helped to pave the 
way for the rapid growth of the Internet.
The High Failure Rate of Innovation Although promoting innovation can be a 
source of competitive advantage, the failure rate of innovative new products is high. 
Research evidence suggests that only 10%–20% of major R&D projects give rise to 
commercial products.34 Well- publicized product failures include Apple Computer’s 
Newton, a personal digital assistant, Sony’s Betamax format in the video player 
and recorder market, and Sega’s Dreamcast videogame console. While many reasons 
have been advanced to explain why so many new products fail to generate an eco-
nomic return, fi ve explanations for failure appear on most lists.35
First, many new products fail because the demand for innovations is inherently 
uncertain. It is impossible to know prior to market introduction whether the new 
product has tapped an unmet customer need, and if there is suffi cient market de-
mand to justify making the product. While good market research can likely reduce 
the uncertainty about the future demand for a new technology, it cannot be com-
pletely eradicated, so a certain failure rate is to be expected.
Second, new products often fail because the technology is poorly commercialized. 
This occurs when there is defi nite customer demand for a new product, but the 
product is not well adapted to customer needs because of factors such as poor de-
sign and poor quality. For instance, the failure of Apple Computer to establish a 
market for the Newton, a hand- held personal digital system that Apple introduced 
in the summer of 1993, can be traced to poor commercialization of a potentially at-
tractive technology. Apple predicted a $1 billion market for the Newton, but sales 
failed to materialize when it became clear that the Newton’s handwriting software, 
an attribute that Apple chose to emphasize in its marketing promotions, could not 
adequately recognize messages written on the Newton’s message pad.
Third, new products may fail because of poor positioning strategy. Positioning 
strategy is the specifi c set of options a company adopts for a product on four main 
dimensions of marketing: price, distribution, promotion and advertising, and prod-
uct features. Apart from poor product quality, another reason for the failure of the 
Apple Newton was poor positioning strategy. The Newton was introduced at such a 
high initial price (close to $1,000) that there would probably have been few buyers 
even if the technology had been adequately commercialized.

Heavyweight 
Project Manager
A project manager 
who has high status 
within the organization 
and the power and 
authority required to 
get the ﬁ nancial and 
human resources that a 
project team needs to 
succeed.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
105
Another reason that many new product introductions fail is that companies often 
make the mistake of marketing a technology for which there is not enough demand. 
A company can gets blinded by the wizardry of a new technology and fail to exam-
ine whether there is customer demand for the product. Finally, companies fail when 
they are slow to get their products to market. The more time that elapses between 
initial development and fi nal marketing— the slower “cycle time”— the more likely it 
is that someone else will beat the company to market and gain a fi rst- mover advan-
tage.36 In the car industry, General Motors has suffered from being a slow innovator. 
Its product development cycle has been about 5 years, compared with 2–3 years 
at Honda, Toyota, and Mazda and 3–4 years at Ford. Because they are based on 
5- year- old technology and design concepts, GM cars are already out of date when 
they reach the market.
Reducing Innovation Failures One of the most important things that managers 
can do to reduce the high failure rate associated with innovation is to make sure that 
there is tight integration between R&D, production and marketing.37 Tight cross- 
functional integration can help a company to ensure that:
1. Product development projects are driven by customer needs.
2. New products are designed for ease of manufacture.
3. Development costs are kept in check.
4. Time to market is minimized.
5. Close integration between R&D and marketing is achieved to ensure that product 
development projects are driven by the needs of customers.
A company’s customers can be one of its primary sources of new product ideas. The 
identifi cation of customer needs, and particularly unmet needs, can set the context 
within which successful product innovation takes place. As the point of contact with 
customers, the marketing function can provide valuable information. Moreover, in-
tegrating R&D and marketing is crucial if a new product is to be properly commer-
cialized. Otherwise, a company runs the risk of developing products for which there 
is little or no demand.
Integration between R&D and production can help a company to ensure that 
products are designed with manufacturing requirements in mind. Design for manu-
facturing lowers manufacturing costs and leaves less room for mistakes and thus 
can lower costs and increase product quality. Integrating R&D and production can 
help lower development costs and speed products to market. If a new product is not 
designed with manufacturing capabilities in mind, it may prove too diffi cult to build, 
given existing manufacturing technology. In that case, the product will have to be 
redesigned, and both overall development costs and time to market may increase 
signifi cantly. Making design changes during product planning can increase overall 
development costs by 50% and add 25% to the time it takes to bring the product 
to market.38
One of the best ways to achieve cross- functional integration is to establish cross- 
functional product development teams, composed of representatives from R&D, 
marketing, and production. The objective of a team should be to take a product 
development project from the initial concept development to market introduction. A 
number of attributes seem to be important in order for a product development team 
to function effectively and meet all its development milestones.39
First, a heavyweight project manager— one who has high status within the or-
ganization and the power and authority required to get the fi nancial and human 
resources that the team needs to succeed— should lead the team and be dedicated 

106  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
primarily, if not entirely, to the project. The leader should believe in the project 
(a champion) and be skilled at integrating the perspectives of different functions and 
helping personnel from different functions work together for a common goal. The 
leader should also be able to act as an advocate of the team to senior management.
Second, the team should be composed of at least one member from each key 
function. The team members should have a number of attributes, including an ability 
to contribute functional expertise, high standing within their function, a willingness 
to share responsibility for team results, and an ability to put functional advocacy 
aside. It is generally preferable if core team members are 100% dedicated to the 
project for its duration. This makes sure that their focus is on the project, not on the 
ongoing work of their function.
Third, the team members should be physically co- located to create a sense of 
camaraderie and facilitate communication. Fourth, the team should have a clear 
plan and clear goals, particularly with regard to critical development milestones and 
development budgets. The team should have incentives to attain those goals; for 
example, pay bonuses when major development milestones are hit. Fifth, each team 
needs to develop its own processes for communication and confl ict resolution. For 
example, one product development team at Quantum Corporation, a California- 
based manufacturer of disk drives for personal computers, instituted a rule that all 
major decisions would be made and confl icts resolved at meetings that were held 
every Monday afternoon. This simple rule helped the team to meet its development 
goals.40
Achieving Superior Customer Responsiveness
Customer responsiveness is an important differentiating attribute that can help to 
build brand loyalty. Achieving superior responsiveness means giving customers value 
for money. Taking steps to improve the effi ciency of a company’s production process 
and the quality of its products is consistent with this aim. Responding to customers 
needs may also require the development of new products with new features. In other 
words, achieving superior effi ciency, quality, and innovation are all part of achieving 
superior responsiveness to customers. In addition, there are two other prerequisites 
for attaining this goal; a tight customer focus and an ongoing effort to seek better 
ways to satisfy those needs.
Customer Focus A company cannot be responsive to its customers’ needs unless 
it knows what those needs are. The fi rst step to building superior responsiveness is 
to motivate the whole company to focus on the customer. Customer focus must start 
at the top of the organization. A commitment to superior customer responsiveness 
brings attitudinal changes throughout a company that ultimately can be built only 
through strong leadership. A mission statement that puts customers fi rst is one way 
to send a clear message to employees about the desired focus. Another avenue is top 
management’s own actions. For example, Tom Monaghan, the founder of Domino’s 
Pizza, stayed close to the customer by visiting as many stores as possible every week, 
running some deliveries himself, insisting that other top managers do the same, and 
eating Domino’s pizza regularly.41
Leadership alone is not enough to attain a superior customer focus. All employ-
ees must see the customer as the focus of their activity and be trained to focus on the 
customer, whether their function is marketing, manufacturing, R&D, or accounting. 
The objective should be to make employees think of themselves as customers— to 

Customization
Varying the features 
of a good or service 
to tailor it to the unique 
needs or tastes of 
groups of customers 
or, in the extreme case, 
of individual customers.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
107
put themselves in customers’ shoes. At that point, employees will be better able to 
identify ways to improve the quality of a customer’s experience with the company.
To reinforce this mindset, incentive systems within the company should reward 
employees for satisfying customers. For example, senior managers at the Four Seasons 
hotel chain, who pride themselves on their customer focus, like to tell the story 
of Roy Dyment, a doorman in Toronto who neglected to load a departing guest’s 
briefcase into his taxi. The doorman called the guest, a lawyer, in Washington D.C., 
and found that he desperately needed the briefcase for a morning meeting. Dyment 
hopped on a plane to Washington and returned it— without fi rst securing approval 
from his boss. Far from punishing Dyment for making a mistake and for not check-
ing with management before going to Washington, the Four Seasons responded by 
naming Dyment Employee of the Year.42 This action sent a powerful message to Four 
Seasons employees about the importance of satisfying customer needs.
Satisfying Customer Needs Another key to superior responsiveness is to satisfy 
customer needs that have been identifi ed. As already noted, effi ciency, quality, and in-
novation are crucial competencies that help a company satisfy customer needs. Beyond 
that, companies can provide a higher level of satisfaction if they differentiate their 
products by (1) customizing them, where possible, to the requirements of individual 
customers and (2) reducing the time it takes to respond to or satisfy customer needs.
Customization entails varying the features of a good or service to tailor it to the 
unique needs or tastes of groups of customers or, in the extreme case, individual cus-
tomers. Although extensive customization can raise costs, the development of fl exible 
manufacturing technologies has made it possible to customize products to a much 
greater extent than was feasible 10–15 years ago without experiencing a prohibitive 
rise in cost structure (particularly when fl exible manufacturing technologies are linked 
with web- based information systems). For example, online retailers such as Amazon.
com have used Web- based technologies to develop a home page customized for each 
individual user. When a customer accesses Amazon.com, he or she is offered a list of 
recommendations for books or music to purchase based on an analysis of prior buy-
ing history, a powerful competency that gives Amazon.com a competitive advantage.
In addition, to gain a competitive advantage a company must often respond to 
customer demands very quickly, whether the transaction is a furniture manufactur-
er’s delivery of a product once it has been ordered, a bank’s processing of a loan ap-
plication, an automobile manufacturer’s delivery of a spare part for a car that broke 
down, or the wait in a supermarket checkout line. We live in a fast- paced society, 
where time is a valuable commodity. Companies that can satisfy customer demands 
for rapid response build brand loyalty, differentiate their products, and can charge 
higher prices for them.
A good example of the value of rapid response time is Caterpillar, the manufac-
turer of heavy earth- moving equipment, which can get a spare part to any point in the 
world within 24 hours. Downtime for heavy construction equipment is very costly, 
so Caterpillar’s ability to respond quickly in the event of equipment malfunction is 
of prime importance to its customers. As a result, many of them have remained loyal 
to Caterpillar despite the aggressive low- price competition from Komatsu of Japan.
In general, reducing response time requires (1) a marketing function that can 
quickly communicate customer requests to production, (2) production and materials 
management functions that can quickly adjust production schedules in response to 
unanticipated customer demands, and (3) information systems that can help produc-
tion and marketing in this process.

Distinctive 
Competency
A unique, ﬁ rm- speciﬁ c 
strength that enables 
a company to better 
differentiate its 
products and/or achieve 
substantially lower 
costs than its rivals and 
thus gain a competitive 
advantage.
Resources
Financial, physical, 
social or human, 
technological, and 
organizational factors 
that allow a company 
to create value for its 
customers. Company 
resources can be 
divided into two types: 
tangible and intangible 
resources.
Tangible Resources
Physical resources, 
such as land, buildings, 
plant, equipment, 
inventory, and money.
Intangible Resources
Nonphysical entities 
that are the creation 
of managers and 
other employees, 
such as brand names, 
the reputation of 
the company, the 
knowledge that 
employees have gained 
through experience, 
and the intellectual 
property of the 
company, including 
that protected through 
patents, copyrights, and 
trademarks.
108  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
Distinctive Competencies 
and Competitive Advantage
If managers are successful in their efforts to improve the effi ciency, quality, innova-
tion and customer responsiveness of their organization, they may lower the cost 
structure of the company and/or better differentiate its product offering, either of 
which can be the basis for a competitive advantage. When a company is uniquely 
skilled at a value chain activity that underlies superior effi ciency, quality, innovation, 
or customer responsiveness relative to its rivals, we say that it has a distinctive com-
petency in this activity. A distinctive competency is a unique fi rm- specifi c strength 
that allows a company to better differentiate its products and/or achieve substan-
tially lower costs than its rivals and thus gain a competitive advantage. For example, 
3M has a distinctive competency in innovation that has enabled the company to 
generate 30% of its sales from differentiated products introduced within the last 
5 years. Distinctive competencies can be viewed as the bedrock of a company’s com-
petitive advantage. Distinctive competencies arise from two complementary sources: 
resources and capabilities.43
Resources and Capabilities
Resources are fi nancial, physical, social or human, technological, and organizational 
factors that allow a company to create value for its customers. Company resources 
can be divided into two types: tangible and intangible resources. Tangible resources 
are something physical, such as land, buildings, plant, equipment, inventory, and 
money. Intangible resources are nonphysical entities that are the creation of man-
agers and other employees, such as brand names, the reputation of the company, 
the knowledge that employees have gained through experience, and the intellectual 
property of the company, including that protected through patents, copyrights, and 
trademarks.
The more fi rm specifi c and diffi cult to imitate is a resource, the more likely a 
company is to have a distinctive competency. For example, Polaroid’s distinctive 
competency in instant photography was based on a fi rm- specifi c and valuable intan-
gible resource: technological know- how in instant fi lm processing that was protected 
from imitation by a thicket of patents. Once a process can be imitated, as when pat-
ents expire, or a superior technology, such as digital photography, comes along, the 
distinctive competency disappears, as has happened to Polaroid. Another important 
quality of a resource that leads to a distinctive competency is that it is valuable: 
in some way, it helps to create strong demand for the company’s products. Thus, 
Polaroid’s technological know- how was valuable while it created strong demand for 
its photographic products; it became far less valuable when superior digital technol-
ogy came along.
Capabilities refer to a company’s skills at coordinating its resources and put-
ting them to productive use. These skills reside in an organization’s rules, routines, 
and procedures, that is, the style or manner through which it makes decisions and 
manages its internal processes to achieve organizational objectives. More generally, 
a company’s capabilities are the product of its organizational structure, processes, 
and control systems. They specify how and where decisions are made within a com-
pany, the kind of behaviors the company rewards, and the company’s cultural norms 
and values. (We discuss how organizational structure and control systems help a 

Capabilities
A company’s skills 
at coordinating its 
resources and putting 
them to productive use.
 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
109
company obtain capabilities in Chapters 7 and 8.) Capabilities are intangible. They 
reside not so much in individuals as in the way individuals interact, cooperate, and 
make decisions within the context of an organization.44
The distinction between resources and capabilities is critical to understanding 
what generates a distinctive competency. A company may have fi rm- specifi c and valu-
able resources, but unless it has the capability to use those resources effectively, it may 
not be able to create a distinctive competency. It is also important to recognize that 
a company may not need fi rm- specifi c and valuable resources to establish a distinc-
tive competency so long as it does have capabilities that no competitor possesses. For 
example, the steel mini- mill operator Nucor is widely acknowledged to be the most 
cost- effi cient steel maker in the United States. Its distinctive competency in low- cost 
(effi cient) steel making does not come from any fi rm- specifi c and valuable resources. 
Nucor has the same resources (plant, equipment, skilled employees, know- how) as 
many other mini- mill operators. What distinguishes Nucor is its unique capability to 
manage its resources in a highly productive way. Specifi cally, Nucor’s structure, con-
trol systems, and culture promote effi ciency at all levels within the company.
In sum, for a company to have a distinctive competency it must at a minimum 
have either (1) a fi rm- specifi c and valuable resource and the capabilities (skills) 
necessary to take advantage of that resource (as illustrated by Polaroid) or (2) a 
fi rm- specifi c capability to manage resources (as exemplifi ed by Nucor). A company’s 
distinctive competency is strongest when it possesses both fi rm- specifi c and valuable 
resources and fi rm- specifi c capabilities to manage those resources.
Figure 4.6 illustrates the relationship of a company’s strategies, distinctive com-
petencies, and competitive advantage. Distinctive competencies shape the strategies 
that the company pursues, which build superior effi ciency, quality, innovation or cus-
tomer responsiveness. In turn, this leads to competitive advantage and superior prof-
itability. However, it is also very important to realize that the strategies a company 
adopts can build new resources and capabilities or strengthen the existing resources 
and capabilities of the company, thereby enhancing the distinctive competencies of 
the enterprise. Thus, the relationship between distinctive competencies and strategies 
is not a linear one; rather, it is a reciprocal one in which distinctive competencies 
shape strategies, and strategies help to build and create distinctive competencies.45
Shape
Build
Build
Resources
Distinctive
competences
Capabilities
Competitive
advantage
Superior
profitability
Strategies
Figure 4.6 Strategy, Resources, Capabilities, and Competencies

Barriers to Imitation
Factors that make 
it difﬁ cult for a 
competitor to copy a 
company’s distinctive 
competencies.
110  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
The Durability of Competitive Advantage
A company with a competitive advantage will have superior profi tability. This sends 
a signal to rivals that the company has some valuable distinctive competency that 
allows it to create superior value. Competitors will try to identify and imitate that 
competency, and insofar as they are successful, ultimately the imitators may compete 
away the company’s superior profi tability.46 The speed at which this process occurs 
depends upon the height of barriers to imitation.
Barriers to imitation are factors that make it diffi cult for a competitor to copy a 
company’s distinctive competencies; the greater the barriers to imitation, the more 
sustainable are a company’s competitive advantage.47 Barriers to imitation differ de-
pending on whether a competitor is trying to imitate resources or capabilities.
In general, the easiest distinctive competencies for prospective rivals to imitate 
tend to be those based on possession of fi rm- specifi c and valuable tangible resources, 
such as buildings, plant, and equipment. Such resources are visible to competitors 
and can often be purchased on the open market. For example, if a company’s com-
petitive advantage is based on sole possession of effi cient- scale manufacturing fa-
cilities, competitors may move fairly quickly to establish similar facilities. Although 
Ford gained a competitive advantage over General Motors in the 1920s by being the 
fi rst to adopt an assembly line manufacturing technology to produce automobiles, 
General Motors quickly imitated that innovation, competing away Ford’s distinctive 
competence in the process.
Intangible resources can be more diffi cult to imitate. This is particularly true of 
brand names, which are important because they symbolize a company’s reputation. 
In the heavy earthmoving equipment industry, for example, the Caterpillar brand 
name is synonymous with high quality and superior after- sales service and support. 
Customers often display a preference for the products of such companies because the 
brand name is an important guarantee of high quality. Although competitors might 
like to imitate well- established brand names, the law prohibits them from doing so.
Marketing and technological know- how are also important intangible resources 
and can be relatively easy to imitate. Successful marketing strategies are relatively 
easy to imitate because they are so visible to competitors. Thus, Coca- Cola quickly 
imitated PepsiCo’s Diet Pepsi brand with the introduction of its own brand, Diet 
Coke.
With regard to technological know- how, the patent system in theory should make 
technological know- how relatively immune to imitation. Patents give the inventor 
of a new product a 20- year exclusive production agreement. However, it is often 
possible to invent around patents— that is, produce a product that is functionally 
equivalent, but does not rely upon the patented technology. One study found that 
60% of patented innovations were successfully invented around in 4 years.48 This 
suggests that in general, distinctive competencies based on technological know- how 
can be relatively short- lived.
Imitating a company’s capabilities tends to be more diffi cult than imitating its 
tangible and intangible resources, chiefl y because capabilities are based on the way 
in which decisions are made and processes managed deep within a company. It is 
hard for outsiders to discern them.
On its own, the invisible nature of capabilities would not be enough to halt imi-
tation; competitors could still gain insights into how a company operates by hiring 
people away from that company. However, a company’s capabilities rarely reside in a 

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
111
single individual. Rather, they are the product of how numerous individuals interact 
within a unique organizational setting.49 It is possible that no one individual within 
a company may be familiar with the totality of a company’s internal operating rou-
tines and procedures. In such cases, hiring people away from a successful company 
in order to imitate its key capabilities may not be helpful.
In sum, a company’s competitive advantage tends to be more secure when it is 
based upon intangible resources and capabilities, as opposed to tangible resources. 
Capabilities can be particularly diffi cult to imitate, since doing so requires the imi-
tator to change its own internal management processes— something that is never 
easy due to organization inertia. Even in such a favorable situation, however, a 
company is never totally secure. The reason for this is that rather than imitating a 
company with a competitive advantage, competitors may invent their way around 
the source of competitive advantage. The decline of once dominant companies like 
IBM, General Motors, and Sears has not been due to imitation of their distinctive 
competencies, but to the fact that rivals such as Dell, Toyota, and Walmart developed 
new and better ways of competing which nullifi ed the competitive advantage once 
enjoyed by these enterprises. Herein lies the rationale for the statement popularized 
by the former CEO of Intel, Andy Grove that “only the paranoid survive!” Even if 
a company’s distinctive competencies are protected by high barriers to imitation, it 
should act as if rivals are continually trying to nullify its source of advantage either 
by imitation, or by developing new ways of doing business— for in reality, that is 
exactly what they are trying to do.
1. To have superior profi tability, a company must 
lower its costs or differentiate its product so that 
it creates more value and can charge a higher 
price, or do both simultaneously.
2. The four building blocks of competitive advan-
tage are effi ciency, quality, innovation, and cus-
tomer responsiveness. Superior effi ciency enables 
a company to lower its costs; superior quality 
allows it to charge a higher price and lower its 
costs; and superior customer service lets it charge 
a higher price. Superior innovation can lead to 
higher prices, particularly in the case of product 
innovations, or lower unit costs, particularly in 
the case of process innovations.
3. The term value chain refers to the idea that a com-
pany is a chain of activities for transforming inputs 
into outputs valued by customers’ value. The pro-
cess of transforming inputs into outputs is com-
posed of a number of primary activities and support 
activities. Each activity adds value to the product.
4. Actions taken by functional managers at every step 
in the value chain— functional level strategies— 
can increase the effi ciency, quality, innovation, 
and customer responsiveness of a company.
5. Distinctive competencies are the fi rm- specifi c 
strengths of a company. Valuable distinctive com-
petencies enable a company to generate superior 
profi tability.
6. The distinctive competencies of an organization 
arise from its resources and capabilities.
7. In order to achieve a competitive advantage, a 
company needs to pursue strategies that build on 
its existing resources and capabilities and formu-
late strategies that build additional resources and 
capabilities (develop new competencies).
8. The durability of a company’s competitive ad-
vantage depends on the height of barriers to 
imitation.
Summary of Chapter

112  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
1. What are the main implications of the material 
discussed in this chapter for strategy formulation?
2. When is a company’s competitive advantage 
most likely to endure over time?
3. It is possible for a company to be the lowest- cost 
producer in its industry and simultaneously have 
an output that is the most valued by customers. 
Discuss this statement.
4. How are the four generic building blocks of com-
petitive advantage related to each other?
5. What role can top management play in helping a 
company achieve superior effi ciency, quality, in-
novation, and responsiveness to customers?
Discussion Questions
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: 
Analyzing Competitive Advantage
Break into a group of 3–5 people. Drawing on the 
concepts introduced in this chapter, analyze the 
competitive position of your business school in 
the market for business education. Then answer 
the following questions:
1. Does your business school have a competitive 
advantage?
2. If so, on what is this advantage based, and is 
this advantage sustainable?
3. If your school does not have a competitive 
advantage in the market for business educa-
tion, identify the inhibiting factors that are 
holding it back.
4. How might the Internet change the way in 
which business education is delivered?
5. Does the Internet pose a threat to the competi-
tive position of your school in the market for 
business education, or is it an opportunity for 
your school to enhance its competitive posi-
tion? (Note that it can be both.)
Visiting Johnson & Johnson
Visit the web site of Johnson and Johnson (http://
www.jnj.com). Read through the material con-
tained on the site, paying particular attention 
to the features on company history, Johnson & 
Johnson’s credo, innovations, and company news. 
On the basis of the information contained here, 
answer the following questions:
1. Do you think that Johnson & Johnson has a 
distinctive competence?
2. What is the nature of this competence? How 
does it help the company to attain a competitive 
advantage?
3. What are the resources and capabilities that 
underlie this competence? Where do these re-
sources and capabilities come from?
4. How imitable is Johnson & Johnson’s distinc-
tive competence?
General Task
Search the Web for a company site that goes into 
depth about the history, products, and competitive 
position of that company. On the basis of the infor-
mation you collect, answer the following questions:
1. Does the company have a distinctive competence?
2. What is the nature of this competence? How 
does it help the company to attain a competi-
tive advantage?
3. What are the resources and capabilities that 
underlie this competence? Where do these re-
sources and capabilities come from?
4. How imitable is the company’s distinctive 
competence?
Exploring The Web

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
113
In 2006, Starbucks’, the ubiquitous coffee retailer, 
closed a decade of astounding fi nancial performance. 
Sales had increased from $697 million to $7.8 billion 
and net profi ts from $36 million to $540 million. In 
2006, Starbucks’ was earning a return on invested 
capital of 25.5%, which was impressive by any mea-
sure, and the company was forecasted to continue 
growing earnings and maintain high profi ts through 
to the end of the decade. How did this come about?
Thirty years ago Starbucks was a single store in 
Seattle’s Pike Place Market selling premium roasted 
coffee. Today it is a global roaster and retailer of coffee 
with more than 12,000 retail stores, some 3,000 of 
which are to be found in 40 countries outside the 
United States. Starbucks Corporation set out on its 
current course in the 1980s when the company’s 
director of marketing, Howard Schultz, came back 
from a trip to Italy enchanted with the Italian coffee-
house experience. Schultz, who later became CEO, 
persuaded the company’s owners to experiment with 
the coffeehouse format— and the Starbucks experi-
ence was born.
Schultz’s basic insight was that people lacked a 
“third place” between home and work where they 
could have their own personal time out, meet with 
friends, relax, and have a sense of gathering. The 
business model that evolved out of this was to sell 
the company’s own premium roasted coffee, along 
with freshly brewed espresso- style coffee beverages, 
a variety of pastries, coffee accessories, teas, and 
other products, in a coffeehouse setting. The com-
pany devoted, and continues to devote, considerable 
attention to the design of its stores, so as to create 
a relaxed, informal and comfortable atmosphere. 
Underlying this approach was a belief that Starbucks 
was selling far more than coffee— it was selling 
an experience. The premium price that Starbucks 
charged for its coffee refl ected this fact.
From the outset, Schultz also focused on provid-
ing superior customer service in stores. Reasoning 
that motivated employees provide the best customer 
service, Starbucks executives developed employee 
hiring and training programs that were the best in 
the restaurant industry. Today, all Starbucks employ-
ees are required to attend training classes that teach 
them not only how to make a good cup of coffee, 
but also the service oriented values of the company. 
Beyond this, Starbucks provided progressive com-
pensation policies that gave even part- time employ-
ees stock option grants and medical benefi ts— a very 
innovative approach in an industry where most em-
ployees are part time, earn minimum wage, and have 
no benefi ts.
Unlike many restaurant chains, which expanded 
very rapidly through franchising arrangement once 
they have established a basic formula that appears to 
work, Schultz believed that Starbucks needed to own 
its stores. Although it has experimented with fran-
chising arrangements in some countries, and some 
situations in the United States such as at airports, the 
company still prefers to own its own stores wherever 
possible.
This formula met with spectacular success in the 
United States, where Starbucks went from obscurity 
to one of the best known brands in the country in 
a decade. As it grew, Starbucks found that it was 
generating an enormous volume of repeat business. 
Today the average customer comes into a Starbucks’ 
store around 20 times a month. The customers them-
selves are a fairly well- healed group— their average 
income is about $80,000.
As the company grew, it started to develop a 
very sophisticated location strategy. Detailed demo-
graphic analysis was used to identify the best loca-
tions for Starbuck’s stores. The company expanded 
rapidly to capture as many premium locations as 
possible before imitators. Astounding many observ-
ers, Starbucks would even sometimes locate stores 
on opposite corners of the same busy street— so that 
it could capture traffi c going different directions 
down the street.
By 1995 with almost 700 stores across the United 
States, Starbucks began exploring foreign opportuni-
ties. First stop was Japan, where Starbucks proved 
that the basic value proposition could be applied to 
a different cultural setting (there are now 600 stores 
in Japan). Next, Starbucks embarked upon a rapid 
development strategy in Asia and Europe. By 2001, 
the magazine Brandchannel named Starbucks 1 of 
the 10 most impactful global brands, a position it 
Starbucks

114  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
has held ever since. But this is only the beginning. 
In late 2006, with 12,000 stores in operation, the 
company announced that its long term goal was to 
have 40,000 stores worldwide. Looking forward, it 
expects 50% of all new store openings to be outside 
of the United States.50
Case Discussion Questions
1. What functional strategies at Starbucks’ help the 
company to achieve superior fi nancial performance?
2. Identify the resources, capabilities, and distinc-
tive competencies of Starbucks?
3. How do Starbucks’ resources, capabilities, and 
distinctive competencies translate into superior 
fi nancial performance?
4. Why do you think Starbucks’ prefers to own its 
own stores wherever possible?
5. How secure is Starbucks’ competitive advantage? 
What are the barriers to imitation here?
 1. The concept of consumer surplus is an important 
one in economics. For a more detailed exposition see 
D. Besanko, D. Dranove, and M. Shanley, Economics of 
Strategy (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 2. However, P  V only in the special case where the com-
pany has a perfect monopoly, and where it can charge 
each customer a unique price that refl ects the value of 
the product to that customer (i.e., where perfect price 
discrimination is possible). More generally, except in the 
limiting case of perfect price discrimination even a mo-
nopolist will see most consumers capture some of the 
value of a product in the form of a consumer surplus.
 3. This point is central to the work of Michael Porter. 
See M.  E.  Porter, Competitive Advantage (New York: 
Free Press, 1985). See also Chapter 4 in P. Ghemawat, 
Commitment: The Dynamic of Strategy (New York: 
Free Press, 1991).
 4. Harbour Consulting, “Productivity Gap Among North 
American Auto Makers Narrows in Harbour Report 
2006,” Harbour Consulting Press Release, July 1, 2006.
 5. M.  E.  Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York: Free 
Press, 1980).
 6. This approach goes back to the pioneering work by 
K.  Lancaster, Consumer Demand: A New Approach 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1971).
 7. D. Garvin, “Competing on the Eight Dimensions of Quality,” 
Harvard Business Review, November–December 1987, 
101–119; P. Kotler, Marketing Management (Millennium ed.) 
(Upper Saddle River, N.j.: Prentice- Hall, 2000).
 8. J.D.  Power Asia Pacifi c 2010 Malaysia Initial Quality 
Studysm (IQS), October 29, 2010, http://businesscenter
.jdpower.com/news/pressrelease.aspx?ID2010208 
(accessed January 6, 2011); and “Proton Bomb,” The 
Economist, May 8, 2004, 77.
 9. C. K. Prahalad and M. S. Krishnan, “The New Meaning 
of Quality in the Information Age,” Harvard Business 
Review, September–October 1999, 109–118.
 10. See D.  Garvin, “What Does Product Quality Really 
Mean,” Sloan Management Review, Fall 1984, 26, 25–44; 
P. B. Crosby, Quality is Free (New York: Mentor, 1980); 
and A. Gabor, The Man Who Discovered Quality (New 
York: Times Books, 1990).
 11. M.  Cusumano, The Japanese Automobile Industry 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989); 
and S.  Spear and H.  K.  Bowen, “Decoding the DNA 
of the Toyota Production System,” Harvard Business 
Review, September–October 1999, 96–108.
 12. W. Chan Kim and R. Mauborgne, “Value Innovation: 
The Strategic Logic of High Growth,” Harvard Business 
Review, January–February 1997, 102–115.
 13. G. Stalk and T. M. Hout, Competing Against Time (New 
York: Free Press, 1990).
 14. Ibid.
 15. M. E. Porter, Competitive Advantage.
 16. H.  Luft, J.  Bunker, and A.C.  Enthoven, “Should 
Operations Be Regionalized?” New England Journal of 
Medicine 301 (1979): 1364–1369.
 17. S.  Chambers and R.  Johnston, “Experience Curves 
in Services,” International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management 20 (2000): 842–860.
 18. Source: G.  P.  Pisano, R.  M.  J.  Bohmer, and 
A. C. Edmondson, “Organizational Differences in Rates 
of Learning: Evidence from the Adoption of Minimally 
Invasive Cardiac Surgery,” Management Science 47 
(2001): 752–768.
 19. See P. L. Nemetz and L. W. Fry, “Flexible Manufacturing 
Organizations: Implications for Strategy Formulation,” 
Academy of Management Review 13 (1988): 627–638; 
N.  Greenwood, Implementing Flexible Manufactur-
ing Systems (New York: Halstead Press, 1986); 
J. P. Womack, D. T. Jones, and D. Roos, The Machine 
That Changed the World (New York: Rawson 
Associates, 1990); and R. Parthasarthy and S. P. Seith, 
“The Impact of Flexible Automation on Business 
Notes

 
Chapter 4 Building Competitive Advantage 
115
Strategy and Organizational Structure,” Academy of 
Management Review 17 (1992): 86–111.
 20. B.  J.  Pine, Mass Customization: The New Frontier in 
Business Competition (Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1993); S.  Kotha, “Mass Customization: 
Implementing the Emerging Paradigm for Competitive 
Advantage,” Strategic Management Journal 16 (1995): 
21–42; and J. H. Gilmore and B. J. Pine II, “The Four 
Faces of Mass Customization,” Harvard Business 
Review, January–February 1997, 91–101.
 21. F.  F.  Reichheld and W.  E.  Sasser, “Zero Defections: 
Quality Comes to Service,” Harvard Business Review, 
September–October 1990, 105–111.
 22. A.  Z.  Cuneo, “Call Verizon Victorious,” Advertising 
Age, March 8, 2004, 3–5.
 23. H.  F.  Busch, “Integrated Materials Management,” 
International Journal of Physical. Distribution and 
Materials Management 18 (1990): 28–39.
 24. Stalk and Hout, Competing Against Time.
 25. See P. Bamberger and I. Meshoulam, Human Resource 
Strategy: Formulation, Implementation, and Impact 
(Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 2000); and P. M. Wright 
and S.  Snell, “Towards a Unifying Framework for 
Exploring Fit and Flexibility in Human Resource 
Management,” Academy of Management Review, 23 
October 1998, 756–772.
 26. J. Hoerr, “The Payoff from Teamwork,” Business Week, 
July 10, 1989, 56–62.
 27. T.  C.  Powell and A.  Dent- Micallef, “Information 
Technology as Competitive Advantage: The Role of 
Human, Business, and Technology Resource,” Strategic 
Management Journal 18 (1997): 375–405; and B. Gates, 
Business @ the Speed of Thought (New York: Warner 
Books, 1999).
 28. “Cisco@speed,” Economist, June 26, 1999, 12; S. Tully, 
“How Cisco Mastered the Net,” Fortune, August 17, 
1997, 207–210; and C.  Kano, “The Real King of the 
Internet,” Fortune, September 7, 1998, 82–93.
 29. Sources: S.  Walton and J.  Huey, Sam Walton: Made 
in America (New York: Bantam, 1993). S.  Maich, 
“Walmart’s Mid Life Crisis,” Maclean’s, August 23, 
2004, 45; and “The People Make It All Happen,” 
Discount Store News, October 1999, 103–106. http://
www.walmartstores.com.
 30. Gates, Business @ the Speed of Thought.
 31. See the articles published in the special issue of the 
Academy of Management Review on Total Quality 
Management 19 (1994): 3. The following article 
provides a good overview of many of the issues in-
volved from an academic perspective: J. W. Dean and 
D. E. Bowen, “Management Theory and Total Quality,” 
Academy of Management Review 19 (1994): 392–418. 
Also see T. C. Powell, “Total Quality Management as 
Competitive Advantage,” Strategic Management Journal 
16 (1995): 15–37.
 32. A. Ries and J. Trout, Positioning: The Battle for Your 
Mind (New York: Warner Books, 1982).
 33. R.  G.  Cooper, Product Leadership (Reading, Mass.: 
Perseus Books, 1999).
 34. See: Cooper, Product Leadership. A.  L.  Page PDMA’s 
New product development practices survey: Performance 
and best practices. PDMA 15th Annual International 
Conference, Boston, Mass., October 16, 1991; and 
E.  Mansfi eld, “How Economists See R&D,” Harvard 
Business Review, November–December 1981, 98–106.
 35. S.  L.  Brown and K.  M.  Eisenhardt, “Product 
Development: 
Past 
Research, 
Present 
Findings, 
and Future Directions,” Academy of Management 
Review 20 (1995): 343–378; M.  B.  Lieberman and 
D. B. Montgomery, “First Mover Advantages,” Special 
Issue, Strategic Management Journal 9 (Summer 1988): 
41–58; D.  J.  Teece, “Profi ting from Technological 
Innovation: Implications for Integration, Collaboration, 
Licensing and Public Policy,” Research Policy 15 (1987): 
285–305; G. J. Tellis and P. N. Golder, “First to Market, 
First to Fail?” Sloan Management Review, Winter 1996, 
65–75; and G.  A.  Stevens and J.  Burley, “Piloting the 
Rocket of Radical Innovation,” Research Technology 
Management, 46 (2003): 16–26.
 36. Stalk and Hout, Competing Against Time.
 37. K.  B.  Clark and S.  C.  Wheelwright, Managing New 
Product and Process Development (New York: Free 
Press, 1993); and M.  A.  Schilling and C.  W.  L.  Hill, 
“Managing the New Product Development Process,” 
Academy of Management Executive 12, no. 3 (August 
1998): 67–81.
 38. O. Port, “Moving Past the Assembly Line,” Special Issue, 
Business Week, Reinventing America, 1992, 177–180.
 39. K.  B.  Clark and T.  Fujimoto, “The Power of Product 
Integrity,” Harvard Business Review, November–
December 1990, 107–118; Clark and Wheelwright, 
Managing New Product and Process Development; 
Brown and Eisenhardt, “Product Development”; and 
Stalk and Hout, Competing Against Time.
 40. C.  Christensen, “Quantum Corporation— Business 
and Product Teams,” Harvard Business School Case, 
#9- 692- 023.
 41. S.  Caminiti, “A Mail Order Romance: Lands’ End 
Courts Unseen Customers,” Fortune, March 13, 1989, 
43–44.
 42. P.  Sellers, “Getting Customers to Love You,” Fortune, 
March 13, 1989, 38–42.
 43. The material in this section relies on the resource- based 
view of the company. For summaries of this perspective, 
see J.  B.  Barney, “Company Resources and Sustained 
Competitive Advantage,” Journal of Management 
17 (1991): 99–120; J. T. Mahoney and J. R. Pandian, 
“The Resource- Based View Within the Conversation of 
Strategic Management,” Strategic Management Journal 
13 (1992): 63–380; R. Amit and P. J. H. Schoemaker, 
“Strategic Assets and Organizational Rent,” Strategic 
Management Journal 14 (1993): 33–46; M. A. Peteraf, 
“The Cornerstones of Competitive Advantage: A 
Resource- Based View,” Strategic Management Journal 14 

116  
Part 2 The Nature of Competitive Advantage
(1993): 179–191; B. Wernerfelt, “A Resource Based View 
of the Company,” Strategic Management Journal 15 
(1994): 171–180; and K. M. Eisenhardt and J. A. Martin, 
“Dynamic Capabilities: What are They?” Strategic 
Management Journal, 21 (2000): 1105–1121.
 44. For a discussion of organizational capabilities, see 
R. R. Nelson and S. G. Winter, An Evolutionary Theory 
of Economic Change (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 
1982).
 45. Kim and Mauborgne, “Value Innovation: The Strategic 
Logic of High Growth.”
 46. This is the nature of the competitive process. For more 
detail, see C. W. L. Hill and D. Deeds, “The Importance 
of Industry Structure for the Determination of Company 
Profi tability: A Neo- Austrian Perspective,” Journal of 
Management Studies, 33 (1996): 429–451.
 47. As with resources and capabilities, so the concept of 
barriers to imitation is also grounded in the resource- 
based view of the company. For details, see R.  Reed 
and R.  J.  DeFillippi, “Causal Ambiguity, Barriers to 
Imitation, and Sustainable Competitive Advantage,” 
Academy of Management Review 15 (1990): 88–102.
 48. E. Mansfi eld, “How Economists See R&D.”
 49. S.  L.  Berman, J.  Down, and C.  W.  L.  Hill, “Tacit 
Knowledge as a Source of Competitive Advantage in 
the National Basketball Association,” Academy of 
Management Journal (2002): 13–33.
 50. Sources: Starbucks 10K, various years; C.  McLean, 
“Starbucks Set to Invade Coffee- Loving Continent,” 
Seattle Times, October 4, 2000, E1; J.  Ordonez, 
“Starbucks to Start Major Expansion in Overseas 
Market,” Wall Street Journal, October 27, 2000, B10; 
S. Homes and D. Bennett, “Planet Starbucks,” Business 
Week, September 9, 2002, 99–110; J. Batsell, “A Bean 
Counters Dream,” Seattle Times, March 28, 2004, 
E1; Staff Reporter, “Boss Talk: it’s a Grande Latte 
World,” Wall Street Journal, December 15, 2003, B1. 
S. C. Harris, “Starbucks beats estimates, outlines ex-
pansion plans,” Seattle Post Intelligencer, October 5, 
2006, C1.

After reading this chapter, you should be 
able to:
• Discuss the nature of competitive posi-
tioning in reference to the three main 
factors that underlie the choice of a 
successful business- level strategy.
• Differentiate between the principal kinds 
of generic business- level strategies 
and appreciate their advantages and 
disadvantages.
• Appreciate the competitive positioning 
issues involved in fragmented, growing, 
mature, and declining industry 
environments.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
The Nature of Competitive 
Positioning
Customer Needs and Product 
Differentiation
Customer Groups and Market 
Segmentation
Distinctive Competencies
Choosing a Business- Level Strategy
Cost- Leadership Strategy
Differentiation Strategy
Cost Leadership and Differentiation
Focus Strategy
Stuck in the Middle
Competitive Positioning in Different 
Industry Environments
Strategies in Fragmented and 
Growing Industries
Strategy in Mature Industries
Strategies in Declining Industries
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Business- Level Strategy 
and Competitive Positioning 5

Business-Level 
Strategy
The plan of action 
strategic managers 
adopt to use a 
company’s resources 
and distinctive 
competencies to gain 
a competitive 
advantage.
Customer Needs
Desires, wants, or 
cravings that can be 
satisﬁ ed by means 
of the characteristics 
of a product or service.
Product 
Differentiation
The process of 
creating a competitive 
advantage by designing 
goods or services to 
satisfy customer needs.
118  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
OVERVIEW
This chapter examines the various strategies a company can adopt to maximize its 
competitive advantage and profi tability in a business or industry. Chapter 3, on 
the industry environment, provides concepts for analyzing industry opportunities 
and threats. Chapter 4 discusses how a company develops functional- level strate-
gies to build distinctive competencies to achieve a competitive advantage. In this 
chapter, we fi rst examine the principal business- level strategies that a company 
can use to achieve a competitive advantage against rivals in an industry. Second, 
we discuss a separate but related issue: how to choose appropriate competitive 
tactics, and maneuvers to build a company’s competitive advantage over time in 
different kinds of industry environments. By the end of this chapter, you will be 
able to identify and distinguish among the business- level strategies and tactics 
that strategic managers use to give their companies a competitive advantage over 
their industry rivals.
The Nature of Competitive Positioning
In order to maximize its competitive advantage, a company must fi nd the best 
way to position itself against its rivals. It does this by using business- level strategy. 
Business- level strategy is the plan of action that strategic managers adopt to use a 
company’s resources and distinctive competencies to gain a competitive advantage 
over its rivals in a market or industry. In Chapter 2 we discuss how the process of 
defi ning a business involves decisions about (1) customer needs, or what is to be sat-
isfi ed; (2) customer groups, or who is to be satisfi ed; and (3) distinctive competen-
cies, or how customer needs are to be satisfi ed.1 These three decisions are the basis 
of the choice of a business- level strategy because they determine how a company 
will compete in an industry. Consequently, we need to look at the ways in which a 
company makes these three decisions in an effort to gain a competitive advantage 
over its rivals.
Customer Needs and Product Differentiation
Customer needs are desires, wants, or cravings that can be satisfi ed by means of the 
characteristics of a product (a good or service). For example, a person’s craving for 
something sweet can be satisfi ed by a carton of Godiva chocolates, a Snickers bar, or 
a spoonful of sugar. Product differentiation is the process of creating a competitive 
advantage by designing products— goods or services— to satisfy customer needs. All 
companies must differentiate their products to a certain degree in order to attract 
customers and satisfy some minimal level of need. However, some companies differ-
entiate their products to a much greater degree than others, and this difference can 
give them a competitive edge.
Some companies offer the customer a low- priced product without engaging 
in much product differentiation. Others seek to endow their product with some 
unique attribute(s) so that it will satisfy customers’ needs in ways that other prod-
ucts cannot. The uniqueness may be related to the physical characteristics of the 
product, such as quality or reliability, or it may lie in the product’s appeal to 

Market Segmentation
The way a company 
decides to group 
customers based on 
important differences 
in their needs or 
preferences, to gain a 
competitive advantage.
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
119
customers’ psychological needs, such as the need for prestige or status.2 Thus, a 
Japanese car may be differentiated by its reputation for reliability, and a Corvette 
or a Porsche may be differentiated by its ability to satisfy customers’ needs for 
status.
Customer Groups and Market Segmentation
Market segmentation is the way a company decides to group customers, based on 
important differences in their needs or preferences, in order to gain a competitive 
advantage.3 For example, General Motors groups its customers according to the 
amount of money they want to spend, and can afford to spend, to buy a car, and for 
each group it builds different cars, which range from the low- priced Chevrolet Aveo 
to the high- priced Cadillac DTS.
In general, a company can adopt one of three alternative strategies for market 
segmentation.4 First, it can choose not to recognize that different groups of custom-
ers have different needs and can instead adopt the approach of serving the average 
customer. Second, a company can choose to recognize the differences between cus-
tomer groups and make a product targeted toward most or all of the different mar-
ket segments. For example, Toyota offers over 20 different kinds of vehicles, such as 
family cars, luxury vehicles, SUVs, and trucks, each targeted at a different market 
segment. Third, a company can choose to recognize that the market is segmented but 
concentrate on servicing only one market segment—  an example is the luxury- car 
niche chosen by Mercedes- Benz.
Why would a company want to make complex product/market choices and cre-
ate a different product tailored to each market segment, rather than creating a single 
product for the whole market? The answer is that the decision to provide many prod-
ucts for many market niches allows a company to satisfy customers’ needs better. 
As a result, customer demand for a company’s products rises and generates more rev-
enue than would be the case if the company offered just one product for the whole 
market.5 Sometimes, however, the nature of the product or the nature of the industry 
does not allow much differentiation; this is the case, for example, with bulk chemi-
cals or cement.6 In these industries, there is little opportunity to obtain a competitive 
advantage through product differentiation and market segmentation, because there 
is little opportunity for serving customers’ needs and customer groups in different 
ways. Instead, price is the main criterion that customers use to evaluate the product, 
and the competitive advantage lies with the company that has superior effi ciency and 
can provide the lowest- priced product.
Distinctive Competencies
The third issue in business- level strategy is to decide which distinctive competen-
cies to pursue to satisfy customers’ needs and customer groups.7 In Chapter 4 we 
discuss four ways in which companies can obtain a competitive advantage: superior 
effi ciency, quality, innovation, and responsiveness to customers. The Four Seasons 
hotel chain, for example, attempts to do all it can to provide its customers with the 
highest- quality accommodations and the best customer service possible. In making 
business strategy choices, a company must decide how to organize and combine its 
distinctive competencies to gain a competitive advantage.

120  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Choosing a Business- Level Strategy
Companies pursue a business- level strategy to gain a competitive advantage that en-
ables them to outperform rivals and achieve above- average returns. They can choose 
from three basic generic competitive approaches: cost leadership, differentiation, and 
focus, although, as we will see, these can be combined in different ways.8 These strat-
egies are called generic because all businesses or industries can pursue them, regard-
less of whether they are manufacturing, service, or nonprofi t enterprises. Each of the 
generic strategies results from a company’s making consistent choices on product, 
market, and distinctive competencies— choices that reinforce each other. Table 5.1 
summarizes the choices appropriate for each of the three generic strategies.
Walmart’s business model is based on buying goods 
from suppliers as inexpensively as possible and then 
selling them to customers at the lowest possible 
prices. Sam Walton, the company’s founder, devel-
oped strategies to allow the company to position itself 
to keep operating costs to a minimum so that he could 
offer customers everyday low prices and continuous 
price rollbacks. Walton chose strategies to increase 
efﬁ ciency, such as having low product differentiation 
(Walmart chooses minimal advertising and low respon-
siveness to customers) and targeting the mass mar-
ket. His discount retail business model was based on 
the idea that lower costs mean lower prices.
Having devised a way to compete for customers, 
Walton’s task was now to implement the business 
model in ways that would create a low- cost structure 
to allow him to charge lower prices. One business- 
level strategy he implemented was to locate his stores 
in small towns where there were no low- cost competi-
tors; a second was to ﬁ nd ways to manage the value 
chain to reduce the costs of getting products from 
manufacturers to customers; and a third was to de-
sign and staff store operations to increase efﬁ ciency. 
The task of all functional managers in logistics, mate-
rials management, sales and customer service, store 
management, and so on, was to implement speciﬁ c 
functional- level strategies that supported the low- cost/
low- price business model. Walmart has made thou-
sands of speciﬁ c strategic choices to allow it to imple-
ment its low- price business model successfully.
Walmart’s Business Model and Competitive Positioning
R U N N I N G  C A S E
Table 5.1 Product/Market/Distinctive- Competency Choices and Generic Competitive Strategies
Cost Leadership
Differentiation
Focus
Product Differentiation
Low (principally by price)
High (principally by 
uniqueness)
Low to high (price 
or uniqueness)
Market Segmentation
Low (mass market)
High (many market 
segments)
Low (one or few 
segments)
Distinctive Competency
Manufacturing and 
materials management
Research and development, 
sales and marketing
Any kind of distinctive 
competency

Cost- Leadership 
Strategy
A strategy of trying 
to outperform 
competitors by doing 
everything possible 
to produce goods or 
services at a cost lower 
than they do.
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
121
Cost- Leadership Strategy
A company’s goal in pursuing a cost- leadership strategy is to outperform competitors 
by doing everything it can to produce goods or services at a cost lower than those 
competitors. Two advantages accrue from a cost- leadership strategy. First, because 
the company has lower costs, it will be more profi table than its closest competitors— 
the companies that compete for the same set of customers and charge similar low 
prices for their products. If companies in the industry charge similar prices for their 
products, the cost leader still makes a higher profi t than its competitors because of 
its lower costs. Second, if rivalry within the industry increases and companies start to 
compete on price, the cost leader will be able to withstand competition better than the 
other companies because of its lower costs. For both of these reasons, cost leaders are 
likely to earn above- average profi ts. How does a company become the cost leader? 
It achieves this position by means of the product/market/distinctive- competency 
choices that it makes to gain a low- cost competitive advantage (see Table 5.1).
Strategic Choices The cost leader chooses a low to moderate level of product dif-
ferentiation. Differentiation is expensive; if the company expends resources to make 
its products unique, then its costs rise.9 The cost leader aims for a level of differentia-
tion not markedly inferior to that of the differentiator (a company that competes by 
spending resources on product development), but a level obtainable at low cost.10 
The cost leader does not try to be the industry leader in differentiation; it waits until 
customers want a feature or service before providing it. For example, a cost leader 
does not introduce stereo sound in television sets. It adds stereo sound only when 
consumers clearly want it or after competitors do it fi rst.
The cost leader also normally ignores the different market segments and posi-
tions its product to appeal to the average customer. This is because developing a 
line of products tailored to the needs of different market segments is an expensive 
proposition. A cost leader normally engages in only a limited amount of market 
segmentation. Even though no customer may be totally happy with the product, the 
fact that the company normally charges a lower price than its competitors attracts 
customers to its products.
In developing distinctive competencies, the overriding goal of the cost leader must 
be to increase its effi ciency and lower its costs compared with its rivals. The devel-
opment of distinctive competencies in manufacturing and materials management is 
central to achieving this goal. Companies pursuing a low- cost strategy may attempt 
to ride down the experience curve so that they can lower their manufacturing costs.
Achieving a low- cost position may also require that the company develop skills 
in fl exible manufacturing and adopt effi cient materials- management techniques. 
(As you may recall, Table 4.1 outlines the ways in which a company’s functions can 
be used to increase effi ciency.) Consequently, the reduction of operating costs of 
manufacturing and materials- management functions are the center of attention for 
a company pursuing a cost- leadership strategy, and the other functions shape their 
distinctive competencies to meet this objective.11 For example, the sales function 
may develop the competency of capturing large, stable sets of customers’ orders. 
This, in turn, allows manufacturing to make longer production runs and so achieve 
economies of scale and reduce costs. The human resource function may focus on in-
stituting training programs and compensation systems that lower costs by enhancing 
employees’ productivity, and the research and development function may specialize 
in process improvements to lower the manufacturing costs.

Differentiation 
Strategy
A strategy of trying to 
achieve a competitive 
advantage by creating 
a product that is 
perceived by customers 
as unique in some 
important way.
122  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Many cost leaders gear all their strategic choices to the single goal of squeezing 
out every cent of costs to sustain their competitive advantage. A company such as 
H. J. Heinz is another excellent example of a cost leader. Because beans and canned 
vegetables do not permit much of a markup, the profi t comes from the large volume 
of cans sold. Therefore, Heinz goes to extraordinary lengths to reduce costs— by 
even one- twentieth of a cent per can, because this will lead to large cost savings and 
thus bigger profi ts over the long-run.
Advantages and Disadvantages The advantages of each generic strategy are 
best discussed in terms of Porter’s fi ve forces model introduced in Chapter 3.12 The 
fi ve forces are threats from competitors, powerful suppliers, powerful buyers, sub-
stitute products, and new entrants. The cost leader is protected from industry com-
petitors because it has a lower cost structure. Its lower costs also mean that it will 
be less affected than its competitors by increases in the price of inputs if there are 
powerful suppliers and less affected by the lower prices it can charge for its prod-
ucts if powerful buyers exist. Moreover, because cost leadership usually requires a 
big market share, the cost leader purchases in relatively large quantities, increasing 
its bargaining power over suppliers. If substitute products start to come into the 
market, the cost leader can reduce its price to compete with them and retain its mar-
ket share. Finally, the leader’s cost advantage constitutes a barrier to entry, because 
other companies are unable to enter the industry and match the leader’s low costs or 
prices. The cost leader is therefore relatively safe as long as it can maintain its cost 
advantage, and price is the key for a signifi cant number of buyers.
The principal dangers of the cost- leadership approach arise when competitors 
are able to develop new strategies that lower their cost structure and beat the cost 
leader at its own game. For instance, if technological change makes experience- 
curve economies obsolete, new companies may apply lower- cost technologies that 
give them a cost advantage over the cost leader. The steel mini- mills discussed in 
Chapter 4 gained this advantage. Competitors may also draw a cost advantage from 
labor- cost savings. Competitors in many Asian countries, for example, have very low 
labor costs, and U.S. companies now assemble many of their products abroad as part 
of their low- cost strategy.
Competitors’ ability to imitate the cost leader’s methods is another threat to 
the cost- leadership strategy. For example, the ability of Dell’s major competitors 
HP, Acer, and Lenovo to imitate Dell’s low- cost materials management practices has 
eroded its competitive advantage and Dell is struggling to fi nd new ways to compete.
Finally, the cost- leadership strategy carries a risk that the cost leader, in its single- 
minded desire to reduce costs, may lose sight of changes in customers’ tastes. Thus, 
a company might make decisions that decrease costs but drastically affect demand 
for the product. For example, Joseph Schlitz Brewing lowered the quality of its beer’s 
ingredients, substituting inferior grains to reduce costs. Consumers immediately 
caught on, and demand for the product dropped dramatically. As mentioned earlier, 
the cost leader cannot abandon product differentiation, and even low- priced prod-
ucts, such as Timex watches, cannot be too inferior to the more expensive watches 
made by Seiko if the low- cost, low- price policy is to succeed.
Differentiation Strategy
The objective of the generic differentiation strategy is to achieve a competitive ad-
vantage by creating a product that is perceived by customers to be unique in some 
important way. The differentiated company’s ability to satisfy a customer’s need in a 

Broad Differentiator
A company that offers 
a product designed for 
each market niche.
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
123
way that its competitors cannot means that it can charge a premium price— a price 
considerably above the industry average. The ability to increase revenues by charg-
ing premium prices (rather than by reducing costs as the cost leader does) allows 
the differentiator to outperform its competitors and gain above- average profi ts. The 
premium price is usually substantially above the price charged by the cost leader, and 
customers pay it because they believe the product’s differentiated qualities are worth 
the difference. Consequently, the product is priced on the basis of what customers 
are willing to pay for it.13
Cars made by Mercedes- Benz, BMW, and Lexus command premium prices be-
cause customers perceive that the luxury and prestige of owning these vehicles are 
something worth paying for. In watches, the name of Rolex stands out; in jewelry, 
Tiffany; in airplanes, Learjet. All these products command premium prices because 
of their differentiated qualities.
Strategic Choices As Table 5.1 shows, a differentiator chooses a high level of 
product differentiation to gain a competitive advantage. Product differentiation can 
be achieved in three principal ways, which are discussed in detail in Chapter 4: qual-
ity, innovation, and responsiveness to customers. For example, Procter & Gamble 
claims that its product quality is high and that Ivory soap is 99.44% pure. IBM 
promotes the quality service provided by its well- trained sales force.
Innovation is very important for high- tech products for which new features are 
the source of differentiation, and many people pay a premium price for new and 
innovative products, such as a state- of- the- art computer, videogame console, or car.
When differentiation is based on responsiveness to customers, a company offers 
comprehensive after- sale service and product repair. This is an especially important 
consideration for complex products such as cars and domestic appliances, which are 
likely to break down periodically. Companies such as Whirlpool, Dell, and BMW all 
excel in responsiveness to customers. In service organizations, quality- of- service at-
tributes are also very important. Why can Neiman Marcus, Nordstrom’s, and FedEx 
charge premium prices? They offer an exceptionally high level of service. Similarly, 
law fi rms and accounting fi rms emphasize to clients the service aspects of their op-
erations: their knowledge, professionalism, and reputation.
Finally, a product’s appeal to customers’ psychological desires can become a 
source of differentiation. The appeal can be prestige or status, as it is with Rolls- 
Royce cars and Rolex watches; patriotism, as with Chevrolet; safety of home and 
family, as with Prudential Insurance; or value for money, as with Bed, Bath, & 
Beyond and The Gap. Differentiation can also be tailored to age groups and to socio-
economic groups. Indeed, the bases of differentiation are endless.
A company that pursues a differentiation strategy strives to differentiate itself 
along as many dimensions as possible. The less it resembles its rivals, the more it is 
protected from competition and the wider its market appeal. Thus, BMWs do not 
offer prestige alone. They also offer technological sophistication, luxury, reliability, 
and good (though very expensive) repair service. All these bases of differentiation 
help increase sales.
Generally, a differentiator chooses to segment its market into many niches. 
Now and then a company offers a product designed for each market niche and de-
cides to be a broad differentiator, but a company might choose to serve just those 
niches in which it has a specifi c differentiation advantage. For example, Sony pro-
duces over 20 different kinds of high- defi nition, fl at- screen televisions, fi lling all 
the niches from mid- priced to high- priced sets. However, its lowest- priced models 
are always priced hundreds of dollars above that of its competitors, bringing into 

124  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
play the premium- price factor. You have to pay extra for a Sony. Similarly, although 
Mercedes- Benz has fi lled niches below its old high- priced models with its S and 
C series, it has made no attempt to produce a car for every market segment.
Finally, in choosing which distinctive competency to pursue, a differentiated 
company concentrates on the organizational function that provides the sources of 
its differentiation advantage. Differentiation on the basis of innovation and techno-
logical competency depends on the R&D function, as we noted in Chapter 4. Efforts 
to improve service to customers depend on the quality of the sales function. A focus 
on a specifi c function does not mean, however, that the control of costs is not impor-
tant for a differentiator. A differentiator does not want to increase costs unnecessar-
ily and tries to keep them somewhere near those of the cost leader. However, because 
developing the distinctive competency needed to provide a differentiation advantage 
is often expensive, a differentiator usually has higher costs than the cost leader. Still, 
it must control all costs that do not contribute to its differentiation advantage so 
that the price of the product does not exceed what customers are willing to pay. 
Because bigger profi ts are earned by controlling costs and by maximizing revenues, 
it pays to control costs but not to minimize them to the point of losing the source of 
differentiation.14
Advantages and Disadvantages Differentiation safeguards a company against 
competitors to the degree that customers develop brand loyalty for its products. 
Brand loyalty is a very valuable asset that protects the company on all fronts. For 
example, powerful suppliers are rarely a problem because the differentiated com-
pany’s strategy is geared more toward the price it can charge than toward the costs 
of production. Thus, a differentiator can tolerate moderate increases in the prices of 
its inputs better than the cost leader can. Differentiators are unlikely to experience 
problems with powerful buyers because the differentiator offers the buyer a unique 
product. Only it can supply the product, and it commands brand loyalty. Differentiation 
and brand loyalty also create a barrier to entry for other companies seeking to enter 
the industry. New companies are forced to develop their own distinctive competency 
to be able to compete, and doing so is very expensive. Finally, the threat of substitute 
products depends on the ability of competitors’ products to meet the same customer 
needs as the differentiator’s products and to break the differentiator’s customers’ 
brand loyalty. The main problems with a differentiation strategy center on the com-
pany’s long- term ability to maintain its perceived uniqueness in customers’ eyes. We 
have seen in the last 10 years how quickly competitors move to imitate and copy 
successful differentiators. This has happened in many industries, such as computers, 
autos, and electronics. Patents and fi rst- mover advantages (the advantages of being 
the fi rst to market a product or service) last only so long, and as the overall quality 
of products made by all companies increases, brand loyalty declines.
Cost Leadership and Differentiation
Recently, changes in production techniques— in particular, the development of fl ex-
ible manufacturing technologies (discussed in Chapter 4)— have made the choice 
between cost- leadership and differentiation strategies less clear- cut. With techno-
logical developments, companies have found it easier to obtain the benefi ts of both 
strategies. The reason is that the new fl exible technologies allow fi rms to pursue 
a differentiation strategy at a low cost; that is, companies can combine these two 
generic strategies.

Focus Strategy
A strategy of serving 
the needs of one or a 
few customer groups 
or segments.
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
125
Traditionally, differentiation was obtainable only at high cost, because the neces-
sity of producing different models for different market segments meant that fi rms 
had to have short production runs, which raised manufacturing costs. In addition, the 
differentiated fi rm had to bear higher marketing costs than the cost leader because 
it was servicing many market segments. As a result, differentiators had higher costs 
than cost leaders, which produced large batches of standardized products. However, 
fl exible manufacturing may enable a fi rm pursuing differentiation to manufacture a 
range of products at a cost comparable to that of the cost leader. The use of fl exible 
manufacturing cells reduces the costs of retooling the production line and the costs 
associated with small production runs. Indeed, a factor promoting the current trend 
toward market fragmentation and niche marketing in many consumer goods indus-
tries, such as mobile phones, computers, and appliances, is the substantial reduction 
of the costs of differentiation achieved via fl exible manufacturing.
Another way that a differentiated producer may be able to realize signifi cant 
economies of scale is by standardizing many of the component parts used in its 
end products. In the late 2000s, for example, Fiat- Chrysler introduced more than 
20 different models of cars and minivans to different segments of the auto market. 
However, despite their different appearances, all 20 models are based on only three 
different platforms. Moreover, most of the cars used many of the same components, 
including axles, drive units, suspensions, and gear boxes. As a result, Fiat- Chrysler 
was able to realize signifi cant economies of scale in the manufacture and bulk pur-
chase of standardized component parts.
A company can also reduce both production and marketing costs if it limits the 
number of models in the product line by offering packages of options rather than let-
ting consumers decide exactly what options they require. It is increasingly common 
for auto manufacturers, for example, to offer an economy auto package, a luxury 
package, and a sports package to appeal to the principal market segments. Package 
offerings substantially lower manufacturing costs because long production runs of 
the various packages are possible. At the same time, the fi rm is able to focus its ad-
vertising and marketing efforts on particular market segments so that these costs are 
also decreased. Once again, the fi rm is reaping gains from differentiation and low 
cost at the same time.
Taking advantage of new developments in production and marketing, some com-
panies are managing to reap the gains from cost- leadership and differentiation strat-
egies simultaneously. Because they can charge a premium price for their products 
compared with the price charged by the pure cost leader, and because they have 
lower costs than the pure differentiator, they obtain at least an equal, and prob-
ably a higher, level of profi t than fi rms pursuing only one of the generic strategies. 
Companies have moved quickly to take advantage of new production and market-
ing techniques because the combined strategy is the most profi table to pursue, as the 
example of Dell Computer suggests.
Focus Strategy
The third generic competitive strategy, the focus strategy, differs from the other two 
chiefl y in that it is directed toward serving the needs of a limited customer group or 
segment. A focus strategy concentrates on serving a particular market niche, which 
can be defi ned geographically, by type of customer, or by a segment of the product 
line.15 For example, a geographic niche can be defi ned by region or even by locality. 
Selecting a niche by type of customer might mean serving only the very rich, the very 

126  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
young, or the very adventurous. A company that concentrates on a segment of the 
product line focuses only on vegetarian foods, for example, or on very fast cars, or 
on designer clothes or sunglasses. In following a focus strategy, a company is special-
izing in some way.
Once it has chosen its market segment, a company pursues a focus strategy 
through either a differentiation or a low- cost approach. Figure 5.1 shows these two 
different kinds of focused strategies and compares them with a pure cost- leadership 
or pure differentiation strategy.
In essence, a focused company is a specialized differentiator or a cost leader. If a 
company uses a focused low- cost approach, it competes against the cost leader in the 
market segments in which it has no cost disadvantage. For example, in local lumber 
or cement markets, the focuser has lower transportation costs than the low- cost na-
tional company. The focuser may also have a cost advantage because it is producing 
complex or custom- built products that do not lend themselves easily to economies 
of scale in production and, therefore, offer few experience- curve advantages. With a 
focus strategy, a company concentrates on small- volume custom products, for which 
it has a cost advantage, and leaves the large- volume standardized market to the cost 
leader.
If a company uses a focused differentiation approach, then all the means of dif-
ferentiation that are open to the differentiator are available to the focused com-
pany. The point is that the focused company competes with the differentiator in only 
one or a few segments. For example, Porsche, a focused company, competes against 
BMW and Lexus in the sports car, luxury- SUV, and most recently luxury sedan seg-
ments of the auto market, not in other segments. Focused companies are likely to be 
able to differentiate their products successfully because of their detailed knowledge 
of a small customer set (such as sports car buyers) or of a region.
Furthermore, concentration on a small range of products sometimes allows a 
focuser to develop innovations faster than a large differentiator can. However, the 
focuser does not attempt to serve all market segments, because doing so would bring 
it into direct competition with the differentiator. Instead, a focused company concen-
trates on building market share in one or a few market segments and, if successful, 
may begin to serve more and more market segments and chip away at the differentia-
tor’s competitive advantage over time.
Figure 5.1 Types of Business- Level Strategies
Offers
low-priced
products to
customers
Offers products
to only one group
of customers
Offers products
to many kinds
of customers
Focused
cost-leadership
strategy
Focused
differentiation
strategy
Cost-leadership
strategy
Differentiation
strategy
Offers unique
or distinctive
products to
customers

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
127
Strategic Choices Table 5.1 illustrated the specifi c product/market/distinctive- 
competency choices made by a focused company. Differentiation can be high or 
low because the company can pursue a low- cost or a differentiation approach. 
As for customer groups, a focused company chooses specifi c niches in which to 
compete rather than going for a whole market, as a cost leader does, or fi lling 
a large number of niches, as a broad differentiator does. The focused fi rm can 
pursue any distinctive competency because it can seek any kind of differentiation 
or low- cost advantage. Thus, it might fi nd a cost advantage and develop superior 
effi ciency in low- cost manufacturing within a region. Alternatively, it might de-
velop superior skills in responsiveness to customers, based on its ability to serve 
the needs of regional customers in ways that a national differentiator would fi nd 
very expensive.
The many avenues that a focused company can take to develop a competitive 
advantage explain why there are so many more small companies than large ones. A 
focused company has enormous opportunity to develop its own niche and compete 
against larger low- cost and differentiated companies. A focus strategy provides an 
opportunity for an entrepreneur to fi nd and then take advantage of a gap in the mar-
ket by developing an innovative product that customers cannot do without.16 The 
steel mini- mills discussed in Chapter 4 are a good example of how focused companies 
specializing in one market can grow so effi cient that they become the cost leaders. 
Many large companies started with a focus strategy, and, of course, one means by 
which companies can expand is to take over other focused companies.
Advantages and Disadvantages A focused company’s competitive advantages 
stem from the source of its distinctive competency: effi ciency, quality, innovation, 
or responsiveness to customers. The fi rm is protected from rivals to the extent that 
it can provide a good or service that they cannot. This ability also gives the focuser 
power over its buyers because they cannot get the same product from anyone else. 
With regard to powerful suppliers, however, a focused company is at a disadvan-
tage because it buys inputs in small volume and thus is in the suppliers’ power. 
However, as long as it can pass on price increases to loyal customers, this disad-
vantage may not be a signifi cant problem. Potential entrants have to overcome the 
customer loyalty the focuser has generated, which also reduces the threat from 
substitute products. This protection from the fi ve forces allows the focuser to earn 
above- average returns on its investment. A further advantage of the focus strategy 
is that it permits a company to stay close to its customers and to respond to their 
changing needs.
Because a focuser produces a small volume, its production costs often exceed 
those of a low- cost company. Higher costs can also reduce profi tability if a focuser 
is forced to invest heavily in developing a distinctive competency, such as expensive 
product innovation, in order to compete with a differentiated fi rm. However, once 
again, fl exible manufacturing systems are opening up new opportunities for focused 
fi rms because small production runs become possible at a lower cost. Increasingly, 
small, specialized fi rms are competing with large companies in specifi c market seg-
ments in which their cost disadvantage is much reduced.
Finally, there is the prospect that differentiators will compete for a focuser’s niche 
by offering a product that can satisfy the demands of the focuser’s customers; for ex-
ample, GM’s and Ford’s new luxury cars are aimed at Lexus, BMW, and Mercedes- 
Benz buyers. A focuser is vulnerable to attack and, therefore, has to defend its niche 
constantly.

Stuck in the Middle
The fate of a company 
whose strategy fails 
because it has made 
product/market choices 
in a way that does not 
lead to a sustained 
competitive advantage.
128  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Stuck in the Middle
Each generic strategy requires a company to make consistent product/market/
distinctive- competency choices to establish a competitive advantage. Thus, for ex-
ample, a low- cost company cannot strive for a high level of market segmentation, as 
a differentiator does, and provide a wide range of products, because doing so would 
raise production costs too much and the company would lose its low- cost advantage. 
Similarly, a differentiator with a competency in innovation that tries to reduce its 
expenditures on research and development, or one with a competency in responsive-
ness to customers through after- sale service that seeks to economize on its sales force 
to decrease costs, is asking for trouble because it will lose its competitive advantage 
as its distinctive competency disappears.
Choosing a business- level strategy successfully means giving serious attention to 
all elements of the competitive plan. Many companies, through ignorance or error, 
do not do the planning necessary for success in their chosen strategy. Such companies 
are said to be stuck in the middle because they have made product/market choices in 
such a way that they have been unable to obtain or sustain a competitive advantage.17 
As a result, they have no consistent business- level strategy, experience below- average 
performance, and suffer when industry competition intensifi es.
Some companies that fi nd themselves stuck in the middle may have started out 
pursuing one of the three generic strategies but then have made wrong resource al-
location decisions or have experienced a hostile, changing environment. It is very 
easy to lose control of a generic strategy unless strategic managers keep close track 
of the business and its environment, constantly adjusting product/market choices to 
suit changing conditions within the industry. There are many paths to getting stuck 
in the middle. Quite commonly, a focuser gets stuck in the middle when it becomes 
over- confi dent and starts to act like a broad differentiator.
People Express, a now defunct airline, exemplifi es a company in this situation. 
It started out as a specialized air carrier serving a narrow market niche: low- priced 
travel on the eastern seaboard. In pursuing this focus strategy based on cost leader-
ship, it was very successful. But when it tried to expand to other geographic regions 
and began taking over other airlines to gain a larger number of planes, it lost its 
niche. People Express became just one more carrier in an increasingly competitive 
market where it had no competitive advantage against other national carriers. The 
result was fi nancial disaster, and People Express was incorporated into Continental 
Airlines. By contrast, Southwest Airlines, a focused low- cost company, continued 
to focus on this strategy and has grown successfully to become a national low- cost 
leader— in 2010 it bought another cost leader Air Tran for $1.4 billion to gain access 
to profi table markets in Boston and the East Coast.
Differentiators, too, can fail in the market and end up stuck in the middle if com-
petitors attack their markets with more specialized or low- cost products that blunt 
their competitive edge. This happened to IBM in the mainframe computer market as 
PCs grew more powerful and became able to do the job of the much more expen-
sive mainframes. The increasing movement toward fl exible manufacturing systems 
aggravates the problems faced by cost leaders and differentiators. Many large fi rms 
will become stuck in the middle unless they make the investment needed to pursue 
both strategies simultaneously. No company is safe in a highly- competitive global 
environment and each must be constantly on the lookout to take advantage of com-
petitive advantages as they arise and to defend the advantages it already has.
To sum up, successful management of a generic competitive strategy requires 
that strategic managers attend to two main issues. First, they must ensure that their 

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
129
product/market/distinctive- competency decisions are oriented toward one specifi c 
competitive strategy. Second, they need to monitor the environment so that they can 
keep the fi rm’s sources of competitive advantage in tune with changing opportunities 
and threats— the issue we turn to now.
Competitive Positioning 
in Different Industry Environments
If strategic managers succeed in developing a successful generic business- level strat-
egy, they immediately face another crucial issue: how to choose appropriate com-
petitive tactics and maneuvers to position their company to sustain its competitive 
advantage over time in different kinds of industry environments. In this section we 
fi rst focus on how companies in fragmented and growing industries try to develop 
competitive strategies to support their generic strategies. Second, we consider the 
challenges of maintaining a competitive advantage in mature industries. Finally, we 
assess the problems of managing a company’s generic competitive strategy in declin-
ing industries, in which rivalry between competitors is high because market demand 
is slowing or falling.
Strategies in Fragmented and Growing Industries
Many industries are fragmented, which means they are composed of a large number 
of small and medium- sized companies. The restaurant industry is fragmented, for 
example, as is the health club industry and the legal- services industry. There are sev-
eral reasons why an industry may consist of many small companies rather than a few 
large ones. In some industries there are few economies of scale, so large companies 
do not have an advantage over smaller ones. Indeed, in some industries there are ad-
vantages to staying small, which enables companies to get closer to their customers. 
Many home buyers, for example, have a preference for dealing with local real estate 
agents, whom they perceive as having better local knowledge than national chains. 
Similarly, in the restaurant business, many customers prefer the unique style of a 
local restaurant. In addition, many industries are fragmented because there are few 
barriers to entry (such as in the restaurant industry, where a single entrepreneur can 
often bear the costs of opening a restaurant). High transportation costs, too, can 
keep an industry fragmented, for regional production may be the only effi cient way 
to satisfy customers’ needs, as in the cement business. Finally, an industry may be 
fragmented because customers’ needs are so specialized that only small job lots of 
products are required, and thus there is no room for a large, mass- production opera-
tion to satisfy the market.
For some fragmented industries, these factors dictate the competitive strategy 
to pursue, and the focus strategy stands out as a principal choice. Companies may 
specialize by customer group, customer need, or geographic region, so that many 
small specialty companies operate in local or regional market segments. All kinds 
of custom- made products— furniture, clothing, hats, boots, and so on— fall into this 
category, as do all small service operations that cater to particular customers’ needs, 
such as laundries, restaurants, health clubs, and furniture rental stores.
Strategic managers, however, are eager to gain the cost advantages of pursuing 
a low- cost strategy or the sales- revenue- enhancing advantages of differentiation by 
You are a top manager of a 
small company that has pi-
oneered the development 
of software that allows 
Web users to interface in 
real time online. A major 
rival recognized the value 
of your product and offered 
to buy your company at a 
price you think is inade-
quate. When you refused to 
sell your company, the rival 
began recruiting your top 
software engineers in order 
to obtain their specialized 
knowledge. One engineer 
left and others have banded 
together, 
threatening 
to 
leave if demands aren’t 
met. Consequently, you 
stand to lose your competi-
tive advantage. Is it ethical 
for you to apply for a court 
order preventing engineers 
from leaving to join your 
competitor? Is it ethical for 
your competitor to recruit 
your employees to obtain 
their 
knowledge? 
Given 
your answers to these 
questions, should you let 
the differentiator buy your 
company and take over 
your market niche?
Ethical Dilemma

130  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
circumventing the problems of a fragmented industry. Returns from consolidating 
a fragmented industry are often huge— especially when industry sales and revenues 
are growing. Thus, over the past decades many companies have developed com-
petitive strategies to consolidate fragmented industries. These companies include 
large retailers such as Walmart and Target; fast- food chains such as McDonald’s and 
Subway; and chains of health clubs, repair shops, and even lawyers and consultants. 
As illustrated in Figure 5.2, to grow and consolidate their industries, and to become 
the dominant companies in them, strategic managers utilize three main competitive 
strategies: (1) chaining, (2) franchising, and (3) horizontal merger.
Chaining Companies such as Walmart and Midas International pursue a chain-
ing strategy to obtain the advantages of cost leadership. They establish networks 
of linked merchandising outlets that are so interconnected that they function as 
one large business entity. The amazing buying power that these companies possess 
through their nationwide store chains enables them to negotiate large price reduc-
tions with their suppliers, which in turn promotes their competitive advantage. They 
overcome the barrier of high transportation costs by establishing sophisticated re-
gional distribution centers, which can economize on inventory costs and maximize 
responsiveness to the needs of stores and customers. (This is Walmart’s specialty.) 
Last but not least, they realize economies of scale from sharing managerial skills 
across the chain and from placing nationwide, rather than local, advertising.
Franchising For differentiated companies in fragmented industries, such as 
McDonald’s and Century 21 Real Estate, the competitive advantage comes from 
a business strategy that employs franchise agreements. In franchising, the franchi-
sor (parent) grants the franchisee the right to use the parent’s name, reputation, 
and business skills in a particular location or area. If the franchisee also acts as the 
manager, he or she is strongly motivated to control the business closely and make 
sure that quality and standards are consistently high so that customer needs are 
always satisfi ed. Such motivation is particularly critical in a strategy of differentia-
tion, where it is vital that a company maintain its uniqueness. One reason why in-
dustries are fragmented is the diffi culty of maintaining control over the many small 
outlets that they must operate, while at the same time retaining their uniqueness. 
Franchising solves this problem. In addition, franchising lessens the fi nancial burden 
of swift expansion and so permits rapid growth of the company. Finally, a differen-
tiated large company can reap the advantages of large- scale advertising, as well as 
Figure 5.2 Strategies for Consolidating a Fragmented Industry
Strategies for consolidating
a fragmented industry
Chaining
Franchising
Horizontal
merger
IT and the
Internet

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
131
economies in purchasing, management, and distribution, as McDonald’s does very 
effi ciently. Indeed, McDonald’s is able to pursue cost leadership and differentiation 
simultaneously only because franchising allows costs to be controlled locally and 
differentiation to be achieved by marketing on a national level.
Horizontal Merger Companies such as Anheuser- Busch and Macy’s Inc. chose a 
strategy of horizontal merger to consolidate their respective industries. For example, 
Macy’s arranged the merger of many regional store chains in order to form a na-
tional company. By pursuing horizontal merger, companies are able to obtain econo-
mies of scale or secure a national market for their products. As a result, they are able 
to pursue a cost- leadership strategy, or a differentiation strategy, or both. We discuss 
merger in more detail in Chapter 7.
Using the Internet The latest way in which companies have been able to consoli-
date a fragmented industry is by using the Internet. eBay is a good example of how 
a company can accomplish this. Before eBay, the auction business was extremely 
fragmented, with local auctions, fairs, or garage sales in cities being the principal 
way people could dispose of their antiques and collectibles. Now, using eBay, sellers 
can be assured that they are getting global visibility for their collectibles so that they 
are likely to receive a higher price for their product. Similarly, Amazon.com’s success 
in the online book market led to the closing of thousands of small bookstores that 
simply could not compete on either price or selection. The trend toward using the 
Internet seems likely to further consolidate even relatively oligopolistic industries.
The challenge in fragmented and growing industries is to choose the most ap-
propriate means— franchising, chaining, horizontal merger, or the Internet— to con-
solidate the market and grow sales so that the competitive advantages gained from 
pursuing the generic business- level strategies can be realized. It is diffi cult to think 
of any major service activities— from consulting and accounting fi rms to businesses 
satisfying the smallest consumer need, such as beauty parlors and car repair shops— 
that have not been merged or consolidated by chaining or franchising. In addition, 
the Internet has brought into being many new industries, such as those that make 
computer and digital products, and many of these are growing at a rapid pace as 
Internet broadband service expands.
Strategy in Mature Industries
As a result of fi erce competition in the growth and shakeout stages, an industry be-
comes consolidated, so a mature industry is often dominated by a small number of 
large companies. Although a mature industry may also contain many medium- sized 
companies and a host of small, specialized ones, the large companies determine the 
nature of the industry’s competition because they can infl uence the fi ve competitive 
forces. Indeed, these are the companies that developed the most successful generic 
business- level strategies in the industry.
By the end of the shakeout stage, companies in an industry have learned how 
important it is to analyze each other’s business- level strategies continually. This com-
petitive analysis helps them determine how to modify their competitive positioning 
to maintain and build their competitive advantage. At the same time, however, they 
also know that if they move aggressively to change their strategies to attack competi-
tors, this will stimulate a competitive response from rivals threatened by the change 
in strategy.

132  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
For example, a differentiator that starts to lower its prices because it has adopted 
a more cost- effi cient technology threatens other differentiators. It also threatens 
low- cost companies that see their competitive edge being eroded. All these com-
panies may now change their strategies in response, most likely by reducing their 
prices, too, as often occurs in the PC and car industries. Thus, the way one company 
changes or fi ne- tunes its business- level strategy over time affects the way the other 
companies in the industry pursue theirs. Hence, by the mature stage of the industry 
life cycle, companies have learned just how interdependent their strategies are.
In fact, the main challenge facing companies in a mature industry is to adopt a 
competitive strategy that simultaneously allows each individual company to protect 
its competitive advantage and preserves industry profi tability. No generic strategy 
will generate above- average profi ts if competitive forces in an industry are so strong 
that companies are at the mercy of each other, of potential entrants, of powerful 
suppliers, of powerful customers, and so on. As a result, in mature industries, com-
petitive strategy revolves around understanding how large companies try collectively 
to reduce the strength of the fi ve forces of industry competition to preserve both 
company and industry profi tability.
Interdependent companies can help protect their competitive advantage and 
profi tability by adopting competitive moves and tactics to reduce the threat of each 
competitive force. In the next sections, we examine the various price and nonprice 
competitive moves and tactics that companies use— fi rst, to deter entry into an in-
dustry, and second, to reduce the level of rivalry within an industry.
Strategies to Deter Entry in Mature Industries Companies can utilize three 
main methods to deter entry by potential rivals and hence maintain and increase 
industry profi tability. As Figure 5.3 shows, these methods are product proliferation, 
price cutting, and maintaining excess capacity.
Product Proliferation Companies seldom produce just one product. Most com-
monly, they produce a range of products aimed at different market segments so that 
they have broad product lines. Sometimes, to reduce the threat of entry, companies 
expand the range of products they make to fi ll a wide variety of niches. This creates 
a barrier to entry because potential competitors now fi nd it harder to break into an 
industry in which all the niches are fi lled.18 This strategy of pursuing a broad product 
line to deter entry is known as product proliferation.
Maintaining
excess
capacity
Price
cutting
Product
proliferation
Strategies
for deterring
entry of rivals
Figure 5.3 Strategies for Deterring Entry of Rivals

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
133
Because the Big Three U.S. carmakers were so slow to fi ll the small- car niches 
in the 1980s (they did not pursue a product proliferation strategy), they allowed 
Japanese companies to enter these segments, which they now dominate in the 
2000s. U.S. carmakers really had no excuse for this lack of foresight, for in their 
European operations they had a long history of successful small- car manufacturing. 
They should have seen the danger of leaving this market segment open and fi lled it 
10 years earlier, but their view was that “small cars mean small profi ts.” In the break-
fast cereal industry, on the other hand, competition is based on continually produc-
ing new kinds of cereal, or improving existing cereals, to satisfy consumer desires 
or create new desires. Thus the number and kind of breakfast cereals and snacks 
proliferate, making it very diffi cult for prospective entrants to fi nd an empty market 
segment to fi ll. Filling all the product “spaces” in a particular market creates a bar-
rier to entry and makes it much more diffi cult for a new company to gain a foothold 
and differentiate itself.
Price Cutting In some situations, pricing strategies that involve price cutting can 
be used to deter entry by other companies, thus protecting the profi t margins of 
companies already in an industry. One price- cutting strategy, for example, is ini-
tially to charge a high price for a product and seize short- term profi ts but then to 
cut prices aggressively in order to build market share and deter potential entrants 
simultaneously.19 The incumbent companies thus signal to potential entrants that if 
they enter the industry, the incumbents will use their competitive advantage to drive 
down prices to a level at which new companies will be unable to cover their costs.20 
This pricing strategy also allows a company to ride down the experience curve and 
obtain substantial economies of scale. Because costs fall with increasing sales, profi t 
margins can still be maintained.
Still, this strategy is unlikely to deter a strong potential competitor— an estab-
lished company that is trying to fi nd profi table investment opportunities in other 
industries. It is diffi cult, for example, to imagine that IBM or 3M would be afraid 
to enter an industry because incumbent companies threaten to drive down prices. 
Companies such as IBM and 3M have the resources to withstand any short- term 
losses. Hence, it may be in the interests of incumbent companies to accept new entry 
gracefully, giving up market share gradually to the new entrants to prevent price 
wars from developing, and thus maintain their profi t margins, if this is feasible.
Most evidence suggests that companies fi rst skim the market and charge high 
prices during the growth stage, maximizing short- run profi ts.21 Then they move to 
increase their market share and charge a lower price to expand the market rapidly; 
develop a reputation; and obtain economies of scale, driving down costs and bar-
ring entry. As competitors do enter, incumbent companies reduce prices to retard 
entry and give up market share to create a stable industry context— one in which 
they can use nonprice competitive tactics, such as product differentiation, to maxi-
mize long- run profi ts. At that point, nonprice competition becomes the main basis 
of industry competition, and prices are quite likely to rise as competition stabilizes. 
Thus, competitive tactics such as pricing and product differentiation are linked in 
mature industries; competitive decisions are taken to maximize the returns from a 
company’s generic strategy.
Maintaining Excess Capacity A third competitive technique that allows com-
panies to deter entry involves maintaining excess capacity— that is, producing more 
of a product than customers currently demand. Existing industry companies may 
deliberately develop some limited amount of excess capacity because it serves to 

Price Signaling
The process by which 
companies increase 
or decrease product 
prices to convey their 
competitive intentions 
to other companies.
Tit- for- Tat Strategy
A form of market 
signaling in which one 
company starts to cut 
prices aggressively, 
and then competitors 
respond in a similar 
way; when this occurs, 
nobody gains and 
everybody loses.
Price Leadership
The process by which 
one company informally 
takes the responsibility 
for setting industry 
prices.
134  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
warn potential entrants that if they do enter the industry, existing fi rms will retali-
ate by increasing output and forcing down prices, so entry would be unprofi table. 
However, the threat to increase output has to be credible; that is, companies in an 
industry must collectively be able to raise the level of production quickly if entry 
appears likely.
Strategies to Manage Rivalry in Mature Industries Beyond seeking to deter 
entry, incumbent companies also need to develop a competitive strategy to manage 
their competitive interdependence and decrease rivalry. As we noted earlier, unre-
stricted industry price competition reduces both company and industry profi tability. 
Several competitive tactics and gambits are available to companies to prevent price 
wars and manage industry relations. The most important are price signaling, price 
leadership, nonprice competition, and capacity control.
Price Signaling Most industries start out fragmented, with small companies bat-
tling for market share. Then, over time, the leading players emerge, and companies 
start to interpret each other’s competitive moves. Price signaling is the fi rst means 
by which companies attempt to structure competition within an industry in order to 
control rivalry.22 Price signaling is the process by which companies increase or de-
crease product prices to convey their competitive intentions to other companies and 
so infl uence the way competitors price their products.23 There are two ways in which 
companies can use price signaling to help defend their generic competitive strategies.
First, companies use price signaling to make a clear announcement that they will 
respond vigorously to hostile competitive moves that threaten them. For example, 
companies may signal that if one company starts to cut prices aggressively, they will 
respond in kind; hence, the term tit- for- tat strategy is often used to describe this kind 
of market signaling. The outcome of a tit- for- tat strategy is that nobody gains and 
everybody loses. Similarly, as we noted in the last section, companies may signal to 
potential entrants that if the latter do enter the market, they will fi ght back by reduc-
ing prices, so that new entrants may incur signifi cant losses.
A second, and very important, use of price signaling is to allow companies indi-
rectly to coordinate their actions and avoid costly competitive moves that lead to a 
breakdown in pricing policy within an industry. One company may signal that it in-
tends to lower prices because it wishes to attract customers who are switching to the 
products of another industry, not because it wishes to stimulate a price war. On the 
other hand, signaling can be used to improve profi tability within an industry. The PC 
industry is a good example of the power of price signaling. In the 1990s, signals of 
lower prices set off price wars, but in the 2000s, PC makers have used price signaling 
to prevent price wars and keep prices steady. In sum, price signaling allows compa-
nies to give one another information that enables them to understand each other’s 
competitive product/market strategy and make coordinated, competitive moves to 
protect industry profi tability.
Price Leadership Price leadership, the process by which one company informally 
takes the responsibility for setting industry prices, is a second tactic used to enhance 
the profi tability of companies in a mature industry.24 Formal price leadership, or price 
setting by companies jointly, is illegal under antitrust laws, so the process of price lead-
ership is often very subtle. In the auto industry, for example, vehicle prices are set by 
imitation. The price set by the weakest company— the one with the highest costs— is 
often used as the basis for competitors’ pricing. Thus, U.S. carmakers set their prices, and 
Japanese carmakers then set theirs with reference to the U.S. prices. The Japanese are 

Existing
Existing
New
Products
Marketing Segments
Market
penetration
New
Product
development
Market
development
Product
proliferation
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
135
happy to do this because they have lower costs than U.S. companies and are making 
higher profi ts than U.S. carmakers without competing with them by price. Pricing is 
done by market segment. The prices of different vehicles in a company’s model range 
indicate the customer segments that it is aiming for and the price range it believes the 
market segment can tolerate. Each manufacturer prices a model in the segment with 
reference to the prices charged by its competitors, not by reference to costs. Price 
leadership allows differentiators to charge a premium price and also helps low- cost 
companies by increasing their margins.
Although price leadership can stabilize industry relationships by preventing head- 
to- head competition and thus raise the level of profi tability within an industry, it has 
its dangers. Price leadership helps companies with higher costs by allowing them to 
survive without becoming more productive or more effi cient. In the long term, such 
behavior makes them vulnerable to companies that continually develop new produc-
tion techniques to lower costs. That is what happened in the U.S. auto industry after 
the Japanese entered the market. After years of tacit price fi xing, with GM as the price 
leader, the carmakers were subjected to growing low- cost Japanese competition. By 
the 2000s, Japanese carmakers such as Toyota and Honda had become so popular 
that they were setting the prices, and U.S. carmakers were forced to offer incentive 
price discounts, often around $3,000–4,000, to get their cars off the lot, while the 
Japanese did not drop theirs signifi cantly. Even so, the market share of Japanese car-
makers continued to increase, and by 2006 Toyota was selling more cars than Ford in 
the United States and by 2010 it became the largest global automaker 2008.
Nonprice Competition A third very important aspect of product/market strategy 
in mature industries is the use of nonprice competition to manage rivalry within an 
industry. Using various tactics and maneuvers to try to prevent costly price cutting 
and price wars does not preclude competition by product differentiation. Indeed, in 
many industries, product differentiation is the principal competitive tactic used to 
prevent rivals from stealing a company’s customers and reducing its market share. 
In other words, companies rely on product differentiation to deter potential entrants 
and manage rivalry within their industry.
Product differentiation allows industry rivals to compete for market share by 
offering products with different or superior features or by utilizing different mar-
keting techniques. In Figure 5.4, product and market segment dimensions are used 
to identify four nonprice competitive strategies based on product differentiation. 
(Note that this model applies to new market segments, not to new markets.)25
Figure 5.4 Four Nonprice Competitive Strategies

Market Penetration
A strategy in which a 
company concentrates 
on expanding market 
share in its existing 
product markets.
Product Development
A strategy involving 
the constant creation 
of new or improved 
products to replace 
existing ones.
Market Development
A strategy involving 
a search for new 
market segments, and 
therefore new uses, for 
a company’s products.
136  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
• When a company concentrates on expanding market share in its existing product 
markets, it is engaging in a strategy of market penetration.26 Market penetration 
involves heavy advertising to promote and build product differentiation. In a 
mature industry, the thrust of advertising is to infl uence consumers’ brand choice 
and create a brand- name reputation for the company and its products. In this 
way, a company can increase its market share by attracting the customers off its 
rivals. Because brand- name products often command premium prices, building 
market share in this situation is very profi table.
• In some mature industries (for example, soap and detergent, disposable diapers, 
and brewing), a market- penetration strategy becomes a way of life.27 In these 
industries, all companies engage in intensive advertising and battle for market 
share. Each company fears that by not advertising, it will lose market share to 
rivals. Consequently, in the soap and detergent industry, for instance, Procter & 
Gamble spends more than 20% of sales revenues on advertising, with the aim of 
maintaining and increasing market share. These huge advertising outlays consti-
tute a barrier to entry for prospective entrants.
• Product development is the creation of new or improved products to replace ex-
isting ones, such as occurs in the fast- food industry.28 The wet- shaving industry is 
another industry that depends on product replacement to create successive waves 
of consumer demand, which then creates new sources of revenue for companies 
in the industry. Gillette, for example, periodically comes out with a new and im-
proved razor, such as the Sensor, the Mach3, and the Fusion shaving system, to 
boost its market share and profi tability. Similarly, each major global car- maker 
replaces its models every 3–5 years to encourage customers to trade in their old 
models and buy the new one that has the latest styling and technology.
• Product development is important for maintaining product differentiation and 
building market share.29 For instance, the laundry detergent Tide has gone 
through more than 50 different changes in formulation during the past 40 years 
to improve its performance. The product is always advertised as Tide, but it is 
a different product each year. The battle over diet and fl avored colas is another 
interesting example of competitive product differentiation by product develop-
ment. Royal Crown Cola developed Diet Rite, the fi rst diet cola. However, Coca- 
Cola and PepsiCo responded quickly with their versions of the diet drink, and 
by massive advertising they soon achieved dominance. Today, there are dozens 
of variations of diet colas on the market. Refi ning and improving products is an 
important competitive tactic in defending a company’s generic competitive strat-
egy in a mature industry. However, this kind of competition can be as vicious as 
a price war because it is expensive and raises costs dramatically.
• Market development involves searching for new market segments, and therefore 
uses, for a company’s products. A company pursuing this strategy wants to capi-
talize on the brand name it has developed in one market segment by locating 
new market segments in which to compete. In this way, it can exploit the product 
differentiation advantages of its brand name. Japanese carmakers provide an in-
teresting example of the use of market development. When they fi rst entered the 
market, each Japanese manufacturer offered a car, such as the Toyota Corolla and 
the Honda Accord, aimed at the economy segment of the auto market. However, 
the Japanese upgraded each car over time, and now each is directed at a more 
expensive market segment. The Accord and Toyota Camry are the leading con-
tenders in the mid- size car segment, while the Honda Civic, and Toyota Corolla, 
and Prius compete to lead the small- car segment. By redefi ning their product of-
ferings, Japanese manufacturers have profi tably developed their market segments 

Product Proliferation
A strategy in which 
leading companies in 
an industry all make a 
product in each market 
segment or niche and 
compete head- to- head 
for customers.
Intensity of
competition
Height of
exit barriers
Level of
fixed costs
Commodity
nature of
product
Speed of
decline
Figure 5.5  Factors That Determine the Intensity of Competition 
in Declining Industries
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
137
and successfully attacked their U.S. rivals, continually wresting market share from 
these companies. Although the Japanese used to compete primarily as low- cost 
producers, market development has allowed them to become leading differentia-
tors as well. Toyota is an example of a company that has used market develop-
ment to pursue simultaneously a low- cost and a differentiation strategy, and its 
Lexus brand competes in the luxury segment of the global car market.
• Product proliferation can be used to manage rivalry within an industry and to 
deter entry. The strategy of product proliferation generally means that the lead-
ing companies in an industry all have a product in each market segment, or niche, 
and compete head- to- head for customers. If a new niche develops (such as SUVs, 
designer sunglasses, or Internet Web sites), then the leader gets a fi rst- mover 
advantage, but soon all the other companies catch up, and once again competi-
tion is stabilized and rivalry within the industry is reduced. Product proliferation 
thus allows the development of stable industry competition based on product dif-
ferentiation, not price— that is, nonprice competition based on the development 
of new products. The battle is over a product’s perceived quality and uniqueness, 
not over its price.
Strategies in Declining Industries
Sooner or later many industries enter into a decline stage, in which the size of the 
total market starts to shrink. Examples include the railroad industry, the tobacco 
industry, and the steel industry. Industries start declining for a number of reasons, 
including technological change, social trends, and demographic shifts. The railroad 
and steel industries began to decline when technological changes brought viable sub-
stitutes for the products these industries offered. The advent of the internal combus-
tion engine drove the railroad industry into decline, and the steel industry fell into 
decline with the rise of plastics and composite materials. The decline of the tobacco 
industry was caused by changing social attitudes toward smoking because of con-
cerns about its health effects.
When the size of the total market is shrinking, competition tends to intensify in 
a declining industry, and profi t rates tend to fall. The intensity of competition in a 
declining industry depends on four critical factors, which are indicated in Figure 5.5.

Leadership Strategy
A strategy through 
which a company 
seeks to become the 
dominant player in a 
declining industry.
138  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
First, the intensity of competition is greater in industries where decline is rapid 
than in industries, such as tobacco, where decline is gradual.
Second, the intensity of competition is greater in declining industries in which 
exit barriers are high. As you recall from Chapter 3, high exit barriers keep compa-
nies locked into an industry even when demand is falling. The result is the emergence 
of excess productive capacity— and hence an increased probability of fi erce price 
competition.
Third, and related to the previous point, the intensity of competition is greater 
in declining industries in which fi xed costs are high (as in the steel industry). This 
is because the need to cover fi xed costs, such as the costs of maintaining productive 
capacity, can make companies try to utilize any excess capacity they have by slashing 
prices— an action that can trigger a price war.
Finally, the intensity of competition is greater in declining industries where the 
product is perceived as a commodity (as it is in the steel industry) than in industries 
where differentiation gives rise to signifi cant brand loyalty, as was true until very 
recently of the declining tobacco industry.
Not all segments of an industry typically decline at the same rate. In some seg-
ments, demand may remain reasonably strong, despite decline elsewhere. The steel 
industry illustrates this situation. Although bulk steel products, such as sheet steel, 
have suffered a general decline, demand has actually risen for specialty steels, such 
as those used in high- speed machine tools. Vacuum tubes provide another example. 
Although demand for them collapsed when transistors replaced them as a key com-
ponent in many electronics products, for years afterward vacuum tubes still had 
some limited applications in radar equipment. Consequently, demand in this vacuum 
tube segment remained strong despite the general decline in the demand for vacuum 
tubes. The point is that in an industry, there may be pockets of demand in which 
demand is declining more slowly than in the industry as a whole or, indeed, is not 
declining at all. Price competition may be far less intense among the companies serv-
ing such pockets of demand than within the industry as a whole.
Choosing a Strategy There are four main strategies that companies can adopt 
to deal with decline: (1) a leadership strategy, by which a company seeks to become 
the dominant player in a declining industry; (2) a niche strategy, which focuses on 
pockets of demand that are declining more slowly than demand in the industry as 
a whole; (3) a harvest strategy, which optimizes cash fl ow; and (4) a divestment 
strategy, by which a company sells off the business to others. The choice of strategy 
depends in part on the intensity of the competition. Figure 5.6 provides a frame-
work for guiding choice or strategy on the basis of two factors: (1) the intensity 
of competition in the declining industry, measured on the vertical axis, and (2) a 
company’s strengths relative to remaining pockets of demand, measured on the 
horizontal axis.
Leadership Strategy A leadership strategy aims at growing in a declining indus-
try by picking up the market share of companies that are leaving the industry. A lead-
ership strategy makes the most sense (1) when the company has distinctive strengths 
that enable it to capture market share in a declining industry and (2) when the speed 
of decline and the intensity of competition in the declining industry are moderate. 
Philip Morris has pursued such a strategy in the tobacco industry. By aggressive 
marketing, Philip Morris has increased its market share in a declining industry and 
earned enormous profi ts in the process.

Niche Strategy
The strategy of 
focusing on pockets 
of demand that are 
declining more slowly 
than demand in the 
industry as a whole.
Harvest Strategy
A strategy that 
optimizes cash ﬂ ow.
High
Low
Few
Many
Company strengths relative to
remaining pockets of demand
Intensity of competition
in declining industry
Harvest
or divest
Leadership
or niche
Divest
Niche or
harvest
Figure 5.6 Strategy Selection in a Declining Industry
 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
139
The tactical steps companies might use to achieve a leadership position include 
aggressive pricing and marketing to build market share; acquiring established com-
petitors to consolidate the industry; and raising the stakes for other competitors— 
for example, by making new investments in productive capacity. Such competitive 
tactics signal to other competitors that the company is willing and able to stay and 
compete in the declining industry. These signals may persuade other companies 
to exit the industry, which would further enhance the competitive position of the 
industry leader.
Niche Strategy A niche strategy focuses on those pockets of demand in the indus-
try in which demand is stable or is declining less rapidly than demand in the industry 
as a whole. The strategy makes sense when the company has some unique strengths 
relative to those niches where demand remains relatively strong. As an example, con-
sider Naval, a company that manufactures whaling harpoons and small guns to fi re 
them and makes money doing so. This might be considered rather odd, given that 
most whaling has been outlawed by the world community. However, Naval survived 
the terminal decline of the harpoon industry by focusing on the one group of people 
who are still allowed to hunt whales in very limited numbers: the North American 
Inuit tribe. Inuit are permitted to hunt bowhead whales, provided that they do so 
only for food and not for commercial purposes. Naval is the sole supplier of small 
harpoon whaling guns to Eskimo communities, and its monopoly position allows it 
to earn a healthy return in this small market.30
Harvest Strategy A harvest strategy is the best choice when a company wishes 
to get out of a declining industry and perhaps optimize cash fl ow in the process. 

Divestment Strategy
A strategy in which a 
company sells off its 
business assets and 
resources to other 
companies.
140  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
This strategy makes the most sense when the company foresees a steep decline and 
intense future competition or when it lacks strengths relative to remaining pockets 
of demand in the industry. A harvest strategy requires the company to cut all new 
investments in capital equipment, advertising, R&D, and the like. The inevitable 
result is that the company will lose market share, but because it is no longer invest-
ing in this business, initially its positive cash fl ow will increase. Ultimately, however, 
cash fl ows will start to decline, and at this stage it makes sense for the company to 
liquidate the business.
Divestment Strategy A divestment strategy is based on the idea that a company 
can maximize its net investment recovery from a business by selling it early, before 
the industry has entered into a steep decline. This strategy is appropriate when the 
company has few strengths relative to whatever pockets of demand are likely to 
remain in the industry and when the competition in the declining industry is likely 
to be intense. The best option may be to sell out to a company that is pursuing a 
leadership strategy in the industry. The drawback of the divestment strategy is that 
its success depends on the ability of the company to notice its industry’s decline be-
fore it becomes serious and thus to sell out while the company’s assets are still valued 
by others.
1. Companies can use various generic competitive 
strategies in different industry environments to 
protect and enhance their competitive advan-
tage. Companies must fi rst develop a successful 
generic competitive strategy in order to gain a 
secure position in an industry. Then they must 
choose industry- appropriate competitive tactics 
and maneuvers to position their company suc-
cessfully over time. Companies must always be 
on the alert for changes in conditions within their 
industry and in the competitive behavior of their 
rivals if they are to respond to these changes in a 
timely manner.
2. Business- level strategy consists of the way stra-
tegic managers devise a plan of action to use a 
company’s resources and distinctive competen-
cies to gain a competitive advantage over rivals 
in a market or industry.
3. At the heart of developing a generic business- level 
strategy are choices concerning product differ-
entiation, market segmentation, and distinctive 
competency. The combination of those three 
choices results in the specifi c form of generic 
business- level strategy employed by a company.
4. The three pure generic competitive strategies are 
cost leadership, differentiation, and focus. Each 
has advantages and disadvantages. A company 
must constantly manage its strategy; otherwise, it 
risks being stuck in the middle.
5. Increasingly, developments in manufacturing 
technology are allowing fi rms to pursue both a 
cost- leadership and a differentiation strategy and 
thus obtain the economic benefi ts of both strate-
gies simultaneously. Technical developments also 
enable small fi rms to compete with large fi rms on 
an equal footing in particular market segments; 
thus these developments increase the number of 
fi rms pursuing a focus strategy.
6. Companies can also adopt either of two forms of 
focus strategy: a focused low- cost strategy or a 
focused differentiation strategy.
7. In fragmented and growing industries composed 
of a large number of small and medium- sized 
companies, the principal forms of competitive 
strategy are chaining, franchising, and horizontal 
merger.
8. Mature industries are composed of a few large 
companies whose actions are so highly interde-
pendent that the success of one company’s strategy 
depends on the responses of its rivals.
9. The principal competitive tactics used by compa-
nies in mature industries to deter entry are prod-
uct proliferation, price cutting, and maintaining 
excess capacity.
Summary of Chapter

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
141
10. The principal competitive tactics used by com-
panies in mature industries to manage rivalry 
are price signaling, price leadership, nonprice 
competition, and capacity control.
11. There are four main strategies a company can 
pursue when demand is falling: leadership, 
niche, harvest, and divestment strategies. The 
choice of strategy is determined by the severity 
of industry decline and the company’s strengths 
relative to the remaining pockets of demand.
1. Why does each generic competitive strategy re-
quire a different set of product/market/distinctive- 
competency choices? Give examples of pairs 
of companies in (a) the computer industry and 
(b) the auto industry that pursue different com-
petitive strategies.
2. How can companies pursuing a cost- leadership, 
differentiation, or focus strategy become stuck in 
the middle? In what ways can they regain their 
competitive advantage?
3. Why are industries fragmented? What are the 
main ways in which companies can turn a frag-
mented industry into a consolidated one?
4. What are the key problems involved in maintain-
ing a competitive advantage in a growing indus-
try environment?
5. Discuss how companies can use (a) product dif-
ferentiation and (b) capacity control to manage 
rivalry and increase an industry’s profi tability.
Discussion Questions
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: How to Keep 
the Salsa Hot
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people, and 
discuss the following scenario. Appoint one group 
member as spokesperson for the group, who will 
communicate your fi ndings to the class when 
called upon to do so by the instructor.
You are the managers of a company that has 
pioneered a new kind of salsa for chicken that has 
taken the market by storm. The salsa’s differenti-
ated appeal has been based on a unique combina-
tion of spices and packaging that has allowed you 
to charge a premium price. Within the last 3 years, 
your salsa has achieved a national reputation, and 
now major food companies such as Kraft and 
Nabisco, seeing the potential of this market seg-
ment, are beginning to introduce salsas of their 
own, imitating your product.
1. Describe the generic business- level strategy 
you are pursuing.
2. Describe the industry environment in which 
you are competing.
3. What kinds of competitive tactics and maneu-
vers could you adopt to protect your generic 
strategy in this kind of environment?
4. What do you think is the best strategy for you 
to pursue in this situation?

142  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Visiting the Luxury- Car Market
Enter the Web sites of three luxury- car makers such as 
Lexus (www.lexususa.com), BMW (www.bmwusa 
.com), or Cadillac (www.cadillac.com), all of 
which compete in the same strategic group. Scan 
the sites to determine the key features of each 
company’s business- level strategy. In what ways 
are their strategies similar and different? Which of 
these companies do you think has a competitive 
advantage over the others? Why?
General Task 
Search the Web for a company pursuing a low- cost 
strategy, a differentiation strategy, or both. What 
product/market/distinctive- competency 
choices 
has the company made to pursue this strategy? 
How successful has the company been in its in-
dustry by using this strategy?
Exploring The Web
Nike, headquartered in Beaverton, Oregon, was 
founded over 30 years ago by Bill Bowerman, a 
former University of Oregon track coach, and Phil 
Knight, an entrepreneur in search of a profi table 
business opportunity. Bowerman’s goal was to dream 
up a new kind of sneaker tread that would enhance 
a runner’s traction and speed, and he came up with 
the idea for Nike’s “waffl e tread” after studying the 
waffl e iron in his home. Bowerman and Knight made 
their shoe and began by selling it out of the trunks 
of their car at track meets. From this small begin-
ning Nike has grown into a company that sold over 
$12 billion worth of shoes in the $35 billion athletic 
footwear and apparel industries in 2004.31
Nike’s amazing growth came from its business 
model, which has always been based on two origi-
nal functional strategies: to innovate state- of- the- art 
athletic shoes and then to publicize the qualities of 
its shoes through dramatic “guerrilla” marketing. 
Nike’s marketing is designed to persuade customers 
that its shoes are not only superior but also a high 
fashion statement and a necessary part of a lifestyle 
based on sporting or athletic interests. A turning 
point came in 1987 when Nike increased its market-
ing budget from $8 million to $48 million to per-
suade customers its shoes were the best. A large part 
of this advertising budget soon went to pay celebri-
ties like Michael Jordan millions of dollars to wear 
and champion its products. The company has consis-
tently pursued this strategy and many other sporting 
stars, such as Tiger Woods and Serena Williams who 
are part of its charmed circle.
Nike’s strategy to emphasize the uniqueness of 
its product paid off; its market share soared and its 
revenues hit $9.6 billion in 1998. However, 1998 
was also a turning point, for in that year sales be-
gan to fall. Nike’s $200 Air Jordans no longer sold 
like they used to, and inventory built up in stores 
and warehouses. Suddenly it seemed much harder to 
design new shoes that customers perceived to be sig-
nifi cantly better and Nike’s stunning growth in sales 
was actually reducing its profi tability— somehow it 
had lost control of its business strategy. Phil Knight, 
who had resigned his management position, was 
forced to resume the helm and lead the company out 
of its troubles. He recruited a team of talented top 
managers from leading consumer products compa-
nies to help him improve Nike’s business model. As 
a result, Nike has changed its business strategies in 
some fundamental ways.
In the past, Nike shunned sports like golf, soc-
cer, rollerblading, and so on and focused most of its 
efforts on making shoes for the track and basket-
ball market to build its market share in this area. 
However, when its sales started to fall, it realized 
that using marketing to increase sales in a particular 
Nike’s Business- Level Strategies

 
Chapter 5 Business- Level Strategy and Competitive Positioning  
143
market segment can only grow sales and profi ts so 
far; it needed to start to sell more types of shoes to 
more segments of the athletic shoe market. So Nike 
took its design and marketing competencies and 
began to craft new lines of shoes for new market 
segments. For example, it launched a line of soccer 
shoes and perfected their design over time, and by 
2004 it had won the biggest share of the soccer mar-
ket from its archrival Adidas.32 In addition, in 2004 
it launched its Total 90 III shoes, which are aimed 
at the millions of casual soccer players throughout 
the world who want a shoe they can just “play” in. 
Once more, Nike’s dramatic marketing campaigns 
aim to make their shoes part of the “soccer lifestyle,” 
to persuade customers that traditional sneakers do 
not work because soccer shoes are sleeker and fi t the 
foot more snugly.33
To take advantage of its competencies in design 
and marketing, Nike then decided to enter new 
market segments by purchasing other footwear 
companies that offered shoes that extended or com-
plemented its product lines. For example, it bought 
Converse, the maker of retro- style sneakers; Hurley 
International, which makes skateboards and Bauer 
in- line and hockey skates; and Offi cial Starter, a li-
censor of athletic shoes and apparel whose brands in-
clude the low- priced Shaq brand. Allowing Converse 
to take advantage of Nike’s in- house competencies 
has resulted in dramatic increases in the sales of its 
sneakers, and Converse has made an important con-
tribution to Nike’s profi tability.34
Nike had also entered another market segment 
when it bought Cole Haan, the dress shoemaker, 
in the 1980s. Now it is searching for other possi-
ble acquisitions. It decided to enter the athletic ap-
parel market to use its skills there, and by 2004 sales 
were over $1 billion. Nike made all these changes 
to its product line to increase its market share and 
profi tability. Its new focus on developing new and 
improved products for new market segments is 
working. Nike’s profi ts have soared from 14% in 
2000 to 25% in 2007, it makes over $1 billion profi t 
a year.
Case Discussion Questions
1. What business- level strategies is Nike pursuing?
2. How have Nike’s business- level strategies changed 
the nature of industry competition?
 1. Derek F. Abell, Defi ning the Business: The Starting Point 
of Strategic Planning (Englewood Cliffs, N.j.: Prentice- 
Hall, 1980), 169.
 2. R. Kotler, Marketing Management, 5th. ed. (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.j.: Prentice- Hall, 1984) and M.  R.  Darby and 
E. Karni, “Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of 
Fraud,” Journal of Law and Economics 16 (1973): 67–86.
 3. Abell, Defi ning the Business, p. 8.
 4. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and 
Sustaining Superior Performance (New York: Free Press, 
1985).
 5. R.  D.  Buzzell and F.  D.  Wiersema, “Successful Share 
Building 
Strategies,” 
Harvard 
Business 
Review, 
January–February 1981, 135–144 and L.  W.  Phillips, 
D. R. Chang, and R. D. Buzzell, “Product Quality, Cost 
Position, and Business Performance: A Test of Some Key 
Hypotheses,” Journal of Marketing 47 (1983): 26–43.
 6. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for 
Analyzing Industries and Competitors (New York: Free 
Press, 1980), 45.
 7. Abell, Defi ning the Business, p. 15.
 8. Although many other authors have discussed cost 
leadership and differentiation as basic competitive ap-
proaches [e.g., F.  Scherer, Industrial Market Structure 
and Economic Performance, 2nd ed. (Boston, Mass.: 
Houghton Miffl in, 1980)], Porter’s model (Porter, 
Competitive Strategy) has become the dominant ap-
proach. Consequently, this model is the one developed 
here, and the discussion draws heavily on his defi ni-
tions. The basic cost- leadership/differentiation dimen-
sion has received substantial empirical support (e.g., 
D.  C.  Hambrick, “High Profi t Strategies in Mature 
Capital Goods Industries: A Contingency Approach,” 
Academy of Management Journal 26 (1983): 687–707.
 9. Porter, Competitive Advantage, p. 37.
 10. Ibid., pp. 13–14.
 11. D.  Miller, “Confi gurations of Strategy and Structure: 
Towards a Synthesis,” Strategic Management Journal 7 
(1986): 217–231.
 12. Porter, Competitive Advantage, pp. 44–46.
 13. Charles W. Hofer and D. Schendel, Strategy Formulation: 
Analytical Concepts (St. Paul, Minn.: West, 1978).
Notes

144  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
 14. W. K. Hall, “Survival Strategies in a Hostile Environment,” 
Harvard Business Review 58 (1980): 75–85 and 
Hambrick, “High Profi t Strategies.”.
 15. Porter, Competitive Strategy, p. 46.
 16. Peter F.  Drucker, The Practice of Management (New 
York: Harper, 1954).
 17. Porter, Competitive Advantage, pp. 44–46.
 18. J.  Brander and J.  Eaton, “Product Line Rivalry,” 
American Economic Review 74 (1985): 323–334.
 19. P.  Milgrom and J.  Roberts, “Predation, Reputation, 
and Entry Deterrence,” Journal of Economic Theory 27 
(1982): 280–312.
 20. Sharon M. Oster, Modern Competitive Analysis (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 262–264.
 21. Donald A.  Hay and Derek J.  Morris, Industrial 
Economics: Theory and Evidence (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1979), 192–193.
 22. Porter, Competitive Strategy, pp. 76–86.
 23. O.  Heil and T.  S.  Robertson, “Towards a Theory of 
Competitive Market Signaling: A Research Agenda,” 
Strategic Management Journal 12 (1991): 403–418.
 24. Scherer, Industrial Market Structure and Economic 
Performance, Ch. 8.
 25. The model differs from Ansoff’s model for this reason.
 26. H.  Igor Ansoff, Corporate Strategy (London: Penguin 
Books, 1984), 97–100.
 27. Robert D.  Buzzell, Bradley T.  Gale, and Ralph 
G. M. Sultan, “Market Share— A Key to Profi tability,” 
Harvard Business Review, January–February 1975, 
97–103 and Robert Jacobson and David A. Aaker, “Is 
Market Share All That It’s Cracked Up to Be?” Journal 
of Marketing 49 (1985): 11–22.
 28. Ansoff, Corporate Strategy, pp. 98–99.
 29. S.  L.  Brown, and K.  M.  Eisenhardt, “Product 
Development: Past Research, Present Findings, and 
Future Directions,” Academy of Management Review 
20 (1995): 343–378.
 30. Jack Willoughby, “The Last Iceman,” Forbes, July 13, 
1987, 183–202.
 31. www.nike.com, 2008.
 32. www.nike.com (2004), press release; “The New Nike,” 
yahoo.com September 12, 2004.
 33. A.  Wong, “Nike: Just Don’t Do It,” Newsweek, 
November 1, 2004, 84.
 34. www.nike.com, 2008.

After reading this chapter you should be 
able to:
• Understand the process of globalization 
and how that impacts upon a company’s 
strategy.
• Discuss the motives for expanding 
internationally.
• Review the different strategies that 
companies use to compete in the global 
market place.
• Explain the pros and cons of different 
modes for entering foreign markets.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
The Global Environment
Increasing Proﬁ tability 
Through Global Expansion
Expanding the Market: Leveraging 
Products and Competencies
Realizing Economies of Scale
Realizing Location Economies
Leveraging the Skills of Global 
Subsidiaries
Cost Pressures and Pressures 
for Local Responsiveness
Pressures for Cost Reductions
Pressures for Local Responsiveness
Choosing a Global Strategy
Global Standardization Strategy
Localization Strategy
Transnational Strategy
International Strategy
Changes in Strategy over Time
Choices of Entry Mode
Exporting
Licensing
Franchising
Joint Ventures
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
Choosing an Entry Strategy
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Strategy in the Global 
Environment
6

146  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
OVERVIEW
This chapter looks at the process of globalization in the world economy and the 
strategic response required from companies that compete across national borders. 
The chapter opens with a discussion of ongoing changes in the global competitive 
environment and discusses models managers can use for analyzing competition in 
different national markets. Next, we look at the various ways in which international 
expansion can increase a company’s profi tability and profi t growth. Then we discuss 
the different strategies companies can pursue to gain a competitive advantage in the 
global marketplace and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each. This is 
followed by a discussion of two related strategic issues: (1) how managers decide 
which foreign markets to enter, when to enter them, and on what scale and (2) what 
kind of vehicle or means a company should use to expand globally and enter a 
foreign country. By the time you have completed this chapter, you will have a good 
understanding of the various strategic issues that companies face when they decide 
to expand their operations internationally to achieve competitive advantage and 
superior profi tability.
The Global Environment
Fifty years ago most national markets were isolated from each other by signifi cant 
barriers to international trade and investment. In those days, managers could focus 
on analyzing just those national markets in which their company competed. They 
did not need to pay much attention to entry by global competitors, for there were 
few and entry was diffi cult. Nor did they need to pay much attention to entering 
foreign markets, since that was often prohibitively expensive. All of this has now 
changed. Barriers to international trade and investment have tumbled. Huge global 
markets for goods and services have been created. Companies from different nations 
are entering each others home markets on a hitherto unprecedented scale, increasing 
the intensity of competition. Rivalry can no longer be understood merely in terms 
of what happens within the boundaries of a nation; managers now need to consider 
how globalization is impacting the environment in which their company competes, 
and what strategies their company should adopt to exploit opportunities, and coun-
ter competitive threats.
Consider barriers to international trade and investment. The average tariff rate 
on manufactured goods traded between advanced nations has fallen from around 
40% to under 4%. Similarly, in nation after nation, regulations prohibiting foreign 
companies from entering domestic markets and establishing production facilities, or 
acquiring domestic companies, have been removed. As a result of these two develop-
ments, there has been a surge in both the volume of international trade and the value 
of foreign direct investment. The volume of world merchandise trade has grown 
faster than the world economy since 1950 (see Figure 1.1).1 From 1970 to 2007, the 
volume of world merchandise trade expanded 28- fold, outstripping the expansion 
of world production, which grew about eight times in real terms. Moreover, be-
tween 1992 and 2007, the total fl ow of foreign direct investment from all countries 
increased by more than 500% while world trade by value grew by some 145% and 
world output by about 40%.2 These two trends have led to the globalization of pro-
duction and the globalization of markets.3

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
147
The globalization of production has been increasing as companies take advantage 
of lower barriers to international trade and investment to disperse important parts 
of their production process around the globe. Doing so enables them to take advan-
tage of national differences in the cost and quality of factors of production such as 
labor, energy, land, and capital, which allow them to lower their cost structures and 
boost profi ts. For example, the Boeing Company’s commercial jet aircraft, the 777, 
uses 132,500 engineered parts that are produced around the world by 545 suppliers. 
Eight Japanese suppliers make parts of the fuselage, doors, and wings; a supplier in 
Singapore makes the doors for the nose landing gear; three suppliers in Italy manu-
facture wing fl aps; and so on. In total, some 30% of the 777, by value, is built by 
foreign companies. For its most recent jet airliner, the 787, Boeing has pushed this 
trend even further, with some 65% of the total value of the aircraft scheduled to be 
outsourced to foreign companies, 35% of which is going to three major Japanese 
companies.4 Part of Boeing’s rationale for outsourcing so much production to for-
eign suppliers is that these suppliers are the best in the world at performing their 
particular activity. Therefore, the result of having foreign suppliers build specifi c 
parts is a better fi nal product and higher profi tability for Boeing.5
As for the globalization of markets, it has been argued that the world’s economic 
system is moving from one in which national markets are distinct entities, isolated 
from each other by trade barriers and barriers of distance, time, and culture, toward 
a system in which national markets are merging into one huge global marketplace. 
Increasingly, customers around the world demand and use the same basic product 
offerings. Consequently, in many industries, it is no longer meaningful to talk about 
the German market, the U.S. market, or the Japanese market; there is only the global 
market. The global acceptance of Coca- Cola, Citigroup credit cards, blue jeans, the 
Sony PlayStation and Nintendo Wii, McDonald’s hamburgers, the Nokia wireless 
phone, and Microsoft’s Windows operating system are examples of this trend.6
The trend toward the globalization of production and markets has several im-
portant implications for competition within an industry. First, industry boundaries 
do not stop at national borders. Because many industries are becoming global in 
scope, actual and potential competitors exist not only in a company’s home market 
but also in other national markets. Managers who analyze only their home market 
can be caught unprepared by the entry of effi cient foreign competitors. The glo-
balization of markets and production implies that companies around the globe are 
fi nding their home markets under attack from foreign competitors. For example, in 
Japan, American fi nancial institutions such as JP Morgan have been making inroads 
against Japanese fi nancial service institutions. In the United States, Finland’s Nokia 
has taken the lead from Motorola in the market for wireless phone handsets.
Second, the shift from national to global markets has intensifi ed competitive ri-
valry in industry after industry. National markets that once were consolidated oligop-
olies, dominated by three or four companies and subjected to relatively little foreign 
competition, have been transformed into segments of fragmented global industries 
where a large number of companies battle each other for market share in country 
after country. This rivalry has threatened to drive down profi tability and made it 
all the more critical for companies to maximize their effi ciency, quality, customer 
responsiveness, and innovative ability. The painful restructuring and downsizing that 
has been going on at companies such as Motorola and Kodak is as much a response 
to the increased intensity of global competition as it is to anything else. However, 
not all global industries are fragmented. Many remain consolidated oligopolies, ex-
cept that now they are consolidated global, rather than national, oligopolies. In the 

148  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
video game industry, for example, three companies are battling for global domi-
nance, Microsoft from the U.S. and Nintendo and Sony from Japan. In the market 
for wireless handsets, Nokia of Finland does global battle against Motorola of the 
U.S. and Samsung from South Korea, and, most recently, Apple with its iPhone; and 
Research in Motion of Canada with its Blackberry.
Finally, although globalization has increased both the threat of entry and the 
intensity of rivalry within many formerly protected national markets, it has also 
created enormous opportunities for companies based in those markets. The steady 
decline in barriers to cross- border trade and investment has opened up many once 
protected markets to companies based outside them. Thus in recent years, Western 
European, Japanese, and U.S. companies have accelerated their investments in the 
nations of Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Southeast Asia as they try to take 
advantage of growth opportunities in those areas.
Increasing Profitability 
through Global Expansion
There are a number of ways in which expanding globally can enable companies to 
increase their profi tability and grow their profi ts more rapidly. At the most basic 
level, global expansion increases the size of the market a company is addressing, 
thereby boosting profi t growth. Moreover, global expansion offers opportunities for 
reducing the cost structure of the enterprise, or adding value through differentiation, 
thereby potentially boosting profi tability.
Expanding the Market: Leveraging Products and Competencies
A company can increase its growth rate by taking goods or services developed at 
home and selling them internationally. Indeed, almost all multinationals started out 
doing just this. Procter and Gamble, for example, developed most of its best selling 
products at home, and then sold them around the world. Similarly, from its earli-
est days, Microsoft has always focused on selling its software around the world. 
Automobile companies like Ford, Volkswagen and Toyota also grew by developing 
products at home, and then selling them in international markets. The returns from 
such a strategy are likely to be greater if indigenous competitors in the nations a 
company enters lack comparable products. Thus Toyota has grown its profi ts by 
entering the large automobile markets of North America and Europe, offering prod-
ucts that are differentiated from those offered by local rivals (Ford and GM) by their 
superior quality and reliability.
It is important to note that the success of many multinational companies is based 
not just upon the goods or services that they sell in foreign nations, but also upon the 
distinctive competencies (unique skills) that underlie the production and marketing 
of those goods or services. Thus Toyota’s success is based upon its distinctive com-
petence in manufacturing automobiles, and expanding internationally can be seen 
as a way of generating greater returns from this competence. Similarly, Procter & 
Gamble’s global success was based on more than its portfolio of consumer products; 
it was also based on the company’s skills in mass marketing consumer goods. P&G 
grew rapidly in international markets between 1950 and 1990 because it was one 
of the most skilled mass marketing enterprises in the world, and could “out market” 

Location Economies
Economic beneﬁ ts that 
arise from performing a 
value creation activity in 
the optimal location for 
that activity.
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
149
indigenous competitors in the nations it entered. Global expansion was thus a way 
of generating higher returns from its competency in marketing.
Pushing this further, one could say that since distinctive competencies are in es-
sence the most valuable aspects of a company’s business, successful global expansion 
by manufacturing companies like Toyota and P&G was based upon their ability to 
take their distinctive competencies and apply them to foreign markets.
The same can be said of companies engaged in the service sectors of an economy— 
such as fi nancial institutions, retailers, restaurant chains and hotels. Expanding the 
market for their services often means replicating their basic business model in for-
eign nations (albeit with some changes to account for local differences— which we 
will discuss in more detail shortly). Starbucks, for example, is expanding rapidly 
outside of the United States by taking the basic business model it developed at home, 
and using that as a blue print for establishing international operations. As detailed 
in the Running Case, Walmart has done the same thing, establishing stores in nine 
other nations since 1992 following the blue print it developed in the United States. 
Similarly, McDonalds is famous for its international expansion strategy which has 
taken the company into more than 120 nations that collectively generate over half 
of the company’s revenues.
Realizing Economies of Scale
In addition to growing profi ts more rapidly, by expanding its sales volume through 
international expansion a company can realize cost savings from economies of scale, 
thereby boosting profi tability. Such scale economies come from several sources. First, 
by spreading the fi xed costs associated with developing a product and setting up 
production facilities over its global sales volume, a company can lower its average 
unit cost. Thus, Microsoft can garner signifi cant scale economies by spreading the 
$5 billion it cost to develop Windows Vista over global demand.
Second, by serving a global market, a company can potentially utilize its produc-
tion facilities more intensively, which leads to higher productivity, lower costs and 
greater profi tability. For example, if Intel only sold microprocessors in the United 
States, it may only be able to keep its factories open for one shift, 5 days a week. But 
by serving a global market from the same factories, it may be able to utilize those 
assets for two shifts, 7 days a week. In other words, the capital invested in those 
factories is used more intensively if Intel sells to a global as opposed to national 
market, which translated into higher capital productivity and a higher return on 
invested capital.
Third, as global sales increase the size of the enterprise, so its bargaining power 
with suppliers increases, which may allow it to bargain down the cost of key inputs 
and boost profi tability that way. Walmart has been able to use its enormous sales 
volume as a lever to bargain down the price it pays suppliers for merchandise sold 
through its stores.
Realizing Location Economies
Earlier in this chapter we discussed how countries differ from each other along a 
number of dimensions, including differences in the cost and quality of factors of pro-
duction. These differences imply that some locations are more suited than others for 
producing certain goods and services.7 Location economies are the economic benefi ts 
that arise from performing a value creation activity in the optimal location for that 

150  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
In the early 1990s, managers at Walmart realized 
that the company’s opportunities for growth in the 
United States were becoming more limited. By 
1995, the company would be active in all 50 states. 
Management calculated that by the early 2000s, do-
mestic growth opportunities would be constrained due 
to market saturation. So the company decided to ex-
pand globally. The critics scoffed. Walmart, they said, 
was too American a company. Although its business 
model was well suited to America, it would not work 
in other countries where infrastructure was different, 
consumer tastes and preferences varied, and where 
established retailers already dominated.
Unperturbed, in 1991, Walmart started to expand 
internationally with the opening of its ﬁ rst stores in 
Mexico. The Mexican operation was established as 
a joint venture with Cifera, the largest local retailer. 
Initially, Walmart made a number of missteps that 
seemed to prove the critics right. Walmart had prob-
lems replicating its efﬁ cient distribution system in 
Mexico. Poor infrastructure, crowded roads, and a lack 
of leverage with local suppliers, many of whom could 
not or would not deliver directly to Walmart’s stores or 
distribution centers, resulted in stocking problems and 
raised costs and prices. Initially, prices at Walmart in 
Mexico were some 20% above prices for comparable 
products in the company’s United States stores, which 
limited Walmart’s ability to gain market share. There 
were also problems with merchandise selection. Many 
of the stores in Mexico carried items that were popular 
in the United States. These included ice skates, riding 
lawn mowers, leaf blowers, and ﬁ nishing tackle. Not 
surprisingly, these items did not sell well in Mexico, 
so managers would slash prices to move inventory, 
only to ﬁ nd that the company’s automated information 
systems would immediately order more inventory to 
replenish the depleted stock.
By the mid- 1990s, however, Walmart had learned 
from its early mistakes and adapted its operations in 
Mexico to match the local environment. A partner-
ship with a Mexican trucking company dramatically 
improved the distribution system, while more careful 
stocking practices meant that the Mexican stores sold 
merchandise that appealed more to local tastes and 
preferences. As Walmart’s presence grew, many of 
Walmart’s suppliers built factories close by its Mexican 
distribution centers so that they could better serve the 
company, which helped to drive down inventory and 
logistics costs. In 1998, Walmart acquired a control-
ling interest in Cifera. Today, Mexico is a leading light 
in Walmart’s international operations, where the com-
pany is more than twice the size of its nearest rival.
The Mexican experience proved to Walmart that 
it could compete outside the United States. It subse-
quently expanded into 15 other countries. In Canada, 
Britain, Germany, Japan, and South Korea, Walmart 
entered by acquiring existing retailers and then trans-
ferring its information systems, logistics, and manage-
ment expertise. In Puerto Rico, Brazil, Argentina, and 
China, Walmart established its own stores (although it 
added to its Chinese operations with a major acquisi-
tion in 2007). As a result of these moves, by 2008, 
the company had more than 3,000 stores outside the 
United States, 600,000 associates, and generated in-
ternational revenues of more than $80 billion.
In addition to greater growth, expanding interna-
tionally has brought Walmart two other major beneﬁ ts. 
First, Walmart has also been able to reap signiﬁ cant 
economies of scale from its global buying power. 
Many of Walmart’s key suppliers have long been in-
ternational companies; for example, GE (appliances), 
Unilever (food products), and P&G (personal care prod-
ucts) are all major Walmart suppliers that have long had 
their own global operations. By building international 
reach, Walmart has been able to use its enhanced size 
to demand deeper discounts from the local operations 
of its global suppliers, increasing the company’s ability 
to lower prices to consumers, gain market share and 
ultimately earn greater proﬁ ts. Second, Walmart has 
found that it is beneﬁ ting from the ﬂ ow of ideas across 
the countries in which it now competes. For example, 
Walmart’s Argentina team worked with Walmart’s 
Mexican management to replicate a Walmart store for-
mat developed ﬁ rst in Mexico and to adopt the best 
practices in human resources and real estate that had 
been developed in Mexico. Other ideas, such as wine 
departments in its stores in Argentina, have now been 
integrated into layouts worldwide.
Moreover, Walmart realized that if it did not expand 
internationally, other global retailers would beat them 
Walmart’s Global Expansion
R U N N I N G  C A S E

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
151
activity, wherever in the world that might be (transportation costs and trade barriers 
permitting). Locating a value creation activity in the optimal location for that activ-
ity can have one of two effects: (1) it can lower the costs of value creation, helping 
the company achieve a low- cost position, or (2) it can enable a company to differen-
tiate its product offering, which gives it the option of charging a premium price or 
keeping price low and using differentiation as a means of increasing sales volume. 
Thus, efforts to realize location economies are consistent with the business- level 
strategies of low cost and differentiation. In theory, a company that realizes location 
economies by dispersing each of its value creation activities to the optimal location 
for that activity should have a competitive advantage over a company that bases all 
of its value creation activities at a single location. It should be able to differentiate 
its product offering better and lower its cost structure more than its single- location 
competitor. In a world where competitive pressures are increasing, such a strategy 
may well become an imperative for survival.
For illustration, consider IBM’s ThinkPad X31 laptop computer (this business 
was acquired by China’s Lenova in 2005).9 The ThinkPad was designed in the United 
States by IBM engineers because IBM believed that the U.S. was the best location in 
the world to do the basic design work. The case, keyboard and hard drive were made 
in Thailand, the display screen and memory was made in South Korea, the built in 
wireless card was made in Malaysia; and the microprocessor was manufactured in 
the United States. In each case, these components were manufactured in the optimal 
location given manager’s assessment of the relative costs of performing each activ-
ity at different locations. These components were shipped to an IBM operation in 
Mexico, where the product was assembled, before being shipped to the United States 
for fi nal sale. IBM assembled the ThinkPad in Mexico because IBM’s managers cal-
culated that due to low labor costs, the costs of assembly could be minimized there. 
The marketing and sales strategy for North America was developed by IBM person-
nel in the United States, primarily because IBM believed that due to their knowl-
edge of the local marketplace, U.S. personnel would add more value to the product 
through their marketing efforts than personnel based elsewhere.
to the punch. In fact, Walmart does face signiﬁ cant 
global competition from Carrefour of France, A hold of 
Holland, and Tesco of the United Kingdom. Carrefour, 
the world’s second- largest retailer, is perhaps the 
most global of the lot. The pioneer of the hyper market 
concept now operates in 26 countries and generates 
more than 50% of its sales outside France. Compared 
to this, Walmart is a laggard with just 25% of its sales 
in 2008 generated from international operations. 
However, there is still room for signiﬁ cant global ex-
pansion. The global retailing market is still very frag-
mented. The top- 25 retailers controlled only about a 
quarter of retail sales in 2008.
Still, for all of its success Walmart has hit some 
signiﬁ cant speed bumps in its drive for global expan-
sion. In 2006, the company pulled out of two markets, 
South Korea— where it failed to decode the shopping 
habits of local customers— and Germany— where it 
could not beat incumbent discount stores on price. It is 
also struggling in Japan, where the company does not 
seem to have grasped the market’s cultural nuances. 
One example was Walmart’s decision to sell lower- 
priced gift fruits at Japanese holidays. It failed because 
customers felt spending less would insult the recipi-
ent. Interestingly, the markets where Walmart has 
struggled were all developed markets that it entered 
through acquisitions, where it faced long- established 
and efﬁ cient local competitors, and where shopping 
habits were very different than in the United States. 
In contrast, many of those markets where it has done 
better have been developing nations that lacked strong 
local competitors, and where Walmart has built opera-
tions from the ground up (e.g., Mexico, Brazil, and, in-
creasingly, China).8

152  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Leveraging the Skills of Global Subsidiaries
Initially, many multinational companies develop the valuable competencies and skills 
that underpin their business in their home nation then expand internationally, pri-
marily by selling products and services based on those competencies. Thus, Walmart 
honed its retailing skills in the United States before transferring them to foreign 
locations. However, for more mature multinationals enterprises that have already 
established a network of subsidiary operations in foreign markets, the development 
of valuable skills can just as well occur in foreign subsidiaries.10 Skills can be created 
anywhere within a multinational’s global network of operations, wherever people 
have the opportunity and incentive to try new ways of doing things. The creation of 
skills that help to lower the costs of production, or to enhance perceived value and 
support higher product pricing, is not the monopoly of the corporate center.
Leveraging the skills created within subsidiaries and applying them to other oper-
ations within the fi rm’s global network may create value. For example, McDonald’s 
increasingly is fi nding that its foreign franchisees are a source of valuable new ideas. 
Faced with slow growth in France, its local franchisees have begun to experiment 
not only with the menu, but also with the layout and theme of restaurants. Gone are 
the ubiquitous Golden Arches, gone too are many of the utilitarian chairs and tables 
and other plastic features of the fast- food giant. Many McDonald’s restaurants in 
France now have hardwood fl oors, exposed brick walls, and even armchairs. Half 
of the 930 or so outlets in France have been upgraded to a level that would make 
them unrecognizable to an American. The menu, too, has been changed to include 
premier sandwiches, such as a chicken on focaccia bread, priced some 30% higher 
than the average hamburger. In France at least, the strategy seems to be working. 
Following the change, increases in same store sales rose from 1% annually to 3.4%. 
Impressed with the impact, McDonald’s executives are now considering adopting 
similar changes at other McDonald’s restaurants in markets where same store sales 
growth is sluggish, including the United States.11
Cost Pressures and Pressures 
for Local Responsiveness
Companies that compete in the global marketplace typically face two types of com-
petitive pressures: pressures for cost reductions and pressures to be locally respon-
sive (see Figure 6.2).12 These competitive pressures place confl icting demands on a 
company. Responding to pressures for cost reductions requires that a company try 
to minimize its unit costs. To attain this goal, it may have to base its productive ac-
tivities at the most favorable low- cost location, wherever in the world that might be. 
It may also have to offer a standardized product to the global marketplace in order 
to realize the cost savings that come from economies of scale and learning effects. 
On the other hand, responding to pressures to be locally responsive requires that 
a company differentiate its product offering and marketing strategy from country 
to country in an effort to accommodate the diverse demands arising from national 
differences in consumer tastes and preferences, business practices, distribution chan-
nels, competitive conditions, and government policies. Because differentiation across 
countries can involve signifi cant duplication and a lack of product standardization, 
it may raise costs.

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
153
While some companies, such as Company A in Figure 6.1, face high pressures 
for cost reductions and low pressures for local responsiveness, and others, such as 
Company B, face low pressures for cost reductions and high pressures for local re-
sponsiveness, many companies are in the position of Company C. They face high 
pressures for both cost reductions and local responsiveness. Dealing with these con-
fl icting and contradictory pressures is a diffi cult strategic challenge, primarily be-
cause being locally responsive tends to raise costs.
Pressures for Cost Reductions
In competitive global markets, international businesses often face pressures for cost 
reductions. Responding to pressures for cost reduction requires a fi rm to try to lower 
the costs of value creation. A manufacturer, for example, might mass producing a 
standardized product at the optimal location in the world, wherever that might be, 
to realize economies of scale and location economies. Alternatively, they might out-
source certain functions to low cost foreign suppliers in an attempt to reduce costs. 
Thus, many computer companies have outsourced their telephone based customer 
service functions to India, where qualifi es technicians who speak English can be 
hired for a lower wage rate than in the United States. In the same vein, a retailer 
like Walmart might push its suppliers (who are manufacturers) to do the same. (In 
fact, the pressure that Walmart’s has placed on its suppliers to reduce prices has been 
cited as a major cause of the trend among North American manufacturers to shift 
production to China).13 A service business, such as a bank, might move some back 
offi ce functions, such as information processing, to developing nations were wage 
rates are lower.
High
Low
Low
High
Pressures for Local Responsiveness
Pressures for Cost Reductions
Company
C
Company
A
Company
B
Figure 6.1 Pressures for Cost Reductions and Local Responsiveness

Universal Needs
Needs arising from the 
similar, if not identical, 
tastes and preferences 
of consumers in 
different nations.
Because of low labor costs, 
your company has estab-
lished a manufacturing sub-
sidiary in Southern China. 
At the local minimum wage, 
employees work 10- hour 
days (sometimes 12- hour 
days due to mandatory 
overtime), 6  days a week. 
The factory does not ad-
here to the same standards 
for environmental protec-
tion and employee safety 
as those mandated in your 
home nation. You are con-
cerned with the substan-
dard working conditions and 
environmental 
protection 
and ask the expatriate man-
ager heading operations if 
something should be done 
to improve conditions. He 
argues that he is comply-
ing with all local regulations 
and laws. Moreover, he 
notes that the company es-
tablished this subsidiary to 
have a low- cost manufactur-
ing base. Improving working 
conditions and environmen-
tal standards beyond those 
mandated by local laws 
would not be consistent 
with this goal. Is his position 
ethical? What are the poten-
tial negative consequences 
of continuing operations in 
this manner? What beneﬁ ts 
might there be to improve 
conditions 
beyond 
local 
standards?
Ethical Dilemma
154  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Cost reduction pressures can be particularly intense in industries producing 
commodity- type products where meaningful differentiation on nonprice factors is 
diffi cult and price is the main competitive weapon. This tends to be the case for 
products that serve universal needs. Universal needs exist when the tastes and prefer-
ences of consumers in different nations are similar if not identical. This is the case for 
conventional commodity products such as bulk chemicals, petroleum, steel, sugar, 
and the like. It also tends to be the case for many industrial and consumer prod-
ucts; for example, handheld calculators, semiconductor chips, personal computers, 
and liquid crystal display screens. Pressures for cost reductions are also intense in 
industries where major competitors are based in low- cost locations, where there is 
persistent excess capacity, and where consumers are powerful and face low switch-
ing costs. Many commentators have argued that the liberalization of the world trade 
and investment environment in recent decades, by facilitating greater international 
competition, has generally increased cost pressures.14
Pressures for Local Responsiveness
Pressures for local responsiveness arise from differences in consumer tastes and 
preferences, infrastructure and traditional practices, distribution channels, and host 
government demands. Recall that responding to pressures to be locally responsive 
requires that a company differentiate its products and marketing strategy from coun-
try to country to accommodate these factors, all of which tends to raise a company’s 
cost structure.
Differences in Consumer Tastes and Preferences Strong pressures for local 
responsiveness emerge when customer tastes and preferences differ signifi cantly 
between countries, as they may for historic or cultural reasons. In such cases, a 
multinational company’s products and marketing message have to be customized to 
appeal to the tastes and preferences of local customers. This typically creates pres-
sures for the delegation of production and marketing responsibilities and functions 
to a company’s overseas subsidiaries.
For example, the automobile industry in the 1980s and early 1990s moved 
toward the creation of “world cars.” The idea was that global companies such as 
General Motors, Ford, and Toyota would be able to sell the same basic vehicle the 
world over, sourcing it from centralized production locations. If successful, the strat-
egy would have enabled automobile companies to reap signifi cant gains from global 
scale economies. However, this strategy frequently ran aground upon the hard rocks 
of consumer reality. Consumers in different automobile markets seem to have dif-
ferent tastes and preferences, and these require different types of vehicles. North 
American consumers show a strong demand for pickup trucks. This is particularly 
true in the South and West where many families have a pickup truck as a second or 
third car. But in European countries, pickup trucks are seen purely as utility vehicles 
and are purchased primarily by fi rms rather than individuals. As a consequence, the 
product mix and marketing message needs to be tailored to take into account the 
different nature of demand in North America and Europe.
Differences in Infrastructure and Traditional Practices Pressures for local re-
sponsiveness arise from differences in infrastructure or traditional practices among 
countries, creating a need to customize products accordingly. Fulfi lling this need 
may require the delegation of manufacturing and production functions to foreign 

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
155
subsidiaries. For example, in North America, consumer electrical systems are based 
on 110 volts, whereas in some European countries, 240- volt systems are standard. 
Thus, domestic electrical appliances have to be customized to take this difference in 
infrastructure into account. Traditional practices also often vary across nations. For 
example, in Britain, people drive on the left- hand side of the road, creating a demand 
for right- hand- drive cars, whereas in France (and the rest of Europe), people drive on 
the right- hand side of the road and therefore want left- hand- drive cars. Obviously, 
automobiles have to be customized to take this difference in traditional practices 
into account.
Although many of the country differences in infrastructure are rooted in history, 
some are quite recent. For example, in the wireless telecommunications industry, 
different technical standards are found in different parts of the world. A technical 
standard known as GSM is common in Europe, and an alternative standard, CDMA, 
is more common in the United States and parts of Asia. The signifi cance of these 
different standards is that equipment designed for GSM will not work on a CDMA 
network, and vice versa. Thus, companies such as Nokia, Motorola, and Ericsson, 
which manufacture wireless handsets and infrastructure such as switches, need to 
customize their product offering according to the technical standard prevailing in a 
given country.
Differences in Distribution Channels A company’s marketing strategies may 
have to be responsive to differences in distribution channels among countries, which 
may necessitate the delegation of marketing functions to national subsidiaries. In the 
pharmaceutical industry, for example, the British and Japanese distribution system is 
radically different from the U.S. system. British and Japanese doctors will not accept 
or respond favorably to a U.S.- style high- pressure sales force. Thus, pharmaceutical 
companies have to adopt different marketing practices in Britain and Japan com-
pared with the United States— soft sell versus hard sell.
Differences in Host Government Demands Economic and political demands 
imposed by host country governments may require local responsiveness. For ex-
ample, pharmaceutical companies are subject to local clinical testing, registration 
procedures, and pricing restrictions, all of which make it necessary that the manufac-
turing and marketing of a drug should meet local requirements. Moreover, because 
governments and government agencies control a signifi cant proportion of the health 
care budget in most countries, they are in a powerful position to demand a high level 
of local responsiveness.
More generally, threats of protectionism, economic nationalism, and local con-
tent rules (which require that a certain percentage of a product should be manu-
factured locally) dictate that international businesses manufacture locally. As an 
example, consider Bombardier, the Canadian- based manufacturer of railcars, air-
craft, jet boats, and snowmobiles. Bombardier has twelve railcar factories across 
Europe. Critics of the company argue that the resulting duplication of manufactur-
ing facilities leads to high costs and helps explain why Bombardier makes lower 
profi t margins on its railcar operations than on its other business lines. In reply, 
managers at Bombardier argue that in Europe, informal rules with regard to local 
content favor people who use local workers. To sell railcars in Germany, they claim, 
you must manufacture in Germany. The same goes for Belgium, Austria, and France. 
To try and address its cost structure in Europe, Bombardier has centralized its engi-
neering and purchasing functions, but it has no plans to centralize manufacturing.15

Global 
Standardization 
Strategy
A strategy that 
focuses on increasing 
proﬁ tability by reaping 
the cost reductions 
derived from 
economies of scale and 
location economies.
156  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Choosing a Global Strategy
Pressures for local responsiveness imply that it may not be possible for a fi rm to real-
ize the full benefi ts from economies of scale and location economies. It may not be 
possible to serve the global marketplace from a single low- cost location, producing a 
globally standardized product, and marketing it worldwide to achieve economies of 
scale. In practice, the need to customize the product offering to local conditions may 
work against the implementation of such a strategy. For example, automobile fi rms 
have found that Japanese, American, and European consumers demand different 
kinds of cars, and this necessitates producing products that are customized for local 
markets. In response, fi rms like Honda, Ford, and Toyota are pursuing a strategy of 
establishing top- to- bottom design and production facilities in each of these regions 
so that they can better serve local demands. Although such customization brings 
benefi ts, it also limits the ability of a fi rm to realize signifi cant scale economies and 
location economies.
In addition, pressures for local responsiveness imply that it may not be pos-
sible to leverage skills and products associated with a fi rm’s distinctive competencies 
wholesale from one nation to another. Concessions often have to be made to local 
conditions. Despite being depicted as “poster boy” for the proliferation of standard-
ized global products, even McDonald’s has found that it has to customize its product 
offerings (i.e., its menu) in order to account for national differences in tastes and 
preferences.
Given the need to balance the cost and differentiation (value) sides of a com-
pany’s business, how do differences in the strength of pressures for cost reductions 
versus those for local responsiveness affect the choice of a company’s strategy? 
Companies typical make a choice among four main strategic postures when compet-
ing internationally. These can be characterized as a global standardization strategy, 
a localization strategy, a transnational strategy, and an international strategy.16 The 
appropriateness of each strategy varies given the extent of pressures for cost reduc-
tions and local responsiveness. Figure 6.2 illustrates the conditions under which each 
of these strategies is most appropriate.
Global Standardization Strategy
Companies that pursue a global standardization strategy focus on increasing profi t-
ability by reaping the cost reductions that come from economies of scale and loca-
tion economies; that is, their strategy is to pursue a low- cost strategy on a global 
scale. The production, marketing, and R&D activities of companies pursuing a 
global strategy are concentrated in a few favorable locations. Companies pursuing a 
global standardization strategy try not to customize their product offering and mar-
keting strategy to local conditions because customization, which involves shorter 
production runs and the duplication of functions, can raise costs. Instead, they prefer 
to market a standardized product worldwide so that they can reap the maximum 
benefi ts from economies of scale. They also tend to use their cost advantage to sup-
port aggressive pricing in world markets.
This strategy makes most sense when there are strong pressures for cost reduc-
tions and demand for local responsiveness is minimal. Increasingly, these conditions 
prevail in many industrial goods industries, whose products often serve universal 
needs. In the semiconductor industry, for example, global standards have emerged, 

Localization Strategy
A strategy that 
focuses on increasing 
proﬁ tability by 
customizing the 
company’s goods 
or services so that 
they provide a good 
match to tastes and 
preferences in different 
national markets.
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
157
creating enormous demands for standardized global products. Accordingly, com-
panies such as Intel, Texas Instruments, and Motorola all pursue a global strategy. 
These conditions are not always found in many consumer goods markets, where 
demands for local responsiveness remain high. However, even some consumer goods 
companies are moving towards a global standardization strategy in an attempt to 
drive down their costs. Procter & Gamble, which is featured in the next Strategy in 
Action feature, is one example of such a company.
Localization Strategy
A localization strategy focuses on increasing profi tability by customizing the compa-
ny’s goods or services so that they provide a good match to tastes and preferences in 
different national markets. Localization is most appropriate when there are substan-
tial differences across nations with regard to consumer tastes and preferences, and 
where cost pressures are not too intense. By customizing the product offering to local 
demands, the company increases the value of that product in the local market. On the 
downside, because it involves some duplication of functions and smaller production 
runs, customization limits the ability of the company to capture the cost reductions 
associated with mass producing a standardized product for global consumption. The 
strategy may make sense, however, if the added value associated with local customiza-
tion supports higher pricing, which enables the company to recoup its higher costs, or 
if it leads to substantially greater local demand, enabling the company to reduce costs 
through the attainment of some scale economies in the local market.
High
Low
Low
High
Pressures for Local Responsiveness
Pressures for Cost Reductions
Global
standardization
strategy
Transnational
strategy
International
strategy
Localization
strategy
Figure 6.2 Four Basic Strategies

158  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
MTV is a good example of a company that has had to pursue a localization 
strategy. MTV has varied its programming to match the demands of viewers in dif-
ferent nations. If MTV had not done this, it would have lost market share to local 
competitors, its advertising revenues would have fallen and its profi tability would 
have declined. Thus, even though it raised costs, localization became a strategic im-
perative at MTV.
At the same time, it is important to realize that companies like MTV still have 
to keep a close eye on costs. Companies pursuing a localization strategy still need 
Founded in 1837, Cincinnati- based Procter & Gamble 
has long been one of the world’s most international of 
companies. Today P&G is a global colossus in the con-
sumer products business with annual sales in excess of 
$50 billion, some 54% of which are generated outside 
the United States. P&G sells more than 300  brands— 
including Ivory soap, Tide, Pampers, Iams pet food, Crisco, 
and Folgers— to consumers in 160 countries. Historically, 
the strategy at P&G was well established. The company 
developed new products in Cincinnati and then relied on 
semiautonomous foreign subsidiaries to manufacture, 
market, and distribute those products in different nations. 
In many cases, foreign subsidiaries had their own pro-
duction facilities and tailored the packaging, brand name, 
and marketing message to local tastes and preferences. 
For years this strategy delivered a steady stream of new 
products and reliable growth in sales and proﬁ ts. By the 
1990s, however, proﬁ t growth at P&G was slowing.
The essence of the problem was simple; P&G’s costs 
were too high because of extensive duplication of manu-
facturing, marketing, and administrative facilities in differ-
ent national subsidiaries. The duplication of assets made 
sense in the world of the 1960s, when national markets 
were segmented from each other by barriers to cross- 
border trade. Products produced in Great Britain, for ex-
ample, could not be sold economically in Germany due to 
high tariff duties levied on imports into Germany. By the 
1980s, however, barriers to cross- border trade were fall-
ing rapidly worldwide, and fragmented national markets 
were merging into larger regional or global markets. Also, 
the retailers through which P&G distributed its products 
were growing larger and more global, such as Walmart, 
Tesco from the United Kingdom, and Carrefour from 
France. These emerging global retailers were demanding 
price discounts from P&G.
In the 1990s, P&G embarked on a major reorganiza-
tion in an attempt to control its cost structure and rec-
ognize the new reality of emerging global markets. The 
company shut down 30 manufacturing plants around 
the globe, laid off 13,000 employees, and concen-
trated production in fewer plants that could better real-
ize economies of scale and serve regional markets. It 
was not enough. Proﬁ t growth remained sluggish, so in 
1999, P&G launched a second reorganization. The goal 
was to transform P&G into a truly global company. The 
company tore up its old organization, which was based 
on countries and regions, and replaced it with one 
based on seven self- contained global business units, 
ranging from baby care to food products. Each business 
unit was given complete responsibility for generating 
proﬁ ts from its products, and for manufacturing, mar-
keting, and product development. Each business unit 
was told to rationalize production, concentrating it in 
fewer larger facilities; to try to build global brands wher-
ever possible, thereby eliminating marketing difference 
between countries; and to accelerate the development 
and launch of new products. P&G announced that as 
a result of this initiative, it would close another 10 fac-
tories and lay off 15,000 employees, mostly in Europe 
where there was still extensive duplication of assets. 
The annual cost savings were estimated to be about 
$800  million. P&G planned to use the savings to cut 
prices and increase marketing spending in an effort to 
gain market share, and thus further lower costs through 
the attainment of economies of scale. This time the 
strategy seemed to be working. Between 2003 and 
2007, P&G reported strong growth in both sales and 
proﬁ ts. Signiﬁ cantly, P&G’s global competitors, such as 
Unilever, Kimberly- Clark, and Colgate- Palmolive, were 
struggling in 2003 to 2007.17
6.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
The Evolution of Strategy at Procter & Gamble

Transnational 
Strategy
A strategy in 
which ﬁ rms try to 
simultaneously achieve 
low costs, differentiate 
the product offering 
across geographic 
markets, and foster a 
ﬂ ow of skills among 
different subsidiaries in 
the company’s global 
network of operations.
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
159
to be effi cient and whenever possible, to capture some scale economies from their 
global reach. As noted earlier, many automobile companies have found that they 
have to customize some of their product offerings to local market demands— for 
example, producing large pickup trucks for US consumers and small fuel effi cient 
cars for Europeans and Japanese. At the same time, these companies try to get some 
scale economies from their global volume by using common vehicle platforms and 
components across many different models, and manufacturing those platforms and 
components at effi ciently scaled factories that are optimally located. By designing 
their products in this way, these companies have been able to localize their product 
offering, yet simultaneously capture some scale economies.
Transnational Strategy
We have argued that a global standardization strategy makes most sense when cost 
pressures are intense, and demands for local responsiveness limited. Conversely, a 
localization strategy makes most sense when demands for local responsiveness are 
high, but cost pressures are moderate or low. What happens, however, when the 
company simultaneously faces both strong cost pressures, and strong pressures for 
local responsiveness? How can managers balance out the competing and inconsis-
tent demands such divergent pressures place on the company? According to some 
researchers, the answer is by pursuing what has been called a transnational strategy.
According to some, today’s global environment, competitive conditions are so 
intense that to survive, companies must do all they can to respond to pressures for 
cost reductions and local responsiveness. They must try to realize location econo-
mies and economies of scale from global volume, transfer distinctive competencies 
and skills within the company, and simultaneously pay attention to pressures for 
local responsiveness.18 Moreover, in the modern multinational enterprise, distinctive 
competencies and skills do not reside just in the home country but can develop in 
any of the company’s worldwide operations. Thus, the fl ow of skills and product of-
ferings should not be all one way, from home company to foreign subsidiary. Rather, 
the fl ow should also be from foreign subsidiary to home country and from foreign 
subsidiary to foreign subsidiary. Transnational companies, in other words, must also 
focus on leveraging subsidiary skills.
In essence, companies that pursue a transnational strategy are trying to simulta-
neously achieve low- costs, differentiate the product offering across geographic mar-
kets, and foster a fl ow of skills between different subsidiaries in the company’s global 
network of operations. As attractive as this may sound, the strategy is not an easy 
one to pursue since it places confl icting demands on the company. Differentiating the 
product to respond to local demands in different geographic markets raises costs, 
which runs counter to the goal of reducing costs. Companies like Ford and ABB (one 
of the world’s largest engineering conglomerates) have tried to embrace a transna-
tional strategy, and found it diffi cult to implement in practice.
International Strategy
Sometimes it is possible to identify multinational companies that fi nd themselves in 
the fortunate position of being confronted with low cost pressures and low pressures 
for local responsiveness. Typically these are enterprises that are selling a product that 
serves universal needs, but who do not face signifi cant competitors, and thus are not 

International Strategy
A strategy in which 
ﬁ rms try to centralize 
product development 
functions such as R&D 
at home but establish 
manufacturing and 
marketing functions 
in each major country 
or geographic region 
in which they do 
business.
160  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
confronted with pressures to reduce their cost structure. Xerox found itself in this 
position in the 1960s after its invention of the photocopier. The technology underly-
ing the photocopier was protected by strong patents, so for several years Xerox did 
not face competitors— it had a monopoly. The product was highly valued in most 
developed nations, and so Xerox was able to sell the same basic product the world 
over, charge a relatively high price for that product, and because it did not face direct 
competitors, the company did not have to deal with strong pressures to minimize its 
costs.
Historically, companies like Xerox have followed a similar developmental pattern 
as they build their international operations. Companies pursuing an international 
strategy tend to centralize product development functions such as R&D at home. 
However, they also tend to establish manufacturing and marketing functions in each 
major country or geographic region in which they do business. Although they may 
undertake some local customization of product offering and marketing strategy, this 
tends to be rather limited in scope. Ultimately, in most international companies, the 
head offi ce retains tight control over marketing and product strategy.
Other companies that have pursues this strategy include Procter & Gamble, 
which historically always developed innovative new products in Cincinnati, and 
then transferred them wholesale to local markets (see the Strategy in Action feature). 
Another company that has followed a similar strategy is Microsoft. The bulk of 
Microsoft’s product development work takes place in Redmond, Washington, where 
the company is headquartered. Although some localization work is undertaken else-
where, this is limited to producing foreign language versions of popular Microsoft 
programs such as Offi ce.
Changes in Strategy Over Time
The Achilles heal of the international strategy is that over time, competitors inevita-
bly emerge, and if managers do not take proactive steps to reduce their cost struc-
ture, their company may be rapidly outfl anked by effi cient global competitors. This 
is exactly what happened to Xerox. Japanese companies such as Canon ultimately 
invented their way around Xerox’s patents, produced their own photocopies in very 
effi cient manufacturing plants, priced them below Xerox’s products, and rapidly 
took global market share from Xerox. Xerox’s demise was not due to the emergence 
of competitors, for ultimately that was bound to occur, but due to its failure to 
proactively reduce its cost structure in advance of the emergence of effi cient global 
competitors. The message in this story is that an international strategy may not be 
viable in the long term, and to survive companies that are able to pursue it need to 
shift towards a global standardization strategy, or perhaps a transnational strategy, 
in advance of competitors (see fi gure 6.3).
The same can be said about a localization strategy. Localization may give a com-
pany a competitive edge, but if it is simultaneously facing aggressive competitors, 
the company will also have to reduce its cost structure, and the only way to do that 
may be to adopt more of a transnational strategy. Thus, as competition intensifi es, 
international and localization strategies tend to become less viable, and managers 
need to orientate their companies towards either a global standardization strategy, 
or a transnational strategy. Procter & Gamble, for example, has moved from a local-
ization strategy to more of a transnational strategy in recent years (see the Strategy 
in Action feature).

High
Low
Low
High
Pressures for
Local Responsiveness
Pressures for Cost Reductions
Global
standardization
strategy
Transnational
strategy
International
strategy
Localization
strategy
As competitors emerge,
these strategies
become less viable.
Figure 6.3 Changes Over Time
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
161
Choices of Entry Mode
Another key strategic issue confronting managers in a multinational enterprise is 
deciding upon the best strategy for entering a market. There are fi ve main choices 
of entry mode: exporting, licensing, franchising, entering into a joint venture with a 
host country company, and setting up a wholly owned subsidiary in the host country. 
Each mode has its advantages and disadvantages, and managers must weigh these 
carefully when deciding which mode to use.19
Exporting
Most manufacturing companies begin their global expansion as exporters and only 
later switch to one of the other modes for serving a foreign market. Exporting has 
two distinct advantages: it avoids the costs of establishing manufacturing operations 
in the host country, which are often substantial, and it may be consistent with scale 
economies and location economies. By manufacturing the product in a centralized 
location and then exporting it to other national markets, the company may be able 
to realize substantial scale economies from its global sales volume. That is how Sony 
came to dominate the global television market, how Matsushita came to dominate 

International 
Licensing
An arrangement 
whereby a foreign 
licensee buys the 
rights to produce a 
company’s product in 
the licensee’s country 
for a negotiated fee.
162  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
the VCR market, and how many Japanese auto companies originally made inroads 
into the U.S. auto market.
There are also a number of drawbacks to exporting. First, exporting from the 
company’s home base may not be appropriate if there are lower- cost locations for 
manufacturing the product abroad (that is, if the company can realize location econ-
omies by moving production elsewhere). Thus, particularly in the case of a company 
pursuing a global standardization or transnational strategy, it may pay to manufac-
ture in a location where conditions are most favorable from a value creation per-
spective and then export from that location to the rest of the globe. This is not 
so much an argument against exporting as an argument against exporting from 
the company’s home country. For example, many U.S. electronics companies have 
moved some of their manufacturing to Asia because low- cost but highly skilled labor 
is available there. They export from that location to the rest of the globe, including 
the United States.
Another drawback is that high transport costs can make exporting uneconomi-
cal, particularly in the case of bulk products. One way of getting around this problem 
is to manufacture bulk products on a regional basis, realizing some economies from 
large- scale production while limiting transport costs. Many multinational chemical 
companies manufacture their products on a regional basis, serving several countries 
in a region from one facility.
Tariff barriers, too, can make exporting uneconomical, and a government’s threat 
to impose tariff barriers can make the strategy very risky. Indeed, the implicit threat 
from the U.S. Congress to impose tariffs on Japanese cars imported into the United 
States led directly to the decision by many Japanese auto companies to set up manu-
facturing plants in the United States.
Finally, a common practice among companies that are just beginning to export 
also poses risks. A company may delegate marketing activities in each country in 
which it does business to a local agent, but there is no guarantee that the agent will 
act in the company’s best interest. Often foreign agents also carry the products of 
competing companies and thus have divided loyalties. Consequently, they may not 
do as good a job as the company would if it managed marketing itself. One way 
to solve this problem is to set up a wholly owned subsidiary in the host country to 
handle local marketing. In this way, the company can reap the cost advantages that 
arise from manufacturing the product in a single location and exercise tight control 
over marketing strategy in the host country.
Licensing
International licensing is an arrangement whereby a foreign licensee buys the rights 
to produce a company’s product in the licensee’s country for a negotiated fee (nor-
mally, royalty payments on the number of units sold). The licensee then puts up 
most of the capital necessary to get the overseas operation going.20 The advantage of 
licensing is that the company does not have to bear the development costs and risks 
associated with opening up a foreign market. Licensing therefore can be a very at-
tractive option for companies that lack the capital to develop operations overseas. It 
can also be an attractive option for companies that are unwilling to commit substan-
tial fi nancial resources to an unfamiliar or politically volatile foreign market where 
political risks are particularly high.
Licensing has three serious drawbacks, however. First, it does not give a com-
pany the tight control over manufacturing, marketing, and strategic functions in 

Franchising
A specialized form of 
licensing in which the 
franchiser sells the 
franchisee intangible 
property (normally a 
trademark) and insists 
that the franchisee 
agree to abide by strict 
rules about how it does 
business.
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
163
foreign countries that it needs to have in order to realize scale economies and loca-
tion economies— as companies pursuing both global standardization and transna-
tional strategies try to do. Typically, each licensee sets up its own manufacturing 
operations. Hence, the company stands little chance of realizing scale economies and 
location economies by manufacturing its product in a centralized location. When 
these economies are likely to be important, licensing may not be the best way of 
expanding overseas.
Second, competing in a global marketplace may make it necessary for a com-
pany to coordinate strategic moves across countries so that the profi ts earned in 
one country can be used to support competitive attacks in another. Licensing, by its 
very nature, severely limits a company’s ability to coordinate strategy in this way. 
A licensee is unlikely to let a multinational company take its profi ts (beyond those 
due in the form of royalty payments) and use them to support an entirely different 
licensee operating in another country.
A third problem with licensing is the risk associated with licensing technological 
know- how to foreign companies. For many multinational companies, technological 
know- how forms the basis of their competitive advantage, and they would want 
to maintain control over the use to which it is put. By licensing its technology, a 
company can quickly lose control over it. RCA, for instance, once licensed its color 
television technology to a number of Japanese companies. The Japanese companies 
quickly assimilated RCA’s technology and then used it to enter the U.S. market. Now 
the Japanese have a bigger share of the U.S. market than the RCA brand does.
Franchising
Franchising is similar to licensing, although franchising tends to involve longer- term 
commitments than licensing. Franchising is basically a specialized form of licensing 
in which the franchiser not only sells intangible property to the franchisee (normally 
a trademark), but also insists that the franchisee agree to abide by strict rules as to 
how it does business. The franchiser will also often assist the franchisee to run the 
business on an ongoing basis. As with licensing, the franchiser typically receives a 
royalty payment, which amounts to some percentage of the franchisee revenues.
Whereas licensing is a strategy pursued primarily by manufacturing companies, 
franchising, which resembles it in some respects, is a strategy employed chiefl y by 
service companies. McDonald’s provides a good example of a fi rm that has grown 
by using a franchising strategy. McDonald’s has set down strict rules as to how fran-
chisees should operate a restaurant. These rules extend to control over the menu, 
cooking methods, staffi ng policies, and restaurant design and location. McDonald’s 
also organizes the supply chain for its franchisees and provides management training 
and fi nancial assistance.21
The advantages of franchising are similar to those of licensing. Specifi cally, the 
franchiser does not have to bear the development costs and risks of opening up a 
foreign market on its own, for the franchisee typically assumes those costs and risks. 
Thus, using a franchising strategy, a service company can build up a global presence 
quickly and at a low cost.
The disadvantages are less pronounced than in the case of licensing. Because 
franchising is a strategy used by service companies, a franchiser does not have to 
consider the need to coordinate manufacturing in order to achieve scale economies 
and location economies. Nevertheless, franchising may inhibit a company’s ability to 
achieve global strategic coordination.

Joint Venture
A separate corporate 
entity in which two or 
more companies have 
an ownership stake.
164  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
A more signifi cant disadvantage of franchising is the lack of quality control. 
The foundation of franchising arrangements is the notion that the company’s 
brand name conveys a message to consumers about the quality of the company’s 
product. Thus, a traveler booking into a Four Seasons hotel in Hong Kong can 
reasonably expect the same quality of room, food, and service as he or she would 
receive in New York; the Four Seasons name is a guarantee of the consistency of 
product quality. However, foreign franchisees may not be as concerned about qual-
ity as they should be, and poor quality may mean not only lost sales in the foreign 
market but also a decline in the company’s worldwide reputation. For example, if 
the traveler has a bad experience at the Four Seasons in Hong Kong, he or she may 
never go to another Four Seasons hotel and steer her colleagues away as well. The 
geographic distance separating it from its foreign franchisees and the sheer number 
of individual franchisees— tens of thousands in the case of McDonald’s— can make 
it diffi cult for the franchiser to detect poor quality. Consequently, quality problems 
may persist.
To reduce this problem, a company can set up a subsidiary in each country or 
region in which it is expanding. The subsidiary, which might be wholly owned by 
the company or a joint venture with a foreign company, then assumes the rights and 
obligations to establish franchisees throughout that particular country or region. 
The combination of proximity and the limited number of independent franchisees 
that have to be monitored reduces the quality control problem. Besides, since the 
subsidiary is at least partly owned by the company, the company can place its own 
managers in the subsidiary to ensure the kind of quality monitoring it wants. This 
organizational arrangement has proved very popular in practice. It has been used 
by McDonald’s, KFC, and Hilton Hotels Corp. to expand their international opera-
tions, to name just three examples.
Joint Ventures
Establishing a joint venture with a foreign company has long been a favored mode 
for entering a new market. A joint venture is a separate corporate entity in which 
two or more companies have an ownership stake. One of the most famous long- 
term joint ventures is the Fuji- Xerox joint venture to produce photocopiers for the 
Japanese market. The most typical form of joint venture is a fi fty- fi fty venture, in 
which each party takes a 50% ownership stake and operating control is shared by a 
team of managers from both parent companies. Some companies have sought joint 
ventures in which they have a majority shareholding (for example, a 51% to 49% 
ownership split), which permits tighter control by the dominant partner.22
Joint ventures have a number of advantages. First, a company may feel that it can 
benefi t from a local partner’s knowledge of a host country’s competitive conditions, 
culture, language, political systems, and business systems. Second, when the develop-
ment costs and risks of opening up a foreign market are high, a company might gain 
by sharing these costs and risks with a local partner. Third, in some countries, politi-
cal considerations make joint ventures the only feasible entry mode.23 For example, 
historically many U.S. companies found it much easier to get permission to set up 
operations in Japan if they went in with a Japanese partner than if they tried to enter 
on their own. This is why Xerox originally teamed up with Fuji to sell photocopiers 
in Japan.
Despite these advantages, joint ventures can be diffi cult to establish and run be-
cause of two main drawbacks. First, as in the case of licensing, a company that enters 

Wholly Owned 
Subsidiary
A subsidiary where 
the parent company 
owns 100% of the 
subsidiary’s stock.
 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
165
into a joint venture risks losing control over its technology to its venture partner. To 
minimize this risk, it can seek a majority ownership stake in the joint venture, for as 
the dominant partner it would be able to exercise greater control over its technology. 
The trouble with this strategy is that it may be diffi cult to fi nd a foreign partner will-
ing to accept a minority ownership position.
The second disadvantage is that a joint venture does not give a company the tight 
control over its subsidiaries that it might need in order to realize scale economies or 
location economies— as both global standardization and transnational companies 
try to do— or to engage in coordinated global attacks against its global rivals.
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
A wholly owned subsidiary is one in which the parent company owns 100% of the 
subsidiary’s stock. To establish a wholly owned subsidiary in a foreign market, a 
company can either set up a completely new operation in that country or acquire 
an established host country company and use it to promote its products in the host 
market.
Setting up a wholly owned subsidiary offers three advantages. First, when a com-
pany’s competitive advantage is based on its control of a technological competency, a 
wholly owned subsidiary will normally be the preferred entry mode, since it reduces 
the company’s risk of losing this control. Consequently, many high- tech companies 
prefer wholly owned subsidiaries to joint ventures or licensing arrangements. Wholly 
owned subsidiaries tend to be the favored entry mode in the semiconductor, com-
puter, electronics, and pharmaceutical industries.
Second, a wholly owned subsidiary gives a company the kind of tight control 
over operations in different countries that it needs if it is going to engage in global 
strategic coordination— taking profi ts from one country to support competitive at-
tacks in another.
Third, a wholly owned subsidiary may be the best choice if a company wants 
to realize location economies and the scale economies that fl ow from producing a 
standardized output from a single or limited number of manufacturing plants. When 
pressures on costs are intense, it may pay a company to confi gure its value chain in 
such a way that value added at each stage is maximized. Thus, a national subsidiary 
may specialize in manufacturing only part of the product line or certain components 
of the end product, exchanging parts and products with other subsidiaries in the 
company’s global system. Establishing such a global production system requires a 
high degree of control over the operations of national affi liates. Different national 
operations have to be prepared to accept centrally determined decisions as to how 
they should produce, how much they should produce, and how their output should 
be priced for transfer between operations. A wholly owned subsidiary would have to 
comply with these mandates, whereas licensees or joint venture partners would most 
likely shun such a subservient role.
On the other hand, establishing a wholly owned subsidiary is generally the most 
costly method of serving a foreign market. The parent company must bear all the 
costs and risks of setting up overseas operations— in contrast to joint ventures, 
where the costs and risks are shared, or licensing, where the licensee bears most of 
the costs and risks. But the risks of learning to do business in a new culture diminish 
if the company acquires an established host country enterprise. Acquisitions, though, 
raise a whole set of additional problems, such as trying to marry divergent corporate 
cultures, and these problems may more than offset the benefi ts.

166  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Choosing an Entry Strategy
The advantages and disadvantages of the various entry modes are summarized in 
Table 6.1. Inevitably, there are trade- offs in choosing one entry mode over another. 
For example, when considering entry into an unfamiliar country with a track record 
of nationalizing foreign- owned enterprises, a company might favor a joint venture 
with a local enterprise. Its rationale might be that the local partner will help it estab-
lish operations in an unfamiliar environment and speak out against nationalization 
should the possibility arise. But if the company’s distinctive competency is based on 
proprietary technology, entering into a joint venture might mean risking loss of con-
trol over that technology to the joint venture partner, which would make this strat-
egy unattractive. Despite such hazards, some generalizations can be offered about 
the optimal choice of entry mode.
Distinctive Competencies and Entry Mode When companies expand interna-
tionally to earn greater returns from their differentiated product offerings, entering 
markets where indigenous competitors lack comparable products, the companies are 
pursuing an international strategy. The optimal entry mode for such companies de-
pends to some degree on the nature of their distinctive competency. In particular, we 
Table 6.1 The Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Entry Modes
Entry Mode
Advantages
Disadvantages
Exporting
•  Ability to realize location and scale 
based economies
• High transport costs
• Trade barriers
• Problems with local marketing agents
Licensing
• Low development costs and risks
• Inability to realize location and scale based economies
• Inability to engage in global strategic coordination
• Lack of control over technology
Franchising
• Low development costs and risks
• Inability to engage in global strategic coordination
• Lack of control over quality
Joint ventures
• Access to local partner’s knowledge
• Inability to engage in global strategic coordination
• Shared development costs and risks
• Inability to realize location scale based economies
• Political dependency
• Lack of control over technology
Wholly owned 
subsidiaries
• Protection of technology
•  Ability to engage in global strategic 
coordination
•  Ability to realize location and scale 
based economies
• High costs and risks

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
167
need to distinguish between companies with a distinctive competency in technologi-
cal know- how and those with a distinctive competency in management know- how.
If a company’s competitive advantage— its distinctive competency— derives 
from its control of proprietary technological know- how, licensing and joint ven-
ture arrangements should be avoided if possible in order to minimize the risk of 
losing control of that technology. Thus, if a high- tech company is considering set-
ting up operations in a foreign country in order to profi t from a distinctive com-
petency in technological know- how, it should probably do so through a wholly 
owned subsidiary.
However, this rule should not be viewed as a hard and fast one. For instance, a li-
censing or joint venture arrangement might be structured in such a way as to reduce 
the risks that a company’s technological know- how will be expropriated by licensees 
or joint venture partners. We consider this kind of arrangement in more detail later 
in the chapter when we discuss the issue of structuring strategic alliances. To take an-
other exception to the rule, a company may perceive its technological advantage as 
being only transitory and expect rapid imitation of its core technology by competi-
tors. In this situation, the company might want to license its technology as quickly 
as possible to foreign companies in order to gain global acceptance of its technol-
ogy before imitation occurs.24 Such a strategy has some advantages. By licensing its 
technology to competitors, the company may deter them from developing their own, 
possibly superior, technology. It also may be able to establish its technology as the 
dominant design in the industry (as Matsushita did with its VHS format for VCRs), 
ensuring a steady stream of royalty payments. Such situations apart, however, the 
attractions of licensing are probably outweighed by the risks of losing control of 
technology, and therefore licensing should be avoided.
The competitive advantage of many service companies, such as McDonald’s or 
Hilton Hotels, is based on management know- how. For such companies, the risk of 
losing control of their management skills to franchisees or joint venture partners is 
not that great. The reason is that the valuable asset of such companies is their brand 
name, and brand names are generally well protected by international laws pertaining 
to trademarks. Given this fact, many of the issues that arise in the case of technologi-
cal know- how do not arise in the case of management know- how. As a result, many 
service companies favor a combination of franchising and subsidiaries to control 
franchisees within a particular country or region. The subsidiary may be wholly 
owned or a joint venture. In most cases, however, service companies have found that 
entering into a joint venture with a local partner in order to set up a controlling sub-
sidiary in a country or region works best because a joint venture is often politically 
more acceptable and brings a degree of local knowledge to the subsidiary.
Pressures for Cost Reduction and Entry Mode The greater the pressures for 
cost reductions are, the more likely it is that a company will want to pursue some 
combination of exporting and wholly owned subsidiaries. By manufacturing in the 
locations where factor conditions are optimal and then exporting to the rest of the 
world, a company may be able to realize substantial location economies and sub-
stantial scale economies. The company might then want to export the fi nished prod-
uct to marketing subsidiaries based in various countries. Typically, these subsidiaries 
would be wholly owned and have the responsibility for overseeing distribution in 
a particular country. Setting up wholly owned marketing subsidiaries is preferable 
to a joint venture arrangement or using a foreign marketing agent because it gives 
the company the tight control over marketing that might be required to coordinate 

168  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
a globally dispersed value chain. In addition, tight control over a local operation en-
ables the company to use the profi ts generated in one market to improve its competi-
tive position in another market. Hence companies pursuing global or transnational 
strategies prefer to establish wholly owned subsidiaries.
1. Plot the position of the following companies on 
Figure 6.3: Procter & Gamble, IBM, Coca- Cola, 
Dow Chemicals, Pfi zer, and McDonald’s. In each 
case, justify your answer.
2. Are the following global industries or are they 
characterized by local responsiveness: bulk 
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, branded food prod-
ucts, moviemaking, television manufacture, per-
sonal computers, airline travel, and cell phones?
3. Discuss how the need for control over foreign 
operations varies with the strategy and distinc-
tive competencies of a company. What are the 
implications of this relationship for the choice of 
entry mode?
4. Licensing proprietary technology to foreign com-
petitors is the best way to give up a company’s 
competitive advantage. Discuss.
1. For some companies, international expansion 
represents a way of earning greater returns by 
transferring the skills and product offerings de-
rived from their distinctive competencies to mar-
kets where indigenous competitors lack those 
skills.
2. Because of national differences, it pays a com-
pany to base each value creation activity it per-
forms at the location where factor conditions are 
most conducive to the performance of that activ-
ity. This strategy is known as focusing on the at-
tainment of location economies.
3. By building sales volume more rapidly, inter-
national expansion can assist a company in the 
process of gain a cost advantage through the re-
alization of scale economies and learning effects.
4. The best strategy for a company to pursue may 
depend on the kind of pressures it must cope 
with: pressures for cost reductions or for local 
responsiveness. Pressures for cost reductions are 
greatest in industries producing commodity- type 
products, where price is the main competitive 
weapon. Pressures for local responsiveness arise 
from differences in consumer tastes and prefer-
ences, as well as from national infrastructure and 
traditional practices, distribution channels, and 
host government demands.
5. Companies pursuing an international strategy 
transfer the skills and products derived from dis-
tinctive competencies to foreign markets, while 
undertaking some limited local customization.
6. Companies pursuing a localization strategy cus-
tomize their product offering, marketing strategy, 
and business strategy to national conditions.
7. Companies pursuing a global standardization 
strategy focus on reaping the cost reductions 
that come from scale economies and location 
economies.
8. Many industries are now so competitive that 
companies must adopt a transnational strategy. 
This involves a simultaneous focus on reducing 
costs, transferring skills and products, and lo-
cal responsiveness. Implementing such a strategy 
may not be easy.
9. There are fi ve different ways of entering a foreign 
market: exporting, licensing, franchising, enter-
ing into a joint venture, and setting up a wholly 
owned subsidiary. The optimal choice among en-
try modes depends on the company’s strategy.
Summary of Chapter
Discussion Questions

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
169
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: 
Developing A Global Strategy
Break into groups of three to fi ve people, and ap-
point one group member as a spokesperson who 
will communicate your fi ndings to the class. You 
work for a company in the soft drink industry that 
has developed a line of carbonated fruit- based 
drinks. You have already established a signifi cant 
presence in your home market, and now you are 
planning the global strategy development of the 
company in the soft drink industry. You need to 
decide the following:
1. What overall strategy to pursue: a global 
strategy, multidomestic strategy, international 
strategy, or transnational strategy
2. Which markets to enter fi rst
3. What entry strategy to pursue (e.g., franchis-
ing, joint venture, wholly owned subsidiary)
What information do you need in order 
to make this kind of decision? On the basis 
of what you do know, what strategy would you 
recommend?
Visiting IBM
IBM stands for International Business Machines. 
Using the signifi cant resources located at IBM’s 
corporate Web site (www.ibm.com), including an-
nual reports and company history, explain what 
the “International” means in IBM. Specifi cally, 
how many countries is IBM active in? How does 
IBM create value by expanding into foreign mar-
kets? What entry mode does IBM adopt in most 
markets? Can you fi nd any exceptions to this? 
How would you characterize IBM’s strategy for 
competing in the global marketplace? Is IBM pur-
suing a transnational, global, international, or 
multidomestic strategy?
General Task
Search the Web for a company site where there is a 
good description of that company’s international 
operations. On the basis of this information, try to 
establish how the company enters foreign markets 
and what overall strategy it is pursuing (global, 
international, multidomestic, transnational).
Exploring The Web
IKEA may be the world’s most successful global re-
tailer. Established by Ingvar Kamprad in Sweden in 
1943 when he was just 17 years old, the home fur-
nishing superstore has grown into a global cult brand 
with 230 stores in 33 countries that host 410 million 
shoppers a year and generates sales of €15 billion 
($18 billion). Kamprad himself, who still owns the 
private company, is rumored to be the world’s rich-
est man.
IKEA’s target market is the global middle class 
who are looking for low priced but attractively de-
signed furniture and household items. The company 
applies the same basic formula worldwide— open 
large warehouse stores festooned in the blue and 
yellow colors of the Swedish fl ag that offer 8,000 
to 10,000 items from kitchen cabinets to candle-
sticks. Use wacky promotions to drive traffi c into 
the stores. Confi gure the interior of the stores so that 
IKEA— The Global Retailer

170  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
customers have to pass through each department to 
get to the checkout. Add restaurants and child care 
facilities so that shoppers stay as long as possible. 
Price the items as low as possible. Make sure that 
product design refl ects the simple clean Swedish lines 
that have become IKEA’s trademark. And then watch 
the results— customers who enter the store planning 
to buy a $40 coffee table and end up spending $500 
on everything from storage units to kitchen ware.
IKEA aims to reduce the price of its offerings by 
2%–3% per year, which requires relentless atten-
tion to cost cutting. With a network of 1,300 sup-
pliers in 53  countries, IKEA devotes considerable 
attention to fi nding the right manufacturer for each 
item. Consider the company’s best selling Klippan 
love seat. Designed in 1980, the Klippan with its 
clean lines, bright colors, simple legs and compact 
size has sold some 1.5 million units since its intro-
duction. Originally manufactured in Sweden, IKEA 
soon transferred production to lower cost suppliers 
in Poland. As demand for the Klippan grew, IKEA 
then decided that it made more sense to work with 
suppliers in each of the company’s big markets to 
avoid the costs associated with shipping the product 
all over the world. Today there are fi ve suppliers of 
the frames in Europe, plus three in the United States 
and two in China. To reduce the cost of the cotton 
slipcovers, production has been concentrated in four 
core suppliers in China and Europe. The resulting 
effi ciencies from these global sourcing decisions en-
abled IKEA to reduce the price of the Klippan by 
some 40% between 1999 and 2006.
Despite its standard formula, however, IKEA has 
found that global success requires that it adapt its 
offerings to the tastes and preferences of consum-
ers in different nations. IKEA fi rst discovered this in 
the early 1990s when it entered the United States. 
The company soon found that its European style of-
ferings didn’t always resonate with American con-
sumers. Beds were measured in centimeters, not the 
king, queen and twin sizes that Americans are famil-
iar with. Sofas weren’t big enough, wardrobe draws 
were not deep enough, glasses were too small, cur-
tains too short, and kitchens didn’t fi t U.S. size appli-
ances. Since then IKEA has redesigned its offerings 
in the U.S. to appeal to American consumers, and 
has been rewarded with stronger stores sales. The 
same process is now unfolding in China where the 
company plans to have 10 stores by 2010. The store 
layout in China refl ects the layout of many Chinese 
apartments, and since many Chinese apartments 
have balconies, IKEA’s Chinese stores include a bal-
cony section. IKEA has had to adapt its locations to 
China, where car ownership is still not widespread. 
In the West, IKEA stores are generally located in sub-
urban areas and have lots of parking space, but in 
China they are located near public transportation, 
and IKEA offers delivery services so that Chinese 
customers can get their purchases home.25
Case Discussion Questions
1. How is IKEA profi ting from global expansion? 
What is the essence of its strategy for creating 
value by expanding internationally?
2. How would you characterize IKEA’s original 
strategic posture in foreign markets? What were 
the strengths of this posture? What were its 
weaknesses?
3. How has the strategic posture of IKEA changed 
as a result of its experiences in the United States? 
Why did it change its strategy? How would you 
characterize the strategy of IKEA today?
 1. World Trade Organization, International Trade Trends 
and Statistics, 2006 (Geneva: WTO, 2007).
 2. World Trade Organization, International Trade Statistics, 
2008 (Geneva: WTO, 2008), and United Nations, World 
Investment Report, 2008.
 3. P.  Dicken, Global Shift (New York: Guilford Press, 
1992).
 4. D. Pritchard, “Are Federal Tax Laws and State Subsidies 
for Boeing 7E7 Selling America Short?” Aviation Week, 
April 12, 2004, 74–75.
 5. I.  Metthee, “Playing a Large Part,” Seattle Post 
Intelligence, April 9, 1994, 13.
 6. T.  Levitt, “The Globalization of Markets,” Harvard 
Business Review (May–June 1983): 92–102.
Notes

 
Chapter 6 Strategy in the Global Environment 
171
 7. M. E.  Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations 
(New York: Free Press, 1990).
 8. A.  Lillo, “Walmart Says Global Going Good,” Home 
Textiles Today, Septmeber 15, 2003, 12–13. A. de Rocha 
and L. A.  Dib, “The Entry of Walmart into Brazil,” 
International Journal of Retail and Distribution 
Management, 
30 
(2002): 
61–73; 
Anonymous, 
“Walmart: Mexico’s Biggest Retailer,” Chain Store Age, 
June 2001, 52–54; M.  Flagg, “In Asia, Going to the 
Grocery Increasingly Means Heading for a European 
Retail Chain,” Wall Street Journal, April 24, 2001, 
A21; “A Long Way from Bentonville,” The Economist, 
September 20, 2006, 38–39; and “How Walmart Should 
Right Itself,” The Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2007, 
C1, C5. http://www.walmart.com
 9. D.  Barboza, “An Unknown Giant Flexes its Muscles,” 
New York Times, December 4, 2004, B1, B3.
 10. See J. Birkinshaw and N. Hood, “Multinational Subsidiary 
Evolution: Capability and Charter Change in Foreign 
Owned Subsidiary Companies;” Academy of Management 
Review 23 (October 1998): 773–95; A. K.  Gupta and 
V. J. Govindarajan, “Knowledge Flows within Multinational 
Corporations,” Strategic Management Journal 21 (2000): 
473–96; V. J. Govindarajan and A. K. Gupta, The Quest 
for Global Dominance (San Francisco, Calif: Jossey Bass, 
2001); T. S.  Frost, J. M.  Birkinshaw, and P. C.  Ensign, 
“Centers of Excellence in Multinational Corporations,” 
Strategic Management Journal 23 (2002), 997–1018; and 
U. Andersson, M. Forsgren, and U. Holm, “The Strategic 
Impact of External Networks,” Strategic Management 
Journal 23 (2002): 979–96.
 11. S.  Leung, “Armchairs, TVs and Espresso: Is It 
McDonald’s?” Wall Street Journal, August 30, 2002, 
A1, A6.
 12. C. K.  Prahalad and Yves L.  Doz, The Multinational 
Mission: Balancing Local Demands and Global Vision 
(New York: Free Press, 1987). Also see J. Birkinshaw, 
A. Morrison, and J. Hulland, “Structural and Competitive 
Determinants of a Global Integration Strategy,” Strategic 
Management Journal 16 (1995): 637–655.
 13. J.E. Garten, “Walmart gives globalization a bad name”, 
Business Week, March 8, 2004, 24.
 14. C. K.  Prahalad and Yves L.  Doz, The Multinational 
Mission: Balancing Local Demands and Global Vision 
(New York: Free Press, 1987). Prahalad and Doz actu-
ally talk about local responsiveness rather than local 
customization.
 15. C. J.  Chipello, “Local Presence Is Key to European 
Deals,” Wall Street Journal, June 30, 1998, A15.
 16. Bartlett and Ghoshal, Managing Across Borders.
 17. J. Neff, “P&G Outpacing Unilever in Five- Year Battle,” 
Advertising Age, November 3, 2003, 1–3; G.  Strauss, 
“Firm Restructuring into Truly Global Company,” USA 
Today, September 10, 1999, B2; Procter & Gamble 
10K Report, 2005; and M.  Kolbasuk McGee, “P&G 
Jump- Starts Corporate Change,” Information Week, 
November 1, 1999, 30–34.
 18. Ibid.
 19. This section draws on several studies, including: 
C. W. L. Hill, P. Hwang, and W. C. Kim, “An Eclectic 
Theory of the Choice of International Entry Mode,” 
Strategic Management Journal 11 (1990): 117–128; 
C. W. L. Hill and W. C. Kim, “Searching for a Dynamic 
Theory of the Multinational Company: A Transaction 
Cost Model,” Strategic Management Journal 9 (Special 
Issue on Strategy Content, 1988): 93–104. E. Anderson 
and H.  Gatignon, “Modes of Foreign Entry: A 
Transaction Cost Analysis and Propositions,” Journal 
of International Business Studies 17 (1986): 1–26; 
F. R. Root, Entry Strategies for International Markets 
(Lexington, Mass.: D. C.  Heath, 1980). A.  Madhok, 
“Cost, Value and Foreign Market Entry: The Transaction 
and the Company,” Strategic Management Journal 18 
(1997): 39–61.
 20. F. J. Contractor, “The Role of Licensing in International 
Strategy,” Columbia Journal of World Business (Winter 
1982): 73–83.
 21. Andrew E. Serwer, “McDonald’s Conquers the World,” 
Fortune, October 17, 1994, 103–116.
 22. B.  Kogut, “Joint Ventures: Theoretical and Empirical 
Perspectives,” Strategic Management Journal 9 (1988): 
319–332.
 23. D. G.  Bradley, “Managing Against Expropriation,” 
Harvard Business Review (July–August 1977): 78–90.
 24. C. W. L. Hill, “Strategies for Exploiting Technological 
Innovations,” Organization Science 3 (1992): 428–441.
 25. K. Capell, A. Sains, C. Lindblad and A.T. Palmer, “IKEA”, 
Business Week, November 14, 2005, 96–101. K.  Capell 
et al, “What a sweetheart of a love seat”, Business Week, 
November 14, 2005, 101. P.M. Miller, “IKEA with Chinese 
Characterristics,” The Chinese Business Review, July/August 
2004, 36–69. C.  Daniels, “Create IKEA, make billions, 
take bus,” Fortune, May 3, 2004, 44.

After reading this chapter, you should be 
able to:
• Discuss the arguments for and against 
concentrating a company’s resources 
and competing in just one industry.
• Explain the conditions under which a 
company is likely to pursue vertical in-
tegration as a means to strengthen its 
position in its core industry.
• Appreciate the conditions under which a 
company can create more value through 
diversiﬁ cation and why there is a limit to 
successful diversiﬁ cation.
• Understand why restructuring a com-
pany is often necessary, and discuss the 
pros and cons of the strategies a com-
pany can adopt to exit businesses and 
industries.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Concentration on a Single Industry
Horizontal Integration
Beneﬁ ts and Costs of Horizontal 
Integration
Outsourcing Functional Activities
Vertical Integration
Arguments for Vertical Integration
Arguments Against Vertical 
Integration
Vertical Integration and Outsourcing
Entering New Industries 
Through Diversiﬁ cation
Creating Value Through Diversiﬁ cation
Related versus Unrelated 
Diversiﬁ cation
Restructuring and Downsizing
Why Restructure?
Exit Strategies
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Corporate- Level Strategy 
and Long- Run Profitability
7

Concentration 
on a Single Industry
The strategy a company 
adopts when it 
focuses its resources 
and capabilities on 
competing successfully 
within a particular 
product market.
 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
173
OVERVIEW
The principal concern of corporate- level strategy is to identify the industry or 
industries a company should participate in to maximize its long- run profi tability. A 
company has several options when choosing which industries to compete in. First, a 
company can concentrate on only one industry and focus its activities on develop-
ing business- level strategies to improve its competitive position in that industry (see 
Chapter 5). Second, a company may decide to enter new industries in adjacent stages 
of the industry value chain by pursuing a strategy of vertical integration, which means 
it either begins to make its own inputs and/or sell its own products. Third, a company 
can choose to enter new industries that may or may not be connected to its existing 
industry by pursuing a strategy of diversifi cation. Finally, a company may choose to 
exit businesses and industries to increase its long- run profi tability and to shrink the 
boundaries of the organization by restructuring and downsizing its activities.
In this chapter we explore these different alternatives and discuss the pros and 
cons of each as a method of increasing a company’s profi tability over time. The chap-
ter repeatedly stresses that if corporate- level strategy is to increase long- run profi t-
ability, it must enable a company, or its different business units, to perform one or 
more value creation functions at a lower cost and/or in a way that leads to increased 
differentiation (and thus a premium price). Thus successful corporate- level strategy 
works to build a company’s distinctive competencies and increase its competitive 
advantage over industry rivals. There is, therefore, a very important link between 
corporate- level strategy and creating competitive advantage at the business level.
Concentration on a Single Industry
For many companies the appropriate choice of corporate- level strategy entails 
concentration on a single industry, whereby a company focuses its resources and 
capabilities on competing successfully within the confi nes of a particular prod-
uct market. Examples of companies that currently pursue such a strategy include 
McDonald’s with its focus on the fast- food restaurant market, Starbucks with its 
focus on the premium coffee shop business, and Walmart with its focus on global 
discount retailing. These companies have chosen to stay in one industry because 
there are several advantages to concentrating on the needs of customers in just one 
product market (and the different segments within it).
A major advantage of concentrating on a single industry is that doing so enables 
a company to focus all its managerial, fi nancial, technological, and functional re-
sources and capabilities on developing strategies to strengthen its competitive posi-
tion in just one business. This strategy is important in fast- growing industries that 
make strong demands on a company’s resources and capabilities but also offer the 
prospect of substantial long- term profi ts if a company can sustain its competitive 
advantage. For example, it would make little sense for a company such as Starbucks 
to enter new industries such as supermarkets or specialty doughnuts when the cof-
fee shop industry is still in a period of rapid growth and when fi nding new ways to 
compete successfully would impose signifi cant demands on Starbucks’ managerial, 
marketing, and fi nancial resources and capabilities. In fact, companies that spread 
their resources too thin, in order to compete in several different product markets, 
run the risk of starving their fast- growing core business of the resources needed 

Horizontal Integration
Acquiring or merging 
with industry 
competitors to achieve 
the competitive 
advantages that come 
with large size.
Acquisition
A company’s use 
of capital such as 
stock, debt, or cash 
to purchase another 
company.
Merger
An agreement between 
two companies to pool 
their operations and 
create a new business 
entity.
174  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
to expand rapidly. The result is loss of competitive advantage in the core business 
and— often— failure.
Nor is it just rapidly growing companies that benefi t from focusing their re-
sources and capabilities on one business, market, or industry. Many mature com-
panies that expand over time into too many different businesses and markets fi nd 
out later that they have stretched their resources too far and that their performance 
declines as a result. For example, Coca- Cola once decided to expand into the movie 
business and acquired Columbia Pictures; it also acquired a large California wine-
maker. It soon found it lacked the competencies to compete successfully in these new 
industries and that it had not foreseen the strong competitive forces that existed in 
these industries, from movie companies such as Fox and winemakers such as Gallo. 
Coca- Cola concluded that entry into these new industries had reduced rather than 
created value and lowered its profi tability; it divested or sold off these new busi-
nesses at a signifi cant loss.
Concentrating on a single business allows a company to “stick to the knitting”— 
that is, to focus on doing what it knows best and avoid entering new businesses it 
knows little about and where it can create little value.1 This prevents companies 
from becoming involved in businesses that their managers do not understand and 
where poor, uninformed decision making can result in huge losses.
On the other hand, concentrating on just one market or industry can result in dis-
advantages emerging over time. As we discuss later in the chapter, a certain amount 
of vertical integration may be necessary to strengthen a company’s competitive ad-
vantage within its core industry. Moreover, companies that concentrate on just one 
industry may miss out on opportunities to create more value and increase their prof-
itability by using their resources and capabilities to make and sell products in other 
markets or industries.
Horizontal Integration
For many companies, as we have just noted, profi table growth and expansion often 
entail concentrating on competing successfully within a single industry. One tactic 
or tool that has been widely used at the corporate level to help managers position 
their companies to compete better in an industry is horizontal integration, which we 
discussed briefl y in Chapter 5. Horizontal integration is the process of acquiring or 
merging with industry competitors in an effort to achieve the competitive advantages 
that come with large size or scale. An acquisition occurs when one company uses its 
capital resources (such as stock, debt, or cash) to purchase another company, and 
a merger is an agreement between two companies to pool their resources in a com-
bined operation. For example, Rupert Murdock, CEO of News Corp, made scores 
of acquisitions in the newspaper industry so that all his newspapers could reduce 
costs by taking advantage of the news and stories written by News Corp journalists 
anywhere in the world.
In industry after industry there have been thousands of mergers and acquisitions 
over the past decades. In the aerospace industry, Boeing merged with McDonald 
Douglass to create the world’s largest aerospace company; in the pharmaceutical 
industry, Pfi zer acquired Warner- Lambert to become the largest pharmaceutical fi rm; 
in the computer hardware industry, Compaq acquired Digital Equipment and then 
was itself acquired by HP; and in the Internet industry, Yahoo!, Google, and AOL 
have taken over hundreds of small Internet companies to better position themselves 
in segments such as streaming video, music downloading, and digital photography.

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
175
The result of wave upon wave of global mergers and acquisitions has been to in-
crease the level of concentration in a wide range of industries. Twenty years ago, cable 
television was dominated by a patchwork of thousands of small, family- owned busi-
nesses, but by the 2000s, three companies controlled over two- thirds of the market. 
In 1990 the three main publishers of college textbooks accounted for 35% of the 
market; by 2008 they accounted for over 75%. In semiconductor chips, mergers and 
acquisitions between the industry leaders resulted in the four largest fi rms control-
ling 85% of the global market in 2007, up from 45% in 1997. This has occurred 
because horizontal integration can signifi cantly improve the competitive advantage 
and profi tability of companies whose managers choose to stay inside one industry 
and focus on managing its competitive forces. The way in which Walmart did this 
by expanding its presence in the supermarket industry is discussed in the Running 
Case below.
Beneﬁ ts and Costs of Horizontal Integration
Managers who pursue horizontal integration have decided that the best way to in-
crease their company’s profi tability is to invest its capital to purchase the resources 
and assets of industry competitors. Profi tability increases when horizontal integra-
tion results in four major benefi ts: It (1) lowers operating costs, (2) increases product 
differentiation, (3) reduces rivalry within an industry, and/or (4) increases a com-
pany’s bargaining power over suppliers and buyers.
Lower Operating Costs Horizontal integration lowers a company’s operating 
costs when it results in increasing economies of scale. Suppose there are fi ve major 
competitors, each of which owns a manufacturing plant in every region of the United 
States, but none of these plants is operating at full capacity (so costs are relatively 
high). If one competitor buys up another and shuts down that competitor’s plant, it 
can then operate its own plant at full capacity and so reduce manufacturing costs.
Achieving economies of scale is very important in industries that have high fi xed 
costs, because large- scale production allows a company to spread its fi xed costs over 
a large volume, which drives down average operating costs. In the telecommunica-
tions industry, for example, the fi xed costs of building an advanced Internet network 
are enormous, so to make such an investment pay off, a company needs a large vol-
ume of customers. Thus companies such as AT&T and Verizon acquired many large 
telecommunications companies in order to obtain their customers who would then 
be “switched” to their network. This drives up network utilization and drives down 
the cost of serving each customer on the network. Similarly, mergers and acquisitions 
in the pharmaceutical industry are often driven by the need to realize scale econo-
mies in sales and marketing. The fi xed costs of building a nationwide pharmaceutical 
sales force are very high, and pharmaceutical companies need to have a large number 
of drugs to sell if they are to use their sales force effectively. Thus, for example, Pfi zer 
acquired Warner- Lambert because its combined sales force would then have many 
more products to sell when they visited physicians— an advantage that increases 
their productivity. And, again, after Pfi zer acquired Wyeth Pharmaceuticals it created 
a prescription drug company of unprecedented scale; the combined company had 
almost $70 billion in sales in 2009.
A company can also lower its operating costs when horizontal integration elimi-
nates the need for two sets of corporate head offi ces, two separate sales forces, and 
so on, such that the costs of operating the combined company fall.

176  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
After its entry into the supermarket industry, Walmart 
soon recognized that its huge supercenters and dis-
count stores do not serve the needs of customers who 
want quick and convenient shopping experiences, for 
example, when they want to pick up food for evening 
meals. It also recognized that customers spend bil-
lions of dollars shopping in local stores such as neigh-
borhood supermarkets, drugstores, and convenience 
stores and that this was potentially a highly proﬁ table 
segment of the retail market. Thus, in the 2000s, 
Walmart decided to enter this segment by opening a 
new chain of Walmart “Neighborhood Markets.” Each 
of these supermarkets is approximately 40,000 square 
feet, about one- quarter the size of a Walmart super-
store, and stocks 20,000–30,000 items compared to 
more than 100,000 items available in superstores. 
Walmart’s strategy for the new chain stores was to po-
sition them to compete directly with local supermar-
kets, such as those run by Kroger and Safeway. They 
would be open 24 hours a day to maximize respon-
siveness to local customers, and they would also have 
high- proﬁ t- margin departments such as a pharmacy, 
drugs, health, and beauty products to draw off trade 
from drugstores such as CVS and Walgreen’s. As a re-
sult, customers could shop for food while they waited 
for their prescriptions to be ﬁ lled or their ﬁ lm to be 
developed.2
To test whether its cost- leadership model would 
work at this small scale of operations, Walmart opened 
stores slowly in good locations. Margins are small in 
the supermarket business, often between 1% and 
2%, which is lower than Walmart was accustomed 
to. To keep costs low, it located its new stores in ar-
eas where it had efﬁ cient warehouse food prepara-
tion and delivery systems. Its strategy was to prepare 
high- margin items like bakery goods and meat and 
deli products in central locations and then ship them 
to supermarkets in prepackaged containers. Each 
neighborhood market store was also tied in by satellite 
to Walmart’s retail link network so that food service 
managers would know what kind of food was selling 
and what was not. They could then customize the food 
each store sold to customer needs by changing the 
mix that was trucked fresh each day. Also, because the 
stores had no onsite butchers or bakers, costs were 
much lower.
As a result of these strategies the 60- plus United 
States stores opened by 2004 were able to undercut 
the prices charged by supermarkets such as Publix, 
Winn- Dixie, Kroger, and Albertsons by 10%. A typi-
cal neighborhood market generates approximately 
$20 million per year in sales, has a staff of 90, and ob-
tains a 2.3% proﬁ t margin, which is signiﬁ cantly higher 
than average in the supermarket industry. Encouraged 
by their success, Walmart continued to open more 
stores and by 2009, had 145 neighborhood markets 
in operation, most of which are the southern United 
States.
Walmart is continuing to experiment with new 
kinds of small supermarkets to increase its share of 
this market segment. Its “Marketside” store concept 
is an even smaller “corner- store” format with store 
size in the 30–25,000 square- feet range. It is also ex-
perimenting actively with a chain of stores geared to 
the needs of Hispanic consumers.3 One experimental 
“Hispanic Community” store in Texas is a large- format 
store at about 160,000 square feet, which in addition 
to its focus on Hispanic food and grocery also offers 
a large selection of non- food products tailored toward 
Hispanic shoppers. Walmart is also looking into small 
“bodega” supermarkets tailored toward this customer 
group. Clearly, many proﬁ table opportunities exist in 
this market segment and just, as at the global level, 
Walmart’s managers are developing strategies to 
take advantage of them— indeed, in 2010 Walmart an-
nounced it would open another 1,000 Neighborhood 
Markets in the next 5 years.4
Walmart’s Growing Chain of “Neighborhood Markets”
R U N N I N G  C A S E
Increased Product Differentiation Horizontal integration may also boost profi t-
ability when it increases product differentiation, for example, by allowing a com-
pany to combine the product lines of merged companies in order to offer customers 
a wider range of products that can be bundled together. Product bundling involves 

Product Bundling
The strategy of 
offering customers 
the opportunity to buy 
a complete range of 
products at a single, 
combined price.
 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
177
offering customers the opportunity to buy a complete range of products they need at 
a single, combined price. This increases the value that customers see in a company’s 
product line, because (1) they often obtain a price discount by purchasing products as 
a set and (2) they get used to dealing with just one company. For this reason, a com-
pany may obtain a competitive advantage from increased product differentiation.
An early example of the value of product bundling is Microsoft Offi ce, which 
is a bundle of different software programs, including a word processor, spread-
sheet, and presentation program. At the beginning of the 1990s, Microsoft was 
Number two or three in each of these product categories, behind companies such 
as WordPerfect (which led in the word- processing category), Lotus (which had the 
best- selling spreadsheet), and Harvard Graphics (which had the best- selling presen-
tation software). When it offered all three programs in a single- price package, how-
ever, Microsoft presented consumers with a superior value proposition. Its product 
bundle quickly gained market share, ultimately accounting for more than 90% of all 
sales of word- processing, spreadsheet, and presentation software.
Reduced Industry Rivalry Horizontal integration can help to reduce industry 
rivalry in two ways. First, acquiring or merging with a competitor helps to eliminate 
excess capacity in an industry, which, as we saw in Chapter 5, often triggers price 
wars. By taking excess capacity out of an industry, horizontal integration creates a 
more benign environment in which prices might stabilize or even increase.
In addition, by reducing the number of competitors in an industry, horizontal inte-
gration often makes it easier to use tacit price coordination between rivals. (Recall that 
tacit coordination is coordination reached without communication, whereas explicit 
communication to fi x prices is illegal.) In general, the larger the number of competi-
tors in an industry, the more diffi cult it is to establish an informal pricing agreement, 
such as price leadership by a dominant fi rm, which reduces the chances that a price 
war will erupt. Horizontal integration makes it easier for rivals to coordinate their 
actions because it increases industry concentration and creates an oligopoly.
Both of these motives also seem to have been behind Oracle’s many software ac-
quisitions. There was signifi cant excess capacity in the corporate software industry, 
and major competitors were offering customers discounted prices that had led to 
a price war and falling profi t margins. Oracle hoped to be able to eliminate excess 
industry that would reduce price competition. By 2009, it was clear that the major 
corporate software competitors were focusing on fi nding ways to better differentiate 
their product suites to prevent a price war and continuing to make major acquisi-
tions to help them build competitive advantage.
Increased Bargaining Power A fi nal reason for a company to use horizontal 
integration is to achieve more bargaining power over suppliers or buyers, which 
strengthens its competitive position and increases its profi tability at their expense. 
By using horizontal integration to consolidate its industry, a company becomes a 
much larger buyer of a supplier’s product; it can use this buying power as leverage to 
bargain down the price it pays for inputs, and this also lowers its costs. Similarly, a 
company that acquires its competitors controls a greater percentage of an industry’s 
fi nal product or output, and so buyers become more dependent on it. Other things 
being equal, the company now has more power to raise prices and profi ts, because 
customers have less choice of suppliers from whom to buy. When a company has 
greater ability to raise prices to buyers or to bargain down the price it pays for in-
puts, it has increased market power.

178  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Although horizontal integration can strengthen a company’s competitive posi-
tion in several ways, this strategy does have some problems and limitations. As we 
discuss in detail in Chapter 8, the gains that are anticipated from mergers and ac-
quisitions often are not realized for a number of reasons. These include problems as-
sociated with merging very different company cultures, high management turnover 
in the acquired company when the acquisition was a hostile one, and a tendency for 
managers to overestimate the benefi ts to be had from a merger or acquisition and 
to underestimate the problems involved in merging their operations. For example, 
there was considerable opposition to the merger between HP and Compaq because 
critics believed that HP’s then CEO, Carly Fiorina, was glossing over the diffi culties 
and costs associated with merging the operations of these two companies, which had 
very different cultures. As it turned out, she was right and the merger went smoothly, 
however, it took longer than she expected and she lost her job as CEO before the 
benefi ts of her strategy became apparent.
Another problem with horizontal integration is that when a company uses it to 
become a dominant industry competitor, an attempt to keep using the strategy to 
grow even larger brings a company into confl ict with the Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), the government agency responsible for enforcing antitrust law. Antitrust au-
thorities are concerned about the potential for abuse of market power; they believe 
that more competition is better for consumers than less competition. So the FTC is 
concerned when a few industry companies try to make acquisitions that will allow 
them to raise prices to consumers above the level that would exist in a more com-
petitive situation and thus abuse their market power. The FTC wishes to prevent 
dominant companies from using their market power to crush potential competitors 
by, for example, cutting prices whenever new competitors enter a market and so 
forcing them out of business, and then raising prices again once the threat has been 
eliminated. Because of these concerns, the FTC blocks any merger or acquisition that 
they decide will create too much industry consolidation and so increase the potential 
for companies to abuse their market power in the future.
Outsourcing Functional Activities
A second tactic that a company may deploy to improve its competitive position in 
an industry is to outsource one or more of its own value creation functions and 
contract with another company to perform that activity on its behalf. In recent 
years the amount of outsourcing of functional activities, especially manufacturing 
and information technology (IT) activities, has grown enormously.5 The expansion 
of global outsourcing has become one of the most signifi cant trends in modern 
strategic management, as companies seek not only to improve their competitive 
advantage at home but also to compete more effectively in today’s cutthroat global 
environment.
We discussed this trend in Chapter 6 and noted that the outsourcing of functions 
begins with a company identifying those value chain activities that form the basis 
of its competitive advantage— that give it its distinctive competencies. A company’s 
goal is to nurture and protect these vital functions and competences by perform-
ing them internally. The remaining noncore functional activities are then reviewed 
to see whether they can be performed more effi ciently and effectively by specialist 
companies either at home or abroad. If they can, these activities are outsourced to 
specialists in manufacturing, distribution, IT, and so on. The relationships between 
the company and its subcontractors are then structured by a competitive bidding 
process; subcontractors compete for a company’s business for a specifi ed price and 
Microsoft pursued a strat-
egy of horizontal integration 
and has bought hundreds 
of small software compa-
nies to become the domi-
nant software provider for 
PCs. Microsoft has often 
been accused of being a 
monopoly by overpowering 
(Lotus and WordPerfect) 
and 
forcing 
(Netscape) 
many rivals out of the mar-
ket. Microsoft’s managers 
have responded that prod-
uct prices have actually 
fallen because its large size 
provides the opportunity to 
cut prices, give some prod-
ucts away, and dramatically 
improve other offerings. If 
you were on a committee 
charged with deciding if 
Microsoft has behaved in an 
unethical manner, what kind 
of criteria would you use to 
determine the outcome?
Ethical Dilemma

Virtual Corporation
A company that 
outsources most of 
its functional activities 
and focuses on one or 
a few core value chain 
functions.
 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
179
length of time. The term virtual corporation has been coined to describe companies 
that outsource most of their functional activities and focus on one or a few core 
value chain functions.6
Xerox is one company that has signifi cantly increased its use of outsourcing in 
recent years. It decided that its distinctive competencies are in the design and manu-
facture of photocopying systems. Accordingly, to reduce costs Xerox outsourced 
the responsibility for performing its noncore value chain activities, such as its IT, 
to other companies. For example, Xerox has a $3.2 billion contract with Electronic 
Data Systems (EDS), a global IT consulting company, to manage and maintain all 
Xerox’s internal computer and telecommunications networks. As part of this rela-
tionship, 1,700 Xerox employees were transferred to EDS.7 As another example, 
Nike, the world’s largest maker of athletic shoes, has outsourced all its manufactur-
ing operations to Asian partners, while keeping its core product design and market-
ing capabilities in- house.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Outsourcing There are several advantages 
to outsourcing functional activities.8 First, outsourcing a particular noncore activity 
to a specialist company that is more effi cient at performing that activity than the 
company itself lowers a company’s operating costs. Second, a specialist often has a 
distinctive competency in a particular functional activity, so the specialist can help 
the company better differentiate its products. For example, Convergys, a division 
spun off by phone company Cincinnati Bell, developed a distinctive competency in 
the customer care function, which includes activating accounts, billing customers, 
and dealing with customer inquiries. To take advantage of this competency, other 
phone companies and global companies such as Orange, Cox, and Logica, decided 
to outsource their customer care function to Convergys; they recognize that it can 
provide better customer care service than they can. Thus Convergys helps its client 
companies to better differentiate their service offerings, and by 2010 it had almost 
$3 billion in revenues.
A third advantage of outsourcing is that it enables a company to concentrate 
scarce human, fi nancial, and physical resources on further strengthening its core 
competencies. Thus Nortel and Wachovia can devote their energies to building wire-
less networks and providing insurance, secure in the knowledge that Convergys is 
providing fi rst- class customer care.
On the other hand, there are some disadvantages associated with outsourcing 
functions. A company that outsources an activity loses both the ability to learn from 
that activity and the opportunity to transform that activity into one of its distinc-
tive competencies. Thus, although outsourcing customer care activities to Convergys 
may make sense right now for Nortel, a potential problem is that it will not be build-
ing its own internal competency in customer care that may become crucial in the 
future. A second drawback of outsourcing is that in its enthusiasm for outsourcing, 
a company may go too far and outsource value creation activities that are central 
to the maintenance of its competitive advantage. As a result, the company may lose 
control over the future development of a competency, and its performance may start 
to decline as a result. Finally, over time a company may become too dependent on a 
particular subcontractor. This may hurt the company if the performance of that sup-
plier starts to deteriorate or if the supplier starts to use its power to demand higher 
prices from the company. These problems do not mean that strategic outsourcing 
should not be pursued, but they do suggest that managers should carefully weigh the 
pros and cons of the strategy before pursuing it and should negotiate contracts that 
prevent some of these problems.

Vertical Integration
A strategy in which 
a company expands 
its operations either 
backward into 
industries that produce 
inputs for its core 
products (backward 
vertical integration) or 
forward into industries 
that use, distribute, 
or sell its products 
(forward vertical 
integration).
180  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
In sum, the corporate strategy of concentrating on one industry may enable a 
company to signifi cantly strengthen its competitive position in that industry because 
such concentration may help it either to lower costs or to better differentiate its 
products. Both horizontal integration and outsourcing functional activities are pow-
erful tools that help a company make better use of its resources and capabilities and 
build its competitive advantage over time. To the extent that a company becomes the 
dominant industry competitor, it also gains increasing market power that also helps 
it to increase its long- run profi tability.
Vertical Integration
Vertical integration is a corporate- level strategy that involves a company entering 
new industries to increase its long- run profi tability. Once again, the justifi cation for 
pursuing vertical integration is that a company is able to enter new industries that 
add value to the “core” products it makes and sells because entry into these new 
industries increases the core products’ differentiated appeal or reduces the costs of 
making them.
When a company pursues a strategy of vertical integration, it expands its op-
erations either backward into industries that produce inputs for its core products 
(backward vertical integration) or forward into industries that use, distribute, or 
sell its products (forward vertical integration). To enter a new industry, a company 
may establish its own operations and create the set of value chain functions it needs 
to compete effectively in this industry. Alternatively, it may acquire or merge with a 
company that is already in the industry. A steel company that establishes the value 
chain operations necessary to supply its iron ore needs from company- owned iron ore 
mines exemplifi es backward integration. A PC maker that sells its laptops through 
a nationwide chain of company- owned retail outlets illustrates forward integration. 
For example, Apple Computer entered the retail industry when it decided to set up 
the value chain functions necessary to retail its products through Apple Stores. IBM 
is a highly vertically integrated company. It integrated backward and entered the mi-
croprocessor and disk drive industries to produce the major components that go into 
its computers. It also integrated forward and established the value chain functions 
necessary to compete in the computer software and IT consulting services industries.
Figure  7.1 illustrates four main stages in a typical raw- materials- to- customer 
value- added chain. For a company based in the fi nal assembly stage, backward 
Figure 7.1 Stages in the Raw- Materials- to- Customer Value- Added Chain
Customer
Backward vertical
integration into
upstream industries
Forward vertical
integration into
downstream industries
Raw
materials
Final
assembly
Retail
Component
parts
manufacturing

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
181
integration means moving into component- parts manufacturing and raw materi-
als production. Forward integration means moving into distribution and sales. At 
each stage in the chain value is added to the product, which means that a company 
at that stage takes the product produced in the previous stage and transforms it in 
some way so that it is worth more to a company at the next stage in the chain and, 
ultimately, to the customer.
It is important to note that each stage of the value- added chain is a separate 
industry or industries in which many different companies may be competing. And 
within each industry, every company has a value chain composed of the value chain 
functions we discussed in Chapter 4: R&D, manufacturing, marketing, customer 
service, and so on. In other words, we can think of a value chain that runs across 
industries, and embedded within that are the value chains of companies within each 
industry.
As an example of the value- added concept, consider the production chain in-
volved in the PC industry illustrated in Figure 7.2. Companies in the raw materials 
stage of the PC value chain include the manufacturers of specialty ceramics, chemi-
cals, and metals, such as Kyocera of Japan that manufactures the ceramic substrate 
for semiconductors. Raw materials companies sell their output to the manufactur-
ers of intermediate or component products. Intermediate manufacturers, including 
companies such as Intel, AMD, and Samsung, transform the ceramics, chemicals, 
and metals they purchase into computer components such as microprocessors, disk 
drives, and fl ash memory chips. In doing so they add value to the raw materials they 
purchase.
In turn, at the fi nal assembly stage, these components are sold to companies such 
as Apple, Dell, and HP and transformed into PCs— and, hence, adding value to the 
components they purchase. Many of the completed PCs are then sold to distributors 
such as Best Buy and Staples that then sell them to fi nal customers. The distributors 
also add value to the product by making it accessible to customers and by providing 
PC service and support. Thus value is added by companies at each stage in the raw- 
materials- to- consumer chain.
As a corporate- level strategy, vertical integration gives companies a choice about 
which industries in the raw- materials- to- consumer chain they should compete in to 
maximize their long- run profi tability. In the PC industry, most companies have not 
entered industries in adjacent stages because of the many advantages of specializa-
tion and concentration on one industry. However, there are exceptions, such as IBM 
and HP, who are involved in several different industries.
Figure 7.2  The Raw- Materials- to- Customer Value- Added Chain in the Personal 
Computer Industry
Examples:
Dow Chemical
Union Carbide
Kyocera
Examples:
 Intel
 Micron–
 Technology
Examples:
 Dell
 Hewlett-Packard
 Gateway
Examples:
Office Max
CompUSA
Customer
Raw
materials
Final
assembly
Retail
Component
parts
manufacturing

Specialized Asset
A value creation tool 
that is designed to 
perform a speciﬁ c set 
of activities and whose 
value creation potential 
is signiﬁ cantly lower in 
its next- best use.
182  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Arguments for Vertical Integration
A company pursues vertical integration to strengthen its competitive position in its 
original or core business.9 There are four main reasons for pursuing a vertical inte-
gration strategy. It (1) enables the company to build barriers to new competition, 
(2) facilitates investments in effi ciency- enhancing specialized assets, (3) protects 
product quality, and (4) results in improved scheduling.
Building Barriers to Entry By vertically integrating backward to gain control 
over the source of critical inputs or by vertically integrating forward to gain control 
over distribution channels, a company can build barriers to new entry into its indus-
try. To the extent that this strategy is effective, it limits competition in the company’s 
industry, thereby enabling the company to charge a higher price and make greater 
profi ts than it could otherwise.10 To grasp this argument, consider a famous example 
of this strategy from the 1930s.
At that time the commercial smelting of aluminum was pioneered by companies 
such as Alcoa and Alcan. Aluminum is derived from smelting bauxite. Although 
bauxite is a common mineral, the percentage of aluminum in bauxite is usually so 
low that it is not economical to mine and smelt. During the 1930s, only one large- 
scale deposit of bauxite had been discovered where the percentage of aluminum in 
the mineral made smelting economical. This deposit was on the Caribbean island of 
Jamaica. Alcoa and Alcan vertically integrated backward and acquired ownership 
of this deposit. This action created a barrier to entry into the aluminum industry. 
Potential competitors were deterred from entry because they could not get access to 
high- grade bauxite; it was all owned by Alcoa and Alcan. Because they had to use 
lower- grade bauxite, those that did enter the industry found themselves at a cost 
disadvantage. This situation persisted until the 1950s, when new high- grade deposits 
were discovered in Australia and Indonesia.
During the 1970s and 1980s, a similar strategy was pursued by vertically inte-
grated companies in the computer industry, such as IBM and Digital Equipment. 
These companies manufactured the main components of computers (such as micro-
processors and memory chips), designed and assembled the computers, produced 
the software that ran the computers, and sold the fi nal product directly to end users. 
These companies reasoned that by producing the proprietary technology in- house, 
they could limit rivals’ access to it, thereby building barriers to entry. This strategy 
worked well until the early 1990s but it has failed since especially in the PC and 
server computer industries. In the early 1990s, the worst performers in the computer 
industry were precisely the companies that pursued the vertical integration strat-
egy: IBM and Digital Equipment. Why? The shift to open standards in computer 
hardware and software nullifi ed the advantages of extensive vertical integration for 
computer companies. In addition, companies such as Dell took advantage of open 
standards to search out the world’s lowest- cost producer of every computer compo-
nent in order to drive down costs, effectively circumventing this barrier to entry. In 
2005, IBM sold its loss- making PC unit to the Chinese company, Lenovo, and what 
was left of Digital was swallowed up by Compaq, which was then integrated into HP.
Facilitating Investments in Specialized Assets A specialized asset is a value- 
creation tool— machine, computer, or even factory— designed to perform a specifi c 
set of activities, but whose value- creation potential is signifi cantly lower in its next- 
best use.11 A specialized asset may be a piece of equipment used to make only one 

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
183
kind of product, or it may be the know- how or skills that a person or company has 
acquired through training and experience. Companies invest in specialized assets be-
cause these assets allow them to lower the costs of value creation and/or to better dif-
ferentiate their products from those of competitors— that permits premium pricing.
A company might invest in specialized equipment because that equipment en-
ables it to lower its manufacturing costs and increase its quality, or it might invest 
in developing highly specialized technological knowledge because doing so allows 
it to develop better products than its rivals. Thus specialization can be the basis for 
achieving a competitive advantage at the business level.
Why does a company have to vertically integrate and invest in the specialized 
assets itself? Why can’t another company perform this function? Because it may be 
very diffi cult to persuade other companies in adjacent stages in the raw- materials- 
to- consumer value- added chain to undertake investments in specialized assets. To 
realize the economic gains associated with specialized assets, the company may have 
to vertically integrate into such adjacent stages and make the investments itself.
As an illustration, imagine that Ford has developed a new, high- performance, 
high- quality, uniquely designed fuel injector. The injector will increase fuel effi ciency, 
which in turn will help differentiate Ford’s cars from those of its rivals and give it 
a competitive advantage. Ford has to decide whether to make the injector in- house 
(vertical integration) or contract its manufacture out to an independent supplier. 
Manufacturing these fuel injectors requires substantial investments in equipment 
that can be used only for this purpose. Because of its unique design, the equipment 
cannot be used to manufacture any other type of injector for Ford or any other car-
maker. Thus the investment in this equipment constitutes an investment in special-
ized assets.
First consider this situation from the perspective of an independent supplier that 
has been asked by Ford to make this investment. The supplier might reason that once 
it has made the investment, it will be dependent on Ford for business because Ford is 
the only possible customer for this equipment. The supplier perceives this as putting 
Ford in a strong bargaining position and worries that the carmaker might use this 
position to force down the price it pays for the injectors. Given this risk, the supplier 
declines to invest in the specialized equipment.
Now consider Ford’s position. Ford might reason that if it contracts out produc-
tion of these fuel injectors to an independent supplier, it might become too dependent 
on that supplier for a vital input. Because specialized equipment is needed to pro-
duce the injector, Ford cannot easily switch its orders to other suppliers that lack the 
equipment. Ford perceives this as increasing the bargaining power of the supplier and 
worries that the supplier might use its bargaining strength to demand higher prices.
The situation of mutual dependence that would be created by this investment in 
specialized assets makes Ford hesitant to contract out and makes any potential sup-
pliers hesitant to undertake the investments in specialized assets required to produce 
the fuel injectors. The real problem here is a lack of trust: Neither Ford nor the sup-
plier trusts the other to play fair in this situation. The lack of trust arises from the 
risk of holdup— that is, the risk of being taken advantage of by a trading partner 
after the investment in specialized assets has been made.12 Because of this risk, Ford 
might reason that the only safe way to get the new fuel injectors is to manufacture 
them itself.
To generalize from this example, when achieving a competitive advantage re-
quires one company to make investments in specialized assets in order to trade with 
another, the risk of holdup may serve as a deterrent, and the investment may not take 

184  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
place. Consequently, the potential gains from lower costs or increased differentia-
tion will not be realized. To obtain these gains, companies must vertically integrate 
into adjacent stages in the value chain. This consideration has driven automobile 
companies to vertically integrate backward into the production of component parts, 
steel companies to vertically integrate backward into the production of iron, 
computer companies to vertically integrate backward into chip production, and 
aluminum companies to vertically integrate backward into bauxite mining.
Protecting Product Quality By protecting product quality, vertical integration 
enables a company to become a differentiated player in its core business. The banana 
industry illustrates this situation. Historically, a problem facing food companies that 
import bananas was the variable quality of delivered bananas, which often arrived 
on the shelves of American stores either too ripe or not ripe enough. To correct this 
problem, major U.S. food companies such as General Foods have integrated back-
ward to gain control over supply sources. Consequently, they have been able to dis-
tribute bananas of a standard quality at the optimal time for consumption. Knowing 
they can rely on the quality of these brands, consumers are willing to pay more 
for them. Thus, by vertically integrating backward into plantation ownership, the 
banana companies have built consumer confi dence, which enables them to charge a 
premium price for their product. Similarly, when McDonald’s decided to open up its 
fi rst restaurant in Moscow, it found, much to its initial dismay, that in order to serve 
food and drink indistinguishable from that served in McDonald’s restaurants else-
where, it had to vertically integrate backward and supply its own needs. The quality 
of Russian- grown potatoes and meat was simply too poor. Thus, to protect the qual-
ity of its product, McDonald’s set up its own dairy farms, cattle ranches, vegetable 
plots, and food- processing plant within Russia.
The same kinds of considerations can result in forward integration. Ownership 
of distribution outlets may be necessary if the required standards of after- sale service 
for complex products are to be maintained. For example, in the 1920s Kodak owned 
retail outlets for distributing photographic equipment. The company felt that few 
established retail outlets had the skills necessary to sell and service its photographic 
equipment. By the 1930s, however, Kodak decided that it no longer needed to own 
its retail outlets, because other retailers had begun to provide satisfactory distribu-
tion and service for Kodak products. The company then withdrew from retailing. 
Now, in the 2000s, Kodak has a chain of digital photo- processing booths that it has 
established to attract people to use its paper, digital cameras, and so on.
Arguments Against Vertical Integration
Over time, however, vertical integration can result in some major disadvantages. 
Even though it is often undertaken to reduce production costs, vertical integra-
tion may actually increase costs when a company has to purchase high- cost inputs 
from company- owned suppliers despite the existence of low- cost external sources 
of supply. For example, during the early 1990s General Motors made 68% of the 
component parts for its vehicles in- house, more than any other major automaker 
(at Chrysler the fi gure was 30% and at Toyota 28%). This high level of vertical 
integration resulted in GM being the highest- cost global carmaker, and despite 
its attempts to reduce costs, such as spinning off its Delco components division, 
GM remained in deep trouble and was forced to declare bankruptcy in 2009. 
Thus, vertical integration can be a major disadvantage when it leads to increases in 
operating costs.

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
185
Frequently, the operating costs of company- owned suppliers become higher than 
those of outside, independent suppliers when their managers know that they can 
always sell their components to the company’s assembly divisions— that are captive 
buyers. For example, GM’s glass- making division knows it can sell its windows to 
GM’s car- making divisions. Because they do not have to compete for orders, com-
pany suppliers have less incentive to be effi cient and fi nd ways to reduce operating 
costs. Indeed, managers of the supply divisions may be tempted to pass on any cost 
increases to other company divisions in the form of higher prices for components, 
rather than looking for ways to lower costs! This problem is far less serious, how-
ever, when the company pursues taper, rather than full, integration (see Figure 7.3).
A company pursues full integration when it produces all of a particular input 
needed for its processes or when it disposes of all its output through its own opera-
tions. Taper integration occurs when a company buys some components from inde-
pendent suppliers and some from company- owned suppliers, or when it sells some of 
its output through independent retailers and some through company- owned outlets. 
When a company pursues taper integration, as most companies do today, company- 
owned suppliers have to compete with independent suppliers. This gives managers a 
strong incentive to reduce costs; if they do not do so, a company might close down or 
sell off its component operations, which is what GM did when it spun off its Delco 
components division.
Another problem is that when technology is changing rapidly, a strategy of verti-
cal integration often ties a company into old, obsolescent, high- cost technology.13 In 
general, because a company has to develop value chain functions in each industry 
stage in which it operates, any signifi cant changes in the environment of each indus-
try, such as major changes in technology, can put its investment at risk. The more 
industries in which a company operates, the more risk it incurs.
Thus, on the one hand, vertical integration may create value and increase profi t-
ability when it lowers operating costs or increases differentiation. On the other hand, 
FULL INTEGRATION
Customers
TAPER INTEGRATION
Customers
In house
suppliers
In house
manufacturing
In house
distributors
In house
suppliers
In house
manufacturing
In house
distributors
Outside
suppliers
Independent
distributors
Figure 7.3 Full Integration and Taper Integration

186  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
it can reduce profi tability if a lack of cost- cutting incentive on the part of company- 
owned suppliers increases operating costs, or if the inability to change its technology 
quickly results in lower quality and reduced differentiation. How much vertical dif-
ferentiation, then, should a company pursue?
In general, a company should pursue vertical integration only if the extra value 
created by entering a new industry in the value chain exceeds the extra costs involved 
in managing its new operations when it decides to perform additional upstream or 
downstream value creation activities. Not all vertical integration opportunities have 
the same potential for value creation. Therefore, strategic managers will fi rst verti-
cally integrate into those industry stages that will realize the most value at the least 
cost. Then, when the extra value created by entering each new industry falls and 
the costs of managing exchanges along the industry value chain increase, managers 
stop the vertical integration process. Indeed, if operating costs rise faster, over time, 
than the value being created in a particular industry, companies will vertically dis-
integrate and exit the industries that are now unprofi table. Clearly, there is a limit 
to how much a strategy of vertical integration can increase a company’s long- run 
profi tability.14
Vertical Integration and Outsourcing
Can the advantages associated with vertical integration be obtained if a company 
makes agreements with specialized suppliers to perform specifi c upstream or down-
stream activities on its behalf? Under certain circumstances, companies can realize 
the advantages of vertical integration, without experiencing problems due to low 
incentive to contain costs or due to changing technology, by entering into coop-
erative outsourcing relationships with suppliers or distributors. The advantages and 
disadvantages of outsourcing were discussed earlier in this chapter.
In general, research suggests that outsourcing promotes a company’s competitive 
advantage when the company enters into long- term relationships or strategic alli-
ances with its partners, because trust and goodwill build up between them over time. 
However, if a company enters into only short- term or “once and for all” contracts 
with suppliers or distributors, it is often unable to realize the gains associated with 
vertical integration through outsourcing. This is because its outsourcing partners 
have no incentive to take the long view and fi nd ways to help the company reduce 
costs or improve product features or quality.
Entering New Industries 
Through Diversification
High- performing companies fi rst choose corporate- level strategies that allow them 
to achieve the best competitive position in their core business or market. Then they 
may vertically integrate to strengthen their competitive advantage in that indus-
try. Still later, they may decide to vertically disintegrate, exit the industry, and use 
outsourcing instead. At this point, strategic managers must make another decision 
about how to invest their company’s growing resources and capital to maximize its 
long- run profi tability: They must decide whether to pursue the corporate- level strat-
egy of diversifi cation.

Diversiﬁ cation
The process of entering 
into one or more 
industries that are 
distinct or different 
from a company’s core 
or original industry to 
ﬁ nd ways to use the 
company’s distinctive 
competencies to 
increase the value 
to customers of the 
products it offers in 
those industries.
Diversiﬁ ed Company
A company that 
operates in two or 
more industries to ﬁ nd 
ways to increase long- 
run proﬁ tability.
 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
187
Diversifi cation is the process of entering one or more industries that are distinct 
or different from a company’s core or original industry, in order to fi nd ways to use 
its distinctive competencies to increase the value of products in those industries to 
customers. A diversifi ed company is one that operates in two or more different or 
distinct industries (industries not in adjacent stages of an industry value chain as in 
vertical integration) to fi nd ways to increase its long- run profi tability. In each indus-
try a company enters, it establishes an operating division or business unit, which is 
essentially a self- contained company that performs a complete set of the value chain 
functions needed to make and sell products for that particular market. Once again, 
to increase profi tability, a diversifi cation strategy should enable the company, or its 
individual business units, to perform one or more of the value chain functions either 
at a lower cost or in a way that results in higher differentiation and premium prices.
Creating Value Through Diversiﬁ cation
Most companies fi rst consider diversifi cation when they are generating fi nancial re-
sources in excess of those necessary to maintain a competitive advantage in their 
original business or industry.15 The question strategic managers must tackle is how 
to invest a company’s excess resources in such a way that they will create the most 
value and profi tability in the long run. Diversifi cation can help a company create 
greater value in three main ways: (1) by permitting superior internal governance, 
(2) by transferring competencies among businesses, and (3) by realizing economies 
of scope.
Superior Internal Governance The term internal governance refers to the manner 
in which the top executives of a company manage (or “govern”) its business units, 
divisions, and functions. In a diversifi ed company, effective or superior governance 
revolves around how well top managers can develop strategies that improve the 
competitive positioning of its business units in the industries where they compete. 
Diversifi cation creates value when top managers operate the company’s different 
business units so effectively that they perform better than they would if they were 
separate and independent companies.16
It is important to recognize that this is not an easy thing to do. In fact, it is one of 
the most diffi cult tasks facing top managers— and the reason why some CEOs and 
other top executives are paid tens of millions of dollars a year. Certain senior execu-
tives develop superior skills in managing and overseeing the operation of many busi-
ness units and pushing the managers in charge of these business units to achieve high 
performance. Examples include Jeffrey Immelt at General Electric, Steve Ballmer at 
Microsoft, Steve Jobs at Apples, and Michael Dell and Kevin Rollins at Dell.
Research suggests that the top, or corporate, managers who are successful at 
creating value through superior internal governance seem to make a number of simi-
lar kinds of strategic decisions. First, they organize the different business units of 
the company into self- contained divisions each of which operates separately. For 
example, GE has over 300 self- contained divisions, including light bulbs, turbines, 
NBC, and so on. Second, these divisions tend to be managed by corporate executives 
in a highly decentralized fashion. Corporate executives do not get involved in the 
day- to- day operations of each division. Instead, they set challenging fi nancial goals 
for each division, probe the general managers of each division about their strategy 
for attaining these goals, monitor divisional performance, and hold divisional man-
agers accountable for that performance. Third, corporate managers are careful to 

Acquisition and 
Restructuring 
Strategy
A strategy in which 
a company acquires 
inefﬁ cient and poorly 
managed enterprises 
and creates value 
by putting a superior 
internal governance 
structure in place  
and restructuring the 
operating systems to 
improve performance 
of the acquired 
companies.
188  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
link their internal monitoring and control mechanisms to incentive pay systems that 
reward divisional personnel for attaining, and especially for surpassing, performance 
goals. Although this may sound easy to do, in practice it requires highly skilled cor-
porate executives to pull it off.
An extension of this approach is an acquisition and restructuring strategy, which 
involves corporate managers acquiring ineffi cient and poorly managed enterprises 
and then creating value by installing their superior internal governance in these ac-
quired companies and restructuring their operations systems to improve their per-
formance. This strategy can be considered as diversifi cation because the acquired 
company does not have to be in the same industry as the acquiring company.
The performance of an acquired company can be improved in various ways. 
First, the acquiring company usually replaces the top management team of the ac-
quired company with a more aggressive top management team— one often drawn 
from its own ranks of executives who understand the ways to achieve superior 
governance. Then the new top management team in charge looks for ways to reduce 
operating costs by, for example, selling off unproductive assets such as executive jets 
and very expensive corporate headquarters buildings, and by fi nding ways to reduce 
the number of managers and employees (badly managed companies frequently let 
their labor forces grow out of control).
The top management team put in place by the acquiring company then focuses 
on how the acquired businesses were managed previously and seeks out ways to 
improve the business unit’s effi ciency, quality, innovativeness, and responsiveness to 
customers. In addition, the acquiring company often establishes, for the acquired 
company, performance goals that cannot be met without signifi cant improvements 
in operating effi ciency. It also makes the new top management aware that failure 
to achieve performance improvements consistent with these goals within a given 
amount of time will probably result in losing their jobs. Finally, to motivate the new 
top management team and the other managers of the acquired unit to undertake 
such demanding and stressful activities, the acquiring company directly links perfor-
mance improvements in the acquired unit to pay incentives.
This system of rewards and punishments established by the corporate executives 
of the acquiring company gives the new managers of the acquired business unit every 
incentive to look for ways of improving the effi ciency of the unit under their charge. 
GE, Textron, United Technologies, and IBM are good examples of companies that 
operate in this way.
Transferring Competencies A second way for a company to create value from 
diversifi cation is to transfer its existing distinctive competencies in one or more value 
creation functions (for example, manufacturing, marketing, materials management, 
and R&D) to other industries. Top managers seek out companies in new industries 
where they believe they can apply these competencies to create value and increase 
profi tability. For example, they may use the superior skills in one or more of their 
company’s value creation functions to improve the competitive position of the new 
business unit. Alternatively, corporate managers may decide to acquire a company 
in a different industry because they believe the acquired company possesses superior 
skills that can improve the effi ciency of their existing value creation activities.
If successful, such competency transfers can lower the costs of value creation in 
one or more of a company’s diversifi ed businesses or enable one or more of these 
businesses to perform their value creation functions in a way that leads to differ-
entiation and a premium price. The transfer of Philip Morris’s existing marketing 

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
189
skills to Miller Brewing is one of the classic examples of how value can be created by 
competency transfers. Drawing on its marketing and competitive positioning skills, 
Philip Morris pioneered the introduction of Miller Lite, a product that redefi ned the 
brewing industry and moved Miller from Number six to Number two in the market 
(see Figure 7.4).
For such a strategy to work, the competencies being transferred must allow the 
acquired company to establish a competitive advantage in its industry; that is, they 
must confer a competitive advantage on the acquired company. All too often, how-
ever, corporate executives incorrectly assess the advantages that will result from the 
competency transfer and overestimate the benefi ts that will accrue from it. The acqui-
sition of Hughes Aircraft by GM, for example, took place because GM’s managers 
believed cars and car manufacturing were “going electronic,” and Hughes was an 
electronics concern. The acquisition failed to realize any of the anticipated gains 
for GM, which fi nally sold the company off in 2005. On the other hand, Yahoo! 
has taken over many companies in the electronics, media, video, and entertainment 
industries because it recognized the need to strengthen its competitive position as a 
web portal. 3M has done the same, as the accompanying Strategy in Action recounts.
Economies of Scope The phrase “two can live cheaper than one” expresses the 
idea behind economies of scope. When two or more business units can share re-
sources or capabilities such as manufacturing facilities, distribution channels, adver-
tising campaigns, and R&D costs, total operating costs fall because of economies of 
scope. Each business unit that shares a common resource has to pay less to operate 
a particular functional activity.17 Procter & Gamble’s disposable diaper and paper 
towel businesses offer one of the best examples of the successful realization of econ-
omies of scope. These businesses share the costs of procuring certain raw materials 
(such as paper) and of developing the technology for new products and processes. In 
addition, a joint sales force sells both products to supermarkets, and both products 
Marketing
and
sales
Research
and
development
Customer
service
Tobacco Industry
Research
and
development
Production
Customer
service
Brewing Industry
Marketing
and
sales
Transfer of
Competency
Production
Figure 7.4 Transfer of Competencies at Philip Morris

190  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
3M is a 100- year- old industrial colossus that in 2009 
generated over $17 billion in revenues and $1.4 billion 
in proﬁ ts from a portfolio of more than 50,000 individ-
ual products ranging from sandpaper and sticky tape to 
medical devices, ofﬁ ce supplies, and electronic compo-
nents. The company has consistently created new busi-
nesses by leveraging its scientiﬁ c knowledge to ﬁ nd 
new applications for its proprietary technology. Today, 
the company is composed of more than 40 discrete 
business units grouped into six major sectors: trans-
portation, health care, industrial, consumer and ofﬁ ce, 
electronics and communications, and specialty materi-
als. The company has consistently generated 30% of 
sales from products introduced within the prior 5 years 
and currently operates with the goal of producing 40% 
of sales revenues from products introduced within the 
previous 4 years.
The process of leveraging technology to create new 
businesses at 3M can be illustrated by the following 
quotation from William Coyne, head of R&D at 3M: “It 
began with sandpaper: mineral and glue on a substrate. 
After years as an abrasives company, it created a tape 
business. A researcher left off the mineral, and adapted 
the glue and substrate to create the ﬁ rst sticky tape. 
After creating many varieties of sticky tape— consumer, 
electrical, medical— researchers created the world’s 
ﬁ rst audiotapes and videotapes. In their search to cre-
ate better tape backings, other researchers happened 
on multilayer ﬁ lms that, surprise, have remarkable light 
management qualities. This multiplayer ﬁ lm technology 
is being used in brightness enhancement ﬁ lms, which 
are incorporated in the displays of virtually all laptops 
and palm computers.”
How does 3M do it? First, the company is a science- 
based enterprise with a strong tradition of innovation and 
risk taking. Risk taking is encouraged, and failure is not 
punished but seen as a natural part of the process of cre-
ating new products and business. Second, 3M’s manage-
ment is relentlessly focused on the company’s customers 
and the problems they face. Many of 3M’s products have 
arisen from efforts to help solve difﬁ cult problems. Third, 
managers set “stretch goals” that require the company 
to create new products and businesses at a rapid pace 
(an example is the current goal that 40% of sales should 
come from products introduced within the last 4 years). 
Fourth, employees are given considerable autonomy to 
pursue their own ideas. An employee can spend 15% 
of his or her time working on a project of his or her own 
choosing without management approval. Many products 
have resulted from this autonomy, including the ubiqui-
tous Post- it Notes.
Fifth, although products belong to business units and 
it is business units that are responsible for generating 
proﬁ ts, the technologies belong to every unit within the 
company. Anyone at 3M is free to try to develop new 
applications for a technology developed by its business 
units. Sixth, 3M has implemented an IT system that pro-
motes the sharing of technological knowledge between 
business units so that new opportunities can be identi-
ﬁ ed. Also, it hosts many in- house conferences where 
researchers from different business units are brought to-
gether to share the results of their work. Finally, 3M uses 
numerous mechanisms to recognize and reward those 
who develop new technologies, products, and busi-
nesses, including peer- nominated award programs, a cor-
porate hall of fame, and, of course, monetary rewards.18
7.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
Diversiﬁ cation at 3M: Leveraging Technology
are shipped via the same distribution system (see Figure 7.5). This resource sharing 
has given both business units a cost advantage that has enabled them to undercut the 
prices of their less diversifi ed competitors.19
Similarly, one of the motives behind the merger of Citicorp and Travelers 
Insurance to form Citigroup was that the merger would allow Travelers to sell its 
insurance products and fi nancial services through Citicorp’s retail banking network. 
To put it differently, the merger was intended to allow the expanded group to better 
utilize a major existing common resource— its retail banking customer network. This 
merger was a total failure; it turned out that Citicorp’s customers had little interest 
in buying insurance from a bank. Citigroup sold Travelers to MetLife because the 

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
191
merger had not created value. The decision to diversify, like all corporate strategies, 
is a complex one, and it is hard to make the right decisions all the time.
Like competency transfers, diversifi cation to realize economies of scope is pos-
sible only if there is a real opportunity for sharing the skills and services of one or 
more of the value creation functions between a company’s existing and new business 
units. Diversifi cation for this reason should be pursued only when sharing is likely to 
generate a signifi cant competitive advantage in one or more of a company’s business 
units. Moreover, managers need to be aware that the costs of managing and coordi-
nating the activities of the newly linked business units to achieve economies of scope 
are substantial and may outweigh the value that can be created by such a strategy. 
This is apparently what happened to Citigroup.20
Thus, just as in the case of vertical integration, the costs of managing and coor-
dinating the skill and resource exchanges between business units increase substan-
tially as the number and diversity of its business units increase. This places a limit 
on the amount of diversifi cation that can profi tably be pursued. It makes sense for 
a company to diversify only as long as the extra value created by such a strategy 
exceeds the increased costs associated with incorporating additional business units 
into a company. Many companies diversify past this point, acquiring too many new 
companies, and their performance declines. To solve this problem, a company must 
reduce the scope of the enterprise through divestments— that is, through the selling 
of business units and exiting industries, which is discussed at the end of this chapter.
Related versus Unrelated Diversiﬁ cation
One issue that a diversifying company must resolve is whether to diversify into to-
tally new businesses and industries or into those that are related to its existing busi-
ness because their value chains share something in common. The choices it makes 
determine whether a company pursues related diversifi cation and/or unrelated 
diversifi cation.
Marketing
and
sales
Research
and
development
Customer
service
Disposable Diapers
Research
and
development
Production
Customer
service
Paper Towels
Marketing
and
sales
Shared
Production
Shared
Figure 7.5 Sharing Resources at Procter & Gamble

Related Diversiﬁ cation
The strategy of 
operating a business 
unit in a new industry 
that is related to a 
company’s existing 
business units through 
some commonality in 
their value chains.
Unrelated 
Diversiﬁ cation
The strategy of 
operating a business 
unit in a new industry 
that has no value 
chain connection with 
a company’s existing 
business units.
192  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
Related diversifi cation is the strategy of operating a business unit in a new in-
dustry that is related to a company’s existing business units by some form of linkage 
or connection between one or more components of each business unit’s value chain. 
Normally, these linkages are based on manufacturing, marketing, or technological 
connections or similarities. The diversifi cation of Philip Morris into the brewing in-
dustry with the acquisition of Miller Brewing is an example of related diversifi cation, 
because there are marketing similarities between the brewing and tobacco businesses 
(both are consumer product businesses in which competitive success depends on 
competitive positioning skills).
Unrelated diversifi cation is diversifi cation into a new business or industry that 
has no obvious value chain connection with any of the businesses or industries in 
which a company is currently operating. A company pursuing unrelated diversifi ca-
tion is often called a conglomerate, a term that implies the company is made up of a 
number of diverse businesses.
By defi nition, a related company can create value by resource sharing and by 
transferring competencies between businesses. It can also carry out some restructur-
ing. In contrast, because there are no connections or similarities between the value 
chains of unrelated businesses, an unrelated company cannot create value by sharing 
resources or transferring competencies. Unrelated diversifi ers can create value only 
by pursuing an acquisition and restructuring strategy.
Related diversifi cation can create value in more ways than unrelated diversifi ca-
tion, so one might expect related diversifi cation to be the preferred strategy. In ad-
dition, related diversifi cation is normally perceived as involving fewer risks, because 
the company is moving into businesses and industries about which top manage-
ment has some knowledge. Probably because of those considerations, most diversi-
fi ed companies display a preference for related diversifi cation.21 Indeed, in the last 
decade, many companies pursuing unrelated diversifi cation have decided to split 
themselves up into totally self- contained companies to increase the value they can 
create. In 2007, for example, the conglomerate Tyco split into three separate public 
companies focusing on the electronics, health care, and security and fi re protection 
businesses for this reason— and each separate company has performed at a higher 
level since.
However, United Technologies (UTC), a conglomerate that pursues unrelated di-
versifi cation, provides an excellent example of a company that has created a lot of 
value using this strategy. UTC’s CEO George David uses all the kinds of superior 
governance skills that we have discussed to improve the profi tability of his com-
pany’s business units. The closing case describes how UTC has pursued unrelated 
diversifi cation successfully and why it is one of the highest performing of the Fortune 
500 companies.
Restructuring and Downsizing
So far we have focused on strategies for expanding the scope of a company and 
entering into new business areas. We turn now to their opposite: strategies for re-
ducing the scope of the company by exiting business areas. In recent years, reduc-
ing the scope of a company through restructuring and downsizing has become an 
increasingly popular strategy, particularly among the companies that diversifi ed their 
activities during the 1980s and 1990s. In most cases, companies that are engaged 

Diversiﬁ cation 
Discount
When stock in highly 
diversiﬁ ed companies 
is assigned a lower 
market valuation than 
stock in less diversiﬁ ed 
companies.
 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
193
in restructuring are divesting themselves of diversifi ed activities and downsizing in 
order to concentrate on fewer businesses.22 For example, in 1996 AT&T spun off 
its telecommunications equipment business (Lucent), and then, after acquiring two 
large cable TV companies in the late 1990s, in 2002 AT&T sold its cable unit to 
rival cable TV provider Comcast for $72 billion. Then, in 2005 a downsized AT&T 
became a takeover target for SBC Communications that acquired AT&T to strengthen 
its position in the growing mobile phone business. By 2007 SBC, renamed AT&T, 
had once again become the largest U.S. global communications company, and by 
2010, given that it was the sole supplier of Apple’s iPhone, it had once again become 
the dominant U.S. phone and Internet provider.
The fi rst question to ask is why have so many companies restructured during 
the last decade. Then, we can examine the different strategies that companies adopt 
for exiting from business areas. Finally, we discuss the various turnaround strategies 
that companies employ to revitalize their core profi t- making business.
Why Restructure?
A prime reason why extensively diversifi ed companies restructure is that in the last 
decade, the stock market has assigned a diversifi cation discount to the stock price 
of these companies.23 Diversifi cation discount refers to the fact that the stock of 
highly diversifi ed companies are often assigned a lower valuation relative to their 
earnings than the stock of less diversifi ed companies. There are two reasons for this. 
First, investors are often put off by the complexity and lack of transparency in the 
fi nancial statements of highly diversifi ed enterprises that are harder to interpret and 
may not give them a good picture of how the individual divisions of the company 
are performing. In other words, they perceive diversifi ed companies as riskier invest-
ments than companies that focus on one or a few major industries. In such cases, 
restructuring can boost the returns to shareholders when it splits the company into 
a number of parts that can each be divested at a higher price.
A second reason for the diversifi cation discount is that many investors have 
learned from experience that managers often have a tendency to pursue too much 
diversifi cation or to diversify for the wrong reasons, such as the pursuit of growth 
for its own sake, rather than to increase profi tability.24 Some senior managers tend to 
expand the scope of their company beyond the point where the bureaucratic costs 
of managing extensive diversifi cation exceed the additional value that can be created 
so that the performance of the company begins to decline. Restructuring in such 
cases is often a response to declining fi nancial performance.
Restructuring can also be a response to failed acquisitions. This is true whether 
the acquisitions were made to support a horizontal integration, vertical integration, 
or diversifi cation strategy. We noted earlier in the chapter that many acquisitions 
fail to deliver the anticipated gains. When this is the case, corporate managers often 
respond by cutting their losses and exiting from the acquired business.
A fi nal factor that helps to explain why restructuring is occurring more and 
more frequently is that innovations in management strategy and in advanced IT 
have diminished the profi t- enhancing advantages of vertical integration and diver-
sifi cation. So, to increase profi tability, companies have reduced the scope of their 
activities through restructuring and exiting businesses. For example, a few decades 
ago, there was little understanding of how long- term cooperative relationships or 
strategic alliances between a company and its suppliers could be a viable alterna-
tive to vertical integration. Most companies considered only two alternatives for 

Divestment
The sale a business unit 
to the highest bidder.
Spinoff
The sale of a business 
unit to another 
company or to 
independent investors.
Harvest Strategy
The halting of 
investment in a 
business unit to 
maximize short- to- 
medium- term cash 
ﬂ ow from that unit.
Liquidation Strategy
The shutting down of 
the operations of a 
business unit and the 
sale of its assets.
194  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
managing the supply chain: vertical integration or competitive bidding. However, 
if conditions are right, a third alternative for managing the supply chain, long- term 
contracting, can be a better strategy than either vertical integration or competitive 
bidding. Like vertical integration, long- term contracting facilitates investments in 
specialization. But unlike vertical integration, long- term contracting avoids the need 
to incur bureaucratic costs or dispense with market discipline. As this strategic in-
novation has spread throughout global business the relative advantages of vertical 
integration have declined.
Exit Strategies
Companies can choose from three main strategies for exiting business areas: divest-
ment, harvest, and liquidation. Of the three strategies, divestment is usually favored. 
It represents the best way for a company to recoup as much of its initial investment 
in a business unit as possible.
Divestment Divestment involves selling a business unit to the highest bidder. 
Three types of buyers are independent investors, other companies, and the manage-
ment of the unit to be divested. Selling off a business unit to independent investors 
is normally referred to as a spinoff. A spinoff makes good sense when the unit to 
be sold is profi table and when the stock market has an appetite for new stock is-
sues (which is normal during market upswings, but not during market downswings). 
However, spinoffs do not work if the unit to be spun off is unprofi table and unat-
tractive to independent investors or if the stock market is slumping and unresponsive 
to new issues.
Selling off a unit to another company is a strategy frequently pursued when 
a unit can be sold to a company in the same line of business as the unit. In such 
cases, the purchaser is often prepared to pay a considerable amount of money for 
the opportunity to substantially increase the size of its business virtually overnight. 
For example, as we noted earlier, in 2002 AT&T sold off its cable TV business to 
Comcast for a hefty $72 billion; SBC then bought AT&T for $16 billion and today 
it has become the dominant U.S. phone and Internet provider.
Harvest Strategy A harvest strategy involves halting investment in a unit in order 
to maximize short- to- medium- term cash fl ow from that unit. Although this strategy 
seems fi ne in theory, it is often a poor one to apply in practice. Once it becomes ap-
parent that the unit is pursuing a harvest strategy, the morale of the unit’s employees, 
as well as the confi dence of the unit’s customers and suppliers in its continuing op-
eration, can sink very quickly. If this occurs, as it often does, the rapid decline in the 
unit’s revenues can make the strategy untenable.
Liquidation Strategy A liquidation strategy involves shutting down the opera-
tions of a business unit. A pure liquidation strategy is the least attractive of all to 
pursue, because it requires that the company write off its investment in a business 
unit, often at considerable cost. However, for a poorly performing business unit 
where a selloff or spinoff is unlikely, and where an MBO cannot be arranged, it may 
be the only viable alternative.

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
195
1. There are different corporate- level strategies that 
companies pursue in order to increase their long- 
run profi tability; they may choose to remain in the 
same industry, to enter new industries, or even to 
leave industries in order to prosper over time.
2. Corporate strategies should add value to a cor-
poration, enabling it, or one or more of its busi-
ness units, to perform one or more of the value 
creation functions at a lower cost or in a way 
that allows for differentiation and thus a pre-
mium price.
3. Concentrating on a single business allows a 
company to focus its total managerial, fi nancial, 
technological, and physical resources and com-
petencies on competing successfully in just one 
area. It also ensures that the company sticks to 
doing what it knows best.
4. The strategic outsourcing of noncore value cre-
ation activities may allow a company to lower 
its costs, better differentiate its product offering, 
and make better use of scarce resources, while 
also enabling it to respond rapidly to changing 
market conditions. However, strategic outsourc-
ing may have a detrimental effect if the company 
outsources important value creation activities or 
if it becomes too dependent on key suppliers of 
those activities.
5. The company that concentrates on a single busi-
ness may be missing out on the opportunity to 
create value through vertical integration and/or 
diversifi cation.
 6. Vertical integration can enable a company to 
achieve a competitive advantage by helping build 
barriers to entry, facilitating investments in spe-
cialized assets, and safeguarding product quality.
 7. The disadvantages of vertical integration in-
clude cost disadvantages if a company’s internal 
source of supply is a high- cost one, and lack of 
strategic fl exibility if technology and the envi-
ronment are changing rapidly.
 8. Entering into cooperative long- term outsourc-
ing agreements can enable a company to realize 
many of the benefi ts associated with vertical in-
tegration without having to contend with these 
problems.
 9. Diversifi cation can create value through the ap-
plication of superior governance skills, including 
a restructuring strategy, competency transfers, 
and the realization of economies of scope.
10. Related diversifi cation is often preferred to un-
related diversifi cation because it enables a com-
pany to engage in more value creation activities 
and is less risky.
11. Restructuring is often a response to excessive 
diversifi cation, failed acquisitions, and innova-
tions in the management process that have re-
duced the advantages of vertical integration and 
diversifi cation.
12. Exit strategies include divestment, harvest, and 
liquidation. The choice of exit strategy is gov-
erned by the characteristics of the business unit 
involved.
Summary of Chapter
1. Why was it profi table for General Motors and 
Ford to integrate backward into component- 
parts manufacturing in the past, and why are 
both companies now trying to buy more of their 
parts from outside?
2. Under what conditions might concentration on a 
single business be inconsistent with the goal?
3. Why do you think vertical integration is nor-
mally the fi rst strategy to be pursued after con-
centration on a single business?
4. What value creation activities should a company 
out- source to independent suppliers? What are 
the risks involved in outsourcing these activities?
5. When is a company likely to choose (1) related 
diversifi cation and (2) unrelated diversifi cation? 
Discuss with reference to a major electronics 
company such as HP, Apple, or Dell.
Discussion Questions

196  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: 
Comparing Vertical Integration Strategies
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people. 
Appoint one group member a spokesperson for the 
group, who will communicate your fi ndings to the 
class when called on to do so by the instructor. Then 
read the following description of the activities of 
Seagate Technologies and Quantum Corporation, 
both of which manufacture computer disk drives. 
On the basis of this description, outline the pros 
and cons of a vertical integration strategy. Which 
strategy do you think makes most sense in the con-
text of the computer disk drive industry?
Quantum Corporation 
and Seagate Technologies
Quantum Corporation and Seagate Technologies 
are both major producers of disk drives for PCs 
and workstations. The disk drive industry is char-
acterized by sharp fl uctuations in the level of 
demand, intense price competition, rapid techno-
logical change, and product life cycles of no more 
than 12–18 months. In recent years Quantum and 
Seagate have pursued very different vertical inte-
gration strategies. Seagate is a vertically integrated 
manufacturer of disk drives, both designing and 
manufacturing the bulk of its own disk drives. 
Quantum specializes in design, while outsourcing 
most of its manufacturing to a number of indepen-
dent suppliers, including its most important sup-
plier, Matsushita Kotobuki Electronics (MKE) of 
Japan. Quantum makes only its newest and most 
expensive products in- house. Once a new drive is 
perfected and ready for large- scale manufactur-
ing, Quantum turns over manufacturing to MKE. 
MKE and Quantum have cemented their partner-
ship over 8 years. At each stage in designing a new 
product, Quantum’s engineers send the newest 
drawings to a production team at MKE. MKE ex-
amines the drawings and is constantly proposing 
changes that make the new disk drives easier to 
manufacture. When the product is ready for man-
ufacture, eight–ten Quantum engineers travel to 
MKE’s plant in Japan for at least a month to work 
on production ramp- up.
Visiting Motorola
Visit the Web site of Motorola (http://www
.motorola.com). Review the various business ac-
tivities of Motorola. Using this information, an-
swer the following questions:
1. To what extent is Motorola vertically integrated?
2. Does vertical integration help Motorola estab-
lish a competitive advantage, or does it put the 
company at a competitive disadvantage?
3. How diversifi ed is Motorola? Does Motorola 
pursue a related or an unrelated diversifi cation 
strategy?
4. How, if at all, does Motorola’s diversifi cation 
strategy create value for the company’s stock-
holders?
General Task
Search the Web for an example of a company that 
has pursued a diversifi cation strategy. Describe 
that strategy and assess whether the strategy cre-
ates or dissipates value for the company.
Exploring The Web

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
197
United Technologies Corporation (UTC), based in 
Hartford, Connecticut, is a conglomerate, a company 
that owns a wide variety of other companies that 
operate in different businesses and industries. Some 
of the companies in UTC’s portfolio are more well 
known than UTC itself, such as Sikorsky Aircraft 
Corporation; Pratt & Whitney, the aircraft engine 
and component maker; Otis Elevator Company; 
Carrier air conditioning; and Chubb, the security 
and lock maker that UTC acquired in 2003. Today, 
investors frown upon companies like UTC that own 
and operate companies in widely different industries. 
There is a growing perception that managers can 
better manage a company’s business model when the 
company operates as an independent or stand- alone 
entity. How can UTC justify holding all these com-
panies together in a conglomerate? Why would this 
lead to a greater increase in their long- term profi t-
ability than if they operated as separate companies? 
In the last decade the boards of directors and CEOs 
of many conglomerates, such as Greyhound- Dial, 
ITT Industries, and Textron, have realized that by 
holding diverse companies together they were reduc-
ing, not increasing, the profi tability of their com-
panies. As a result, many conglomerates have been 
broken up and their companies spun off to allow 
them to operate as separate, independent entities.
UTC’s CEO George David claims that he has cre-
ated a unique and sophisticated multibusiness model 
that adds value across UTC’s diverse businesses. 
David joined Otis Elevator as an assistant to its 
CEO in 1975, but within one year Otis was acquired 
by UTC, during a decade when “bigger is better” 
ruled corporate America and mergers and acquisi-
tions, of whatever kind, were seen as the best way to 
grow profi ts. UTC sent David to manage its South 
American operations and later gave him responsi-
bility for its Japanese operations. Otis had formed 
an alliance with Matsushita to develop an elevator 
for the Japanese market, and the resulting “Elevonic 
401,” after being installed widely in Japanese build-
ings, proved to be a disaster. It broke down much 
more often than elevators made by other Japanese 
companies, and customers were concerned about its 
reliability and safety.
Matsushita was extremely embarrassed about 
the elevator’s failure and assigned one of its leading 
total quality management (TQM) experts, Yuzuru 
Ito, to head a team of Otis engineers to fi nd out why 
it performed so poorly. Under Ito’s direction all the 
employees— managers, designers, and production 
workers— who had produced the elevator analyzed 
why the elevators were malfunctioning. This inten-
sive study led to a total redesign of the elevator, and 
when their new and improved elevator was launched 
worldwide, it met with great success. Otis’s share of 
the global elevator market increased dramatically, 
and one result was that David was named president 
of UTC in 1992. He was given the responsibility to 
cut costs across the entire corporation, including its 
important Pratt & Whitney division, and his success 
in reducing UTC’s cost structure and increasing its 
ROIC led to his appointment as CEO in 1994.
Now responsible for all of UTC’s diverse com-
panies, David decided that the best way to increase 
UTC’s profi tability, which had been falling, was to 
fi nd ways to improve effi ciency and quality in all its 
constituent companies. He convinced Ito to move to 
Hartford and take responsibility for championing 
the kinds of improvements that had by now trans-
formed the Otis division, and Ito began to develop 
UTC’s TQM system, which is known as Achieving 
Competitive Excellence, or ACE.
ACE is a set of tasks and procedures that are used 
by employees from the shop fl oor to top managers 
to analyze all aspects of the way a product is made. 
The goal is to fi nd ways to improve quality and reli-
ability, to lower the costs of making the product, and 
especially to fi nd ways to make the next generation of 
a particular product perform better— in other words, 
to encourage technological innovation. David makes 
every employee in every function and at every level 
take responsibility for achieving the incremental, 
step- by- step gains that can result in innovative and 
effi cient products that enable a company to dominate 
its industry— to push back the value creation frontier.
United Technologies Has an “ACE in Its Pocket”

198  
Part 3 Building and Sustaining Long-Run Competitive Advantage
David calls these techniques “process disci-
plines,” and he has used them to increase the per-
formance of all UTC companies. Through these 
techniques he has created the extra value for UTC 
that justifi es it owning and operating such a diverse 
set of businesses. David’s success can be seen in the 
performance that his company has achieved in the 
decade since he took control: he has quadrupled 
UTC’s earnings per share, and in the fi rst 6 months 
of 1994 profi t grew by 25% to $1.4 billion, while 
sales increased by 26% to $18.3 billion. UTC has 
been in the top three performers of the companies 
that make up the Dow Jones industrial average for 
the last 3 years, and the company has consistently 
outperformed GE, another huge conglomerate, in its 
returns to investors.
David and his managers believe that the gains 
that can be achieved from UTC’s process disciplines 
are never- ending because its own R&D—  in which it 
invests over $2.5 billion a year— is constantly pro-
ducing product innovations that can help all its busi-
nesses. Indeed, recognizing that its skills in creating 
process improvements are specifi c to manufacturing 
companies, UTC’s strategy is to only acquire compa-
nies that make products that can benefi t from the use 
of its ACE program— hence its Chubb acquisition. 
At the same time, David only invests in companies 
that have the potential to remain leading companies 
in their industries and so can charge above- average 
prices. His acquisitions strengthen the competen-
cies of UTC’s existing businesses. For example, he 
acquired a company called Sunderstrand, a leading 
aerospace and industrial systems company, and com-
bined it with UTC’s Hamilton aerospace division to 
create Hamilton Sunderstrand, which is now a ma-
jor supplier to Boeing and makes products that com-
mand premium prices.
Case Discussion Questions
1. In what ways does UTC’s corporate- level strat-
egy of unrelated diversifi cation create value?
2. What are the dangers and disadvantages of this 
strategy?
3. Collect some recent information on UTC from 
sources like Yahoo! Finance. How successful has 
it been in pursuing its strategy?
 1. T. J. Peters and R. H. Waterman, In Search of Excellence 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1982).
 2. www.walmart.com, 2009.
 3. J. Birchall, “Walmart Looks to Hispanic Market,” ft.com, 
March 12, 2009.
 4. “Does ‘Cool’ Matter? A Blogger Compares Tesco and 
Walmart’s ‘Neighborhood Market’ Offerings,” http://
freshneasybuzz.blogspot.com/2009/01/bloggers-at-large-
does-cool-matter.html.
 5. W. H. Davidow and M. S. Malone, The Virtual Corporation 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1992).
 6. Ibid.
 7. “The Outing of Outsourcing,” Economist, November 25, 
1995, 57–58.
 8. Davidow and Malone, The Virtual Corporation and 
H.  W.  Chesbrough and D.  J.  Teece, “When Is Virtual 
Virtuous? Organizing for Innovation,” Harvard Business 
Review, January– February 1996, 65–74.
 9. This is the essence of Chandler’s argument. See 
Alfred D. Chandler, Strategy and Structure (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1962). The same argument is 
made by Jeffrey Pfeffer and Gerald  R.  Salancik, 
The External Control of Organizations (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1978). See also K. R. Harrigan, Strategic 
Flexibility (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1985); 
K.  R.  Harrigan, “Vertical Integration and Corporate 
Strategy,” Academy of Management Journal 28 (1985): 
397–425; and F. M. Scherer, Industrial Market Structure 
and Economic Performance (Chicago, III.: Rand 
McNally, 1981).
 10. This section is based on the transaction cost approach 
popularized by Oliver  E.  Williamson, The Economic 
Institutions of Capitalism (New York: Free Press, 1985).
 11. Williamson, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. 
For recent empirical work that uses this framework, see 
L. Poppo and T. Zenger, “Testing Alternative Theories 
of the Firm: Transaction Cost, Knowledge Based, and 
Measurement Explanations for Make or Buy Decisions 
in Information Services,” Strategic Management Journal 
19 (1998): 853–878.
 12. Williamson, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism.
 13. Harrigan, Strategic Flexibility, pp. 67–87.
 14. For a detailed theoretical rationale for this argument, 
see G.  R.  Jones and C.  W.  L.  Hill, “A Transaction 
Cost Analysis of Strategy- Structure Choice,” Strategic 
Management Journal 9 (1988): 159–172.
Notes

 
Chapter 7 Corporate- Level Strategy and Long- Run Proﬁ tability 
199
 15. This resource- based view of diversifi cation can be traced 
to Edith Penrose’s seminal book The Theory of the 
Growth of the Firm (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1959).
 16. See, for example, Jones and Hill, “A Transaction Cost 
Analysis” and Williamson, Markets and Hierarchies 
(New York: Free Press), 132–175.
 17. D.  J.  Teece, “Economies of Scope and the Scope of 
the Enterprise,” Journal of Economic Behavior and 
Organization 3 (1980): 223–247. For recent empirical 
work on this topic, see C. H. St. John and J. S. Harrison, 
“Manufacturing Based Relatedness, Synergy and 
Coordination,” Strategic Management Journal 20 
(1999): 129–145.
 18. W.E. Coyne, “How 3M Innovated for Long-Term Growth,” 
Research Technology Management (March-April 2001): 
21–24.
 19. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and 
Sustaining Superior Performance (New York: Free Press, 
1985), 326.
 20. For a detailed discussion, see C.  W.  L.  Hill 
and R.  E.  Hoskisson, “Strategy and Structure in the 
Multi- product Firm,” Academy of Management Review 
12 (1987): 331–341.
 21. For example, see C. W. L. Hill, “Diversifi ed Growth and 
Competition,” Applied Economics 17 (1985): 827–847; 
R. P. Rumelt, Strategy, Structure and Economic Performance 
(Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1974); and 
Jones and Hill, “A Transaction Cost Analysis.”
 22. For a review of the evidence, and some contrary em-
pirical evidence, see D. E. Hatfi eld, J. P. Liebskind, and 
T. C. Opler, “The Effects of Corporate Restructuring on 
Aggregate Industry Specialization,” Strategic Management 
Journal 17 (1996): 55–72.
 23. O.  A.  Lamont and C.  Polk, “The Diversifi cation 
Discount: Cash Flows versus Returns,” Journal of 
Finance 56 (October 2001): 1693–1721. See also R. Raju, 
H. Servaes, and L. Zingales, “The Cost of Diversity: The 
Diversifi cation Discount and Ineffi cient Investment,” 
Journal of Finance 55 (February 2000): 35–80.
 24. For example, see A.  Schleifer and R.  W.  Vishny, 
“Takeovers in the 60s and 80s: Evidence and 
Implications,” Strategic Management Journal 12 (Special 
Issue, Winter 1991): 51–60.

After reading this chapter, you should be 
able to:
• Understand the main steps involved in 
the strategic change process.
• Appreciate the need to analyze a com-
pany’s set of businesses from a “portfolio 
of competencies” perspective.
• Review the advantages and risks of im-
plementing strategy through (1) internal 
new ventures, (2) acquisitions, 
and (3) strategic alliances.
• Discuss how to limit the risks associated 
with internal new ventures, acquisitions, 
and strategic alliances.
• Appreciate the special issues associated 
with using a joint venture to structure 
a strategic alliance.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
Strategic Change
Types of Strategic Changes
A Model of the Change Process
Analyzing a Company as a Portfolio 
of Core Competencies
Fill in the Blanks
Premier Plus 10
White Spaces
Mega- Opportunities
Implementing Strategy Through 
Internal New Ventures
Pitfalls with Internal New Ventures
Guidelines for Successful Internal 
New Venturing
Implementing Strategy 
Through Acquisitions
Pitfalls with Acquisitions
Guidelines for Successful 
Acquisition
Implementing Strategy 
Through Strategic Alliances
Advantages of Strategic Alliances
Disadvantages of Strategic Alliances
Making Strategic Alliances Work
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Strategic Change: 
Implementing Strategies to 
Build and Develop a Company
8

Strategic Change
The movement of a 
company away from its 
present state toward 
some desired future 
state to increase its 
competitive advantage 
and proﬁ tability.
Reengineering
A process whereby, 
in their effort to boost 
company performance, 
managers focus not 
on the company’s 
functional activities 
but on the business 
processes underlying 
its value creation 
operations.
Business Process
Any business activity, 
such as order 
processing, inventory 
control, or product 
design, that is vital to 
delivering goods and 
services to customers 
quickly or that 
promotes high quality 
or low costs.
 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
201
OVERVIEW
In Chapter 7 we examined the different corporate- level strategies that managers can 
pursue to increase a company’s long- run profi tability. All these choices of strategy 
have important implications for a company’s future prosperity, and it is vital that 
managers understand the issues and problems involved in implementing these strat-
egies if the strategies are to be successful. We begin this chapter by examining the 
nature of strategic change and the obstacles that may hinder managers’ attempts to 
change a company’s strategy and structure to improve its future performance. We 
then focus on the steps managers can take to overcome these obstacles and make 
their efforts to change a company successful.
Second, we tackle a crucial question: How do managers determine which busi-
nesses or industries a company should continue to participate in or exit from, and 
how do they determine whether a company should enter one or more new businesses? 
Obviously managers need to have a vision of where their company should be in the 
future— that is, a vision of its desired future state— and we discuss an important tech-
nique, the portfolio of competencies approach, that helps them accomplish this.
Third, we turn our attention to the different methods that managers can use 
to enter new businesses or industries in order to build and develop their company 
and improve its performance over time. The choice here is whether to implement 
a corporate- level strategy through acquisitions, internal new ventures, or strategic 
alliances (including joint ventures). Finally, we examine the pros and cons of these 
different ways of implementing strategy, given the goal of increasing a company’s 
competitive advantage and long- run profi tability.
Strategic Change
Strategic change is the movement of a company away from its present state toward 
some desired future state to increase its competitive advantage and profi tability.1 In 
the last decade, most large Fortune 500 companies have gone through some kind of 
strategic change as their managers have tried to strengthen their existing core com-
petencies and build new ones to compete more effectively. Often, because of drastic 
unexpected changes in the environment, such as the emergence of aggressive new 
competitors or technological breakthroughs, strategic managers need to develop a 
new strategy and structure to raise the level of their business’s performance.2
Types of Strategic Change
One way of changing a company to enable it to operate more effectively is by 
reengineering, a process in which managers focus not on a company’s functional 
activities but on the business processes underlying the value creation process.3 
A business process is any activity (such as order processing, inventory control, or 
product design) that is vital to delivering goods and services to customers quickly or 
that promotes high quality or low costs.4 Business processes are not the responsibility 
of any one function but cut across functions.
Hallmark Cards, for example, reengineered its card design process with great 
success. Before the reengineering effort, artists, writers, and editors worked in differ-
ent functions to produce all kinds of cards. After reengineering, these same artists, 

202  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
writers, and editors were organized into cross- functional teams, each of which now 
works on a specifi c type of card (such as birthday, Christmas, or Mother’s Day). The 
result was that the time it took to bring a new card to market dropped from years to 
months, and Hallmark’s performance improved dramatically.
Reengineering and total quality management (TQM, discussed in Chapter 4) are 
highly interrelated and complementary.5 After reengineering has taken place and the 
question “What is the best way to provide customers with the goods or service they 
require?” has been answered, TQM takes over and addresses the question “How 
can we now continue to improve and refi ne the new process and fi nd better ways of 
managing task and role relationships?” Successful companies examine both ques-
tions together, and managers continuously work to identify new and better processes 
for meeting the goals of increased effi ciency, quality, and responsiveness to customer 
needs. Thus managers are always working to improve their vision of their company’s 
desired future state.
Recall from Chapter 7 that restructuring is the process through which managers 
simplify organizational structure by eliminating divisions, departments, or levels in 
the hierarchy, and downsize by terminating employees, thereby lowering operating 
costs. Restructuring may also involve outsourcing, the process whereby one com-
pany contracts with other companies to perform a functional activity such as manu-
facturing, marketing, or customer service. Restructuring is a second form of strategic 
change that managers can implement to improve performance. As we noted, there 
are many reasons why it can become necessary for an organization to streamline, 
simplify, and downsize its operations. Sometimes a change in the business environ-
ment occurs that could not have been foreseen; perhaps a shift in technology renders 
the company’s products obsolete or a worldwide recession reduces the demand for 
its products. Sometimes an organization has excess capacity because customers no 
longer want the goods and services it provides, perhaps because they are outdated 
or offer poor value for the money. Sometimes organizations downsize because they 
have grown too tall and bureaucratic and operating costs have become excessive. 
And sometimes they restructure even when they are in a strong position, simply to 
build and improve their competitive advantage and stay on top.
All too often, however, companies are forced to downsize and lay off employees 
because managers have not continuously monitored the way they operate their basic 
business processes and have not made the incremental changes to their strategies that 
would allow them to contain costs and adjust to changing conditions. Paradoxically, 
because they have not paid attention to the need to reengineer themselves, they are 
forced into a position where restructuring is the only way they can survive and com-
pete in an increasingly competitive environment.
A Model of the Change Process
In order to understand the issues involved in implementing strategic change, it is use-
ful to focus on the series of distinct steps that strategic managers must follow if the 
change process is to succeed.6 These steps are listed in Figure 8.1.
Determining the Need for Change The fi rst step in the change process is for stra-
tegic managers to recognize the need for change. Sometimes this need is obvious, as 
when divisions are fi ghting or when competitors introduce a product that is clearly 
superior to anything the company has in production. More often, however, manag-
ers have trouble determining that something is going wrong in the organization. 

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
203
Problems may develop gradually, and organizational performance may slip for 
a number of years before the decline becomes obvious. Thus, the fi rst step in the 
change process occurs when strategic managers, or others in a position to take ac-
tion, such as directors or takeover specialists, recognize that there is a gap between 
desired company performance and actual performance. Using measures such as a 
decline in profi tability, return on investment (ROI), stock price, or market share as 
indicators that change is needed, managers can start looking for the source of the 
problem. To discover it, they conduct a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats (SWOT) analysis.
Strategic managers examine the company’s strengths and weaknesses. For ex-
ample, management conducts a strategic audit of all functions and divisions and 
assesses their contribution to profi tability over time. Perhaps some divisions have 
become relatively unprofi table as innovation has slowed without the management 
realizing it. Perhaps sales and marketing have failed to keep pace with changes in 
the competitive environment. Perhaps the company’s product is simply outdated. 
Strategic managers also analyze the company’s level of differentiation and integra-
tion to make sure that it is appropriate for its strategy. Perhaps a company does not 
have the integrating mechanisms in place to achieve gains from synergy, or perhaps 
the structure has become tall and infl exible so that bureaucratic costs have escalated.
Strategic managers then examine environmental opportunities and threats that 
might explain the problem, using all the concepts developed in Chapter 3 of this 
book. For instance, intense competition may have arisen unexpectedly from sub-
stitute products, or a shift in technology or consumers’ tastes may have caught the 
company unawares.
Once the source of the problem has been identifi ed via SWOT analysis, strategic 
managers must determine the desired future state of the company— that is, how it 
should change its strategy and structure to achieve the new goals they have set for 
it. In the next section, we discuss one important tool managers can use to work 
out the best future mission and strategy for maximizing company profi tability. Of 
course, the choices they make are specifi c to each individual company, because each 
company has a unique set of skills and competencies. The challenge for managers 
is that there is no way they can determine in advance, or even reliably estimate, the 
accuracy of their assumptions about the future. Strategic change always involves 
considerable uncertainty and risks that must be borne if above- average returns are 
to be achieved.
Determining the Obstacles to Change Strategic change is frequently resisted 
by people and groups inside an organization. Often, for example, the decision to 
reengineer and restructure a company requires the establishment of a new set of role 
and authority relationships among managers in different functions and divisions. 
Figure 8.1 Stages in the Change Process
Managing
change
Determining
the obstacles
to change
Determining
the need
for change
Evaluating
change

204  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Because this change may threaten the status and rewards of some managers, they 
resist the changes being implemented. Many efforts at change take a long time, and 
many fail because of the high level of resistance to change at all levels in the organi-
zation. Thus, the second step in implementing strategic change is to determine what 
obstacles to change exist in a company. Obstacles to change can be found at four 
levels in the organization: corporate, divisional, functional, and individual.
At the corporate level, changing strategy even in seemingly trivial ways may sig-
nifi cantly affect a company’s behavior. For example, suppose that to reduce costs, 
a company decides to centralize all divisional purchasing and sales activities at the 
corporate level. Such consolidation could severely damage each division’s ability to 
develop a unique strategy for its own individual market. Alternatively, suppose that 
in response to low- cost foreign competition, a company decides to pursue a strategy 
of increased differentiation. This action would change the balance of power among 
functions and could lead to problems as functions start fi ghting to retain their status 
in the organization. A company’s present strategies constitute a powerful obstacle 
to change. They generate a massive amount of resistance that has to be overcome 
before change can take place. This is why strategic change is usually a slow process.
Similar factors operate at the divisional level. Change is diffi cult at the divisional 
level if divisions are highly interrelated, because a shift in one division’s operations 
affects other divisions. Furthermore, changes in strategy affect different divisions in 
different ways, because change generally favors the interests of some divisions over 
those of others. Managers in the different divisions may thus have different attitudes 
toward change, and some will be less supportive than others. Existing divisions may 
resist establishing new product divisions, for example, because they will lose re-
sources and their status in the organization will diminish.
The same obstacles to change exist at the functional level. Just like divisions, 
different functions have different strategic orientations and goals and react differ-
ently to the changes management proposes. For example, manufacturing generally 
has a short- term, cost- directed effi ciency orientation; research and development is 
oriented toward long- term, technical goals; and the sales function is oriented toward 
satisfying customers’ needs. Thus, production may see the solution to a problem as 
one of reducing costs, sales as one of increasing demand, and research and develop-
ment as product innovation. Differences in functional orientation make it hard to 
formulate and implement a new strategy and may signifi cantly slow a company’s 
response to changes in the competitive environment.
At the individual level, too, people are notoriously resistant to change because 
change implies uncertainty, which breeds insecurity and fear of the unknown. 
Because managers are people, this individual resistance reinforces the tendency of 
each function and division to oppose changes that may have uncertain effects on 
them. Restructuring and reengineering efforts can be particularly stressful for man-
agers at all levels of the organization. All these obstacles make it diffi cult to change 
strategy or structure quickly. That is why U.S. carmakers and companies such as 
IBM, Kodak, and Motorola were so slow to respond to fi erce global competition, 
fi rst from Japan and then from China and other Asian countries.
Paradoxically, companies that experience the greatest uncertainty may become 
best able to respond to it. When companies have been forced to change frequently, 
managers often develop the ability to handle change easily. Strategic managers must 
identify potential obstacles to change as they design and implement new strategies. 
The larger and more complex the organization, the harder it is to implement change 
because inertia is likely to be more pervasive.

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
205
Managing and Evaluating Change The process of managing and evaluating 
change raises several questions. For instance, who should actually carry out the 
change: internal managers or external consultants? Although internal managers may 
have the most experience or knowledge about a company’s operations, they may 
lack perspective because they are too close to the situation and “can’t see the forest 
for the trees.” They also run the risk of appearing to be politically motivated and of 
having a personal stake in the changes they recommend. This is why companies of-
ten turn to external consultants, who can view a situation more objectively. Outside 
consultants, however, have to spend a lot of time learning about the company and its 
problems before they can propose a plan of action. It is for both of these reasons that 
many companies (such as Quaker Oats, Gap, and IBM) bring in new CEOs from 
outside the company, and even from outside its industry, to spearhead their change 
efforts. In this way, companies can get the benefi ts of both inside information and 
external perspective.
Generally, a company can take one of two main approaches to implementing and 
managing change: top- down change or bottom- up change.7 With top- down change, 
a strong CEO or top management team analyzes what strategies need to be pursued, 
recommends a course of action, and then moves quickly to restructure and imple-
ment change in the organization. The emphasis is on speed of response and prompt 
management of problems as they occur. Bottom- up change is much more gradual. 
Top management consults with managers at all levels in the organization. Then, over 
time, it develops a detailed plan for change, with a timetable of events and stages 
that the company will go through. The emphasis in bottom- up change is on partici-
pation and on keeping people informed about the situation so that uncertainty is 
minimized.
The advantage of bottom- up change is that it removes some of the obstacles to 
change by including them in the strategic plan. Furthermore, the purpose of consult-
ing with managers at all levels is to reveal potential problems. The disadvantage 
of bottom- up change is its slow pace. On the other hand, in the case of the much 
speedier top- down change, problems may emerge later and may be diffi cult to re-
solve. Giants such as GM and Kodak often must apply top- down change because 
managers are so unaccustomed to and threatened by change that only a radical re-
structuring effort provides enough momentum to overcome organizational inertia.
The last step in the change process is to evaluate the effects of the changes in 
strategy on organizational performance. A company must compare the way it op-
erates after implementing change with the way it operated before. Managers use 
indexes such as changes in stock market price, market share, and higher revenues 
from increased product differentiation. They also can benchmark their company’s 
performance against market leaders to see how much they have improved, and how 
much more they need to improve to catch the market leader.
Analyzing a Company as a Portfolio 
of Core Competencies
Earlier we noted that managers must have access to tools that help them determine 
their companies’ desired future state— the businesses and industries that they should 
compete in to increase long- run competitive advantage. One conceptual tool that 
helps them do this was developed by Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad. It is to analyze 

206  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
a company as a portfolio of core competencies, as opposed to a portfolio of actual 
businesses.8 Recall from Chapter 1 the importance of adopting a customer- oriented, 
rather than a product- oriented, business defi nition; now the core competency be-
comes the key competitive variable.
According to Hamel and Prahalad, a core competency is a central value creation 
capability of a company— that is, a core skill. They argue, for example, that Canon, 
the Japanese concern best known for its cameras and photocopiers, has core com-
petencies in precision mechanics, fi ne optics, microelectronics, and electronic imag-
ing. Corporate development is oriented toward maintaining existing competencies, 
building new competencies, and leveraging competencies by applying them to new 
business opportunities. For example, Hamel and Prahalad argue that the success of 
a company such as 3M in creating new business has come from its ability to apply 
its core competency in adhesives to a wide range of businesses opportunities, from 
Scotch Tape to Post- it- Notes.
Hamel and Prahalad maintain that identifying current core competencies is the 
fi rst step a company should take in deciding which business opportunities to pur-
sue. Once a company has identifi ed its core competencies, they advocate using a 
matrix similar to that illustrated in Figure 8.2 to establish an agenda for building 
and leveraging core competencies to create new business opportunities. This matrix 
distinguishes between existing and new competencies, and between existing and new 
product markets. Each quadrant in the matrix has a title, and the strategic implica-
tions of these quadrants are discussed below.
Fill in the Blanks
The lower- left quadrant represents the company’s existing portfolio of competencies 
and products. Twenty years ago, for example, Canon had competencies in precision 
mechanics, fi ne optics, and microelectronics and was active in two basic businesses: 
producing cameras and photocopiers. The competencies in precision mechanics and 
Figure 8.2 Establishing a Competency Agenda
New
Existing
Premier plus 10
What new competences
will we need to build to
protect and extend our
franchise in current
industries?
New
Mega-opportunities
What new competences
will we need to build to
participate in the most
exciting industries of the
future?
Existing
Fill in the blanks
What is the opportunity
to improve our position
in existing industries
and better leverage our
existing competences?
White spaces
What new products or
services could we create
by creatively redeploying
or recombining our
current competences?
Industry
Competence

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
207
fi ne optics were used in the production of basic mechanical cameras. These two 
competencies, plus an additional competency in microelectronics, were needed to 
produce plain paper copiers. The title for this quadrant of the matrix, Fill in the 
blanks, refers to the opportunity to improve the company’s competitive position in 
existing markets by leveraging existing core competencies. For example, Canon was 
able to improve the position of its camera business by leveraging microelectronics 
skills from its copier business to support the development of cameras with electronic 
features, such as autofocus capabilities.
Premier Plus 10
The upper- left quadrant is referred to as Premier plus 10. This title is meant to sug-
gest another important question: What new core competencies must be built today 
to ensure that the company remains a premier provider of its existing products in 
10 years’ time? Canon, for example, decided that in order to maintain a competitive 
edge in its copier business, it was going to have to build a new competency in digital 
imaging. This new competency subsequently helped Canon to extend its product 
range to include laser copiers, color copiers, and digital cameras.
White Spaces
The lower- right quadrant is titled White spaces. The question to be addressed here is 
how best to fi ll the “white space” by creatively redeploying or recombining current 
core competencies. In Canon’s case, the company has been able to recombine its es-
tablished core competencies in precision mechanics, fi ne optics, and microelectronics 
with its more recently acquired competency in digital imaging to enter the market 
for computer printers and scanners.
Mega- Opportunities
The Mega- opportunities represented by the upper- right quadrant of Figure 8.2 do 
not overlap with the company’s current market position or with its current endow-
ment of competencies. Nevertheless, a company may choose to pursue such oppor-
tunities if they are particularly attractive, signifi cant, or relevant to the company’s 
existing business opportunities. For example, back in 1979 Monsanto was primar-
ily a manufacturer of chemicals, including fertilizers. However, the company saw 
that there were enormous opportunities in the emerging fi eld of biotechnology. 
Specifi cally, senior research scientists at Monsanto believed it might be possible to 
produce genetically engineered crop seeds that would produce their own “organic” 
pesticides. In that year the company embarked upon a massive investment that ulti-
mately amounted to over a billion dollars to build a world- class competency in bio-
technology. This investment was funded by cash fl ows generated from Monsanto’s 
core chemical operations. The investment began to bear fruit after Monsanto in-
troduced a series of genetically engineered crop seeds, including Bollgard, a cotton 
seed that is resistant to many common pests, including the bollworm; and Roundup- 
resistant soybean seeds (Roundup is an herbicide produced by Monsanto) that have 
earned the company hundreds of billions of dollars in profi t.9
The framework proposed by Hamel and Prahalad helps a company identify busi-
ness opportunities, and it has clear implications for resource allocation (as exempli-
fi ed by the Monsanto case just discussed). However, the great advantage of Hamel 

Internal New Venture
A company’s creation 
of the value chain 
functions necessary 
to start a new business 
from scratch.
208  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
and Prahalad’s framework is that it focuses explicitly on how a company can create 
value by building new competencies or by recombining existing competencies to 
enter new business areas (as Canon did with fax machines and bubble jet printers). 
Whereas traditional portfolio tools treat businesses as independent, Hamel and 
Prahalad’s framework recognizes the interdependencies among businesses and fo-
cuses on opportunities to create value by building and leveraging competencies. In 
this sense, their framework is a useful tool to help strategic managers reconceptual-
ize their company’s core competencies, activities, and businesses to determine its 
desired future state— and so reduce the uncertainty surrounding the investment of 
its scarce resources.
Having reviewed the different businesses in the company’s portfolio, corporate 
managers might decide to enter a new business area or industry to create more value 
and profi t— something Monsanto did when it decided to enter the biotechnology in-
dustry. In the next three sections, we discuss the three main vehicles that companies 
can use to enter new businesses or industries: internal new ventures, acquisitions, 
and strategic alliances (including joint ventures).
Implementing Strategy 
Through Internal New Ventures
Internal new ventures involve creating the value chain functions necessary to start 
a new business from scratch. Internal new venturing is typically used to execute 
corporate- level strategy when a company possesses a set of valuable competencies 
(resources and capabilities) in its existing businesses that can be leveraged or recom-
bined to enter the new business area. As a rule, science- based companies that use 
their technology to create market opportunities in related areas tend to favor inter-
nal new venturing as an entry strategy. 3M, for example, has a near- legendary knack 
for shaping new markets from internally generated ideas. HP originally started out 
making test and measurement instruments and later moved into computers and then 
printers through an internal new- venture strategy. Microsoft started out making 
software for PCs, but it developed the Xbox video game business by leveraging its 
software skills and applying them to this new industry.
Even if it lacks the competencies required to compete in a new business, a com-
pany may pursue internal new venturing if the industry it is entering is an emerg-
ing or embryonic industry. In such an industry there are no established companies 
that already possess the competencies required to compete in that industry. Thus a 
company is at no competitive disadvantage if it starts a new venture. Also, the op-
tion of acquiring an established enterprise that possesses those competencies is not 
available, so a company may have no choice but to enter via an internal new venture.
This was the position in which Monsanto found itself back in 1979 when it con-
templated entering the biotechnology fi eld to produce herbicide and seeds yielding 
pest- resistant crops. The biotechnology fi eld was young at that time, and there were 
no incumbent companies focused on applying biotechnology to agricultural prod-
ucts. Accordingly, Monsanto established an internal new venture to enter the busi-
ness, even though at the time it lacked the required competencies. Indeed, Monsanto’s 
whole venturing strategy was built around the notion that it had the ability to build 
competencies ahead of potential competitors and so gain a strong competitive lead 
in this newly emerging fi eld.

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
209
Pitfalls with Internal New Ventures
Despite the popularity of internal new venturing, there is a high risk of failure. 
Research suggests that somewhere between 33% and 60% of all new products that 
reach the marketplace do not generate an adequate economic return,10 and most 
of these products were the result of internal new ventures. Three reasons are of-
ten put forward to explain the relatively high failure rate of internal new ventures: 
(1) market entry on too small a scale, (2) poor commercialization of the new- venture 
product, and (3) poor corporate management of the new- venture division.11
Scale of Entry Research suggests that on average, large- scale entry into a new 
business is often a critical precondition of success with a new venture. In the short 
run, this means that a substantial capital investment must be made to support large- 
scale entry; thus, there is a risk of major losses if the new venture fails. But, in the 
long run, which can be as long as 5–12 years depending on the industry, such a large 
investment results in far greater returns than if a company chooses to enter on a 
small scale in order to limit its investment to reduce potential losses.12 Large- scale 
entrants can more rapidly realize scale economies, build brand loyalty, and gain ac-
cess to distribution channels in the new industry, all of which increase the probabil-
ity of a new venture’s success. In contrast, small- scale entrants may fi nd themselves 
handicapped by high costs due to a lack of scale economies and market presence that 
limits their ability to build brand loyalties and gain access to distribution channels. 
These scale effects are particularly signifi cant when a company is entering an estab-
lished industry where incumbent companies do have the benefi t of scale economies, 
brand loyalty, and access to distribution channels. In that case, the new entrant has 
to make a major investment in order to succeed.
Figure 8.3 plots the relationship between scale of entry and profi tability over 
time for successful small- scale and large- scale ventures. The fi gure shows that suc-
cessful small- scale entry is associated with lower initial losses but that in the long 
Profitability
Large-scale entry
Small-scale entry
(+)
(–)
Time
0
Figure 8.3 Scale of Entry and Proﬁ tability

210  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
run, large- scale entry generates greater returns. However, because of the high costs 
and risks associated with large- scale entry, many companies make the mistake of 
choosing a small- scale entry strategy, which often means they fail to build the market 
share necessary for long- term success.
Commercialization Many internal new ventures are driven by the opportunity to 
use a new or advanced technology to make better products for customers and out-
perform competitors. To be commercially successful, science- based innovations must 
be developed with market requirements in mind. Many internal new ventures fail 
when a company ignores the basic needs of the market. A company can be blinded 
by the technological possibilities of a new product and fail to analyze market oppor-
tunities properly. Thus, a new venture may fail because of a lack of commercializa-
tion or because it is marketing a technology for which there is no demand. One of 
the most dramatic new- venture failures in recent history, the Iridium satellite com-
munications system developed by Motorola, illustrates this well. The Iridium project 
was breathtaking in its scope. It called for 66 communications satellites to be placed 
in an orbital network. In theory, this network of fl ying telecommunications switches 
would enable anyone with an Iridium satellite phone to place and receive calls, no 
matter where they were on the planet. Motorola’s CEO, Christopher Galvin, called 
the project the eighth wonder of the world but after spending 5 billion dollars to 
launch Iridium Motorola declared that Iridium was bankrupt only 9 months after 
the service began!
To its critics, the Iridium project was a classic case of a company being so blinded 
by the promise of a technology that it ignored market realities. Several serious short-
comings of the Iridium project limited its market acceptance. First, the phones them-
selves were large and heavy by current cell phone standards, weighing more than 
a pound! They were diffi cult to use, call clarity was poor, the phones themselves 
cost $3,000 each, and despite the “can be used anywhere” marketing theme, the 
phones could not be used inside cars or buildings— a major inconvenience for the 
busy globe- trotting executives at whom the service was aimed! Finally, the rapid ac-
ceptance of much cheaper and more convenient cell phones limited the need for the 
Iridium phone. Why would a customer who had a cheaper, more convenient alterna-
tive pay $3,000 for the privilege of owning a phone the size and weight of a brick 
that would not work in places where other cell phones do?13
Poor Corporate Management Managing the new- venture process and control-
ling the new- venture division creates many diffi cult managerial and organizational 
issues.14 For example, one common mistake some companies make to try to increase 
their chances of making successful products is to establish too many different inter-
nal new- venture divisions at the same time. It places great demands on a company’s 
cash fl ow and can result in the best ventures being starved of the cash they need for 
success. In addition, if a company has too many internal new ventures in progress, 
management attention is likely to be spread too thin over these ventures, inviting 
disaster.
Another common mistake is failure by corporate management to establish the 
strategic context within which new- venture projects should be developed. Simply 
taking a team of research scientists and allowing them to do research in their favorite 
fi eld may produce novel results, but these results may have little strategic or commer-
cial value. It is necessary to be very clear about the strategic objectives of the venture 
and to understand exactly how it will seek to establish a competitive advantage.

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
211
Failure to anticipate the time and costs involved in the new- venture process is 
another common mistake. Many companies have unrealistic expectations regarding 
the time frame involved. Reportedly, some companies operate with a philosophy of 
killing new businesses if they do not turn a profi t by the end of the third year— a 
most unrealistic view, given the evidence that it can take 5–12 years before a new 
venture generates substantial profi ts.
Guidelines for Successful Internal New Venturing
To avoid the pitfalls just discussed, a company should adopt a structured approach 
to managing internal new venturing.15 New venturing typically begins with R&D. To 
make effective use of its R&D capacity, a company must fi rst spell out its strategic 
objectives and then communicate them to its scientists and engineers. Research, after 
all, makes sense only when it is undertaken in areas relevant to strategic goals.16
To increase the probability of commercial success, a company should foster close 
links between R&D and marketing personnel, for this is the best way to ensure that 
research projects address the needs of the market. The company should also foster 
close links between R&D and manufacturing personnel to ensure that the company 
has the capability to manufacture any proposed new products.
Many companies successfully integrate different functions by setting up project 
teams. Such teams comprise representatives of the various functional areas; their task 
is to oversee the development of new products. Another advantage of such teams is 
that they can signifi cantly reduce the time it takes to develop a new product. Thus, 
while R&D personnel are working on the design, manufacturing personnel can be 
setting up facilities, and marketing can be developing its plans. Because of such in-
tegration, Apple needed only 12 months to take the iPad tablet computer from an 
idea on the drawing board to a marketable product that has been wildly successful.
To use resources to the best effect, a company must also devise a selection pro-
cess for choosing only the ventures that are most likely to meet with commercial 
success. Picking future winners is a tricky business; by their very defi nition, new 
ventures have an uncertain future. One study found the uncertainty surrounding 
new ventures to be so great that it usually took a company 4–5 years after launching 
the venture to reasonably estimate the venture’s future profi tability.17 Nevertheless, 
a selection process is necessary if a company is to avoid spreading its resources over 
too many projects.
Once a project has been selected, management needs to monitor the progress of 
the venture closely. Evidence suggests that the most important criterion for evaluat-
ing a venture during its fi rst 4–5 years is growth in market share, rather than cash 
fl ow or profi tability. In the long run, the most successful ventures are those that 
increase their market share. A company should have clearly defi ned market share 
objectives for an internal new venture and should decide whether to retain or kill it 
in its early years on the basis of its ability to achieve market share goals. Only in the 
medium term should profi tability and cash fl ow begin to take on greater importance.
Finally, the association of large- scale entry with greater long- term profi tability 
suggests that a company can increase the probability of success for an internal new 
venture by “thinking big.” Thinking big means the construction of effi cient- scale pro-
duction facilities before demand has fully materialized, large marketing expenditures 
to build a market presence and brand loyalty, and a commitment by corporate man-
agement to accept initial losses as long as market share is expanding. Note that it is not 
just high- tech companies that utilize internal new venturing, any company can take 

Acquisition
The purchase of one 
company by another.
212  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
its existing skills and distinctive competencies to develop new ways to gain access 
to customers such as Walmart did when it developed its chain of Neighborhood 
Market stores (see Chapter 7, p. 176).
Implementing Strategy 
Through Acquisitions
Acquisitions involve one company purchasing another company. A company may 
use acquisitions in two ways: to strengthen its competitive position in an existing 
business by purchasing a competitor (horizontal integration) and to enter a new 
business or industry. Companies may use acquisitions to enter a new business when 
they lack the distinctive competencies (resources and capabilities) required to com-
pete in that area, but they can purchase, at a reasonable price, an incumbent com-
pany that does have those competencies.
Companies also have a preference for acquisitions as an entry mode when they 
feel the need to move fast. As we noted above, building a new business through in-
ternal venturing can be a relatively slow process. Acquisition is a much quicker way 
to establish a signifi cant market presence, create value, and increase profi tability. 
A company can purchase a leading company with a strong competitive position 
in months, rather than waiting years to build a market leadership position by engag-
ing in internal venturing. Thus when speed is important, acquisition is the favored 
entry mode.
Acquisitions are also often perceived as somewhat less risky than internal new 
ventures, primarily because they involve less commercial uncertainty. It is in the very 
nature of internal new ventures that large uncertainties are associated with project-
ing future profi tability, revenues, and cash fl ows. In contrast, when one company ac-
quires another, it knows the profi tability, revenues, and market share of the acquired 
company, so there is considerably less uncertainty. In short, acquisition enables 
a company to buy an established business with a track record, and for this reason, 
many companies favor an acquisition strategy.
Finally, acquisitions may be the preferred entry mode when the industry to be en-
tered is well established and incumbent companies enjoy signifi cant protection from 
barriers to entry. As you recall from Chapter 3, barriers to entry arise from factors 
associated with product differentiation (brand loyalty), absolute cost advantages, 
and economies of scale. When such barriers are substantial, a company fi nds enter-
ing an industry through internal new venturing diffi cult. To enter, a company may 
have to construct an effi cient- scale manufacturing plant, undertake massive adver-
tising to break down established brand loyalties, and quickly build up distribution 
outlets— all challenging goals likely to involve substantial expenditures.
In contrast, by acquiring an established enterprise, a company can circumvent 
most entry barriers. It can purchase a market leader that already benefi ts from sub-
stantial scale economies and brand loyalty. Thus the greater the barriers to entry, the 
more likely it is that acquisition will be the favored entry mode. (We should note, 
however, that the attractiveness of an acquisition is based on the assumption that an 
incumbent company can be acquired for less than it would cost to enter the same 
industry through internal new venturing. As we discuss in the next section, the valid-
ity of this assumption is often questionable.)

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
213
Pitfalls with Acquisitions
For the reasons just noted, acquisitions have long been a popular vehicle for expand-
ing the scope of the organization into new business areas. However, despite their 
popularity, there is ample evidence that many acquisitions fail to add value for the 
acquiring company and, indeed, often end up dissipating value. For example, a study 
of 700 large acquisitions found that although 30% of these resulted in higher profi ts, 
31% led to losses, and the remainder had little impact.18
In fact, a wealth of evidence from academic research suggests that many 
acquisitions fail to realize their anticipated benefi ts.19 Not only do profi ts and mar-
ket shares often decline following acquisition, but a substantial subset of acquired 
companies experience traumatic diffi culties that ultimately lead to their being sold 
off by the acquiring company.20 Thus many acquisitions dilute value rather than 
create it.21
Why do so many acquisitions fail to create value? There appears to be four major 
reasons: (1) companies often experience diffi culties when trying to integrate diver-
gent corporate cultures; (2) companies overestimate the potential economic benefi ts 
from an acquisition; (3) acquisitions tend to be very expensive; and (4) companies 
often do not adequately screen their acquisition targets.
Postacquisition Integration Having made an acquisition, the acquiring com-
pany has to integrate the acquired business into its own organizational structure. 
Integration involves the adoption of common management and fi nancial control 
systems, the joining together of operations from the acquired and the acquiring 
company, the establishment of bureaucratic mechanisms to share information and 
personnel, and the need to create a common culture. When integration is attempted, 
many unexpected problems can occur. Often they stem from differences in corporate 
cultures. After an acquisition, many acquired companies experience high manage-
ment turnover, possibly because their employees do not like the acquiring company’s 
way of doing things.22 Research evidence suggests that the loss of management talent 
and expertise, to say nothing of the damage from constant tension between different 
business units, can harm the performance of the acquired unit.23
Overestimating Economic Beneﬁ ts Even when companies achieve integration, 
they often overestimate the potential for creating value by marrying different busi-
nesses. They overestimate the strategic advantages that can be derived from the ac-
quisition, and thus pay more for the target company than it is probably worth. Why? 
Top managers typically overestimate their ability to create value from an acquisition, 
primarily because rising to the top of a corporation gives them an exaggerated sense 
of their own capabilities.24 The overestimation of economic benefi ts seems to have 
been a factor in the disastrous 2001 acquisition of Time Warner by AOL, for ex-
ample, that resulted in billions of dollars in losses for Time Warner, which spun AOL 
off into a separate company in December 2009.
The Expense of Acquisitions Acquisitions of companies whose stock is publicly 
traded tend to be very expensive, as Time Warner found out. When a company moves 
to acquire the stock of another company, the stock price frequently gets bid up in 
the acquisition process. In such cases the acquiring company must often pay a sig-
nifi cant premium over the current market value of the target. Often these premiums 
are 50%–100% above the stock value of the target company before the acquisition 

214  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
was announced. Such a situation is particularly likely to occur in the case of con-
tested bids, where two or more companies simultaneously bid for control of a single 
target company. For example, in 2010 Dell and HP entered into a bidding war for 
cloud- computing data storage company 3Par. Dell fi rst offered $1 billion to buy the 
company but then HP offered $1.5 billion. Dell then offered $1.7 billion but gave up 
the battle after HP bid over $2 billion for 3Par— over a 150% premium.
The debt taken on in order to fi nance expensive acquisitions can later become 
a noose around the acquiring company’s neck, particularly if interest rates rise. 
Moreover, if the market value of the target company prior to an acquisition was 
a true refl ection of that company’s worth under its management at that time, 
a premium of 50% or 100% over this value means that the acquiring company 
has to improve the performance of the acquired unit by just as much if it is to reap 
a positive return on its investment! Such performance gains can be very diffi cult 
to achieve.
Inadequate Preacquisition Screening One common reason for the failure of ac-
quisitions is management’s inadequate attention to preacquisition screening.25 Many 
companies decide to acquire other fi rms without thoroughly analyzing the potential 
benefi ts and costs. After the acquisition has been completed, many acquiring com-
panies discover that instead of buying a well- run business, they have purchased a 
troubled organization. IBM avoided this situation in 2009 when it was in negotia-
tions to purchase chip maker Sun Microsystems. After spending 1 week examining 
its books IBM reduced its offer price by 10% after its negotiators had examined 
Sun’s books and found its customer base was not as solid as they had expected. Sun 
was eventually sold to Oracle for a much lower price.
Guidelines for Successful Acquisition
To avoid pitfalls and make successful acquisitions, companies need to take a struc-
tured approach with three main components: (1) target identifi cation and preacqui-
sition screening, (2) bidding strategy, and (3) integration.26
Screening Thorough preacquisition screening increases a company’s knowl-
edge about potential takeover targets and lessens the risk of purchasing a problem 
company— one with a weak business model. It also leads to a more realistic assess-
ment of the problems involved in executing a particular acquisition so that a com-
pany can plan how to integrate the new business and blend organizational structures 
and cultures. The screening should begin with a detailed assessment of the strategic 
rationale for making the acquisition and with identifi cation of the kind of enterprise 
that would make an ideal acquisition candidate.
Next, the company should scan a target population of potential acquisition can-
didates, evaluating each in terms of a detailed set of criteria, focusing on (1) fi nancial 
position, (2) product market position, (3) competitive environment, (4) management 
capabilities, and (5) corporate culture. Such an evaluation should enable the com-
pany to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each candidate, the extent of poten-
tial economies of scope between the acquiring and the acquired companies, potential 
integration problems, and the compatibility of the corporate cultures of the acquir-
ing and the acquired companies. For example, Microsoft and SAP, the world’s lead-
ing provider of enterprise resource planning software, sat down together to discuss 
a possible acquisition by Microsoft. Both companies decided that even though there 

Strategic Alliance
A cooperative 
agreement between 
two or more companies 
to work together 
and share resources 
to achieve a common 
business objective.
Joint Venture
A formal type of 
strategic alliance in 
which two companies 
jointly create a new, 
separate company 
to enter a new product 
market or industry.
 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
215
was a strong strategic rationale for a merger— together they could dominate the 
software computing market that satisfi es the need of large global companies— 
the problems of creating an organizational structure that could successfully integrate 
their hundreds of thousands of employees throughout the world, and blend two very 
different cultures, were insurmountable.
The company should then reduce the list of candidates to the most promising 
ones and evaluate them further. At this stage, it should sound out third parties, such 
as investment bankers, whose opinions may be important and who may be able to 
offer valuable insights into the effi ciency of target companies. The company that 
heads the list after this process should be the acquisition target.
Bidding Strategy The objective of bidding strategy is to reduce the price that a 
company must pay for an acquisition candidate. The essential element of a good 
bidding strategy is timing. For example, Hanson PLC, one of the most successful 
companies to pursue unrelated diversifi cation, always looked for essentially sound 
businesses that were suffering from short- term problems due to cyclical industry 
factors or from problems localized in one division. Such companies are typically 
undervalued by the stock market and thus can be picked up without payment of 
the standard 40% or 50% premium over current stock prices. With good timing, a 
company can make a bargain purchase.
Integration Despite good screening and bidding, an acquisition will fail unless 
positive steps are taken to integrate the acquired company into the organizational 
structure of the acquiring one. Integration should center on the source of the po-
tential strategic advantages of the acquisition— for instance, opportunities to share 
marketing, manufacturing, procurement, R&D, fi nancial, or management resources. 
Integration should also be accompanied by steps to eliminate any duplication of 
facilities or functions. In addition, any unwanted divisions of the acquired company 
should be sold. Finally, if the different business activities are closely related, they will 
require a high degree of integration. In the case of a company pursuing unrelated 
diversifi cation, the level of integration may be a minimal problem. But for a strategy 
of related diversifi cation, the problem of integrating the two companies’ operations 
is much greater. One company that has succeeded well in its acquisition strategy for 
these reasons is News Corp., discussed in the following Strategy in Action.
Implementing Strategy 
Through Strategic Alliances
Strategic alliances are cooperative agreements between two or more companies to 
work together and share resources to achieve a common business objective. A joint 
venture is a formal type of strategic alliance in which two companies jointly create a 
new, separate company to enter a new business area.
A company may prefer internal new venturing to acquisition as an entry strategy 
into new business areas and yet hesitate to commit itself to an internal new venture 
because of the risks and costs of building a new operation “from the ground up.” 
Such a situation is likely when a company sees the advantages of establishing a new 
business in an embryonic or growth industry, but the risks and costs associated with 

216  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
the business are more than it is willing to assume on its own. In this case, a company 
may decide to form some kind of strategic alliance with another company.
As noted earlier, strategic alliances are cooperative agreements between companies. 
The parties to an alliance may be actual or potential competitors; or they may be 
situated at different stages in an industry’s value chain; or they may be in different 
businesses but have a joint interest in working together to develop distinctive com-
petencies in R&D or marketing that are useful to both parties or decide to cooperate 
on a particular problem, such as developing a new product or technology.
Strategic alliances run the gamut from informal agreements and short- term 
contracts, where companies agree to share know- how, to formal contractual agree-
ments such as long- term outsourcing agreements and joint ventures in which both 
News Corp is a company that has engineered scores of 
acquisitions to become one of the four largest, and most 
powerful, entertainment media companies in the world. 
What kind of strategies has its CEO Rupert Murdock 
used to create his media empire?
Rupert Murdock was born into a newspaper fam-
ily; his father owned and ran the Adelaide News, an 
Australian regional newspaper, and when his father died 
in 1952 he gained control of it. He quickly set his sights 
on enlarging his customer base. After all, more proﬁ t is 
earned when more customers buy your products, and so 
he used his ﬁ nancial acumen to acquire more and more 
Australian newspapers. One of these had connections 
to a major British “pulp” newspaper the Mirror, which is 
quite similar to National Enquirer, and Murdock acquired 
and established the Sun as a leading British tabloid.
His growing reputation as an entrepreneur enabled 
him to borrow more and more money from investors 
who saw that he could create a much higher return from 
the assets he controlled than competitors. Murdock 
carried on buying well- known newspapers such as the 
British Sunday Telegraph, and then his ﬁ rst U.S. news-
paper, the San Antonio Express. Then, he launched the 
National Star and his growing proﬁ ts allowed him to con-
tinue to borrow money and he bought the New York Post 
and The Times and Sunday Times.
Pursuing this strategy of horizontal integration 
through acquisitions to create one of the world’s biggest 
newspaper empires was just one part of Murdock’s cor-
porate strategies, however. He realized that industries in 
the entertainment and media sector can be divided into 
those that provide media content, or “software,” such as 
book publishing, movies, and television programming, 
and those that provide or supply the media channels or 
“hardware” necessary to get media software to custom-
ers such as movie theatres, TV channels, TV cable, and 
satellite broadcasting. Murdock realized he could create 
the most proﬁ t by getting involved in both the media 
software and media hardware industries, which are es-
sentially adjacent stages in the value chain of the enter-
tainment and media sector. So, Murdock went all out 
to pursue a strategy of vertical integration and went on 
a buying spree to purchase global media companies in 
both the software and hardware stages of the entertain-
ment sector. He paid $1.5 billion for Metromedia, which 
owned seven stations that reached over 20% of house-
holds in the United States. He scored another major coup 
when he bought Twentieth Century Fox Movie Studios, a 
premium content provider. Now he had Fox’s huge ﬁ lm 
library and the creative talents the studio possessed to 
make new ﬁ lms and TV programming. Murdock decided 
to create the Fox Broadcasting network and buy or cre-
ate its own U.S. network of Fox afﬁ liates that would 
show programs developed by its own Fox movie stu-
dios. After a slow start, the Fox Network gained popular-
ity with shows like The Simpson’s, which became Fox’s 
ﬁ rst blockbuster program. He also engineered another 
coup when Fox purchased the sole rights to broadcast 
all NFL games for over $1 billion, shutting out NBC, and 
making Fox the “fourth network.” The Fox network has 
never looked back and it was one of the ﬁ rst to get into 
“reality” programming. News Corp has acquired a host 
of companies in the entertainment value chain that ﬁ t 
with its newspaper, TV station, and movie and broadcast-
ing companies to strengthen its competitive position in 
these industries.
8.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
News Corp’s Successful Acquisition Strategy

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
217
companies establish and assume ownership of a new company. Thus some strategic 
alliances are meant to be temporary, but others may be a prelude to a permanent re-
lationship. For example, sometimes long- term agreements result in the establishment 
of a joint venture (they may even lead to a merger through acquisition). Strategic 
alliances of all kinds are often used as a vehicle that enables companies to share the 
risks and costs of developing a new business. In any event, strategic alliances are a 
valuable strategic tool that helps companies maximize their business opportunities, 
especially in today’s competitive global environment.
Advantages of Strategic Alliances
Companies enter into strategic alliances with competitors to achieve a number of 
strategic objectives.27 First, strategic alliances may be a way of facilitating entry into 
a market. For example, Motorola initially found it very diffi cult to gain access to 
the Japanese cellular telephone market because of formal and informal Japanese 
trade barriers. The turning point for Motorola came when it formed its alliance with 
Toshiba to build microprocessors. As part of the deal, Toshiba provided Motorola 
with marketing help, including some of its best managers. This helped Motorola win 
government approval to enter the Japanese market.28
Second, many companies enter into strategic alliances to share the fi xed costs 
and associated risks that arise from the development of new products or processes. 
Motorola’s alliance with Toshiba was partly motivated by a desire to share the high 
fi xed costs associated with setting up the capital- intensive operation that manufac-
turing microprocessors entailed (it cost Motorola and Toshiba close to $1 billion to 
set up their facility). Few companies can afford the costs and risks of going it alone 
on such a venture. Similarly, an alliance between Boeing and a number of Japanese 
companies to build Boeing’s latest commercial jet liner, the 787, was motivated by 
Boeing’s desire to share the burden of the estimated $8 billion investment required 
to develop the aircraft.
Third, many alliances can be seen as a way of bringing together complementary 
skills and assets that neither company could easily develop on its own. For example, 
Microsoft and Toshiba established an alliance aimed at developing embedded micro-
processors (essentially, tiny computers) that can perform a variety of entertainment 
functions in an automobile (for example, they can run a backseat DVD player or 
a wireless Internet connection). The processors will run a version of Microsoft’s 
Windows CE operating system. Microsoft brings its software engineering skills to 
the alliance, and Toshiba brings its skills in developing microprocessors.29
Disadvantages of Strategic Alliances
Strategic alliances have many signifi cant advantages, but there are also several dis-
advantages that may arise. First, strategic alliances may provide a company’s com-
petitors with access to valuable low- cost manufacturing knowledge and a route to 
gain new technology and market access.30 For example, some commentators have 
argued that many strategic alliances between U.S. and Japanese fi rms facilitated an 
implicit Japanese strategy to keep higher- paying, higher- value- added jobs in Japan 
while gaining the project engineering and production process skills that underlie 
the competitive success of many U.S. companies.31 These observers maintain that 
Japanese success in the machine tool and semiconductor industries was the result 
of knowledge acquired through strategic alliances with U.S. companies. And they 

218  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
contend that U.S. managers aided the Japanese by entering into alliances that chan-
nel new inventions to Japan and provide a convenient sales and distribution network 
for the resulting Japanese products sent back for sale in the United States. Although 
such agreements may generate short- term profi ts, in the long run the result is to 
“hollow out” U.S. fi rms, leaving them with no competitive advantage in the global 
marketplace.
Consider, for example, the situation in a joint venture, the formal strategic al-
liance in which two companies team up and establish a separate company to pool 
their complementary skills and assets. Such an arrangement enables a company to 
share the substantial risks and costs involved in developing a new business oppor-
tunity and may increase the probability of success in the new business. But there are 
three main drawbacks to joint venture arrangements.
First, just as a joint venture allows a company to share the risks and costs of 
developing a new business, it also requires the sharing of profi ts if the new business 
succeeds. Second, a company that enters into a joint venture always runs the risk 
of giving critical know- how away to its joint- venture partner, which might use that 
know- how to compete directly with the company in the future. Third, the venture 
partners must share control. If the partners have different business philosophies, 
time horizons, or investment preferences, substantial problems can arise. Confl icts 
over how to run the joint venture can tear it apart and result in business failure.
Thus the critics of strategic alliances have a point: Alliances do have risks, and 
the more formal or extensive the alliance, the greater the possibility that a company 
may give away more than it gets in return. Nevertheless, there are so many examples 
of apparently successful alliances between companies, including alliances between 
U.S. and Japanese companies, that it seems that long- term strategic alliances can and 
often do result in more advantages than disadvantages. The next section suggests 
why, and under what conditions, companies can gain these advantages.
Making Strategic Alliances Work
The failure rate for strategic alliances is quite high. For example, one study of 
49 global strategic alliances found that two- thirds ran into serious managerial and 
fi nancial troubles within 2 years of their formation. The same study suggests that 
although many of these problems are ultimately resolved, 33% of strategic alliances 
are ultimately rated as failures by the parties involved.32 The success of a strategic 
alliance seems to be a function of three main factors: partner selection, alliance struc-
ture, and the manner in which the alliance is managed.
Partner Selection One of the keys to making a strategic alliance work is to select 
the right kind of partner. A good partner has three principal characteristics. First, a 
good partner helps the company achieve strategic goals, such as gaining market ac-
cess, sharing the costs and risks of new- product development, or gaining access to 
critical core competencies. In other words, the partner must have capabilities that 
the company lacks and that it values. Second, a good partner shares the fi rm’s vision 
for the purpose of the alliance. If two companies approach an alliance with radically 
different agendas, the chances are great that the relationship will not be harmonious 
and will end in divorce.
Third, a good partner is unlikely to try to exploit the alliance opportunistically 
for its own ends— that is, to expropriate or even steal the company’s technological 
know- how while giving little in return. In this respect, fi rms with reputations for fair 
play to maintain probably make the best partners. For example, IBM is involved in 

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
219
so many strategic alliances that it would not pay the company to cheat on individual 
alliance partners (in the mid- 2000s, IBM reportedly had more than 150 major stra-
tegic alliances).33 Doing so would tarnish IBM’s reputation as a good ally and make 
it diffi cult for IBM to attract alliance partners in the future. Because IBM attaches 
great importance to its alliances, it is unlikely to engage in the kind of underhand 
behavior that critics highlight. Similarly, their reputations make it less likely (though 
by no means impossible) that such Japanese fi rms as Sony, Toshiba, and Fuji, which 
have histories of alliances with non- Japanese fi rms, would exploit an alliance partner.
To select a partner with these three characteristics, a company needs to thor-
oughly investigate potential alliance candidates. To increase the probability of select-
ing a good partner, the company should collect as much relevant publicly available 
information about potential allies as possible; collect data from informed third 
parties, including companies that have had alliances with the potential partners, 
investment bankers who have had dealings with them, and some of their former 
employees; and get to know potential partners as well as possible before committing 
to an alliance. This last step should include face- to- face meetings between senior 
managers to ensure that the “chemistry” is right.
Alliance Structure Once a partner has been selected, the alliance should be struc-
tured so that the company’s risk of giving too much away to the partner is reduced 
to an acceptable level. Figure 8.4 depicts the four safeguards against opportunism of 
cheating by alliance partners discussed below. First, alliances can be designed to make it 
diffi cult or impossible to transfer technology meant to be kept secret and proprietary. 
Specifi cally, the design, development, and servicing of a product manufactured by an 
alliance can be structured so as to “wall off” and protect sensitive technologies from 
partners. In the alliance between GE and Snecma to build commercial aircraft engines, 
for example, GE reduced the risk of “excess transfer” by walling off certain sections 
of the production process. This effectively cut off the transfer of what GE regarded 
as key competitive technology, while permitting Snecma access to fi nal assembly. 
Similarly, in the alliance between Boeing and the Japanese to build the 767, Boeing 
walled off research, design, and marketing functions considered central to its com-
petitive position, while allowing the Japanese to share in production technology. 
Boeing also walled off new technologies not required for 767 production.34
Second, contractual safeguards can be written into an alliance agreement to 
guard against the risk of being exploited by a partner. For example, TRW Systems, 
Establishing
contractual
safeguards
Agreeing to swap
valuable skills and
technologies
Seeking credible
commitments
“Walling off”
critical
technology
Probability of
opportunism by alliance
partner reduced by
Figure 8.4 Structuring Alliances to Reduce Opportunism

220  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
an auto- parts supplier now part of Honeywell, had strategic alliances with large 
Japanese car component suppliers to produce seat belts, engine valves, and steer-
ing gears for sale to Japanese- owned car assembly plants in the United States. TRW 
ensured that clauses in each of its alliance contracts barred the Japanese fi rms from 
competing with TRW to supply U.S.- owned auto companies with component parts. 
So TRW protected itself against the possibility that the Japanese companies entered 
the alliances only as a way of gaining access to the U.S. market to compete with 
TRW on its home turf.
Third, both parties to an alliance can promise in advance to swap important 
proprietary skills and technologies, thereby ensuring the opportunity for equitable 
gain. Cross- licensing agreements are one way to achieve this goal. For example, in 
an alliance between Motorola and Toshiba, Motorola licensed some of its micro-
processor technology to Toshiba and in return Toshiba licensed some of its memory 
chip technology to Motorola.
Fourth, the risk of deceitful behavior by an alliance partner can be reduced if 
the less powerful fi rm extracts a signifi cant credible commitment from its partner in 
advance. The purpose of a credible commitment is to send a signal that the company 
making the commitment will do its best to ensure that the alliance works. Such cred-
ible commitments often come in the form of capital investments. For example, in 
2004 the small British biotechnology fi rm Cambridge Antibody Technology entered 
into a 5- year alliance with the large pharmaceutical company Astra Zeneca to de-
velop new treatments for infl ammatory disorders. As part of the deal, Astra Zeneca 
agreed to invest $140 million, a 20% equity stake in the smaller company. This 
investment increases the probability that Astra Zeneca will do its best to ensure the 
alliance achieves its strategic goals.35
Managing the Alliance Once a partner has been selected and an appropriate 
alliance structure agreed on, the task facing the company is to maximize the benefi ts 
from the alliance. One important ingredient of success appears to be sensitivity to 
cultural differences. Many differences in management style are attributable to cul-
tural differences, and managers need to make allowances for these in dealing with 
their partner. Beyond this, maximizing the benefi ts from an alliance seems to involve 
building trust between partners and learning from partners.36
Managing an alliance successfully requires building interpersonal relationships 
between the fi rms’ managers, or what is sometimes referred to as relational capital.37 
This is one lesson that can be learned from a successful strategic alliance between 
Ford and Mazda. Ford and Mazda set up a framework of meetings within which 
their managers not only discuss matters pertaining to the alliance but also have time 
to get to know each other better. The belief is that the resulting friendships help build 
trust and facilitate harmonious relations between the two fi rms. Personal relation-
ships also foster an informal management network between the fi rms. This network 
can then be used to help solve problems arising in more formal contexts (such as in 
joint committee meetings between personnel from the two fi rms). When entering an 
alliance, a company must take some measures to ensure that it learns from its alli-
ance partner and then puts that knowledge to good use within its own organization.
In sum, although strategic alliances often have a distinct advantage over internal 
new venturing or acquisitions as a means of establishing a new business operation, 
they also have certain drawbacks. When deciding whether to go it alone, acquire, 
or cooperate with another company in a strategic alliance, managers need to assess 
carefully the pros and cons of the alternatives.
As a top manager of a newly 
formed strategic alliance, 
you have been asked to de-
velop a contractual control 
system to ensure ethical 
and non- exploitive behavior 
from each of the partner 
companies. Identifying po-
tential ways in which a stra-
tegic alliance can go wrong 
will help you establish the 
necessary safeguards. From 
what you’ve learned, can 
you determine rules or pro-
cedures that could  en sure 
an ethical and successful 
alliance is maintained?
Ethical Dilemma

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
221
1. Strategic change is the movement of a company 
from its present state to some desired future state 
to increase its competitive advantage. Two main 
types of strategic changes are reengineering and 
restructuring.
2. Strategic change is implemented through a series 
of steps. The fi rst step in the change process is de-
termining the need for change. Strategic managers 
use a SWOT analysis to determine the company’s 
present state and then characterize its desired fu-
ture state. The second stage in the change process 
is to identify the obstacles to change at all levels 
in the organization.
3. An important technique used to identify a com-
pany’s desired future state is to analyze it as a 
portfolio of “core competencies”—  as opposed to 
a portfolio of businesses. In this approach, stra-
tegic change is oriented toward maintaining ex-
isting competencies, building new competencies, 
and leveraging competencies by applying them to 
new business opportunities.
4. There are three vehicles that companies use to 
enter new business areas: internal ventures, ac-
quisitions, and strategic alliances (including joint 
ventures).
5. Internal new venturing is used as an entry strat-
egy when a company possesses a set of valuable 
competencies in its existing businesses that can 
be leveraged or recombined to enter the new 
business area.
6. Many internal ventures fail because of entry on 
too small a scale, poor commercialization, and/or 
poor corporate management of the internal ven-
ture process. Guarding against failure involves 
a structured approach to project selection and 
management, integration of R&D and marketing 
to improve commercialization of a venture idea, 
and entry on a signifi cant scale.
7. Acquisitions are often favored as an entry strat-
egy when the company lacks important compe-
tencies (resources and capabilities) required to 
compete in an area, but when it can purchase, at 
 
a reasonable price, an incumbent company 
that has those competencies. Acquisitions also 
tend to be favored when the barriers to entry 
into the target industry are high and when the 
company is unwilling to accept the time frame, 
development costs, and risks of internal new 
venturing.
 8. Many acquisitions fail because of poor post- 
acquisition integration, overestimation of the 
value that can be created from an acquisition, 
the high cost of acquisition, and poor preac-
quisition screening. Guarding against acquisi-
tion failure requires structured screening, good 
bidding strategies, and positive attempts to in-
tegrate the acquired company into the organiza-
tion of the acquiring fi rm.
 9. Strategic alliances may be the preferred entry 
strategy when (1) the risks and costs associated 
with setting up a new business unit are more 
than the company is willing to assume on its 
own and (2) the company can increase the prob-
ability of successfully establishing a new busi-
ness by teaming up with another company that 
has skills and assets complementing its own.
10. Strategic alliances are short- term informal or 
long- term formal cooperative agreements be-
tween companies. Alliances can facilitate entry 
into markets, enable partners to share the fi xed 
costs and risks associated with new products 
and processes, facilitate the transfer of comple-
mentary skills between companies, and help 
companies establish technical standards.
11. The drawbacks of formal strategic alliances, 
particularly joint ventures, include the risk that 
a company may give away technological know- 
how and market access to its alliance partner 
without getting much in return.
12. The disadvantages associated with alliances can 
be reduced if the company selects partners care-
fully, paying close attention to their reputation, 
and structures the alliance in such a way as to 
avoid unintended transfers of know- how.
Summary of Chapter

222  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
1. Outline the issues and problems involved in iden-
tifying a company’s desired future state.
2. How should a company manage the change 
process to ensure that it reaches its desired future 
state?
3. Under what circumstances might it be best to 
enter a new business area by acquisition? Under 
what circumstances might internal new venturing 
be the preferred mode of entry?
4. If IBM decides to diversify into the wireless tele-
communications business, what entry strategy 
would you recommend that the company pur-
sue? Why?
5. Under what circumstances might a long- term 
strategic alliance with a key supplier enable a 
company to capture most of the benefi ts associ-
ated with vertical integration, without bearing 
the associated risks and costs?
Discussion Questions
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: Evaluating AOL’s 
Acquisition of Time Warner
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people, and 
appoint one group member as spokesperson, who 
will communicate your fi ndings to the class when 
called on to do so by the instructor. Research the 
2001 acquisition of Time Warner by AOL and dis-
cuss the following issues:
1. What were the proposed benefi ts for the com-
bination between AOL and Time Warner?
2. Do you think that management exaggerated 
the proposed benefi ts of the deal? Why? Was 
this exaggeration deliberate, or did manage-
ment just get caught up in its own hype?
3. The acquisition was announced at the peak of 
a stock market bubble, when stock prices were 
hitting new heights every day. To what extent 
might this have distorted perceptions of the 
value of the deal?
4. In retrospect, why did the deal fail to deliver 
the benefi ts promised at the time? What are the 
crucial lessons here?
Visiting UTC
Visit the Web site of United Technologies, or UTC 
(www.utc.com). Using the information contained 
on that Web site, answer the following questions.
1. In what major businesses is UTC involved? 
Does this portfolio make sense from a value 
creation perspective? Why?
2. What (if any) changes would you make to 
UTC’s portfolio of businesses? Why would 
you make these changes?
3. What (if any) core competencies do you think 
UTC’s major business units share? Is there any 
evidence that UTC creates new businesses by 
leveraging its core competencies?
4. How did UTC enter new business areas— 
through acquisitions, internal new ventures, 
or some combination of the two? Historically, 
which entry mode has been the most impor-
tant for UTC?
5. Is UTC an example of a successful acquirer? 
Justify your response.
General Task
By searching through information sources on the 
Web, fi nd an example of a company that has re-
cently made a major acquisition. Identify and evalu-
ate the strategic rationale behind this acquisition. 
Does it make sense?
Exploring The Web

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
223
Oracle Corp., based in Redwood City California, is 
the world’s largest maker of database software and 
the third largest global software company in terms 
of sales after Microsoft and IBM. This commanding 
position is not enough for Oracle, however, which 
has set its sights on becoming the global leader in 
the corporate applications software market. Here, 
Germany’s SAP which has 45% of the market is the 
acknowledged leader and Oracle, with only 19%, is 
a distant second.38 Corporate applications is a fast 
growing and highly profi table market, however, and 
Oracle has been snapping up leading companies 
in this segment at a fast pace. Its goal is to quickly 
build the distinctive competencies it needs to expand 
the range of products that it can offer to its existing 
customers and to attract new customers to compete 
with SAP. Beginning in 2005, Oracle’s CEO Larry 
Ellison spent $19 billion to acquire 14 leading sup-
pliers of corporate software including two of the 
top fi ve companies: PeopleSoft, a leading Human 
Resource Management (HRM) software supplier it 
bought for $10 billion, and Siebel Systems, a leader 
in customer relationship management (CRM) soft-
ware which cost Oracle $5.8 billion.
Oracle expects several competitive advantages to 
result from its use of acquisitions to pursue the cor-
porate strategy of horizontal integration. First, it is 
now able to meld or bundle the best software appli-
cations of these acquired companies— with Oracle’s 
own fi rst- class set of corporate and database soft-
ware programs— to create a new integrated suite of 
software that will allow corporations to manage all 
their functional activities such as accounting, mar-
keting, sales, HRM, CRM, and supply- chain man-
agement. Second, through these acquisitions Oracle 
obtained access to thousands of new customers— all 
the companies that currently use the software of 
the companies it acquired. All these companies now 
become potential new customers for all of Oracle’s 
other database and corporate software offerings. 
Third, beyond increasing the range of its products 
and number of its customers, Oracle’s acquisitions 
have consolidated the corporate software industry. 
By taking over some of its largest rivals, Oracle has 
become the second largest supplier of corporate soft-
ware and so it is better positioned to compete with 
leader SAP.
Achieving the advantages of its new strategy may 
not be easy, however. The person in charge of assem-
bling Oracle’s new unifi ed software package and sell-
ing it to customers is John Wookey, Oracle’s senior 
vice- president in charge of applications, who jokingly 
says that his “head is the one on the chopping block 
if this doesn’t work.” CEO Ellison has been quick to 
fi re executives who don’t perform well in the past, 
however, who expects a lot from his top executives. 
To grow Oracle’s market share and profi ts Wookey 
must draw on the best of the technology Oracle ob-
tain from each of the companies it acquired to build 
its new suite of state- of- the- art corporate software 
applications. He also has to persuade customers not 
to switch software vendors, for example, jump ship 
to SAP, while Oracle builds its package and then to 
gradually adopt more and more of Oracle’s software 
offerings to run their functional activities.
Wookey is well- placed to implement Oracle’s new 
strategy. However, he is known as a consensus builder 
and product champion, both inside the company and 
outside, when interacting with Oracle’s customers. 
He spends his working day sharing information with 
the top managers of Oracle’s various businesses, and 
meeting with his team of 14 senior staff members, to 
work out how the whole package should be put to-
gether and what it should include. He also regularly 
visits major customers, especially those that came 
with its acquisitions, to gain their input into how and 
what kind of software package Oracle should build. 
Wookey even formed an advisory council of lead-
ing customers to help make sure the fi nal package 
meets their needs. One of Wookey’s notable achieve-
ments was retaining the top- rate software engineers 
who Oracle obtained from its acquired rivals. These 
people could have easily found high- paying jobs else-
where, but most of the top engineers Oracle wanted 
stayed to help it achieve its new goals.
Nevertheless, by the end of 2006 there were signs 
that all was not going well with Oracle’s new strategy. 
SAP is a powerful competitor, its popular software is 
Oracle’s Growing Portfolio of Businesses

224  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
fast becoming the industry standard, so unseating SAP 
in the $23.4 billion corporate software market will not 
be easy. Moreover, SAP is still the leader in more ad-
vanced functional applications incorporating the latest 
technologies and its proprietary technology is all home-
grown, so it doesn’t face the huge implementation issue 
of bringing together the applications from many dif-
ferent acquisitions. Preventing customers from switch-
ing to SAP may not be easy now that their loyalty to 
their old software supplier has been broken because of 
its acquisition by Oracle. Analysts also say that Oracle 
runs the risk of stretching itself too thin if it continues 
to purchase too many companies too quickly because 
high- tech acquisitions are the most diffi cult to pull off 
in terms of management and execution.39
Larry Ellison is under pressure to accelerate 
sales growth and surpass investors’ expectations 
and only if Oracle can put out corporate applica-
tion software sales numbers that beat expectations 
will analysts regard its strategy as a success. Still, 
Oracle’s stock gained 47% in 2006 compared to 
SAP’s 15% and in 2007 Oracle announced record 
revenues and profi ts. Its stock price jumped as in-
vestors now believe he and Wookey have the ability 
to make its acquisitions pay. In 2008 Oracle an-
nounced yet another major acquisition of software 
supplier BEA Systems; will they be able to continue 
their track record of success?
Case Discussion Questions
1. In what ways is Oracle seeking to create value 
from its acquisitions?
2. Based upon the ways it is seeking to increase the 
value it creates, what is its corporate- level strategy?
 1. R.  Beckhard, Organizational Development (Reading, 
Mass.: Addison- Wesley, 1969); and W.  L.  French and 
C.  H.  Bell, Jr., Organizational Development, 2nd ed. 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice- Hall, 1978).
 2. Beckhard, Organizational Development.
 3. M.  Hammer and J.  Champy, Reengineering the 
Corporation (New York: HarperCollins, 1993).
 4. Hammer and Champy, Reengineering the Corporation, 
p. 39.
 5. J.  F.  McDonnell, “Learning to Think in Different 
Terms: TQM & Restructuring at McDonnell Douglas,” 
Executive Speeches, June/July 1994, 25–28.
 6. L. C. Coch and R. P. French, Jr., “Overcoming Resistance 
to Change,” Human Relations, August 1948, 512–532 
and P. R. Lawrence, “How to Deal with Resistance to 
Change,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 
1969, 4–12.
 7. P. Kotter and L. A. Schlesinger, “Choosing Strategies for 
Change,” Harvard Business Review, March–April 1979, 
106–114.
 8. G. Hamel and C. K. Prahalad, Competing for the Future 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 
1994).
 9. D. Leonard Barton and G. Pisano, “Monsanto’s March 
into Biotechnology,” Harvard Business School Case, 
1990, 690009. See Monsanto’s homepage (http://www
.monsanto.com) for more information about its geneti-
cally engineered seed products.
 10. See Booz, Allen, and Hamilton, New Products Manage-
ment for the 1980s (privately published, 1982); 
A. L. Page, “PDMA’s New Product Development Practices 
Survey: Performance and Best Practices” (presented at 
the PDMA Fifteenth Annual International Conference, 
Boston, October 16, 1991); and E.  Mansfi eld, “How 
Economists See R&D,” Harvard Business Review, 
November–December 1981, 98–106.
 11. See R. Biggadike, “The Risky Business of Diversifi cation,” 
Harvard Business Review, May–June 1979, 103–111; 
R.  A.  Burgelman, “A Process Model of Internal 
Corporate Venturing in the Diversifi ed Major Firm,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983): 223–244; 
and Z. Block and I. C. MacMillan, Corporate Venturing 
(Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1993).
 12. Biggadike, “The Risky Business of Diversifi cation” and 
Block and Macmillan, Corporate Venturing.
 13. R. O. Crockett and C. Yang, “Why Motorola Should Hang 
Up on Iridium,” Business Week, August 30, 1999, 46; 
L. Cauley, “Iridium’s Downfall: The Marketing Took a 
Back Seat to the Science,” Wall Street Journal, August 18, 
1999, A1; and J.  N.  Seth and R.  Sisodia, “Why Cell 
Phones Succeeded Where Iridium Failed,” Wall Street 
Journal, August 23, 1999, A14.
 14. I. C. Macmillan and R. George, “Corporate Venturing: 
Challenges for Senior Managers,” Journal of Business 
Strategy 5 (1985): 34–43.
 15. I.  C.  MacMillan and R.  G.  McGrath, “Nine New 
Roles for Technology Managers,” Research Technology 
Management 47 (2004): 16–25.
 16. See Block and Macmillan, Corporate Venturing 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 
Notes

 
Chapter 8 Strategic Change: Implementing Strategies to Build and Develop a Company 
225
1993); and Burgelman, Maidique, and Wheelwright, 
Strategic Management of Technology and Innovation 
(Chicago: Irwin, 1996).
 17. G. Beardsley and E. Mansfi eld, “A Note on the Accuracy 
of Industrial Forecasts of the Profi tability of New 
Products and Processes,” Journal of Business 23 (1978): 
127–130.
 18. For evidence on acquisitions and performance, see 
R.  E.  Caves, “Mergers, Takeovers, and Economic 
Effi ciency,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Industrial 
Organization 7 (1989): 151–174; M.  C.  Jensen and 
R. S. Ruback, “The Market for Corporate Control: The 
Scientifi c Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 11 
(1983): 5–50; R. Roll, “Empirical Evidence on Takeover 
Activity and Shareholder Wealth,” in Knights, Raiders 
and Targets, edited by J.  C.  Coffee, L.  Lowenstein, 
and S. Rose (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989); 
A.  Schleifer and R.  W.  Vishny, “Takeovers in the 
60s and 80s: Evidence and Implications,” Strategic 
Management Journal 12 (Special Issue, Winter 1991): 
51–60; T. H. Brush, “Predicted Changes in Operational 
Synergy and Post Acquisition Performance of Acquired 
Businesses,” Strategic Management Journal 17 (1996): 
1–24; and T. Loughran and A. M. Vijh, “Do Long Term 
Shareholders Benefi t from Corporate Acquisitions?” 
Journal of Finance 5 (1997): 1765–1787.
 19. For evidence on acquisitions and performance, see Caves, 
“Mergers, Takeovers, and Economic Effi ciency”; Jensen 
and Ruback, “The Market for Corporate Control: The 
Scientifi c Evidence”; Roll, “Empirical Evidence on 
Takeover Activity and Shareholder Wealth,” in Knights, 
Raiders and Targets; Schleifer and Vishny, “Takeovers in 
the 60s and 80s: Evidence and Implications”; and Brush, 
“Predicted Changes in Operational Synergy and Post 
Acquisition Performance of Acquired Businesses.”
 20. D. J. Ravenscraft and F. M. Scherer, Mergers, Selloffs, 
and Economic Effi ciency (Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution, 1987).
 21. S.  B.  Moeller, F.  P.  Schlingemann, and R.  M.  Stulz, 
“Wealth Destruction on a Massive Scale? A Study of 
Acquiring Firm Returns in the Recent Merger Wave,” 
Journal of Finance 60, no. 2 (2005): 757–783.
 22. See J. P. Walsh, “Top Management Turnover Following 
Mergers and Acquisitions,” Strategic Management 
Journal 9 (1988): 173–183.
 23. See A.  A.  Cannella and D.  C.  Hambrick, “Executive 
Departure and Acquisition Performance,” Strategic 
Management Journal 14 (1993): 137–152.
 24. R.  Roll, “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate 
Takeovers,” Journal of Business 59 (1986): 197–216.
 25. P. Haspeslagh and D. Jemison, Managing Acquisitions 
(New York: Free Press, 1991).
 26. For views on this issue, see L. L Fray, D. H. Gaylin, and 
J. W. Down, “Successful Acquisition Planning,” Journal 
of Business Strategy 5 (1984): 46–55; C.  W.  L.  Hill, 
“Profi le of a Conglomerate Takeover: BTR and Thomas 
Tilling,” Journal of General Management 10 (1984): 
34–50; D. R. Willensky, “Making It Happen: How to 
Execute an Acquisition,” Business Horizons, March–
April 1985, 38–45; Haspeslagh and Jemison, Managing 
Acquisitions; and P. L. Anslinger and T. E. Copeland, 
“Growth Through Acquisition: A Fresh Look,” Harvard 
Business Review, January–February 1996, 126–135.
 27. See K. Ohmae, “The Global Logic of Strategic Alliances,” 
Harvard Business Review, March–April 1989, 143–154; 
G. Hamel, Y. L. Doz, and C. K. Prahalad, “Collaborate 
with Your Competitors and Win!” Harvard Business 
Review, January–February 1989, 133–139; W. Burgers, 
C. W. L. Hill, and W. C. Kim, “Alliances in the Global 
Auto Industry,” Strategic Management Journal 14 (1993): 
419–432; and P.  Kale, H.  Singh, and H.  Perlmutter, 
“Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in 
Strategic Alliances: Building Relational Capital,” 
Strategic Management Journal 21 (2000): 217–237.
 28. “Asia Beckons,” Economist, May 30, 1992, 63–64.
 29. C. Souza, “Microsoft Teams with MIPS, Toshiba,” EBN, 
February 10, 2003, 4.
 30. Kale, Singh, and Perlmutter, “Learning and Protection 
of Proprietary Assets in Strategic Alliances: Building 
Relational Capital.”
 31. R.  B.  Reich and E.  D.  Mankin, “Joint Ventures with 
Japan Give Away Our Future,” Harvard Business 
Review, March–April 1986, 78–90.
 32. J. Bleeke and D. Ernst, “The Way to Win in Cross- Border 
Alliances,” Harvard Business Review, November–
December 1991, 127–135.
 33. E.  Booker and C.  Krol, “IBM Finds Strength in 
Alliances,” B to B, February 10, 2003, 3, 27.
 34. W. Roehl and J. F. Truitt, “Stormy Open Marriages Are 
Better,” Columbia Journal of World Business (Summer 
1987): 87–95.
 35. Staff Reporter, “Cambridge Antibody Technology: 
Astra Zeneca to Buy 19.9% Stake,” Wall Street Journal, 
November 23, 2004, A1.
 36. See T. Khanna, R. Gulati, and N. Nohria, “The Dynamics 
of Learning Alliances: Competition, Cooperation, and 
Relative Scope,” Strategic Management Journal 19 
(1998): 193–210; and Kale, Singh, and Perlmutter, 
“Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in 
Strategic Alliances.”
 37. Kale, Singh, and Perlmutter, “Learning and Protection 
of Proprietary Assets in Strategic Alliances.”
 38. www.sap.com, 2010.
 39. www.oracle.com, 2010.

After reading this chapter, you should be 
able to:
• Discuss how organizational strategy is 
implemented through organizational 
 structure.
• Explain the building blocks 
of organizational  structure.
• Distinguish between vertical 
and horizontal  differentiation.
• Discuss the importance of integration 
and the relationship between 
differentiation and  integration.
• Explain the nature and function 
of strategic control  systems.
L
E
A
R
N
I
N
G
 
O
B
J
E
C
T
I
V
E
S
The Role of Organizational Structure
Building Blocks of Organizational 
Structure
Vertical Differentiation
Problems with Tall Structures
Centralization or Decentralization?
Horizontal Differentiation
Functional Structure
Product Structure
Product- Team Structure
Geographic Structure
Multidivisional Structure
Integration and Organizational 
Control
Forms of Integrating Mechanisms
Differentiation and Integration
The Nature of Organizational Control
Strategic Controls
Financial Controls
Output Controls
Behavior Controls
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
O
U
T
L
I
N
E
Implementing 
Strategy Through 
Organizational Design
9

Organizational Design
The process through 
which managers select 
the combination of 
organizational structure 
and control systems 
that they believe will 
enable the company 
to create and sustain a 
competitive  advantage.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
227
OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we examine how a company should organize its activities to create 
the most  value. In Chapter 1, we defi ned strategy implementation as the way a com-
pany creates the organizational arrangements that enable it to pursue its strategy 
most  effectively. Strategy is implemented through organizational  design.
Organizational design means selecting the combination of organizational 
structure and control systems that allows a company to pursue its strategy most 
effectively— that lets it create and sustain a competitive  advantage. Good organiza-
tional design increases profi ts in two  ways. First, it economizes on operating costs 
and lowers the costs of value creation  activities. Second, it enhances the ability of 
a company’s value creation functions to achieve superior effi ciency, quality, inno-
vativeness, and customer responsiveness and to obtain a differentiation  advantage.
The primary role of organizational structure and control is twofold: (1) to co-
ordinate the activities of employees in such a way that they work together most 
effectively to implement a strategy that increases competitive advantage and (2) to 
motivate employees and provide them with incentives to achieve superior effi ciency, 
quality, innovation, or customer  responsiveness. Microsoft’s strategy, for example, 
is to speed decision making and new- product development, and it constantly works 
to keep its structure as fl exible as possible to allow its teams of programmers to 
respond quickly to the ever- changing nature of competition in the software  industry.
Organizational structure and control shape the way people behave and deter-
mine how they will act in the organizational  setting. If a new CEO wants to know 
why it takes a long time for people to make decisions in a company, why there is a 
lack of cooperation between sales and manufacturing, or why product innovations 
are few and far between, he or she needs to look at the design of the organizational 
structure and control system and analyze how it coordinates and motivates employ-
ees’  behavior. An analysis of how structure and control work makes it possible to 
change them to improve both coordination and  motivation. Good organizational 
design allows an organization to improve its ability to create value and obtain a 
competitive  advantage.
In this chapter we fi rst examine the organizational structures available to strate-
gic managers to coordinate and motivate  employees. Then we consider the strategic 
control systems that companies use in conjunction with their organizational struc-
tures to monitor and motivate managers and employees at all levels and encourage 
them to be responsive to changes in the competitive  environment.
The Role of Organizational Structure
After formulating a company’s strategies, management must make designing 
organizational structure its next priority, for strategy is also implemented through 
organizational  structure. The value creation activities of organizational members 
are meaningless unless some type of structure is used to assign people to tasks 
and link the activities of different people and  functions.1 As we saw in Chapter 4, 
each organizational function needs to develop a distinctive competency in a value 
creation activity in order to increase effi ciency, quality, innovation, or customer 
 responsiveness. Thus, each function needs a structure designed to allow it to de-
velop its skills and become more specialized and  productive. As functions become 

Differentiation
The way in which a 
company allocates 
people and resources 
to organizational tasks 
and divides them into 
functions and divisions 
so as to create  value.
Vertical Differentiation
The process by which 
strategic managers 
choose how to 
distribute decision- 
making authority over 
value creation activities 
in an  organization.
Horizontal 
Differentiation
The process by which 
strategic managers 
choose how to divide 
people and tasks into 
functions and divisions 
to increase their ability 
to create  value.
Integration
The means a company 
uses to coordinate 
people, functions, and 
divisions to accomplish 
organizational  tasks.
228  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
increasingly specialized, however, they often begin to pursue their own goals ex-
clusively and lose sight of the need to communicate and coordinate with other 
 functions. The goals of R&D, for example, center on innovation and product de-
sign, whereas the goals of manufacturing often revolve around increasing  effi ciency. 
Left to themselves, the various functions may have little to say to one another, and 
value creation opportunities will be  lost.
The role of organizational structure is to provide the vehicle through which man-
agers can coordinate the activities of a company’s various functions, divisions, and 
business units to take advantage of their skills and  competencies. To pursue a cost- 
leadership strategy, for example, a company must design a structure that facilitates 
close coordination between the activities of manufacturing and those of R&D to 
ensure that innovative products can be produced reliably and cost- effectively. To 
achieve gains from economies of scope and resource sharing between divisions, man-
agers must design mechanisms that motivate and encourage divisional managers to 
communicate and share their skills and  knowledge. In pursuing a global or trans-
national strategy, managers must create the right kind of organizational structure 
for managing the fl ow of resources and capabilities between domestic and overseas 
 divisions. Below we examine the basic building blocks of organizational structure to 
understand how it shapes the behavior of people, functions, and  divisions.
Building Blocks of Organizational Structure
The basic building blocks of organizational structure are differentiation and 
 integration. Differentiation is the way in which a company allocates people and 
resources to organizational tasks in order to create  value.2 Generally, the greater the 
number of different functions or divisions in an organization and the more skilled 
and specialized they are, the higher is the level of  differentiation. For example, a 
company such as General Electric, which has more than 300 different divisions and 
a multitude of different sales and R&D departments, has a much higher level of dif-
ferentiation than a small manufacturing company or a national restaurant  chain. In 
deciding how to differentiate the organization to create value, strategic managers 
face two  choices.
First, strategic managers must choose how to distribute decision- making authority 
in the organization to control value creation activities best; these are vertical 
 differentiation  choices.3 For example, corporate managers must decide how much 
authority to delegate to managers at the divisional or functional  level. Second, 
 corporate managers must choose how to divide people and tasks into functions and 
divisions to increase their ability to create value; these are horizontal differentiation 
 choices. Should there be separate sales and marketing departments, for example, 
or should the two be combined? What is the best way to divide the sales force to 
 maximize its ability to serve customers’ needs— by type of customer or by region in 
which customers are located?
Integration is the means by which a company seeks to coordinate people and 
functions to accomplish organizational  tasks.4 As we have just noted, when separate 
and distinct value creation functions exist, they tend to pursue their own goals and 
 objectives. An organization has to create an organizational structure that encourages 
the different functions and divisions to coordinate their  activities. An organization 
uses integrating mechanisms and control systems to promote coordination and co-
operation between functions and  divisions. In Microsoft and Google, for instance, to 
speed innovation and product development, these companies have established teams 

Span of Control
The number of 
subordinates a manager 
directly  manages.
Flat Structure
A structure with few 
hierarchical levels 
and a relatively wide 
span of  control.
Tall Structure
A structure with many 
hierarchical levels 
and a relatively narrow 
span of  control.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
229
so that employees could work together to exchange information and ideas and co-
operate  effectively. Similarly, establishing organizational norms, shared values, and a 
common culture that supports innovation promotes  integration.
In short, differentiation consists of the way a company divides itself into parts 
(functions and divisions), and integration consists of the way those parts are then 
 combined. Together, the two processes determine how an organizational structure 
will operate and how successfully strategic managers will be able to create value 
through their chosen  strategies. Consequently, it is necessary to understand the prin-
ciples behind organizational  design. We start by looking at  differentiation.
Vertical Differentiation
The aim of vertical differentiation is to specify the reporting relationships that link 
people, tasks, and functions at all levels of a  company. Fundamentally, this means 
that management chooses the appropriate number of hierarchical levels and the cor-
rect span of control for implementing a company’s strategy most  effectively.
The organizational hierarchy establishes the authority structure from the top 
to the bottom of the  organization. The span of control is defi ned as the number of 
subordinates a manager directly  manages.5 The basic choice is whether to aim for a 
fl at structure, with few hierarchical levels and thus a relatively wide span of control, 
or a tall structure, with many levels and thus a relatively narrow span of control 
(see Figure 9.1). Tall structures have many hierarchical levels relative to their size, and 
fl at structures have relatively  few.6 For example, research suggests that the average 
Tall Structure
(Eight levels)
Flat Structure
(Three levels)
8
3
2
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Figure 9.1 Tall and Flat Structures

230  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
number of hierarchical levels for a company employing 3,000 people is  seven. Thus, 
such an organization having nine levels would be called tall, and one having four 
would be called  fl at. With its 22,000 employees and fi ve hierarchical levels, Google, 
for instance, has a relatively fl at  structure.
Companies choose the number of levels they need on the basis of their strategy 
and the functional tasks necessary to achieve this  strategy.7 High- tech companies, 
for example, often pursue a strategy of differentiation based on service and  quality. 
Consequently, these companies usually have fl at structures, giving employees wide 
discretion to meet customers’ demands without having to consult constantly with 
 supervisors.8 The crux of the matter is that the allocation of authority and responsi-
bility in a company must match the needs of its corporate- , business- , and functional- 
level  strategies.9
Problems with Tall Structures
As a company grows and diversifi es, the number of levels in its hierarchy of author-
ity increases to allow it to monitor and coordinate employee activities  effi ciently. 
Research shows that the number of hierarchical levels relative to company size is 
predictable as the size increases (see Figure 9.2).10
Companies with approximately 1,000 employees usually have four levels in 
the hierarchy: chief executive offi cer (CEO), departmental vice presidents,  fi rst- line 
supervisors, and shop- fl oor  employees. Those with 3,000 employees normally 
 increase their level of vertical differentiation by raising the number of levels to  seven. 
However, something interesting happens to companies that employ more than 
3,000  employees. Even when companies grow to 10,000 employees or more, the 
number of hierarchical levels rarely increases beyond nine or  ten. As organizations 
grow, managers work to limit the number of hierarchical  levels.
Figure 9.2  Relationship Between Company Size 
and Number of Hierarchical Levels
Number of Hierarchical Levels
1,000
3,000
2,000
4
5
6
7
9
8
10
0
Employees

Principle of the 
Minimum Chain 
of Command
The principle that 
managers should 
choose a hierarchy with 
the minimum number 
of levels of authority 
necessary to achieve 
its  strategy.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
231
Managers try to keep the organization as fl at as possible and follow what is 
known as the principle of the minimum chain of command, which states that an 
organization should choose a hierarchy with the minimum number of levels of au-
thority necessary to achieve its  strategy. Managers try to keep the hierarchy as fl at as 
possible because when companies become too tall, several problems arise that make 
strategy more diffi cult to  implement.11
Coordination Problems Having too many hierarchical levels impedes commu-
nication and coordination between employees and functions and also raises  costs. 
Communication between the top and the bottom of the hierarchy takes much longer 
as the chain of command  lengthens. This leads to infl exibility, and valuable time 
is lost in bringing a new product to market or in keeping up with technological 
 developments.12 For FedEx, rapid communication and coordination is vital, so the 
company allows a maximum of only fi ve layers of management between employees 
and the  CEO.13 In contrast, Procter & Gamble had a tall hierarchy, and the company 
needed twice as much time as its competitors to introduce new  products. To improve 
coordination and reduce costs, the company moved to streamline its structure and 
reduce its number of hierarchical  levels.14 Other companies have also taken measures 
to fl atten their structures to speed communication and decision  making.
Information Distortion More subtle, but just as important, are the problems of 
information distortion that occur as the hierarchy of authority  lengthens. Going 
down the hierarchy, managers at different levels (for example, divisional or corporate 
managers) may misinterpret information, either through accidental garbling of mes-
sages or on purpose to suit their own  interests. In either case, information from the 
top may not reach its destination  intact. For instance, a request to share divisional 
knowledge to achieve gains from synergy may be overlooked or ignored by divisional 
managers who perceive it as a threat to their autonomy and  power. Information 
transmitted upward in the hierarchy may also be  distorted. Subordinates may trans-
mit to their superiors only the information that enhances their own standing in the 
 organization. The greater the number of hierarchical levels, the more scope sub-
ordinates have to distort facts and, as a consequence, the costs of managing the 
hierarchy  increase.
Motivational Problems As the number of levels in the hierarchy increases, the 
amount of authority possessed by managers at each hierarchical level  diminishes. 
For example, consider the situation of two organizations of identical size, one of 
which has three levels in its hierarchy and the other  seven. Managers in the fl at 
structure have much more authority, and greater authority increases their motivation 
to perform effectively and take responsibility for the organization’s  performance. 
Besides, when there are fewer managers, their performance is more visible, so they 
can expect greater rewards when the business does  well.
By contrast, the ability of managers in a tall structure to exercise authority is 
limited, and their decisions are constantly scrutinized by their  superiors. As a result, 
managers tend to pass the buck and refuse to take the risks that are often necessary 
when new strategies are  pursued. This increases the costs of coordination because 
more managerial time must be spent coordinating task  activities. Thus, the shape of 
the organization’s structure strongly affects the motivation of people within it and 
the way strategy is  implemented.15

232  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Too Many Middle Managers Another drawback of tall structures is that hav-
ing many hierarchical levels implies having many middle managers, and employing 
managers is  expensive. As noted earlier, managerial salaries, benefi ts, offi ces, and sec-
retaries are a huge expense for an  organization. If the average middle manager costs 
a company a total of $200,000 a year, then employing 100 “surplus” managers costs 
$20 million a  year. Most large  U. S. companies have recognized this fact, and in the 
2000s, companies such as IBM, HP, and Procter & Gamble have moved to downsize 
their hierarchies, terminating thousands of managers to reduce billions in operating 
 costs. Also, when companies grow and are successful, they often hire personnel and 
create new positions without much regard for the effect of these actions on the orga-
nizational  hierarchy. Later, when managers review that structure, they frequently act 
to reduce the number of levels because of the disadvantages we have  noted.
In sum, when companies become too tall and the chain of command becomes 
too long, strategic managers tend to lose control over the hierarchy, which means 
that they lose control over their  strategies. Disaster often follows because a tall or-
ganizational structure decreases, rather than promotes, motivation and coordination 
between employees and functions, and operating costs escalate as a  result. One way 
to address such problems and lower costs is to decentralize authority— that is, to vest 
authority in the hierarchy’s lower levels as well as at the  top.
Centralization or Decentralization?
Authority is centralized when managers at the upper levels of the organizational hi-
erarchy retain the authority to make the most important  decisions. When authority 
is decentralized, it is delegated to divisions, functions, and managers and workers at 
lower levels in the  organization. By delegating authority in this fashion, managers 
can avoid communication and coordination problems because information does not 
have to be constantly sent to the top of the organization for decisions to be  made. 
Decentralization has three main advantages:
1. When strategic managers delegate operational decision- making responsibility to 
middle and fi rst- level managers, they reduce information overload, enabling stra-
tegic managers to spend more time on strategic decision  making. Consequently, 
they can make more effective  decisions.
2. When managers in the bottom layers of the organization become responsible for 
adapting the organization to local conditions, their motivation and accountabil-
ity  increase. The result is that decentralization promotes organizational fl exibil-
ity because lower- level managers are authorized to make on- the- spot  decisions. 
This can often provide a company with a signifi cant competitive  advantage. 
Companies such as IBM and Dell empower their employees and allow them to 
make signifi cant decisions so that they can respond quickly to customers’ needs 
and so ensure superior  service.
3. When lower- level employees are given the right to make important decisions, 
fewer managers are needed to oversee their activities and tell them what to  do. 
And fewer managers mean lower  costs.
If decentralization is so effective, why don’t all companies decentralize decision mak-
ing and avoid the problems of tall hierarchies? The answer is that centralization has 
its advantages,  too. First, centralized decision making facilitates coordination of the 
organizational activities needed to pursue a company’s  strategy. If managers at all 
Suppose a poorly perform-
ing organization has de-
cided to terminate hundreds 
of middle  managers. Top 
managers making the ter-
mination decisions might 
choose to keep subordi-
nates that they like rather 
than the best performers or 
terminate the most highly 
paid sub ordinates even if 
they are top  performers. 
Remembering that organiza-
tional structure and culture 
affects all company stake-
holders, which ethical princi-
ples about equality, fairness, 
and justice would you use 
to redesign the organization 
hierarchy? Keep in mind that 
some employees may feel 
to have as strong a claim 
on the organization as some 
of its stockholders, even 
claiming to “own” their jobs 
from contributions to past 
 successes. Do you think 
this is an ethical claim? How 
would it factor into your 
design?
Ethical Dilemma

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
233
levels can make their own decisions, overall planning becomes extremely diffi cult, 
and the company may lose control of its decision  making. Second, centralization also 
means that decisions fi t broad organizational  objectives. When its branch operations 
were getting out of hand, for example, Merrill Lynch increased centralization by 
installing more information systems to give corporate managers greater control over 
branch  activities. Similarly, HP centralized R&D responsibility at the corporate level 
to provide a more directed corporate strategy and to lower operating costs across its 
growing number of operating  divisions.
Union Paciﬁ c (UP), one of the biggest rail freight carri-
ers in the United States, was experiencing a crisis in the 
1990 s. An economic boom had led to a record increase 
in the amount of freight the railroad had to transport— 
but, at the same time, the railroad was experiencing re-
cord delays in moving the  freight. UP’s customers were 
irate and complaining bitterly about the problem, and the 
delays were costing the company millions of dollars in 
penalty  payments. The problem stemmed from UP’s de-
cision to centralize authority high in the organization to 
cut  costs. All scheduling and route planning were han-
dled centrally at its headquarters to promote operating 
 efﬁ ciency. The job of regional managers was largely to 
ensure the smooth ﬂ ow of freight through their  regions. 
Now, recognizing that efﬁ ciency had to be balanced by 
the need to be responsive to customers, UP’s CEO Dick 
Davidson announced a sweeping  reorganization. In the 
future, regional, not top managers, would have the au-
thority to make operational decisions; they could alter 
scheduling and routing to accommodate customer re-
quests even if it raised  costs. The goal of the organization 
was to “return to excellent performance by simplifying 
our processes and becoming easier to deal  with.” In de-
ciding to decentralize authority, UP was following the 
lead of its competitors who had already decentralized 
their operations; its managers, would continue to “de-
centralize decision making into the ﬁ eld, while fostering 
improved customer responsiveness, operational excel-
lence, and personal  accountability.”
Yahoo!, on the other hand, has been forced by cir-
cumstances to pursue a different approach to decentral-
ization. In 2009, after the failed merger between Yahoo! 
and Microsoft, the company’s stock price plunged. Jerry 
Wang, one of the company’ founders, who had come un-
der intense criticism for preventing the merger, resigned 
as CEO and was replaced by Carol  Bartz. Bartz, with a 
long history of success in managing online companies, 
had to move quickly to ﬁ nd ways to reduce Yahoo!’s 
cost structure and simplify its operations to maintain its 
strong online brand  identity. Intense competition from 
the growing popularity of new online companies such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and established companies such as 
Google and Microsoft were threatening its  popularity.
Bartz decided the best way to rebuild Yahoo!’s 
business model was to recentralize  authority. To both 
gain more control over its different business units and 
 reduce operating costs, she decided to centralize func-
tions that had been previously performed by Yahoo!’s 
different business units, such as product development 
and marketing  activities. For example, all the com-
pany’s publishing and advertising functions were cen-
tralized and put under the control of Hilary  Schneider. 
The  control over Yahoo!’s European, Asian, and emerg-
ing markets divisions was centralized and another top 
Yahoo! executive took  control. Her goal was to ﬁ nd out 
how she could make the company work  better. While 
she was centralizing authority, she was also holding 
many “town hall”  meetings. Bartz was asking Yahoo!’s 
employees, across all departments, “What would you 
do if you were me?” Even as she centralized authority 
to help Yahoo! recover its dominant industry position, 
she was looking for the input of employees at any level 
in the  hierarchy. Once Yahoo! has regained its competi-
tive advantage, she will likely decentralize authority to 
increase Yahoo!’s proﬁ tability, given her general mana-
gerial  competences.16
9.1 STRATEGY IN ACTION
To Centralize or Decentralize? That Is the Question

Functional Structure
A structure in which 
people are grouped 
on the basis of their 
common expertise 
and experience or 
because they use 
the same  resources.
234  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Horizontal Differentiation
Managing the strategy- structure relationship when the number of hierarchical levels 
becomes too great is diffi cult and  expensive. Depending on a company’s situation, 
the problems of tall hierarchies can be reduced by  decentralization. As company 
size increases, however, decentralization may become less  effective. How, then, as 
fi rms grow and diversify, can they operate effectively without becoming too tall or 
decentralized? How can a fi rm such as Exxon control 300,000 employees without 
becoming too bureaucratic and infl exible? There must be alternative ways of creat-
ing organizational arrangements to achieve corporate  objectives.
The fi rst of these ways is to choose the appropriate form of horizontal 
differentiation— that is, to decide how best to group organizational tasks and activi-
ties to meet the objectives of a company’s  strategies.17 The kinds of structures that 
companies can choose among are discussed  next.
Functional Structure
The issue facing a company is to fi nd the best way to invest its resources to create 
an infrastructure that allows it to build the distinctive competencies that increase 
the amount of value a company can  create. As a company grows, two things begin 
to  happen. First, the range of tasks that must be performed  expands. For example, it 
suddenly becomes apparent that a professional accountant or a production manager 
or a marketing expert is needed to perform specialized  tasks. Second, no one per-
son can successfully perform more than one organizational task without becoming 
 overloaded. The company’s founder, for example, can no longer simultaneously make 
and sell the  product. The question that arises is what grouping of activities— what 
form of horizontal differentiation— can most effi ciently handle the needs of the grow-
ing company at least cost? The answer for most companies is a functional  structure.
Functional structures arrange and group people on the basis of their common 
expertise and experience or because they use the same  resources.18 For example, 
engineers are grouped in a function because they perform the same tasks and use the 
same skills or  equipment. Figure 9.3 shows a typical functional  structure. Each of 
the rectangles represents a different functional specialization (research and develop-
ment, sales and marketing, manufacturing,  etc.), and each function concentrates on 
its own specialized  task.
Advantages of a Functional Structure Functional structures have several advan-
tages. First, if people who perform similar tasks are grouped together, they can learn 
from one another and become better— more specialized and productive— at what 
they  do. Second, they can monitor each other to make sure that all are performing 
their tasks effectively and not shirking their  responsibilities. As a result, the work 
process becomes more effi cient, reducing manufacturing costs and increasing opera-
tional  fl exibility.
A third important advantage of functional structures is that they give managers 
greater control of organizational  activities. As already noted, many diffi culties arise 
when the number of levels in the hierarchy  increases. If people are grouped into dif-
ferent functions, however, each with their own managers, then several different hier-
archies are created, and the company can avoid becoming too  tall. There will be one 
hierarchy in manufacturing, for example, and another in accounting and  fi nance. 
Managing the business is much easier when different groups specialize in different 
organizational tasks and are managed  separately.

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
235
Disadvantages of a Functional Structure In adopting a functional structure, 
a company increases its level of horizontal differentiation to handle more complex 
 tasks. The structure enables it to keep control of its activities as it  grows. This struc-
ture serves the company well until it starts to grow and  diversify. If the company 
becomes geographically diverse and begins operating in many locations, or if it starts 
producing a wide range of products, control and coordination problems arise that 
undermine a company’s ability to coordinate its activities and reduce  costs.19
Communications Problems As separate functional hierarchies evolve, functions 
grow more remote from one  another. As a result, it becomes increasingly diffi cult to 
communicate across functions and to coordinate their  activities. This communica-
tion problem arises because with greater differentiation, the various functions de-
velop different orientations toward the problems and issues facing the  organization. 
Different functions have different time or goal orientations, for  example. Some, 
such as manufacturing, see things in a short time frame and concentrate on achiev-
ing short- run goals, such as reducing manufacturing  costs. Others, such as R&D, 
see things from a long- term point of view, and their goals (innovation and product 
development) may have a time horizon of several  years. These factors may cause 
each function to develop a different view of the strategic issues facing the  company. 
Manufacturing, for example, may see the strategic issue as the need to reduce costs, 
sales may see it as the need to increase customer responsiveness, and R&D may see it 
as the need to create new  products. In such cases, functions have trouble coordinat-
ing with one another, and costs  increase.
Measurement Problems As the number of its products grows, a company may 
fi nd it diffi cult to measure the contribution of one or a few products to its overall 
 profi tability. Consequently, the company may turn out some unprofi table products 
without realizing it and so make poor resource allocation  decisions. This means 
that the company’s measurement systems are not complex enough to serve its  needs. 
Dell’s explosive growth in the early 1990s, for example, caused it to lose control of 
its inventory management systems; soon it could not accurately project supply and 
demand for the components that go into its personal  computers. Problems with 
its organizational structure plagued Dell, reducing effi ciency and  quality. As one 
manager commented, designing its structure to keep pace with its growth was like 
building a high-performance car while going around the race  track. Dell succeeded 
until the mid- 2000s and it enjoyed a 20% cost advantage over competitors such 
as HP and Acer because of its innovative organizational  design. However, HP and 
CEO
Manufacturing
Sales and
marketing
Research and
development
Materials
management
Engineering
Figure 9.3 Functional Structure

236  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Acer imitated Dell’s innovations and by 2007 they had caught up with Dell and then 
overtook it to become the lowest cost PC  makers.
Location Problems Location factors may also hamper coordination and  control. If 
a company makes and sells in many different regions, then the centralized system of 
control provided by the functional structure no longer suits it because managers in the 
various regions must have the fl exibility to respond to the needs of their  customers. 
Thus, the functional structure is not complex enough to handle regional  diversity.
Strategic Problems Sometimes the combined effect of all these factors is that 
long- term strategic considerations are frequently ignored because management is 
preoccupied with solving communication and coordination  problems. As a result, a 
company may lose direction and fail to take advantage of new opportunities while 
costs  escalate.
Experiencing these problems is a sign that the company does not have an ap-
propriate form of differentiation to achieve its  objectives. A company must change 
its mix of vertical and horizontal differentiation if it is to perform effectively the 
organizational tasks that will enhance its competitive  advantage. Essentially, these 
problems indicate that the company has outgrown its  structure. It needs to invest 
resources in developing a more complex structure, one that can meet the needs of its 
competitive  strategy. Once again, this is expensive, but as long as the value a com-
pany can create is greater than the costs of operating the structure, it makes sense to 
adopt a more complex  structure. To this end, many companies reorganize, adopting 
a product, geographic, or product- team structure depending on the source of the 
coordination  problem.
Product Structure
In the product structure, activities are grouped by product  line. The manufacturing 
function is broken down into different product lines based on the similarities and 
differences among the  products. Figure 9.4 presents a product structure typical of 
an imaging  company. In this company, products are grouped in terms of their being 
consumer, health, or commercial imaging  products. Inside each product group, many 
kinds of similar products are being  manufactured.
Because three different product groupings now exist, the degree of horizontal dif-
ferentiation in this structure is higher than that in the functional  structure. The spe-
cialized support functions, such as accounting and sales, are centralized at the top of 
the organization, but each support function is divided in such a way that personnel 
tend to specialize in one of the different product categories to avoid communication 
 problems. Thus there may be three groups of accountants, one for each of the three 
product  categories. In sales, separate sales forces dealing with the different product 
lines may emerge, but because maintaining a single sales function brings econo-
mies of scale to selling and distribution, these groups will coordinate their  activities. 
Dell, for example, moved to a product structure based on serving the product needs 
of different customer groups; the commercial and the public sectors are two such 
 groups. Dell’s salespeople specialize in one customer group, but all groups coordi-
nate their sales activities to ensure good communication and the transfer of knowl-
edge among product  lines.
The use of a product structure reduces the problems of control and coordination 
associated with the functional  structure. It pushes aside barriers among functions 
because the product line, rather than each individual function, becomes the focus 

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
237
of  attention. In addition, the profi t contribution of each product line can be clearly 
identifi ed, and resources can be allocated more  effi ciently. Note also that this struc-
ture has one more level in the hierarchy than the functional structure— that of the 
product line  manager. This increase in vertical differentiation allows managers at 
the level of the production line to concentrate on day- to- day operations and gives 
top managers more time to develop the company’s competitive  advantage. Although 
operating costs are higher, that expense is warranted by the extra coordination and 
control the structure  provides.
Another example of a company that adopted a product structure to manage its 
product lines is  Maytag. Initially, when it manufactured only washers and dryers, 
Maytag used a functional  structure. In trying to increase its market share, however, 
Maytag bought two other appliance manufacturers: Jenn- Air, known for its electric 
ranges, and Hardwick, which made gas  ranges. Maytag moved to a product struc-
ture, and each company operated as a separate product line, but major specialized 
support functions were centralized to reduce costs (this is similar to the structure of 
the imaging company shown in Figure 9.4). Maytag continued to diversify, however, 
and, as we discuss in the next section, it then needed to move to a multidivisional 
structure to manage its strategy more  effectively.
Product- Team Structure
A major structural innovation in recent years has been the product- team  structure. 
In today’s competitive environment, many companies have been forced to fi nd bet-
ter ways of coordinating their support functions in order to bring their products to 
market more rapidly and protect their competitive  advantage. One way to do this is 
to use cross  functional teams and develop a product- team structure (see Figure 9.5).
Consumer
imaging products
CEO
Materials
management
Marketing
and sales
Finance
Engineering
Research and
development
Health
imaging products
Commercial
imaging products
Figure 9.4 Product Structure

238  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
In the product- team structure, as in the product structure, task activities are 
divided along product lines to reduce costs and increase management’s ability to 
monitor and control the manufacturing  process. However, specialists are taken from 
the various support functions and assigned to work on a product or project, where 
they are combined into cross- functional teams to serve the needs of the  product. 
These teams are formed right at the beginning of the product development process so 
that any problems that arise can be ironed out early, before they lead to major rede-
sign  problems. When all functions have direct input from the beginning, design costs 
and subsequent manufacturing costs can be kept  low. Moreover, the use of cross- 
functional teams can speed innovation and responsiveness to customers, because 
when authority is decentralized to the team, decisions can be made more  quickly.
Geographic Structure
When a company is organized geographically, geographic regions become the basis 
for the grouping of organizational  activities. For example, a company may divide up 
its manufacturing operations and establish manufacturing plants in different regions 
of the  country. This allows it to be responsive to the needs of regional customers and 
reduces transportation  costs. Similarly, service organizations such as store chains 
and banks may organize their sales and marketing activities on a regional, rather 
than national, level to get closer to their  customers. Like a product structure, a geo-
graphic structure provides more control than a functional structure because there are 
several regional hierarchies carrying out the work previously performed by a single 
centralized  hierarchy. A company like FedEx clearly needs a geographic structure to 
fulfi ll its corporate goal: next- day  mail. Large merchandising organizations, such as 
Neiman Marcus, Dillard’s, and Walmart, also moved to a geographic structure soon 
after they started building stores across the  country. With a geographic structure, 
Research and
development
Sales and
marketing
Materials
management
Engineering
CEO
Product
teams
Manufacturing units
Figure 9.5 Product- Team Structure

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
239
different regional clothing needs— sun wear in the West, down coats in the East— can 
be handled as  required. At the same time, because the purchasing function remains 
centralized, one central organization can buy for all  regions. Thus a company both 
achieves economies of scale in buying and distribution and reduces coordination and 
communication  problems. For example, Neiman Marcus developed a geographic 
structure similar to the one shown on Figure 9.6 to manage its nationwide store 
 chain.
In each region, it established a team of regional buyers to respond to the needs 
of customers in each of the Western, Central, Eastern, and Southern  regions. The 
regional buyers then fed their information to the central buyers at corporate head-
quarters, who coordinated their demands in order to obtain purchasing economies 
and to ensure that Neiman Marcus’s high- quality standards, on which its differentia-
tion advantage depends, were maintained  nationally. Today, it is the most profi table 
luxury department store  chain.
Once again, however, the usefulness of the product or geographic structure de-
pends on the size of the company and its range of products and  regions. If a company 
starts to diversify into unrelated products or to integrate vertically into new indus-
tries, the product structure will not be capable of handling the increased  diversity. 
The reason is that it does not allow managers to coordinate the company’s value 
creation activities effectively; it is not complex enough to deal with the needs of the 
large, multi business  company. At this point in its development, the company would 
normally adopt the multidivisional  structure.
Central operations 
Western
regional operations
Central
regional operations
Individual stores
CEO
Southern
regional operations 
Eastern
regional operations
Figure 9.6 Geographic Structure

240  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Multidivisional Structure
The multidivisional structure possesses two main advantages over a functional struc-
ture, innovations that let a company grow and diversify yet overcome problems that 
stem from loss of  control. First, each distinct product line or business unit is placed 
in its own self- contained unit or division, with all support  functions. For example, 
GE competes in more than 150 different industries, and in each industry, all of its 
divisions are self- contained, performing all the value creation functions necessary to 
give the division a competitive  advantage. The result is a higher level of horizontal 
 differentiation.
Second, the offi ce of corporate headquarters staff is created to monitor divisional 
activities and exercise fi nancial control over each of the  divisions.20 This staff con-
tains corporate managers who oversee the activities of divisional and functional 
managers, and it constitutes an additional level in the organizational  hierarchy. 
Hence, there is a higher level of vertical differentiation in a multidivisional structure 
than in a functional  structure.
Figure 9.7 presents a typical multidivisional structure found in a large chemical 
company such as  DuPont. Although this company might easily have 70 operating di-
visions, only three— the oil, pharmaceuticals, and plastics divisions— are represented 
 here. As a self- contained business unit, each division possesses a full array of sup-
port  services. For example, each has self- contained accounting, sales, and personnel 
 departments. Each division functions as a profi t center, which makes it much easier 
for corporate headquarters staff to monitor and evaluate each division’s  activities.21
The costs of operating a multidivisional structure are very high compared with 
the costs of a functional  structure. The size of the corporate staff is a major expense, 
Corporate headquarters staff 
CEO
Typical Chemical Company
Oil division
(functional structure)
Pharmaceuticals division
(product-team structure)
Plastics division
(matrix structure)
Figure 9.7 Multidivisional Structure

Matrix Structure
A structure in which 
functional managers 
work with project 
managers in temporary 
teams to develop new 
products.
Operating 
Responsibility
In the multidivisional 
structure, the 
responsibility of 
divisional managers 
for the day- to- day 
operations of their 
 divisions.
Strategic 
Responsibility
In the multidivisional 
structure, responsibility 
of managers at 
corporate headquarters 
for overseeing long- 
term plans and 
providing guidance 
for divisional  managers.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
241
and while thousands of managers remain on the corporate staff of large companies 
such as IBM and Ford, all companies today make major efforts to keep their number 
to a  minimum. Similarly, the use of product divisions, each with its own special-
ist support functions, such as research and development and marketing, is a major 
 expense. Here again, however, if higher operating costs are offset by a higher level of 
value creation, it makes sense to move to a more complex  structure.
Each division is also able to adopt the structure that best suits its  needs. Figure 9.7 
shows that the oil division has a functional structure because its activities are stan-
dardized; the pharmaceuticals division has a product- team structure; and the plastics 
division has a matrix  structure. In a matrix structure, functional managers work 
with project managers in temporary teams to develop a new product. But once the 
product is completed, functional and project managers move to new teams where 
they can apply their skills to develop a string of new products.
Similarly, Microsoft operates its corporation through a multidivisional structure, 
but each division is part of a different product group depending on the kind of soft-
ware or hardware that it is responsible for  developing.
In the multidivisional structure, day- to- day operations of a division are the re-
sponsibility of divisional management; that is, divisional management has operating 
 responsibility. Corporate headquarters staff, however, which includes members of 
the board of directors as well as top executives, is responsible for overseeing long- 
term plans and providing the guidance for interdivisional  projects. This staff has 
strategic  responsibility. Such a combination of self- contained divisions with a cen-
tralized corporate management represents a higher level of both vertical and hori-
zontal differentiation, as noted  earlier.
These two innovations provide the extra control necessary to coordinate growth 
and  diversifi cation. Because this structure, despite its high costs, has now been ad-
opted by more than 90% of all large  U. S. corporations, we need to consider its ad-
vantages and disadvantages in more  detail.
Advantages of a Multidivisional Structure When managed effectively at both 
the corporate level and the divisional level, a multidivisional structure offers sev-
eral  advantages. Together, they can raise corporate profi tability to a new peak be-
cause they enable the organization to operate more complex kinds of corporate- level 
 strategies.
Enhanced Corporate Financial Control The profi tability of different business 
divisions is clearly visible in the multidivisional  structure.22 Because each division is 
its own profi t center, fi nancial controls can be applied to each business on the basis 
of profi t  criteria. Corporate managers establish performance goals for each divi-
sion, monitor their performance on a regular basis, and selectively intervene when 
problems  arise. They can then use this information to identify the divisions in which 
investment of the company’s fi nancial resources will yield the greatest long- term 
 ROIC. As a result, they can allocate the company’s funds among competing divi-
sions in a way that will maximize the profi tability of the whole  company. Essentially, 
managers at corporate headquarters act as “internal investors” who channel funds to 
high- performing divisions in which they will produce the most  profi ts.
Enhanced Strategic Control The multidivisional structure frees corporate man-
agers from operating  responsibilities. The managers thus gains time for contemplat-
ing wider long- term strategic issues and for developing responses to environmental 

242  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
 changes. The multidivisional structure also enables corporate headquarters to obtain 
the information it needs to perform strategic planning  functions. For example, sepa-
rating individual businesses is a necessary prerequisite to portfolio  planning.
Growth The multidivisional structure lets the company overcome an organizational 
limit to its  growth. By reducing information overload at the center, corporate manag-
ers can handle a greater number of  businesses. They can consider opportunities for 
further growth and  diversifi cation. Communication problems are reduced because the 
same set of standardized accounting and fi nancial control techniques can be used to 
evaluate all  divisions. Corporate managers are also able to implement a policy of man-
agement by exception, which means that they intervene only when problems  arise.
Stronger Pursuit of Internal Efﬁ ciency Within a functional structure, the inter-
dependence of functional departments means that the individual performance of each 
function inside a company cannot be measured by objective  criteria. For example, 
the profi tability of the fi nance function, marketing function, or manufacturing func-
tion cannot be assessed in isolation, because they are only part of the  whole. This 
often means that within the functional structure, considerable degrees of organiza-
tional slack— that is, functional resources that are being used unproductively— can 
go  undetected. For example, in order to reduce work pressure within the department 
and achieve higher personal status, the head of the fi nance function might employ a 
larger staff than was necessary, resulting in relatively ineffi cient  operation.
In a multidivisional structure, however, the individual effi ciency of each autono-
mous division can be directly observed and measured in terms of the profi t it  generates. 
Autonomy makes divisional managers accountable; they have no excuses for poor 
 performance. The corporate offi ce is thus in a better position to identify  ineffi ciencies.
Disadvantages of a Multidivisional Structure Because multidivisional structure 
has a number of powerful advantages, it seems to be the preferred choice of most 
large, diversifi ed enterprises  today. Indeed, research suggests that large companies 
that adopt this structure outperform those that retain the functional  structure.23 
A multidivisional structure has its disadvantages as well,  however. Good manage-
ment can eliminate some of them, but others are inherent in the way the structure 
 operates. Corporate managers have to continually pay attention to the way they 
operate to detect  problems. These disadvantages are discussed  next.
Establishing the Divisional– Corporate Authority Relationship The authority 
relationship between corporate headquarters and the divisions must be correctly 
 established. The multidivisional structure introduces a new level in the management 
hierarchy, the corporate  level. The problem for corporate managers is to decide how 
much authority and control to assign to the operating divisions and how much au-
thority to retain at corporate  headquarters.
This problem was fi rst noted by Alfred Sloan, who introduced the multidivisional 
structure at General Motors (which became the fi rst company to adopt it) and cre-
ated GM’s original fi ve automobile divisions: Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, 
and  Cadillac.24 What Sloan found, however, was that when corporate managers re-
tained too much power and authority, the managers of operating divisions lacked 
suffi cient autonomy to develop the business strategy that might best meet the needs 
of the  division. On the other hand, when too much authority is delegated to di-
visions, managers may start to pursue strategies that benefi t their own divisional 
objectives but add little value to the corporation as a  whole. As a result, for example, 
not all of the potential gains from synergy can be  achieved.

Transfer Pricing
Establishment of the 
prices at which the 
products produced by 
one business unit are 
sold to other company- 
owned business  units.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
243
Thus, the central issue in managing a multidivisional structure is how much au-
thority should be centralized at corporate headquarters and how much should be 
decentralized to the  divisions. This issue must be decided by each company, taking 
into account the nature of its business-  and corporate- level  strategies. There are no 
easy answers, and, as the environment changes or a company alters its strategies over 
time, the optimal balance between centralization and decentralization of authority 
will also  change.
Distortion of Information If corporate headquarters puts too much emphasis on 
divisional return on investment— for instance, by setting very high and stringent 
return- on- investment targets— divisional managers may choose to distort the infor-
mation they supply top management and paint a rosy picture of the present situation 
at the expense of future  profi ts. That is, divisions may start to pursue strategies that 
increase short- run profi tability but reduce future  profi tability. The problem stems 
from too tight fi nancial  control. GM suffered from this problem in recent years, as 
declining performance prompted divisional managers to try to make their divisions 
look good to corporate  headquarters. Managing the corporate- divisional interface 
requires coping with subtle power  issues. Hence, corporate managers must carefully 
control their interactions with divisional managers to ensure that both the short-  and 
long- term goals of the business are being  met.
Competition for Resources A third problem of managing a multidivisional 
structure is that the divisions themselves may compete for resources, and this ri-
valry prevents synergy gains or economies of scope from  emerging. For example, 
the amount of money that corporate personnel have to distribute to the divisions 
is  fi xed. Generally, the divisions that can demonstrate the highest return on invest-
ment will get the lion’s share of the  money. In turn, because they have more money 
to invest in their business, this usually will raise their performance the next year so 
strong divisions grow ever  stronger. Consequently, divisions may actively compete 
for resources and, by doing so, reduce interdivisional  coordination.
Transfer Pricing Divisional competition may also lead to battles over transfer 
 pricing. One of the main challenges that vertical integration or related diversifi ca-
tion imposes is the need to set the prices at which products are transferred between 
 divisions. Rivalry among divisions increases the problem of setting fair  prices. Each 
supplying division tries to set the highest price for its outputs to maximize its own 
 profi tability. Such competition can completely undermine the corporate culture and 
make the company a  battleground. Many companies have a history of competition 
among  divisions. Some, of course, may encourage competition if managers believe 
that it leads to maximum  performance.
Focus on Short- Term Research and Development If extremely high profi tabil-
ity targets are set by corporate headquarters, the danger arises that the divisions will 
cut back on research and development expenditures to improve the fi nancial per-
formance of the  division. Although this infl ates divisional performance in the short 
term, it reduces a division’s ability to develop new products and leads to a fall in the 
stream of long- term  profi ts. Hence, corporate headquarters personnel must carefully 
control their interactions with the divisions to ensure that both the short- term and 
long- term goals of the business are being  achieved.
High Operating Costs As noted earlier, because each division possesses its own 
specialized functions, such as fi nance and R&D, multidivisional structures are ex-
pensive to run and  manage. R&D is especially costly, so some companies centralize 

244  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
such functions at the corporate level to serve all  divisions. The duplication of spe-
cialist services is not a problem if the gains from having separate specialist functions 
outweigh the  costs. Again, strategic managers must decide whether duplication is 
fi nancially  justifi ed. Activities (particularly advisory services and planning functions) 
are often centralized in times of downturn or recession; divisions, however, are re-
tained as profi t  centers.
The advantages of divisional structures must be balanced against their disadvan-
tages, but the disadvantages can be managed by an observant, professional manage-
ment team that is aware of the issues  involved. The multidivisional structure is the 
dominant one today, which clearly suggests its usefulness as a means of managing 
the multi business  corporation.
Integration and 
Organizational Control
As we have seen, an organization must choose the appropriate form of differen-
tiation to match its  strategy. Greater diversifi cation, for example, requires that a 
company move from a functional structure to a multidivisional  structure. Choosing 
a type of differentiation, however, is only the fi rst organizational design decision to 
be  made. The second decision concerns the level and type of integration and control 
necessary to make an organizational structure work  effectively.
Forms of Integrating Mechanisms
As noted earlier, a company’s level of integration is the extent to which it seeks to 
coordinate its value creation activities and make them  interdependent. The design 
issue can be summed up simply: The higher a company’s level of differentiation, 
the higher the level of integration needed to make organizational structure work 
 effectively.25 Thus, if a company adopts a more complex form of differentiation, it 
requires a more complex form of integration to accomplish its  goals. FedEx, for ex-
ample, needs a tremendous amount of integration to fulfi ll its promise of next- day 
package  delivery. It is renowned for its innovative use of integrating  mechanisms, 
such as customer liaison personnel, to coordinate its activities quickly and  effi ciently.
There is a series of integrating mechanisms a company can use to increase its level 
of integration as its level of differentiation  increases.26 Some of these mechanisms— on 
a continuum from simple to complex— are diagrammed in Figure 9.8. Like increasing 
the level of differentiation, increasing the level of integration is also  expensive. There 
are high costs associated with using managers to coordinate value creation  activities. 
Hence, a company uses more complex integrating mechanisms to coordinate its 
activities only to the extent necessary to implement its strategy  effectively.
Direct Contact The aim behind establishing direct contact among managers is to 
set up a context within which managers from different divisions or functions can 
work together to solve mutual  problems. Managers from different functions have 
different goals and interests but equal authority, so they may tend to compete rather 
than cooperate when confl icts  arise. In a typical functional structure, for example, 
the heads of each of the functions have equal authority; the nearest common point 
of authority is the  CEO. Consequently, when disputes arise, no mechanism exists to 
resolve the confl icts except the authority of the  boss.

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
245
In fact, one sign of confl ict in organizations is the number of problems sent up the 
hierarchy for upper- level managers to  solve. This wastes management time and ef-
fort, retards strategic decision making, and makes it diffi cult to create a cooperative 
culture in the  company. For this reason, companies generally choose more complex 
integrating mechanisms to coordinate interfunctional and divisional  activities.
Interdepartmental Liaison Roles A company can improve its interfunctional 
coordination through the interdepartmental liaison  role. When the volume of con-
tacts between two departments or functions increases, one of the ways of improving 
coordination is to give one manager in each division or function the responsibility 
for coordinating with the other  function. These managers may meet daily, weekly, 
monthly, or as  needed. Figure 9.8a depicts the nature of the liaison role; the small 
dot represents the manager inside the functional department who has responsibil-
ity for coordinating with the other  function. The responsibility for coordination is 
part of a manager’s full- time job, but through these roles a permanent relationship 
forms between the managers involved, greatly easing strains between  departments. 
Furthermore, liaison roles offer a way of transferring information across the organi-
zation, which is important in large, anonymous organizations whose employees may 
not know anyone outside their immediate  department.
Temporary Task Forces When more than two functions or divisions share com-
mon problems, direct contact and liaison roles are of limited value because they do 
not provide enough  coordination. The solution is to adopt a more complex integrat-
ing mechanism called a task  force. The nature of the task force is represented dia-
grammatically in Figure 9.8 b. One member of each function or division is assigned 
to a task force created to solve a specifi c  problem. Essentially, task forces are ad hoc 
committees, and members are responsible for reporting to their departments on the 
issues addressed and the solutions  recommended. Task forces are temporary because 
once the problem has been solved, members return to their normal roles in their own 
departments or are assigned to other task  forces. Task force members also perform 
many of their normal duties while serving on the task  force.
Permanent Teams In many cases, the issues addressed by a task force  recur. To 
deal with these issues effectively, an organization must establish a permanent inte-
grating mechanism, such as a permanent  team. An example of a permanent team is 
a new- product development committee, which is responsible for the choice, design, 
and marketing of new  products. Such an activity obviously requires a great deal 
of integration among functions if new products are to be successfully introduced, 
and establishing a permanent integrating mechanism accomplishes  this. Intel, for 
instance, emphasizes  teamwork. It devised a council system based on approximately 
90 cross- functional groups, which meet regularly to set functional strategy in areas 
such as engineering and marketing and to develop business- level  strategy.
The importance of teams in the management of the organizational structure can-
not be  overemphasized. Essentially, permanent teams are the organization’s standing 
committees, and much of the strategic direction of the organization is formulated 
in their  meetings. Henry Mintzberg, in a study of how the managers of corpora-
tions spend their time, discovered that they spend more than 60% of their time in 
these  committees.27 The reason is not bureaucracy but rather that integration is pos-
sible only in intensive, face- to- face sessions, in which managers can understand oth-
ers’ viewpoints and develop a cohesive organizational  strategy. The more complex 

246  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
the company, the more important these teams  become. Microsoft, for example, has 
established a whole new task force and team system to promote integration among 
divisions and improve corporate  performance. As we noted earlier, the product- team 
structure is based on the use of cross- functional teams to speed products to  market. 
These teams assume the responsibility for all aspects of product development; their 
goal is to increase coordination and integration among  functions.
Figure 9.8 Types of Integrating Mechanisms
Integrating
role
Plastics
division
Indicates manager with responsibility for integration
Sales
Production
Production
Engineering
Research and
development
Sales
Oil
division
(a) Liaison Role
(b) Task Force or Team
(c) Integrating Role

Organizational 
Control
The process by which 
managers monitor 
the ongoing activities 
of an organization 
and its members to 
evaluate whether 
activities are being 
performed efﬁ ciently 
and  effectively and to 
take corrective action to 
improve performance if 
they are not.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
247
Integrating Roles The only function of the integrating role is to prompt integra-
tion among divisions or departments; it is a full- time  job. As Figure 9.8c indicates, 
this role is independent of the subunits or divisions being  integrated. It is staffed 
by an independent expert, who is normally a senior manager with a great deal of 
experience in the joint needs of the two  departments. The job is to coordinate the 
decision process among departments or divisions in order to reap synergetic gains 
from  cooperation. One study found that DuPont had created 160 integrating roles 
to provide coordination among the different divisions of the company and improve 
corporate  performance.28 Once again, the more differentiated the company, the more 
common are these  roles. Often people in these roles take the responsibility for chair-
ing task forces and teams, and this provides additional  integration. Sometimes the 
number of integrating roles becomes so high that a permanent integrating depart-
ment is established at corporate  headquarters. Normally, this occurs only in large, 
diversifi ed corporations that see the need for integration among  divisions.
Differentiation and Integration
Clearly, fi rms have a large number of options available to them when they increase 
their level of differentiation as a result of increased growth or  diversifi cation. The 
implementation issue is for managers to match differentiation with the level of inte-
gration to meet organizational  objectives. Note that just as too much differentiation 
and not enough integration lead to a failure of implementation, the converse is also 
 true. The combination of low differentiation and high integration leads to an over-
controlled, bureaucratized organization in which fl exibility and speed of response 
are reduced rather than enhanced by the level of  integration. Besides, too much 
integration is expensive for the company because it raises  costs. For these reasons, 
the goal is to decide on the optimum amount of integration necessary for meeting 
organizational goals and  objectives. A company needs to operate the simplest struc-
ture consistent with implementing its strategy  effectively.
In practice, integrating mechanisms are only the fi rst means through which a com-
pany seeks to increase its ability to coordinate its  activities. Control systems are a  second.
The Nature of Organizational Control
Organizational control is the process by which managers monitor the ongoing ac-
tivities of an organization and its members to evaluate whether activities are being 
performed effi ciently and effectively and to take corrective action to improve perfor-
mance if they are  not. First, strategic managers choose the organizational strategy 
and structure they hope will allow the organization to use its resources most ef-
fectively to create value for its  customers. Second, strategic managers create control 
systems to monitor and evaluate whether, in fact, their organization’s strategy and 
structure are working as managers intended, how they could be improved, and how 
they should be changed if they are not  working.
Organizational control does not just mean reacting to events after they have 
occurred; it also means keeping an organization on track, anticipating events that 
might occur, and responding swiftly to new opportunities that present  themselves. 
For this reason, control is a strategic  process. Companies develop strategic control 
systems that establish ambitious goals and targets for all managers and employees, 

Strategic Control 
Systems
The formal target- 
setting, measurement, 
and feedback systems 
that enable strategic 
managers to evaluate 
whether a company 
is implementing its 
strategy  successfully.
248  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
and then they develop performance measures that stretch and encourage mangers 
and employees to excel in their quest to raise  performance. Thus, control is not just 
about monitoring how well an organization and its members are achieving current 
goals or how well the fi rm is utilizing its existing  resources. It is also about keeping 
employees motivated, focused on the important problems confronting an organiza-
tion now and for the future, and working together to fi nd ways to change a company 
so that it will perform better over  time.29
Strategic Controls
Strategic control systems are developed to measure performance at four levels in an 
organization: the corporate, divisional, functional, and individual  levels. Managers at 
all levels must develop the most appropriate set of measures to  evaluate  corporate- , 
business- , and functional- level  performance. These measures should be tied as closely 
as possibly to the goals of achieving superior effi ciency, quality,  innovativeness, 
and responsiveness to  customers. Care must be taken, however, to ensure that the 
 standards used at each level do not cause problems at the other  levels. Rather, 
the controls at each level should provide a platform on which managers at the levels 
below can base their control  systems.
Strategic control systems are the formal target- setting, measurement, and feed-
back systems that allow strategic managers to evaluate whether a company is 
achieving superior effi ciency, quality, innovation, and customer responsiveness and 
is implementing its strategy  successfully. An effective control system should have 
three  characteristics. It should be fl exible enough to allow managers to respond as 
necessary to unexpected events; it should provide accurate information, giving a 
true picture of organizational performance; and it should supply managers with the 
information in a timely manner because making decisions on the basis of outdated 
information is a recipe for  failure.30 As Figure 9.9 shows, designing an effective stra-
tegic control system requires four  steps.
Evaluate results and
take corrective action,
 if necessary.
Compare actual
performance to
established targets.
Create measuring and
monitoring systems.
Established standards
and targets.
Figure 9.9 Steps in Designing an Effective Control System

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
249
1. Establish the standards and targets against which performance is to be  evaluated. 
The standards and targets that managers select are the ways in which a company 
chooses to evaluate its  performance. General performance standards often derive 
from the goal of achieving superior effi ciency, quality, innovation, or responsive-
ness to  customers. Specifi c performance targets are derived from the strategy pur-
sued by the  company. For example, if a company is pursuing a low- cost strategy, 
then reducing costs by 7% a year might be a  target. If the company is a service 
organization such as Walmart or McDonald’s, then its standards might include 
time targets for serving customers or guidelines for food  quality.
2. Create the measuring and monitoring systems that indicate whether the stan-
dards and targets are being  reached. The company establishes procedures for 
assessing whether work goals at all levels in the organization are being  achieved. 
In some cases, measuring performance is fairly  straightforward. For example, 
managers can measure quite easily how many customers their employees serve 
by counting the number of receipts from the cash  register. In many cases, how-
ever, measuring performance is diffi cult because the organization is engaged in 
many complex  activities. How can managers judge how well their research and 
development department is doing when it may take 5 years for products to 
be developed? How can they measure the company’s performance when the 
company is entering new markets and serving new customers? How can they 
evaluate how well divisions are integrating their activities? The answer is that 
managers need to use various types of control systems, which we discuss later in 
this  chapter.
3. Compare actual performance against the established  targets. Managers 
 evaluate whether and to what extent performance deviates from the  standards 
and targets developed in step one. If performance is higher, management 
may decide that it has set the standards too low and may raise them for the 
next time  period. The Japanese are renowned for the way they use targets 
on the  production line to control  costs. They are constantly trying to raise 
 performance, and they raise the standards to provide a goal for managers to 
work  toward. On the other hand, if performance is too low, managers must 
decide whether to take remedial  action. This decision is easy when the rea-
sons for poor performance can be identifi ed— for instance, high labor  costs. 
More often, however, the reasons for poor performance are hard to  uncover. 
They may stem from external factors, such as a  recession. Alternatively, the 
cause may be  internal. For instance, the research and development laboratory 
may have underestimated the problems it would encounter or the extra costs 
of  doing unforeseen  research.
4. Initiate corrective action when it is determined that the standards and targets 
are not being  achieved. The fi nal stage in the control process is to take the cor-
rective action that will allow the organization to meet its  goals. Such corrective 
action may mean changing any aspect of strategy or structure discussed in this 
 book. For example, managers may invest more resources in improving R&D, 
or diversify, or even decide to change their organizational  structure. The goal is 
continuously to enhance the organization’s competitive  advantage.
Table 9.1 shows the various types of strategic control systems that managers can use 
to monitor and coordinate organizational  activities. Each of these types of control, 
along with its use at the corporate, divisional, functional, and individual levels, is 
discussed  next.

250  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Financial Controls
The measures most commonly used by managers and other stakeholders to moni-
tor and evaluate a company’s performance are fi nancial  controls. Typically, strategic 
managers select fi nancial goals they wish their company to achieve (such as goals 
related to growth, profi tability, and/or return to shareholders), and then they mea-
sure whether or not these goals have been  achieved. One reason for the popularity 
of fi nancial performance measures is that they are  objective. The performance of one 
company can be compared with that of another in terms of its stock market price, 
return on investment, market share, or even cash fl ow so that strategic managers 
and other stakeholders, particularly shareholders, have some way of judging their 
company’s performance relative to that of other  companies.
Stock price, for example, is a useful measure of a company’s performance, pri-
marily because the price of the stock is determined competitively by the number of 
buyers and sellers in the  market. The stock’s value is an indication of the market’s ex-
pectations for the fi rm’s future  performance. Thus, movements in the price of a stock 
provide shareholders with feedback on a company’s and its manager’s  performance. 
Stock market price acts as an important measure of performance because top man-
agers watch it closely and are sensitive to its rise and fall— particularly its fall! When 
Ford’s stock price plunged in the 2000s, for example, its then CEO Bill Ford, and 
present CEO Alan Mulally, heeded its shareholders’ complaints that Ford’s operat-
ing costs were too  high. In response, they both took radical steps, such as laying off 
thousands of employees and closing many plants to reduce costs in order to boost 
the company’s profi tability and stock  price. Finally, because stock price refl ects the 
long- term future return from the stock, it can be regarded as an indicator of the 
company’s long- run  potential.
Return on investment (ROI), a measure of profi tability determined by dividing net 
income by invested capital, is another popular kind of fi nancial  control. At the cor-
porate level, the performance of the whole company can be evaluated against that of 
other companies to assess its relative  performance. Top managers, for example, can as-
sess how well their strategies have worked by comparing their company’s performance 
against that of similar  companies. In the PC industry, companies such as Dell, HP, and 
Apple use ROI to gauge their performance relative to that of their  competitors. A de-
clining ROI signals a potential problem with a company’s strategy or  structure. When 
HP’s ROI fell in relation to Dell’s in the early 2000s because HP could not match the 
effi ciency of Dell’s inventory management systems, this signaled to its managers the 
need to fi nd new and improved materials management  strategies. By 2007 they had 
succeeded and HP overtook Dell to become the largest global PC  maker.
Table 9.1 Types of Control Systems
Financial 
Controls
Output 
Controls
Behavior 
Controls
Organizational 
Controls
Stock price
Divisional goals
Budgets
Values
ROI
Functional goals
Standardization
Norms
Individual goals
Rules and procedures
Socialization

Output Control
A system of control 
in which strategic 
managers estimate 
or forecast appropriate 
performance goals 
for each division, 
department, and 
employee and then 
measure actual 
performance relative 
to these  goals.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
251
ROI can also be used inside the company at the divisional level to judge the per-
formance of an operating division by comparing it to that of a similar freestanding 
business or other internal  division. Indeed, one reason for selecting a multidivisional 
structure is that each division can be evaluated as a self- contained profi t  center. 
Consequently, management can directly measure the performance of one division 
against that of  another. HP moved to a divisional structure partly because it gave 
corporate managers information about the relative costs of its various divisions, 
 allowing them to base capital allocations on the divisions’ relative  performance.
Similarly, manufacturing companies often establish production facilities at differ-
ent locations, domestically and globally, so that they can measure the performance 
of one against the  other. For example, Xerox was able to identify the relative inef-
fi ciency of its  U. S. division by comparing its profi tability with that of its Japanese 
 counterpart. ROI is a powerful form of control at the divisional level, especially if 
divisional managers are rewarded on the basis of their performance vis- à- vis other 
 divisions. The most successful divisional managers are promoted to become the next 
generation of corporate  executives.
Failure to meet stock price or ROI targets also indicates that corrective action is 
 necessary. It signals the need for corporate reorganization in order to meet corporate 
objectives, and such reorganization can involve a change in structure or the liqui-
dation and divestiture of  businesses. It can also indicate the need for new strategic 
 leadership. In recent years, the CEOs of Merck, Ford, and Motorola have all been 
ousted by disgruntled boards of directors, dismayed at the declining performance of 
their companies relative to that of  competitors.
Output Controls
Financial goals and controls are important, but it is also necessary to develop goals 
and controls that tell managers how well their strategies are creating a competitive 
advantage and building distinctive competences and capabilities that will lead to 
future  success. When strategic managers establish goals and measures to evaluate ef-
fi ciency, quality, innovation, and responsiveness to customers, they are using output 
 control. In output control, strategic managers estimate or forecast appropriate per-
formance goals for each division, department, and employee and then measure ac-
tual performance relative to these  goals. Often a company’s reward system is linked 
to performance on these goals, so that output control also provides an incentive 
structure for motivating employees at all levels in the  organization.
Divisional Goals Divisional goals state corporate managers’ expectations for each 
division’s performance on such dimensions as effi ciency, quality, innovation, and res-
ponsiveness to  customers. Generally, corporate managers set challenging  divisional 
goals to encourage divisional managers to create more effective strategies and  structures 
in the  future. At GE, for example, CEO Jeffrey Immelt sets clear performance goals 
for GE’s more than 150  divisions. He expects each division to be  number one or 
 number two in its industry in terms of market  share. Divisional managers are given 
 considerable autonomy to formulate a strategy to meet this goal (to fi nd ways to increase 
effi ciency, innovation,  etc.), and the divisions that fail are  divested.
Functional and Individual Goals Output control at the functional and individual 
levels is a continuation of control at the divisional  level. Divisional managers set 
goals for functional managers that will allow the division to achieve its  goals. As at 

Behavior Control
A system of control 
based on the 
establishment of a 
comprehensive system 
of rules and procedures 
to direct the actions or 
behavior of divisions, 
functions, and  individuals.
Operating Budget
A blueprint that states 
how managers intend 
to use organizational 
resources to achieve 
organizational goals 
most  efﬁ ciently.
252  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
the divisional level, functional goals are established to encourage development of 
competencies that give the company a competitive  advantage. The same four build-
ing blocks of competitive advantage (effi ciency, quality, innovation, and customer re-
sponsiveness) act as the standards against which functional performance is  evaluated. 
In the sales function, for example, goals related to effi ciency (such as cost of sales), 
quality (such as number of returns), and customer responsiveness (such as the time 
needed to respond to customer needs) can be established for the whole  function.
Finally, functional managers establish goals that individual employees are ex-
pected to achieve to allow the function to achieve its  goals. Sales personnel, for 
example, can be given specifi c goals (related to functional goals) that they in turn 
are required to  achieve. Functions and individuals are then evaluated on the basis of 
whether they achieve their goals— and in sales, compensation is commonly pegged 
to  achievement. The achievement of these goals is a sign that the company’s strategy 
is working and it is meeting organizational  objectives.
Behavior Control
The fi rst step in strategy implementation is for managers to design the right kind 
of organizational  structure. To make the structure work, however, employees must 
learn the kinds of behaviors they are expected to  perform. Using managers to tell 
employees what to do lengthens the organizational hierarchy, is expensive, and 
raises costs; consequently, strategic managers rely on behavior  controls. Behavior 
control is control through the establishment of a comprehensive system of rules 
and procedures to direct the actions or behavior of divisions, functions, and 
 individuals.31
The objective of using behavior controls is not to specify the goals but to stan-
dardize the way of reaching  them. Rules standardize behavior and make outcomes 
 predictable. If employees follow the rules, then actions are performed and decisions 
handled the same way, time and time  again. The result is predictability and accuracy, 
the aim of all control  systems. The main kinds of behavior controls are operating 
budgets, standardization, rules and procedures, and organizational  culture.
Operating Budgets Once managers at each level have been given a goal to achieve, 
operating budgets that regulate how managers and workers are to attain those goals 
are  established. An operating budget is a blueprint that states how managers intend 
to use organizational resources to achieve organizational goals most  effi ciently. Most 
often, managers at one level allocate to managers at a lower level a specifi c amount 
of resources to use to produce goods and  services.
Once they have been given a budget, managers must decide how they will allo-
cate certain amounts of money for different organizational  activities. These lower- 
level managers are then evaluated on the basis of their ability to stay inside the 
budget and make the best use of  it. Thus, for example, managers at GE’s washing 
machine division might have a budget of $50 million to develop and sell a new 
line of washing machines, and they have to decide how much money to allocate to 
R&D, engineering, sales, and the other functions so that the division will generate 
the most revenue and hence make the biggest profi t  possible. Most commonly, large 
organizations treat each division as a stand- alone profi t center, and corporate man-
agers evaluate each division’s performance by its relative contribution to corporate 
 profi tability.

Standardization
The degree to which 
a company speciﬁ es 
how decisions are 
to be made so that 
employees’ behavior 
becomes  predictable.
 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
253
Standardization Standardization is the degree to which a company specifi es 
how decisions are to be made so that employees’ behavior becomes  predictable.32 
In practice, there are three things an organization can standardize: inputs, conver-
sion activities, and  outputs. First, an organization can control the behavior of both 
people and resources by standardizing inputs into the  organization. This means 
that managers screen inputs according to preestablished criteria or standards and 
then decide which inputs to allow into the  organization. If employees are the input 
in question, one way of standardizing them is to specify which qualities and skills 
they must possess and then to select only those applicants who possess  them. If the 
inputs in question are raw materials or component parts, the same considerations 
 apply. The Japanese are renowned for the high quality and precise tolerances they 
demand from component parts to minimize problems with the product at the manu-
facturing  stage. Just- in- time (JIT) inventory systems also help standardize the fl ow 
of  inputs.
Second, the aim of standardizing conversion activities is to program work 
activities such that they are done the same way time and time  again. The goal is 
 predictability. Behavior controls, such as rules and procedures, are among the chief 
means by which companies can standardize  throughputs. Fast food restaurants such 
as McDonald’s and Burger King, for example, standardize all aspects of their restau-
rant operations; the result is standardized fast  food.
Third, the goal of standardizing outputs is to specify what the performance 
characteristics of the fi nal product or service should be— what the dimensions or 
tolerances the product should conform to, for  example. To ensure that their prod-
ucts are standardized, companies apply quality control and use various criteria to 
measure this  standardization. One criterion might be the number of goods returned 
from customers or the number of customers’  complaints. On production lines, pe-
riodic sampling of products can indicate whether they are meeting performance 
 standards.
Rules and Procedures As with other kinds of controls, the use of behavior con-
trol is accompanied by potential pitfalls that must be managed if the organization 
is to avoid strategic  problems. Top management must be careful to monitor and 
evaluate the usefulness of behavior controls over  time. Rules constrain people and 
lead to standardized, predictable  behavior. However, rules are always easier to 
establish than to get rid of, and over time the number of rules an organization uses 
tends to  increase. As new developments lead to additional rules, often the old rules 
are not discarded, and the company becomes overly  bureaucratized. Consequently, 
the organization and the people in it become infl exible and are slow to react to 
changing or unusual  circumstances. Such infl exibility can reduce a company’s com-
petitive advantage by lowering the pace of innovation and reducing responsiveness 
to  customers.
Similarly, inside the organization, integration and coordination may fall apart as 
rules impede communication between  functions. Managers must therefore be con-
stantly on the alert for opportunities to reduce the number of rules and procedures 
necessary to manage the business, and they should always prefer to discard a rule 
rather than add a new  one. Hence, reducing the number of rules and procedures to 
the essential minimum is  important. Strategic managers frequently neglect this task, 
however, and often only a change in strategic leadership brings the company back 
on  course.

Organizational Culture
The speciﬁ c collection 
of values and norms 
that are shared by 
people and groups 
in an organization 
and that control the 
way they interact with 
each other and with 
stakeholders outside 
the  organization.
Organizational Values
Beliefs and ideas 
about what kinds of 
goals members of an 
organization should 
pursue and what 
behaviors they should 
use to achieve these 
 goals.
Organizational Norms
Unwritten guidelines 
or expectations that 
prescribe the kinds 
of behavior employees 
should adopt in 
particular situations 
and regulate the way 
they  behave.
254  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
Organizational Culture One important kind of behavioral control that serves this 
dual function of keeping organizational members goal- directed yet open to new op-
portunities to use their skills to create value is organizational  culture. Organizational 
culture is the specifi c collection of values and norms that are shared by people and 
groups in an organization and that control the way they interact with each other 
and with stakeholders outside the  organization.33 Organizational values are beliefs 
and ideas about what kinds of goals members of an organization should pursue and 
what kinds or standards of behavior employees should use to achieve these  goals. 
Bill Gates of Microsoft is famous for the set of organizational values that he created 
for his company, which include entrepreneurship, ownership, honesty, frankness, 
and open  communication. Gates stressed entrepreneurship and ownership because 
he wanted Microsoft to operate less like a big bureaucracy and more like a collection 
of smaller and very adaptive  companies. Gates also emphasized giving lower- level 
managers considerable decision- making autonomy and encouraged them to take 
risks— that is, to behave more like entrepreneurs and less like corporate  bureaucrats. 
The stress Gates, and its current top managers, place on values such as honesty, 
frankness, and open communication refl ects their belief that an open internal dia-
logue is necessary for competitive success at  Microsoft.
From organizational values develop organizational norms, the guidelines or ex-
pectations that prescribe appropriate kinds of behavior by employees in particular 
situations and control the behavior of organizational members toward one  another. 
The norms of behavior for software programmers at Microsoft include working 
long hours and weekends, wearing whatever clothing is comfortable (but never a 
suit and tie), consuming junk food, and communicating with other employees via 
electronic mail and the company’s state- of- the- art  intranet.
Organizational culture functions as a form of control in that strategic managers 
can infl uence the values and norms that develop in an organization— values and 
norms that specify appropriate and inappropriate behaviors and that shape the way 
its members  behave.34 Strategic managers such as Gates and Michael Dell, for exam-
ple, deliberately cultivate values that encourage subordinates to perform their roles 
in innovative and creative  ways. They establish and support norms dictating that to 
be innovative and entrepreneurial, employees should feel free to experiment and go 
out on a limb even if there is a signifi cant chance of  failure.
Managers of other companies, however, might cultivate values that encourage 
employees always to be conservative and cautious in their dealings with others, to 
consult their superiors before they make important decisions, and to record their 
actions in writing so they can be held accountable for what  happens. Managers of 
organizations such as chemical and oil companies, fi nancial institutions, and insur-
ance companies— indeed, any organization in which caution is needed— may en-
courage such an approach to making  decisions.35 In a bank or mutual fund, the risk 
of losing all your investors’ money makes a cautious approach to investing highly 
 appropriate. Thus, we might expect that managers of different kinds of organiza-
tions will deliberately try to cultivate and develop the organizational values and 
norms that are best suited to their strategy and  structure.
Culture and Strategic Leadership Because both an organization’s structure 
(the design of its task and reporting relationships) and its culture shape employees’ 
behavior, it is crucial to match organizational structure and culture to implement 
strategy  successfully. How do managers design and create their cultures? In gen-
eral, organizational culture is the product of strategic leadership provided by an 

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
255
organization’s founder and top  managers. The organization’s founder is particularly 
important in determining culture, because the founder imprints his or her values and 
management style on the  organization. Walt Disney’s conservative infl uence on the 
company he established continued until well after his death, for  example. Managers 
were afraid to experiment with new forms of entertainment because they were afraid 
Walt Disney wouldn’t have liked  it.
The leadership style established by the founder is transmitted to the company’s 
managers, and as the company grows, it typically attracts new managers and em-
ployees who share the same  values. Moreover, members of the organization typically 
recruit and select only those who share their  values. Thus, a company’s culture be-
comes more and more distinct as its members become more  similar.
The virtue of these shared values and common culture is that it increases integra-
tion and improves coordination among organizational  members. For example, the 
common language that typically emerges in an organization because people share 
the same beliefs and values facilitates cooperation among  managers. Similarly, rules 
and procedures and direct supervision are less important when shared norms and 
values regulate behavior and motivate  employees. When organizational members 
subscribe to the organization’s cultural norms and values, this bonds them to the or-
ganization and increases their commitment to fi nd new ways to help it  succeed. That 
is, such employees are more likely to commit themselves to organizational goals and 
work actively to develop new skills and competencies to help achieve those  goals. 
Strategic managers need to establish the values and norms that will help them bring 
their organizations into the  future.
Finally, organizational structure contributes to the implementation process by 
providing the framework of tasks and roles that reduces transaction diffi culties and 
allows employees to think and behave in ways that allow a company to achieve 
superior  performance. The way in which the frugal Sam Walton (he used to drive a 
30- year- old pickup truck, for example, and lived in a very modest home) used all the 
kinds of control systems discussed above to implement Walmart’s cost- leadership 
strategy is very instructive, as discussed in the Running  Case.
Walmart, headquartered in Bentonville, Arkansas, is 
the largest retailer in the  world. In 2009, it sold more 
than $700  billion worth of  products. A large part of 
Walmart’s success is due to the nature of the culture 
that its founder, the late Sam Walton, established for 
the  company. Walton wanted all his managers and 
workers to take a hands- on approach to their jobs 
and be totally committed to Walmart’s main goal, 
which he deﬁ ned as total customer  satisfaction. To 
motivate his employees, Walton created a culture that 
gave all employees, called “associates,” continuous 
feedback about their performance and the company’s 
 performance.
To involve his associates in the business and en-
courage them to develop work behaviors focused on 
providing quality customer service, Walton established 
strong cultural values and norms for his  company. One 
of the norms associates are expected to follow is the 
How Sam Walton Created Walmart’s Culture
R U N N I N G  C A S E
(continued)

256  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
“10- foot  attitude.” This norm encourages associates, 
in Walton’s words, to “promise that whenever you 
come within 10 feet of a customer, you will look him in 
the eye, greet him, and ask him if you can help  him.” 
The “sundown rule” states that employees should 
strive to answer customer requests by sundown of the 
day they are  made. The Walmart cheer (“Give me a W, 
give me an A,”  etc.) is used in all its  stores.
The strong customer- oriented values that Walton 
created are exempliﬁ ed in the stories Walmart mem-
bers tell one another about associates’ concern for 
 customers. They include stories like the one about 
Sheila, who risked her own safety when she jumped in 
front of a car to prevent a little boy from being struck; 
about Phyllis, who administered CPR to a customer 
who had suffered a heart attack in her store; and about 
Annette, who gave up the Power Ranger she had on lay-
away for her own son to fulﬁ ll the birthday wish of a cus-
tomer’s  son. The strong Walmart culture helps to control 
and motivate employees to achieve the stringent output 
and ﬁ nancial targets the company sets for  itself.
A notable way Walmart builds its culture is through 
its annual stockholders’ meeting, its extravagant cer-
emony celebrating the company’s  success. Every year, 
Walmart ﬂ ies thousands of its highest performers to 
its annual meeting at its corporate headquarters in 
Arkansas for a show featuring famous singers, rock 
bands, and  comedians. Walmart feels that expensive 
entertainment is a reward its employees deserve 
and that the event reinforces the company’s high- 
performance values and  culture. The proceedings are 
even broadcast live to all of Walmart’s stores so that 
employees can celebrate the company’s achievements 
 together.
Since Sam Walton’s death, public attention to 
Walmart, which has more than 1 million employees, 
has revealed the “hidden side” of its  culture. Critics 
claim that few Walmart employees receive reasonably 
priced health care or other beneﬁ ts, and the company 
pays employees at little above the minimum  wage. 
They also contend that employees do not question 
these policies because managers have convinced 
them into believing that this has to be the case— that 
the only way Walmart can keep its prices low is by 
keeping their pay and beneﬁ ts  low. In 2009, Walmart 
was threatened by proposed changes to health care 
laws that would force it to pay a much higher percent-
age of employee  beneﬁ ts. Will its loyal employees de-
cide to follow Sam Walton’s 10- foot- attitude rule in the 
future?36
1. Implementing a strategy successfully depends on 
selecting an organizational structure and control 
system appropriate to the company’s  strategy.
2. The basic tool of strategy implementation is or-
ganizational  design. Good organizational design 
increases profi ts in two  ways. First, it economizes 
on operating costs and lowers the costs of value 
creation  activities. Second, it enhances the abil-
ity of a company’s value creation functions to 
achieve a differentiation advantage through su-
perior effi ciency, quality, innovativeness, and re-
sponsiveness to  customers.
3. Differentiation and integration are the two de-
sign concepts that govern how a structure will 
 work. Differentiation has two aspects: Vertical 
differentiation refl ects how a company chooses 
to allocate its decision- making authority, and 
horizontal differentiation refl ects the way a com-
pany groups organizational activities into func-
tions, departments, or  divisions.
4. Tall hierarchies have a number of disadvan-
tages, such as problems with communication 
and information transfer, motivation, and  cost. 
Decentralization, or delegation of authority, can 
solve some of these problems,  however.
5. Most companies fi rst choose a functional struc-
ture. Then, as a company grows and diversifi es, 
it adopts a multidivisional  structure. Although 
a multidivisional structure has higher costs than 
a functional structure, it overcomes the control 
problems associated with a functional structure 
and gives a company the capability to handle its 
value creation activities  effectively.
6. Other kinds of structures include the product, 
product- team, and geographic  structures. Each 
has a specialized use and, to be effective, must 
match the needs of the  organization.
7. The more complex the company and the higher its 
level of differentiation, the higher the level of inte-
gration needed to manage its  structure. The kinds 
Summary of Chapter

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
257
of integrating mechanisms available to a company 
range from direct contact to integrating  roles. The 
more complex the mechanism, the greater the 
costs of using  it. A company should take care to 
match these mechanisms to its strategic  needs.
8. Strategic control is the process of setting tar-
gets and monitoring, evaluating, and rewarding 
organizational  performance. Managers should 
develop strategic control systems that measure 
all important aspects of their organization’s 
 performance.
9. Control takes place at all levels in the organi-
zation: corporate, divisional, functional, and 
 individual. Effective control systems are fl exible, 
 
accurate, and able to provide quick feedback to 
strategic  planners.
10. Control systems range from those directed at 
measuring outputs to those that measure be-
haviors or  actions. Output controls establish 
goals for divisions, functions, and  individuals. 
They can be used only when outputs can be 
objectively measured and are often linked to a 
“management by objectives”  system. Behavior 
controls are achieved through budgets, stan-
dardization, rules and procedures, and orga-
nizational culture, the collection of norms and 
values that govern the way people act and be-
have inside the  organization.
1. What is the difference between vertical differen-
tiation and horizontal differentiation? Rank the 
various structures discussed in this chapter along 
these two  dimensions.
2. What kind of structure best describes the way 
your business school or university operates? Why 
is that structure appropriate? Would another 
structure fi t better?
3. When would a company decide to change from a 
functional to a multidivisional structure?
4. What are the relationships among differentia-
tion, integration, and strategic control systems? 
Why are these relationships important?
5. For each of the structures we discussed in this 
chapter, outline the most suitable control  system.
6. What kinds of control and reward systems would 
we be likely to fi nd in (a) a small manufacturing 
company, (b) a chain store, (c) a high- tech com-
pany, and (d) a Big Five accounting fi rm?
Discussion Questions
PRACTICING STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
Small- Group Exercise: 
Speeding Up Product Development
Break up into groups of three to fi ve people, and 
discuss the following  scenario. Appoint one group 
member as spokesperson for the group, who will 
communicate your fi ndings to the class when 
called on to do so by the  instructor.
You are the top functional manager of a small 
greeting card company whose new lines of humorous 
cards for every occasion are selling out as fast as they 
are reaching the  stores. Currently, your  employees 
are organized into different functions such as 
card designers, artists, and joke  writers, as well as 
functions such as marketing and  manufacturing. 
Each function works on a wide range of different 
kinds of cards (birthday, Christmas, Hanukkah, 
Thanksgiving,  etc.). Sometimes the design depart-
ment comes up with the initial idea for a new 
card and sends the idea to the artists, who draw 
and color the  picture. Then the card is sent to the 
joke writers, who write the joke to suit the  card. 
At other times the process starts with writing the 
(continued)

258  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
joke, which is then sent to the design department 
to fi nd the best use for the  idea.
The problem you are experiencing is that your 
current functional structure does not allow you to 
produce new cards fast enough to satisfy custom-
ers’  demands. It typically takes a new card 1 year 
to reach the market, and you want to shorten this 
time by half in order to protect and expand your 
market  niche.
1. Discuss ways in which you can improve the 
way your current functional structure operates 
to speed up the product development  process.
2. Discuss the pros and cons of moving to a 
(a) multidivisional, (b) matrix, and (c) product- 
team structure to reduce card development 
 time.
3. Which of these structures do you think is most 
appropriate? Why?
Visiting Google’s Control System
Go to Google’s Web site and look at the section 
on its corporate culture and operating  philosophy.
1. How 
would 
you 
characterize 
Google’s 
approach to strategic control?
2. How does its control system help it to imple-
ment its strategies?
General Task
Explore the Web to fi nd a Web site that displays 
a company’s organizational chart or that talks 
about a company’s method of managing and con-
trolling its  structure. (For example, does it use a 
centralized or a decentralized approach?) What 
kind of structure and what control systems does 
the company use to manage its activities? Why?
Exploring The Web
Dell Computer was one of the fastest- growing com-
panies of the 1990s, and its stock price increased at 
the rate of 100% per year, delighting its  stockholders. 
Achieving this high return has been a constant chal-
lenge for Michael  Dell. One of his biggest battles has 
been to manage and change Dell’s organizational 
structure, control systems, and culture as his com-
pany  grows.
Michael Dell was 19 in 1984, when he took 
$1,000 and spent it on the computer parts he assem-
bled into PCs that he sold over the  phone. Increasing 
demand for his PCs meant that within a few weeks, 
he needed to hire people to help  him. Soon he found 
himself supervising three employees who worked to-
gether around a six- foot table to assemble comput-
ers while two more employees took orders over the 
 phone.37
By 1993, Dell employed 4,500 workers and was 
hiring more than 100 new workers each week just 
to keep pace with the demand for the  computers. 
When he found himself working 18- hour days man-
aging the company, he realized that he could not 
lead the company single- handedly. The company’s 
growth had to be managed, and he knew that he 
had to recruit and hire strategic managers who had 
experience in managing different functional areas, 
such as marketing, fi nance, and  manufacturing. He 
recruited executives from IBM and  Compaq. With 
their help, he created a functional structure, one 
in which employees were grouped by their com-
mon skills or tasks they performed, such as sales or 
manufacturing, to organize the value chain activi-
ties necessary to deliver his PCs to  customers. As a 
part of this organizing process, Dell’s structure also 
became taller, with more levels in the management 
hierarchy, to ensure that he and his managers had 
suffi cient control over the different activities of his 
growing  business. Michael Dell delegated authority 
Strategy Implementation at Dell Computer

 
Chapter 9 Implementing Strategy Through Organizational Design  
259
to control Dell’s functional value chain activities to 
his managers, which gave him the time he needed 
to perform his entrepreneurial task of fi nding new 
opportunities for the  company.
Dell’s functional structure worked well and, un-
der its new management team, the company’s growth 
continued to  soar. Moreover, Dell’s new structure 
had given functional managers the control they 
needed to squeeze out costs, and Dell had become 
the lowest- cost PC  maker. Analysts also reported that 
Dell had developed a lean organizational culture, 
meaning that employees had developed norms and 
values that emphasized the importance of working 
hard to help each other fi nd innovative new ways of 
making products to keep costs low and increase their 
 reliability. Indeed, Dell rose to the top of the cus-
tomer satisfaction rankings for PC makers because 
few customers complained about its  products. Its 
employees became known for the excellent customer 
service they gave to PC buyers who were experienc-
ing problems with setting up their  computers.
However, Michael Dell realized that new and 
different kinds of problems were  arising. Dell was 
now selling huge numbers of computers to differ-
ent kinds of customers, for example, home, business, 
and educational customers and different branches 
of  government. Because customers were demanding 
computers with different features or more comput-
ing power, the company’s product line broadened 
 rapidly. It became more diffi cult for employees to 
meet the needs of these customers effi ciently because 
each employee needed information about all product 
features or all of Dell’s thousands of different sales 
offers across its product  range.
By the late 1990s, Michael Dell moved to change 
his company to a market structure and created sepa-
rate divisions, each geared to the needs of a different 
group of customers: a consumer division, a business 
division, and so  on. In each division, teams of em-
ployees specialized in servicing the needs of one of 
these customer  groups. This move to a more com-
plex structure also allowed each division to de-
velop a unique subculture that suited its tasks, and 
employees were able to obtain in- depth knowledge 
about the needs of their market that helped them to 
respond better to their customers’  needs. So success-
ful was this change in structure and culture that by 
2000, Dell’s revenues were more than $35  billion 
and its profi ts in excess of $3 billion, a staggering 
increase from 1984.38
Michael Dell has continued to change his com-
pany’s structure in the 2000s to respond to changing 
customer needs and increasing competitive chal-
lenges from Apple and  HP. For example, Michael 
Dell realized that he could leverage his company’s 
strengths in materials management, manufacturing, 
and Internet sales over a wider range of computer 
hardware  products. He decided to begin assembling 
servers, workstations, and storage devices to compete 
with IBM, Sun, and  HP. The increasing importance 
of the Internet also led him to pay more attention to 
more specialized groups of customers and fi nd the 
best way to customize its approach to best meet each 
group’s specifi c needs over the  Internet. Today, for 
example, Dell can offer large and small companies 
and private buyers a complete range of computers, 
workstations, and storage devices that can be cus-
tomized to their  needs.
To help coordinate its growing activities, Dell is 
increasingly making use of its corporate Intranet to 
standardize activities across divisions and integrate 
its activities across functions to reduce  costs. Dell’s 
hierarchy is shrinking as managers increasingly 
delegate decision making to employees who use its 
advanced IT to access the information they need to 
provide excellent customer  service. To reduce costs, 
Dell has also outsourced most of its customer service 
function to India and in June 2010 Dell closed its 
last  U. S. factory and now outsources all its assembly 
operations to companies in China and  Taiwan.39 As 
a result of these moves, Dell’s smaller  U. S. workforce 
has become even more committed to fi nding ways to 
keep costs as low as possible while being responsive 
to its  customers. All members of the organization 
are working to fi ght back and regain Dell’s low- cost 
competitive advantage from rivals such as HP and 
Acer that have imitated its cost- saving  strategies.
Case Discussion Questions
1. Why has Dell moved to different kinds of organi-
zational structures over time?
2. Has Dell’s performance been improved?
3. Search the Internet to fi nd out how Dell has been 
trying to increase its performance and how its 
competitors such as HP and Acer have also been 
working to improve  theirs.

260  
Part 4 Strategy Implementation
 1. J.   R.  Galbraith, Designing Complex Organizations 
(Reading,  Mass.: Addison- Wesley, 1973).
 2. J.  Child, Organization: A Guide for Managers and 
Administrators (New York: Harper & Row, 1977), 50–72.
 3. R.   H.  Miles, Macro Organizational Behavior (Santa 
Monica,  Calif.: Goodyear, 1980), 19–20.
 4. Galbraith, Designing Complex  Organizations.
 5. V.   A.  Graicunas, “Relationships in Organizations,” in 
Papers on the Science of Administration,  ed.  L. Gulick and 
 L. Urwick (New York: Institute of Public Adminis tration, 
1937), 181–185 and  J.   C.  Worthy, “Organizational 
Structure and Company Morale,” American Sociological 
Review 15 (1950): 169–179.
 6. Child, Organization,  pp. 50–52.
 7. G.   R.  Jones, “Organization- Client Transactions and 
Organizational Governance Structures,” Academy of 
Management Journal 30 (1987): 197–218.
 8. H.  Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs,  N. J.: Prentice- Hall, 1979), 435.
 9. B. Woolridge and  S.  W. Floyd, “The Strategy Process, 
Middle Management Involvement, and Organizational 
Performance,” Strategic Management Journal 9 (1990): 
231–241.
 10. Child, Organization,  p. 51.
 11. R.  Carzo  Jr. and  J.   N.  Yanousas, “Effects of Flat and 
Tall Organization Structure,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 14 (1969): 178–191.
 12. A.  Gupta and  V.  Govindarajan, “Business Unit Strategy, 
Managerial Characteristics, and Business Unit Effectiveness 
at Strategy Implementation,” Academy of Management 
Journal 27 (1984): 25–41 and  R.  T. Lenz, “Determinants of 
Organizational Performance: An Interdisciplinary Review,” 
Strategic Management Journal 2 (1981): 131–154.
 13. fedex.com, 2011.
 14. www. pg.com, 2011.
 15. G.  R. Jones, “Task Visibility, Free Riding and Shirking: 
Explaining the Effect of Organization Structure on 
Employee Behavior,” Academy of Management Review 4 
(1984): 684–695.
 16. http:// www. unionpacifi c.com, 2010;  yahoo.com, 2010.
 17. R.  L. Daft, Organizational Theory and Design, 3rd  ed. 
(St. Paul,  Minn.: West, 1986), 215.
 18. J.   R.  Galbraith and  R.   K.  Kazanjian, Strategy Imple-
mentation: Structure System and Process, 2nd  ed. 
(St. Paul,  Minn.: West, 1986); Child, Organization; and 
 R. Duncan, “What Is the Right Organization Structure?” 
Organizational Dynamics, Winter 1979, 59–80.
 19. O.  E. Williamson, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and 
Antitrust Implications (New York: Free Press, 1975).
 20. Alfred  D.  Chandler, Strategy and Structure (Cambridge, 
 Mass.: MIT Press, 1971); Williamson, Markets and 
Hierarchies; and  L.  Wrigley, Divisional Autonomy and 
Diversifi cation (Ph. D.  diss., Harvard Business School, 1970).
 21. R.   P.  Rumelt, Strategy, Structure, and Economic 
Performance (Boston,  Mass.: Division of Research, 
Harvard Business School, 1974);  B.  R. Scott, Stages of 
Corporate Development (Cambridge,  Mass.: Harvard 
Business School, 1971); and Williamson, Markets and 
 Hierarchies.
 22. The discussion draws on each of the sources cited in 
endnotes 10–17 and on  G.  R. Jones and  C.  W.  L. Hill, 
“Transaction Cost Analysis of Strategy- Structure Choice,” 
Strategic Management Journal 9 (1988): 159–172.
 23. H.   O.  Armour and  D.   J.  Teece, “Organizational 
Structure and Economic Performance: A Test of the 
Multidivisional Hypothesis,” Bell Journal of Economics 9 
(1978): 106–122.
 24. Alfred Sloan, My Years at General Motors (New York: 
Doubleday, 1983),  Ch. 3.
 25. P.   R.  Lawrence and  J.  Lorsch, Organization and 
Environment (Homewood,  Ill.: Irwin, 1967), 50–55.
 26. Galbraith, Designing Complex Organizations,  Ch. 1 and 
Galbraith and Kazanjian, Strategy Implementation,  Ch. 7.
 27. Henry Mintzberg, The Nature of Managerial Work 
(Englewood Cliffs,  N. J.: Prentice- Hall, 1973),  Ch. 10.
 28. Lawrence and Lorsch, Organization and Environment, 
 p. 55.
 29. R. Simmons, “Strategic Orientation and Top Management 
Attention to Control Systems,” Strategic Management 
Journal 10 (1991): 49–62.
 30. W.   G.  Ouchi, “The Transmission of Control Through 
Organizational Hierarchy,” Academy of Management 
Journal 21 (1978): 173–192 and  W.   H.  Newman, 
Constructive Control (Englewood Cliffs,  N. J.: Prentice- 
Hall, 1975).
 31. O.   E.  Williamson, Markets and Hierarchies; and 
 W.   G.  Ouchi, “Markets, Bureaucracies, and Clans,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 25 (1980): 109–141.
 32. H.  Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs,  N. J.: Prentice- Hall, 1979), 5–9.
 33. L. Smircich, “Concepts of Culture and Organizational 
Analysis,” Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983): 
339–358.
 34. Ouchi, “Markets, Bureaucracies, and Clans,”  p. 130.
 35. G.   R.  Jones, Organizational Theory, Design, and 
Change, 6th  ed. (Upper Saddle River,  N. J.: Prentice Hall, 
2007.
 36. http://  www. walmart.com, 2009; “Associates Keystone to 
Structure,” Chain Store Age, December, 1999, 17;  M. Troy, 
“The Culture Remains the Constant,” Discount Store 
News, June 8, 1998, 95–98;  S. Voros, “3D Management,” 
Management Review, January 2000, 45–47; “Neurosis, 
Arkansas- Style,” Fortune, April 17, 2000, 36.
 37. http:// www. dell.com, 2011.
 38. G.  McWilliams, “Dell Looks for Ways to Rekindle 
the Fire It Had as an Upstart,” Wall Street Journal, 
August  31, 2000,  A.1,  A.8 and “Dell Hopes to Lead 
Firm out of Desert,” Houston Chronicle, September 3, 
2000, 4 D.
 39. http:// www. dell.com, 2011.
Notes

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C1
C1
What Is Case Study Analysis?
Case study analysis is an integral part of a course in strategic management. The 
purpose of a case study is to provide students with experience of the strategic man-
agement problems that actual organizations face. A case study presents an account 
of what happened to a business or industry over a number of years. It chronicles 
the events that managers had to deal with, such as changes in the competitive envi-
ronment, and charts the managers’ response, which usually involved changing the 
 business- or corporate-level strategy. The cases in this book cover a wide range of 
issues and problems that managers have had to confront. Some cases are about fi nding 
the right business-level strategy to compete in changing conditions. Some are about 
companies that grew by acquisition, with little concern for the rationale behind their 
growth, and how growth by acquisition affected their future profi tability. Each case 
is different because each organization is different. The underlying thread in all cases, 
however, is the use of strategic management techniques to solve business problems.
Cases prove valuable in a strategic management course for several reasons. First, 
cases provide you, the student, with experience of organizational problems that you 
probably have not had the opportunity to experience fi rsthand. In a relatively short 
period of time, you will have the chance to appreciate and analyze the problems 
faced by many different companies and to understand how managers tried to deal 
with them.
Second, cases illustrate the theory and content of strategic management. The 
meaning and implications of this information are made clearer when they are applied 
to case studies. The theory and concepts help reveal what is going on in the compa-
nies studied and allow you to evaluate the solutions that specifi c companies adopted 
to deal with their problems. Consequently, when you analyze cases, you will be like 
a detective who, with a set of conceptual tools, probes what happened and what or 
who was responsible and then marshals the evidence that provides the solution. Top 
managers enjoy the thrill of testing their problem-solving abilities in the real world. 
It is important to remember that no one knows what the right answer is. All that 
managers can do is to make the best guess. In fact, managers say repeatedly that they 
are happy if they are right only half the time in solving strategic problems. Strategic 
management is an uncertain game, and using cases to see how theory can be put into 
practice is one way of improving your skills of diagnostic investigation.
Third, case studies provide you with the opportunity to participate in class and 
to gain experience in presenting your ideas to others. Instructors may sometimes call 
on students as a group to identify what is going on in a case, and through classroom 
discussion the issues in and solutions to the case problem will reveal themselves. In 
such a situation, you will have to organize your views and conclusions so that you 
Analyzing a Case Study and Writing 
a Case Study Analysis

C2  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
can present them to the class. Your classmates may have analyzed the issues differ-
ently from you, and they will want you to argue your points before they will accept 
your conclusions, so be prepared for debate. This mode of discussion is an example 
of the dialectical approach to decision making. This is how decisions are made in the 
actual business world.
Instructors also may assign an individual, but more commonly a group, to analyze 
the case before the whole class. The individual or group probably will be responsible 
for a thirty- to forty-minute presentation of the case to the class. That presentation 
must cover the issues posed, the problems facing the company, and a series of recom-
mendations for resolving the problems. The discussion then will be thrown open to the 
class, and you will have to defend your ideas. Through such discussions and presenta-
tions, you will experience how to convey your ideas effectively to others. Remember 
that a great deal of managers’ time is spent in these kinds of situations: presenting 
their ideas and engaging in discussion with other managers who have their own views 
about what is going on. Thus, you will experience in the classroom the actual process 
of strategic management, and this will serve you well in your future career.
If you work in groups to analyze case studies, you also will learn about the group 
process involved in working as a team. When people work in groups, it is often dif-
fi cult to schedule time and allocate responsibility for the case analysis. There are 
always group members who shirk their responsibilities and group members who are 
so sure of their own ideas that they try to dominate the group’s analysis. Most of 
the strategic management takes place in groups, however, and it is best if you learn 
about these problems now.
Analyzing a Case Study
The purpose of the case study is to let you apply the concepts of strategic manage-
ment when you analyze the issues facing a specifi c company. To analyze a case study, 
therefore, you must examine closely the issues confronting the company. Most often 
you will need to read the case several times—once to grasp the overall picture of 
what is happening to the company and then several times more to discover and grasp 
the specifi c problems. 
Generally, detailed analysis of a case study should include eight areas:
 1. The history, development, and growth of the company over time
 2. The identifi cation of the company’s internal strengths and weaknesses
 3. The nature of the external environment surrounding the company
 4. A SWOT analysis
 5. The kind of corporate-level strategy that the company is pursuing
 6. The nature of the company’s business-level strategy
 7. The company’s structure and control systems and how they match its strategy
 8. Recommendations
To analyze a case, you need to apply the concepts taught in this course to each of 
these areas. To help you further, we next offer a summary of the steps you can take 
to analyze the case material for each of the eight points we just noted:
 1. Analyze the company’s history, development, and growth. A convenient way 
to investigate how a company’s past strategy and structure affect it in the pres-
ent is to chart the critical incidents in its history—that is, the events that were 

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C3
the most unusual or the most essential for its development into the company it 
is today. Some of the events have to do with its founding, its initial products, 
how it makes new-product market decisions, and how it developed and chose 
functional competencies to pursue. Its entry into new businesses and shifts in its 
main lines of business are also important milestones to consider.
 2. Identify the company’s internal strengths and weaknesses. Once the historical 
profi le is completed, you can begin the SWOT analysis. Use all the incidents you 
have charted to develop an account of the company’s strengths and weaknesses 
as they have emerged historically. Examine each of the value creation functions of 
the company, and identify the functions in which the company is currently strong 
and currently weak. Some companies might be weak in marketing; some might be 
strong in research and development. Make lists of these strengths and weaknesses. 
The SWOT Checklist (Table 1) gives examples of what might go in these lists.
 3. Analyze the external environment. To identify environmental opportunities and 
threats, apply all the concepts on industry and macroenvironments to analyze 
the environment the company is confronting. Of particular importance at the 
industry level are Porter’s fi ve forces model and the stage of the life cycle model. 
Which factors in the macroenvironment will appear salient depends on the 
specifi c company being analyzed. Use each factor in turn (for instance, demo-
graphic factors) to see whether it is relevant for the company in question.
 
  
Having done this analysis, you will have generated both an analysis of the 
company’s environment and a list of opportunities and threats. The SWOT 
Checklist table also lists some common environmental opportunities and threats 
that you may look for, but the list you generate will be specifi c to your company.
 4. Evaluate the SWOT analysis. Having identifi ed the company’s external oppor-
tunities and threats as well as its internal strengths and weaknesses, consider 
what your fi ndings mean. You need to balance strengths and weaknesses against 
opportunities and threats. Is the company in an overall strong competitive posi-
tion? Can it continue to pursue its current business- or corporate-level strategy 
profi tably? What can the company do to turn weaknesses into strengths and 
threats into opportunities? Can it develop new functional, business, or corporate 
strategies to accomplish this change? Never merely generate the SWOT analysis 
and then put it aside. Because it provides a succinct summary of the company’s 
condition, a good SWOT analysis is the key to all the analyses that follow.
 5. Analyze corporate-level strategy. To analyze corporate-level strategy, you fi rst 
need to defi ne the company’s mission and goals. Sometimes the mission and 
goals are stated explicitly in the case; at other times, you will have to infer them 
from available information. The information you need to collect to fi nd out the 
company’s corporate strategy includes such factors as its lines of business and 
the nature of its subsidiaries and acquisitions. It is important to analyze the rela-
tionship among the company’s businesses. Do they trade or exchange resources? 
Are there gains to be achieved from synergy? Alternatively, is the company just 
running a portfolio of investments? This analysis should enable you to defi ne 
the corporate strategy that the company is pursuing (for example, related or 
unrelated diversifi cation, or a combination of both) and to conclude whether 
the company operates in just one core business. Then, using your SWOT analy-
sis, debate the merits of this strategy. Is it appropriate given the environment 
the company is in? Could a change in corporate strategy provide the company 
with new opportunities or transform a weakness into a strength? For example, 
should the company diversify from its core business into new businesses?

C4  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
Potential Internal Strengths
Potential Internal Weaknesses
Many product lines?
Obsolete, narrow product lines?
Broad market coverage?
Rising manufacturing costs?
Manufacturing competence?
Decline in R&D innovations?
Good marketing skills?
Poor marketing plan?
Good materials management systems?
Poor material management systems?
R&D skills and leadership?
Loss of customer good will?
Information system competencies?
Inadequate human resources?
Human resource competencies?
Inadequate information systems?
Brand name reputation?
Loss of brand name capital?
Portfolio management skills?
Growth without direction?
Cost of differentiation advantage?
Bad portfolio management?
New-venture management expertise?
Loss of corporate direction?
Appropriate management style?
Inﬁ ghting among divisions?
Appropriate organizational structure?
Loss of corporate control?
Appropriate control systems?
Inappropriate organizational 
Ability to manage strategic change?
structure and control systems?
Well-developed corporate strategy?
High conﬂ ict and politics?
Good ﬁ nancial management?
Poor ﬁ nancial management?
Others?
Others?
Potential Environmental Opportunities
Potential Environmental Threats
Expand core business(es)?
Attacks on core business(es)?
Exploit new market segments?
Increases in domestic competition?
Widen product range?
Increase in foreign competition?
Extend cost or differentiation advantage?
Change in consumer tastes?
Diversify into new growth businesses?
Fall in barriers to entry?
Expand into foreign markets?
Rise in new or substitute products?
Apply R&D skills in new areas?
Increase in industry rivalry?
Enter new related businesses?
New forms of industry competition?
Vertically integrate forward?
Potential for takeover?
Vertically integrate backward?
Existence of corporate raiders?
Enlarge corporate portfolio?
Increase in regional competition?
Overcome barriers to entry?
Changes in demographic factors?
Reduce rivalry among competitors?
Changes in economic factors?
Make proﬁ table new acquisitions?
Downturn in economy?
Apply brand name capital in new areas?
Rising labor costs?
Seek fast market growth?
Slower market growth?
Others?
Others?
Table 1 A SWOT Checklist

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C5
 
  
Other issues should be considered as well. How and why has the company’s 
strategy changed over time? What is the claimed rationale for any changes? Often, it 
is a good idea to analyze the company’s businesses or products to assess its situation 
and identify which divisions contribute the most to or detract from its competitive 
advantage. It is also useful to explore how the company has built its portfolio over 
time. Did it acquire new businesses, or did it internally venture its own? All of these 
factors provide clues about the company and indicate ways of improving its future 
performance.
 6. Analyze business-level strategy. Once you know the company’s corporate-level 
strategy and have done the SWOT analysis, the next step is to identify the com-
pany’s business-level strategy. If the company is a single-business company, its 
business-level strategy is identical to its corporate-level strategy. If the company 
is in many businesses, each business will have its own business-level strategy. You 
will need to identify the company’s generic competitive strategy—differentiation, 
low-cost, or focus—and its investment strategy, given its relative competitive 
position and the stage of the life cycle. The company also may market differ-
ent products using different business-level strategies. For example, it may offer a 
low-cost product range and a line of differentiated products. Be sure to give a full 
account of a company’s business-level strategy to show how it competes.
 
  
Identifying the functional strategies that a company pursues to build com-
petitive advantage through superior effi ciency, quality, innovation, and customer 
responsiveness and to achieve its business-level strategy is very important. The 
SWOT analysis will have provided you with information on the company’s 
functional competencies. You should investigate its production, marketing, 
or research and development strategy further to gain a picture of where the 
company is going. For example, pursuing a low-cost or a differentiation strat-
egy successfully requires very different sets of competencies. Has the company 
developed the right ones? If it has, how can it exploit them further? Can it 
 pursue both a low-cost and a differentiation strategy simultaneously?
 
  
The SWOT analysis is especially important at this point if the industry anal-
ysis, particularly Porter’s model, has revealed threats to the company from the 
environment. Can the company deal with these threats? How should it change 
its business-level strategy to counter them? To evaluate the potential of a com-
pany’s business-level strategy, you must fi rst perform a thorough SWOT  analysis 
that captures the essence of its problems.
 
  
Once you complete this analysis, you will have a full picture of the way the 
company is operating and be in a position to evaluate the potential of its strat-
egy. Thus, you will be able to make recommendations concerning the pattern of 
its future actions. However, fi rst you need to consider strategy implementation, 
or the way the company tries to achieve its strategy.
 7. Analyze structure and control systems. The aim of this analysis is to identify 
what structure and control systems the company is using to implement its 
strategy and to evaluate whether that structure is the appropriate one for 
the company. Different corporate and business strategies require different 
structures. You need to determine the degree of fi t between the company’s 
strategy and structure. For example, does the company have the right level 
of vertical differentiation (e.g., does it have the appropriate number of levels 
in the hierarchy or decentralized control?) or horizontal differentiation (does 
it use a functional structure when it should be using a product structure?)? 
Similarly, is the company using the right integration or control systems to 

C6  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
manage its operations? Are managers being appropriately rewarded? Are the 
right rewards in place for encouraging cooperation among divisions? These 
are all issues to consider.
 
  
In some cases, there will be little information on these issues, whereas in 
others there will be a lot. In analyzing each case, you should gear the analy-
sis toward its most salient issues. For example, organizational confl ict, power, 
and politics will be important issues for some companies. Try to analyze why 
problems in these areas are occurring. Do they occur because of bad strategy 
formulation or because of bad strategy implementation?
 
  
Organizational change is an issue in many cases because the companies are 
attempting to alter their strategies or structures to solve strategic problems. 
Thus, as part of the analysis, you might suggest an action plan that the company 
in question could use to achieve its goals. For example, you might list in a logi-
cal sequence the steps the company would need to follow to alter its business-
level strategy from differentiation to focus.
 8. Make recommendations. The quality of your recommendations is a direct result 
of the thoroughness with which you prepared the case analysis. Recommenda-
tions are directed at solving whatever strategic problem the company is fac-
ing and increasing its future profi tability. Your recommendations should be in 
line with your analysis; that is, they should follow logically from the previ-
ous discussion. For example, your recommendation generally will center on 
the specifi c ways of changing functional, business, and corporate strategies and 
organizational structure and control to improve business performance. The set 
of recommendations will be specifi c to each case, and so it is diffi cult to discuss 
these recommendations here. Such recommendations might include an increase 
in spending on specifi c research and development projects, the divesting of cer-
tain businesses, a change from a strategy of unrelated to related diversifi cation, 
an increase in the level of integration among divisions by using task forces and 
teams, or a move to a different kind of structure to implement a new business-
level strategy. Make sure your recommendations are mutually consistent and 
written in the form of an action plan. The plan might contain a timetable that 
sequences the actions for changing the company’s strategy and a description of 
how changes at the corporate level will necessitate changes at the business level 
and subsequently at the functional level.
After following all these stages, you will have performed a thorough analysis of 
the case and will be in a position to join in class discussion or present your ideas to 
the class, depending on the format used by your professor. Remember that you must 
tailor your analysis to suit the specifi c issue discussed in your case. In some cases, you 
might completely omit one of the steps in the analysis because it is not relevant to 
the situation you are considering. You must be sensitive to the needs of the case and 
not apply the framework we have discussed in this section blindly. The framework is 
meant only as a guide, not as an outline.
Writing a Case Study Analysis
Often, as part of your course requirements, you will need to present a written case 
analysis. This may be an individual or a group report. Whatever the situation, there 
are certain guidelines to follow in writing a case analysis that will improve the 

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C7
evaluation your work will receive from your instructor. Before we discuss these 
guidelines and before you use them, make sure that they do not confl ict with any 
directions your instructor has given you.
The structure of your written report is critical. Generally, if you follow the steps 
for analysis discussed in the previous section, you already will have a good structure 
for your written discussion. All reports begin with an introduction to the case. In it, 
outline briefl y what the company does, how it developed historically, what problems 
it is experiencing, and how you are going to approach the issues in the case write-up. 
Do this sequentially by writing, for example, “First, we discuss the environment of 
Company X. . . . Third, we discuss Company X’s business-level strategy. . . . Last, we 
provide recommendations for turning around Company X’s business.”
In the second part of the case write-up, the strategic analysis section, do the SWOT 
analysis, analyze and discuss the nature and problems of the company’s business-
level and corporate strategies, and then analyze its structure and control systems. 
Make sure you use plenty of headings and subheadings to structure your analysis. For 
example, have separate sections on any important conceptual tool you use. Thus, 
you might have a section on Porter’s fi ve forces model as part of your analysis of 
the environment. You might offer a separate section on portfolio techniques when 
analyzing a company’s corporate strategy. Tailor the sections and subsections to the 
specifi c issues of importance in the case.
In the third part of the case write-up, present your solutions and recommendations. 
Be comprehensive, and make sure they are in line with the previous analysis so that 
the recommendations fi t together and move logically from one to the next. The recom-
mendations section is very revealing because your instructor will have a good idea of 
how much work you put into the case from the quality of your recommendations.
Following this framework will provide a good structure for most written reports, 
though it must be shaped to fi t the individual case being considered. Some cases are 
about excellent companies experiencing no problems. In such instances, it is hard 
to write recommendations. Instead, you can focus on analyzing why the company 
is doing so well, using that analysis to structure the discussion. Following are some 
minor suggestions that can help make a good analysis even better:
 1. Do not repeat in summary form large pieces of factual information from the 
case. The instructor has read the case and knows what is going on. Rather, use 
the in formation in the case to illustrate your statements, defend your  arguments, 
or make salient points. Beyond the brief introduction to the company, you must 
avoid being descriptive; instead, you must be analytical.
 2. Make sure the sections and subsections of your discussion fl ow logically and 
smoothly from one to the next. That is, try to build on what has gone before so 
that the analysis of the case study moves toward a climax. This is particularly 
important for group analysis, because there is a tendency for people in a group 
to split up the work and say, “I’ll do the beginning, you take the middle, and I’ll 
do the end.” The result is a choppy, stilted analysis; the parts do not fl ow from 
one to the next, and it is obvious to the instructor that no real group work has 
been done.
 3. Avoid grammatical and spelling errors. They make your work look sloppy.
 4. In some instances, cases dealing with well-known companies end in 1998 or 
1999 because no later information was available when the case was written. If 
possible, do a search for more information on what has happened to the com-
pany in subsequent years.

C8  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
 
  
Many libraries now have comprehensive web-based electronic data search 
facilities that offer such sources as ABI/Inform, The Wall Street Journal Index, 
the F&S Index, and the Nexis-Lexis databases. These enable you to identify any 
article that has been written in the business press on the company of your choice 
within the past few years. A number of nonelectronic data sources are also use-
ful. For example, F&S Predicasts publishes an annual list of articles relating to 
major companies that appeared in the national and international business press. 
S&P Industry Surveys is a great source for basic industry data, and Value Line 
Ratings and Reports can contain good summaries of a fi rm’s fi nancial position 
and future prospects. You will also want to collect full fi nancial information on 
the company. Again, this can be accessed from web-based electronic databases 
such as the Edgar database, which archives all forms that publicly quoted com-
panies have to fi le with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC; e.g., 
10-K fi lings can be accessed from the SEC’s Edgar database). Most SEC forms 
for public companies can now be accessed from Internet-based fi nancial sites, 
such as Yahoo’s fi nance site (http://fi nance.yahoo.com/).
 5. Sometimes instructors hand out questions for each case to help you in your 
analysis. Use these as a guide for writing the case analysis. They often illuminate 
the important issues that have to be covered in the discussion.
 
 If you follow the guidelines in this section, you should be able to write a thor-
ough and effective evaluation.
The Role of Financial Analysis 
in Case Study Analysis
An important aspect of analyzing a case study and writing a case study analysis is the 
role and use of fi nancial information. A careful analysis of the company’s fi nancial 
condition immensely improves a case write-up. After all, fi nancial data represent 
the concrete results of the company’s strategy and structure. Although analyzing 
fi nancial statements can be quite complex, a general idea of a company’s fi nancial 
position can be determined through the use of ratio analysis. Financial performance 
ratios can be calculated from the balance sheet and income statement. These ratios 
can be classifi ed into fi ve subgroups: profi t ratios, liquidity ratios, activity ratios, 
leverage ratios, and shareholder-return ratios. These ratios should be compared 
with the industry average or the company’s prior years of performance. It should 
be noted, however, that deviation from the average is not necessarily bad; it simply 
warrants further investigation. For example, young companies will have purchased 
assets at a different price and will likely have a different capital structure than older 
companies do. In addition to ratio analysis, a company’s cash fl ow position is of 
critical importance and should be assessed. Cash fl ow shows how much actual cash 
a company possesses.
Proﬁ t Ratios
Profi t ratios measure the effi ciency with which the company uses its resources. The 
more effi cient the company, the greater is its profi tability. It is useful to compare a 
company’s profi tability against that of its major competitors in its industry to deter-
mine whether the company is operating more or less effi ciently than its rivals. In 

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C9
addition, the change in a company’s profi t ratios over time tells whether its perfor-
mance is improving or declining.
A number of different profi t ratios can be used, and each of them measures a 
different aspect of a company’s performance. Here, we look at the most commonly 
used profi t ratios.
Return on Invested Capital This ratio measures the profi t earned on the capital 
invested in the company. It is defi ned as follows:
Return on invested capital (ROIC)   
Net profi t 
 
______________ 
 
Invested capital
  Net profi t is calculated by subtracting the total costs of operating the company away 
from its total revenues (total revenues – total costs). Total costs are the (1) costs of 
goods sold, (2) sales, general, and administrative expenses, (3) R&D expenses, and 
(4) other expenses. Net profi t can be calculated before or after taxes, although many 
fi nancial analysts prefer the before-tax fi gure. Invested capital is the amount that 
is invested in the operations of a company—that is, in property, plant, equipment, 
inventories, and other assets. Invested capital comes from two main sources: interest-
bearing debt and shareholders’ equity. Interest-bearing debt is money the company 
borrows from banks and from those who purchase its bonds. Shareholders’ equity 
is the money raised from selling shares to the public, plus earnings that have been 
retained by the company in prior years and are available to fund current invest-
ments. ROIC measures the effectiveness with which a company is using the capital 
funds that it has available for investment. As such, it is recognized to be an excellent 
measure of the value a company is creating.1 Remember that a company’s ROIC can 
be decomposed into its  constituent parts.
Return on Total Assets (ROA) This ratio measures the profi t earned on the 
employment of assets. It is defi ned as follows:
Return on total assests    Net profi t 
___________ 
Total assets
  
Return on Stockholders’ Equity (ROE) This ratio measures the percentage of 
profi t earned on common stockholders’ investment in the company. It is defi ned as 
follows:
Return on stockholders equity   
Net profi t 
 
__________________ 
 
Stockholders equity  
If a company has no debt, this will be the same as ROIC.
Liquidity Ratios
A company’s liquidity is a measure of its ability to meet short-term obligations. An 
asset is deemed liquid if it can be readily converted into cash. Liquid assets are cur-
rent assets such as cash, marketable securities, accounts receivable, and so on. Two 
liquidity ratios are commonly used.
1Tom Copeland, Tim Koller, and Jack Murrin, Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value 
of Companies (New York: Wiley, 1996).

C10  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
Current Ratio The current ratio measures the extent to which the claims of short-
term creditors are covered by assets that can be quickly converted into cash. Most 
companies should have a ratio of at least 1, because failure to meet these commit-
ments can lead to bankruptcy. The ratio is defi ned as follows:
Current ratio   Current assets 
 
________________ 
 
Current liabilities  
Quick Ratio The quick ratio measures a company’s ability to pay off the claims 
of short-term creditors without relying on selling its inventories. This is a valuable 
measure since in practice the sale of inventories is often diffi cult. It is defi ned as 
 follows:
Quick ratio   Current assets  inventory 
 
 
________________________ 
 
Current liabilities 
 
Activity Ratios
Activity ratios indicate how effectively a company is managing its assets. Two ratios 
are particularly useful.
Inventory Turnover This measures the number of times inventory is turned over. 
It is useful in determining whether a fi rm is carrying excess stock in inventory. It is 
defi ned as follows:
Inventory turnover   Cost of goods sold 
 
_________________ 
 
Inventory 
 
Cost of goods sold is a better measure of turnover than sales because it is the cost 
of the inventory items. Inventory is taken at the balance sheet date. Some companies 
choose to compute an average inventory, beginning inventory, and ending inventory, 
but for simplicity, use the inventory at the balance sheet date.
Days Sales Outstanding (DSO) or Average Collection Period This ratio is the 
average time a company has to wait to receive its cash after making a sale. It mea-
sures how effective the company’s credit, billing, and collection procedures are. It is 
defi ned as follows:
DSO   Accounts receivable 
 
__________________ 
 
Total sales/360 
 
Accounts receivable is divided by average daily sales. The use of 360 is the stan-
dard number of days for most fi nancial analysis.
Leverage Ratios
A company is said to be highly leveraged if it uses more debt than equity, including 
stock and retained earnings. The balance between debt and equity is called the capi-
tal structure. The optimal capital structure is determined by the individual company. 
Debt has a lower cost because creditors take less risk; they know they will get their 
interest and principal. However, debt can be risky to the fi rm because if enough 
profi t is not made to cover the interest and principal payments, bankruptcy can 
result. Three leverage ratios are commonly used.
Debt-to-Assets Ratio The debt-to-assets ratio is the most direct measure of the 
extent to which borrowed funds have been used to fi nance a company’s investments. 
It is defi ned as follows:

 
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis 
C11
Debt-to-assets ratio   Total debt 
___________ 
Total assets  
Total debt is the sum of a company’s current liabilities and its long-term debt, 
and total assets are the sum of fi xed assets and current assets.
Debt-to-Equity Ratio The debt-to-equity ratio indicates the balance between debt 
and equity in a company’s capital structure. This is perhaps the most widely used 
measure of a company’s leverage. It is defi ned as follows:
Debt-to-equity ratio   Total debt 
___________ 
 
Total equity  
Times-Covered Ratio The times-covered ratio measures the extent to which a 
company’s gross profi t covers its annual interest payments. If this ratio declines to 
less than 1, the company is unable to meet its interest costs and is technically insol- 
vent. The ratio is defi ned as follows:
Times-covered ratio   Profi t before interest and tax 
 
 
__________________________ 
 
 
Total interest charges 
 
Shareholder-Return Ratios
Shareholder-return ratios measure the return that shareholders earn from holding 
stock in the company. Given the goal of maximizing stockholders’ wealth, providing 
shareholders with an adequate rate of return is a primary objective of most com-
panies. As with profi t ratios, it can be helpful to compare a company’s shareholder 
returns against those of similar companies as a yardstick for determining how well 
the company is satisfying the demands of this particularly important group of orga-
nizational constituents. Four ratios are commonly used.
Total Shareholder Returns Total shareholder returns measure the returns earned 
by time t  1 on an investment in a company’s stock made at time t. (Time t is the 
time at which the initial investment is made.) Total shareholder returns include both 
dividend payments and appreciation in the value of the stock (adjusted for stock 
splits) and are defi ned as follows:
 
 
Stock price (t  1)  stock price (t) 
Total shareholder returns    sum of annual dividends per share 
 
 
 
________________________________ 
 
 
Stock price (t) 
 
If a shareholder invests $2 at time t and at time t  1 the share is worth $3, 
while the sum of annual dividends for the period t to t  1 has amounted to 
$0.20, total shareholder returns are equal to (3  2  0.2)/2  0.6, which is a 
60% return on an initial investment of $2 made at time t.
Price-Earnings Ratio  The price-earnings ratio measures the amount investors are 
willing to pay per dollar of profi t. It is defi ned as follows:
Price-earnings ratio   Market price per share 
 
____________________ 
 
Earnings per share  
Market-to-Book Value Market-to-book value measures a company’s expected 
future growth prospects. It is defi ned as follows:
Market-to-book value   Market price per share 
 
____________________ 
 
Earnings per share  

C12  
Introduction: Analyzing a Case Study and Writing a Case Study Analysis
Dividend Yield The dividend yield measures the return to shareholders received in 
the form of dividends. It is defi ned as follows:
Dividend yield    Dividend per share 
 
____________________ 
 
Market price per share
  
Market price per share can be calculated for the fi rst of the year, in which case 
the dividend yield refers to the return on an investment made at the beginning of the 
year. Alternatively, the average share price over the year may be used. A company 
must decide how much of its profi ts to pay to stockholders and how much to rein-
vest in the company. Companies with strong growth prospects should have a lower 
dividend payout ratio than mature companies. The rationale is that shareholders 
can invest the money elsewhere if the company is not growing. The optimal ratio 
depends on the individual fi rm, but the key decider is whether the company can 
produce better returns than the investor can earn elsewhere.
Cash Flow
Cash fl ow position is cash received minus cash distributed. The net cash fl ow can be 
taken from a company’s statement of cash fl ows. Cash fl ow is important for what 
it reveals about a company’s fi nancing needs. A strong positive cash fl ow enables a 
company to fund future investments without having to borrow money from bank-
ers or investors. This is desirable because the company avoids paying out interest or 
dividends. A weak or negative cash fl ow means that a company has to turn to external 
sources to fund future investments. Generally, companies in  strong-growth industries 
often fi nd themselves in a poor cash fl ow position (because their  investment needs are 
substantial), whereas successful companies based in mature industries generally fi nd 
themselves in a strong cash fl ow position.
A company’s internally generated cash fl ow is calculated by adding back its 
depreciation provision to profi ts after interest, taxes, and dividend payments. If 
this fi gure is insuffi cient to cover proposed new investments, the company has little 
choice but to borrow funds to make up the shortfall or to curtail investments. If this 
fi gure exceeds proposed new investments, the company can use the excess to build 
up its liquidity (that is, through investments in fi nancial assets) or repay existing 
loans ahead of schedule.
Conclusion
When evaluating a case, it is important to be systematic. Analyze the case in a logi-
cal fashion, beginning with the identifi cation of operating and fi nancial strengths 
and weaknesses and environmental opportunities and threats. Move on to assess the 
value of a company’s current strategies only when you are fully conversant with the 
SWOT analysis of the company. Ask yourself whether the company’s current strate-
gies make sense given its SWOT analysis. If they do not, what changes need to be 
made? What are your recommendations? Above all, link any strategic recommenda-
tions you may make to the SWOT analysis. State explicitly how the strategies you 
identify take advantage of the company’s strengths to exploit environmental oppor-
tunities, how they rectify the company’s weaknesses, and how they counter environ-
mental threats. Also, do not forget to outline what needs to be done to  implement 
your recommendations.

Introduction
In 1997, Apple Computer was in deep trouble. The 
company that had pioneered the personal com-
puter (PC) market with its easy-to-use Apple II in 
1978 and introduced the fi rst graphical user inter-
face (GUI) with the Macintosh in 1984 was bleeding 
red ink. Apple’s worldwide market share, which had 
been fl uctuating between 7% and 9% since 1984, 
had sunk to 4%. Sales were declining. Apple was on 
track to lose $378 million on revenues of $7 billion, 
on top of a $740 million loss in 1996. In July 1997, 
the cofounder of the company, Steve Jobs, who had 
been fi red from Apple in 1985, returned as CEO. At 
an investor conference, Michael Dell, CEO of Dell 
Computer, was asked what Jobs should do as head 
of Apple. Dell quipped “I’d shut it down and give the 
money back to shareholders.”1
By 2008, the situation looked very different. 
Apple was on track to book record sales of more than 
$32 billion and net profi ts of close to $4.7 billion. 
The stock price, which had traded as low as $6 a 
share in 2003 was about $170, with the market capi-
talization at $140 billion, which far surpassed that of 
Dell Computer which was about $41 billion. Driving 
the transformation were strong sales of Apple’s iPod 
music player, music downloads from the iTunes 
store, and Apple’s iPhone. In addition, strong sales of 
Apple’s iMac laptop and desktop computers had lifted 
Apple’s market share in the United States PC busi-
ness to 8.5%, up from a low of under 3% in 2004.2 
Apple now ranked third in the United States PC mar-
ket behind Dell with 32% and HP 25%. Moreover, 
analysts were predicting that the halo effect of the 
iPod and iPhone, together with Apple’s adoption 
of Intel’s microprocessor architecture, would drive 
strong sales going forward. To emphasize the broad-
ening product portfolio of the company, Apple had 
dropped “computer” from its name.
For the fi rst time in 20 years, it looked as if 
Apple, the perennial also-ran, might be seizing the 
initiative. But questions remained. Could the com-
pany continue to build on its momentum? Could the 
company break out of its niche and become a main-
stream player in the computer industry? How sus-
tainable was the iPod driven sales boom? Would the 
iPhone continue to gain market traction? And with 
new competitors coming along, could Apple hold 
onto its market leading position in the market for 
digital music players?
Apple 1976–1997
The Early Years
Apple’s genesis is the stuff of computer industry 
ledged.3 On April Fools Day 1976, two young elec-
tronics enthusiasts, Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, 
started a company to sell a primitive personal com-
puter that Wozniak’s had designed. Steve Jobs was 
just 20 years old; Wozniak, or Woz as he was com-
monly called, was fi ve years older. They had known 
each other for several years, having been introduced 
by a mutual friend who realized that they shared an 
interest in consumer electronics. Woz had designed 
the computer just for the fun of it. That is what peo-
ple did in 1976. The idea that somebody would actu-
ally want to purchase his machine had not occurred 
This case was prepared by Charles W. L. Hill, the University of Washington. Copyright Charles W. L. Hill © 2008. Reprinted by 
permission.
Apple in 2008
C13
1

C14  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
to Woz, but it did to Jobs. Jobs persuaded a reluctant 
Woz to form a company and sell the machine. The 
location of the company was Steve Jobs’ garage. Jobs 
suggested they call the company Apple and their fi rst 
machine, Apple I. They sold about 200 computers at 
$666 each. The price point was picked as something 
of a prank.
The Apple I had several limitations: no case, key-
board, or power supply being obvious ones. It also 
required several hours of laborious assembly by hand. 
By late 1976, Woz was working on a replacement 
to the Apple I, the Apple II.4 In October 1976, with 
the Apple II under development, Jobs and Woz were 
introduced to Mike Markkula. Only 34, Markkula 
was already a retired millionaire, having made a 
small fortune at Fairchild and Intel. Markkula had 
no plans to get back into business anytime soon, but 
a visit to Jobs’ garage changed all that. He commit-
ted to investing $92,000 for one-third of the com-
pany and promised that his ultimate investment 
would be $250,000. Stunned, Jobs and Woz agreed 
to let him join as a partner. It was a fateful deci-
sion. The combination of Woz’s technical skills, Jobs’ 
entrepreneurial zeal and vision, and Markkula’s 
business savvy and connections, was a powerful one. 
Markkula told Jobs and Woz that neither of them 
had the experience to run a company and persuaded 
them to hire a President, Michael Scott, who had 
worked for Markkula at Fairchild.
The Apple II was introduced in 1977 at a price 
of $1,200. The fi rst version was an integrated com-
puter with a Motorola microprocessor and included 
a keyboard, a power supply, a monitor, and the 
BASIC programming software. It was Steve Jobs 
who pushed Woz to design an integrated machine: 
he wanted something that was easy to use, not just 
a toy for geeks. Jobs also insisted that the Apple II 
looked good. It had an attractive case and no vis-
ible screws or bolts. This differentiated it from most 
personal computers at the time that looked as if 
they had been assembled by hobbyists at home (as 
many had).
In 1978, Apple started to sell a version of the 
Apple II that incorporated something new: a disk 
drive. The disk drive turned out to be a critical 
innovation, for it enabled third-party developers to 
write software programs for the Apple II that could 
be loaded via fl oppy disks. Soon programs started 
to appear, among them EasyWriter, a basic word-
processing program, and VisiCalc, a spreadsheet 
program. VisiCalc was an instant hit, and pulled in 
a new customer set, business types who could use 
VisiCalc for fi nancial planning and accounting. 
Because VisiCalc was only available for the Apple II, 
it helped to drive demand for the machine.
By the end of 1980, Apple had sold more than 
100,000 Apple IIs, making the company the leader 
in the embryonic personal computer industry. The 
company had successfully executed an IPO, was 
generating over $200 million in annual sales, and 
was profi table. With the Apple II series selling well, 
particularly in the education market, Apple intro-
duced its next product, the Apple III, in the fall of 
1980. It was a failure. The computer was fi lled with 
bugs and crashed constantly. The Apple III had been 
rushed to market too quickly. Apple reintroduced a 
reengineered Apple III in 1981, but it continued to 
be outsold by Apple II. Indeed, successive versions 
of the Apple II family, each an improvement on the 
proceeding version, continued to be produced by the 
company until 1993. In total, more than two million 
Apple II computers were sold. The series became a 
standard in American classrooms, where it was 
valued for its intuitive ease of use. Moreover, the 
Apple II was the mainstay of the company until 
the late 1980s, when an improved version of the 
Macintosh started to garner signifi cant sales.
The IBM PC and Its Aftermath
Apple’s success galvanized the world’s largest com-
puter company, IBM, to speed up development of its 
entry into the personal computer market. IBM had a 
huge and very profi table mainframe computer busi-
ness, but it had so far failed to develop a personal 
computer, despite two attempts. To get to market 
quickly with this, its third PC project, IBM broke 
with its established practice of using its own pro-
prietary technology to build the PC. Instead, IBM 
adopted “open architecture,” purchasing the com-
ponents required to make the IBM PC from other 
manufacturers. These components included a 16-bit 
microprocessor from Intel and an operating system, 
MS-DOS, which was licensed from a small Washington 
state company, Microsoft.
Microsoft had been in the industry from its 
inception, writing a version of the BASIC software 
programming language for the MITS Atari in 1977, 
the fi rst PC ever produced. IBM’s desire to license 
BASIC brought them to Redmond to talk with the 

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C15
company’s CEO, Bill Gates. Gates, still in his early 
20s, persuaded IBM to adopt a 16-bit processor 
(originally IBM had been considering a less-powerful 
8-bit processor). He was also instrumental in push-
ing IBM to adopt an open architecture, arguing that 
IBM would benefi t from the software and peripher-
als that other companies could then make.
Initially IBM was intent on licensing the CP/M 
operating system, produced by Digital Research, for 
the IBM PC. However, the current version of CP/M 
was designed to work on an 8-bit processor, and 
Gates had persuaded IBM that it needed a 16-bit pro-
cessor. In a series of quick moves, Gates purchased 
a 16-bit operating system from a local company, 
Seattle Computer, for $50,000. Gates then hired 
the designer of the operating system, Tim Paterson, 
renamed the system MS-DOS and offered to license 
it to IBM. In what turned out to be a masterstroke, 
Gates persuaded IBM to accept a non-exclusive 
license for MS-DOS (which IBM called PC-DOS).
To stoke sales, IBM offered a number of appli-
cations for the IBM PC that were sold separately, 
including a version of VisiCalc, a word processor 
called EasyWriter, and well-known series of business 
programs from Peachtree Software.
Introduced in 1981, the IBM PC was an instant 
success. Over the next two years, IBM would sell 
more than 500,000 PCs, seizing market leadership 
from Apple. IBM had what Apple lacked, an ability 
to sell into corporate America. As sales of the IBM 
PC mounted, two things happened. First, indepen-
dent software developers started to write programs 
to run on the IBM PC. These included two appli-
cations that drove adoptions of the IBM PC; word-
processing programs (Word Perfect) and spreadsheet 
programs (Lotus 1-2-3). Second, the success of 
IBM gave birth to clone manufacturers who made 
“IBM-compatible” PCs that also utilized an Intel 
microprocessor and Microsoft’s MS-DOS operat-
ing system. The fi rst and most successful of the clone 
makers was Compaq, which in 1983 introduced its 
fi rst personal computer, a 28-pound “portable” PC. 
In its fi rst year, Compaq booked $111 million in 
sales, which at the time was a record for fi rst year 
sales of a company. Before long, a profusion of IBM 
clone makers entered the market, including Tandy, 
Zenith, Leading Edge, and Dell. The last was estab-
lished in 1984 by Michael Dell, then a student at the 
University of Texas, who initially ran the company 
out of his dorm room.
The Birth of the Macintosh
By 1980, two other important projects were under-
way at Apple; Lisa and the Macintosh. Lisa was orig-
inally conceived as a high-end business machine and 
the Macintosh as a low-end portable machine.
The development of both the Lisa, and ultimately 
the Macintosh, were infl uenced by two visits Steve 
Jobs paid to Xerox’s fabled Palo Alto Research 
Center (PARC) in November and December 1979. 
Funded out of Xerox’s successful copier business, 
PARC had been set up to do advanced research on 
offi ce technology. Engineers at PARC had developed 
a number of technologies that were later to become 
central to personal computers, including a GUI, soft-
ware programs that were made tangible through on 
screen icons, a computer mouse that let a user click 
on and drag on screen objects, and a laser printer. 
Jobs was astounded by what he saw at PARC and 
decided on the spot that these innovations had to be 
incorporated into Apple’s machines.
Jobs initially pushed the Lisa team to implement 
PARC’s innovations, but he was reportedly driv-
ing people on the project nuts with his demands, 
so President Mike Scott pulled him of the project. 
Jobs reacted by essentially hijacking the Macintosh 
project, and transforming it into a skunk works that 
would put his vision into effect. By one account:
He hounded the people on the Macintosh 
project to do their best work. He sang their 
praises, bullied them unmercifully, and told 
them they weren’t making a computer, they 
were making history. He promoted the Mac 
passionately, making people believe that he 
was talking about much more than a piece of 
offi ce equipment.5
It was during this period that Bud Tribble, a soft-
ware engineer on the Mac project, quipped that Steve 
Jobs could create a “reality distortion fi eld.” Jobs 
insisted that the Mac would ship by early 1982. Tribble 
knew that the schedule was unattainable, and when 
asked why he did not point this out to Jobs, he replied: 
“Steve insists that we’re shipping in early 1982, and 
won’t accept answers to the contrary. The best way to 
describe the situation is a term from Star Trek. Steve 
has a reality distortion fi eld. . . . In his presence, reality 
is malleable. He can convince anyone of practically 
anything. It wears off when he’s not around, but it 
makes it hard to have realistic schedules.”6

C16  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Andy Hertzfeld, another engineer on the 
Macintosh project, thought Tribble was exaggerat-
ing, “until I observed Steve in action over the next 
few weeks. The reality distortion fi eld was a con-
founding mélange of a charismatic rhetorical style, 
an indomitable will, and an eagerness to bend any 
fact to fi t the purpose at hand. If one line of argu-
ment failed to persuade, he would deftly switch to 
another. Sometimes, he would throw you off balance 
by suddenly adopting your position as his own, with-
out acknowledging that he ever thought differently.7
Back at Apple, things were changing too. Mike 
Scott had left the company after clashes with other 
executives, including Markkula, who had become 
chairman. Steve Jobs persuaded John Sculley to join 
Apple as CEO. Sculley was the former vice president 
of marketing at Pepsi, where he had become famous 
for launching the Pepsi Challenge. Jobs had report-
edly asked Sculley, “Do you want to sell sugar water 
for the rest of your life, or do you want to change 
the world?” Sculley opted for changing the world. 
A Wharton MBA, Sculley had been hired for his 
marketing savvy, not his technical skills.
While the Lisa project suffered several delays, 
Jobs pushed the Macintosh team to fi nish the project 
and beat the Lisa team to market with a better prod-
uct. Introduced in 1984, the Macintosh certainly 
captured attention for its stylish design and utiliza-
tion of a graphical user interface, icons, and a mouse, 
all of which made the machine easy to use and were 
not found on any other personal computer at the 
time. Jobs, ever the perfectionist, again insisted that 
not a single screw should be visible on the case. He 
reportedly fi red a designer who presented a mockup 
with a screw that could be seen by lifting a handle.
Early sales were strong; then they faltered. For all 
of its appeal, the Macintosh lacked some important 
features: it had no hard disk drive, only one fl oppy 
drive, and insuffi cient computer memory. Moreover, 
there were few applications available to run on the 
machine, and the Mac proved to be a more diffi cult 
machine to develop applications for than the IBM 
PC and its clones. Jobs, however, seemed oblivious 
to the problems, and continued to talk about out-
sized sales projections, even when it was obvious to 
all around him that they were unattainable.
In early 1985, Apple posted its fi rst loss. Aware 
that drastic action was necessary, but could not be 
taken while Jobs was running the Macintosh division, 
Sculley got backing from the board of directors to 
strip Jobs of his management role and oversight of the 
Macintosh division. In late 1985, an embittered Jobs 
resigned from Apple, sold all of his stock, and left to 
start another computer company, aptly named NeXT.
The Golden Years
With Jobs gone, Sculley shut down the Lisa line, 
which had done poorly in the market due to a very 
high price point of $10,000. He pushed developers 
to fi x the problems with the Macintosh. In January 
1986, a new version of the Macintosh, the Mac Plus, 
was introduced. This machine fi xed the shortcomings 
of the original Mac, and sales started to grow again.
What also drove sales higher was Apple’s domina-
tion of the desktop publishing market. Several events 
came together to make this happen. Researchers from 
Xerox PARC formed a company, Adobe, to develop 
and commercialize the PostScript page description 
language. PostScript enabled the visual display and 
printing of high quality page layouts loaded with 
graphics (e.g., colored charts, line drawings, and 
photos). Apple licensed PostScript and used it as the 
output for its Apple LaserWriter, which was intro-
duced in 1985. Shortly afterward, a Seattle company, 
Aldus, introduced a program called PageMaker for 
the Mac. PageMaker used Adobe’s PostScript page 
description language for output. Although Aldus 
introduced a version of PageMaker for MS-DOS in 
1986, Apple already had a lead, and with the Mac’s 
GUI interface appealing to graphic artists, Apple’s 
tightened its hold on the desktop publishing seg-
ment. Apple’s position in desktop publishing was fur-
ther strengthened by the release of Adobe Illustrator 
in 1987 (a freehand drawing program) and Adobe 
Photoshop in 1990.
The period between 1986 and 1991 were in 
many ways the golden years for Apple. Because it 
made both hardware and software, Apple was able 
to control all aspects of its computers, offering a 
complete desktop solution that allowed customers 
to “plug and play.” With the Apple II series still sell-
ing well in the education market, and the Mac domi-
nating desktop publishing, Apple was able to charge 
a premium price for its products. Gross margins on 
the Mac line got as high as 55%. In 1990, Apple 
sales reached $5.6 billion; its global market share, 
which had fallen rapidly as the IBM-compatible PC 

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C17
market had grown, stabilized at 8%. The company 
had a strong balance sheet and was the most profi t-
able personal computer manufacturer in the world.
During this period executives at Apple actively 
debated the merits of licensing the Mac operating 
system to other computer manufacturers, allowing 
them to make Mac clones. Sculley was in favor of 
this move. So was Microsoft’s Bill Gates, who wrote 
two memos to Sculley laying out an argument for 
licensing the Mac OS. Gates argued that the closed 
architecture of the Macintosh prevented indepen-
dent investment in the standard by third parties, 
and put Apple at a disadvantage against the IBM PC 
standard. However, some senior executives at Apple 
were against the licensing strategy, arguing that once 
Apple licensed its intellectual property, it would be 
diffi cult to protect it. In one version of events, senior 
executives debated the decision at a meeting, and 
took a vote on whether to license. Given the con-
troversial nature of the decision, it was decided that 
the vote in favor had to be unanimous. It was not: 
a single executive voted against the licensing deci-
sion, and it was never pursued.8 In another version 
of events, Jean-Louis Gassee, head of R&D at Apple, 
vigorously opposed Sculley’s plans to clone, and 
Sculley backed down.9 Gassee was deeply distrustful 
of Microsoft and Bill Gates and believed that Gates’ 
probably had an ulterior motive, given how the com-
pany benefi ted from the IBM standard.
Ironically, in 1985 Apple had licensed its “visual 
displays” to Microsoft. Reportedly Gates had strong-
armed Sculley, threatening that Microsoft would 
stop developing crucial applications for the Mac 
unless Apple granted Microsoft the license. At the 
time, Microsoft had launched development of its 
own GUI. Called Windows, it mimicked the look 
and feel of the Mac operating system, and Microsoft 
did not want to be stopped by a lawsuit from Apple. 
Several years later, when Apple fi led a lawsuit against 
Microsoft, arguing that Windows 3.1 imitated the 
“look and feel” of the Mac, Microsoft was able to 
point to the 1985 license agreement to defend its 
right to develop Windows: a position that the judge 
in the case agreed with.
1990–1997
By the early 1990s, the prices of IBM-compatible 
PCs were declining rapidly. As long as Apple was 
the only company to sell machines that utilized 
GUIs, its  differential appeal gave it an advantage 
over MS-DOS-based PCs with their clunky text-
based interfaces, and the premium price could be 
justifi ed. However, in 1990, Microsoft introduced 
Windows 3.1, its own GUI that sat on top of MS-
DOS, and Apple’s differential appeal began to erode. 
Moreover, the dramatic growth of the PC market 
had turned Apple into a niche player. Faced with the 
choice of writing software to work with MS-DOS/
Windows operating systems and Intel microproces-
sors (now the dominant standard found on 90% of 
all personal computers), or the Mac OS and Motor-
ola processors, developers logically opted for the 
dominant standard (desktop publishing remained 
an exception to this rule). Refl ecting on this logic, 
Dan Eilers, then vice president of strategic planning 
at Apple, reportedly stated that “The company was 
on a glide path to history.”10
Sculley too, thought that the company was in 
trouble. Apple seemed boxed into its niche. Apple 
had a high cost structure. It spent signifi cantly 
more on R&D as a percentage of sales than its 
rivals. (In 1990, Apple spent 8% of sales on R&D, 
Compaq about 4%.) Its microprocessor sup-
plier, Motorola, lacked the scale of Intel, which 
translated into higher costs for Apple. Moreover, 
Apple’s small market share made it diffi cult to 
recoup the spiraling cost of developing a new oper-
ating system, which by 1990 amounted to at least 
$500 million.
Sculley’s game plan to deal with these problems 
involved a number of steps.11 First, he appointed 
himself chief technology offi cer in addition to 
CEO—a move that raised some eyebrows given 
Sculley’s marketing background. Second, he com-
mitted the company to bring out a low-cost version 
of the Macintosh to compete with IBM clones. The 
result was the Mac Classic, introduced in October 
1990 and priced at $999. He also cut prices for 
the Macs and Apple IIs by 30%. The reward was 
a 60% increase in sales volume, but lower gross 
margins. So, third, he cut costs. The workforce at 
Apple was reduced by 10%, the salaries of top man-
agers (including Sculley’s) were cut by as much as 
15%, and Apple shifted much of its manufactur-
ing to subcontractors (for example, the PowerBook 
was built in Japan—a fi rst for Apple). Fourth, he 
called for the company to maintain its technologi-
cal lead by bringing out hit products every 6 to 
12 months. The results include the fi rst Apple 

C18  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
portable, the PowerBook notebook, which was 
shipped in late 1991 and garnered very favorable 
reviews, and the Apple Newton handheld computer, 
which bombed. Fifth, Apple entered into an alliance 
with IBM, whose managers realized that it had lost 
its hold on the PC market to companies such as 
Intel, Microsoft, and Compaq.
The IBM alliance had several elements. One was 
the decision to adopt IBM’s Power PC microproces-
sor architecture, which IBM would also use in its 
own offerings. A second was the establishment of 
two joint ventures: Taligent to create a new oper-
ating system, and Kaleida to develop multimedia 
applications. A third was a project to help IBM and 
Apple machines work better together.
Although Sculley’s game plan helped to boost the 
top line, the bottom line shrunk in 1993 due to a com-
bination of low gross margins and continuing high 
costs. In 1994, Sculley left Apple. He was replaced 
by Michael Spindler, a German engineer who had 
gained prominence as head of Apple Europe.
In 1994, Spindler fi nally took the step that had 
been long debated in the company: he decided to 
license the Mac-OS to a handful of companies, 
allowing them to make Mac clones. The Mac-OS 
would be licensed for $40 a copy. It was too little 
too late—the industry was already waiting for the 
introduction of Microsoft’s Windows 95. When 
it came, it became clear that Apple was in seri-
ous trouble. Windows 95 was a big improvement 
over Windows  3.1, and it closed the gap between 
Windows and the Mac. While many commentators 
criticized Apple for not licensing the Mac-OS in the 
1980s, when it still had a big lead over Microsoft, 
ironically Bill Gates disagreed. In a 1996 interview 
with Fortune, Gates noted:
As Apple has declined, the basic criticism 
seems to be that Apple’s strategy of doing a 
unique hardware/software combination was 
doomed to fail. I disagree. Like all strate-
gies, this one fails if you execute poorly. 
But the strategy can work, if Apple picks 
its markets and renews the innovation in 
the Macintosh.12
Spindler responded to Windows 95 by commit-
ting Apple to develop a next-generation operating 
system for the Macintosh—something that raised 
questions about the Taligent alliance with IBM. At 
the end of 1995, IBM and Apple parted ways, ending 
Taligent, which after $500 million in investments, 
had produced little.
By then, Spindler had other issues on his mind. 
The latter half of 1995 proved to be a disaster for 
Apple. The company seemed unable to predict 
demand for its products. It overestimated demand 
for its low-end Macintosh Performa computers and 
was left with excess inventory, while underestimat-
ing demand for its high end machines. To compound 
matters, its new PowerBooks had to be recalled 
after batteries started to catch fi re, and a price war 
in Japan cut margins in one of its best markets. As 
a consequence, in the last quarter of 1995, gross 
margins slumped to 15%, down from 29% in 1994, 
and Apple lost $68 million. Spindler responded in 
January 1996 by announcing 1,300 layoffs. He sug-
gested that up to 4,000 might ultimately go—some 
23% of the workforce.13 That was his last  signifi cant 
act. He was replaced in February by Gilbert Amelio.
Amelio, who joined Apple from National Semi-
conductor where he had gained a reputation for his 
turnaround skills, lasted just 17 months. He followed 
through on Spindler’s plans to cut personnel and stated 
that Apple would return to its differentiation strategy. 
His hope was that the new Mac operating system 
would help, but work on that was in total disarray. 
He took the decision to scrap the project after an 
investment of more than $500 million. Instead, Apple 
purchased NeXT, the computer company founded 
by none other than Steve Jobs, for $425 million. The 
NeXT machines had received strong reviews but had 
gained no market traction due to a lack of supporting 
applications. Amelio felt that the NeXT OS could be 
adapted to run on the Mac. He also hired Steve Jobs as 
a consultant, but Jobs was rarely seen at Apple; he was 
too busy running Pixar, his computer animation com-
pany that was riding a wave of success after a huge hit 
with the animated movie, Toy Story.14
Amelio’s moves did nothing to stop the slide in 
Apple’s fortunes. By mid-1997, market share had 
slumped to 3%, from 9% when Amelio took the 
helm. The company booked a loss of $742 million 
in 1996 and was on track to lose another $400 million 
in 1997. It was too much for the board. In July 1997, 
Amelio was fi red. With market share falling, third-
party developers and distributors were rethinking 
their commitments to Apple. Without them, the 
company would be dead.

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C19
The Return of Steve Jobs
Following Amelio’s departure, Steve Jobs was 
appointed interim CEO. In April 1998, he took the 
position on a permanent basis, while staying on at 
Pixar as CEO. Jobs moved quickly to fi x the bleeding. 
His fi rst act was to visit Bill Gates and strike a deal 
with Microsoft. Microsoft agreed to invest $150 million 
in Apple and to continue producing Offi ce for the 
Mac through until at least 2002. Then he ended the 
licensing deals with the clone makers, spending more 
than $100 million to acquire the assets of the lead-
ing Mac clone maker, Power Computing, including 
its license. Jobs killed slow-selling products, most 
notably the Apple Newton handheld computer, and 
reduced the number of product lines from 60 to just 
four. He also pushed the company into online dis-
tribution, imitating Dell Computer’s direct-selling 
model. While these fi xes brought the company time 
and a favorable reaction from the stock market, they 
were not a recipe for growth.
New Computer Offerings
Almost immediately, Jobs started to think about a 
new product that would embody the spirit of Apple. 
What emerged in May 1998 was the iMac. The 
differentiator for the iMac was not its software, 
its power, or its monitor: it was the design of the 
machine itself. A self-contained unit that combined 
the monitor and central processing unit in translu-
cent teal and with curved lines, the iMac was a bold 
departure in a world dominated by putty-colored 
PC boxes.
To develop the iMac, Jobs elevated a team of 
designers headed by Jonathan Ive, giving them an 
unprecedented say in the development project. Ive’s 
team worked closely with engineers, manufacturers, 
marketers and Jobs himself. To understand how to 
make a plastic shell look exciting rather than cheap, 
the designers visited a candy factory to study the 
fi ner points of making jelly beans. They spent months 
working with Asian partners designing a sophisticated 
process capable of producing millions of iMacs a year. 
The designers also pushed for the internal electron-
ics to be redesigned, to make sure that they looked 
good through the thick shell. Apple may have spent as 
much as $65 a machine on the casing, compared with 
perhaps $20 for the average PC.15
Priced at $1,299, iMac sales were strong, with 
orders placed for 100,000 units even before the 
machine was available. Moreover, according to 
Apple’s research, one-third of iMac purchases were 
by fi rst-time buyers according to Apple’s research.16 
The iMac line was continually updated, with faster 
processors, more memory, and bigger hard drives 
being added. The product was also soon available 
in many different colors. In 1999, Apple followed up 
the iMac with introduction of the iBook portable. 
Aimed at consumers and students, the iBook had 
the same design theme as the iMac and was priced 
aggressively at $1,599.
Sales of the iMac and iBook helped push Apple 
back into profi tability. In 1999, the company earned 
$420 million on sales of $6.1 billion. In 2000, it 
made $611 million on sales of almost $8 billion.
To keep sales growing, Apple continued to invest in 
the development of a new operating system, based on 
the technology acquired from NeXT. After three years 
work by nearly 1,000 software engineers and a cost of 
approximately $1 billion, the fi rst version of Apple’s 
new operating systems was introduced in 2001. Known 
as OS X, it garnered rave reviews from analysts who 
saw the UNIX-based program as offering superior sta-
bility and faster speed than the old Mac OS. OS X 
also had an enhanced ability to run multiple programs 
at once, to support multiple users, connected easily 
to other devices such as digital camcorders, and was 
easier for developers to write applications for. In typi-
cal Apple fashion, OS X also sported a well- designed 
and intuitively appealing interface. Since 2001, new 
versions of OS X have been introduced almost once 
a year. The most recent version, OS X Leopard, was 
introduced in 2008 and retailed for $129.
To get the installed base of Mac users to upgrade 
to OS X, who at the time numbered 25 million, Apple 
had to offer applications. The deal with Microsoft 
ensured that its popular Offi ce program would be 
available for the OS X. Steve Jobs had assumed that 
the vote of confi dence by Microsoft would encourage 
other third-party developers to write programs for 
OS X, but it did not always happen. Most signifi -
cantly, in 1998, Adobe Systems refused to develop a 
Mac version of their consumer video-editing program, 
which was already available for Windows PCs.
Shocked, Jobs directed Apple to start working 
on its own applications. The fi rst fruits of this effort 
were two video-editing programs: Final Cut Pro for 

C20  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
professionals and iMovie for consumers. Next was 
iLife, a bundle of multimedia programs preinstalled 
on every Mac, which included iMovie, iDVD, iPhoto, 
Gargage Band, and the iTunes digital jukebox. Apple 
also developed its own Web browser, Safari.
Meanwhile, Apple continued to update its com-
puter lines with eye-catching offerings. In 2001, 
Apple introduced its Titanium PowerBook G4 note-
books. Cased in Titanium, these ultralight and fast 
notebooks featured a clean post-industrial look that 
marked a distinct shift from the whimsical look of 
the iMac and iBook. As with the iMac, Jonathan 
Ive’s design team played a central part in the prod-
ucts development. A core team of designers set up 
a design studio in a San Francisco warehouse, far 
away from Apple’s main campus. They worked for 
six weeks on the basic design, and then headed to 
Asia to negotiate for widescreen fl at panel displays 
and to work with tool makers.17
The Titanium notebooks were followed by a rede-
signed desktop line that appealed to the company’s 
graphic design customers, including the offering of 
elegantly designed very wide screen cinema displays. 
In 2004, Ive’s design team came out with yet another 
elegant offering, the iMac G5 computer, which PC 
Magazine described as a “simple stunning all in one 
design.”18 This was followed in 2008 with the release 
of yet another strong design, the ultra-thin MacBook 
Air that weighed just 3 pounds and was only 0.76 of 
an inch thick at its widest point.
For all of Apple’s undisputed design excellence 
and the loyalty of its core user base, graphic artists 
and students, during the early 2000s Apple’s global 
market share remained anemic, trailing far behind 
industry leaders Dell, HP, and IBM/Lenovo. Weak 
demand, combined with its low market share, 
translated into another loss for Apple in 2001, 
leading some to question the permanence of Steve 
Job’s turnaround. However, while Apple’s share in 
its core U.S. market fell to less than 3% in 2004, 
it started to pick up again in 2005, and the com-
pany made strong share gains in 2006–2008 (see 
Exhibit 1). Momentum was particularly strong in 
the United States, where Apple shipments surged. 
During the second quarter of 2008, for example, 
Apple’s shipments were up over 40% compared to 
the prior year, and its growth rate was three times 
that of the industry. Driving growth during the 
2005–2008 period, according to many analysts, 
was the surging popularity of Apple’s iPod music 
player and, in 2007, the iPhone. These two prod-
ucts had raised Apple’s profi le among younger 
consumers and was having a spill-over effect on 
Mac sales.19
Intel Inside, Windows on the Desktop
Since the company’s inception, Apple had not used 
Intel microprocessors, which had become the indus-
try standard for microprocessors since the introduc-
tion of the IBM PC in 1981. In June 2005, Apple 
announced that it would start to do so. Driving 
the transition was growing frustration with the 
performance of the PowerPC chip line made by 
IBM that Apple had been using for over a decade. 
The PowerPC had failed to keep up with the Intel 
chips, which were both faster and had lower power 
consumption—something that was very important 
in the portable computer market, in which Apple 
had a respectable market share.
The transition created signifi cant risks for Apple. 
Old applications and OS X had to be rewritten to 
run on Intel processors. By the spring of 2006, Apple 
had produced Intel compatible versions of OS X and 
its own applications, but many other applications 
had not been rewritten for Intel chips. To make the 
transition easier, Apple provided a free software pro-
gram, known as Rosetta, which enabled users to run 
Source: Gartner Press release: “Worldwide PC Market Grew 
16% in Second Quarter of 2008,” July 16, 2008.
Exhibit 1 Worldwide Market Share and United 
States Market Share, Second Quarter 2008
Company
Global Market 
Share (%)
U.S. Market 
Share (%)
HP
18.1%
25.3%
Dell
15.6%
31.9%
Acer
9.4%
8.1%
Lenova
7.8%
4.0%
Toshiba
4.4%
5.5%
Apple
1.9%
8.5%
Other
42.9%
16.8%
Total
    100%
    100%

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C21
From the start, Apple’s stores exhibited the same 
stylish design that characterized its products: clean 
lines, attractive displays, and postindustrial feel 
(see Exhibit 2). Steve Jobs himself was intimately 
involved in the design process. Indeed, he is one 
of the named inventors on a patent Apple secured 
for the design of the signature glass staircase found 
in many stores, and he was apparently personally 
involved in the design of a glass cube atop a store 
on New York’s Fifth Avenue that opened in 2006. 
In an interview, Jobs noted that “We spent a lotof 
time designing the store, and it deserves to be built 
perfectly.”22
Customers and analysts were immediately 
impressed by the product fl uency that employees 
in Apple stores exhibited. Indeed, one hallmark of 
Apple stores seems to be the personal attention paid 
to customers by smiling sales staff, an approach that 
is remonstrant of upscale retailers like Nordstrom. 
They also liked the highlight of many stores, a “genius 
bar” where technical experts helped customers fi x 
problems with their Apple products. The wide-open 
interior space, however, did nothing to allay the fears 
of critics that Apple’s product portfolio was just too 
narrow to generate the traffi c required to support 
premium space.
The critics could not have been more wrong. 
Spurred on by booming sales of the iPod, Apple’s 
stores did exceptionally well. By early 2008, Apple 
had some 200 stores in upscale locations that 
 generated some 20% of the company’s total reve-
nues, and the company was planning to open another 
40 stores. Sales per square foot are apparently now 
signifi cantly in excess of $4,000, making Apple the 
envy of other retailers.23
older applications on Intel-based Macs. Moreover, 
Apple went a step farther by issuing a utility pro-
gram, known as Boot Camp, which enabled Mac 
owners to run Windows XP on their machines. Boot 
Camp was included was part of OS X Leopard, and 
allows Mac owners to run Windows XP or Vista if 
they should so chose.
Reviews of Apple’s Intel-based machines were 
generally favorable, with many reviewers noting the 
speed improvement over the older PowerPC Macs.20 
In the fall of 2006, Apple reported that its transition 
to an Intel-based architecture was complete, some 
six months ahead of schedule. The move to Intel 
architecture may have helped Apple to close the price 
differential that had long existed between Windows-
based PCs and Apple’s offerings. According to one 
analysis, by September 2006, Apple’s products were 
selling at a discount to comparable product offerings 
from Dell and HP.21
Moving into Retail
In 2001, Apple made another important strategic 
shift: the company opened its fi rst retail store. In an 
industry that had long relied on third-party retailers 
or direct sales, as in the case of Dell, this shift seemed 
risky. One concern was that Apple might encounter 
a backlash from Apple’s long-standing retail part-
ners. Another was that Apple would never be able to 
generate the sales volume required to justify expen-
sive retail space; the product line seemed too thin. 
However, Apple clearly felt that it was hurt by a lack 
of retail presence. Many computer retailers did not 
carry Apple machines, and some of those that did 
often buried Mac displays deep in the store.
Exhibit 2 Sales of Apple’s Main Product Lines 2003–2007 (millions)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Computers
$4,491
$4,923
$6,275
$    7,375
$10,314
iPod
$  345
$1,306
$4,540
$  7,676
$ 8,305
iTunes
$   36
$  278
$  899
$ 1,885
$ 2,496
Software
$  644
$  821
$1,091
$ 1,279
$ 1,508
Peripherals
$  691
$  951
$1,126
$  1,100
$ 1,260
iPhone
$   123

C22  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
The iPod Revolution
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the music indus-
try was grappling with the implications of two 
new technologies. The fi rst was the development of 
 inexpensive portable MP3 players that could store 
and play digital music fi les, such as Diamond Media’s 
Rio, which was introduced in 1997 and could hold 
two hours of music. The second was the rise of peer-
to-peer computer networks, such as Napster, Kazaa, 
Grokster, and Morpheus, that enabled individuals to 
effi ciently swap digital fi les over the Internet. By the 
early 2000s, millions of individuals were download-
ing music fi les over the Internet without the permis-
sion of the copyright holders, the music publishing 
companies. For the music industry, this development 
had been devastating. After years of steady growth, 
global sales of music peaked in 1999 at $38.5  billion, 
falling to $32 billion in 2003. Despite the fall in 
sales, the International Federation of the Phono-
graphic Industry (IFPI) claimed that the demand 
for music was higher than ever, but the decline in 
sales refl ected the fact that “the commercial value of 
music is being widely devalued by mass copying and 
piracy.”24
The music industry had tried to counter piracy 
over the Internet by taking legal action to shut down 
the peer-to-peer networks, such as Napster, and fi ling 
lawsuits against individuals who made large num-
bers of music fi les available over the Internet. Its suc-
cess had been limited, in part because peer-to-peer 
networks offered tremendous utility to consumers. 
They were fast, immediate, and enabled consumers 
to unbundled albums, downloading just the tracks 
they wanted while ignoring junk fi ller tracks. And, 
of course, they were free.
The music industry was desperate for a legal 
alternative to illegal downloading. Its own initia-
tives, introduced in 2002, had gained little traction. 
MusicNet, which offered songs from Warner Music, 
BMG, and EMI, had a single subscription plan: $9.85 
a month for 100 streams and 100 downloads. After 
30 days downloads expired and could not be played. 
Pressplay, which offered music from Sony, Universal, 
and EMI, had four subscription plans, from $9.95 
to $24.95 a month, for up to 1,000 streams and 100 
downloads. The higher subscription fee service from 
Pressplay allowed users to burn up to 20 songs a 
month onto CDs that would not expire, but no more 
than two songs could be burned from any one artist.25
Then along came the iPod and iTunes. These 
products were born out of an oversight: in the late 
1990s, when consumers were starting to burn their 
favorite CDs, Macs did not have CD burners, or 
software to manage their digital music collections. 
Realizing the mistake, CEO Steve Jobs ordered 
Apple’s software developers to create the iTunes 
program to help Mac users manage their growing 
digital music collections. The fi rst iTunes program 
led to the concept of the iPod. If people were going 
to maintain the bulk of their music collection on 
a computer, they needed portable MP3 players to 
take music with them—a Sony Walkman for the 
digital age. While there were such devices on the 
market already, they could only hold a few dozen 
songs each.
To run the iPod, Apple licensed software from 
PortalPlayer. Apple also learned that Toshiba was 
building a tiny 1.8-inch hard drive that could hold 
more than 1,000 songs. Apple quickly cut a deal 
with Toshiba, giving it exclusive rights to the drive 
for 18 months. Meanwhile, Apple focused on design-
ing the user interface, the exterior styling, and the 
synchronization software to make it work with the 
Mac. As with so many product offerings unveiled 
since Jobs had returned to the helm, the design team 
led by Jonathan Ive played a pivotal role in giving 
birth to the iPod. Ive’s team worked in secrecy in San 
Francisco. The members, all paid extremely well by 
industry standards, worked together in a large open 
studio with little personal space. The team was able 
to fi gure out how to put a layer of clear plastic over 
the white and black core of an iPod, giving it tre-
mendous depth of texture. The fi nish was superior to 
other MP3 players, with no visible screws or obvious 
joins between parts. The serial number of the iPod 
was not on a sticker, as with most products, it was 
elegantly etched onto the back of the device. This 
attention to detail and design elegance, although not 
with cost implications, was to turn the iPod into a 
fashion accessory.26
The iPod was unveiled in October 2001 to mixed 
reviews. The price of $399 was signifi cantly above 
that of competing devices, and because the iPod only 
worked with Apple computers, it seemed destined 
to be a niche product. However, initial sales were 
strong. It turned out that consumers were willing 
to pay a premium price for the iPod’s huge storage 
capacity. Moreover, Jobs made the call to develop a 
version of the iPod that would be compatible with 

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C23
Windows. After it was introduced in mid-2002, sales 
took off.
By this time, Jobs was dealing with a bigger 
strategic issue—how to persuade the music compa-
nies to make their music available for legal down-
loads. Jobs met with executives from the major 
labels. He persuaded them that it was in their best 
interest to support a legal music download business 
as an alternative to widespread illegal downloading 
of music over peer-to-peer networks that the music 
industry had not been able to shut down. People 
would pay to download music over the Internet, he 
argued. Although all of the labels were setting up 
their own online businesses, Jobs felt that because 
they were limited to selling music owned by the par-
ent companies, demand would also be limited. What 
was needed was a reputable independent online 
music retailer, and Apple fi t the bill. If it was going 
to work, however, all of the labels needed to get on 
board. Under Jobs’ scheme, iTunes fi les would be 
downloaded for $0.99 each. The only portable digi-
tal player that the fi les could be stored and played 
on was an iPod. Job’s argument was that this closed 
world made it easier to protect copyrighted material 
from unauthorized distribution.
Jobs also meet with 20 of the world’s top record-
ing artists, including U2’s Bono, Sheryl Crow, and 
Mick Jagger. His pitch to them was that digital dis-
tribution is going to happen, and the best way to 
protect your interests is to support a legal online 
music distribution business. Wooed by Jobs, these 
powerful stakeholders encouraged the music record-
ing companies to take Apple’s proposal seriously.27
By early 2003, Jobs had all of the major labels 
onboard. Launched in April 2003, within days it 
was clear that Apple had a major hit on its hands. 
A  million songs were sold in the fi rst week. In mid-
2004, iTunes passed the 100 million-download mark, 
and sales kept accelerating, hitting the 150 million-
download mark in October 2004. At that point, cus-
tomers were downloading more than 4 million songs 
per week, which represented a run rate of more than 
200 million a year. While Steve Jobs admitted that 
Apple did not make much money from iTunes down-
loads, probably only $0.10 a song, it did make good 
margins on sales of the iPod—and sales of the iPod 
ballooned (see Exhibit 2).
As the installed base of iPods expanded, an eco-
system of companies selling iPod accessories emerged. 
The accessories include speakers, headphones, and 
add-on peripherals that allowed iPods to record 
voice, charge on the go, play tunes over the radio, or 
use the iPod wirelessly with a remote. There are also 
cases, neck straps, belt clips, and so on. By 2006, it 
was estimated that there were more than 100 com-
panies in this system. Apple collects an unspecifi ed 
royalty from companies whose products access the 
iPod’s ports and benefi ts indirectly from the prefer-
ence of buyers for the iPod over competing products 
that lack the same accessories.28
Success such as this attracts competitors. 
RealNetworks, Walmart, Yahoo!, Napster, and 
Amazon all set up legal downloading services to 
compete with iTunes. However, iTunes continued 
to outsell its rivals by a wide margin. In mid-2008, 
iTunes was accounting for about 90% of all legal 
music downloads.29 iTunes was also the largest 
music retailer in the United States—the other three 
all had physical stores.
The iPod also had plenty of competition includ-
ing offerings from SanDisk and Microsoft (Zune). 
Many of these were priced aggressively, well 
designed, and had as much storage capacity as the 
iPod. Few, however, manage to gain share against 
the iPod, which accounted for 73.5% of all unit 
sales in the United States in July 2008 and 88% of 
total dollar sales. SanDisk was second with an 8% 
share of unit sales, and Microsoft was third with a 
2.6% share of unit sales. Moreover, Apple’s seems to 
have yet again stolen a march on its competitors in 
late 2007 when it introduced the iPod touch, which 
had Web-browsing capability and quickly generated 
strong sales volume. However, the overall market for 
digital music players was maturing by 2007, with 
growth rates dropping into the low single digits. 
Apple needed another new product driver to keep 
sales expanding.
The iPhone
In June 2007, Apple introduced the iPhone. First 
announced in January 2007, the iPhone was essen-
tially a smartphone that was also able to browse the 
Web, take pictures, and function as a digital music 
player. The iPhone was differentiated from estab-
lished smartphone offerings by revolutionary touch 
screen design that replaced the traditional mechanical 
keypad and allowed users to quickly and easily switch 
between functions. The phone used a version of Apple’s 

C24  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
OS X operating system and the company’s Safari Web 
browser. Apple struck a deal with AT&T, under which 
it was to be the exclusive provider of wireless service 
for the iPhone. Under the deal, AT&T would share a 
percentage of its service fees from iPhone users with 
Apple (the percentage was rumored to be 30%, but 
neither company would confi rm this).
Priced between $499 and $599 depending on the 
model, the iPhone was positioned at the high end of 
the smartphone market. Some were skeptical that the 
device would be able to gain share from established 
smartphones such as Research in Motion with its 
Blackberry and offerings from Palm, Motorola, and 
Nokia, all of which had gained a following among 
business users.
Steve Jobs announced that the goal was to try and 
grab 1% of the total global market for cell phones 
in the fi rst full year that the iPhone was on the mar-
ket. With a total market in excess of 1 billion units, 
most of which were not smartphones, this suggested 
a goal of selling 10 million iPhones in fi scal 2008 
(which ended September 2008).
There was some disappointment that the iPhone 
would use AT&T’s slower data network, rather 
than the faster 3G network that was more suited to 
Web browsing. There was also disappointment that 
the iPhone did not contain a GPS location-fi nding 
function.
Despite the high price and perceived limita-
tions, early demand for the iPhone was strong, with 
long lines forming outside Apple stores on the day 
the device was released. Although some consumers 
experienced activation problems, most were happy 
with their purchase. The device got rave reviews 
for its design elegance, ease of use, and compel-
ling touch screen interface. Apple sold more than 
250,000 iPhones in the fi rst two days the device was 
on the market; it soon became clear that the com-
pany had another hit on its hands.
In June 2008, Apple introduced a second ver-
sion of its iPhone, the iPhone 3G. Designed to run 
on a faster 3G networks, the new phone also incor-
porated GPS functionality. AT&T was again picked 
as the exclusive service provider in the United 
States. However, Apple shifted the business model. 
Instead of giving a share of service fees to Apple, 
AT&T agreed to pay a subsidy to Apple for each 
iPhone sold. The subsidy allowed Apple to drop the 
price for the iPhone to as low as $199 for an entry-
level model. Yet again, long lines formed outside 
Apple stores, and in the fi rst three days, the iPhone 
3G was on the market, more than 1 million units 
were sold. By August, analysts were issuing fore-
casts calling for Apple to sell 11 million iPhones in 
fi scal 2008, and 25 million in 2009, with much of 
the growth coming from rapidly expanding sales in 
40 other countries. While the 25 million still only 
represented only a small slice of the 1.2 billion wire-
less handsets forecast to be sold globally in 2009, 
it would make Apple one of the top-three makers 
of smartphones in the world and the only one with 
a strong position among consumers as opposed to 
business users.30
One feature of the iPhone 3G that started to 
garner a lot of attention was the rapid growth 
in third-party applications for the phone. In July 
2008, Apple opened an online store for applica-
tions that were written to run on the iPhone. In the 
fi rst month, the phone was on the market, more 
than 60 million programs were downloaded. While 
many applications were free, Apple was selling 
$1  million worth of applications a day and sug-
gested that sales could reach a $500 million annual 
run rate fairly quickly. Apple kept 30% of the pro-
ceeds from application sales, just about enough 
to cover the costs of the store, letting program 
creators keep the other 70%. Among the big sell-
ers were some games applications, such as Super 
Monkeyball from Sega, which sold 300,000 copies 
in 20 days at $9.99 a copy.31
The Personal Computer 
Industry in the 2000s
For all of its product success, Apple remained a 
niche player in the computer industry, albeit one 
that was gaining share among consumers. After 
years of growth, sales of PCs had fallen for the fi rst 
time ever in 2001, but the growth path had soon 
resumed. In 2004, 179 million PCs were sold world-
wide, and by 2008 this fi gure had increased to 293 
million.32 Sales to consumers accounted for about 
1/3 of this fi gure, and some 60% of the year on year 
growth in PC sales was now coming from emerging 
markets.
The industry is characterized by a handful of 
players who collectively account for about half the 

 
Case 1 Apple in 2008 
C25
market, and a long tail of small enterprises that 
produce unbranded or locally branded “white box” 
computers, often selling their machines at a signifi -
cant discount to globally branded products.
Among the larger players, consolidation has been 
a theme for several years. In 2002, HP acquired 
Compaq, Gateway and eMachines merged in 2004, 
and the Chinese fi rm Lenovo acquired the personal 
computer business of IBM in 2005. The large PC 
fi rms compete aggressively by offering ever-more 
powerful machines, producing them as effi ciently 
as possible and lowering prices to sell more volume. 
The average selling price of a PC has fallen from 
approximately $1,700 in 1999 to less than $1,000 
in 2006, and projections are that it may continued to 
fall, fueled in part by aggressive competition between 
Dell Computer and HP.33
All of these players focus on the design, assem-
bly, and sales of personal computers, while pur-
chasing the vast majority of component parts from 
independent companies. In recent years, the top per-
sonal computer companies have reduced their R&D 
spending as a percentage of sales, as the industry has 
transitioned toward a commodity business.
The existence of the long tail of white box mak-
ers is made possible by the open architecture of the 
dominant PC standard based on Intel-compatible 
microprocessors, and a Microsoft operating system, 
and the low-tech nature of the assembly process. The 
components for these boxes, which are themselves 
commodities, can be purchased cheaply off the shelf. 
White box makers have a strong position in many 
developing nations. In Mexico, for example, domes-
tic brands accounted for 60% of all sales in 2005, 
up from 44% in 2000. In Latin America as a whole, 
70% of personal computers are produced locally. 
White box makers have a much weaker position in 
the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, where 
consumers display a stronger preference for branded 
products that incorporate leading-edge technology. 
In contrast, in the developing world, consumers are 
willing to accept older components if it saves a few 
hundred dollars.34
During the 1990s and early 2000s, Dell grew 
rapidly to capture the market lead. Dell’s success 
was based on the inventory management effi ciencies 
associated with its direct selling model (Dell could 
build machines to order, which reduced its need to 
hold inventory). Dell was also helped by the prob-
lems HP faced when it merged with Compaq. By 
2005, however, a resurgent HP had lowered its costs, 
could price more aggressively, and was starting to 
gain ground against Dell. Apple continued to be the 
odd man out in this industry, and was the only major 
manufacturer that did not adhere to the Windows 
architecture.
Strategic Issues
As 2008 drew to a close, Apple was in an enviable 
position. Revenue and profi ts growth was strong, 
driven by new product introductions, such as the 
iPhone, and strong sales of Apple’s line of personal 
computers. While the iPod boom was starting to run 
its course as the market reached saturation, the com-
pany might have found a new growth driver in its 
iPhone business. In the PC market, Apple was still a 
niche player, albeit one with renewed growth pros-
pects and an increasingly strong brand among con-
sumers. In the business market, by contrast, Apple 
had very limited presence. Going forward, observers 
wondered whether Apple could continue to main-
tain its growth rate, particularly given concerns that 
CEO Steve Jobs, considered the architect of Apple’s 
revival, was ill and might not be at the helm for 
much longer.
Endnotes
 4. For a detailed history of the development of the Apple II, 
see Steve Weyhrich, Apple II History, http://apple2history
.org/history/ah01.html.
 5. P. Freiberger and M. Swaine, Fire in the Valley, 357.
 6. Andy Hertzfeld, “Reality Distortion Field,” http://www
.folklore.org/ProjectView.py?projectMacintosh.
 7. Ibid.
 8. This version of events was told to the author by a senior 
executive who was present in the room at the time.
 1. Quoted in Pete Burrows, “Steve Jobs” Magic Kingdom, 
BusinessWeek, February 6, 2006, 62–68.
 2. N. Wingfi eld, “Apple Unveils New Computers,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 8, 2006, B3. “Apple Increases 
PC Market Share, Ranks Third Behind Dell and HP,” 
 ChattahBox.com.
 3. Much of this section is drawn from P. Freiberger and 
M. Swaine, Fire in the Valley (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2000).

C26  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
 9. Jim Carlton, “Playing Catch Up—Apple Finally Gives in 
an Attempts Cloning,” Wall Street Journal, October 17, 
1994, A1.
 10. D. B. Yoffi e, “Apple Computer 1992,” Harvard Business 
School Case no. 792–081.
 11. Andrew Kupfer, “Apple’s Plan to Survive and Grow,” For-
tune, May 4, 1992, 68–71. B. R. Schlender, “Yet Another 
Strategy for Apple,” Fortune, October 22, 1990. 81–85.
 12. B. Schlender, “Paradise Lost: Apple’s Quest for Life after 
Death,” Fortune, February 1996, 64–72.
 13. Jim Carlton, “Apple’s Losses to Stretch into 2nd Period,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 18, 1996, B7.
 14. Peter Burrows, “Dangerous Limbo,” BusinessWeek, 
July 21, 1997, 32.
 15. Peter Burrows, The Man Behind Apple’s Design Magic,” 
BusinessWeek, September 2005, 27–34.
 16. A. Reinhardt, “Can Steve Jobs Keep His Mojo Working?” 
BusinessWeek, August 2, 1999, 32.
 17. Peter Burrows, The Man Behind Apple’s Design Magic,” 
27–34.
 18. Apple iMac G5 Review, PC Magazine, http://www
.pcmag.com/article2/0,1759,1648796,00.asp.
 19. Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, Computers: Hard-
ware, “Global Demand for PCs Accelerates,” December 8, 
2005. Mark Veverka, Wall Street Journal, “Barron’s 
Insight: Apple’s Horizon Brightens,” July 23, 2006, A4.
 20. Peter Lewis, “Apple’s New Core,” Fortune, March 29, 
2006, 182–184.
 21. Citigroup Global Markets, “Apple Computer: New Prod-
ucts Position Apple Well for Holidays,” September 13, 
2006.
 22. N. Wingfi eld, “How Apple’s Store Strategy Beat the 
Odds,” Wall Street Journal, May 17, 2006, B1.
 23. M. Frazier, “The Bigger Apple,” Advertising Age, Febru-
ary 13, 2006, pp, 4–6. K. Hafner, “Inside Apple Stores,” 
New York Times, December 27, 2007, C1.
 24. IFPI News release. Global Music Sales Down 5% in 
2001. www.ifpi.org.
 25. W. S. Mossberg, “Record Labels Launch Two Feeble Ser-
vices to Replace Napster,” Wall Street Journal, February 7, 
2002, B1.
 26. Peter Burrows, “The Man Behind Apple’s Design Magic,” 
27–34.
 27. N. Wingfi eld and E. Smith, “U2’s Gig: Help Apple Sell 
iPods,” Wall Street Journal, October 20, 2004, D5. 
Apple Computer Press Release, “iTunes Music Store 
Downloads Top 150 Million Songs,” October 14, 2004.
 28. Paul Taylor, “iPod Ecosystem Offers Rich Pickings,” 
FT.com, January 24, 2006, 1.
 29. T. Braithwaite and K. Allison, “Crunch Time for Apple’s 
Music Icon,” Financial Times, June 14, 2006, 27.
 30. P. Borrows, “Apple’s Ambitious iPhone 3G Plans,” 
BusinessWeek, August 25, 2008, 28.
 31. N. Wingfi eld, “iPhone Software Sales Take Off,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 11, 2008, B1.
 32. “Gartner Says Worldwide PC Shipments to Grow 11% 
in 2008,” Gartner Press release, March 25, 2008.
 33. Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, Computers: 
 Hardware, “Global Demand for PCs Accelerates”, 
December 8, 2005.
 34. M. Dickerson, “Plain PCs Sitting Pretty,” Los Angeles 
Times, December 11, 2005, C1.

SGI, or Silicon Graphics International, was formed 
by the merger of Rackable Systems and Silicon 
Graphics in May 2009. Although Silicon Graphics 
is the company with the longest and most famous 
history—it was once the industry leader in graphi-
cal, supercomputing solutions and worth $7 billion 
at its peak—it lost its competitive advantage in 
the last decade to other high-tech companies, such 
as HP, Nvidia, Dell, and Sun Microsystems. The 
company was forced to declare Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy in 2009. In March 2009, Rackable Systems 
CEO Mark Barrenechea decided to buy Silicon 
Graphics for $45 million, and managers from both 
companies are working to combine their techno-
logical competences to strengthen the new SGI 
business model. Barrenechea, now SGI’s CEO, is 
hoping Silicon Graphic’s assets and competences 
can help the new company cope better with an 
intensely competitive industry environment that 
emerged after Dell decided to target the same mar-
ket segment as Rackable Systems. Both companies 
are competing to sell powerful servers to Internet 
companies, particularly those building up their 
capabilities in cloud computing. In May 2009, the 
strategic task facing Barrenechea was how to use 
SGI’s global assets to better position the company 
for the upcoming battle against Dell, as well as HP, 
IBM, and Sun.
The Server Computer 
Industry Environment
Server computers (servers) are designed to perform 
powerful, information-intensive computing that in 
the past could have been executed only on expensive 
mainframe computers. Servers are also designed to 
link to desktop and laptop personal computers (PCs) 
so that all company employees can access the pow-
erful computing capacity and software applications 
to gain historical and real-time information about 
ongoing events. In the late 1990s, the power of serv-
ers increased enormously as Intel and AMD devel-
oped ever-more advanced microprocessors (chips) 
that delivered more and more computing capacity, 
a trend that has continued. A server is fundamen-
tally a PC on steroids. Just as a PC purchased today 
is much more powerful than one bought just two 
or three years ago, so today’s individual servers usu-
ally contain microprocessors from Intel or AMD and 
other components such as powerful graphical units 
(GPUs) from Nvidia, enormous storage devices from 
Samsung or EMC, and powerful networking chips 
from Cisco Systems. All these components are linked 
by some brand of software that allows them to work 
seamlessly together so that they can perform the 
specifi c computing application they were designed 
to do. Today, servers are more or less similar to the 
Copyright © 2009 by Gareth R. Jones. All rights reserved, not to be copied, reproduced, or distributed by any means physical or mechani-
cal without the permission of the author.
For the most recent fi nancial results of the company discussed in this case, go to http://fi nance.yahoo.com, input the company’s stock 
symbol, and download the latest company report from its homepage.
SGI versus Dell: Competition 
in Server and Cloud Computing
C27
2

C28  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
“supercomputers” of the past; they can process stag-
gering amounts of data to execute highly complex 
software applications, and they can access and store 
enormous amounts of information. As a result, serv-
ers are the foundation of most companies’ database 
management centers.
From its beginning, the development of the server 
industry has been affected by a lack of common 
industry standards; each server maker has sought 
to obtain a competitive advantage from its propri-
etary chips, software, or even server case or chassis. 
(The server chassis houses and links whatever mix 
of components, such as storage devices, micropro-
cessor, networking hardware, cooling systems, and 
motherboard, a server maker chooses and so deter-
mines the fi nal server design.) Most major computer 
companies that make servers—such as IBM, HP, and 
Dell—use chips based on the x86 computing archi-
tecture pioneered by Intel, which it licensed to its 
main competitor, AMD. However, Sun, which once 
dominated the server market, uses its own propri-
etary chips and software to power its servers; in the 
past, Silicon Graphics was also a competitor in this 
market, offering a “supercomputing” server solu-
tion. The servers made by different companies are 
also loaded with a wide variety of different software 
systems, such as Sun’s Solaris and Microsoft’s NT 
that are proprietary; and some operate on the Linux 
open software platform. Because of their different 
hardware and software confi gurations, the servers 
made by different companies cannot easily be com-
bined into one integrated system.
This causes major problems for large or medium-
sized companies or organizations that are major 
buyers of the standardized, “brand name” servers 
offered by the major computer makers. Each com-
pany’s IT managers have to select the brand of server 
that can best perform the specifi c set of computing 
applications necessary to manage its company-wide 
value chain activities and process and store its data-
base. Once a company has chosen one server brand 
or “platform,” for example, Sun’s or HP’s, it then 
becomes locked into that server maker because of 
the enormous problems of making the servers of dif-
ferent companies work seamlessly together. This is 
especially aggravating to companies. Often, a server 
made by one computer maker is confi gured in a way 
that allows it to perform specifi c computing applica-
tions, such as crunching data, Web site hosting, or 
massive database management much more effi ciently 
than the servers available from a company’s current 
server maker; however, the servers of different com-
panies are incompatible.
Over time, this problem has become more and 
more important; sales of servers have increased 
enormously (the server market is $25 billion a year) 
because of their ever-increasing computing power and 
their low cost compared to mainframe computers. As 
companies began to buy hundreds and thousands of 
servers to meet their increasing need to process infor-
mation, server makers started to design rack-mounted 
servers or rack servers. Rack servers link an individual 
server to a rack of 10 connected servers; then 10 racks 
create a network of 100 servers; 100 racks create a 
network of 1,000 servers, and so on. Using software 
to link the operations of these server racks, large 
companies develop what are called “server farms” 
to manage their information databases. Server farms 
are “remote,” physically separate database centers 
composed of many thousands of networked server 
racks that are constantly monitored, maintained, and 
upgraded by a company’s IT engineers.
Also, interconnected systems of powerful serv-
ers that in many respects resemble the way a single 
computer operates are referred to as cluster comput-
ing. In cluster computing, servers are connected to 
each other through vast local area networks (LANs) 
between the different divisions or functions of a com-
pany to perform complex software applications, such 
as enterprise resource planning (ERP), for example. 
They are also used to handle sophisticated applica-
tions, such as computer-aided product design or 
customer relationship management inside functions 
such as research and development (R&D) or sales 
and marketing. Clusters are also deployed to improve 
computing performance for enormous information-
intensive computing tasks; provide backup data 
capabilities in case of computer failure; or provide 
the extra information processing or storage capacity 
power needed to handle peak period user demands on 
servers, either from in-house users at 9–11 a.m. and 
1–3 p.m. or from Internet users between 5–10 p.m. 
each evening.
As noted previously, huge racks of servers or 
cluster server solutions are much more fl exible and 
cost-effective than using a single mainframe com-
puter of comparable speed or capacity. However, to 
deliver the highest quality and most cost-effective 
solution, they also must be customized to each com-
pany’s unique requirements by choosing the mix of 

 
Case 2 SGI versus Dell: Competition in Server and Cloud Computing 
C29
hardware and software to allow specifi c computing 
applications and services to execute most effi ciently 
and effectively. Increasingly, this requires mixing the 
server hardware and software of different companies 
so that different brands of servers work together. This 
complex computing task requires the development of 
“middleware” computer software that allows differ-
ent brands or makes of servers to operate seamlessly 
together. This expensive middleware is provided by 
companies such as IBM, EDS, and Accenture, which 
have all expanded their computer consulting services 
to serve the growing and lucrative server market.
SGI/Rackable Systems, 1999–2009
Rackable Systems (SGI) was founded in 1999 in 
 Milpitas in Silicon Valley, California, as a specialist 
server company. The question facing the start-up’s 
top management team was how to break into a server 
market dominated by IBM, HP, and Sun, the princi-
pal providers of servers to large and medium-sized 
companies. The question for SGI was how to offer 
companies buying servers something unique: How 
could it fi nd a way to design its servers to fi nd a way 
to enter the market and avoid head-to-head compe-
tition with the Big Three? At this time, SGI’s larger 
competitors still thought of servers as standardized 
products; they competed by buying the best available 
server hardware and software—such as Intel’s chips 
or Oracle’s database management software—and then 
embedding them in their servers to offer customers a 
more powerful computing solution that could be sold 
by SGI’s nationwide force of sale representatives.
SGI could offer customers an equally powerful 
server, because any server maker can buy the lat-
est AMD chips or Microsoft software. In addition, 
however, SGI decided to focus on offering a custom-
ized solution. Using the competences of its engineers, 
the strategy SGI’s managers developed was to offer 
customers a server rack\cluster-computing solution 
that could be custom designed to each company’s 
individual requirements, thus offering its custom-
ers maximum fl exibility and cost-effectiveness. In 
other words, SGI’s strategy was to offer customers a 
unique kind of server computing solution that would 
better meet customer needs than its competitors; in 
this way it would be able to gain a profi table share 
of the server market.
What was unique about its strategy? First, SGI 
focused on custom manufacturing servers that had 
superior computing density, meaning that many more 
chips could be placed in the same amount of physical 
space that those of its competitors. Second, it empha-
sized superior thermal effi ciency and worked hard 
to design server racks that operated at lower tem-
peratures, thus reducing a company’s energy costs—a 
major source of cost savings for a large company. 
Third, its engineers developed a design to compete 
on the basis of superior reliability and serviceability. 
They focused on simplifying the components in its 
servers to reduce the potential for failure; if a break-
down occurred, its servers were confi gured to make it 
easier to fi nd and solve the problem.
From the beginning, a major focus of SGI’s busi-
ness model was to publicize its energy-effi ciency 
server solutions and their ability to create “ecologi-
cally minded,” green database centers that could 
 signifi cantly reduce the electricity costs associated 
with cooling the hundreds, thousands—or tens of 
thousands of servers—companies must constantly 
monitor to protect their data and information 
 systems. For a large company, electricity costs can 
amount to many hundreds of thousands of dollars 
a year; SGI was offering companies a signifi cant 
way to reduce costs—especially Internet companies 
whose use of servers was increasing exponentially.
Over time, SGI worked to improve its distinctive 
competences to increase its competitive advantage. 
One of its earliest innovations was to create half-
depth servers that allow back-to-back rack mounting 
of servers. This means that two servers can operate 
in the space that formerly was taken up by only one, 
so it could pack double the computing processing 
power into a smaller physical “footprint.” Second, 
SGI worked to design “dense server racks,” using its 
highly differentiated and patented server rack chas-
sis and cabinet to house the thousands of individual 
servers that it custom builds to meet each customer’s 
specifi c needs for computer processing capacity and 
performance. Third, SGI worked to improve the phys-
ical design of these server racks to reduce heat emis-
sions from the core microprocessors as well as fi nd 
innovative ways to cool all the other server compo-
nents. One of the main ways it did this was to reduce 
the number of individual components in each server. 
It was one of the fi rst companies to recognize that it 
is possible to eliminate the storage, networking, and 
cooling hardware necessary for each server to work 
as a stand-alone entity. In the design, all of the indi-
vidual servers in a dense server rack are  connected 

C30  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
to a single set of storage and networking hardware 
located in each server rack, and one fan cools all the 
servers. SGI’s design signifi cantly reduces the amount 
of heat generated by each server rack, and its cooling 
solution also substantially reduces the energy costs 
associated with cooling its server racks and server 
clusters while allowing them to operate at maximum 
effi ciency. In fact, SGI claims it has the most energy 
effi cient solution of any of the major server makers.
Also, its custom-built server racks offer customers 
unparalleled confi guration fl exibility and a signifi -
cantly smaller physical footprint that helps to radi-
cally reduce the total costs of managing a company’s 
database center. “Through our unique build-to-order
program, SGI servers are confi gured using best-
of-breed, industry-standard components (processors, 
memory, hard disk, RAID, power supplies, etc.) to 
provide the ideal confi guration for a given data cen-
ter’s application needs and power envelope.” Indeed, 
to provide the best customized solution to each com-
pany’s or client’s needs, SGI partnered with leading 
hardware component manufacturers and software 
makers to provide the latest combination of server 
technology to meet their needs. For example, SGI 
can custom-build rack servers using either Intel or 
AMD chips that operate in conjunction with what-
ever operating system (Linux, Windows, Solaris, and 
so on) that a particular customer requires to be com-
patible with its existing server platform.
SGI’s ability to provide an energy-effi cient server 
solution that could be customized to a client’s  specifi c 
needs appealed to large and medium-sized compa-
nies because they now were no longer locked into the 
server technology of any particular maker, such as 
Sun, HP, or IBM. Many large companies were will-
ing to experiment with SGI server solutions, and in a 
short time, Internet companies such as Amazon.com 
and Yahoo!; high-tech companies such as Electronic 
Arts, Microsoft, Nvidia, Oracle; and public institu-
tions such as Lawrence Livermore National Labora-
tory and large state universities were experimenting 
with its innovative high-density energy-saving server 
rack solutions.
New Competitive Issues
SGI’s business model led to increasing customer 
purchases of its dense rack servers, and its revenues 
increased steadily over time; it seemed as if the com-
pany had found a profi table new business model to 
compete against giants such as HP and IBM. SGI 
conducted an initial public offering of its stock in 
June 2005 at $12 a share; by the fall of 2005, it had 
reached $55, as sales of its racks continued to soar. 
Investors thought SGI had found a niche in the low-
profi t, mature rack server market. Its breakthrough 
designs for dense, compact, and energy-saving rack 
servers met the needs of Internet companies such as 
Amazon, Facebook, Yahoo! and Microsoft’s online 
division that were growing at an explosive rate. 
These companies were all rapidly expanding their 
bricks-and-mortar database centers to deal with the 
huge increase in Internet usage but wanted to expand 
capacity while reducing operating costs by adopting 
more energy-effi cient server racks.
However, the start-up’s success was not unno-
ticed; all the major server companies began to ana-
lyze SGI’s business model; seeing its advantages, their 
focus became to beat the company at its own game. 
IBM, HP, and, especially, Dell began to experiment 
with new ways to design rack servers to increase their 
capacity and reduce their power consumption. SGI’s 
committed engineers worked hard to protect its fi rst-
mover advantage, but it did not have the resources of 
the large server makers.
By 2006, the cost-leader Dell recognized the chal-
lenge that SGI posed to its continuing leadership in 
the low-cost segment of the rack server market as it 
continued to increase its installed customer base. So 
Dell created a new business unit and hired a new team 
of skilled engineers to learn how to build  customized, 
energy-effi cient servers that could compete with SGI. 
Dell was especially concerned to protect its advan-
tage in the crucially important Internet company 
segment of the market that was expanding rapidly 
because of increasing emphasis on cloud computing. 
And, because the core of SGI’s dense servers were 
the components it bought from other high-tech com-
panies, such as chips from Intel and AMD, the only 
thing it had to protect itself from Dell’s attack was its 
propriety server design and cooling technology.
By 2007, Dell had entered the market with its 
own low-priced, customized servers targeted at Inter-
net companies, as well as its own installed base of 
customers. In doing so, it created a price war that, 
by the end of 2007, decimated SGI’s profi t margins 
as its server sales plunged. This precipitated a huge 
plunge in its stock price. Dell’s goal was clear: to 
prevent SGI from gaining a sustained competitive 
advantage by attracting away its customers with 

 
Case 2 SGI versus Dell: Competition in Server and Cloud Computing 
C31
offers of  low-priced server racks. As a result, SGI 
had to accelerate its development of even more effi -
cient rack server and cluster computing solutions for 
 companies’ database centers—especially given the 
growing popularity of cloud computing.
The Growth of Cloud Computing
In 2007, the term cloud computing was being popu-
larized by companies like Google, Amazon.com, and 
IBM to refer to a new, emerging kind of informa-
tion or computing service that would be available to 
companies and individuals in the same way that they 
used utilities like water or electricity. Essentially, the 
push behind cloud computing was to create (1) a cost-
effective, Internet-based global platform of hardware 
and software provided by (2) a network of thousands 
of interlinked information technology (IT) companies 
that have (3) the capability to provide a full range of 
on-demand software applications, services, database 
storage, and computing services to millions of compa-
nies and billions of individual users. The word cloud is 
used to emphasize that the users of cloud computing 
often do not even know which specifi c IT providers are 
satisfying their computing or information-processing 
needs; users’ principal concern is that they have the 
ability to send, receive, and process data and informa-
tion reliably and securely and at low cost.
The two main uses of cloud computing for com-
panies and individual users are applications and 
infrastructure. Applications such as corporate e-mail 
systems and powerful on-demand online comput-
ing software programs for individual users, such as 
e-mail, messaging, online document storage, and word 
processing, along with the ability to access YouTube, 
search engines, Wikipedia, Facebook, and so on. The 
infrastructure dimension of cloud computing is most 
important to the companies providing these Inter-
net applications to users or that use Internet-based 
applications to manage their own businesses. These 
companies contract with an application or service 
IT provider in the cloud network infrastructure to 
store and access the software resources and data-
base management services they need to manage their 
in-house value-chain functions or provide Internet 
applications/services to individual users.
In sum, cloud computing is outsourced, pay-
 as-you-go, on-demand, Internet software capabilities 
available to companies for a fee; it is usually free to 
individual users (because companies supplying Internet 
services to individuals get their revenues from online 
advertising). The cloud metaphor is invoked, because, 
in the future, as more and more software services such 
as e-mail, data storage, and business software applica-
tions come to be located in tens of thousands of physi-
cal database centers around the world, the  identity of 
these service providers will be largely unknown to 
users. Today, for example, most individual users of 
the Internet have no idea which IT companies actu-
ally send them the Web pages they request; usually 
the Web sites they visit have contracted with Web site 
hosting and data storage companies to actually supply 
the Web pages their visitors request.
If the idea of cloud computing takes off in the 
future, then even the largest companies may cease 
to operate their own database centers and move 
all their information and computing operations to 
Web-based IT providers, because those companies 
will be able to perform their computing function 
at a signifi cantly lower cost than the company can 
itself. For example, in 2009, IBM announced its own 
cloud computing initiative, called “Blue Cloud.” Blue 
Cloud is intended to show large companies that they 
do not need to own and operate their own database 
centers and maintain physical networks of company-
wide servers. Instead, IBM would provide powerful 
cloud-based server racks and mainframes bundled 
with software that automates, self-manages, and 
maintains the cloud computing network, thus safe-
guarding any company’s database and applications 
and making them available on-demand. IBM’s cloud 
infrastructure will be located around the world in 
huge globally accessible data centers that contain 
hundreds of thousands of servers with the capac-
ity to drive the real-time data streams required for 
applications such as search, social networking, and 
mobile e-commerce. And, IBM claims Blue Cloud 
will save companies money: It will be a cost-effective 
energy-saving solution.
Mobile Data Center Storage Capacity
An idea, which originated in Europe, was to offer 
companies a quick and effi cient way to enlarge and 
upgrade their cluster computing and database center 
capabilities by housing a server rack storage and pro-
cessing solution in a standard storage container—the 
same kind of container hauled on trucks or stacked 
on cargo ships. The fi rst United States server maker 
to announce such a mobile database solution was 

C32  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Sun; in 2006, it launched its “Blackbox” data center 
containing its proprietary Solaris rack server con-
fi guration in a 20-foot shipping container. Its Black-
box would contain a mobile data center that could 
deliver the computing capability of a 9,000-square-
foot physical data center but would only cost about 
one-fi fth of a physical data center. In addition, Sun 
said it would save about 20% on the power costs 
necessary to cool the servers.
However, SGI beat Sun to the punch when it 
announced that its new “Concentro” mobile server 
container would be available for delivery in the spring 
of 2007. Sun did not expect to roll out its fi rst con-
tainer until the summer. SGI’s engineers had used all 
their design capabilities to make the Concentro the 
market leader. SGI’s fi rst self-contained data center 
is based on its custom-designed, high-density server 
racks and data storage housed in a larger 40-by-
20-foot shipping container. Because SGI’s space- 
saving rack servers are half as deep as standard 
servers, it can cram in twice as many individual serv-
ers into a 40-foot container than its competitors—and 
four times as many as Sun because Sun’s  container is 
smaller. Also, SGI’s container design takes advantage 
of its competence in reducing server power consump-
tion. Each server rack is equipped with one large fan 
that allowed its engineers to eliminate the need for 
each individual server to have its own individual 
fan; across the thousands of servers in a Concen-
tro container, this cut the amount of power needed 
to cool the servers by 80% compared to a conven-
tional server design. The immense processing power 
of these Concentro containers allows companies to 
rethink their need for high-cost brick-and-mortar 
data centers, especially given the relatively low oper-
ating costs of SGI containers compared to physical 
data centers. Companies will be able to effi ciently 
operate networks of geographically dispersed server 
containers that allow for a more reliable and secure 
computing solution—one that will not be subject to 
local disasters or Internet or power outages that can 
seriously harm centralized data centers.
SGI’s engineers have worked steadily to increase 
the energy effi ciency of its server containers. In 2008, 
SGI introduced a new advanced class of containers, 
called the ICE Cube™ Modular Data Center. It is 
purely air cooled and does not require chilled water 
from an outside physical data center, which means 
that mobile data centers can be located in any con-
venient low-cost location. The ICE Cube system also 
accepts SGI’s customized rack servers or the fast-
growing market for blade servers. Blade servers are 
stripped-down servers that are designed to slide into 
existing rack servers. Server blades are smaller, more 
cost-effi cient, and consume less power than tradi-
tional servers. Also, blade servers are inherently dif-
ferent from rack servers because they are used for 
more general-purpose computing solutions, such 
as Web hosting and general database management; 
customized rack servers, as noted earlier, are meant 
for specifi c computing applications, where enormous 
amounts of data must be crunched to provide a user-
specifi c solution. However, introducing blade servers 
into its new mobile data center puts SGI in a position 
to offer its customers a broader set of solutions from 
cloud computing to company-wide applications, 
such as ERP systems.
In 2008, SGI announced that it would provide 
the ICE Cube solution—which was claimed to be the 
most energy effi cient on the market—in 20- or 40-foot 
container sizes. Also, it would allow users to choose 
either Intel or AMD microprocessors to power the 
high-performing blade systems. An ICE Cube con-
tainer can hold up to 1,344 dual-socket blades with 
quad-core Intel Xeons or 672 quad-socket, dual-
core AMD Opteron blades—equivalent to an old 
20,000-square-foot bricks-and-mortar database cen-
ter. To try to attract customers quickly, given compe-
tition from Dell, SGI also signed an agreement with 
IBM to allow its proprietary blade servers to be fi tted 
seamlessly into its ICE Cube containers that provide 
the energy-effi cient power and cooling system SGI 
claims is the lowest-cost cluster computing server 
solution on the market.
In 2008, however, IBM announced it was buying 
another server container start-up company to allow 
it to enter this market segment, making it a direct 
competitor to SGI in the mobile blade server market. 
In 2009, IBM also announced that, like Dell, it was 
entering the market for customized servers, which 
would mean it was also going head to head with 
SGI. By 2009, worldwide blade server revenues had 
grown to more than $5 billion despite the recession; 
however, IBM and HP controlled 80% of the market 
between them.
So, despite its advances in developing state-of-
the-art cooling and customizable server solutions, 
SGI was still struggling to compete with its larger 
rivals, including Dell, which has targeted SGI’s 
 customer base with low-priced products. As Mark 

 
Case 2 SGI versus Dell: Competition in Server and Cloud Computing 
C33
Barrenechea commented in 2008, however, “I cer-
tainly don’t see Dell as an innovator; I see them 
more as a price spoiler.” Barrenechea singled out 
Dell because of its increasing strategy to compete 
with SGI by offering customers lower and lower 
prices for servers—that it was increasingly custom-
izing to each individual client’s needs. As a result, 
profi t margins in the “customizable” segment of the 
server market became razor thin. Indeed, Dell has 
been able to use its competence in low-cost supply 
chain management because of its enormous buying 
power to offset SGI’s competitive advantage from 
its unique design skills in making dense, compact, 
energy-effi cient servers.
SGI’s revenues collapsed to $39 million from 
$111 million in the last quarter of 2008 compared to 
2007, and its gross margins went from a positive 
25% to a negative 15%. The company warned that 
lower orders from its two largest customers had 
caused a 21% fall in revenues. However, Barrenechea 
claimed that in the customized server segment of the 
market, price discounting was not a viable long-term 
strategy and that SGI would remain a viable compet-
itor, even if it took two, four, or even eight quarters 
to force Dell to give up its price-cutting policy.
Some analysts thought that Dell might attempt to 
takeover SGI to gain access to its proprietary tech-
nology. However, in December 2008 Dell announced 
it was also entering the mobile data center container 
market with a unique, double-decker server design 
code-named “Humidor.” One Dell container stores 
1,300 servers and their associated storage and net-
working systems; the other container stores all 
the necessary power and cooling devices. Dell has 
adopted this solution, because it can outfi t its twin 
containers with standard hardware and software and 
avoid the need to use proprietary technology such as 
SGI’s. Once again, instead of paying for an expen-
sive physical building, a company can order a data 
center in a container, add power, cooled water, and 
a network connection and upgrade its existing data 
center. Some of Dell’s fi rst containers would go to a 
new Microsoft data center near Chicago. Microsoft 
has been pushing a platform based on its own server 
software, and Dell is the biggest buyer of Microsoft’s 
software. This was a blow to SGI; having also sold 
some of the ICE Cube systems to Microsoft, it is com-
peting directly with Dell for the business of its major 
customers such as Amazon.com and Facebook. Dell 
is ready and willing to fi ght with its smaller rival for 
orders despite slim profi t margins—perhaps to drive 
SGI out of the market.
Another sign that Dell was not letting up on its 
smaller rival came in May 2009 when Dell announced 
it was expanding its range of powerful blade serv-
ers to include a new product aimed at Internet busi-
nesses, those like Amazon and Google that promote 
cloud computing. The new Dell XS11-VX8 consumes 
only about one-tenth of the power of a typical server 
but has the enormous processing capacity that can 
handle the millions of Internet user requests for Web 
pages from Internet-based businesses. This new server 
uses an energy-saving chip from Via Technologies, a 
Taiwanese company that is practically the only other 
maker of the proprietary X86 chips controlled by 
Intel that had licensed them to AMD and VIA Tech-
nologies. Dell’s new server will put to the test SGI’s 
claim to be the greenest, most energy-effi cient custom 
server maker on the market. Despite the recession, 
companies are expected to spend about $100 billion 
in 2009 on data center hardware and software, so 
there is a lot at stake for SGI—and Dell.
The Merger between Rackable Systems 
and Silicon Graphics
In the fi rst quarter of 2009, SGI’s sales fell by 
35% to $44.3 million. Even though the company had 
been forced to reduce its cost structure in 2008, to 
compete with Dell, by lowering its R&D spending 
and laying off employees in R&D and sales and mar-
keting, the company suffered more than a $13 million 
loss. However, this was not as bad as the fourth quar-
ter of 2008 when the recession hit so hard that sales 
fell by 65% to $39 million and the loss was more 
than $18 million. Indeed, SGI sold its fi rst two ICE 
Cube systems in the fi rst quarter of 2009 to Yahoo! 
and Amazon.com. It launched more than 30 differ-
ent customized server platforms based on Intel’s new 
XEON chips.
Despite its losses, Rackable Systems had 
$174 million in cash and decided to use $42 million 
to purchase the failed supercomputer maker Silicon 
Graphics. Analysts wondered what Rackable Systems 
or SGI was getting for its money. Mark  Barrenechea 
said that SGI was obtaining all the equity in SGI’s 
overseas subsidiaries, as well as its U.S. federal sys-
tems business, and all SG’s real estate, core patents, 
cash on hand, inventories of servers and storage 
hardware, and a 5,000-strong global customer list. 

C34  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
These are very important assets to a young com-
pany with no established foreign operations. In May 
2009, a few weeks after the merger, SGI announced 
that its new UK subsidiary (formerly owned by SG) 
would begin selling ICE Cube containers in the 
summer; also, it was currently taking orders from 
European companies, particularly Internet-oriented 
companies, to design its customized server platforms 
to meet their needs.
This appears to be a make-or-break deal for SGI. 
After the merger, SGI had more than 1,200 employ-
ees compared to 270 before, which was down from 
350 in the previous year because SGI was forced to 
lay off employees after its revenues plunged. Never-
theless, SGI announced that the company targets 
more than $500 million in annual sales and gross 
margins of more than 20% by 2010. How will the 
merger help it achieve this?
First, SGI will be able to combine the two main 
product lines of the former companies: servers and 
storage products from the Rackable Systems lineup, 
and storage, visualization, and professional services 
acquired from Silicon Graphics, including its exper-
tise in super computing. Second, SGI argued that by 
combining their skills, the new SGI could make supe-
rior cluster computing systems and be able to solve 
large-scale data problems through a combination of 
hardware, storage, and software solutions. Third, the 
ability to leverage SGI’s new global competence is 
expected to be very important.  Barrenechea claimed 
that on “day one,” SGI would be operational in 
25 countries, with the expertise necessary to deliver 
customized stationary and mobile servers, together 
with the skills necessary to provide customers with 
unique solutions and provide on-site services and 
logistics to provide them with best of breed solutions. 
As Barrenechea commented, “Innovation, exper-
tise, and service are at the core of SGI. We built our 
company by listening to our customers, providing 
unique solutions for the toughest and most demand-
ing technology and business problems, offering mass 
customization, and being fi rst to market with new 
component technology in order for our customers to 
maintain their competitive advantage. This tradition 
will continue.”
The question is, can SGI survive the challenge 
from Dell, and from the other two major server mak-
ers, HP and IBM, that have also developed customiz-
able and mobile server platforms? In the next few 
crucial years, will the new SGI be able to realize the 
value in the business model proposed by its CEO? 
Will it be acquired by a leading company, because 
it has unique and valuable skills and competences? 
Will it simply fall by the wayside and end up in 
bankruptcy itself, and be acquired by some com-
pany that recognized the value in the assets of the 
new SGI? Or will it become a leading server “super-
computer” company that will come to dominate the 
applications, database storage, and processing needs 
of leading Internet companies?

An Industry Is Born
In 1968, Nolan Bushell, the 24-year-old son of a Utah 
cement contractor, graduated from the  University of 
Utah with a degree in engineering.1 Bushnell then 
moved to California, where he worked briefl y in the 
computer graphics division of Ampex. At home, Bush-
nell turned his daughter’s bedroom into a laboratory. 
There, he created a simpler version of Space War, a 
computer game that had been invented in 1962 by 
an MIT graduate student, Steve Russell. Bushnell’s 
version of Russell’s game, which he called Computer 
Space, was made of integrated circuits connected to 
a 19-inch black-and-white television screen. Unlike a 
computer, Bushnell’s invention could do nothing but 
play the game, which meant that, unlike a computer, 
it could be produced cheaply.
Bushnell envisioned video games like his stand-
ing next to pinball machines in arcades. With hopes 
of having his invention put into production, Bushnell 
left Ampex to work for a small pinball company that 
manufactured 1,500 copies of his video game. The 
game never sold, primarily because the player had to 
read a full page of directions before he or she could 
play the game—way too complex for an arcade game. 
Bushnell left the pinball company and with a friend, 
Ted Dabney, put up $500 to start a company that 
would develop a simpler video game. They wanted to 
call the company Syzygy, but the name was already 
taken, so they settled on Atari, a Japanese word that 
was the equivalent of “check in the go.”
In his home laboratory, Bushnell built the sim-
plest game he could think of. People knew the rules 
immediately, and it could be played with one hand. 
The game was modeled on table tennis, and players 
batted a ball back and forth with paddles that could 
be moved up and down sides of a court by twisting 
knobs. He named the game “Pong” after the sonar-
like sound that was emitted every time the ball con-
nected with a paddle.
In the fall of 1972, Bushnell installed his proto-
type for Pong in Andy Capp’s tavern in Sunnyvale, 
California. The only instructions were “avoid miss-
ing the ball for a high score.” In the fi rst week, 
1,200 quarters were deposited in the casserole dish 
that served as a coin box in Bushnell’s prototype. 
Bushnell was ecstatic; his simple game had brought 
in $300 in a week. The pinball machine that stood 
next to it averaged $35 a week.
Lacking the capital to mass-produce the game, 
Bushnell approached established amusement game 
companies, only to be repeatedly shown the door. 
Down but hardly out, Bushnell cut his hair, put 
on a suit, and talked his way into a $50,000 line 
of credit from a local bank. He set up a production 
line in an abandoned roller skating rink and hired 
people to assemble machines while Led Zeppelin 
and the Rolling Stones played at full volume over 
the speaker system of the rink. Among his fi rst batch 
of employees was a skinny 17-year-old named Steve 
Jobs, who would later found a few companies of his 
own, including Apple Computer, NeXT, and Pixar. 
Like others, Jobs had been attracted by a classifi ed 
ad that read “Have Fun and Make Money.”
In no time at all, Bushnell was selling all the 
machines that his small staff could make—about 
This case was prepared by Charles W. L. Hill, the University of Washington. This case is intended to be used as a basis for class discussion 
rather than as an illustration of either effective or ineffective handling of the situation. Reprinted by permission of Charles W. L. Hill.
The Home Video Game Industry: 
Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii
C35
3

C36  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
10 per day; to grow, however, he needed additional 
capital. The ambience at the rink, with its mix of rock 
music and marijuana fumes, put off most potential 
investors, but Don Valentine, one of the country’s 
most astute and credible venture capitalists, was 
impressed with the growth story. Armed with 
Valentine’s money, Atari began to increase produc-
tion and expand its range of games. New games 
included Tank and Breakout; the latter was designed 
by Jobs and a friend of his, Steve Wozniak, who had 
left HP to work at Atari.
By 1974, 100,000 Pong-like games were sold 
worldwide. Although Atari manufactured only 10% 
of the games, the company still made $3.2 million 
that year. With the Pong clones coming on strong, 
Bushnell decided to make a Pong system for the 
home. In fact, Magnavox had been marketing a 
similar game for the home since 1972, although 
sales had been modest.2 Bushnell’s team managed 
to compress Atari’s coin-operated Pong game down 
to a few inexpensive circuits that were contained in 
the game console. Atari’s Pong had a sharper pic-
ture and more sensitive controllers than Magnavox’s 
machine. It also cost less. Bushnell then went on a 
road show, demonstrating Pong to toy buyers, but 
he received an indifferent response and no sales. 
A dejected Bushnell returned to Atari with no idea 
of what to do next. Then the buyer for the sport-
ing goods department at Sears came to see Bushnell, 
reviewed the machine, and offered to buy every home 
Pong game Atari could make. With Sears’s backing, 
Bushnell boosted production. Sears ran a major tele-
vision ad campaign to sell home Pong, and Atari’s 
sales soared, hitting $450 million in 1975. The home 
video game had arrived.
Boom and Bust
Nothing attracts competitors like success, and by 
1976 about 20 different companies were crowd-
ing into the home video game market, including 
National Semiconductor, RCA, Coleco, and Fair-
child. Recognizing the limitations of existing home 
video game designs, in 1976, Fairchild came out with 
a home video game system capable of playing mul-
tiple games. The Fairchild system consisted of three 
components—a console, controllers, and cartridges. 
The console was a small computer optimized for 
graphics processing capabilities. It was designed to 
receive information from the controllers, process it, 
and send signals to a television monitor. The control-
lers were handheld devices used to direct on-screen 
action. The cartridges contained chips encoding the 
instructions for a game. The cartridges were designed 
to be inserted into the console.
In 1976, Bushnell sold Atari to Warner Com-
munications for $28 million. Bushnell stayed on to 
run Atari. Backed by Warner’s capital, in 1977, Atari 
developed and brought out its own cartridge-based 
system, the Atari 2600. The 2600 system was sold 
for $200, and associated cartridges retailed for 
$25 to $35. Sales surged during the 1977 Christmas 
season. However, a lack of manufacturing capac-
ity on the part of market-leader Atari and a very 
cautious approach to inventory by Fairchild led to 
shortages and kept sales signifi cantly below what 
they could have been. Fairchild’s cautious approach 
was the result of prior experience in consumer elec-
tronics. A year earlier, it had increased demand for 
its digital watches, only to accumulate a buildup of 
excess inventory that had caused the company to 
take a $24.5 million write-off.3
After the 1977 Christmas season, Atari claimed 
to have sold about 400,000 units of the 2600 VCA, 
about 50% of all cartridge-based systems in 
American homes. Atari had also earned more than 
$100 million in sales of game cartridges. By this point, 
 second-place Fairchild sold about 250,000 units of 
its system. Cartridge sales for the year totaled about 
1.2 million units, with an average selling price of 
about $20. Fresh from this success and fortifi ed by 
market forecasts predicting sales of 33 million car-
tridges and an installed base of 16 million machines 
by 1980, Bushnell committed Atari to manufactur-
ing 1 million units of the 2600 for the 1978 Christ-
mas season. Atari estimated that total demand would 
reach 2 million units. Bushnell was also encouraged 
by signals from Fairchild that it would again be lim-
iting production to approximately 200,000 units. At 
this point, Atari had a library of nine games, while  
Fairchild had 17 games.4
Atari was not the only company to be excited by 
the growth forecasts. In 1978, a host of other com-
panies, including Coleco, National Semiconductor, 
Magnavox, General Instrument, and a dozen other 
companies, entered the market with incompatible 
cartridge-based home systems. The multitude of 
choices did not seem to entice consumers, however, 

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C37
and the 1978 Christmas season brought unexpect-
edly low sales. Only Atari and Coleco survived an 
industry shakeout. Atari lost Bushnell, who was 
ousted by Warner executives. (Bushnell went on to 
start Chuck E. Cheese Pizza Time Theater, a restau-
rant chain that had 278 outlets by 1981.) Bushnell 
later stated that part of the problem was a disagree-
ment over strategy. Bushnell wanted Atari to price 
the 2600 at cost and make money on sales of soft-
ware; Warner wanted to continue making profi ts on 
hardware sales.5
Several important developments occurred in 
1979. First, several game producers and program-
mers defected from Atari to set up their own fi rm, 
Activision, and to make games compatible with the 
Atari 2600. Their success encouraged others to fol-
low suit. Second, Coleco developed an expansion 
module that allowed its machine to play Atari games. 
Atari and Mattel (who entered the market in 1979) 
did likewise. Third, the year 1979 saw the introduc-
tion of three new games to the home market—Space 
Invaders, Asteroids, and Pac Man. All three were 
adapted from popular arcade games and all three 
helped drive demand for players.
Demand recovered strongly in late 1979 and kept 
growing for the next three years. In 1981, United 
States sales of home video games and cartridges hit 
$1 billion. In 1982, they surged to $3 billion, with 
Atari accounting for half of this amount. It seemed 
as if Atari could do no wrong; the 2600 was every-
where. About 20 million units were sold, and by late 
1982, a large number of independent companies, 
including Activision, Imagic, and Epyx, were now 
producing hundreds of games for the 2600. Second-
place Coleco was also doing well, partly because of 
a popular arcade game, Donkey Kong, which it had 
licensed from a Japanese company called Nintendo.
Atari was also in contact with Nintendo. In 
1982, the company very nearly licensed the rights to 
 Nintendo’s Famicom, a cartridge-based video game 
system machine that was a big hit in Japan. Atari’s 
successor to the 2600, the 5200, was not selling well, 
and the Famicom seemed like a good substitute. 
The negotiations broke down, however, when Atari 
discovered that Nintendo had extended its Donkey 
Kong license to Coleco. This allowed Coleco to port a 
version of the game to its home computer, which was 
a direct competitor to Atari’s 800 home computer.6
After a strong 1982 season, the industry hoped for 
continued growth in 1983. Then the bottom dropped 
out of the market. Sales of home video games plunged 
to $100 million. Atari lost $500  million in the fi rst 
nine months of the year, causing the stock of parent 
company Warner Communications to drop by half. 
Part of the blame for the collapse was laid at the feet 
of an enormous inventory overhang of unsold games. 
About 15 to 20 million surplus game cartridges were 
left over from the 1982 Christmas season (in 1981, 
there were none). On top of this, approximately 
500 new games hit the market in 1993. The average 
price of a cartridge plunged from $30 in 1979 to 
$16 in 1982 and then to $4 in 1983. As sales slowed, 
retailers cut back on the shelf space allocated to video 
games. It proved diffi cult for new games to make a 
splash in a crowded market. Atari had to dispose of 
6 million ET: The Extraterrestrial games. Meanwhile, 
big hits from previous years, such as Pac Man, were 
bundled with game players and given away free to 
try to encourage system sales.7
Surveying the rubble, commentators claimed that 
the video game industry was dead. The era of dedi-
cated game machines was over, they claimed. Per-
sonal computers were taking their place.8 It seemed 
to be true. Mattel sold off its game business, Fairchild 
moved on to other things, Coleco folded, and 
Warner decided to break up Atari and sell its constit-
uent pieces—at least, those pieces for which it could 
fi nd a buyer. No one in America seemed to want to 
have anything to do with the home video game busi-
ness; no one, that is, except for Minoru Arakawa, 
the head of Nintendo’s United States subsidiary, 
Nintendo of America (NOA). Picking through the 
rubble of the industry, Arakawa noticed that there 
were people who still packed video arcades, bring-
ing in $7 billion a year, more money than the entire 
movie industry. Perhaps it was not a lack of interest 
in home video games that had killed the industry. 
Perhaps it was bad business practice.
The Nintendo Monopoly
Nintendo was a century-old Japanese company that 
had built up a profi table business making playing 
cards before diversifying into the video game busi-
ness. Based in Kyoto and still run by the founding 
Yamauchi family, the company started to diversify 
into the video game business in the late 1970s. The 

C38  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
fi rst step was to license video game technology from 
Magnavox. In 1977, Nintendo introduced a home 
video game system in Japan based on this technology 
that played a variation of Pong. In 1978, the com-
pany began to sell coin-operated video games. It had 
its fi rst hit with Donkey Kong, designed by Sigeru 
Miyamoto.
The Famicom
In the early 1980s, the company’s boss, Hiroshi 
Yamauchi, decided that Nintendo had to develop its 
own video game machine. He pushed the company’s 
engineers to develop a machine that combined supe-
rior graphics-processing capabilities and low cost. 
Yamauchi wanted a machine that could sell for $75, 
less than half the price of competing machines at the 
time. He dubbed the machine the Family Computer, 
or Famicom. The machine that his engineers designed 
was based on the controller, console, and plug-in 
cartridge format pioneered by Fairchild. It contained 
two custom chips—an 8-bit central processing unit 
and a graphics-processing unit. Both chips had been 
scaled down to perform only essential functions. 
A 16-bit processor was available at the time, but to 
keep costs down, Yamauchi refused to use it.
Nintendo approached Ricoh, the electronics giant, 
which had spare semiconductor capacity. Employees 
at Ricoh said that the chips had to cost no more that 
2,000 yen. Ricoh thought that the 2,000-yen price 
point was absurd. Yamauchi’s response was to guar-
antee Ricoh a 3-million-chip order within two years. 
Since the leading companies in Japan were selling, at 
most, 30,000 video games per year at the time, many 
within the company viewed this as an outrageous 
commitment, but Ricoh went for it.9
Another feature of the machine was its 
 memory—2,000 bytes of random access memory 
(RAM), compared to the 256 bytes of RAM in 
the Atari machine. The result was a machine with 
superior graphics-processing capabilities and faster 
action that could handle far more complex games 
than Atari games. Nintendo’s engineers also built a 
new set of chips into the game cartridges. In addi-
tion to chips that held the game program, Nintendo 
developed memory map controller (MMC) chips 
that took over some of the graphics-processing 
work from the chips in the console and enabled 
the system to handle more complex games. With 
the addition of the MMC chips, the potential for 
more- sophisticated and complex games had arrived. 
Over time, Nintendo’s engineers developed more 
powerful MMC chips, enabling the basic 8-bit sys-
tem to do things that originally seemed out of reach. 
The engineers also fi gured out a way to include a 
battery backup system in cartridges that allowed 
some games to store information  independently—to 
keep track of where a player had left off or track 
high scores.
The Games
Yamauchi recognized that great hardware would not 
sell itself. The key to the market, he reasoned, was 
great games. Yamauchi had instructed the engineers, 
as they were developing the hardware, to make sure 
that “it was appreciated by software engineers.” 
Nintendo decided that it would become a haven for 
game designers. “An ordinary man,” Yamauchi said, 
“cannot develop good games no matter how hard he 
tries. A handful of people in this world can develop 
games that everyone wants. Those are the people we 
want at Nintendo.”10
Yamauchi had an advantage in the person of 
Sigeru Miyamoto. Miyamoto had joined Nintendo at 
the age of 24. Yamauchi had hired Miyamoto, a grad-
uate of Kanazawa Munici College of Industrial Arts, 
as a favor to his father and an old friend, although he 
had little idea what he would do with an artist. For 
three years, Miyamoto worked as  Nintendo’s staff 
artist. Then in 1980, Yamauchi called Miyamoto 
into his offi ce. Nintendo had started selling coin-
operated video games, but one of the new games, 
Radarscope, was a disaster. Could Miyamoto come 
up with a new game? Miyamoto was delighted. He 
had always spent a lot of time drawing cartoons, and 
as a student, he had played video games constantly. 
Miyamoto believed that video games could be used 
to bring cartoons to life.11
The game Miyamoto developed was nothing short 
of a revelation. At a time when most coin- operated 
video games lacked characters or depth, Miyamoto 
created a game around a story that had both. Most 
games involved battles with space invaders or heroes 
shooting lasers at aliens; Miyamoto’s game did nei-
ther. Based loosely on Beauty and the Beast and King 
Kong, Miyamoto’s game involved a pet ape who runs 
off with his master’s beautiful girlfriend. His master 
is an ordinary carpenter called Mario, who has a bul-
bous nose, a bushy mustache, a pair of large pathetic 

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C39
eyes, and a red cap (which Miyamoto added because 
he was not good at hairstyles). He does not carry a 
laser gun. The ape runs off with the girlfriend to get 
back at his master, who was not especially nice to the 
beast. The man, of course, has to get his girlfriend 
back by running up ramps, climbing ladders, jump-
ing off elevators, and the like, while the ape throws 
objects at the hapless carpenter. Since the main char-
acter is an ape, Miyamoto called him Kong; because 
the main character is as stubborn as a donkey, he 
called the game Donkey Kong.
Released in 1981, Donkey Kong was a sensation 
in the world of coin-operated video arcades and a 
smash hit for Nintendo. In 1984, Yamauchi again 
summoned Miyamoto to his offi ce. He needed more 
games, this time for Famicom. Miyamoto was made 
the head of a new research and development (R&D) 
group and told to come up with the most imagina-
tive video games ever.
Miyamoto began with Mario from Donkey Kong. 
A colleague had told him that Mario looked more like 
a plumber than a carpenter, so a plumber he became. 
Miyamoto gave Mario a brother, Luigi, who was as 
tall and thin as Mario was short and fat. They became 
the Super Mario Brothers. Since plumbers spend 
their time working on pipes, large green sewer pipes 
became obstacles and doorways into secret worlds. 
Mario and Luigi’s task was to search for the captive 
Princess Toadstool. Mario and Luigi are endearing 
bumblers, unequal to their tasks yet surviving. They 
shoot, squash, or evade their enemies—a potpourri 
of inventions that include fl ying turtles and stinging 
fi sh, man-eating fl owers and fi re-breathing dragons—
while they collect gold coins, blow air bubbles, and 
climb vines into smiling clouds.12
Super Mario Brothers was introduced in 1985. 
For Miyamoto, this was just the beginning. Between 
1985 and 1991, Miyamoto produced eight Mario 
games. About 60 to 70 million were sold world-
wide, making Miyamoto the most successful game 
designer in the world. After adapting Donkey Kong 
for Famicom, he also went on to create other top-
selling games, including another classic, The Legend 
of Zelda. While Miyamoto drew freely from folk-
lore, literature, and pop culture, the main source 
for his ideas was his own experience. The memory 
of being lost among a maze of sliding doors in his 
family’s home was re-created in the labyrinths of the 
Zelda games. The dog that attacked him when he 
was a child attacks Mario in Super Mario. As a child, 
Miyamoto had once climbed a tree to catch a view of 
far-off mountains and had become stuck. Mario gets 
himself in a similar fi x. Once Miyamoto went hiking 
without a map and was surprised to stumble across a 
lake. In the Legend of Zelda, part of the adventure is 
in walking into new places without a map and being 
confronted by surprises.
Nintendo in Japan
Nintendo introduced Famicom into the Japanese 
market in May 1983. Famicom was priced at $100, 
more than Yamauchi wanted, but signifi cantly less 
than the products of competitors. When he intro-
duced the machine, Yamauchi urged retailers to forgo 
profi ts on the hardware because it was just a tool 
to sell software, and that is where they would make 
their money. Backed by an extensive advertising cam-
paign, 500,000 units of Famicom were sold in the 
fi rst two months. Within a year, the fi gure stood at 
1 million, and sales were still expanding rapidly. With 
the hardware quickly fi nding its way into Japanese 
homes, Nintendo was besieged with calls from des-
perate retailers frantically demanding more games.
At this point, Yamauchi told Miyamoto to come 
up with the most imaginative games ever. However, 
Yamauchi also realized that Nintendo alone could 
not satisfy the growing thirst for new games, so he 
initiated a licensing program. To become a Nintendo 
licensee, companies had to agree to an unprecedented 
series of restrictions. Licensees could issue only fi ve 
Nintendo games per year, and they could not write 
those titles for other platforms. The licensing fee was 
set at 20% of the wholesale price of each cartridge 
sold (game cartridges wholesaled for around $30). It 
typically cost $500,000 to develop a game and took 
around six months. Nintendo insisted that games not 
contain any excessively violent or sexually sugges-
tive material and that they review every game before 
allowing it to be produced.13
Despite these restrictions, six companies  (Bandai, 
Capcom, Konami, Namco, Taito, and Hudson) 
agreed to become Nintendo licensees, not least 
because millions of customers were now clamoring 
for games. Bandai was Japan’s largest toy company. 
The others already made either coin-operated video 
games or computer software games. Because of these 
licensing agreements, they saw their sales and earn-
ings surge. For example, Konami’s earnings went 
from $10  million in 1987 to $300 million in 1991.

C40  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
After the six licensees began selling games, 
reports of defective games began to reach Yamauchi. 
The original six licensees were allowed to manufac-
ture their own game cartridges. Realizing that he had 
given away the ability to control the quality of the 
cartridges, Yamauchi decided to change the contract 
for future licensees. Future licensees were required 
to submit all manufacturing orders for cartridges to 
Nintendo. Nintendo charged licensees $14 per car-
tridge, required that they place a minimum order for 
10,000 units (later the minimum order was raised to 
30,000), and insisted on cash payment in full when 
the order was placed. Nintendo outsourced all man-
ufacturing to other companies, using the volume of 
its orders to get rock bottom prices. The cartridges 
were estimated to cost Nintendo between $6 and 
$8 each. The licensees then picked up the cartridges 
from Nintendo’s loading dock and were responsible 
for distribution. In 1985, there were 17 licensees. By 
1987, there were 50. By this point, 90% of the home 
video game systems sold in Japan were Nintendo 
systems.
Nintendo in America
In 1980, Nintendo established a subsidiary in  America 
to sell its coin-operated video games. Yamauchi’s 
American-educated son-in-law, Minoru Arakawa, 
headed the subsidiary. All of the other essential 
employees were Americans, including Ron Judy and 
Al Stone. For its fi rst two years, Nintendo of America 
(NOA), based originally in Seattle, struggled to sell 
second-rate games such as Radarscope. The subsid-
iary seemed on the brink of closing. NOA could not 
even make the rent payment on the warehouse. Then 
they received a large shipment from Japan: 
2,000 units of a new coin-operated video game. 
Opening the box, they discovered Donkey Kong. 
After playing the game briefl y, Judy proclaimed it 
a disaster. Stone walked out of the building, declar-
ing that “It’s over.”14 The managers were appalled. 
They could not imagine a game less likely to sell in 
video arcades. The only promising sign was that a 
20-year employee, Howard Philips, rapidly became 
enthralled with the machine.
Arakawa, however, knew he had little choice but 
to try to sell the machine. Judy persuaded the owner 
of the Spot Tavern near Nintendo’s offi ce to take 
one of the machines on a trial basis. After one night, 
Judy discovered $30 in the coin box, a phenomenal 
amount. The next night there was $35, and $36 the 
night after that. NOA had a hit on its hands.
By the end of 1982, NOA had sold more than 
60,000 copies of Donkey Kong and had booked sales 
in excess of $100 million. The subsidiary had outgrown 
its Seattle location. They moved to a new site in 
Redmond, a Seattle suburb, where they located next to 
a small but fast-growing software company run by an 
old school acquaintance of Howard Philips, Bill Gates.
By 1984, NOA was riding a wave of success in 
the coin-operated video game market. Arakawa, 
however, was interested in the possibilities of sell-
ing Nintendo’s new Famicom system in the United 
States. Throughout 1984, Arakawa, Judy, and Stone 
met with numerous toy and department store rep-
resentatives to discuss the possibilities, only to be 
repeatedly rebuffed. Still smarting from the 1983 
debacle, the representatives wanted nothing to do 
with the home video game business. They also met 
with former managers from Atari and Coleco to 
gain their insights. The most common response they 
received was that the market collapsed because the 
last generation of games were awful.
Arakawa and his team decided that if they were 
going to sell Famicom in the United States, they would 
have to fi nd a new distribution channel. The obvi-
ous choice was consumer electronics stores. Thus, 
Arakawa asked the R&D team in Kyoto to rede-
sign Famicom for the United States market so that it 
looked less like a toy (Famicom was encased in red 
and white plastic), and more like a consumer elec-
tronics device. The redesigned machine was renamed 
the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES).
Arakawa’s big fear was that illegal, low-quality 
Taiwanese games would fl ood the United States 
market if NES was successful. To stop counterfeit 
games from being played on NES, Arakawa asked 
Nintendo’s Japanese engineers to design a security 
system into the U.S. version of Famicom so that 
only  Nintendo-approved games could be played on 
NES. The Japanese engineers responded by design-
ing a security chip that was embedded in the game 
cartridges. NES would not work unless the security 
chips in the cartridges unlocked, or shook hands 
with, a chip in NES. Since the code embedded in the 
security chip was proprietary, the implication of this 
system was that no one could manufacture games for 
NES without Nintendo’s specifi c approval.
To overcome the skepticism and reluctance of 
retailers to stock a home video game system, Arakawa 

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C41
decided in late 1985 to make an extraordinary com-
mitment. Nintendo would stock stores and set up 
displays and windows. Retailers would not have to 
pay for anything they stocked for 90 days. After that, 
retailers could pay Nintendo for what they sold and 
return the rest. NES was bundled with Nintendo’s 
best-selling game in Japan, Super Mario Brothers. It 
was essentially a risk-free proposition for retailers, 
but even with this, most were skeptical. Ultimately, 
thirty Nintendo personnel descended on the New 
York area. Referred to as the Nintendo SWAT team, 
they persuaded some stores to stock NES after an 
extraordinary blitz that involved 18-hour days. To 
support the New York product launch, Nintendo 
also committed itself to a $5 million advertising 
campaign aimed at the 7- to 14-year-old boys who 
seemed to be Nintendo’s likely core audience.
By December 1985, between 500 and 600 stores 
in the New York area were stocking Nintendo sys-
tems. Sales were moderate, about half of the 
100,000 NES machines shipped from Japan were 
sold, but it was enough to justify going forward. The 
SWAT team moved fi rst to Los Angeles, then to 
Chicago, then to Dallas. As in New York, sales started at 
a moderate pace, but by late 1986 they started to accel-
erate rapidly, and Nintendo went national with NES.
In 1986, around 1 million NES units were sold 
in the United States. In 1987, the fi gure increased to 
3 million. In 1988, it jumped to over 7 million. In 
the same year, 33 million game cartridges were sold. 
Nintendo mania had arrived in the United States. 
To expand the supply of games, Nintendo licensed 
the rights to produce up to fi ve games per year to 
31 American software companies. Nintendo contin-
ued to use a restrictive licensing agreement that gave 
it exclusive rights to any games, required licensees to 
place their orders through Nintendo, and insisted on 
a 30,000-unit minimum order.15
By 1990, the home video game market was 
worth $5 billion worldwide. Nintendo dominated 
the industry, with a 90% share of the market for 
game  equipment. The parent company was, by some 
 measures, now the most profi table company in Japan. 
By 1992, it was netting over $1 billion in gross profi t 
 annually, or more than $1.5 million for each employee 
in Japan. The company’s stock market value exceeded 
that of Sony, Japan’s premier consumer electronics 
fi rm. Indeed, the company’s net profi t exceeded that of 
all the American movie studios combined.  Nintendo 
games, it seemed, were bigger than the movies.
As of 1991, there were more than 100 licens-
ees for Nintendo, and more than 450 titles were 
available for NES. In the United States, Nintendo 
products were distributed through toy stores (30% 
of volume), mass merchandisers (40% of volume), 
and department stores (10% of volume). Nintendo 
tightly controlled the number of game titles and 
games that could be sold, quickly withdrawing titles 
as soon as interest appeared to decline. In 1988, 
retailers requested 110 million cartridges from Nin-
tendo. Market surveys suggested that perhaps 45 
million could have been sold, but Nintendo allowed 
only 33 million to be shipped.16 Nintendo claimed 
that the shortage of games was in part due to a 
worldwide shortage of semiconductor chips.
Several companies had tried to reverse-engineer 
the code embedded in Nintendo’s security chip, 
which competitors characterized as a lockout chip. 
Nintendo successfully sued them. The most notable 
was Atari Games, one of the successors of the origi-
nal Atari, which in 1987 sued Nintendo of America 
for anticompetitive behavior. Atari claimed that the 
purpose of the security chip was to monopolize the 
market. At the same time, Atari announced that it 
had found a way around Nintendo’s security chip 
and would begin to sell unlicensed games.17 NOA 
responded with a countersuit. In a March 1991 rul-
ing, Atari was found to have obtained Nintendo’s 
security code illegally and was ordered to stop selling 
NES-compatible games. However, Nintendo did not 
always have it all its own way. In 1990, under pres-
sure from Congress, the Department of Justice, and 
several lawsuits, Nintendo rescinded its exclusivity 
requirements, freeing up developers to write games 
for other platforms. However, developers faced a real 
problem: what platform could they write for?
Sega’s Sonic Boom
Back in 1954, David Rosen, a 20-year-old American, 
left the U.S. Air Force after a tour of duty in Tokyo.18 
Rosen had noticed that Japanese people needed lots 
of photographs for ID cards, but local photo studios 
were slow and expensive. He formed a company, 
Rosen Enterprises, and went into the  photo-booth 
business, which was a big success. By 1957, Rosen 
had established a successful nationwide chain. At 

C42  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
this point, the Japanese economy was booming, 
so Rosen decided it was time to get into another 
 business—entertainment. As his vehicle, he chose 
arcade games, which were unknown in Japan at the 
time. He picked up used games on the cheap from 
America and set up arcades in the same Japanese 
department stores and theaters that typically housed 
his photo booths. Within a few years, Rosen had 
200 arcades nationwide. His only competition came 
from another American-owned fi rm, Service Games 
(SeGa), whose original business was jukeboxes and 
fruit machines.
By the early 1960s, the Japanese arcade market 
had caught up with the United States market. The 
problem was that game makers had run out of excit-
ing new games to offer. Rosen decided that he would 
have to get into the business of designing and manu-
facturing games, but to do that he needed manufac-
turing facilities. SeGa manufactured its own games, 
so in 1965 Rosen approached the company and sug-
gested a merger. The result was Sega Enterprise, a 
Japanese company with Rosen as its CEO.
Rosen designed Sega’s fi rst game, Periscope, 
in which the objective was to sink chain-mounted 
cardboard ships by fi ring torpedoes, represented by 
lines of colored lights. Periscope was a big success 
not only in Japan but also in the United States and 
Europe. It allowed Sega to build up a respectable 
export business. Over the years, the company contin-
ued to invest heavily in game development, always 
using the latest electronic technology.
Gulf and Western (G&W), a United States con-
glomerate, acquired Sega in 1969, with Rosen running 
the subsidiary. In 1975, Gulf and Western (G&W) took 
Sega public in the United States but kept Sega Japan as 
a G&W subsidiary. Hayao Nakayama, a former Sega 
distributor, was drafted as president. In the early 1980s, 
Nakayama pushed G&W to invest more in Sega Japan 
so that the company could enter the then-booming 
home video game market. When G&W refused, 
Nakayama suggested a management buyout. G&W 
agreed, and in 1984, for the price of just $38 million, 
Sega became a Japanese company once more. (Sega’s 
Japanese revenues were about $700 million, but by 
now the company was barely profi table.)
Sega was caught off guard by the huge success of 
Nintendo’s Famicom. Although it released its own 
8-bit system in 1986, the machine never commanded 
more than 5% of the Japanese market. Nakayama, 
however, was not about to give up. From years in 
the arcade business, he understood that great games 
drove sales. Nevertheless, he also understood that 
more powerful technology gave game developers the 
tools to develop more appealing games. This phi-
losophy underlay Nakayama’s decision to develop a 
16-bit game system, Genesis.
Sega took the design of its 16-bit arcade machine 
and adapted it for Genesis. Compared to Nintendo’s 
8-bit machine, the 16-bit machine featured an array 
of superior technological features, including high-
defi nition graphics and animation, a full spectrum of 
colors, two independent scrolling backgrounds that 
created an impressive depth of fi eld, and near CD 
quality sound. The design strategy also made it easy 
to port Sega’s catalog of arcade hits to Genesis.
Genesis was launched in Japan in 1989 and in 
the United States in 1990. In the United States, the 
machine was priced at $199. The company hoped 
that sales would be boosted by the popularity of its 
arcade games, such as the graphically violent Altered 
Beast. Sega also licensed other companies to develop 
games for the Genesis platform. In an effort to recruit 
licensees, Sega asked for lower royalty rates than 
Nintendo, and it gave licensees the right to manufac-
ture their own cartridges. Independent game devel-
opers were slow to climb on board, however, and the 
$200 price tag for the player held back sales.
One of the fi rst independent game developers to 
sign up with Sega was Electronic Arts (EA). Estab-
lished by Trip Hawkins, EA had focused on designing 
games for personal computers and consequently had 
missed the Nintendo 8-bit era. Now Hawkins was 
determined to get a presence in the home video game 
market, and aligning his  company’s wagon with Sega 
seemed to be the best option. The Nintendo playing 
fi eld was already crowded, and Sega offered a far 
less restrictive licensing deal than Nintendo. EA sub-
sequently wrote several popular games for Genesis, 
including John Madden football and several gory 
combat games.19
Nintendo had not been ignoring the potential 
of the 16-bit system. Nintendo’s own 16-bit system, 
Super NES, was ready for market introduction in 
1989—at the same time as Sega’s Genesis. Nintendo 
introduced Super NES in Japan in 1990, where it 
quickly established a strong market presence and 
beat Sega’s Genesis. In the United States, however, 
the company decided to hold back longer to reap 
the full benefi ts of the dominance it enjoyed with the 
8-bit NES system. Yamauchi was also worried about 

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C43
the lack of backward compatibility between Ninten-
do’s 8-bit and 16-bit systems. (The company had tried 
to make the 16-bit system so that it could play 8-bit 
games but concluded that the cost of doing so was 
prohibitive.) These concerns may have led the com-
pany to delay market introduction until the 8-bit mar-
ket was saturated.
Meanwhile, in the United States, the Sega band-
wagon was beginning to gain momentum. One devel-
opment that gave Genesis a push was the introduction 
of a new Sega game, Sonic the Hedgehog. Developed 
by an independent team that was contracted to Sega, 
the game featured a cute hedgehog that impatiently 
tapped his paw when the player took too long to 
act. Impatience was Sonic’s central feature—he had 
places to go—and quickly. He zipped along, collect-
ing brass rings when he could fi nd them, before roll-
ing into a ball and fl ying down slides with loops and 
underground tunnels. Sonic was Sega’s Mario.
In mid-1991, in an attempt to jump-start slow 
sales, Tom Kalinske, head of Sega’s American sub-
sidiary, decided to bundle Sonic the Hedgehog with 
the game player. He also reduced the price for the 
bundled unit to $150, and he relaunched the system 
with an aggressive advertising campaign aimed at 
teenagers. The campaign was built around the slo-
gan “Genesis does what Nintendon’t.” The shift in 
strategy worked, and sales accelerated sharply.
Sega’s success prompted Nintendo to launch 
its own 16-bit system. Nintendo’s Super NES was 
introduced at $200. However, Sega now had a two-
year head start in games. By the end of 1991, about 
125 game titles were available for Genesis, compared 
to 25 for Super NES. In May 1992, Nintendo reduced 
the price of Super NES to $150. At this time Sega 
was claiming a 63% share of the 16-bit market in the 
United States, and Nintendo claimed a 60% share. 
By now, Sega was cool. It began to take more chances 
with mass media-defi ned morality. When Acclaim 
Entertainment released its bloody Mortal Kombat 
game in September 1992, the Sega version let players 
rip off heads and tear out hearts. Refl ecting Ninten-
do’s image of their core market, its version was sani-
tized. The Sega version outsold Nintendo’s two to 
one.20 Therefore, the momentum continued to run in 
Sega’s favor. By January 1993, there were 320 titles 
available for Sega Genesis and 130 for Super NES. 
In early 1994, independent estimates suggested that 
Sega had 60% of the United States market and Nin-
tendo had 40%, fi gures that Nintendo disputed.
3DO
Trip Hawkins, whose fi rst big success was EA, 
founded 3DO in 1991.21 Hawkins’s vision for 3DO 
was to shift the home video game business away 
from the existing cartridge-based format and toward 
a CD-ROM-based platform. The original partners 
in 3DO were EA,  Matsushita, Time Warner, AT&T, 
and the venture capital fi rm Kleiner Perkins. Collec-
tively, they invested more than $17 million in 3DO, 
making it the richest start-up in the history of the 
home video game industry. 3DO went public in May 
1993 at $15 per share. By October of that year, the 
stock had risen to $48 per share, making 3DO worth 
$1 billion—not bad for a company that had yet to 
generate a single dollar in revenues.
The basis for 3DO’s $1 billion market cap was a 
patented computer system architecture and a copy-
righted operating system that allowed for much richer 
graphics and audio capabilities. The system was built 
around a 32-bit reduced instruction set computing 
(RISC)  microprocessor and proprietary graphics pro-
cessor chips. Instead of a cartridge, the 3DO system 
stored games on a  CD-ROM that was capable of hold-
ing up to 600 megabytes of content, sharply up from the 
10 megabytes of content found in the typical game car-
tridge of the time. The slower access time of a  CD-ROM 
compared to a cartridge was alleviated somewhat by 
the use of a  double-speed CD-ROM drive.22
The belief at 3DO—a belief apparently shared by 
many investors—was that the superior storage and 
graphics-processing capabilities of the 3DO system 
would prove very attractive to game developers, 
allowing them to be far more creative. In turn, better 
games would attract customers away from Nintendo 
and Sega. Developing games that used the capabili-
ties of a CD-ROM system altered the economics of 
game development. Estimates suggested that it would 
cost approximately $2 million to produce a game for 
the 3DO system and could take as long as 24 months 
to develop. However, at $2 per disc, a CD-ROM cost 
substantially less to produce than a cartridge.
The centerpiece of 3DO’s strategy was to license 
its hardware technology for free. Game developers 
paid a royalty of $3 per disc for access to the 3DO 
operating code. Discs typically retailed for $40 each.
Matsushita introduced the fi rst 3DO machine 
into the United States market in October 1993. Priced 
at $700, the machine was sold through  electronic 
retailers that carried Panasonic high-end electronics 

C44  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
products. Sega’s Tom Kalinsky noted, “It’s a noble 
effort. Some people will buy 3DO, and they’ll have a 
wonderful experience. It’s impressive, but it’s a niche. 
We’ve done the research. It does not become a large 
market until you go below $500. At $300, it starts 
to get interesting. We make no money on hardware. 
It’s a cutthroat business. I hope Matsushita under-
stands that.”23 CD-ROM discs for the 3DO machine 
retailed for about $75. The machine came bundled 
with Crash ‘n’ Burn, a high-speed combat racing game. 
However, only 18 3DO titles were available by the 
crucial Christmas period, although reports suggested 
that 150 titles were under development.24
Sales of the hardware were slow, reaching only 
30,000 by January 1994.25 In the same month, AT&T 
and Sanyo both announced that they would begin 
to manufacture the 3DO machine. In March, faced 
with continuing sluggish sales, 3DO announced that 
it would give hardware manufacturers two shares 
of 3DO stock for every unit sold at or below a cer-
tain retail price. Matsushita dropped the price of its 
machine to $500. About the same time, Toshiba, LG, 
and Samsung all announced that they would start to 
produce 3DO machines.
By June 1994, cumulative sales of 3DO machines 
in the United States stood at 40,000 units. Matsushita 
announced plans to expand distribution beyond the cur-
rent 3,500 outlets to include the toy and mass merchan-
dise channels. Hawkins and his partners announced 
that they would invest another $37 million in 3DO. By 
July, there were 750 3DO software licensees, but only 
40 titles were available for the format. Despite these 
moves, sales continued at a very sluggish pace, and the 
supply of new software titles started to dry up.26
In September 1996, 3DO announced that it would 
either sell its hardware system business or move it into 
a joint venture.27 The company announced that about 
150 people, one-third of the workforce, would probably 
lose their jobs in the restructuring. According to Trip 
Hawkins, 3DO would now focus on developing soft-
ware for online gaming. Hawkins stated that the Internet 
and Internet entertainment constituted a huge opportu-
nity for 3DO. The stock dropped $1.375 to $6.75.
Sega’s Saturn
3DO was not alone in moving to a CD-ROM-
based format. Both Sega and Sony also introduced 
CD-ROM-based systems in the mid-1990s. Sega 
had, in fact, beaten 3DO to the market with its 
November 1992 introduction of the Sega CD, a 
$300 CD-ROM add-on for the 16-bit Genesis. Sega 
sold 100,000 units in its fi rst month alone. Sales then 
slowed down, however, and by December 1993 were 
standing at just 250,000 units. One reason for the 
slowdown, according to critics, was a lack of strong 
games. Sega was also working on a 32-bit CD-ROM 
system, Saturn, which was targeted for a mid-1995 
introduction in the United States. In January 1994, 
Sega announced that Microsoft would supply the 
operating system for Saturn.28
In March 1994, Sega announced the Genesis Super 
32X, a $150 add-on cartridge designed to increase 
the performance of Genesis cartridge and CD-ROM 
games. The 32X contained the 32-bit Hitachi micro-
processor that was to be used in Saturn. Sega called 
the 32X “the poor man’s 32-bit machine” because it 
sold for a mere $149. Introduced in the fall of 1994, 
the 32X never lived up to its expectations. Most 
users appeared willing to wait for the real thing, Sega 
Saturn, promised for release the following year.
In early 1995, Sega informed the press and retail-
ers that it would release Saturn on “Sega Saturn Sat-
urday, Sept 2nd,” but Sega released the 32-bit Saturn 
in May 1995. It was priced at $400 per unit and 
accompanied by the introduction of just 10 games. 
Sega apparently believed that the world would be 
delighted by the May release of the Saturn. However, 
Saturn was released without the industry fanfare 
that normally greets a new game machine. Only four 
retail chains received the Saturn in May, while the 
rest were told they would have to wait until 
September. This move alienated retailers, who 
responded by dropping Sega products from their 
stores.29 Sega appeared to have made a marketing 
blunder.30
Sony’s PlayStation
In the fall of 1995, Sony entered the fray with the 
introduction of the Sony PlayStation.31 PlaySta-
tion used a 32-bit RISC microprocessor running 
at 33  MHz and using a double-speed CD-ROM 
drive. PlayStation cost an estimated $500 million to 
develop. The machine had actually been under devel-
opment since 1991, when Sony decided that the home 
video game industry was getting too big to ignore. 
Initially, Sony was in an alliance with Nintendo to 

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C45
develop the machine. Nintendo walked away from 
the alliance in 1992, however, after a disagreement 
over who owned the rights to any future CD-ROM 
games. Sony went alone.32
From the start, Sony felt that it could leverage 
its presence in the fi lm and music business to build 
a strong position in the home video game industry. 
A consumer electronics giant with a position in the 
Hollywood movie business and the music industry 
(Sony owned Columbia Pictures and the Columbia 
record label), Sony believed that it had access to 
signifi cant intellectual property that could form the 
basis of many popular games.
In 1991, Sony established a division in New York: 
Sony Electronic Publishing. The division was to serve 
as an umbrella organization for Sony’s multimedia 
offerings. Headed by Iceland native Olaf Olafsson, 
then just 28 years old, this organization ultimately 
took the lead role in both the market launch of Play-
Station and in developing game titles.33 In 1993, as 
part of this effort, Sony purchased a well-respected 
British game developer, Psygnosis. By the fall of 
1995, this unit had 20 games ready to complement 
PlayStation: the Haldeman Diaries, Mickey Mania 
(developed in collaboration with Disney), and 
Johnny Mnemonic, based on the William Gibson 
short story. To entice independent game developers 
such as EA, Namco, and Acclaim Entertainment, 
Olafsson used the promise of low royalty rates. The 
standard royalty rate was set at $9 per disc, although 
developers that signed on early enough were given 
a lower royalty rate. Sony also provided approxi-
mately 4,000 game development tools to licensees in 
an effort to help them speed games to market.34
To distribute PlayStation, Sony set up a retail 
channel separate from Sony’s consumer electronics 
sales force. It marketed the PlayStation as a hip and 
powerful alternative to the outdated Nintendo and 
Sega cartridge-based systems. Sony worked closely 
with retailers before the launch to fi nd out how it 
could help them sell the PlayStation. To jump-start 
demand, Sony set up in-store displays to allow poten-
tial consumers to try the equipment. Just before the 
launch, Sony had lined up an impressive 12,000 retail 
outlets in the United States.35
Sony targeted its advertising for PlayStation at 
males in the 18- to 35-year age range. The targeting 
was evident in the content of many of the games. 
One of the big hits for PlayStation was Tomb Raider, 
whose central character, Lara Croft, combined sex 
appeal with savvy and helped to recruit an older 
generation to PlayStation.36 PlayStation was initially 
priced at $299, and games retailed for as much as 
$60. Sony’s Tokyo-based executives had reportedly 
been insisting on a $350 to $400 price for PlaySta-
tion, but Olafsson pushed hard for the lower price. 
Because of the fallout from this internal battle, in 
January 1996, Olafsson resigned from Sony. By then, 
however, Sony was following Olafsson’s script.37
Sony’s prelaunch work was rewarded with strong 
early sales. More than 800,000 PlayStations and 
4 million games had been sold in the United States 
by January 1996. In May 1996, with 1.2  million 
PlayStations shipped, Sony reduced the price of 
PlayStation to $199. Sega responded with a simi-
lar price cut for its Saturn. The prices on some of 
Sony’s initial games were also reduced to $29.99. 
The weekend after the price cuts, retailers reported 
that PlayStation sales were up by between 350% and 
1,000% over the prior week.38 The sales surge con-
tinued through 1996. By the end of the year, sales 
of  PlayStation and associated software amounted to 
$1.3 billion, out of a total for United States sales at 
$2.2 billion for all video game hardware and soft-
ware. In March 1997, Sony cut the price of Play-
Station again, this time to $149. It also reduced its 
suggested retail price for games by $10 to $49.99. 
By this point, Sony had sold 3.4 million units of 
PlayStation in the United States, compared to 
Saturn’s 1.6 million units.39 Worldwide, PlayStation 
had outsold Saturn by 13 million to 7.8 million units, 
and  Saturn sales were slowing.40 The momentum 
was clearly running in Sony’s favor, but the company 
now had a new challenge to deal with: Nintendo’s 
latest generation game machine, the N64.
Nintendo Strikes Back
In July 1996, Nintendo launched Nintendo 64 (N64) 
in the Japanese market. This release was followed 
by a late fall introduction in the United States. N64 
is a 64-bit machine developed in conjunction with 
Silicon Graphics. Originally targeted for introduc-
tion a year earlier, N64 had been under development 
since 1993. The machine used a plug-in cartridge 
format rather than a CD-ROM drive. According to 
Nintendo, cartridges allow for faster access time and 

C46  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
are far more durable than CD-ROMs (an important 
consideration with children).41
The most-striking feature of the N64 machine, 
however, was its 3D graphics capability. N64 pro-
vides fully rounded fi gures that can turn on their 
heels and rotate through 180 degrees. Advanced ray- 
tracing techniques borrowed from military simula-
tors and engineering workstations added to the sense 
of realism by providing proper highlighting, refl ec-
tions, and shadows.
N64 was targeted at children and young teen-
agers. It was priced at $200 and launched with just 
four games. Despite the lack of games, initial sales were 
very strong. Indeed, 1997 turned out to be a banner 
year for both Sony and Nintendo. The overall United 
States market was strong, with sales of hardware and 
software combined reaching a record $5.5 billion. 
Estimates suggest that PlayStation accounted for 
49% of machines and games by value. N64 captured a 
41% share, leaving Sega trailing badly with less 
than 10% of the market. During the year, the aver-
age price for game machines had fallen to $150. By 
year-end there were 300 titles available for PlaySta-
tion, compared to 40 for N64. Games for PlaySta-
tion retailed for $40, on average, compared to more 
than $60 for N64.42
By late 1998, PlayStation was widening its lead 
over N64. In the crucial North American market, 
PlayStation was reported to be outselling N64 by 
a two-to-one margin, although Nintendo retained 
a lead in the under-12 category. At this point, there 
were 115 games available for N64 versus 431 for 
PlayStation.43 Worldwide, Sony had now sold close 
to 55 million PlayStations. The success of PlaySta-
tion had a major impact on Sony’s bottom line. In 
fi scal 1998, PlayStation business generated revenues 
of $5.5 billion for Sony, 10% of its worldwide rev-
enues, but accounted for $886 million, or 22.5%, of 
the company’s operating income.44
The 128-Bit Era
When Nintendo launched its 64-bit machine in 1996, 
Sony and Sega did not follow, preferring instead to 
focus on the development of even more powerful 
128-bit machines.
Sega was the fi rst to market a 128-bit video game 
console, which it launched in Japan in late 1998 and 
in the United States in late 1999. The Dreamcast 
came equipped with a 56-kilobit modem to allow 
for online gaming over the Internet. By late 2000, 
Sega had sold approximately  6 million Dreamcasts 
worldwide, accounting for about 15% of console 
sales since its launch. Sega nurtured Dreamcast sales 
by courting outside software developers who helped 
develop new games, including Crazy Taxi, Resident 
Evil, and Quake III Arena. The company had a goal 
of shipping 10 million units by March 2001, a goal 
it never reached.45
Despite its position as fi rst mover with a 128-bit 
machine, and despite solid technical reviews, by late 
2000 the company was struggling. Sega was handi-
capped fi rst by product shortages due to constraints 
on the supply of component parts and then by a 
lack of demand as consumers waited to see whether 
Sony’s 128 bit offering, the much anticipated Play-
Station 2 (PS2), would be a more attractive machine. 
In September 2000, Sega responded to the impend-
ing United States launch of Sony’s PS2 by cutting the 
price for its console from $199 to $149. Then in late 
October, Sega announced that, due to this price cut, 
it would probably lose more than $200 million for 
the fi scal year ending March 2001.46
Sony’s PlayStation 2
PS2 was launched in Japan in mid-2000 and in the 
United States at the end of October 2000. Initially 
priced at $299, PS2 is a powerful machine. At its 
core was a 300-megahertz graphics processing 
chip that was jointly developed with Toshiba and 
consumed about $1.3 billion in R&D. Referred to 
as the Emotion Engine processor, the chip allows 
the machine to display stunning graphic images 
previously found only on supercomputers. The 
chip made the PS2 the most powerful video game 
machine yet.
The machine was set up to play different CD and 
DVD formats, as well as proprietary game titles. As 
is true with the original PlayStation, PS2 could play 
audio CDs. The system was also compatible with the 
original PlayStation: any PlayStation title could be 
played on the PS2. To help justify the initial price tag, 
the unit doubled as a DVD player with picture qual-
ity as good as current players. The PS2 did not come 
equipped with a modem, but it did have networking 
capabilities, and a modem could be attached using 
one of two USB ports.47

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C47
Nintendo GameCube
Nintendo had garnered a solid position in the indus-
try with its N64 machine by focusing on its core 
demographic, 7- to 12-year-olds. In 1999, Nintendo 
took 33% of the hardware market and 28% of the 
game market. Nintendo’s next generation video 
game machine, GameCube, packed a modem and 
a powerful 400-megahertz, 128-bit processor made 
by IBM into a compact cube. GameCube marked 
a shift away from Nintendo’s traditional approach 
of using proprietary cartridges to hold game soft-
ware. Instead, software for the new player came on 
8-centimeter CDs, which are smaller than music 
CDs. The disks held 1.5 gigabytes of data each, far 
greater storage capacity than the old game cartridges. 
Players could control GameCube by using wireless 
controllers.48
Nintendo tried to make the GameCube easy for 
developers to work with rather than focusing on 
raw peak performance. While developers no doubt 
appreciated this, by the time GameCube hits store 
shelves in late 2001, PS2 had been on the market 
for 18 months and boasted a solid library of games. 
Despite its strong brand and instantly recognized 
intellectual property, which included  Donkey 
Kong, Super Mario Brothers, and the Pokémon 
characters, Nintendo was playing catch-up to Sony. 
Moreover, another new entrant into the industry 
launched its 128 bit offering at about the same 
time:  Microsoft.
Microsoft’s Xbox
Microsoft was fi rst rumored to be developing a video 
game console in late 1999. In March 2000, Bill Gates 
made it offi cial when he announced that Microsoft 
would enter the home video game market in fall 2001 
with a console code named Xbox. In terms of sheer 
computing power, the 128-bit Xbox had the edge over 
competitors. Xbox had a 733-megahertz Pentium III 
processor, a high-powered graphics chip from Nvidia 
Corp, a built-in broadband cable modem to allow for 
online game playing and high-speed Internet brows-
ing, 64 megabytes of memory, CD and DVD drives, 
and an internal hard disk drive. The operating system 
was a stripped-down version of its popular Windows 
system optimized for graphics-processing capabili-
ties. Microsoft claimed that because the Xbox was 
based on  familiar PC  technology, it would be much 
easier for software developers to write games for, and 
it would be relatively easy to convert games from the 
PC to run on the Xbox.49
Although Microsoft was a new entrant to the 
video game industry, it was no stranger to games. 
Microsoft had long participated in the PC gaming 
industry and was one of the largest publishers of 
PC games, with hits such as Microsoft Flight Simu-
lator and Age of Empires I and II to its credit. Sales 
of Microsoft’s PC games increased 50% annually 
between 1998 and 2001, and the company con-
trolled about 10% of the PC game market in 2001. 
Microsoft also offered online gaming for some 
time, including its popular MSN Gaming Zone 
site. Started in 1996, by 2001 the Web site had 
become the largest online PC gaming hub on the 
Internet, with nearly 12 million subscribers pay-
ing $9.95 a month to play premium games, such 
as Asheron’s Call or Fighter Ace. Nor was Micro-
soft new to hardware; its joysticks and game pads 
outsell all other brands, and it had an important 
mouse business.
To build the Xbox, Microsoft chose Flextron-
ics, a contract manufacturer that already made 
computer mice for Microsoft. Realizing that it 
would probably have to cut Xbox prices over time, 
Microsoft guaranteed Flextronics a profi t margin, 
effectively agreeing to subsidize Flextronics if sell-
ing prices fell below a specifi ed amount. By 2003, 
Microsoft was thought to be losing $100 on every 
Xbox sold. To make that back and turn a profi t, 
Microsoft reportedly had to sell between six and 
nine video games per Xbox.50
Analysts speculated that Microsoft’s entry into 
the home video game market was a response to a 
potential threat from Sony. Microsoft was worried 
that Internet-ready consoles like PS2 might take 
over many Web-browsing functions from the per-
sonal computer. Some in the company described 
Internet-enabled video game terminals as Trojan 
horses in the living room. In Microsoft’s calcula-
tion, it made sense to get in the market to try and 
keep Sony and  others in check. With annual reve-
nues in excess of $20 billion worldwide, the home 
video game market is huge and an important source 
of potential growth for Microsoft. Still, by moving 
away from its core market, Microsoft was taking a 
big risk, particularly given the scale of investments 
required to develop the Xbox, reported to run as 
high as $1.5 billion.

C48  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Mortal Combat: 
Microsoft versus Sony
The launch of Xbox and GameCube helped pro-
pel sales of video game hardware and software to a 
record $9.4 billion in 2001, up from $6.58 billion 
in 2000. Although both Xbox and Nintendo initially 
racked up strong sales, the momentum started to slow 
signifi cantly in 2002. Microsoft, in particular, found 
it very diffi cult to penetrate the Japanese market. By 
September 2002, Sony had sold 11.2 million units of
PS2 in the United States versus 2.2 million units 
of Xbox and 2.7 million units of Nintendo’s 
GameCube. Unable to hold onto market share in the 
wake of the new competition, Sega withdrew from 
the console market, announcing that, henceforth, 
it would focus just on developing games for other 
platforms.
In June 2002, Sony responded to the new entry by 
cutting the price for PS2 from $299 to $199. Micro-
soft quickly followed, cutting the price for Xbox 
from $299 to $199, while Nintendo cut its price 
from $299 to $149.51 A year later, Sony cut prices 
again, this time to $179 a console. Again, Microsoft 
followed with a similar price cut, and in March 2004 
it took the lead, cutting Xbox prices to $149. Sony 
followed suit two months later.52
Microsoft’s strategy, however, involved far more 
than just cutting prices. In November 2002 Micro-
soft announced that it would introduce a new service 
for gamers, Xbox Live. For $50 a year, Xbox Live 
subscribers with broadband connections would be 
able to play online-enabled versions of Xbox games 
with other online subscribers. To support Xbox Live, 
Microsoft invested some $500 million in its own 
data centers to host online game playing.
Online game playing was clearly a strategic prior-
ity from the outset. Unlike the PS2 and GameCube, 
Xbox came with a built in broadband capability. 
The decision to make the Xbox broadband capa-
ble was made back in 1999 when less than 5% of 
United States homes were linked to the Internet with 
a broadband connection. Explaining the decision 
to build broadband capabilities into the Xbox at a 
time when rivals lacked them, the head of Xbox, Jay 
Allard, noted that “My attitude has always been to 
bet on the future, not against it.”53 While Sony’s PS2 
can be hooked up to the Internet via a broadband 
connection, doing so requires the purchase of a spe-
cial network adapter for $40.
By mid-2003, Xbox Live had some 500,000 sub-
scribers, versus 80,000 who had registered to play 
PS2 games online. By this time there were 28 online 
games for Xbox and 18 for PS2. By  January 2004, 
the comparative fi gures stood at 50 for Microsoft 
and 32 for Sony. By mid-2004, Xbox Live report-
edly had over one million subscribers, with Sony 
claiming a similar number of online players.54 
In May 2004, Microsoft struck a deal with EA, 
the world’s largest video game publisher, to bring 
EA games, including its best selling Madden 
 Football, to the Xbox Live platform. Until this 
point, EA had only produced live games for Sony’s 
platform.
In spite of all these strategic moves, by late 
2004, Xbox was still a distant second to PS2 in the 
video game market, having sold 14 million con-
soles against Sony’s 70 million (Nintendo had sold 
13  million GameCube consoles). While Sony was 
making good money from the business, Microsoft 
was registering signifi cant losses. In fi scal 2004, 
Microsoft’s home and entertainment division, of 
which Xbox is the major component, registered 
$2.45 billion in revenues, but lost $1.135  billion. 
By  way of contrast, Sony’s game division had 
$7.5  billion of sales in fi scal 2004 and generated 
operating profi ts of $640 million.
Microsoft, however, indicated that it was in 
the business for the long term. In late 2004, the 
company got a boost from the release of Halo 2, 
the sequel to Halo, one of its best-selling games. 
As fi rst-day sales for Halo 2 were totaled, exec-
utives at Sony had to be worried. Microsoft 
announced that Halo 2 had sales of $125 million in 
its fi rst 24 hours on the market in the United States 
and Canada, an industry record. These fi gures 
represented sales of 2.38 million units and put 
Halo 2 fi rmly on track to be one of the big-
gest video games ever with a shot at surpassing 
Nintendo’s Super Mario 64, which had sold 
$308 million in the United States since its 
September 1996 debut. Moreover, the company 
was rumored to be ahead of Sony by as much as a 
year to bring the next generation video game con-
sole to market. In late 2004, reports suggested that 
Xbox 2 would be on the market in time for the 
2005 Christmas season, probably a full year ahead 
of Sony’s PlayStation 3 (PS3). Sony was rumored to 
be running into technical problems while develop-
ing the PS3.55

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C49
The Next Generation
As the battle between PS2 and Xbox drew to a close, 
it was clear that Sony was the big winner. From 2001 
through the fall of 2006, when PS3 hit the market, 
Sony had sold about 110 million PS2 consoles, ver-
sus 25  million for Microsoft’s Xbox and 21 million 
for Nintendo’s GameCube.56 Sony’s advantage in its 
installed base translated into a huge lead in num-
ber of games sold: approximately 1.08 billion for 
PS2 by mid-2006 versus 200 million for the Xbox.57 
With the console companies reportedly making an 
average royalty on third-party software of $8 per 
game sold, the fi nancial implications of Sony’s lead 
with PS2 are obvious.58 Indeed, in 2005 Sony’s 
games division contributed to 6.24% of the com-
pany’s total revenue but 38% of operating profi t. In 
contrast, Microsoft’s home and entertainment divi-
sion lost $4 billion between the launch of Xbox and 
mid-2006.
However, by 2006, this was all history. In 
November 2005, Microsoft introduced its next gen-
eration machine, Xbox 360, beating Sony and Nin-
tendo to the market by a solid year. The Xbox 360 
represented a big technological advance over the 
original Xbox. To deliver improved picture quality, 
the Xbox 360 could execute 500 million polygons 
per second: a four-fold increase over the Xbox. The 
main microprocessor was 13 times faster than the 
chip in the Xbox. Xbox 360 had 512 megabytes of 
memory, an 8-fold increase, and a 20-gigabyte hard 
drive, 2.5 times bigger than that found on the Xbox. 
Xbox 360 is, of course, enabled for a broadband 
connection to the Internet.
The machine was made by Flextronics and Wis-
tron, two contract manufacturers (a third started 
production after launch). Priced at $299, Xbox 360 
was sold at a loss. The cost for making Xbox 360 
was estimated to be as high as $500 at launch, fall-
ing to $350 by late 2006. Microsoft’s goal was to 
ultimately break even on sales of the hardware as 
manufacturing effi ciencies drove down unit costs.
To seed the market with games, Microsoft took 
a number of steps. Taking a page out of its Windows 
business, Microsoft provided game developers with 
tools designed to automate many of the key software 
programming tasks and reduce development time 
and costs. The company had also expanded its own 
in-house game studios, in part by purchasing sev-
eral independent game developers, including  Bungie 
 Studios, makers of Halo. This strategy enabled Micro-
soft to offer exclusive content for the Xbox 360, 
something that third parties were reluctant to do.
With the costs of game development increas-
ing to between $10 and $15 million for more com-
plex games, and development time stretching out to 
between 24 and 36 months, Microsoft also had to 
provide an inducement to get third-party develop-
ers onboard. Although details of royalty terms are 
kept private, it is believed that Microsoft offered 
very low royalty rates, and perhaps even zero royal-
ties, for a specifi ed period of time to game developers 
who committed early to Xbox 360. One of those to 
commit early was EA, the leading independent game 
development company, which reportedly budgeted as 
much as $200 million to develop some 25 versions 
of its best-selling games, such as its sports games, for 
Xbox 360. Microsoft budgeted a similar amount to 
develop its own games.59
In the event, some 18 games were available for 
the November 2005 launch of Xbox 360, and by the 
end of 2006, this fi gure had increased to about 160. 
Halo 3, which was expected to be one of the big-
gest games for Xbox 360, was released in September 
2007. Exclusive to the Xbox 360, Halo 3 racked in 
fi rst-day sales of $170 million, which was an indus-
try record. Grand Theft Auto 4, the most popular 
franchise on PS2, was also launched simultaneously 
for both Xbox 360 and PS3 in 2007: a major coup 
for Microsoft.
The initial launch of Xbox 360 was marred by 
shortages of key components, which limited the 
number of machines that Microsoft could bring 
to market. Had Sony been on time with its launch 
of PS3, this could have been a serious error, but 
Sony delayed its launch of PS3, fi rst until spring of 
2006 and then November 2006. By the time Sony 
launched PS3 in November 2006, some 6 million 
Xbox 360 consoles had been sold, and Microsoft 
was predicting sales of 10 million by the end of 
2006.
As with Xbox, Microsoft pushed Xbox Live 
with Xbox 360. The company invested as much as 
$1 billion in Live from its inception. By late 2006 
Microsoft was claiming that some 60% of Xbox 360 
customers had also signed on for Xbox Live and that 
the service had 4 million subscribers. By early 2008, 
there were more than 10 million subscribers. Xbox 
Live allowed users to play against each other online 
and to download digital content from Xbox Live 

C50  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
 Marketplace. Looking forward, there is little doubt 
that Microsoft sees Xbox Live as a critical element of 
its strategy, enabling Xbox owners to download any 
digital content—games, fi lm, music—onto their con-
soles, which could become the hub of a home digital 
entertainment system.
The business model for Xbox 360 depends on 
the number of games sold per console, the percent-
age of console owners who sign up for Xbox Live, 
sales of hardware accessories (e.g., controllers, an 
HD-DVD drive, wireless networking adapter), and 
the console itself achieving break-even production 
costs. Reports suggest that Microsoft will break even 
if each console owner buys six to seven games, two 
to three accessories, and some 10 million sign on 
to Xbox Live (Microsoft splits Xbox Live revenues 
with game developers). By the end of 2006, it was 
estimated that some 33 million games had been sold 
for Xbox 360.60
Sony fi nally introduced PS3 on November 11, 
2006 in Japan and November 17, 2006 in the United 
States. The delay in the launch of PS3 was due to 
Sony’s decision to bundle a Blu-ray drive with PS3, 
along with problems developing the “cell” proces-
sor that sits at the core of the PS3. Blu-ray is Sony’s 
proprietary HD-DVD format. The company is cur-
rently locked in a format war with Toshiba, which 
is pushing its rival HD-DVD format (which can be 
purchased as an accessory for the Xbox 360). Sony 
has argued that the combination of its cell proces-
sor and Blu-ray DVD drive will give PS3 a substan-
tial performance edge over Xbox 360. While this 
is true in a technical sense (the Blu-ray discs have 
fi ve times the storage capacity of the DVD discs for 
Xbox 360), few reviewers have noticed much in the 
way of difference from a game playing perspective— 
perhaps because few games were initially available 
that showed the true power of the PS3.
What is certain is that incorporating Blu-ray 
drives in the PS3 has signifi cantly raised the costs 
of the PS3. Sony is selling its standalone Blu-ray 
drives for $999, which suggests that the PS3, ini-
tially priced at between $500 and $600 depend-
ing on confi guration, is in a sense a subsidized 
Blu-ray player. Shortages of blue diodes, a critical 
component in HD-DVD drives, also limited sup-
ply of the PS3 after its launch. Only 93,000 PS3 
players were available for the Japanese launch. At 
launch, there were some 20 games available for the 
PS3. Sony also announced its own live offering to 
compete with Xbox Live and stated that it would be 
free to PS3 users.
Nintendo is also back in the fray. In November 
2006, it launched its own next generation offer-
ing, Wii. When developing the Wii, Nintendo made 
a number of interesting strategic decisions. First, it 
decided not to compete with Microsoft and Sony 
on graphics processing power. Instead of devel-
oping a high-powered machine crammed full of 
expensive custom-built components, they used off-
the-shelf components to assemble a much cheaper 
machine that could be sold at a much lower price 
point (the initial price was $250). Although this 
machine did not offer the graphics processing capa-
bilities of Xbox 360 or PS3, the games were cheaper 
to develop, about $5 million each as opposed to 
as much as $20 million for the PS3. Second, Nin-
tendo decided to target a new demographic, indif-
ferent people who had no interest in video games, as 
opposed to the stereotypical game player. Nintendo 
already had some evidence that this market could be 
tapped and would be extremely lucrative. In 2004, 
Nintendo had introduced a game for its handheld 
player, the DS, that was aimed not at its core 7- to 
12-year-old demographic but at much wider mar-
ket. The game, Brain Age, based on a brain training 
regime developed by a Japanese neuroscientist, was a 
huge hit in Japan, with sales of more than 12 million 
units. It made the DS a hit in such unlikely places as 
nursing homes. Third, rather than processing power, 
Nintendo decided to focus on developing a motion 
sensitive, wireless controller that could detect arm 
and hand motions and transfer them to the screen. 
This enabled the development of interactive games, 
with players physically controlling the action on 
screen by moving their arms, whether by swinging 
an imaginary bat, driving a go-kart, or slashing a 
sword through the air.61
By early 2007, it was clear that the Wii was 
turning into a surprise hit. The combination of low 
price, innovative design, and a portfolio of recogniz-
able games based on Nintendo’s long-established 
franchises, such as Mario Brothers and Pokémon, 
helped to drive sales forward. Moreover, as planned, 
the Wii seemed to have appeal to a broad range of 
age groups and both genders. Soon articles started 
to appear explaining how retirement homes were 
buying the Wii so that residents could play virtual 
baseball with their visiting grandchildren, and sales 
started to accelerate.

 
 Case 3 The Home Video Game Industry: Atari Pong to the Nintendo Wii 
C51
By 2008, Nintendo had seized the leadership 
position in the industry (see Exhibit 1).  Cumulatively, 
the Wii had sold some 32 million units worldwide by 
September 2008, compared to 20.6 million units for 
Xbox 360 and 15.3 million units for the PS3. More-
over, Nintendo had established a strong position in 
all major markets, unlike Microsoft for example, 
which had been unable to garner  signifi cant Xbox 
360 sales in Japan. The popularity of the Wii helped 
to drive Nintendo’s sales and earnings to record 
levels, with net profi ts forecasted to reach a record 
$3.78 billion for the year ending March 2009. 
 Nintendo’s market capitalization on the Japanese 
stock market surpassed Sony’s, and in September 
2008 it was second only to Toyota. It would appear 
that Nintendo was back.
Exhibit 1 Cumulative Sales of Platform Through September 2008 (millions of units)
0
Wii
Xbox360
PS3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Japan
American
Other
Source: Raw data from VG Chartz at http://www.vgchartz.com/.
Endnotes
 8. M. Schrage, “The High Tech Dinosaurs: Video Games, 
Once Ascendant, Are Making Way,” Washington Post, 
July 31, 1983, F1.
 9. D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random House, 
1993.
 10. Quoted in D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random 
House, 1993, 38.
 11. D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random House, 
1993.
 12. D. Golden, “In Search of Princess Toadstool,” Boston 
Globe, November 20, 1988, 18.
 13. N. Gross, and G. Lewis, “Here Come the Super Mario 
Bros.,” Business Week, November 9, 1987, 138.
 14. D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random House, 1993.
 15. D. Golden, “In search of Princess Toadstool,” Boston 
Globe, November 20, 1988, 18.
 1. A good account of the early history of Bushnell and 
Atari can be found in S. Cohen, Zap! The Rise and Fall 
of Atari, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
 2. R. Isaacs, “Video Games Race to Catch a Changing 
Market,” Business Week, December 26, 1977, 44B.
 3. P. Pagnano, “Atari’s Game Plan to Overwhelm Its Com-
petitors,” Business Week, May 8, 1978, 50F.
 4. R. Isaacs, “Video Games Race to Catch a Changing 
Market,” Business Week, December 26, 1977, 44B.
 5. P. Pagnano, “Atari’s Game Plan to Overwhelm Its 
Competitors,” Business Week, May 8, 1978, 50F; and 
D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random House, 1993.
 6. S. Cohen, Zap! The Rise and Fall of Atari, New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1984.
 7. L. Kehoe, “Atari Seeks Way out of Video Game Woes,” 
Financial Times, December 14, 1983, 23.

C52  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
 16. Staff Reporter, “Marketer of the Year,” Adweek, 
 November 27, 1989, 15.
 17. C. Lazzareschi, “No Mere Child’s Play,” Los Angeles 
Times, December 16, 1988, 1.
 18. For a good summary of the early history of Sega, see 
J. Battle, and B. Johnstone, “The Next Level: Sega’s Plans 
for World Domination,” Wired, release 1.06, December 
1993.
 19. D. Sheff, Game Over, New York: Random House, 
1993.
 20. J. Battle, and B. Johnstone, “The Next Level: Sega’s Plans 
for World Domination,” Wired, release 1.06, December 
1993.
 21. For background details, see J. Flower, “3DO: Hip or 
Hype?” Wired, release 1.02, May/June 1993.
 22. R. Brandt, “3DO’s New Game Player: Awesome 
or another Betamax?” Business Week, January 11, 
1993, 38.
 23. J. Flower, “3DO: Hip or Hype?” Wired, release 1.02, 
May/June 1993.
 24. S. Jacobs, “Third Time’s a Charm (They Hope),” Wired, 
release 2.01, January 1994.
 25. A. Dunkin, “Video Games: The Next Generation,” 
 Business Week, January 31, 1994, 80.
 26. J. Greenstein, “No Clear Winners, Though Some Los-
ers: The Video Game Industry in 1995,” Business Week, 
December 22, 1995, 42.
 27. Staff Reporter, “3DO Says ‘I Do’ on Major Shift of 
Its Game Strategy,” Los Angeles Times, September 17, 
1996, 2.
 28. J. Battle, and B. Johnstone, “The Next Level: Sega’s Plans 
for World Domination,” Wired, release 1.06, December 
1993.
 29. J. Greenstein, “No Clear Winners, Though Some Los-
ers: The Video Game Industry in 1995,” Business Week, 
December 22, 1995, 42.
 30. D. P. Hamilton, “Sega Suddenly Finds Itself Embattled,” 
Wall Street Journal, March 31, 1997, A10.
 31. S. Taves, “Meet Your New Playmate,” Wired, release 
3.09, September 1995.
 32. Kunni, I., “The Games Sony Plays,” Business Week, June 
15, 1998, 128.
 33. C. Platt, “WordNerd,” Wired, release 3.10, October 
1995.
 34. I. Kunni, “The Games Sony Plays,” Business Week, 
June 15, 1998, 128.
 35. J. A. Trachtenberg, “Race Quits Sony Just Before U.S. 
Rollout of Its PlayStation Video-Game System,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 8, 1995, B3.
 36. S. Beenstock, “Market Raider: How Sony Won the Con-
sole Game,” Marketing, September 10, 1998, 26.
 37. J. A. Trachtenberg, “Olafsson Calls It Quits as Chair-
man of Sony’s Technology Strategy Group,” Wall Street 
Journal,  January 23, 1996, B6.
 38. J. Greenstein “Price Cuts Boost Saturn, PlayStation 
Hardware Sales,” Video Business, May 31, 1996, 1.
 39. Greenstein, J., “Sony Cuts Prices of PlayStation Hard-
ware,” Video Business, March 10, 1997, 1.
 40. D. Hamilton, “Sega Suddenly Finds Itself Embattled,” 
Wall Street Journal, March 31, 1997, A10.
 41. Staff Reporter, “Nintendo Wakes Up,” The Economist, 
August 3, 1996, 55–56.
 42. D. Takahashi, “Game Plan: Video Game Makers See 
Soaring Sales Now—And Lots of Trouble Ahead,” Wall 
Street Journal, June 15, 1998, R10.
 43. D. Takahashi, “Sony and Nintendo Battle for Kids under 
13,” Wall Street Journal, September 24, 1998, B4.
 44. I. Kunni, “The Games Sony Plays,” Business Week, 
June 15, 1998, 128.
 45. R. A. Guth, “Sega Cites Dreamcast Price Cuts for Loss 
Amid Crucial Time for Survival of Firm,” Wall Street 
Journal,  October 30, 2000, A22.
 46. R. Guth, “Sega Cites Dreamcast Price Cuts for Loss 
Amid Crucial Time for Survival of Firm,” Wall Street 
Journal,  October 30, 2000, A22.
 47. T. Oxford, and S. Steinberg, “Ultimate Game Machine 
Sony’s PlayStation 2 Is Due on Shelves Oct. 26. It Brims 
with  Potential—But at This Point Sega’s Dreamcast 
Appears a Tough Competitor,” Atlanta Journal/Atlanta 
Constitution,  October 1, 2000, P1.
 48. R. A. Guth, “New Players from Nintendo Will Link to 
Web,” Wall Street Journal, August 25, 2000, B1.
 49. D. Takahashi, “Microsoft’s X-Box Impresses Game 
Developers,” Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2000, B12.
 50. K. Powers, “Showdown,” Forbes, August 11, 2003, 
86–87.
 51. The Economist, “Console Wars,” June 22, 2002, 71.
 52. R. A. Guth, “Game Gambit: Microsoft to Cut Xbox 
Price,” Wall Street Journal, March 19, 2004, B1.
 53. K. Powers, “Showdown,” Forbes, August 11, 2003, 
86–87.
 54. E. Taub, “No Longer a Solitary Pursuit: Video Games 
Move Online,” New York Times, July 5, 2004, C4.
 55. J. Greene and C. Edwards, “Microsoft Plays Video Leap-
frog,” Business Week, May 10, 2004, 44–45.
 56. “Playing a Long Game,” The Economist, November 18, 
2006, 63–65. 
 57. B. Thill, “Microsoft: Gat Game? Update on Vista, Xbox 
and the Tender,” Citigroup Capital Markets, August 30, 
2006.
 58. Ibid.
 59. D. Takahashi, The Xbox 360 Uncloaked, Spider Works, 
2006.
 60. B. Thill, “Microsoft: Gat Game? Update on Vista, Xbox 
and the Tender,” Citigroup Capital Markets, August 30, 
2006.
 61. J. M. O’Brian and C. Tkaczyk, “Wii Will Rock You,” 
Fortune, June 11, 2007, 82–92.

As the McDonald’s Corporation entered the 21st 
century, its corporate practices had become more 
vulnerable than ever before. A large variety of 
public interest groups made McDonald’s the tar-
get of their attacks. McDonald’s critics contended 
that the world’s largest fast-food company paid its 
employees low wages, hired part-time workers—
often teenagers—to avoid paying overtime premi-
ums, and enforced an aggressive antiunion policy 
throughout its fast-food empire. More damaging 
to McDonald’s reputation were charges made by 
consumer advocates, health offi cials, and educators 
that McDonald’s exploited children, cultivating in 
them a taste for fat at an early age and thereby con-
tributing to child obesity. Similarly, public  interest 
groups accused McDonald’s of selling unhealthy, 
fatty foods to grownups, hence being responsible, 
at least in part, for the increasing rates of adult 
obesity. Among McDonald’s critics, perhaps the 
most infl uential was Eric Schlosser, author of the 
2001 Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All- 
American Meal, a longstanding best-seller read by 
millions worldwide and turned into a major motion 
picture. In 1999, at the meeting of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), anti-globalization  protesters 
attacked McDonald’s outlets in Seattle. In 2002, 
French  protesters lead by Jose Bove, a sheep farmer, 
demolished a  McDonald’s restaurant under con-
struction in France, and  subsequently, Bove gained 
worldwide fame and, a jail sentence. Between 1997 
and 2000, several fast-food outlets around the world 
were damaged by bombs, among them McDonald’s 
restaurants in St.  Petersburg; Athens; Rio de Janeiro; 
Antwerp;  London; and Cali, Columbia.1
These attacks played a considerable role in the 
company’s fi nancial results. In 1998, McDonald’s 
announced its fi rst job cut since it had gone public 
in 1965, and for the fi rst time, the company recorded 
a decline in net income. Despite several initiatives 
promoted by the company’s CEO, Jack Greenberg, 
business failed to improve, and McDonald’s perfor-
mance continued to deteriorate. In 2002, McDonald’s 
closed nearly 200 underperforming units, and at the 
end of the year, the fast-food giant posted the fi rst 
quarterly loss in its history. McDonald’s fi nancial crisis, 
in turn, forced Greenberg to resign, and the company 
appointed a new CEO at the beginning of 2003.2
Would McDonald’s 
Recover?
To assess the ways in which the company responded 
to the crisis of 1998–2003, this case looks back his-
torically at McDonald’s and its critics, exploring the 
evolution of the company over time. The case begins 
with the company’s foundations laid out by its 
founder Ray Kroc and moves on to the food con-
solidation of the food service network under Fred 
Turner’s direction (1973–1987). The case proceeds 
with McDonald’s global expansion under Michael 
Quinlan’s leadership (1987–1998), pays close atten-
tion to the growing public criticism of the company, 
This was case was prepared by Isaac Cohen, San Jose State University.
This case was presented in the June 2009 Meeting of the World Association of Case Method Research and Application at Vancouver, 
Canada. Copyright © Isaac Cohen. I am grateful for the San Jose State University College of Business for its support.
4
C53
McDonald’s and Its Critics: 
1973–2009

C54  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
and examines Jack Greenberg’s (1998–2003) attempts 
to address the issues raised by McDonald’s critics. 
Following a brief account of Greenberg’s failed lead-
ership, the case moves on to the present, showing 
how, under Jim Skinner’s stewardship (2004–present), 
McDonald’s managed to answer its critics, launch suc-
cessful reforms, and come back strongly as a highly 
profi table, globally-competitive growth company.
Foundations: Ray Kroc, 
1955–1973
The McDonald brothers, Richard and Maurice (Dick 
and Mac), had operated a carhop drive-in restaurant 
in San Bernardino, California, since the 1930s. By 
the early 1950s, the brothers had replaced the car-
hop service with self-service, simplifi ed the menu to 
offer just hamburgers, cheeseburgers, French fries, 
milkshakes, soft drinks, and apple pie; and ran the 
restaurant like an assembly-line operation.3 “[T]he 
brothers’ concept of a limited menu allowed them 
to break down food preparation into simple, repeti-
tive tasks that could be learned quickly, even by 
those stepping into the commercial kitchen for the 
fi rst time,” McDonald’s historian John Love wrote 
in 1986. “Typically, there were three ‘grill men,’ who 
did nothing but grill hamburgers, two ‘shake men,’ 
who did nothing but make milkshakes, two ‘fries 
men,’ who specialized in making French fries, two 
‘dressers,’ who dressed and wrapped the hamburg-
ers, and three ‘countermen’ who did nothing but fi ll 
orders at the two customer windows.”4 The resulting 
labor cost savings, combined with the increased vol-
ume of sales, allowed the McDonald brothers to cut 
the price of a hamburger from 30 to 15 cents.
Such was the mode at operation of the San 
Bernardino restaurant in 1954, when Ray Kroc, a 
salesman who supplied the McDonald brothers with 
multimixer milkshake machines, decided to travel to 
California and observe the brothers at work.
Inspecting carefully the brothers’ operation, Kroc 
realized that the McDonalds’ formula of self-service, 
paper service, and quick service was something radi-
cally different from anything hitherto known in the 
food service industry. He believed the formula was 
a ticket to business success, and bought from the 
brothers the rights to set up McDonald’s  restaurant 
franchises across the country. Kroc opened his fi rst 
McDonald’s restaurant in Des Plaines, Illinois, near 
Chicago in 1955, incorporating his company as 
the McDonald’s Corporation. Under Kroc’s owner-
ship, McDonald’s grew rapidly—growing from 14 
to 38 restaurants in 1958 alone, to 100 in 1959, and 
1,000 by 1968. In 1962, McDonald’s introduced 
the world-famous Golden Arches logo (“now more 
widely recognized than the Christian cross,” accord-
ing to a 2001 study of McDonald’s), and in 1965, 
the company went public. Twenty years later, in 
1985, the McDonald’s Corporation joined the 30 
companies that made up the Dow Jones Industrial 
Average.5
Kroc’s sales background convinced him that the 
key to successful franchising was uniformity. Unifor-
mity was a revolutionary concept in the food service 
industry in the 1950s; at the time, franchisers paid 
little attention to training franchisees, setting qual-
ity standards, and supervising purchasing. In a stark 
contrast to the prevailing practice, Kroc sought to 
develop standards of operation, train licensees to 
meet them, and monitor restaurants to make sure 
franchisees followed the standards. From the outset, 
the hallmark of Kroc’s franchise system was commit-
ment to quality, service, and cleanliness (QSC).6
Although Kroc managed to obtain strict operating 
uniformity among franchisees, his centralized system 
did not stifl e individual creativity. On the contrary, 
franchisees were often innovators. The introduction 
of the Big Mac menu item was a case in point.
The Big Mac was a double-decker ham-
burger that sold for more than twice the price of 
a McDonald’s regular hamburger. It was devel-
oped, tested, and introduced by a franchisee from 
the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania area who ran about 
12 local McDonald’s outlets. To compete successfully 
with rival brands, the Pittsburgh franchisee asked 
McDonald’s for permission to test a large sandwich he 
called the “Big Mac.” Persuading the chain’s top man-
agement to broaden the menu was not easy; only after 
several delays did the franchisee receive corporate per-
mission to test the Big Mac hamburger. The permission 
was restricted to a single restaurant. Once introduced, 
the Big Mac increased the restaurant’s sales by 10% 
to 12% in a few months. This success soon attracted 
the attention of McDonald’s corporate management. 
Following repeated visits to the Pittsburgh area res-
taurants, McDonald’s corporate managers tested the 
Big Mac item in other markets, scoring a 10% gain 

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C55
in sales. McDonald’s Corporation fi nally put the new 
item into nationwide distribution in 1968, and within 
less than a year, the Big Mac accounted for nearly 
20% of all McDonald’s sales. Over time, the Big Mac 
became its most recognizable item.7
Consolidation: 
Fred Turner, 1973–1987
A year after opening McDonald’s fi rst restaurant in 
Illinois, Ray Kroc hired Fred Turner, a 23-year-old 
college dropout, to manage one of his restaurants. 
An ambitious fast learner who paid close attention 
to details, Turner mastered the task of overseeing res-
taurant operations at a remarkable speed. In 1957, 
Kroc asked Turner to train new franchisees and 
develop standard operating procedures for all fran-
chised restaurants. Leading McDonald’s operation 
division during the late 1950s and 1960s, Turner laid 
the foundation for a successful franchise system that 
has lasted well into the 21st century.
Management Science
From the outset, Turner attempted to turn the task of 
running a restaurant from an art to a science. Shortly 
after joining McDonald’s, Turner drafted a 15-page 
training manual that was expanded to 75 pages two 
years later and 360 pages by 1974. Turner’s train-
ing manual converted the systematic knowledge the 
McDonald’s corporation gained from operating its 
franchises into a “management science.”8
In part, the manual was a time-and-motion 
study that defi ned operating techniques in minute 
details. It instructed operators how to grill ham-
burgers, fry potatoes, and prepare milkshakes. 
It specifi ed cooking times for all food items, the 
precise temperature setting for all cooking equip-
ment, and the standard portions of all products. 
It established quality control measures unknown 
in the food service industry at the time (for exam-
ple, meat and potatoes items held in a serving bin 
for over 10 minutes needed to be discarded). And 
describing food service as an assembly-line opera-
tion, the manual told franchisees how to staff each 
“station,” and the optimal number of crew mem-
bers needed for each shift of operation.
Turner’s manual, in addition, showed operators 
how to prepare work schedules, fi nancial reports, 
and sales projections. To calculate operating costs, 
franchisees were told to break down expenses for 
labor, food, and nonfood supplies. To better plan 
future purchasing, the manual instructed operators 
to break down sales by food items. Such informa-
tion helped franchisees track down inventories, 
control costs, detect quality problems, and forecast 
demand.9
Training
McDonald’s operations manual was the main text 
used in classes taught at the “Hamburger Univer-
sity” (HU), a training center set up under Turner’s 
supervision. Conferring a degree in “Hamburgerol-
ogy,” the university expanded from a one-classroom 
school in 1961 to a $500,000 facility in 1968 and 
a $40 million campus in 1983. In 1973, the year 
Turner succeeded Kroc as McDonald’s CEO, HU 
turned out 150 graduates each month, offering 
several classes simultaneously. Altogether, about 
7,000 trainees graduated from the university between 
1961 and 1973. Classes were taught in three areas: 
food, equipment, and management techniques. 
Course titles included “Buns,” “Shortening,” “Hot 
Apple Pie,” “Basic Refrigeration,” “Frozen Products 
Care,” “Management Decision Skills,” and “Com-
petition.” By 1983, the university employed 30 fac-
ulty members and had an overall capacity to train 
750 students in seven auditorium classrooms. It was 
the only school in the fast-food industry accredited 
by the American Council of Education.10
Supervising Franchisees
Beginning in 1957, Kroc asked Turner to visit fran-
chisees and evaluate the performance of their restau-
rants. Early on, Turner drafted a seven-page “fi eld 
service report,” and soon thereafter, he developed a 
more detailed report that evaluated franchisees’ per-
formance in four areas—service, quality, cleanliness, 
and overall performance—and assigned them a sum-
mary grade (A, B, C, D, or F). The McDonald’s Cor-
poration, in turn, created a new position of “Field 
Consultant,” and by the mid-1960s, it employed 
several full-time consultants, whose specialty was 
visiting stores and inspecting their compliance with 
McDonald’s operating standards. The fi eld service 

C56  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
report played a key role in the decision to grant 
or deny existing franchisees permission to operate 
additional restaurants. Under Turner’s leadership, 
furthermore, the consultant position had become 
a prerequisite for promotion; managers wishing to 
climb up the corporate ladder were required to have 
experience working as fi eld consultants.
Over time, the McDonald’s Corporation invested 
heavily in expanding its fi eld service operation. By 
1992, McDonald’s spent $27 million to employ more 
than 300 full-time fi eld consultants. Each consultant 
was expected to visit and grade 21 restaurants sev-
eral times a year. The grade a restaurant received 
determined its “expandability” as well as its future 
prospects; a B grade was now necessary for getting a 
license to operate additional stores.11
Management Style
When Turner became president in 1968, he began 
decentralizing McDonald’s organizational structure. 
He fi rst increased the number of regional offi ces 
from fi ve in 1967 to 12 in 1975 and then expanded 
the authority of regional managers. Under Turner’s 
revamped structure, decisions on both granting fran-
chises and selecting new restaurants sites were made 
by regional managers, not corporate offi cers. In the 
food service industry, Turner observed, “the closer 
decision making is to the stores and the marketplace, 
the better the decision that managers make,” and 
accordingly, McDonald’s growth decisions in each 
region were narrowly tailored to local conditions. 
The result was rapid expansion. During Turner’s fi rst 
fi ve years as president (1968–1973), annual sales per 
restaurant almost doubled, and the total number of 
McDonald’s outlets tripled.12
Advertising
One of McDonald’s most successful advertising 
projects involved its corporate mascot “Ronald 
 McDonald.” The ad project was launched in the early 
1960s when a team of company marketers created a 
clown character named Ronald and featured it on local 
TV. Soon becoming the national spokesperson for the 
chain, Ronald McDonald had a magic touch with 
children and gave the company an important advan-
tage over its competitors in the children’s  market. 
By the mid-1960s, most of McDonald’s advertising 
budget was spent on promoting Ronald McDonald 
on national  TV, and spending on its ads rose 
 precipitously. In 1967, McDonald’s national advertis-
ing budget totaled $5 million, in 1969 $15  million, 
and by 1974 it had climbed to $60  million, placing 
McDonald’s among the nation’s top 30 advertisers. 
Under Turner’s direction, Ronald McDonald’s role 
expanded beyond TV ads. In the mid-1970s, some 
50 Ronald McDonald “greeting” and “performing” 
clowns were employed by the corporation, and real 
Ronald McDonald clowns attended birthday parties 
held for children in restaurants. A variety of Ronald 
items that included Ronald dolls, wristwatches, and 
wall clocks were sold in the stores.13
McDonald’s appeal to children had remained 
powerful long after Turner stepped down. In 1992, 
McDonald’s delivered 40% of the fast-food sold 
to children under seven, a fi gure widely exceed-
ing its 33% total share in the fast-food market. A 
1996 survey of American schoolchildren found that 
fully 96% of all children could identify Ronald 
McDonald; the only fi ctional character more rec-
ognizable to  American children was Santa Claus. A 
Ronald McDonald Web site operating since the late 
1990s encouraged children to send Ronald an e-mail 
listing their favorite menu items at the chain.14
McDonald’s Under Attack: 
Franchisees’ Rights
During Turner’s tenure as president and CEO, 
McDonald’s faced two major problems: one pertain-
ing to franchisee relations and, the other to employee 
relations.
From the start, not all franchisees were willing 
to accept McDonald’s tight control over their store 
operations. In the mid-1970s, a group of about 
50  franchisees staged an open rebellion against 
McDonald’s, establishing their own organization, the 
McDonald’s Operators Association (MOA). The dis-
sident group had two major complaints. First, fran-
chisees resented McDonald’s prerogative to revoke 
their initial franchise at the end of a 20-year con-
tract. Second, franchisees complained about the loss 
of sales at existing McDonald’s restaurants caused 
by the opening of new McDonald’s outlets nearby.
To diffuse this threat of dissention, Turner 
promptly embarked on reform. He established the 
National Operators Advisory Board (NOAB), a rep-
resentative body composed of two elected franchi-
sees form each region, which dealt with policy issues 

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C57
pertaining to McDonald’s relationships with its fran-
chisees. In addition, Turner appointed an ombuds-
man who heard franchisees’ complaints and issued 
advisory judgments.
Turner’s reform measures eroded the foundations 
of the MOA. Losing members and sympathizers, the 
dissent group of franchisees survived for just two 
years, 1975–1977.15
McDonald’s Under Attack: 
Union Rights
Turner was the architect of McDonald’s long- 
standing labor policy of keeping unions out. In the 
late 1960s, he commissioned a study of  McDonald’s 
labor relations from a management consulting fi rm 
in Chicago, fi nding out that the chain’s outlets were 
all vulnerable to union organizing. Turner then 
hired John Cooke, a labor management  consultant 
who was a former union organizer. Overseeing 
 McDonald’s labor relations in the late 1960s and 
1970s, Cooke trained store managers to detect union 
threats; he organized “fl ying squads” of experienced 
managers who quickly arrived at any restaurant 
 suspected of becoming a target for union organizing 
and held “rap sessions” with the employees to defeat 
the organizing drive. Altogether, Turner and Cooke 
managed to turn back more than 400 organizing 
drives at McDonald’s outlets.
Using fl ying squads, closing down restaurants 
threatened by union organizing, and hiring anti-
union labor lawyers were among the successful tac-
tics used by McDonald’s to remain union free for the 
next three decades. In 2006, McDonald’s operated 
nearly 14,000 restaurants in the United States, none 
of which were unionized.16
Expansion: Michael 
Quinlan, 1987–1998
Michael Quinlan succeeded Fred Turner as Presi-
dent in 1982 and CEO in 1987. Quinlan began his 
career in the McDonald’s mailroom in 1963 and 
steadily worked his way up. A low-profi le, reserved 
manager who, unlike his two predecessors, did not 
seek the limelight, Quinlan was the fi rst McDonald’s 
CEO to hold an MBA degree. A shrewd competitor 
who combined street smarts with boardroom skills, 
Quinlan’s reputation for informality combined with 
his hands-off management style helped him gain 
popularity among McDonald’s employees. Lead-
ing the company through the late 1980s and 1990s, 
Quinlan transformed McDonald’s into a global 
empire, extending the chain’s reach to more than 
100 national markets.17
Customer Service
Launched by Quinlan early on, McDonald’s Ser-
vice Enhancement Program was a customer-care 
 initiative. Implemented in every McDonald’s res-
taurant, the program sought to empower employees 
at all levels to do “whatever it takes” to satisfy cus-
tomers’ requests. To improve customer service, the 
company conducted face-to-face orientation with 
each crew member employed at any of the chain’s 
outlets. Using consumer focus groups, employee “rap 
sessions,” complaint tracking systems, and other ser-
vice enhancement techniques, the program differen-
tiated customer service at McDonald’s from service 
at competing chains. McDonald’s employees were 
encouraged to solve problems on the spot empow-
ered to settle disputes with customers without calling 
the manager, and rewarded for exemplary customer 
care. Store managers, similarly, were instructed to 
spend more time with customers, listening to their 
concerns.18
Cost Cutting
Another initiative introduced by Quinlan was cost 
cutting. Under Quinlan’s direction, McDonald’s 
lowered its restaurants’ construction costs by three 
means: (1) by redesigning restaurant buildings, 
(2) by using more effi cient construction methods, 
and (3) by substituting pricy materials with cheaper 
alternatives. As a result, the average restaurant’s con-
struction cost fell by 27% between 1990 and 1993. 
Next, McDonald’s reduced the insurance costs of 
United States restaurants by giving franchisees the 
opportunity to choose among eight competing insur-
ance companies rather than offering them a single 
company-approved insurance program. The fl exibil-
ity of selecting an insurer through competitive bid-
ding resulted in cost savings of about $50 million 
annually across 9,300 United States outlets in the 
mid-1990s (or $4,000 per restaurant).

C58  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
In addition, the company introduced its newly 
designed “mini McDonald’s” in the early 1990s: 
an outlet that occupied half the fl oor space of the 
standard restaurant but was capable of handling an 
equal volume of sales. Building a mini McDonald’s 
was 30% cheaper than the construction costs of 
 “full-sized” restaurants; consequently, the breakeven 
point of the smaller units was considerably lower than 
that of the larger ones. Low-cost mini  McDonald’s 
made up 60% of all restaurant openings in 1992 and 
80% in 1993.
Finally, in the early and mid-1990s, McDonald’s 
expanded aggressively into small-size non-traditional 
sites, thereby lowering its operating and construc-
tion costs in still another way. McDonald’s opened 
restaurants in hospitals, military bases, gas stations, 
shopping malls, recreation sites, sport stadiums, and 
big box retail stores such as Walmart.19
International Expansion
McDonald’s international presence dates back to the 
mid-1960s. Historically, McDonald’s entered most 
foreign markets by means of joint ventures with local 
partners. 
To 
ensure 
uniform 
standards, 
the 
McDonald’s Corporation sought a greater degree 
of control over foreign than domestic operations. In 
most cases, McDonald’s formed partnerships with 
local entrepreneurs acting as franchisees and own-
ing 50% of the business. If successful, the foreign 
entrepreneur might buy McDonald’s 50% share in 
the business and become a full-fl edged franchisee.
During Quinlan’s fi rst fi ve years at the helm, 
McDonald’s international sales nearly tripled from 
$3 to $8.6 billion, and the share of its overseas 
sales grew from 27% to nearly 40%. In 1992, one 
in three McDonald’s outlets was located overseas, 
 McDonald’s operated in 65 countries, and its lead-
ing foreign markets were Japan (865 stores), Canada 
(642 stores), and the UK (445 stores). By 1994, the 
“Big Six” foreign markets—Japan, Canada, UK, 
 Australia, France, and Germany—accounted for 
80% of McDonald’s foreign income.20
Two milestones in McDonald’s international 
expansion were its entry into the Russian and 
 Chinese markets. Following some 20 years of nego-
tiations with the Soviet authorities, McDonald’s 
opened its fi rst restaurant in Moscow in 1990—its 
largest single unit, employing a crew of 1,200 and 
serving 50,000 customers a day. Two years later, 
 McDonald’s opened its fi rst restaurant in Beijing, 
drawing some 40,000 customers a day. Working 
closely with the Chinese government to establish a 
web of suppliers who would deliver 95% of its prod-
ucts (beef, chicken, fi sh, potatoes, lettuce, and bever-
ages), McDonald’s opened 100 additional outlets in 
Beijing and other Chinese cities by 1996.21
During the late 1990s, the pace of international 
expansion accelerated further. Between 1994 and 
1998, McDonald’s opened 5,800 new restaurants 
abroad, more than the total number added by its 
fi ve largest competitors combined. In 1997, 
85% of McDonald’s new restaurant openings took 
place abroad, and McDonald’s replaced Coca Cola 
as the world’s best-known brand. Altogether, during 
Quinlan’s 10-year tenure, McDonald’s foreign sales 
were growing at a rate of 18.2%; the correspond-
ing fi gure for its domestic sales was 5.6%. “We are 
light-years ahead of where we were fi ve years ago,” 
Quinlan said in 1994, adding, “our international 
potential is boundless.” With restaurants operating 
in 109 countries in 1998, McDonald’s was serving 
less than 1% of the world population, according to a 
company spokesperson.22
McDonald’s in Crisis
While McDonald’s expanded rapidly into foreign 
markets, domestic sales languished. First, a variety of 
new products introduced by Quinlan in the 1990s—
vegetable burgers, pasta, fried chicken, fajitas, and 
pizza—did not catch on and were later withdrawn 
(McDonald’s last successful product launch was the 
Chicken McNugget in 1983).23
Second, McDonald’s again faced a growing 
revolt among some 300 embittered franchisees. 
A  San Diego-based group of franchisees called 
“Consortium” claimed that many of the new res-
taurants opened recently by McDonald’s were can-
nibalizing the business of existing restaurants and 
driving operators out of business. Under Quinlan’s 
direction, McDonald’s embarked on a major United 
States expansion just as domestic sales were slowing 
down. “They built a whole bunch of new stores in 
the wrong places,” the dissident group’s leader told 
Business Week in 1998. During the 1990s, franchi-
sees’ per store profi ts declined by 30%, and a 1997 
survey among McDonald’s domestic operators 
revealed that only 28% of the franchisees believed 
 McDonald’s was on the right track.24

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C59
Third, McDonald’s was losing market share. A 
1998 Harris poll showed that fast-food consum-
ers preferred Wendy’s and Burger King’s offerings 
over McDonald’s. Altogether, McDonald’s share in 
the domestic fast-food market dropped from 
18% to 16% between 1987 and 1998, and its per-
share profi ts in the United States fell by 20% (or 
40% after infl ation) in the decade ending March 
1998. During Quinlan’s last two years at the top 
(March 1996 to March 1998), the company’s share 
price inched up 3% while the Standard and Poor’s 
stock index climbed 63%.25
Crisis: Jack Greenberg, 
1998–2003
When Quinlan stepped down in May 1998, 
 McDonald’s board of directors selected Jack 
 Greenberg to lead the company. On the day the 
board announced the new CEO, Greenberg called 
each of McDonald’s 20 largest shareholders, includ-
ing  Warren Buffet, telling them “I’m a different per-
son, I’ll have a different style.” Wall Street responded 
enthusiastically; McDonald’s stock gained 4% on 
the day of the announcement.26
Unlike Quinlan and Turner, Greenberg was the 
fi rst senior manager at McDonald’s recruited from 
outside the fi rm. A former partner in the accounting 
fi rm of Arthur Young, he joined McDonald’s in 1982 
as the company’s chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO). Ambi-
tious, he undertook training in operations and later 
became a regional manager of hundreds of stores, 
while still serving as CFO. After running  McDonald’s 
United States unit between 1996 and 1998, he was 
named CEO.27
Widely described as an “agent of change,” 
Greenberg launched a strategy aimed at “recasting 
the image of McDonald’s from a stodgy consumer 
products company to a dynamic global brand [in 
the words of one industry analyst].” Impressed by 
his initial efforts to reinvent McDonald’s, editors of 
Restaurants and Institutions named Greenberg the 
magazine’s 1999 Executive of the Year.28
Greenberg broke with tradition in three different 
ways. First, he departed from Kroc’s decades-long 
practice of relying almost exclusively on home-grown 
talent and instead hired outside executives from 
other fi rms.29 Second, Greenberg did not conform 
to Kroc’s model of offering a uniform, unchanging 
menu of a few standardized items but rather changed 
McDonald’s menu to an extent previously unknown. 
And third, Greenberg sought growth through merg-
ers, a policy violating Kroc’s unbroken rule of focus-
ing on the McDonald’s brand—and the McDonald’s 
brand only.
New Menu
The idea of expanding McDonald’s limited menu 
dated back to the mid-1990s. When McDonald’s 
 marketers found out that customers preferred 
Wendy’s and Burger King’s products, Quinlan sought 
to improve the chain’s competitive position by offer-
ing a new menu. The new expanded menu was devel-
oped under Greenberg’s supervision at the time he 
ran McDonald’s domestic operation. Once  promoted 
to CEO in 1998, Greenberg moved aggressively to 
implement the new project.
The expanded menu required a new food prepa-
ration system based on the “just in time” principle of 
product customization. To accommodate customers’ 
preferences, McDonald’s offered customers a variety 
of new items—for example, chicken sandwiches—
made to order, a choice readily available in menus 
offered by Burger King and Wendy’s. Dubbed “Made 
for You,” the new food preparation system was 
intended to improve the quality of the food served as 
well as facilitate the development of additional food 
innovations.
Greenberg implemented the “Made for You” 
project at a remarkable speed. By the spring of 2000, 
the new system was fully installed in the company’s 
12,500 domestic restaurants. Yet the changeover 
was not cheap. Installing the new kitchen cost about 
$25,000 per restaurant, and many franchisees were 
reluctant to cover the installation cost. To provide 
franchisees with an incentive, McDonald’s paid up 
to 50% of the unit’s installation cost.30
Acquisitions
Greenberg moved quickly toward the acquisition of 
additional brands. He sought to broaden “the view of 
the brand,” transforming McDonald’s single-line brand 
into a multiple line of different brands. “[We are] sell-
ing hamburgers and chicken under the  McDonald’s 
brand, Pizza under the Donatos brand . . . and 

C60  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
 burritos under the Chipotle brand,” he told the 
Foreign Policy journal in 2001, listing two of his recent 
acquisitions.31
McDonald’s had never before taken control of 
another food chain. In early 1998, as Quinlan was 
getting ready to step down, McDonald’s made its 
fi rst acquisition, purchasing a minority interest in 
the  Colorado-based Chipotle Mexican Grill chain. 
Greenberg followed up with other acquisitions. In 
1999, he bought Aroma Café, a London chain of 
23  coffee  and sandwich shops, and then purchased 
the 150-unit Midwestern chain Donatos Pizza. A 
year later, in 2000, Greenberg completed his  largest 
acquisition, buying Boston Market, a network of 
some 850 restaurants specializing in serving home-
style meals (with rotisserie chicken as the chain’s 
best selling item). Greenberg, in addition, bought a 
33% stake in Pret A Manger, an upscale chain of 
110 stores selling fresh sandwiches in the United 
 Kingdom. And, fi nally, he increased McDonald’s 
 controlling interest at Chipotle to more than 50%.32
The Attacks on McDonald’s
While Greenberg was busy purchasing regional 
chains, a worldwide campaign against the fast-food 
industry—launched by public interest groups, envi-
ronmentalists, and consumer advocates—was in full 
swing. A major event that galvanized the campaign 
was the publication on 2001 of Eric Schlosser’s Fast 
Food Nation. Translated into many languages, the 
best-selling book focused, among other things, on 
the recent increase in child obesity and placed the 
responsibility for such a development on strategies 
undertaken by global fast-food chains. It singled 
out McDonald’s as the principal culprit, generating 
unfavorable publicity and damaging McDonald’s 
reputation. “Schlosser has done for the fast-food 
industry what Upton Sinclair did nearly a century 
ago [for] . . . the meatpacking industry in The 
Jungle,” one writer reviewing the book commented.33
Another event generating negative publicity 
directed at McDonald’s was the 2000 trial of Jose 
Bove, a farmer and social activist. Leading a group of 
protesters, Bove destroyed a half-built  McDonald’s 
outlet in Millau, France, published a French best-
seller targeting McDonald’s “lousy food” (The World 
Is Not for Sale—and Nor Am I!) and was briefl y 
imprisoned. Blaming McDonald’s for undermin-
ing traditional farming methods with agribusiness 
practices, Bove became a hero in France and was 
invited to meet France’s president as well as its prime 
minister. French President Jacques Chirac expressed 
his sympathy with Bove when he declared: “I am 
in complete solidarity with France’s farm workers, 
and I detest McDonald’s,” and French Prime Minis-
ter Lionel Jospin agreed: “I am personally not very 
pro McDonald’s.” Similarly, in Britain, the Duke of 
Edinburgh, Prince Philip commented: “[McDonald’s 
is] destroying the rainforests of the world . . . cut-
ting down trees to graze [its] cheap cattle to sell [its] 
hamburgers.”34
Even more damaging to McDonald’s reputa-
tion was the so called “McLibel Trial.” The famous 
libel trial was the focus of a long-standing and tena-
cious campaign launched by Greenpeace activists in 
 London against McDonald’s.
In 1986, several members of Greenpeace in  London 
distributed a six-page leafl et accusing  McDonald’s of 
selling unhealthy food, exploiting children,  mistreating 
workers, destroying rain forests, and torturing ani-
mals. A series of slogans—“McDollars,” “McGreedy,” 
“McCancer,” 
“McMurder,” 
“ McProfi ts,” 
and 
“McGarbage”—sprinkled with the golden arches was 
printed along the top edge of the leafl et. The activist 
group distributed the leafl et for four years until the 
McDonald’s Corporation decided to sue fi ve group 
members for libel in 1990, claiming the entire content 
of the leafl et was false. Soon thereafter, three of the 
accused settled, apologizing to  McDonald’s. The two 
remaining activists were determined to fi ght back in 
court—and fi ght to the end.
The libel trial turned into a public specta-
cle. It produced 18,000 pages of transcript and 
40,000 pages of documents and witness state-
ments. It began in 1994 and ended in 1997 with an 
800-page judgment. The judge found the two Green-
peace defendants guilty of libeling McDonald’s, 
imposed a combined fi ne of 60,000 Sterling on both, 
but ruled nonetheless that some allegations were true: 
McDonald’s did indeed “exploit children” through 
advertising, paid workers lower wages, and served 
an unhealthy diet (increasing “the risk of  cancer of 
the bowel and of the breast to some extent”). These 
allegations were widely publicized.35
Next, the two Greenpeace defendants appealed 
the verdict to the UK’s Court of Appeal. In 1999, 
one year into the Greenberg tenure, a three-justice 
Court of Appeal heard the case, overturned parts 
of the original verdict (supporting, for example, the 

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C61
 allegation that eating food served by McDonald’s 
may increase the risk of heart disease), and reduced 
the fi ne to 40,000 Sterling. In the meantime, the activ-
ists’ campaign against McDonald’s intensifi ed. The 
McDonald’s corporation wanted the case to go away 
and announced that it would no longer try to stop 
Greenpeace members from distributing the leafl et.
Still, the two Greenpeace defendants were not 
done. They appealed the Court of Appeal’s ruling to 
the British House of Lords. When the Lords refused 
to hear the case, the defendants fi led an appeal with 
the European Court of Human Rights. As of 2002—
Greenberg’s last year at McDonald’s—the appeal to 
the European Court was still pending.36
Financial Results
Under Greenberg’s leadership, McDonald’s fi nancial 
performance had remained lackluster. The introduc-
tion of the expanded menu failed to increase sales, 
the new acquisitions produced disappointing results, 
and the global attack on McDonald’s public image 
turned customers away.
To begin with, the “Made for You” system was 
too labor intensive and, as such, increased both 
implementation costs and service times. A company 
internal document obtained by Fortune magazine 
in 2002 cited “alarming research” showing serious 
problems with customer service. “Mystery shoppers” 
hired by the company to visit restaurants found that 
operators met their “speed-to-service” standards 
only 46% of the time. It also cited complaints about 
“rude service, slow service, unprofessional service, 
and inaccurate service.” The Strategy Direction jour-
nal, similarly, reported in 2003 that in recent years 
waiting time at McDonald’s restaurants doubled, 
commenting: “[t]aking some of the ‘fast’ away from 
fast food has not proven especially popular with 
customers.” Additionally, surveys published in the 
American Customer Survey Index showed that cus-
tomer satisfaction at McDonald’s fell well below the 
levels at Wendy’s and Burger Kings, its two direct 
competitors.37
Nor did the regional chains bought by  Greenberg 
perform as expected. Underperforming, the newly 
acquired chains were sold one after another  during 
the six-year period 2001–2006. In 2001,  McDonald’s 
sold off the Aroma Café chain, and in 2003, shortly 
after Greenberg had stepped down, McDonald’s 
announced that it would henceforth focus on its 
core hamburger business and sell off other  ventures. 
In 2003, McDonald’s sold Donatos Pizza back to 
its founder and disposed of all Boston Market out-
lets outside the United States. In 2006, McDonald’s 
sold off the Chipotle chain, and in 2007, it divested 
itself completely of Boston Market, selling the chain 
to a private equity for $250 million.38
The global criticism of McDonald’s hurt the 
company’s fi nancial performance as well. In the 
United States, the image of McDonald’s as a seller of 
unhealthy, fatty food triggered an increasing number 
of lawsuits fi led against the company by consumers 
alleging that eating regularly at McDonald’s made 
them overweight. Overseas, the “McLibel Trial” 
turned into a public relations disaster as it gained 
worldwide publicity—the Greenpeace leafl et alone 
was translated to 27 languages. One likely result 
of the global attack on McDonald’s public image 
was the company’s decision to pull out of several 
countries, including Bolivia and two Middle Eastern 
nations.39
The decline in McDonald’s performance under 
Greenberg’s direction was evident across several key 
fi nancial indices. During both 2000 and 2001, same 
stores sales—sales at restaurants opened more than 
a year—fell, and McDonald’s United States market 
share was growing at a slower rate (2.2%) than that 
of Burger King (2.7%) and Wendy’s (2.5%). In 2002, 
McDonald’s stock price was trading at a seven-year 
low, and during seven of the eight quarters end-
ing summer 2002, McDonald’s earnings declined. 
When McDonald’s disclosed its third-quarter results 
in December 2002—showing no improvement—
Greenberg announced his resignation.40
Comeback: Jim Skinner, 
2004 to Present
McDonald’s board elected James Cantalupo, a former 
head of the company’s international operations, to 
succeed Greenberg and added two other senior exec-
utives to a newly formed turnaround team: Charles 
Bell and Jim Skinner. A year later, Cantalupo died of 
a heart attack, and Bell, in turn, assumed the com-
pany’s leadership. Stepping down a few months later 
to fi ght a battle against terminal cancer, Bell himself 
was succeeded by Skinner in November 2004.41

C62  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Unlike Greenberg, Skinner was a McDonald’s 
insider, as were both Quinlan and Turner. The son 
of a bricklayer, Skinner started his career at 
McDonald’s fl ipping hamburgers at an Iowa res-
taurant in 1962. Never graduating from college, he 
steadily made his way up the corporate ladder and 
eventually took charge of McDonald’s European 
operation. In 2003, McDonald’s board promoted 
Skinner to vice chairman and a year later to CEO.42
Skinner was a congenial, low-profi le chief execu-
tive who ate daily at McDonald’s, stopping regu-
larly at restaurants to mingle with employees, often 
jumping in to help the kitchen crew at the back end 
of the restaurant (“I don’t touch the cash register. I 
don’t know anything about [it]”). “He’s very 
down-to-earth, rooted and very approachable,” a 
McDonald’s supplier described Skinner. “He’s 
extremely witty and has a great way of putting 
people at ease.” Popular with both subordinates and 
peers, Skinner was a good listener and a skilled con-
sensus builder; he routinely brought managers with 
different viewpoints together, soliciting their advice 
before undertaking important decisions.43
Working together with Cantalupo and Bell to 
turn McDonald’s performance around, Skinner 
helped forge a new strategic initiative called “Plan to 
Win.” Implemented company-wide during Skinner’s 
fi rst fi ve years at the helm (2004–2009), the plan 
 prescribed two principal goals: (1) the upgrading 
of customer service to improve the fi nancial perfor-
mance of existing restaurants (rather than open new 
ones); and (2) the introduction of nutritional, health-
ful, and higher quality food choices coupled with the 
promotion of a “balanced lifestyle.”
Improving Stores’ Operations
Under the leadership of both Quinlan and  Greenberg, 
McDonald’s expanded aggressively, building an 
excessive number of new restaurants, many of 
which were cutting into the profi ts of existing ones. 
In addition, customer service at McDonald’s had 
steadily deteriorated, reaching its lowest level during 
 Greenberg’s last two years in offi ce.
Skinner’s “Plan to Win” was designed to address 
both problems. First, McDonald’s expanded inter-
nally, investing in existing stores instead of adding 
new locations. Most existing stores were redeco-
rated,  and thousands were completely remod-
eled. Aided by the company, franchisees replaced 
 crumbling plastic booths with large comfortable 
chairs, installed soft lights in place of bright ones, 
repainted the walls, and added Internet access. 
Selected McDonald’s outlets went further, display-
ing wide-screen televisions, installing video games, 
and placing stationary bicycles with video screens in 
new play areas within the restaurants.44
To bring in new customers as well as attract old 
ones, store hours were extended. Opening earlier 
and closing late, restaurants could now serve both 
early risers and late night diners. By 2009, fully 
34% of McDonald’s stores in the United States were 
open 24 hours.45
Another initiative undertaken by Skinner 
was diversifi cation into premium coffee drinks. 
 Competing head to head with the Starbucks Cor-
poration, McDonald’s began installing coffee bars 
(“McCafes”) with “baristas” preparing espressos, 
cappuccinos, and lattes in its McDonald’s United 
States restaurants. To begin with, McDonald’s mar-
keting department conducted a large-scale study of 
Starbucks’ customers. Interviewing and videotap-
ing respondents talking about their coffee-drinking 
experiences and offering them espresso drinks at 
McDonald’s, the study found that a large number 
of Starbucks’ customers were sitting “on the fence” 
ready to experiment with McDonald’s choices of 
espresso drinks—all of which were sold at a price 
lower than Starbucks’. Encouraged by its fi ndings, 
the McDonald’s Corporation implemented the 
program promptly, and by 2007, 800 McDonald’s 
United States restaurants were serving espresso 
drinks. McDonald’s installed 5,700 additional 
“McCafes” in its United States restaurants in 2008, 
bringing the total to 6,500 out of some 14,000 out-
lets operating nationwide at the end of the year. In 
the meantime, the Starbucks Corporation was strug-
gling, closing down stores and laying off employees 
for the fi rst time in its history.46
Answering Its Critics
Fast-food nutritional critics continued to target 
McDonald’s long after Greenberg stepped down. 
In 2004, as Skinner assumed the company’s leader-
ship, a documentary fi lm entitled Super Size Me was 
released and played in movie theaters around the 
world. The fi lm depicted a man getting increasingly 
sick as he consumed an all-McDonald’s diet and 
nothing else for a whole month.47

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C63
The renewed attack on McDonald’s required a 
speedy response. Skinner, accordingly, discontinued 
the chain’s Super Size menu and substituted healthier 
food choices; in 2004, McDonald’s promoted fruit 
and milk as substitutes for French fries and soda 
drinks in kids’ meals and, for a limited period, added 
a bottle of water and a pedometer to adults’ Happy 
Meals. In addition, McDonald’s, offered customers 
deli sandwiches, served on either a French or a rye 
roll, a new line of premium salads, and apple slices. 
Milk was no longer sold in large size cartons but in 
small bottles.48
In 2005–2006, McDonald’s launched a Bal-
anced Lifestyle (smart eating) and Fitness program 
and refocused its marketing strategy on exercising. 
In a typical ad released in 2006, Ronald McDonald 
is featured as an “ambassador of balanced lifestyle” 
and is depicted in a running position.49
McDonald’s 
promotion 
of 
healthier 
food 
choices was not confi ned to the United States but 
extended to Europe. In Britain, in the mid-2000s, 
McDonald’s reduced the salt added to French fries 
and chicken nuggets by 25%–30% and in Ireland 
by 50%. McDonald’s also provided consumers with 
nutritional information, labeling all its products and 
listing the products’ fat and salt contents on sign-
posts placed in stores. In both the United States 
and Europe, McDonald’s completely phased out 
trans fats in 2008, using a newly developed blend of 
canola, corn, and soybean oils to cook French fries, 
hash browns, chicken, and fi sh fi lets.50
Still, the most far-reaching change in McDonald’s 
food offerings under Skinner was the shift from beef 
to chicken products. In 2009, McDonald’s menu 
included four chicken choices: grilled chicken sand-
wich, Southern-style chicken sandwich, wrap chicken 
sandwich, and chicken for breakfast. Between 2002 
and 2009, chicken sales at McDonald’s doubled 
while beef sales remained fl at, and by 2009, the 
McDonald’s Corporation was purchasing annually 
more chicken than beef worldwide.51
McDonald’s nutritional efforts did not go unno-
ticed by its critics. Kelly Brownell, director of the 
Rudd Center of Food Policy and Obesity at Yale 
University, pointed out that McDonald’s was more 
responsive to critics than its competitors. “As fast-
food restaurants go, McDonald’s has been pretty 
progressive,” Brownell told the New York Times in 
2009. “If you look at the last fi ve years, McDonald’s 
has introduced some better foods and resisted the 
urge to offer bigger burgers.”52
Financial Results
Skinner’s turnaround efforts resulted in a resounding 
success: during Skinner’s fi rst fi ve years at the helm, 
McDonald’s posted its best fi nancial results ever.
When Skinner completed his fi rst year as 
CEO, same-store sales in the United States rose by 
nearly 10%, the largest increase in 30 years. Dur-
ing  Skinner’s fi rst two years, McDonald’s market 
value doubled, and during the deepening recession 
of 2008, McDonald’s surprised analysts—month 
after month—with  stronger than expected results. 
Throughout 2008—a year in which the stock  market 
lost more than a third of its value in the worst per-
formance since the Great Depression—McDonald’s 
stock gained 6%, and the McDonald’s Corporation 
emerged as one of the only two companies (the other 
being Walmart) listed in the Dow Jones Industrial 
Average to post a stock price increase. In 2008, 
McDonald’s global revenues rose by 5%, and its net 
income tripled, producing a rate of return on sales of 
18%. McDonald’s served 58 million customers a day 
globally in January 2009, 8 million more than two 
years earlier.53
Finally, under Skinner’s leadership, McDonald’s 
planned further expansion in 2009. At that time 
when an increasing number of restaurants, both 
in the United States and Europe, were struggling 
to remain in business, McDonald’s announced its 
plan to open 650 additional outlets within a year 
(2009), 240 of them in Europe, and to spent more 
than $2  billion on this effort.54 Asked whether 
 McDonald’s was “recession proof,” Skinner replied: 
“No, we are recession-  resistant. I don’t know if we 
are depression-resistant though.”55
Endnotes
 1. Eric Schlosser, Fast Food Nation (New York: Harper, 
2005), 244–246; “McDonald’s Corporation,” Inter-
national Directory of Company Histories (New York: 
St. James, 204), vol. 63, 285.
 2. “McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
Histories, 284–285, “McDonald’s,” Hoover’s Handbook 
of American Business, 2008, 557.

C64  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
 3. “McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
Histories, 280.
 4. John Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, (New York: 
Bantam books, 1986, 1995), 17–18.
 5. “McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
Histories, 280–281. The quotation is from Schlosser, 
Fast Food Nation, 5.
 6. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 114–116.
 7. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 293–295.
 8. Max Boas and Steve Chain, Big Mac: The Unauthorized 
Story of McDonald’s (New York: New American Library, 
1976), 72, Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 140.
 9. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 140–141.
 10. Boas and Chain, Big Mac, Chapter 5; Love, McDonald’s: 
Behind the Arches, 147–149.
 11. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 144–146.
 12. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 280–281, but see 
also 385.
 13. Boas and Chain, Big Mac, Chapter 7, but see also Love, 
McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 220–221.
 14. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 222; Schlosser, 
Fast Food Nation, 4, 45, 294.
 15. Boas and Chain, Big Mac, Chapter 9; Love, McDonald’s: 
Behind the Arches, Chapter 16.
 16. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 394–395; Boas 
and Chain, Big Mac, Chapter 10; Schlosser, Fast Food 
Nation, 76–78.
 17. “McDonald’s Names Quinlan as Chief, Succeed-
ing Turner,” Wall Street Journal, October 21, 1986; 
“McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
Histories, 280–281.
 18. Michel Quinlan, “How Does Service Drive the Service 
Company?” Harvard Business Review, November– 
December 1991, 146; Love, McDonald’s: Behind the 
Arches, 459–460.
 19. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 461–462.
 20. Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 416, 462–463.
 21. Tony Royle, Working in McDonald’s in Europe,  (London: 
Routledge, 2000), 24–25; Love, McDonald’s: Behind the 
Arches, 464–466.
 22. J. P. Donlon, “Quinlan Fries Harder,” Chief Executive, 
Jan/Feb. 1998, online ABI data base, 4. The quotation is 
from Love, McDonald’s: Behind the Arches, 463.
 23. “McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
Histories, 280–281; David Leonhardt, “McDonald’s: 
Can It Regain its Golden Touch?” Business Week, 
March 9, 1998, online ABI data base, 70.
 24. Business Week, March 9, 1998.
 25. Business Week, March 9, 1998.
 26. Patricia Sellers, “McDonald’s Starts Over,” Fortune, 
June 22, 1998, online, ABI data base, 122.
 27. Fortune, June 22, 1998.
 28. The quotations, in order, are from Fortune June 22, 1998, 
and Scott Hume, “Jack Greenberg’s New  Populism,” 
Restaurants and Institutions, July 1, 1999, online, ABI 
data base, 109.
 29. Dayan Machan, “Polishing the Golden Arches,” Forbes, 
June 15, 1998, online, ABI data base, 42.
 30. Amy Zuber, “Jack Greenberg: Bringing New Luster to 
the Golden Arches,” Nation’s Restaurants News,  January 
2000, online, ABI data base, 90; Fortune June  2, 1998; 
Restaurants and Institutions, July 1, 1999.
 31. Moises Haim, “McAtlas Shrugged,” Foreign Policy May/
June 2001, online ABI data base, 124.
 32. McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company His-
tories, 284; Nation’s Restaurants News, January 2000.
 33. Reprinted in Eric Schlosser, Fast Food Nation under 
“Praise for Fast Food Nation.”
 34. Eric Schlosser, Fast Food Nation, 244. The quotation is 
from Foreign Policy May/June 2001.
 35. The quotations, in order, are from Eric Schlosser, Fast 
Food Nation, 245–247, and John Vidal, McLibel: Burger 
Culture on Trial (New York: New Press, 1997), 306.
 36. Eric Schlosser, Fast Food Nation, 249.
 37. David Stired, “Fast Food, Slow Service,” Fortune, 
 September 30, 2002, online ABI data base, 38; “Has 
McDonald’s Lost Its Plot?” Strategic Direction, April 
2003, online ABI data base, 14.
 38. McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company 
 Histories, 284–285; McDonald’s Corporation, “His-
tory,” Hoovers.Com, retrieved May 27, 2008.
 39. Eric Schlosser, Fast Food Nation, 249; McDonald’s,” 
International Directory of Company Histories, 284–285.
 40. McDonald’s,” International Directory of Company His-
tories, 284–285; Kate MacArthur, “McD’s Boss Blasts 
Chain ‘Naysayers,’” Advertising Age, March 18, 2002, 
online ABI data base, 11; Shirley Leung, “McDonald’s 
Chief Plans to Leave,” Wall Street Journal, December 6, 
2002.
 41. Dale Buss, “McDonald’s Salad Days,” Chief Executive, 
November 2005, online ABI data base, 16.
 42. Carolyn Walkup, “2006 Golden Chain: Jim Skinner,” 
Nation’s Restaurant News, October 16, 2006, online, 
ABI data base, 88; Andrew Martin, “The Happiest 
Meal,” New York Times, January 11, 2009; Lauren Fos-
ter and Jeremy Grant, “McDonald’s Woos Its ‘Burger 
Flippers,’” Financial Times, April 15, 2005.
 43. The quotations, in order, are from New York Times, 
 January 11, 2009, and Nation’s Restaurant News, 
 October 16, 2006.
 44. Janet Adamy, “Boss Talk: How Jim Skinner Flipped 
McDonald’s,” Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2007; 
“McDonald’s Takes on a Weakened Starbucks,” Wall 
Street Journal, January 7, 2008; New York Times, 
 January 11, 2009.
 45. New York Times, January 11, 2009.
 46. Wall Street Journal, January 7, 2008; New York Times, 
January 11, 2009; Janet Adamy, “McDonald’s to 
Expand, Posting Strong Results,” Wall Street Journal, 
January 27, 2009.
 47. Steven Gray and Janet Adamy, “McDonald’s Gets 
Healthier,” Wall Street Journal, February 23, 2005.

 
Case 4 McDonald’s and Its Critics, 1973–2009 
C65
 48. Amy Garber, “New McD Chief,” Nation’s Restaurant 
News, December 13, 2004, online, ABI data base, 50; 
Chief Executive, November 2005.
 49. Janet Adamy and Richard Gibson, “McDonald’s Read-
ies Strategy to Defl ect Critics’ Next Barrage,” Wall Street 
Journal, April 12, 2006.
 50. Joanne Bowery, “McDonald’s Gets Back to Basics,” 
Marketing, October 25, 2006, online, ABI data base, 16; 
Janet Adamy, “McDonald’s Loses Its Trans Fats,” Wall 
Street Journal, May 23, 2008.
 51. New York Times, January 11, 2009.
 52. Cited in the New York Times, January 11, 2009.
 53. Chief Executive, November 2005; New York Times, 
January 11, 2009; “McDonald’s Press Release October 
22, 2008,” online, McDonalds.com; Wall Street Journal, 
January 5, 2007 and January 27, 2009.
 54. Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2009; Jonathan Brichall 
and Jenny Wiggins, “McDonald’s Bucks Trend by Creat-
ing Jobs,” Financial Times, January 24, 2009.
 55. Quoted in the New York Times, January 11, 2009.

C66  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
5
The Global Automobile 
Industry in 2009
Introduction
As the fi rst decade of the 21st century drew to a close, 
the global automobile industry was facing unprec-
edented economic challenges. A deep recession had 
driven automobile sales down to levels not seen since 
the 1960s. Many long-established companies, including 
General Motors (GM), Chrysler, and Toyota, sought
government aid to help them survive the downturn.
Ultimately, Chrysler had to seek Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy protection. General Motors, also went down 
that road. In contrast, Toyota, with $19 billion in cash 
on its balance sheet, looked well positioned to survive 
the downturn in good shape.
At the same time, two seismic shifts were taking 
place in the structure of global demand. First, while 
demand imploded in many developed nations during 
2008, growth continued in some developed nations, 
particularly China, which experts predicted could 
become the world’s biggest automobile market some-
time between 2016 and 2020. Refl ecting this, several 
automobile companies from developing nations were 
using their strong home markets as springboards 
to expand their global reach. These included Tata 
Motors of India, which purchased Jaguar and Land 
Rover from Ford in 2008, and China’s Geely, which, 
in mid-2009, was reportedly bidding for General 
Motor’s Saab unit and Ford’s Volvo subsidiary, both 
of which were based in Sweden.1 In addition, high 
fuel costs were driving a migration in demand away 
from large vehicles, such as the sports utility (SUVs) 
vehicles so beloved by Americans, toward smaller 
more fuel-effi cient cars, including hybrids such as the 
Ford Focus and Toyota Prius.
Background
Some 50 years ago, renowned management author 
Peter Drucker called the automobile industry the 
“industry of industries.” In many respects, his charac-
terization is still true today. The industry makes over 
50 million cars and trucks a year, employs millions 
of people in factories scattered around the globe, 
and accounts for about 10% of the gross domestic 
product in many developed countries. The industry 
consumes nearly half the world’s output of rubber, 
25% of its glass, and 15% of its steel.2 Its products 
are responsible for almost half of the world’s oil 
 consumption and are a major source of rising carbon 
dioxide levels in the atmosphere, the greenhouse gas 
implicated in global warming. Modern cities, with 
their attendant suburban sprawl, have been designed 
around the automobile. The automobile has shaped 
our landscape, changed our atmosphere, and exerted 
a profound infl uence on the global economy. It is 
indeed still the industry of industries—and today the 
industry of industries is going through wrenching 
changes.
The emergence of the modern industry dates 
back to 1913 and Henry Ford’s fi rst implementation 
of the production technology—the continuously 
moving assembly line—that would revolutionize 
so much of industrial capitalism over the next few 
decades. Ford quickly became the master of mass 
production, churning out thousands of black Model 
T Fords from his Highland Park plant in Michigan. 
Mass production dramatically lowered the costs 
of building cars and paved the way for the emer-
gence of a mass consumer market. It was not Ford, 
This case was prepared by Charles W. L. Hill, the University of Washington, as the basis for class discussion rather than to illustrate 
either effective or ineffective handling of an administrative situation. Reprinted by permission of Charles W. L. Hill. All rights reserved. 
Copyright © Charles W. L. Hill, 2009.
C66

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C67
however, but Alfred Sloan, the CEO of General 
Motors, who in the mid-1920s realized that the 
key to success in the industry was serving custom-
ers by offering them “a car for every purse and 
purpose.”3 Under Sloan, GM segmented the mar-
ket, producing a differentiated range of models to 
consumers. In doing so, the company seized mar-
ket leadership from Ford and has not relinquished 
it since.
By the 1960s, General Motors, Ford, and 
Chrysler dominated the United States market; then 
by far the world’s largest. GM at one point made 
more than 60% of all automobile sales in the 
United States, and collectively the three companies 
accounted for more than 90% of sales. Moreover, the
companies were now multinationals, with signifi cant
operations outside of North America, particularly 
in Europe, the world’s second-largest car market. 
This, however, was all about to change. Riding the 
wave of economic disruption caused by the OPEC 
oil price hikes of the 1970s, foreign manufactur-
ers of fuel-effi cient cars began to invade the United 
States market. First there was Volkswagen, with 
its revolutionary VW Beetle, followed by a slew of 
Japanese manufacturers, including, most notably, 
Honda, Nissan, and Toyota.
It was the invading Toyota that was to usher 
in the next revolution in car making. Faced with a 
small and intensely competitive home market and 
constrained by a lack of capital, Toyota started to 
tweak the mass production system fi rst developed 
by Ford. Engineers tried to fi nd ways to build cars 
effi ciently in smaller volumes and with less capi-
tal. After years of experimentation, by the 1970s, 
a new production system emerged at Toyota. Later 
dubbed “lean production,” it was based on innova-
tions that reduced setup times for machinery and 
made shorter production runs economical. When 
coupled with the introduction of just-in-time (JIT) 
inventory systems, fl exible work practices, an orga-
nization-wide focus on quality, and the practice of 
stopping the assembly line to fi x defects (which was 
the antithesis of Ford’s continually moving assem-
bly line), the lean production system yielded signifi -
cant gains in productivity and product quality. In 
turn, it lowered costs, improved brand equity, and 
gave Toyota a competitive advantage. Toyota capi-
talized on its lean production system to grow faster 
than its rivals; by 2008, the company had replaced 
General Motors as the world’s largest automobile 
manufacturer.
As was the case with mass production, Toyota’s 
innovation of lean production was imitated, with 
varying degrees of success, by other volume car-
makers. Japanese competitors were the fi rst to try 
to adopt Toyota’s innovation. During the 1990s, the 
American volume carmakers jumped on the band-
wagon. Despite this, Toyota still enjoys an advan-
tage in the automobile industry, based on production 
excellence, although the gap has closed signifi cantly. 
Just as importantly, the sluggish American response 
to Japanese and European invasions of their home 
market allowed the foreigners to capture even more 
market share.
By the end of the fi rst decade of the new cen-
tury, America’s big three (now often referred to as 
the Detroit Three) were rapidly losing their grip on 
the domestic market. Collectively, GM, Ford, and 
Chrysler accounted for 47.9% of car and light truck 
sales in the United States in 2008, down from 61.8% 
in 2003 and 74% in 1997 (light trucks include 
pickup trucks and SUVs, both segments in which 
the big three have traditionally been very strong).4 
The other 52.1% of sales were attributed to for-
eign producers, up from 26% in 1997. Moreover, 
in stark contrast to the situation in the 1980s 
when most foreign cars were imported into the 
United States, by 2008, most foreign nameplates 
were built in “transplant” factories located in 
North America.
What saved the Detroit Three during the 1990s 
and early 2000s were robust sales of light trucks, 
particularly SUVs. Foreign manufacturers had 
been caught off-guard by the American appetite 
for SUVs, which surged as oil prices remained low 
and the economy boomed. In 2003, GM, Ford, and 
Chrysler still accounted for 74% of light truck 
sales. But there, too, market share was eroding 
due to gains made by Japanese and European SUV 
models.5 The rapid rise in oil prices between 2004 
and 2008, when oil peaked at nearly $150 a bar-
rel, up from $20 a barrel in 2001, brought an end 
to the two-decade boom in SUV sales, removing 
the main source of strength for American manu-
facturers. With competition in the passenger car 
segment intensifying, the outlook for the Detroit 
Three looked increasingly grim. Then the economic 
recession of 2008 hit the industry.

C68  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
The 2008 Global 
Financial Crisis 
and Automobile Sales
The recession started in the United States housing 
market. Over the prior decade, mortgage lenders had 
been making increasingly risky loans to American 
homebuyers, some of whom clearly could not afford 
the loans that they were taking on. However, low 
“teaser rates” that expired after one to fi ve years, 
to be replaced by much higher interest rates, per-
suaded many borrowers to take on mortgage debt 
obligations. Moreover, many believed, incorrectly as 
it turned out, that if they could not meet their mort-
gage payments, they could always sell their home 
and pay off the loan.
For their part, mortgage lenders were encouraged 
to make risky loans by the development of a market 
for mortgage-backed securities. This enabled them 
to bundle mortgages into bonds and sell them off 
to other fi nancial institutions, thereby shifting the 
risk. The institutions that purchased these mortgage-
backed securities were themselves able to buy insur-
ance that protected them against the risk of default 
by mortgage payees, which would have signifi cantly 
reduced the value of the bonds they held. This insur-
ance took the form of complex derivatives, known as 
collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs, that were 
then traded between institutions. CDOs were viewed 
as relatively safe investments because default rates 
on mortgages were low.
The entire system seemed to work as long as 
 housing prices continued to rise and defaults stayed 
low. But in 2007, a two-decade rise in United States 
housing prices came to an abrupt end. Furthermore, 
the interest rates were starting to rise on many 
adjustable rate mortgages that had been sold with 
low teaser rates. As rates started to rise, defaults 
surged, homes were foreclosed at record rates, and 
an increase in the supply of homes for sale drove 
prices down even further. At this point, the United 
States fi nancial system went into a tailspin. The value 
of mortgage-backed securities and derivatives such 
as CDOs plunged, damaging the balance sheets of 
many fi nancial institutions. Because fi nancial institu-
tions from all over the world had been purchasing 
American mortgage-backed securities and deriva-
tives, the crisis immediately became global. With 
assets on their balance sheets, fi nancial institutions 
had no choice but to dramatically reduce the new 
loans that they made, and after decades of easy credit, 
suddenly it became very diffi cult to borrow money.
The credit squeeze hit the automobile industry 
particularly hard because cars are, for many people, 
their second-biggest purchases after homes and are 
often fi nanced with loans. Moreover, even for those 
people who used cash to buy cars, the fi nancial crisis 
suddenly made them very nervous; they responded 
by putting off any purchases of big-ticket items 
such as automobiles as they waited for the crisis to 
resolve. As a consequence, demand for automobiles 
plunged. For 2008, United States automobile sales 
were down 18% from 16.1 million units in 2007 
to 13.2 million units in 2008. Most of the sales fall 
occurred in the second half of the year, with monthly 
sales fi gures recording some of the lowest levels since 
the 1960s. Moreover, little relief was seen for 2009. 
Standard and Poor’s, for example, was forecasting 
United States sales of 11.5 million units in 2009, a 
39% drop from 2007.6
What complicated the situation was that at the 
same time the fi nancial crisis was unfolding, oil prices 
surged to record highs, hitting $150 a barrel in mid-
2008. As prices at the gas pump rose, people who 
were buying cars switched to more fuel-effi cient vehi-
cles, many of which were made not by American pro-
ducers, but by smaller foreign fi rms such as Hyundai 
and Kia of Korea and Subaru of Japan. Even though 
oil prices subsequently fell as the recession took hold, 
the perception had taken hold that once the econ-
omy recovered, oil prices would again increase, and 
demand for pickup trucks and SUVs remained weak.
While the slump in demand was most dramatic 
in America, other markets also saw sharp declines, 
and for many of the same reasons: the global fi nan-
cial crisis caused credit contraction and increased 
uncertainty about the future, which hit automobile 
sales particularly hard. In France, for example, sales 
fell 15.8% in December 2008 compared with a year 
earlier. In Japan, the fi gure was 22%; in Italy, 13.3%; 
and Spain, 49.9%.7 Looking forward,  forecasts 
called for global automobile sales of approximately 
46.6  million units in 2009, down from a peak of 
54.92 million units in 2007.8
However, while demand declines have been the 
norm in developed nations, there is a different story 
in developing nations (see Exhibit 1). In China, India, 

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C69
and Brazil, for example, the sales declines were much 
smaller, and growth had already resumed by early 
2009. In all of these countries, relatively low levels
of automobile ownership, coupled with fast under-
lying economic growth rates, suggest that sales will 
continue to grow at a robust rate in coming years.
Two factors made the sharp sales declines par-
ticularly painful for automobile manufacturers. One 
was their high level of fi xed costs. As sales fall below 
breakeven run rates, high fi xed costs imply rapidly 
rising losses. Exacerbating the situation was the fact 
that between 2004 and 2008, some 19 million units 
of new productive capacity had been added to the 
global industry.
The combination of expanding global capacity, 
followed by a sharp drop in demand, when coupled 
with a demand shift to smaller cars, proved toxic 
for several companies. Hardest hit were General 
Motors and Chrysler. Both companies were forced 
to seek government aid in an attempt to stave off 
bankruptcy. In total, the United States government 
had committed $17.4 billion in aid to GM and 
Chrysler by early 2009. In contrast, Ford, who had 
raised signifi cant capital from private investors in 
2007, declined government aid and signaled that, 
despite operating losses, it would be able to survive 
the recession. Despite the aid both Chrysler and GM 
were forced into bankruptcy. Under an agreement 
negotiated after Chrysler’s bankruptcy, the Italian 
company Fiat will take over management of the 
company’s assets. Fiat itself had undergone a dra-
matic turnaround between 2004 and 2008 under the 
leadership of Sergio Marchionne, primarily through 
a combination of production effi ciencies and new 
product launches, including small cars that have sold 
well in an environment of high fuel prices. As of May 
2009, Fiat was also reported to be bidding for Opel, 
the European arm of General Motors.
Toyota, too, reported a loss of $3.6 billion for the 
fi nancial year that ended in March 2009, its fi rst-ever 
as a public company, primarily due to the sharp sales 
declines in the United States and Japan. However, 
with $19 billion in cash on its balance sheet, the 
result of years of high profi ts, Toyota was fi nancially 
secure. Despite this, Toyota’s fi nance arm had appar-
ently sought some $2 billion in government aid from 
the Bank of Japan to help its fi nance arms survive the 
global credit crunch.
Exhibit 1  Global Automobile Sales: 2000, 2007, 2008, and 2009 Forecast (millions of units)
2000
2007
2008
2009 Forecast
Total Global Sales
 
46.64
 
54.92
 
52.17
 
46.66
North America
 
19.77
 
18.83
 
15.85
 
12.80
Canada
 
1.55
 
1.65
 
1.64
 
1.38
United States
 
17.35
 
16.09
 
13.19
 
10.50
Western Europe
 
14.75
 
14.75
 
13.54
 
12.46
Eastern Europe
 
2.38
 
3.58
 
4.01
 
3.41
Asia
 
7.85
 
14.42
 
15.07
 
14.44
China
 
0.61
 
5.15
 
5.04
 
5.29
India
 
0.60
 
1.18
 
1.20
 
1.23
South America
 
1.89
 
3.34
 
3.70
 
3.55
Brazil
 
1.17
 
1.98
 
2.19
 
2.24
Source: “Auto Production Swings from Reverse into Drive,” Global Auto Report, Global Economic Research, April 29, 2009.

C70  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Other governments, eager to protect jobs, were 
also putting up cash to support their local producers. 
French government offi cials said that automakers 
could expect approximately $7.8 billion in loans and 
loan guarantees. Germany unveiled a similar plan. 
In Britain, automobile producers (which are almost 
entirely in foreign hands) sought about $3.3 billion 
in government loans. Similarly, the Swedish govern-
ment provided around $3.4 billion in loan guar-
antees to Volvo and Saab (which at the time were 
owned by Ford and GM, respectively). In Brazil, 
where the market continued to grow, the govern-
ment instructed Banco de Brasil to make $1.7 billion 
available to the fi nancing units of local automakers 
so that they could cope with the global credit crisis.9
The fl urry of government aid for ailing automakers 
prompted a caution from Pascal Lamy, the Director 
General of the World Trade Organization. Although 
he chose his words carefully, Lamy seemed to suggest 
that loans and loan guarantees were, in effect, subsi-
dies to ineffi cient producers, and going forward they 
could distort world trade and discriminate against effi -
cient producers who did not receive similar subsidies.
Most forecasts called for 2009 to be another 
rough year for the global automobile industry, 
although many believed that demand would start to 
recover toward the end of the year and the recovery 
would be sustained through 2011. During that time 
period, growth was predicted to be strongest in the 
emerging markets of China, India, and Brazil. The 
structure of the global industry, however, may be 
irreversibly altered.
Industry Trends
Several important trends characterized the competi-
tive landscape of the global automobile industry in 
the fi rst decade of the 21st century. Most important 
among these were the decline of America’s big three, 
the shifting patterns of global demand (and particu-
larly the growth of China as a major market and 
producer), and the increasing attention paid to non-
traditional engines, including hybrids and fuel cells.
The Decline of America’s Big Three
The decline of America’s big three auto producers has 
been ongoing for decades. Once accounting for as 
much as 90% of all cars and trucks sold in the United 
States, by the mid-1990s the fi gure had fallen to 75%, 
and today it is about 44% (see Exhibit 2). Taking up 
market share have been the Japanese trio of Honda, 
Nissan, and Toyota and, to a lesser extent, Volks-
wagen, Hyundai, and Subaru. The decline has been 
notably steeper in the passenger car segment of the 
industry in which the big three saw their share decline 
to under 42% by 2008. In contrast, the light truck seg-
ment has long been a source of strength for the Ameri-
can producers, and collectively they still account for 
around 70% of the share in this segment. However, 
sales declines have been sharp in this segment due to 
the relatively poor fuel economy of most light trucks.
Many foreign companies now build a signifi -
cant proportion of their output in North America. 
Japanese investments began in the early 1980s as a 
response to the threat of import controls on exports 
from Japan. By the early 2000s, foreign-owned 
producers had the capacity to build some 3 mil-
lion automobiles in the United States, up from zero 
in 1981.10 The foreign investment shows no sign 
of slowing down. Hyundai opened its fi rst United 
States factory in Montgomery, Alabama, in 2005, 
making it the fi rst Korean car company to build in 
North America. Meanwhile, Toyota opened its sixth 
North American factory in San Antonio, Texas, in 
2006. Collectively, foreign-owned auto factories 
accounted for close to 30% United States automo-
bile production by 2008.
Exhibit 2 U.S. Market Share, Passenger 
Cars and Light Trucks, February 2009
Producer
Share %
General Motors
18.9%
Toyota
16.9%
Ford
14.3%
Chrysler
10.9%
Honda
10.6%
Nissan
8%
Other Asian makers
12.8%
European makers
7.6%
Source: Ward’s Auto World, March 2009.

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C71
Many states offered fi nancial incentives such as 
tax breaks in an effort to attract inward investment by 
foreign producers and the associated jobs. Estimates 
suggest that by mid-decade the cumulative value of 
incentives given to attract new factories amounted to 
between $1.2 billion and $2 billion, which translates 
into an investment incentive of $1,000 for every car 
built by a foreign-owned factory.11
The addition of foreign capacity created an excess 
capacity situation in the American market, which 
became particularly evident during 2008–2009 
when excess productive capacity exceeded 40%. 
Predictably, the result was signifi cant price competi-
tion. This included zero rate fi nancing, cash back on 
purchases, and large reductions from sticker prices, 
none of which was enough to prevent bankruptcy 
for Chrysler and General Motors.
The rise of foreign competitors in the United 
States market has been attributed to a number of fac-
tors, including better designs and more fuel-effi cient 
offerings (particularly in the passenger car segment) 
superior product quality, higher employee and capi-
tal productivity, and lower costs due to smaller pen-
sion and health care commitments.
Quality seems to be an important factor explaining 
market share changes in the industry. J. D. Power and 
Associates produces quality rankings for automobiles 
sold in the United States market. Over the years, Toyota 
and Honda brands have consistently had among the 
best quality rankings in the industry. However, it is 
notable that American producers have made great 
strides, and by the mid-2000s, they were closing the 
gap. Nevertheless, as of 2008, foreign producers still 
dominated J. D. Power’s vehicle dependability rank-
ings, which measure problems per 100 vehicles within 
their fi rst three years on the market. As can be seen 
from Exhibit 3, in March 2009, the industry average 
was 170 problems per 100 vehicles over three years. 
Although Buick and Jaguar, brands then owned by 
GM and Tata Motors of India topped the list, Toyota 
and Honda brands both scored consistently better than 
most major brands of Ford, Chrysler, and GM (Tata 
Motors purchased Jaguar from Ford in June 2008.) 
This being said, Ford has shown particularly strong 
improvement in recent years. It is clear that by 2009, 
the quality defi cit that had longed plagued American 
made cars had been eliminated for some brands.12
With regard to productivity differences, the story 
is similar. American-owned plants have long had a 
productivity disadvantage compared to their foreign 
competitors. However, the gap has narrowed sub-
stantially in recent years as American-owned pro-
ducers have worked to improve their productivity 
by implementing improved manufacturing tech-
niques based on Toyota’s model. According to the 
Harbour Report, an annual survey of manufacturing 
productivity in American assembly plants, although 
a substantial gap remained in 2003, by 2007 it had 
been reduced signifi cantly (see Exhibit 4).13 Indeed, 
Chrysler’s plants matched those of Toyota, and 
General Motors outperformed Nissan.
Exhibit 3 J. D. Power Vehicle Dependability 
Study, 2009: Problems per 100 Vehicles over 
3 Years
Brand
Rating
Buick
122
Jaguar
122
Lexus
126
Toyota
129
Acura
146
Cadillac
148
Honda
148
Ford
159
Chrysler
165
Industry Average
170
GM
174
Chevrolet
185
Volvo
186
Nissan
199
Dodge
202
Jeep
220
Pontiac
220
Volkswagen
260
Suzuki
263
Source: “Buick and Jaguar Tie to Rank Highest for Vehicle 
Dependability,” J. D. Power press release, March 19, 2009.

C72  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Despite the closing of the productivity gap, 
American vehicle makers still lost money on every 
car they made in 2007, while their Japanese competi-
tors made money (see Exhibit 4). The main reason 
was higher labor costs at the big three. This was due 
not just to higher wage rates but also to the pension 
and health care obligations that American manu-
facturers have long borne not just for their current
employees but also for their retirees. General Motors, 
for example, has 2.4 pensioners for every current 
employee. In the early 2000s, both Ford and GM had 
to issue bonds worth billions of dollars to plug the 
holes in their pension funds. GM now has to pay out 
$1 billion a year in interest payments just to service 
these bonds. Moreover, the company has to pay out 
some $3 billion a year to cover health care costs for 
retirees. Just as troubling, GM may have to increase 
funds going into its pension plan if the fund does not 
earn a long-term return of 9% per annum.14
As a consequence of such factors, in 2007, the aver-
age labor cost at the American big three was $75 an 
hour, compared to $45 an hour at Toyota’s American 
assembly plants. However, all three American compa-
nies have been renegotiating their contracts with the 
Union of Auto Workers (UAW), and trying to shift 
the obligations for retirees onto the union. Indeed, 
bankruptcy protection has enabled Chrysler and GM 
to accelerate this process. According to the Harbour 
Report, the implication is that by 2011, hourly labor 
rates for the big three may be down to $54.
Labor costs may fall still further for American 
manufacturers under an agreement negotiated with 
the UAW in early 2009. The agreement was required 
by the federal government as a condition for its loans 
to GM and Chrysler, which totaled $17.4 billion. The 
agreement was to cut pay for laid off workers, ease 
work rules to allow for greater job fl exibility, and 
eliminate wage increases tied to the cost of living. 
Although Ford took no government aid, the UAW 
has the same agreement with all American manufac-
turers, so Ford also benefi ts from the government 
requirement.15
Among the American manufacturers, Ford 
seems best positioned to come out of the 2008–
2009 recession in the industry. Ford raised some 
$23.5 billion in cash in 2006, before the recession 
hit, by mortgaging almost all of its plants and assets 
while interest rates were low. At the start of 2009, it 
still had $13.4 billion in cash on its balance sheet, 
which will be enough to see it through the reces-
sion without additional capital injections unless 
the recession continues well into 2010. As noted 
earlier, despite receiving $4 billion in government 
assistance, Chrysler entered bankruptcy protection 
in May 2009 and Fiat has taken over management 
of the company. GM, despite receiving $13.4 billion 
in federal assistance, also entered bankruptcy. The 
problems at GM and Chrysler seem to have been 
benefi tting Ford, which started to pick up market 
share from its rivals in early 2009.
Exhibit 4 Productivity Differences Measured by Total Labor Hours per Unit and Proﬁ t per Vehicle 
among U.S. Plants
Manufacturer
2003
2007
2007 Proﬁ t per Vehicle($)
Ford
38.60
33.88
1,467
Chrysler
37.42
30.37
412
General Motors
35.20
32.29
729
Nissan
32.94
32.96
1,641
Honda
32.36
31.33
1,641
Toyota
30.01
30.37
922
Note: Productivity measures are for assembly, stamping, engine, and transmission combined.
Source: Oliver Wyman, The Harbour Report, 2008, Media Release, June 5, 2008.

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C73
Shifting Patterns of Global Demand
While America’s automobile market was in a deep 
recession in 2008–2009, as was most of Europe 
and Japan, some developing markets continued to 
expand. As recently as 2000, the United States mar-
ket accounted for 37% of global demand. By 2008, 
this fi gure was 25%, and it was forecasted to fall to 
22% in 2009 (see Exhibit 1). Leading the growth in 
developed nations was China. In 2002, there were 
just 16 vehicles per 1,000 people in this fast-growing 
country of 1.3 billion. This was compared to more 
than 800 vehicles per 1,000 people in the United 
States and 585 per 1,000 in Germany. By 2008, the 
fi gure for China had increased to 30 per 1,000 peo-
ple, which is still very low. India, too, has a large 
population, fast economic growth, and a low level of 
car ownership (17 per 1,000 in 2008), so there, too, 
rapid growth in demand has been occurring.16
J. D. Power estimates that demand in China will 
climb to 14.6 million units per annum in 2013, 
up from a little over 5 million in 2008. By 2018, 
J. D. Power foresees demand for 19.9 million units 
per annum in China, compared with demand for 
17.6 million units in the United States, which would 
make China the world’s largest market. In fact, sales 
in China surged in early 2009 as their government 
offered subsidies on purchases of small fuel-effi cient 
cars. For the fi rst four months of 2009, sales in China 
outstripped those in the United States. J. D. Power 
also sees rapid growth in demand for automobiles in 
Brazil, India, and Russia, and by 2018 believes that 
demand in developing nations will outstrip demand 
in developed nations.
To serve the growing demand, foreign automobile 
makers have been investing heavily in these markets. 
Automobile production in China, which stood at 
2 million units in 2001, was approaching 10 million 
units by 2009. Ironically, one of the most success-
ful foreign companies in China has been GM, which 
produces cars in China through two joint ventures; 
a 50–50 partnership with Shanghai Automotive 
Industry, which makes and sells Chevrolets, Buicks, 
and Cadillacs in China, and a one-third stake in 
SAIC-GM-Wuling. China requires foreign auto man-
ufacturers to enter into joint ventures with local pro-
ducers. GM plans to double its Chinese capacity to 
2 million vehicles a year and launch 30 new models 
tailored to the Chinese market by 2014. However, 
it is of note that most of GM’s sales gain has come 
at its SAIC joint venture, in which SAIC has a con-
trolling 51% ownership stake.17 In May 2009, GM 
announced that it would start exporting cars to 
America from its SAIC joint venture.
China also has its own home grown industry. 
In addition to companies like SAIC and Shanghai 
Automotive, automakers include Brilliance, Geely, 
and Chery Automobile. While these companies are 
starting to export production to other developing 
nations, they have not yet broken into developed 
markets such as the United States and Western 
Europe. Among other constraints, their cars would 
not currently pass stringent United States emission 
requirements. In 2009, rumors swirled that these 
companies were considering purchasing parts of 
GM and Ford, including Saab, Volvo, and Hummer. 
Such a purchase would give them access not only 
to well-known global brands but also to technologi-
cal know-how, which currently is the weak spot of 
Chinese manufacturers.18 It would also follow the 
lead set by India’s Tata Motors, another emerging 
automobile company, which, in 2008, purchased the 
Jaguar and Land Rover brands from Ford.
Changes in Operations
In an effort to cope with the tough competitive 
 conditions in the North American market and else-
where, automobile companies are looking hard at 
additional ways to take costs out of their system 
or capture more of the available demand. Among 
the most notable initiatives underway have been an 
industry-wide attempt to streamline product devel-
opment, offer a wider range of niche cars, work 
more closely with suppliers, develop systems for 
building cars to order, and introduce a new breed 
of hybrid cars.
Historically, it took four years and cost as much 
as $1 billion to develop a new car model and prepare 
a factory for its production. To recoup those fi xed 
costs, automobile companies needed high-volume 
sales, which required selling cars without a major 
update for four years and sometimes as long as seven 
years. To attain maximum economies of scale, auto-
mobile manufacturers tried to run their plants at full 
capacity, producing 240,000 units a year. The ideal 
was to have each plant produce just one model.
In recent years, the automobile market has 
become increasingly fragmented. Models are now 
updated more frequently to keep pace with changing

C74  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
consumer tastes and competitive pressures, shorten-
ing product life cycles. Customers have demanded 
more variety, and automobile companies have been 
willing to give it to them, bringing a wider variety 
of niche cars to the market. The Ford Taurus, for 
example, was once the best-selling passenger car in 
America with annual sales of approximately 500,000 
(equivalent to two plants running at full capacity). 
As sales slipped, Ford decided to kill the Taurus and 
replace it with two models, one smaller than the 
Taurus and one bigger.
To recoup the costs of such offerings, develop-
ment and manufacturing costs have to be reduced. 
Automobile companies are trying to do this by using 
a common platform and parts in a wider range of 
cars. An example depicting the industry’s evolv-
ing philosophy is GM’s 2005 roadster, the Pontiac 
Solstice. Under the old economics, the Solstice would 
never have made it off the drawing board. The car 
was forecasted to sell only 25,000 units a year. With 
a projected sticker price of $20,000, the volume was 
insuffi cient under the old paradigm to recoup costs. 
To make the car economically, GM revolutionized its 
product design philosophy. By digitalizing much of 
the design of the car and tools, GM was able to cut 
$50 million out of the design costs. It used to take 
12 design engineers three months to produce a clay 
model, an essential step in the design process. Now 
a single designer can take an idea on a computer 
screen to an animated video of a vehicle in three 
weeks. GM saved another $80 million by designing 
the car so that it could use existing tools at its fac-
tory. More money was saved by a decision to base 
the car on a common platform architecture called 
Kappa, which would be used for other small rear-
drive cars. According to GM, the company could 
make an almost unlimited number of bodies on the 
Kappa architecture, and each vehicle would be prof-
itable with a volume of 20,000 to 25,000 a year.19
Using the same platform across a wide model 
range is fast becoming industry standard practice. 
As with so many other industry trends, the Japanese 
pioneered the practice. Honda, for example, builds 
its Odyssey minivan, the Pilot SUV, and the Acura 
MDX SUV on the same platform. In 2004, Chrysler 
based its vehicle fl eet on 13 distinct platforms, but 
by 2008, the company had decreased this to just four 
platforms, in the process reducing the product devel-
opment budget from $42 billion to $30 billion. Ford 
and General Motors have similar aims. The Kappa 
platform for GM’s Pontiac Solstice will also be 
used for its new Saturn coupe and at least one more 
GM car. As GM develops its next generation Chevy 
Silverado and GMC Sierra pickups, it plans to reuse 
much of the existing platform, cutting development 
costs in half to nearly $3 billion. Over the next eight 
years, Ford plans to use its Mazda 6 sedan platform 
(Ford owns Mazda) as the basis for 10 new vehicles. 
The idea, according to Ford’s head of operations, is 
to engineer it once and use it often.20
Another design goal is to try and use the same 
parts in a wider variety of car models and, where 
appropriate, use parts from old models in new cars. 
Detroit auto designers formerly boasted that new 
models were completely redesigned from the fl oor 
up with all new parts. Now that is seen as costly and 
time-consuming. At General Motors the current goal 
is to reuse 40%–60% of parts from one car genera-
tion to the next, thereby reducing design time and 
tooling costs. At Ford, the number of parts has been 
slashed. For example, Ford engineers now choose 
from just four steering wheels, instead of contem-
plating 14 different designs.
As a result of all these changes, the costs and 
time for bringing new cars to market is shrinking. 
Most of GM’s new development projects are now 
on 24-month schedules—a far cry from the late 
1980s when GM engineers celebrated because they 
were able to bring out the Chevrolet Corsica in just 
45 months!21 Ford has reduced its product develop-
ment time by 25% since the late 1990s and is still 
getting better by 10% per year.
Hand in hand with changes in design philosophy, 
automobile companies are retooling their factories 
to reduce costs and make them capable of producing 
several car models from the same line. By doing so, 
they hope to be able to reduce the break-even point 
for a new car model. With the Solstice, for example, 
GM cut design costs by using a common platform 
and parts. It has cut tooling and production costs by 
investing in fl exible manufacturing technologies that 
can be used to produce multiple designs based on the 
Kappa platform from the same basic line. GM has 
also worked hard to get unions to agree to changes 
in infl exible work rules. Assembly line workers now 
perform several different jobs, which reduces waste 
and boosts productivity.
Ford hopes to have 75% of its production built 
on fl exible assembly lines by 2010. If successful, 
its investments in fl exible factories could reduce 

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C75
annual costs by some $2 billion a year.22 Ford spent 
$400 million modernizing an 80-year old assem-
bly plant in Chicago. This plant is now capable of 
 making eight models from two different chassis.
Reengineering their plants to accommodate a 
wider range of models is not cheap. In 2003, GM 
spent some $7.3 billion on capital improvements at its 
automobile plants, up from an average of $5.4 billion 
in the early 1990s. In the early 1990s, Ford spent 
some $3.5 billion annually on capital improvements. 
More recently, its capital spending has been run-
ning at a $7.5–$8 billion annual rate. Chrysler, too, 
has increased its spending, while Toyota spent some 
$9 billion upgrading its factories in the mid-2000s.23
Companies are also changing the way they man-
age their suppliers. At one time, the American auto-
mobile companies were highly vertically integrated, 
producing as much as 70% of their component parts 
in-house. Those parts that were not made in-house 
were often purchased using an annual competitive 
bidding process. The last decade has seen enormous 
changes here. Both Ford and GM have sold off major 
chunks of their in-house suppliers. GM spun off its 
in-house suppliers in 1999 as Delphi Automotive. 
Delphi took some 200,000 former GM employees 
with it, about one-third of the total, many of whom 
were union members. Ford spun off its in-house sup-
pliers the following year as Visteon Corporation. 
Delphi and Visteon are now the number one and 
two auto parts suppliers in the United States. In an 
effort to assert their independence, both companies 
are moving rapidly to build a more diverse set of 
customers.
The Detroit Three have also been reconfi guring 
their relationships with independent suppliers. The 
automobile companies are now expecting their Tier 1 
or major suppliers to produce modules—larger 
vehicle parts that comprise several components such 
as fully assembled chassis, fi nished interiors, and 
“ready for the road” exterior trim. These modules 
are then bolted and welded together to make fi n-
ished vehicles, rather like toy models being snapped 
together. For such an approach to work, the sup-
pliers have to get involved earlier in the process of 
designing and developing new models and engineer-
ing assembly tools. To create an incentive for them 
to do so, the automobile manufacturers have been 
entering into longer-term contracts with their Tier 1 
suppliers. At the same time, Tier 1 suppliers face 
intense price pressures and requirements for quality 
improvements. If they do not meet these, the auto-
mobile companies have shown a willingness to walk 
away from long-term deals. In 2003, for example, 
Chrysler pulled a $90 million contract from a sup-
plier of interior products, Collins & Aikman, because 
of poor product quality.24
Another trend has been to encourage major sup-
pliers to locate new facilities next to assembly plants. 
Ford’s refurbished plant in Chicago has a supplier 
park located next door. The idea is to get suppliers to 
deliver inventory to the assembly line on a JIT basis. At 
the Chicago plant, the average component now needs 
to travel only half a mile, as compared to 450 miles in 
the past. The proximity has saved suppliers transpor-
tation costs, which are passed onto Ford in the form 
of lower prices. In addition, Ford has reduced inven-
tory on hand at its Chicago plant from two to three 
days’ worth to just eight hours’ worth.25
Once a car is built, it spends between 40 and 
80 days sitting in factory lots, distribution centers, 
and dealers’ forecourts before it is actually sold. This 
represents a huge amount of working capital that is 
tied up in inventory. To make matters worse, one of 
the biggest problems in the automobile industry is 
predicting what demand will be. To a large extent, 
repeated rounds of price cutting (disguised as incen-
tives) in the American automobile industry have been 
initiated in an attempt to move slow-selling inven-
tory sitting on dealers’ lots. If automobile companies 
could predict demand more accurately, they might be 
able to reduce the mismatch between inventories and 
demand—and hence the need to resort to incentives.
In an effort to improve this end of the value 
chain, the automobile companies have been trying 
to reduce the time between ordering and delivery. 
The ultimate goal is to have cars built to order, with 
cars being assembled and shipped to a dealer within 
days of a customer placing an order. This is similar 
in conception to the way that Dell sells computers, 
with customers ordering a computer and paying for 
it, online, while the machine is shipped out within 
days. Nissan has calculated that if it could move to 
a build-to-order system with a short cycle time, it 
could reduce costs by as much as $3,600 a vehicle.26
Achieving this goal, however, is easier in theory 
than in practice. One obvious problem is that if the 
fl ow of orders is lumpy or seasonal, so will be the 
output of a factory, which might result in periods 
where capacity is not being fully utilized. Another 
problem involves changing buyer behavior. In 

C76  
 Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
America, at least many consumers look for instant 
gratifi cation and expect to be able to purchase a 
car when they walk onto a dealer’s lot, which is 
the antithesis of a build-to-order system. Still, there 
are some signs of a shift away from this mentality. 
Honda, for example, has been building its best- selling 
MDX SUV to order—although the delivery time is 
more like two months than two days. In Germany, 
BMW now builds some 60% of its cars to order, but 
once again the delivery time can be as long as two 
months. Toyota, too, is trying to build more cars to 
order. By the mid-2000s Toyota was building about 
12% of the cars it sold in the United States to order, 
with a build time of just 14 days.27
New Technologies
For years, automobile companies have experimented 
with alternative power sources, most notably fuel 
cells. These investments have been driven by national 
and local government demands for lower emissions 
of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen 
oxides. Of particular concern has been the global 
buildup of carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas impli-
cated in global warming. In Europe, the European 
Commission has persuaded carmakers to agree to a 
voluntary deal to cut overall emissions across their 
car fl eet by 25% by 2008 or face the imposition of 
strict emission rules on specifi c models. In  California, 
draft regulations may require car manufacturers to 
reduce emissions of carbon dioxide by 30%, start-
ing in 2009. In addition, California already has 
regulations in place that require 2% of car makers’ 
fl eets to be zero emission vehicles (ZEV), although 
this requirement is proving to be a “soft” one. In 
May 2009, the United States government raised the 
stakes by introducing tough new standards for fuel 
effi ciency, which called for automobile manufacturers 
to make fl eets that, on average, achieved 35.5 miles
per gallon, up from 25.3 miles per gallon.
The only conceivable ZEV at this juncture is a 
car powered by an electric motor that runs on a fuel 
cell. A fuel cell combines hydrogen with oxygen from 
the air to produce water. The process generates an 
electric current strong enough to power a car. For 
all of their promise, however, fuel cells have draw-
backs. It costs about 10 times more to produce a fuel 
cell than an internal combustion engine, the range 
of cars using fuel cells is still too limited for most 
customers, and replenishing hydrogen will require a 
network of hydrogen fi lling stations, which  currently 
are not available.
Automakers have also been experimenting with 
modifi ed internal combustion engines that use hydro-
gen rather than gasoline as a fuel. Here too, however, 
progress has been held back by the total absence of 
a network of hydrogen fi lling stations and serious 
technical problems associated with storing liquid 
hydrogen (which requires very cold temperatures).
More promising in the short to medium term are 
hybrid cars. In hybrid cars, at low speed the power 
comes from an electric motor that gets electricity 
from an onboard battery. At higher speed, the inter-
nal combustion engine kicks in and provides power, 
while simultaneously recharging the battery through 
a generator. When braking, energy from the slow-
ing wheels is sent back through the electric motor 
to charge the batteries. The result can be substantial 
savings in fuel consumption, with little in the way of 
a performance penalty. Toyota’s Prius hybrid can go 
from a standstill to 60 mph in 10 seconds and aver-
ages 60 mpg in the city and 51 mpg highway driving. 
This makes the Prius an ideal commuting car. The 
big drawback is that the hybrid propulsion system 
adds about $3,000 to $5,000 to a vehicle’s sticker 
price, and the battery has to be replaced about every 
100,000 miles at a cost of about $2,000. At a gas 
price of $2 a gallon, it takes some fi ve years for a 
hybrid to repay the additional investment.
Introduced in 1997, Toyota had sold some 
200,000 Prius cars by mid-2004. Sales started to 
increase rapidly in 2003 and 2004 as higher fuel 
prices made consumers more concerned about fuel 
economy. In 2004, sales in the United States were 
limited only by supply constraints to 47,000 units. 
By 2008, with fuel prices hitting $4 a gallon in the 
United States, Toyota was selling 250,000 Priuses a 
year. In May 2009, the company introduced its third-
generation Prius in Japan, with plans to roll the car 
out globally over the next few months. Pre-orders 
in Japan were for 80,000 units, far surpassing 
the  automaker’s goal of selling 10,000 a month 
in its home market. In total, Toyota hopes to sell 
some 300,000–400,000 of the new Priuses a year.28 
In addition to the Prius, Toyota also sells hybrid 
 versions of some of its other models, including the 
Lexus SUV, the Highlander SUV, and the Camry 
sedan. The company aims to increase its overall 
hybrid sales to $1 million by 2010–2012 and offer 
hybrid versions of all of its vehicles by 2020.

 
Case 5 The Global Automobile Industry in 2009 
C77
Toyota is not alone in developing hybrid technol-
ogy. Most notably, both Honda and Ford have intro-
duced hybrid models, and both are reportedly selling 
well. Bob Lutz, the vice chairman of GM, who was 
at one time well known for his resistance to alter-
native technologies, said that GM will aim to build 
about one-third of its vehicles as hybrids by 2015 
and 80% by 2020.
In addition to hybrids, GM is also placing a bet 
on another technology, lithium ion batteries, with its 
Chevy Volt. Scheduled for market introduction in 
2010, the Chevy Volt is a compact four-door elec-
tric car with a reserve gasoline-powered engine. The 
primary power source is a large lithium ion battery 
(lithium ion batteries are typically found in small 
electric appliances such as cell phones). The battery 
can be charged by plugging it into a wall socket for 
six hours, and fully charged, it will fuel the car for 
40 miles, which is less than most people’s daily com-
mute. After that, a gasoline engine kicks in, provid-
ing both drive power and recharging the lithium ion 
battery. GM estimates fuel economy will be over 
100 miles a gallon, and charging the car overnight 
from a power outlet would cost about 80% less than 
fi lling it with gas at $3 per gallon. The car will cost 
somewhere between $30,000 and $40,000; because 
it uses battery-powered technology, buyers will be 
able to take a $7,500 tax credit.
Endnotes
 1. F. Balfour, “China’s Geely Eyes GM’s Saab, Ford’s 
Volvo,” Business Week, May 8, 2009, 18.
 2. “A Survey of the Car Industry; Perpetual Motion,” The 
Economist, September 4, 2004, 3–4.
 3. The phrase fi rst appeared in GM’s 1924 Annual Report 
to Shareholders, and more than anything else, it cap-
tured the essence of Sloan’s revolutionary marketing 
philosophy. For details, visit GM’s Web site at http://
www.gm.com/company/corp_info/history/index.html.
 4. Standard & Poor’s, Industry Survey: Autos & Auto 
Parts, December 25, 2008.
 5. Figures from Standard & Poor’s, Industry Survey: Autos 
& Auto Parts, June 24, 2004.
 6. Standard & Poor’s, Industry Survey: Autos & Auto 
Parts, December 25, 2008.
 7. “Global Car Sales Fall by Double Digits,” CNNMoney.
com, January 5, 2009.
 8. “Auto Production Swings from Reverse into Drive,” 
Global Auto Report, Global Economic Research, 
April 29, 2009.
 9. “Too Many Moving Parts,” The Economist, February 7, 
2009, 71.
 10. A Survey of the Car Industry, “Detroit’s Nine Lives,” 
The Economist, September 4, 2004, 6–9.
 11. Ibid.
 12. “Buick and Jaguar Tie to Rank Highest for Vehicle Depend-
ability,” J. D. Power press release, March 19, 2009.
 13. Oliver Wyman, The Harbour Report, 2008, Media 
Release, June 5, 2008.
 14. D. Welch, “Has GM Outrun Its Pension Problems?” 
Business Week, January 19, 2004, 70.
 15. M. Dolan, “Ford Benefi ts as GM and Chrysler Stumble,” 
Wall Street Journal, Feburary 20, 2009, B1.
 16. Standard & Poor’s, Industry Survey: Autos & Auto 
Parts, December 25, 2008.
 17. I. Rowley, “Would Bankruptcy Stall GM’s China 
Growth?” Business Week Online, April 28, 2009, 14.
 18. K. Marr, “As Detroit Crumbles, China Emerges as Auto 
Epicenter,” Washington Post, May 18, 2009, A1.
 19. M. Phelan, “GM Predicts Sporty Profi ts Even from Fewer 
Sales,” Knight Rider Tribune Business News, March 13, 
2004, 1.
 20. D. Welch and K. Kerwin, “Detroit Tries It the 
 Japanese Way,” Business Week, January 26, 2004, 76; 
A. Taylor, “Detroit Buffs Up,” Fortune, February 9, 
2004, 90–94.
 21. D. Winter, “Shrinking Product Development Time,” 
Ward’s Auto World, June 2003, 36–40.
 22. J. Muller, “The Little Car That Could,” Forbes,  December 
8, 2003, 82; “The Year of the Car,” The Economist, 
 January 3, 2004, 47.
 23. Standard & Poor’s, Industry Survey: Autos & Auto 
Parts, June 24, 2004.
 24. Ibid.
 25. K. Kerwin, “Ford to Suppliers: Let’s Get Cozier,”  Business 
Week, September 20, 2004, 8.
 26. A Survey of the Car Industry, “Fighting Back,” The 
Economist, September 4, 2004, 14–16.
 27. R. Rosmarin, “Your Custom Car Is Ready at Toyota,” 
Business vol. 2 (October 2004): 150–151.
 28. Y. Takahashi, “New Prius Is Set to Race Insight,” Wall 
Street Journal, 2009, May 19, B2.

General Motors (GM) was once the largest and most 
profi table industrial company in the world. But dur-
ing the last decades, it became one of the least profi t-
able; in 2008, after the economic recession caused a 
40% plunge in United States car sales, it was losing so 
much money that it was forced to ask the government 
for a loan of billions of dollars to keep it afl oat. As 
an indication of how much the company has shrunk, 
in 1995, GM employed more than 700,000 people 
globally; by 2005, this had dropped to 325,000, and 
by the end of 2009, less than 200,000 as GM contin-
ued to lay off or offer buyouts to tens of thousands 
of its managers and employees.
GM has reported losses of more than $90 billion 
since 2005, and its share of the United States vehicle 
market has dropped to 19% from more than 40% 
in 1980. To understand why GM has performed so 
poorly over the last decades to become one of the 
least-profi table global carmakers—and why it was 
forced to enter bankruptcy in 2009—it is necessary 
to examine the history of the company.
GM’s Origins
The company was founded in 1908 when William 
C. Durant formed the General Motors Corporation 
by bringing together 25 independent car companies, 
including Buick and Cadillac. At the beginning, each 
company retained its own identity, and GM was  simply 
a holding company—a central administrative offi ce 
surrounded by its 25 car divisions that produced hun-
dreds of models of cars targeted at wealthy custom-
ers, the only people who could afford them at the time, 
because the cost of manufacturing cars was so high.
GM’s main competitor was the Ford Motor Car 
Company, and in 1908, Henry Ford announced the 
development of the Model T car that was to be pro-
duced by the revolutionary method of mass produc-
tion. Ford’s new mass production technology was 
based on continuously moving conveyor belts that 
brought the car being assembled to unskilled work-
ers who performed each of the individual operations 
necessary to complete the fi nal vehicle. Before mass 
production, small teams of skilled workers assembled 
cars. Ford also pioneered the use of standardized car 
parts that could be easily fi tted together to make the 
assembly process easier and faster. As a result, the 
costs of manufacturing cars plummeted, and Ford 
created a mass market for the Model T; it became 
the industry leader. GM found itself in the losing 
situation of making a wide variety of expensive cars 
bought by a small number of wealthy customers as 
compared to Ford’s single, inexpensive product tar-
geted at the middle of the United States market. Ford 
grew rich during the period from 1910 to1920, while 
GM struggled to keep its head above water.
In 1920, Alfred P. Sloan became GM’s CEO. 
He decided major strategic changes were neces-
sary to compete effectively with Ford. It was clear 
to Sloan that operating 25 different car companies 
that  produced hundreds of different models was very 
Copyright © Gareth R. Jones, 1994, 2005, 2009. All rights reserved, not to be copied, reproduced, or distributed by any means physical 
or mechanical without the permission of the author.
For the most recent fi nancial results of the company discussed in this case, go to http://fi nance.yahoo.com, click on symbol lookup at top 
of page, input the company’s symbol into the search box, and then follow the appropriate links on the yahoo page for the information 
you require (e.g., click profi le to fi nd link to company’s Web site for its annual fi nancial reports, or click on Yahoo! links to the company’s 
SEC fi lings or Financials).
C78
6
General Motors: From Birth 
to Bankruptcy in 2009

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C79
ineffi cient compared to Ford’s strategy of producing 
one model of car in large quantities. Moreover, GM’s 
high-priced cars were competing against one another 
for the same set of wealthy customers.
GM’s New Structure
Sloan searched for a way to reorganize GM’s car 
companies to increase their competitive advantage. 
He needed to reduce costs and increase effi ciency, but 
he also saw that Ford’s strategy to produce only one 
model of car for the whole market meant that it was 
ignoring the needs of other market segments—such 
as the luxury segment GM served. He realized that 
customers in the middle of the market might want a 
superior product to the standard Ford Model T, and 
there was a lot of opportunity to produce cars for 
market segments between those served by the inex-
pensive Model T and expensive GM models.
To achieve both superior effi ciency and customer 
responsiveness, Sloan chose to group the 25 compa-
nies into fi ve major self-contained operating divisions: 
Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, and Cadillac. 
Each of the different divisions was given its own set 
of support functions, such as sales, manufacturing, 
engineering, and fi nance. Each division was given the 
responsibility to produce a range of cars targeted at 
a specifi c socioeconomic customer segment. Sloan’s 
plan was that GM’s fi ve divisions would make and 
market fi ve brands of cars to customers in fi ve differ-
ent socioeconomic segments. Also, each division was 
instructed to imitate the mass production method 
that had been developed by Ford.
Chevrolet, for example, would make inexpensive 
cars for customers at the entry level of the market; 
Pontiac, Oldsmobile, and Buick would produce cars 
for progressively more prosperous customer seg-
ments, while Cadillac would specialize in making 
high-price, luxury cars directed at wealthy custom-
ers. Sloan’s goal was to be responsive to customers 
in each segment of the car market by producing cars 
to meet their specifi c needs. He hoped that customers 
would move up to the next most expensive line of 
GM car as they prospered. GM carefully priced the 
cars of the different divisions to entice  customers to 
move up: from a Chevrolet to a Buick or a Buick to a 
Cadillac. So customers would not be confused about 
the number of GM models they would be choosing 
from, Sloan insisted that each division should develop 
a range of cars that had a unique image, thus the cars 
of the different divisions could be clearly differenti-
ated by customers. Thus, Cadillac customers should 
believe that the Cadillacs they were buying were 
clearly superior to Buicks—not just more expensive 
cars with a different name.
Sloan also reorganized GM into fi ve different car 
divisions to allow each division to operate as an inde-
pendent profi t center that could be evaluated on its 
profi tability; ROI decision-making would be decen-
tralized to the managers of each division, who would 
be in control of its business model and responsible for 
bottom-line results. Sloan’s goal was that this would 
create competition between the managers of the fi ve 
divisions, who would be motivated to improve their 
division’s effi ciency and receive a greater share of 
GM’s capital to grow their division in the future—
and boost their chances of becoming top corporate 
executives. The results of this change in GM’s busi-
ness model and strategies were dramatic. By 1925, 
demand for the Model T plummeted, because cus-
tomers could buy better equipped, more prestigious, 
or more luxurious GM cars at comparable prices to 
Ford’s. GM became the dominant United States car 
company as Sloan’s new business model took away 
market share from Ford—demand for its Model T 
plummeted as customers switched to GM’s upscale 
and affordable cars. Ford was forced to close down 
his factory for several months to retool the produc-
tion line to imitate GM and produce new models 
of cars targeted at different kinds of customers. He 
never made up lost ground.
With its new strategy and structure in place, 
GM became the United States car market leader and 
obtained the largest market share of any global car 
manufacturer ever since—more than 70% at the 
highest point. From 1925 to 1975, GM embarked 
on a continuous program to expand its product 
range to include all kinds of models of vehicles, from 
cars to full-size trucks, lightweight trucks, and vari-
ous forms of specialized vehicles such as vans and 
ambulances. As it grew bigger, GM also decided to 
take over more and more of its suppliers. It became 
highly vertically integrated; at the highest point, it 
made more than 65% of the components that went 
into its vehicles. For example, it took over Fisher 
Body Company, which had made the car bodies for 
GM cars. GM also internally developed many of its 
own car parts manufacturing operations, such as its 

C80  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
Delco division, which supplied GM with most of 
its electrical/electronic components. From 1925 to 
1975, GM dominated the United States car market, 
controlling, on average, more than 65% of domestic 
sales. Together, GM, Ford, and Chrysler, the big three 
carmakers, controlled more than 90% of the United 
States vehicle market.
1970s: Big Changes in 
the Global Car Industry
GM’s preeminent position in the United States car 
market was broken in the 1970s by a combina-
tion of two factors that altered competition in the 
car industry forever: (1) the global oil crisis and 
(2) the emergence of low-cost/high-quality Japanese 
competitors. The oil embargo of 1973 revealed the 
ineffi ciency of American “gas guzzler” cars that fre-
quently obtained only six to nine miles per gallon. 
United States customers began to demand smaller, 
fuel-effi cient vehicles that the big three did not have 
the technology to build—; but the Japanese had 
developed the competence to make these small, fuel-
effi cient cars. American customers began to switch 
to the Japanese vehicles; when they did, they also 
discovered that cars such as the Honda Accord and 
the Toyota Celica were not only inexpensive but also 
were reliable and much less prone to breaking down.
The switch in customer demand to small, reliable 
cars and the ability of the Japanese to serve the small-
car niche precipitated a crisis for GM in the 1970s 
and 1980s. Demand for its large sedans plummeted, 
and divisions such as Buick and Cadillac began to 
lay off thousands of employees. GM’s operating phi-
losophy had been that large cars mean large profi ts; 
this was now revealed as false by Japanese car-
makers that had been developing effi cient, quality-
enhancing “lean production” techniques to reduce 
manufacturing costs. Japanese companies began to 
make enormous profi ts selling their economy cars 
to United States customers who fl ocked to the rap-
idly expanding network of Japanese car dealerships 
that were spreading across the United States during 
the 1970s. By the end of the 1970s, the big three 
were revealed as high-cost, low-quality carmakers; 
their large, luxurious, boxy cars were now compared 
unfavorably either to inexpensive (ugly) Japanese 
cars or to the sleek European luxury cars made by 
Mercedes and BMW that also began to make inroads 
into the United States luxury car market during the 
1970s and 1980s. As GM lost market share both 
in the inexpensive and luxury segments of the car 
market, its profi ts plummeted as the sales of its large 
cars slowed to a trickle. It has never recovered; this 
explains why GM fi nally went bankrupt in 2009.
GM “Fights Back”
In 1980, GM still earned $3.3 billion on more 
than $60 billion in sales. Its huge cash fl ow and 
cash reserves still allowed it to act like a dominant 
 competitor—despite the fact that its business model 
was clearly inferior to the new model Japanese car-
makers had developed. A new CEO, Roger Smith, 
took control of GM in 1980 to rebuild its competi-
tive advantage. Under his control, GM began several 
major programs to reduce costs and improve qual-
ity that by 1990 had cost the company more than 
$100 billion—enough money, analysts pointed out, 
to have purchased Toyota and Honda given their 
market value at that time! Did Smith’s new strate-
gies work? No, but they allowed GM’s top managers 
to avoid confronting the harsh competitive realities 
it was facing. Also, GM’s managers did not need to 
confront its central problems—solving the internal 
issues that stemmed from its high-cost internal sup-
pliers and its high-cost labor agreements with the 
United Auto Workers (UAW) union that had led to 
its high (unprofi table) cost structure.
Focusing only on the differentiation side of the 
equation, to enhance its competitive position in cars 
and trucks, GM invested more than $50 billion to 
improve and update its technology to gain expertise 
from Japanese lean manufacturing techniques. Begin-
ning in the early 1980s, Roger Smith started to cham-
pion the development of automated factories and 
robots as a way of raising quality and productivity. As 
in Japanese factories, GM used automated equipment 
and robots to mold parts, assemble car components, 
and pick up and distribute parts along the assembly 
line. These automated factories proved very expensive 
to operate; however, vehicle axles made in its new fac-
tories cost twice as much as ones produced conven-
tionally. GM seemed to lack the Japanese know-how 
to effi ciently operate automated factories.

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C81
A major experiment that GM began in 1982 to 
develop low-cost manufacturing skills and produce 
quality cars was to create a new division it called 
Saturn. The Saturn division was charged to imitate 
Japanese manufacturing techniques and produce 
small cars at the same low cost as Japanese mak-
ers. The division was deliberately kept separate from 
GM’s other divisions so its managers and employ-
ees could learn new production skills from scratch. 
 Saturn’s new $2 billion car plant was the biggest con-
struction undertaking in GM’s history. It went into 
full production in 1990. Saturn cars were priced to 
compete with the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla. 
By 1991, Saturn had built just 50,000 cars, far short 
of its 240,000 yearly capacity and lost $800 million 
in 1991. By 1992, Saturn car sales had picked up; its 
cars were ranked in the top 10 of customer satisfac-
tion, but it still lost $700 million. Eventually, GM 
realized Saturn would never be able to match the low 
costs of Japanese manufacturers—one major reason 
because Saturn did not have Toyota’s or Honda’s 
effi cient low-cost supply chain, something essential 
to the success of “lean” manufacturing. And, it was 
burdened with high labor costs due to its previous 
agreements with the UAW.
Another way GM attempted to learn Japanese 
techniques in lean manufacturing was by creating 
a joint venture with Toyota in 1983 called New 
United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI) to 
produce Chevrolet Novas in GM’s Freemont, Cali-
fornia, plant. This plant had closed in 1982 because 
of poor quality and bad labor-management rela-
tions. In 1984, NUMMI reopened under the control 
of Japanese management. By 1986, its productivity 
was higher than that of any other GM factory, and it 
was operating at twice the old level under GM man-
agement. One of the primary reasons for its success 
was the use of fl exible work teams. At the NUMMI 
factory, Toyota divided the workforce into 350 fl ex-
ible work teams consisting of 5–7 people plus a team 
leader. Each worker was trained to perform the jobs 
of other workers and regularly rotated jobs. In addi-
tion, all workers were taught the procedures for 
analyzing jobs to improve work procedures. Team 
members designed all the team’s jobs, timing each 
other using stopwatches and continually attempting 
to fi nd better ways to perform tasks. Before GM had 
employed 80 managers to perform this analysis; now 
not only did fl exible work teams do it, but they were 
also responsible for monitoring product quality. The 
role of managers in the new factory was to provide 
shop-fl oor workers with support, not to monitor 
or supervise their activities. From this venture, GM 
fi nally learned how Toyota’s lean production system 
worked and that work relationships are at least as 
important as automated factories in increasing pro-
ductivity and reducing costs. From this point on, 
GM began to implement the new system across all 
its hundreds of manufacturing plants. Although this 
was a slow process, by 2005, GM could claim it was 
the most effi cient United States carmaker, although it 
still trailed the Japanese, because the Japanese never 
ceased to work to continuously lower costs and 
increase quality.
In sum, although by the 2000s, GM reduced 
operating costs and increased vehicle quality, its 
Japanese and European competitors were always 
one step ahead. Moreover, during the 1990s, the 
United States had become an inexpensive country in 
which to make cars compared to Japan and Europe. 
Global carmakers were anxious to avoid the United 
States government imposing tariffs on their grow-
ing imports of cars or limiting the number of cars 
that could be imported, something that had occurred 
during the 1970s and 1980s. So, Toyota, Honda, 
 Nissan, BMW, and Mercedes began to open their 
own plants in the United States. When it became 
clear that car plants operated by Japanese manag-
ers could attain quality levels close to those achieved 
in Japan, they began to rapidly expand the number 
of these plants. Toyota and Honda led the quality 
ranking of  American-made cars, and, by 1995, they 
made more than 1.5 million cars a year in the United 
States. Their market share was rapidly growing.
A New Management Team Takes Over
Even though GM’s market share had declined rap-
idly from 50% in 1978 to 35% by 1992, it had not 
reduced the number of its manufacturing plants or 
downsized its workforce in any signifi cant way—its 
managers still chose to believe it was experiencing 
only a temporary setback and that its sales and rev-
enues would soon turn around. Smith had even said 
that GM would reach a 50% market share again! 
Everyone except GM’s top executives recognized 
that the company had at least 100,000 excess white-
collar employees and an even greater number of pro-
duction employees who were draining the company’s 
resources and profi tability.

C82  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
In 1990, Roger Smith’s hand-picked successor, 
Robert Stempel, became CEO. Like Smith,  Stempel 
did not want to downsize the corporation and 
make the huge cuts in its workforce that analysts 
thought imperative to turn the company around. 
Luckily for GM in 1991, an activist GM  director, 
John Smale, insisted that to stop GM’s losses, a new 
CEO must be found. In 1992, he convinced the 
board to appoint Jack Smith, the former head of 
GM’s  European operations, as president, and Smale 
became CEO. Together, they forced through a new 
policy of downsizing: GM announced it would lay off 
80,000  workers and close 10 United States  assembly 
plants, 4 engine factories, and 11 parts plants by 
2005. Also, GM’s corporate staff was to be reduced 
from 13,500 to approximately 2,300   managers. 
Eventually, Jack Smith replaced Smale as CEO.
Smith soon defi ned GM’s future strategies: to 
become profi table, an aggressive focus on reducing 
costs and improving quality, an aggressive marketing 
of redesigned vehicles that better satisfy customers 
needs, and a new more-fl exible decentralized organi-
zational structure had to be implemented. All these 
strategies seemed appropriate, yet Smith could not 
fi nd the right way to implement them. Why didn’t 
Jack Smith’s business model and strategies improve 
GM’s performance? Indeed, why did its performance 
continue to decline?
New Production 
Manufacturing Initiatives
Smith had been in charge of GM’s European opera-
tions and successfully implemented new lean pro-
duction techniques to raise quality; he had a clear 
vision of what GM needed to do to reduce its cost 
structure. First, he understood the importance of 
dropping unsuccessful products and reducing the 
number of models to reduce costs. By 1993, GM 
had reduced the number of models in production 
from 85 to 65—but it had introduced more than 
20 new cars and trucks. GM had also imitated other 
carmakers in lowering costs by reducing the num-
ber of its vehicle-making platforms from 14 to 8; by 
2000, it was focusing on small, medium, and large 
cars and trucks. But its Japanese competitors only 
made 8 to 12 different models, using only 4 to 
5 different vehicle platforms. This difference lowered 
Japan’s cost structures, giving them a major competi-
tive advantage over GM.
One continuing part of GM’s new effi ciency pro-
gram was to build new state-of-the-art assembly 
plants and close down old ineffi cient ones. In 2000, 
GM started to build a $1 billion manufacturing plant 
in Lansing, Michigan, to advanced fl exible manufac-
turing technologies and help raise quality nearer to 
its Japanese competitors. The new plant began oper-
ations in 2005 and did achieve signifi cant quality 
improvements, but still its high cost structure, due 
to labor and component costs, meant it could never 
become profi table.
In another attempt to reduce value-chain costs, 
GM fi nally closed down its Oldsmobile division in 
2004. Doing so allowed it to reduce the number of 
its car models. In developing its unsuccessful line of 
new models in the 1980s, GM learned the need to 
standardize components across models and reduce 
the number of parts needed to produce a car to 
reduce value-chain costs and speed product devel-
opment. Smith directed GM’s engineers to work to 
reduce the number of parts used to make a car’s 
basic metal frame by one-third.
GM also changed the way it managed relation-
ships with suppliers, to fi nd more cost-effective ways 
to manage its supply chain. In 1992, GM obtained 
57% of its parts from its own component divisions, 
compared to Chrysler’s 30% and Toyota’s 5%. GM’s 
car assembly divisions were locked into their own 
“allied plant” suppliers such as Central Foundry for 
casting, Delco for brakes, and so on. In 1993, GM 
introduced a new strategy that its in-house high-cost 
components divisions would no longer be protected 
from effi cient outside suppliers.
To help suppliers reduce costs, GM imitated 
Toyota and implemented a Purchased Input Con-
cept Optimization with Suppliers (PICOS) strat-
egy, in which teams of GM engineers visit supplier 
plants and work with suppliers to reduce costs. 
However, with the program up and running, GM, 
unlike Toyota, began to bargain hard with its sup-
pliers to get lower component prices. It started to 
give one supplier’s plans to other suppliers to get 
lower prices from them, essentially trading off one 
against the other, and made suppliers rebid con-
tracts year by year to try to get them to lower their 
bids. This angered outside suppliers, who told GM 
that if it bought mainly on price, they would not 
invest money to improve the components that GM 
wanted them to make and would move their busi-
ness to Ford, Chrysler, and Japanese companies 

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C83
operating in the United States. As a result, GM had 
to rethink its aggressive  strategy.
GM also extended its supply chain management 
program globally and began to develop hundreds 
of alliances with overseas parts manufacturers to 
produce components that could be used in its cars 
assembled around the world. For example, GM 
formed a joint venture with a Hungarian company 
to build axles and diesel engines for assembly in 
cars sold under the Opel name throughout Western 
Europe. The next major development in the supply 
chain management process took place in 2000 when 
GM, Ford, and Chrysler announced they would 
form an organization called Covisint to coordinate 
their purchase of standardized car components 
through the Internet. Billed as the world’s largest 
virtual marketplace, Covisint gives large carmak-
ers considerable power over global suppliers, who 
are essentially forced to compete to obtain the Big 
Three’s business. However, at the same time, there 
is the opportunity to create economies of scale in 
producing many kinds of components. During this 
same period, Japanese carmakers established many 
factories inside the United States and also created 
networks of effi cient, high-quality component sup-
pliers, allowing them to maintain their lead in pro-
ductivity and quality. Toyota, for example, was the 
fi rst to launch a joint program with its suppliers 
to radically reduce the number of steps needed to 
make components and car parts; it saw costs fall by 
$2.6 billion.
Structural Changes
Side-by-side with changes to its production and sup-
ply chain operations, GM also radically altered its 
corporate structure. Starting in 1990, GM realized 
the need to streamline its operations, decentral-
ize decision making, and integrate its design and 
manufacturing operations. In 1992, it consolidated 
its nine engine groups into fi ve and combined all its 
car divisions’ engineering and manufacturing units 
to eliminate redundancy. Also, fi ve design and tech-
nical departments at GM’s Technical Center were 
combined into three to speed product development. 
GM created a new product design system to provide 
strong, single point management of a vehicle pro-
gram and accelerate the vehicle development pro-
cess. GM’s goal was to achieve economies of scale 
through integrating and coordinating its functional 
activities in product development, engineering, 
manufacturing, and marketing around the world. In 
this way, it could avoid unnecessary duplication of 
activities between divisions and facilitate the sharing 
and learning about cost-saving processes and quality 
innovations across divisions and countries.
Given its inability to lower its cost structure sig-
nifi cantly, promoting innovation became a key ele-
ment of GM’s strategy. Its strategy was to improve 
vehicle design and engineering to develop new vehi-
cle models that targeted customer needs in profi table 
market segments such as SUVs and trucks and pro-
vide high-margin, add-on vehicle accessories, such 
as its OnStar service, to increase the profi t made 
on each car sale. Global cooperation became vital 
to achieve these goals in the 1990s because GM’s 
engineers needed to share resources and best prac-
tices to develop a wide range of vehicles for differ-
ent customer needs from GM’s remaining six vehicle 
platforms.
To promote such cooperation, GM changed its 
global organizational structure and adopted the 
global matrix structure shown in Exhibit 1. The ver-
tical axis consists of GM’s fi ve main business units, 
the four world regions in which GM operates: North 
America; Europe; Asia-Pacifi c; and Latin America, 
Africa, and the Middle East. The fi fth business unit 
is GM’s fi nancial services division that is responsi-
ble for fi nancing the sale of GM’s cars throughout 
the world. On the horizontal axis are the main value 
chain activities required to effi ciently orchestrate the 
global production of its cars: supply chain manage-
ment, product development, production, marketing, 
and business services. Where the axes intersect are 
found the hundreds of assembly plants and engineer-
ing facilities that belong to a specifi c GM car divi-
sion, such as Cadillac, Buick, and so on. While each 
car division operates as an independent entity, it is 
also embedded in the global value-chain organiza-
tion GM needed to compete against its highly effi -
cient global rivals.
GM also invested heavily in IT to help imple-
ment its new global structure to provide the integra-
tion necessary to manage the enormously complex 
transactions required to operate global assembly and 
value chain activities using a matrix structure. Using 
software and consultancy services from IBM, GM 
harmonized all its IT systems across the company in 
an attempt to speed information transfer between its 
divisions all around the world. GM’s new IT system 

C84  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
helped to better implement GM’s business model; it 
permitted faster global coordination in design and 
engineering development and reduced the duplication 
of work by engineers in different research areas. It also 
increased the effi ciency of GM’s supply chain opera-
tions, for example, in 2004, it cut its component costs 
by 3% in North America and by 3.5% in Europe.
The problem for GM was that its Japanese com-
petitors continued to obtain more than double the 
cost savings it achieved each year, so that despite 
GM’s improving performance, it was still falling 
behind. To lower its cost structure quickly, GM 
decided to spin off several of its component parts 
divisions and vertically disintegrate. For example, 
in 1999, GM spun off its huge Delphi electronics 
components division into a separate company, in the 
hope that Delco could lower its cost structure and 
supply GM, which remained its biggest customer, 
with lower cost components.
Global Expansion 
under New Leadership
In the 1990s, GM watched Japanese carmakers 
rapidly expand their manufacturing operations in 
Europe and Asia, and GM’s managers decided 
that to compete effectively on a global level, they 
needed to bolster its global presence. To further 
its efforts to learn lean manufacturing techniques, 
in 1996, GM formed joint ventures with Japanese 
 companies Isuzu Motors and Suzuki to establish 
facilities and make specialized engines and transmis-
sions for GM cars in specifi c market segments, such 
as the European diesel engine market. GM took a 
minority equity stake in these ventures. Also, in its 
European Opel and Vauxhall divisions, GM invested 
heavily to update its factories and improve its skills in 
lean production to compete against the Japanese. In 
2000, GM also acquired a 20% equity stake in Fuji, 
Exhibit 1 GM’s Global Matrix Structure
Supply
chain
CEO Rick Waggoner
Product
development
Production
Customer
expenses
Business
services
GM assembly, design, and operating units located in countries around the world.
North
America
Europe
Asia
Pacific
Latin
America
GMAC
Finance

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C85
the  manufacturer of Subaru brand vehicles. Finally, 
it established a strategic alliance with Honda.
While Japan was an important market, GM 
also decide to strengthen its presence in the rapidly 
developing Chinese and Eastern European markets. 
In 2002, GM formed an alliance with a Russian 
 company to produce a line of low-cost Chevrolets 
 tailored to the needs of customers in Eastern Europe. 
After several years of cooperation with Chinese 
companies, in 2001, GM’s new assembly plant in 
 Shanghai, China, began production of the Regal 
economy car for the Chinese market. All global 
 makers were rushing to seize a share of this market 
they hoped would prove profi table in the future.
In 2000, GM went through a change in leader-
ship when Rick Waggoner became the new CEO 
and Jack Smith stayed on as chairman of the board. 
Both of these executives had extensive experience 
in global operations, which led them to champion 
GM’s rapid global expansion. In Europe, GM and 
Ford competed viciously against each other to 
acquire premium European carmakers in the belief 
that they needed to offer United States customers 
a broad line of premium, differentiated cars. To 
achieve this, both companies were willing to pay 
enormously infl ated prices. Ford won the battle 
against GM to acquire the UK carmaker Jaguar 
and Sweden’s Volvo, two highly ineffi cient compa-
nies with high cost structures. To fi ght back, GM 
acquired Saab in 2000 and also bought a 20% 
stake in Fiat with an option to buy the whole com-
pany later.
The problem, of course, was that they were buy-
ing premium car brand names—but they were not 
buying state-of-the-art technology to build quality, 
low-cost vehicles. Japanese companies never made 
a move to acquire highly ineffi cient European car-
makers, and why would they? They soon developed 
their own premium brands such as Toyota’s Lexus 
and Nissan’s Infi nity. The mistake in United States 
carmakers’ strategies became increasingly obvious 
over time. In 2005, GM had to pay $2 billion to 
terminate its ill-fated Fiat alliance. Its Saab opera-
tion also proved to be a disaster, losing GM hun-
dreds of millions of dollars. In the meantime, GM’s 
established European Brands such as Opel, its Ger-
man subsidiary, and Vauxhall, its British unit, were 
struggling to compete against Japanese companies 
that had established effi cient operations inside the 
European Union. French carmaker Renault adopted 
a different strategy. In 2000, it bought a controlling 
interest in Nissan at a time when, because of poor 
car design and management, Nissan was struggling 
to compete against Toyota and Honda in Japan and 
globally. After installing a star Renault manager to 
head its Japanese subsidiary, Carlos Goshen (now 
CEO of Renault), Nissan’s performance soared; 
the company has become a major competitor in all 
global  markets.
Watching its competitors enter China, poten-
tially the largest market in the world, in 2000, GM 
also decided to acquire the car operations of Korean 
conglomerate Daewoo to help it enter the Asian and 
Chinese markets. In South America, GM also opened 
a car assembly complex in Brazil utilizing state-of-
the-art modular assembly techniques to produce 
cars for the rapidly growing South American market. 
Similar assembly plants were opened in Thailand 
and Germany as part of GM’s program to extend the 
learning it was gaining from its global matrix opera-
tions. Meanwhile, the joint venture between GM and 
Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation led to 
its launch of the Buick Sail, the fi rst modern family 
car built in China.
As global competition increased over the last 
decade, fi nding the right way to brand and market its 
cars in the United States (the biggest and most profi t-
able market in the world) has been GM’s principal 
problem. For example, although it achieved some 
success with its Cadillac brand, its Oldsmobile divi-
sion had lost its customer base and closed down. Also 
its Pontiac and Saturn divisions were losing customer 
support because their models were aging. GM’s 
 Chevrolet division eventually became the keystone of 
its plan to increase its SUV and truck sales around the 
world. GM invested hundreds of millions to develop 
and market the trucks and SUVs Chevrolet is known 
for around the world. To promote its SUV sales, GM 
acquired the Hummer brand from AM General Corp. 
in 2000. GM’s small and mid-sized car business was 
still suffering, however. In 2002, GM announced it 
would end production of its Chevrolet Camaro and 
Pontiac Firebird because it had lost this market niche 
for sporty cars to Ford, Nissan, and Toyota. Then, in 
2003, GM announced that it would revamp its entire 
range of midsize American car models and focus on 
a few strong brands. GM’s strategy was to introduce 
10 new or restyled mid-size vehicles between 2003 
and 2006 to strengthen its product line and regain 
market share—despite its high cost structure.

C86  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
The Legacy of the Past: 
A High Cost Structure
GM has spent hundreds of billions of dollars since 
1980 to update and revamp its factories and improve 
its car-assembly skills, redesign its vehicles to appeal 
to modern customer needs, and improve customer 
service. In some areas, it had some success, such 
as increasing sales of its SUVs, trucks, and luxury 
vehicles. But GM profi tability did not increase in 
the 2000s, and its problems increased. Why? The 
main reason is that none of its CEOs has been able 
or willing to confront and solve the huge problems 
that have resulted from the legacies of its prosper-
ous past: from its union contracts, huge car dealer 
network, and high-cost internal suppliers.
GM’s CEOs only dealt with its problems in a 
“piecemeal” fashion. Little by little they worked 
to spin off internal high-cost component suppliers 
and reduce value-chain costs as discussed previ-
ously, but they never caught up with their com-
petitors. One reason it took GM so long to take 
major corrective actions is because of its complex 
long-term agreements with the UAW. Until the 
1980s, GM’s high profi tability and dominance of 
the United States vehicle market meant that it was 
hard to resist the UAW’s demands for higher pay 
and benefi ts, especially pensions and healthcare 
benefi ts. Shareholders, managers, and workers 
were all enjoying GM’s prosperity. When Japanese 
carmakers ended this fortunate situation, GM, like 
Ford and Chrysler, found itself saddled with strict 
union rules that prevented it from retraining and 
moving its workers from job to job or from laying 
off employees or closing down facilities except at 
a high cost. If employees were laid off, GM had 
agreed to pay 60% of their salaries. Also, rising 
healthcare costs, which had not been considered 
an important factor, became hugely signifi cant in 
the 1990s, as did GM’s pension liabilities to former 
and current employees. In 2002, it was estimated 
that GM had more than $45 billion in unfunded 
liabilities. And, GM still paid its workforce much 
more than its competitors in benefi ts; for example, 
GM paid an average of $35 for each employee’s 
pension and medical costs compared to the $11 
Toyota pays for the same  benefi ts.
It has been estimated that the costs of paying these 
high pensions and benefi ts gives Toyota and Honda 
a cost advantage of about $1,500 a car—which is a 
major reason for their higher profi tability. Moreover, 
GM cannot charge a $1,500 premium for its cars—it 
has to charge less than its stronger competitors because 
its quality is lower—which is why its profi t margins 
have been low or nonexistent and why it sells many 
of its vehicles at a loss. In 2004, although Toyota’s 
revenues were 33% lower than GM’s, its net earnings 
were 60% higher; Toyota’s ROIC was almost 6% in 
2004, while GM’s was 1% and Ford’s 0.6%.
Of course, GM’s managers and white-collar 
employees also enjoyed better-than-average pay and 
benefi ts; even though GM had made major reductions 
to its corporate, divisional, and functional staff, it 
still employed tens of thousands of managers it could 
not afford given its weak competitive condition. So, 
at the input (component) and throughput (design 
and production) stages of the value chain, GM’s cost 
structure was strangling its profi tability; at the distri-
bution stage, its contracts with its 5,600 dealerships 
also were draining its profi tability. Each of GM’s 
brands was distributed by different car dealerships, 
and all these dealerships had contracts that guaran-
teed them a supply of cars and favorable fi nancing 
from GM’s fi nancial division, GMAC. When GM’s 
vehicles were market leaders, its many thousands of 
dealerships were a competitive advantage. But once it 
was forced to reduce the number of models of cars it 
produced and shut down divisions such as Oldsmo-
bile, these dealerships became a major liability—and 
it was locked into contracts with them. The greater 
the number of dealerships, the higher GM’s distribu-
tion, fi nancing, and operating costs. When GM’s sales 
plunged in the 2000s, its excessive number of dealer-
ships cost GM billions of dollars a year.
Indeed, in the 2000s, the main reason that GM 
remained profi table at all was because of the profi ts 
made by its fi nancing division, GMAC. This division 
earned the company the billions of dollars it needed 
to offset the losses made by its vehicle production 
operations. The bottom line was that GM made most 
of its profi t by fi nancing the sale of its vehicles to cus-
tomers, rather than actually making the vehicle itself.
Growing Problems in 2008
By 2008, GM was in a desperate situation: as prices 
had risen to more than $4 a gallon, and GM was 
struggling with a vehicle line-up composed of gas-
guzzling SUVs and trucks that no longer matched 
customer demand for smaller, more fuel-effi cient 

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C87
cars. Bravely, GM decided to devote a substan-
tial amount of its dwindling capital to develop an 
all-electric vehicle, the Chevrolet Volt. Powered by 
lithium ion batteries, the car can propel for about 
40 miles on a single charge before a gasoline engine 
kicks in to power the vehicle and recharge the battery. 
Only 4-cylinder engines are needed for this purpose. 
But will Americans really give up their love affairs 
with V6 and V8 engines coupled with the large SUVs 
and pickups trucks, especially if gas prices remain 
under $3 as they were by 2009? Prior to the fi nancial 
meltdown in 2008, the United States congress had 
approved a $25 billion loan to American carmakers, 
to rebuild decades-old car plants and help fund the 
development of advanced batteries and gas-electric 
hybrids. In January 2009, GM established the fi rst 
lithium-ion battery-pack factory in the United States 
to produce batteries for its Volt, with output starting 
in 2010. This money funded GM’s new battery plant, 
but producing lithium-ion batteries on the scale 
needed to power cars is still not a well-developed 
technology; it was not clear in 2009 if this would be 
cost-effective.
Despite GM’s claims that it intended to reduce the 
range of its different models to lower its cost struc-
ture, its managers still continued its old strategy of 
diluting brands and brand cannibalism. For example, 
in 2008, Chevrolet introduced the Traverse, a cross-
over vehicle that was based on a “lambda platform.” 
But Buick and GMC had already released crossover 
vehicles under their brand names based on exactly 
the same platform—and Saturn’s crossover looked 
exactly the same. Why would GM produce four dif-
ferent versions of the same car if its goal is to reduce 
its cost structure? Finally, GM decided its Pontiac 
brand should be downsized and decided to eliminate 
all but two of its models by 2010, but why the wait? 
Clearly, the overhead fi xed costs of maintaining the 
Pontiac brand are enormous, and one reason was its 
contracts with Pontiac car dealerships and the UAW. 
Once again, a major change in strategy to eliminate 
a major drain on its profi tability could not be pur-
sued; exit costs were just too high. (In fact, after the 
government bailout, it announced it would end the 
Pontiac brand in 2009.)
Similarly, its large, gas-guzzling Hummer brand 
has become a major liability since 2008. The  Hummer 
brand used to have status as a “macho” exclusive 
SUV, but, by 2008, it too was seen as a gas-guzzling 
dinosaur out of synch with customer tastes for new, 
greener vehicles. GM put its Hummer brand up 
for sale in late 2008. GM also shut down three 
plants in the fall of 2008 that produced its Cadillacs, 
Hummers, and GMC cars and trucks, because their 
sales  plummeted.
In an unusual move to strengthen its business 
model, in October 2008, GM and Chrysler manag-
ers met to consider a merger to unite their vehicles 
lines, a move that would once again raise GM’s 
United States market share to more than 33%. But, 
would this merger also increase profi tability? Chrys-
ler’s vehicle brands were in worse shape than GM’s; 
they were aging and unreliable, with no competitive 
advantage that would stop overseas carmakers from 
continuing to take away United States carmakers’ 
market share. Talks ended after growing public criti-
cism of a merger that was seen as designed mainly to 
help GM’s managers avoid bankruptcy.
In 2009, Fiat emerged as a prospective buyer for 
Chrysler; after Chrysler declared Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy, Fiat bought its assets to enter the United States 
market with at least fi ve new  European-designed 
vehicles that will be built in Chrysler’s United States 
plants. Ford was luckier than GM or Chrysler, 
because, foreseeing the global recession and plung-
ing car sales, it borrowed several billion dollars at 
low interest rates before the credit markets collapsed. 
Ford claimed that it did not need government bailout 
money and has new fuel-effi cient car models lined up 
to come out when the recession ends that will bring 
it back to profi tability quickly.
In fact, after the recession and meltdown of 
vehicles sales that started in 2008, GM’s top man-
agers had to confront the fact that their strategy of 
offering global customers a broad line of premium 
to low-cost branded vehicles had been a total disas-
ter. Not only had this prevented them from bringing 
their supply chain management costs under control, 
it had diluted the company’s resources by forcing it 
to make too many investments in too many com-
panies in too many countries around the world. So, 
GM decided to spin off, sell, or divest many of its 
global assets. In November 2008, GM sold its entire 
holding of 16,000,000 shares in Suzuki Motors back 
to Suzuki and used the proceeds to bolster its cash 
fl ow. Then, in February 2009, after it failed to fi nd a 
buyer for Saab, GM announced that it was essentially 
abandoning or “cutting loose” this division after the 
Swedish government refused to give GM any loans 
to help keep the division out of bankruptcy. Saab 

C88  
Section A: Business Level Cases: Domestic and Global
entered bankruptcy proceedings in Sweden and laid 
off 750 of its 4,100 employees, while it tried to reor-
ganize to fi nd a buyer that could provide the capital 
needed to rejuvenate its brand image. Similarly, in 
March 2009, GM announced that it wanted to sell 
its German Opel and UK Vauxhall divisions and was 
looking for buyers. Given the credit crunch, a poten-
tial buyer would need loans from the German and 
UK governments, which had resisted helping to pay 
for what they regarded as GM’s mistakes. However, 
the jobs of 50,000 European workers were at stake, 
and, in May 2009, the Italian company, Fiat, emerged 
as a potential buyer. Both governments were negoti-
ating over loan guarantees with the eventual buyer 
to protect the future of Opel and Vauxhall workers. 
At the end of May, however, Canadian component 
parts maker, Magna, beat Fiat to acquire GM’s Opel 
and Vauxhall divisions to provide a market for its 
components and use GM’s Opel technology as a 
platform to enter the Russian car market. Half, or 
25,000, of GM’s European workforce were expected 
to lose their jobs, however, and plant closings were 
also expected. GM sold its global car assets off at 
rock-bottom prices and, in the process, lost tens of 
billions of shareholder wealth.
The Incredible 
Shrinking Company
While it was selling off or closing down its United 
States and European divisions, GM still had to deal 
with the problems of lowering its cost structure by 
reducing its United States workforce. Every GM 
CEO resisted making the massive cuts necessary to 
create a profi table business model, in part because 
each believed that GM could regain market share 
from the Japanese, and because contracts with the 
UAW made laying off workers an expensive under-
taking. By the end of 2008, however, even though 
GM’s total workforce was less than half what it was 
in 1988, there was no choice. After a 40% fall in sales 
in December 2008, GM announced it would tempo-
rarily idle 30% of its assembly plants during the fi rst 
quarter of 2009 and reduce vehicle production by 
250,000 units. In February 2009, GM announced it 
would cut its global salaried workforce by 10,000 
to 63,000 and cut the pay of the remaining salaried 
workforce. Higher-level employees would have 
their base pay cut by 10%, lower-level employees 
by 3%–7%. GM also aimed to cut an additional 
37,000 hourly jobs worldwide by the end of 2009 by 
offering workers generous severance packages.
One executive employee terminated by the 
United States government was CEO Rick Waggoner. 
He was replaced as CEO by Fritz Henderson, a 
highly respected GM executive, and an activist board 
 member, Kent Kresa, a former CEO of Northrop 
 Grumman, became chairman. Under increasing pres-
sure from the United States government to reduce 
its cost structure to avoid a bankruptcy that was 
becoming more likely every day, in March 2009, 
GM’s new CEO announced further business and job 
reductions. After cutting production in the spring by 
250,000 units, GM announced that it was schedul-
ing multiple down weeks at 13 assembly plants to 
remove another 200,000 vehicles from its 2009 pro-
duction schedule, and more would come in the fall of 
2009 unless the economy turned around. As a result, 
GM is scheduled to produce 1 million fewer cars in 
2009 than in 2008. In April 2009, GM said it would 
close at least 6 additional production plants and 
phase out its Pontiac brand, and that the number of 
its North American production facilities would fall 
to 27 by 2012 from the 47 operating in 2008. This 
was truly the end of the old GM; this would effec-
tively eliminate its ability to make the excess one 
million vehicles that it was no longer able to sell. 
Also in May 2009, GM announced that a number of 
potential buyers had expressed interest in buying the 
Saturn brand and dealer network, and there was a 
prospective buyer for the Hummer brand.
GM’s top managers had been forced to pursue 
these drastic strategies because of the need to secure 
government fi nancing to avoid bankruptcy. By April 
2009, GM had received more than $19 billion to 
keep it going. Still trying to avoid bankruptcy, in May 
2009, GM and the UAW began negotiating a major 
new labor agreement to reduce labor costs and pen-
sions by billions of dollars a year—something also 
demanded by the United States government in return 
for billions in future loans. Only at the last min-
ute, on May 29, 2009, did GM and the UAW reach 
an agreement on a major cost-saving deal. Three-
 quarters of UAW members voted to accept a freeze 
on pay and an end to bonuses that will cut labor 
costs by $2 billion a year. The UAW also agreed to 
cut health benefi ts to retired employees, and instead 

 
Case 6 General Motors: From Birth to Bankruptcy in 2009 
C89
of the company funding healthcare costs for former 
workers, a UAW health trust will receive 17.5% of 
shares in the “new GM” to fund this. The UAW also 
agreed not to strike until 2015. Beyond its new agree-
ment with the UAW, GM also announced plans to 
eliminate more than 2,600 of its 6,000 United States 
dealerships and close 250 Canadian dealerships to 
reduce its cost structure.
GM’s Bankruptcy in June 2009
Over time, GM’s CEOs have responded to the pres-
sures of global competition, have adopted strate-
gies to reduce its cost structure, and championed 
the introduction of innovative vehicle models. So 
why was GM forced to enter bankruptcy on June 1, 
2009? Primarily because GM’s legacy problems 
with its high cost structure coincided with a plunge 
in vehicle sales due to the recession that started 
in 2008. The credit crunch that resulted from this 
recession prevented its GMAC fi nancing division 
from making the loans to customers that generated 
the profi ts it needed to fund its ongoing operations; 
indeed, its GMAC division incurred a loss, which 
was why the company had to ask the United States 
government for billions of dollars in loans to allow 
it to keep operating in 2009. Beginning in the third 
quarter of 2008, GM reported lower global vehicle 
sales of 11.4% to 2.1 million vehicles, while sales in 
the United States fell 19% because of credit tighten-
ing, along with high gas prices. This plunge in vehi-
cle sales became steadily worse, and by the spring 
of 2009, United States vehicle sales had dropped by 
over 40%. GM’s cash fl ow also plunged, but it still 
needed billions of dollars a month to pay its suppliers, 
workforce, and fi xed costs. By April 2009, GM had 
received more than $19 billion in loans that allowed 
it to avoid declaring Chapter 11 bankruptcy, but this 
still was not enough. By this time a team of United 
States government fi nancial experts had more or less 
taken control of GM’s fi nancial decision making and 
future strategy because they had control over loans. 
As a sign of their power over GM, they ousted CEO 
Rick Waggoner in May 2009 after deciding that a 
fresh leadership approach was needed to help turn 
around the company—even if GM was forced to 
enter bankruptcy to accomplish this.
By the end of May 2009, it was clear that GM 
would soon declare bankruptcy. In return for the 
$19 billion in loans it had already received, plus 
additional United States government aid of $30 bil-
lion and Canadian government aid of $9 billion, the 
United States will own 60% of the shares in the new 
GM, and the Canadian government will own 12.5% 
once restructuring is complete. The UAW health 
trust will own 17.5%, and GM’s bondholders fi nally 
agreed to swap their ownership of $27 billion of 
GM’s debt for the remaining 10% of shares, although 
they have warrants to buy an additional 15% stake 
under certain conditions. The government plan envi-
sions the slimmed-down new GM with $17 billion in 
long-term debt and $9 billion in debt-like preferred 
shares. Only $8 billion of United States government 
loans would remain on GM’s books; the rest of the 
$50 billion in loans has been converted into stock in 
the new GM.
To push through the restructuring, GM was 
allowed to enter Chapter 11 bankruptcy on June 1, 
2009, in order to legally erase most of its debt, ratify 
its new agreements with the UAW, and allow it to 
sever its contracts with its dealerships. Hopefully, a 
leaner, stronger, and better-managed company will 
emerge that can develop a competitive advantage, 
retain its market share, and make cars profi tably. 
If GM returns to profi tability and its stock rises, it 
would allow the government to sell its GM stock 
and regain some percentage of the money loaned to 
GM. GM’s vice chairman and car design champion, 
Bob Lutz commented that, “We will come out of 
this rid of some of the historic legacy costs that have 
been dragging us down for the last 20 years or so; we 
will come out of it with an all new focus on product 
development.”
For the most up-to-date fi nancial results and 
analysis of the company in this case go to http://
fi nance.yahoo.com, click on symbol lookup at top 
of page, input the company’s symbol into the search 
box, and then follow the appropriate links on the 
yahoo page for the information you require (e.g., 
click profi le to fi nd link to company’s website for its 
annual fi nancial reports, or click on Yahoo! links to 
the company’s SEC fi lings or Financials).

Introduction
IKEA is one of the world’s most successful global 
retailers. In 2007, IKEA had 300 home furnishing 
superstores in 35 countries and was visited by some 
583 million shoppers. IKEA’s low-priced, elegantly 
designed merchandise, displayed in large warehouse 
stores, generated sales of €21.2 billion in 2008, up 
from €4.4 billion in 1994. Although the privately 
held company refuses to publish fi gures on profi t-
ability, its net profi t margins were rumored to be 
approximately 10%, high for a retailer. The founder, 
Ingvar Kamprad, now in his 80s but still an active 
“advisor” to the company, is rumored to be one of 
the world’s richest men.
Company Background
IKEA was established by Ingvar Kamprad in Sweden 
in 1943 when he was just 17 years old. The fl edgling 
company sold fi sh, Christmas magazines, and seeds 
from his family farm. His fi rst business had been sell-
ing matches; the enterprising Kamprad  purchased 
them wholesale in 100-box lots (with help from his 
grandmother who fi nanced the enterprise) and then 
resold individually at a higher markup. The name 
IKEA was an acronym: I and K his initials; E stood 
for Elmtaryd, the name of the family farm; and A 
stood for Agunnaryd, the name of the village in 
southern Sweden where the farm was located. Before 
long, Kamprad had added ballpoint pens to his list 
and was selling his products via mail order. His 
warehouse was a shed on the family farm. The cus-
tomer fulfi llment system used the local milk truck, 
which picked up goods daily and took them to the 
train station.
In 1948, Kamprad added furniture to his prod-
uct line; in 1949, he published his fi rst catalog, dis-
tributed then as now, for free. In 1953, Kamprad 
was struggling with a problem: the milk truck had 
changed its route, and he could no longer use it to 
take goods to the train station. His solution was to 
buy an idle factory in nearby Almhult and convert it 
into a warehouse. With business now growing rap-
idly, Kamprad hired a 22-year-old designer, Gillis 
Lundgren. Lundgren originally helped Kamprad do 
photo shoots for the early IKEA catalogs, but he 
started to design more and more furniture for IKEA, 
eventually designing as many as 400 pieces, includ-
ing many best sellers.
IKEA’s goal over time was to provide stylish 
functional designs with minimalist lines that could 
be cost-effi ciently manufactured under contract 
by suppliers and priced low enough to allow most 
people to afford them. Kamprad’s theory was that 
“good furniture could be priced so that the man with 
a fl at wallet would make a place for it in his spend-
ing and could afford it.”1 Kamprad was struck by the 
fact that furniture in Sweden was expensive at the 
time, something that he attributed to a fragmented 
industry dominated by small retailers. Furniture was 
also often considered family heirlooms, passed down 
across the generations. He wanted to change this: to 
make it possible for people of modest means to buy 
their own furniture. Ultimately, this led to the concept 
of what IKEA calls “democratic design”—a design 
This case was prepared by Charles W. L. Hill, School of Business, University of Washington. Reprinted by permission.
7
IKEA: Furniture Retailer 
to the World
C90

 
Case 7 IKEA: Furniture Retailer to the World 
C91
that, according to Kamprad, “was not just good, but 
also from the start adapted to machine production 
and thus cheap to assemble.”2 Gillis Lundgren was 
instrumental in the implementation of this concept. 
Time and time again, he would fi nd ways to alter the 
design of furniture to save on manufacturing costs.
Gillis Lundgren also stumbled on what was 
to become a key feature of IKEA furniture: self-
 assembly. Trying to effi ciently pack and ship a long-
legged table, he hit upon the idea of taking the legs 
off and mailing them packed fl at under the tabletop. 
Kamprad quickly realized that fl at-packed furniture 
reduced transport and warehouse costs, and dam-
age (IKEA had been having a lot of problems with 
furniture damaged during the shipping process). 
Moreover, customers seemed willing to take on the 
task of assembly in return for lower prices. By 1956, 
self-assembly was integral to the IKEA concept.
In 1957, IKEA started to exhibit and sell its 
products at home furnishing fairs in Sweden. By 
cutting retailers out of the equation and using the 
self- assembly concept, Kamprad could undercut the 
prices of established retail outlets, much to their cha-
grin. Established retailers responded by prohibiting 
IKEA from taking orders at the annual furniture 
trade in Stockholm. Established outlets claimed that 
IKEA was imitating their designs. This was to no 
avail, however, so the retailers went further, pressur-
ing furniture manufacturers not to sell to IKEA. This 
had two unintended consequences. First, without 
access to the designs of many manufacturers, IKEA 
was forced to design more of its products in-house. 
Second, Kamprad looked for a manufacturer who 
would produce IKEA-designed furniture. Ultimately, 
he found one in Poland.
To his delight, Kamprad discovered that furniture 
manufactured in Poland was as much as 50% cheaper 
than furniture made in Sweden, allowing him to cut 
prices even more. Kamprad also found that doing 
business with the Poles required the consumption of 
considerable amounts of vodka to celebrate business 
transactions, and for the next 40 years his drinking 
was legendary. Alcohol consumption apart, the rela-
tionship that IKEA established with the Poles was to 
become the archetype for future relationships with 
suppliers. According to one of the Polish managers, 
there were three advantages of doing business with 
IKEA: “One concerned the decision making; it was 
always one man’s decision, and you could rely upon 
what had been decided. We were given  long-term 
contracts, and were able to plan in peace and quiet. . . . 
A third advantage was that IKEA introduced new 
technology. One revolutionary idea, for instance, 
was a way of treating the surface of wood. They also 
mastered the ability to recognize cost savings that 
could trim the price.”3 By the early 1960s, Polish-
made goods were to be found on more than half of 
the pages of the IKEA catalog.
By 1958, an expanded facility at the Almhult 
location became the fi rst IKEA store. The original 
idea behind the store was to have a location where 
customers could come and see IKEA furniture set 
up. It was a supplement to IKEA’s main mail-order 
business; but it very quickly became an important 
sales point in its own right. The store soon started 
to sell car roof racks so customers could leave with 
fl at-packed furniture loaded on top. Noticing that a 
trip to an IKEA store was something of an outing 
for many shoppers (Almhult was not a major popu-
lation center, and people often drove in from long 
distances), Kamprad experimented with adding a 
restaurant to the store so that customers could relax 
and refresh themselves while shopping. The restau-
rant was a hit, and it became an integral feature of 
all IKEA stores.
The response of IKEA’s competitors to its suc-
cess was to argue that IKEA products were of low 
quality. In 1964, just after 800,000 IKEA catalogs 
had been mailed to Swedish homes, the widely read 
Swedish magazine Allt i Hemmet (Everything for 
the Home) published a comparison of IKEA fur-
niture to that sold in traditional Swedish retailers. 
The furniture was tested for quality in a Swedish 
design laboratory. The magazine’s analysis, detailed 
in a 16-page spread, was that not only was IKEA’s 
quality as good if not better than that from other 
Swedish furniture manufacturers, the prices were 
much lower. For example, the magazine concluded 
that a chair bought at IKEA for 33 kronor ($4) was 
better than a virtually identical one bought in a more 
expensive store for 168 kronor ($21). The maga-
zine also showed how a living room furnished with 
IKEA products was as much as 65% less expensive 
than one furnished with equivalent products from 
four other stores. This publicity made IKEA accept-
able in middle-class households, and sales began to 
take off.
In 1965, IKEA opened its fi rst store in Stockholm, 
Sweden’s capital. By now, IKEA was generating the 
equivalent of €25 million and had already opened a 

C92  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
store in neighboring Norway. The Stockholm store, 
its third, was the largest furniture store in Europe 
and had an innovative circular design that was mod-
eled on the famous Guggenheim Art Museum in 
New York. The location of the store was to set the 
pattern at IKEA for decades. The store was situated 
on the outskirts of the city, rather than downtown, 
with ample space for parking and good access roads. 
The new store generated a large amount of traffi c, so 
much so that employees could not keep up with cus-
tomer orders, and long lines formed at the checkouts 
and merchandise pick-up areas. To try and reduce 
the lines, IKEA experimented with a self-service 
pick-up solution, allowing shoppers to enter the 
warehouse, load fl at-packed furniture onto trolleys, 
and then take them through the checkout. It was so 
successful that this soon became the company norm 
in all stores.
International Expansion
By 1973, IKEA was the largest furniture retailer in 
Scandinavia with nine stores. The company enjoyed a 
market share of 15% in Sweden. Kamprad, however, 
felt that growth opportunities were limited. Starting 
with a single store in Switzerland over the next 
15 years, the company expanded rapidly in Western 
Europe. IKEA met with considerable  success, par-
ticularly in West Germany, where it had 15 stores by 
the late 1980s. As in Scandinavia, Western European 
furniture markets were largely fragmented and 
served by high-cost retailers located in expensive 
downtown stores, selling relatively expensive furni-
ture that was not always immediately available, for 
delivery. IKEA’s elegant functional designs with their 
clean lines, low prices, and immediate availability, 
were a breath of fresh air, as was the self-service store 
format. The company was met with almost universal 
success even though, as one former manager put it: 
“We made every mistake in the book, but money 
nevertheless poured in. We lived frugally, drinking 
now and again, yes perhaps too much, but we were 
on our feet bright and cheery when the doors were 
open for the fi rst customers, competing in good Ikean 
spirit for the cheapest solutions.”4
The man in charge of the European expansion was 
Jan Aulino, Kamprad’s former assistant, who was just 
34 years old when the expansion started. Aulino sur-
rounded himself with a young team. Aulino recalled 
that the expansion was so fast paced that the stores 
were rarely ready when IKEA moved in. Moreover, it 
was hard to get capital out of Sweden due to capital 
controls; the trick was to make a quick profi t and get 
a positive cash fl ow going as soon as possible. In the 
haste to expand, Aulino and his team did not always 
pay attention to detail. He reportedly clashed with 
Kamprad on several occasions and considered him-
self fi red at least four times, although he never was. 
Eventually the European business was reorganized, 
and tighter controls were introduced.
IKEA was slow to expand in the UK, however, 
where the locally grown company Habitat had built 
a business that was similar in many respects to IKEA, 
offering stylish furniture at a relatively low price. 
IKEA also entered North America, opening 7 stores 
in Canada between 1976 and 1982. Emboldened by 
this success, in 1985, the company entered the United 
States. It proved to be a challenge of an entirely dif-
ferent nature.
On the face of it, America looked to be fertile 
territory for IKEA. As in Western Europe, furni-
ture retailing was a very fragmented business in the 
United States. At the low end of the market were the 
general discount retailers, such as Walmart, Costco, 
and Offi ce Depot, who sold a limited product line of 
basic furniture, often at very low prices. This furniture 
was very functional, lacked the design elegance asso-
ciated with IKEA, and was generally of a fairly low 
quality. Then there were higher-end retailers, such as 
Ethan Allen, that offered high-quality, well-designed, 
high-priced furniture. They sold this furniture in full-
service stores staffed by knowledgeable salespeople. 
High-end retailers would often sell ancillary services 
as well, such as interior design. Typically these retail-
ers would offer home delivery service, including set 
up in the home, either for free or a small additional 
charge. Because it was expensive to keep large inven-
tories of high-end furniture, much of what was on 
display in stores was not readily available, and the 
client would often have to wait a few weeks before 
it was delivered.
IKEA opened its fi rst United States store in 1985 
in Philadelphia. The company had decided to locate 
on the coasts. Surveys of American consumers sug-
gested that IKEA buyers were more likely to be peo-
ple who had travelled abroad, considered themselves 
risk takers, and liked fi ne food and wine. These peo-
ple were concentrated on the coasts. As one manager 
put it, “There are more Buicks driven in the middle 
than on the coasts.”5

 
Case 7 IKEA: Furniture Retailer to the World 
C93
Although IKEA initially garnered favorable 
reviews, and enough sales to persuade it to start 
opening additional stores, by the early 1990s, it was 
clear that things were not going well in America. 
The company found that its European-style offer-
ings did not always resonate with American con-
sumers. Beds were measured in centimeters, not the 
king, queen, and twin sizes with which Americans 
are familiar. American sheets did not fi t on IKEA 
beds. Sofas were not big enough, wardrobe draw-
ers not deep enough, glasses too small, curtains too 
short, and kitchens did not fi t American-size appli-
ances. In a story often repeated at IKEA, managers 
noted that customers were buying glass vases and 
using them to drink out of, rather than the small 
glasses for sale at IKEA. The glasses were appar-
ently too small for Americans who like to add liberal 
quantities of ice to their drinks. To make matters 
worse, IKEA was sourcing many of the goods from 
overseas, priced in the Swedish kronor, which was 
strengthening against the American dollar. This 
drove up the price of goods in IKEA’s American 
stores. Moreover, some of the stores were poorly 
located, and not large enough to offer the full IKEA 
experience familiar to Europeans.
Turning around its American operations required 
IKEA to take some decisive actions. Many products 
had to be redesigned to fi t with American needs. 
Newer and larger store locations were chosen. To 
bring prices down, goods were sourced from lower-
cost locations and priced in dollars. IKEA also 
started to source some products from factories in 
the United States to reduce both transport costs and 
dependency on the value of the dollar. At the same 
time, IKEA noticed a change in American culture. 
Americans were becoming more concerned with 
design, and more open to the idea of disposable fur-
niture. It used to be said that Americans changed 
their spouses about as often as they changed their 
dining room tables, about 1.5 times in a lifetime, but 
something was shifting in American culture. Younger 
people were more open to risks and more willing to 
experiment. There was a thirst for design elegance 
and quality. Starbucks was tapping into this, as was 
Apple Computer, and so did IKEA. According to one 
manager at IKEA, “Ten or 15 years ago, travelling in 
the United States, you couldn’t eat well. You couldn’t 
get good coffee. Now you can get good bread in the 
supermarket, and people think that is normal. I like 
that very much. That is more important to good life 
than the availability of expensive wines. That is what 
IKEA is about.” 6
To tap into America’s shifting culture, IKEA reem-
phasized design and started promoting the brand 
with a series of quirky hip advertisements aimed at 
a younger demographic: young married couples, col-
lege students, and 20- to 30-something singles. One 
IKEA commercial, called “Unboring,” made fun of 
the reluctance of Americans to part with their fur-
niture. One famous ad featured a discarded lamp, 
forlorn and forsaken in some rainy American city. A 
man turned to the camera sympathetically. “Many of 
you feel bad for this lamp,” he said in thick Swedish 
accent. “That is because you are crazy.” Hip people, 
the commercial implied, bought furniture at IKEA. 
Hip people did not hang onto their furniture either; 
after a while they discarded it and replaced it with 
something else from IKEA.
The shift in tactics worked. IKEA’s revenues 
doubled in a four-year period to $1.27 billion in 
2001, up from $600 million in 1997. By 2008, the 
United States was IKEA’s second-largest market after 
Germany, with 35 stores accounting for 10% of its 
total revenues, or around $2.4 billion, and expan-
sion plans called for 50-plus stores in the United 
States by 2012.
Having learned vital lessons about competing 
in foreign countries outside continental Western 
Europe, IKEA continued to expand internationally 
in the 1990s and 2000s. It fi rst entered the UK in 
1987, and by 2008, it had 17 stores in the country. 
IKEA also acquired Britain’s Habitat in the early 
1990s and continued to run it under the Habitat 
brand name. In 1998, IKEA entered China, where 
it had 4 stores by 2008, followed by Russia in 2000 
(11 stores by 2008), and Japan in 2006, a country 
where it had failed miserably 30 years earlier (by 
2008 IKEA had four stores in Japan). In total, by 
2008, there were 285 IKEA stores in 36 countries 
and territories. The company had plans to continue 
opening between 20 and 25 stores a year for the 
foreseeable future. According to one manager, an 
important limiting factor on the pace of expansion 
was building the supply network.
As with the United States, some local customi-
zation has been the order of the day. In China, 
for example, the store layout refl ected the layout 
of many Chinese apartments, and because many 
Chinese apartments have balconies, IKEA’s Chinese 
stores included a balcony section. IKEA also has had 

C94  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
to adapt its locations in China, where car ownership 
is still not widespread. In the West, IKEA stores are 
generally located in suburban areas and have lots 
of parking space. In China, stores are located near 
public transportation, and IKEA offers delivery ser-
vices so that Chinese customers can get their pur-
chases home. IKEA has also adopted a deep price 
discounting model in China, pricing some items as 
much as 70% below their price in IKEA stores out-
side China. To make this work, IKEA has sourced a 
large percentage of its products sold in China from 
local suppliers.
The IKEA Concept and Business Model
IKEA’s target market is the young, upwardly mobile 
global middle class who are looking for low-priced 
but attractively designed furniture and household 
items. This group is targeted with somewhat wacky, 
offbeat advertisements that help to drive traffi c into 
the stores. The stores themselves are large ware-
houses festooned in the blue and yellow colors of the 
Swedish fl ag that offer 8,000 to 10,000 items, from 
kitchen cabinets to candlesticks. There is plenty of 
parking outside, and the stores are located with good 
access to major roads.
The interior of the stores is confi gured almost 
like a maze that requires customers to pass through 
each department to get to the checkout. The goal 
is simple; to get customers to make more impulse 
purchases as they wander through the IKEA won-
derland. Customers who enter the store planning to 
buy a $40 coffee table can end up spending $500 on 
everything from storage units to kitchenware. The 
fl ow of departments is constructed with an eye to 
boosting sales. For example, when IKEA managers 
noticed that men would get bored while their wives 
stopped in the home textile department, they added 
a tool section just outside the textile department, and 
sales of tools skyrocketed. At the end of the maze, 
just before the checkout, is the warehouse where cus-
tomers can pick up their fl at-packed furniture. IKEA 
stores also have restaurants (located in the middle 
of the store) and child-care facilities (located at the 
entrance for easy drop off) so that shoppers stay as 
long as possible.
Products are designed to refl ect the clean Swedish 
lines that have become IKEA’s trademark. IKEA has 
a product strategy council, which is a group of senior 
managers who establish priorities for IKEA’s product 
lineup. Once a priority is established, product devel-
opers survey the competition and then set a price 
point that is 30% to 50% below that of rivals. As 
IKEA’s Web site states, “We design the price tag fi rst, 
then the product.” Once the price tag is set, design-
ers work with a network of suppliers to drive down 
the cost of producing the unit. The goal is to identify 
the appropriate suppliers and the least-costly materi-
als, a trial and error process that can take as long as 
three years. By 2008, IKEA had 1,380 suppliers in 
54 countries. The top sourcing countries were China 
(21% of supplies), Poland (17%), Italy (8%), Sweden 
(6%), and Germany (6%).
IKEA devotes considerable attention to fi nding 
the right supplier for each item. Consider the com-
pany’s best-selling Klippan love seat. Designed in 
1980, the Klippan, with its clean lines, bright  colors, 
simple legs, and compact size, has sold some 1.5 mil-
lion units since its introduction. IKEA originally 
manufactured the product in Sweden but soon trans-
ferred production to lower-cost suppliers in Poland. 
As demand for the Klippan grew, IKEA then decided 
that it made more sense to work with suppliers in 
each of the company’s big markets to avoid the costs 
associated with shipping the product all over the 
world. Today there are fi ve suppliers of the frames 
in Europe, plus three in the United States and two 
in China. To reduce the cost of the cotton slipcovers, 
IKEA has concentrated production in four core sup-
pliers in China and Europe. The resulting effi ciencies 
from these global sourcing decisions enabled IKEA 
to reduce the price of the Klippan by some 40% 
between 1999 and 2005.
Although IKEA contracts out manufacturing for 
most of its products, since the early 1990s, a certain 
proportion of goods have been made internally (in 
2008, about 90% of all products were sources from 
independent suppliers, with 10% being produced 
internally). The integration into manufacturing was 
born out of the collapse of communist governments 
in Eastern Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 
1989. By 1991, IKEA was sourcing some 25% of its 
goods from Eastern European manufacturers. It had 
invested considerable energy in building long-term 
relationships with these suppliers, and had often 
helped them to develop and purchase new technol-
ogy so that they could make IKEA products at a 
lower cost. As communism collapsed and new bosses 
came in to the factories, many did not feel bound by 
the relationships with IKEA. They effectively tore up 

 
Case 7 IKEA: Furniture Retailer to the World 
C95
contracts, tried to raise prices, and underinvested in 
new technology.
With its supply base at risk, IKEA purchased a 
Swedish manufacturer, Swedwood. IKEA then used 
Swedwood as the vehicle to buy and run furniture 
manufacturers across Eastern Europe, with the 
largest investments being made in Poland. IKEA 
invested heavily in its Swedwood plants, equipping 
them with the most modern technology. Beyond the 
obvious benefi ts of giving IKEA a low-cost source 
of supply, Swedwood has also enabled IKEA to 
acquire knowledge about manufacturing processes 
that are useful both in product design and in rela-
tionships with other suppliers, giving IKEA the 
ability to help suppliers adopt new technology and 
drive down their costs.
For illustration, consider IKEA’s relationship 
with suppliers in Vietnam. IKEA has expanded its 
supply base in Vietnam to help support its growing 
Asian presence. IKEA was attracted to Vietnam by 
the combination of low-cost labor and inexpensive 
raw materials. IKEA drives a tough bargain with its 
suppliers, many of whom say that they make thin-
ner margins on their sales to IKEA than they do to 
other foreign buyers. IKEA demands high quality 
at a low price. But there is an upside; IKEA offers 
the prospect of forging a long-term, high-volume 
business relationship. Moreover, IKEA regularly 
advises its Vietnamese suppliers on how to seek out 
the best and cheapest raw materials, how to set up 
and expand factories, what equipment to purchase, 
and how to boost productivity through technology 
investments and management process.
Organization and Management
In many ways, IKEA’s organization and manage-
ment practices reflect the personal philosophy of 
its founder. A 2004 article in Fortune describes 
Kamprad, then one of the world’s richest men, 
as an informal and frugal man who “insists on 
flying coach, takes the subway to work, drives a 
10-year-old Volvo, and avoids suits of any kind. It 
has long been rumored in Sweden that when his 
self- discipline fails and he drinks an overpriced 
Coke out of a hotel mini bar, he will go down to a 
grocery store to buy a replacement.”7 Kamprad’s 
thriftiness is attributed to his upbringing in 
Smaland, a traditionally poor region of Sweden. 
Kamprad’s frugality is now part of IKEA’s DNA. 
Managers are forbidden to fly first class and are 
expected to share hotel rooms.
Under Kamprad, IKEA became mission driven. 
He had a cause, and those who worked with him 
adopted it too. It was to make life better for the 
masses, to democratize furniture. Kamprad’s man-
agement style was informal, nonhierarchical, and 
team based. Titles and privileges are taboo at IKEA. 
There are no special perks for senior managers. Pay 
is not particularly high, and people generally work 
there because they like the atmosphere. Suits and 
ties have always been absent, from the head offi ce to 
the loading docks. The culture is egalitarian. Offi ces 
have an open plan and are furnished with IKEA fur-
niture; private offi ces are rare. Everyone is called a 
“co-worker,” and fi rst names are used throughout. 
IKEA regularly stages antibureaucracy weeks dur-
ing which executives work on the store fl oor or tend 
to registers. In a 2005 BusinessWeek article Andres 
Dahlvig, the CEO, described how he spent time ear-
lier in the year unloading trucks and selling beds 
and mattresses.8 Creativity is highly valued, and the 
company is replete with stories of individuals tak-
ing the initiative; from Gillis Lundgren’s pioneering 
of the self-assemble concept to the store manager 
in the Stockholm store who let customers go into 
the warehouse to pick up their own furniture. To 
solidify this culture, IKEA had a preference for hir-
ing younger people who had not worked for other 
enterprises and then promoting from within. IKEA 
has historically tended to shy away from hiring the 
highly educated, status-oriented elite, because they 
often adapted poorly to the company.
Kamprad seems to have viewed his team as 
extended family. Back in 1957, he bankrolled a 
weeklong trip to Spain for all 80 employees and their 
families as reward for hard work. The early team of 
employees all lived near each other. They worked 
together, played together, drank together, and talked 
about IKEA around the clock. When asked by an 
academic researcher what the fundamental key 
was to good leadership, Kamprad replied “Love.” 
Recollecting the early days, he noted that “When 
we were working as a small family in Aluhult, we 
were as if in love. Nothing whatsoever to do with 
eroticism. We just liked each other so damn much.”9 
Another manager noted that “We who wanted to 
join IKEA did so because the company suits our way 
of life. To escape thinking about status, grandeur and 
smart clothes.”10

C96  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
As IKEA grew, the question of taking the company 
public arose. While there were obvious advantages 
associated with doing so, including access to capital, 
Kamprad decided against it. His belief was that the 
stock market would impose short-term pressures on 
IKEA that would not be good for the company. The 
constant demands to produce profi ts, regardless of 
the business cycle, would, in Kamprad’s view, make 
it more diffi cult for IKEA to take bold decisions. At 
the same time, as early as 1970, Kamprad started 
to worry about what would happen if he died. He 
decided that he did not want his sons to inherit the 
business. His worry was that they would either sell 
the company, or they might squabble over control 
of the company, and thus destroy it. All three of his 
sons, it should be noted, went to work at IKEA as 
managers.
The solution to this dilemma created one of the 
most unusual corporate structures in the world. In 
1982, Kamprad transferred his interest in IKEA to a 
Dutch-based charitable foundation, Stichting Ingka 
Foundation. This is a tax-exempt, nonprofi t legal 
entity that in turn owns Ingka Holding, a private 
Dutch fi rm that is the legal owner of IKEA. A fi ve-
person committee, chaired by Kamprad and including 
his wife, runs the foundation. In addition, the IKEA 
trademark and concept was transferred to IKEA 
Systems, another private Dutch company, whose par-
ent company, Inter-IKEA, is based in Luxembourg. 
The Luxembourg company is, in turn, owned by 
an identically named company in the Netherlands 
Antilles, whose benefi cial owners remain hidden 
from public view, but they are almost certainly the 
Kamprad family. Inter-IKEA earns its money from a 
franchise agreement it has with each IKEA store. The 
largest franchisee is none other than Ingka Holdings. 
IKEA states that franchisees pay 3% of sales to Inter-
IKEA. Thus, Kamprad has effectively moved owner-
ship of IKEA out of Sweden, although the company’s 
identity and headquarters remain there, and estab-
lished a mechanism for transferring funds to him-
self and his family from the franchising of the IKEA 
concept. Kamprad himself moved to Switzerland in 
the 1980s to escape Sweden’s high taxes, and he has 
lived there ever since.
In 1986, Kamprad gave up day-to-day control 
of IKEA to Andres Moberg, a 36-year-old Swede 
who had dropped out of college to join IKEA’s mail-
order department. Despite relinquishing manage-
ment control, Kamprad continued to exert infl uence 
over the company as an advisor to senior manage-
ment and as an ambassador for IKEA, a role he was 
still pursuing with vigor in 2008, despite being in 
his 80s.
Looking Forward
In its half century, IKEA had established an enviable 
position for itself. It had become one of the most 
successful retail establishments in the world. It had 
expanded into numerous foreign markets (Exhibit 2), 
learning from its failures and building on its suc-
cesses. It had bought affordable, well-designed, 
functional furniture to the masses, helping them 
to, in Kamprad’s words, achieve a better everyday 
life. IKEA’s goal was to continue to grow by open-
ing 20 to 25 stores a year for the foreseeable future. 
Achieving that growth would mean expansion into 
non-Western markets, including most notably China 
where it had recently established a beachhead. Could 
the company continue to do so? Was its competitive 
advantage secure?
Source: http://franchisor.ikea.com/showContent
.asp?swfId=facts9.
Exhibit 1 IKEA by the Numbers in 2008
IKEA Stores
285 in 35 countries
IKEA Sales
€21.2 billion
IKEA Suppliers
1,380 in 54 countries
The IKEA Range
9,500 products
IKEA Coworkers
127,800 in 39 countries
Source: http://www.ikea.com/ms/en_GB/about_ikea/facts_
and_figures/index.html.
Exhibit 2 Sales and Suppliers
Top Five Sales 
Countries
Top Five Supplying 
Countries
Germany
15%
China
21%
United States
10%
Poland
17%
France
10%
Italy
8%
UK
7%
Sweden
6%
Sweden
6%
Germany
6%

 
Case 7 IKEA: Furniture Retailer to the World 
C97
References & Reading
 1. Anonymous, “Furnishing the World,” The Economist, 
November 19, 1995, 79–80.
 2. Anonymous. “Flat pack accounting,” The Economist, 
May 13, 2006, 69–70.
 3. K. Capell, A. Sains, C. Lindblad, and A. T. Palmer, 
“IKEA,” BusinessWeek, November 14, 2005, 96–101.
 4. K. Capell et al., “What a Sweetheart of a Love Seat,” 
BusinessWeek, November 14, 2005, 101.
 5. C. Daniels, “Create IKEA, Make Billions, Take Bus,” 
Fortune, May 3, 2004, 44.
 6. J. Flynn and L. Bongiorno, “IKEA’s New Game Plan,” 
BusinessWeek, October 6, 1997, 99–102.
 7. R. Heller, “Folk Fortune,” Forbes, September 4, 
2000, 67.
 8. IKEA Documents at www.ikea.com.
 9. J. Leland, “How the Disposable Sofa Conquered 
 America,” New York Times Magazine, October 5, 2005,  
40–50.
 10. P. M. Miller, “IKEA with Chinese Characteristics,” 
 Chinese Business Review, July–August 2004, 36–69.
 11. B. Torekull, Leading by Design: The IKEA Story (New 
York: Harper Collins, 1998).
Endnotes
 1. Quoted in R. Heller, “Folk Fortune,” Forbes, September 
4, 2000, 67.
 2. B. Torekull, Leading by Design: The IKEA Story (New 
York: Harper Collins, 1998), 53.
 3. Ibid.
 4. Ibid.
 5. J. Leland, “How the Disposable Sofa Conquered  America,” 
New York Times Magazine, October 5, 2005, 45.
 6. Ibid.
 7. C. Daniels and A. Edstrom, “Create IKEA, Make  Billions, 
Take a Bus,” Fortune, May 3, 2006, 44.
 8. K. Capell et al., “Ikea,” Business Week, November 14, 
2005, 96–106.
 9. B. Torekull, Leading by Design: The IKEA Story, 82.
 10. B. Torekull, Leading by Design: The IKEA Story, 83.

8
From its beginnings as a company that developed 
instruments to measure time, IBM grew to become 
the world’s largest computer company. At its height in 
1966, its stock was valued at $140; in 1993, its stock 
was trading at $42 a share, and shareholders had lost 
hundreds of billions of dollars of their investments. 
How could a giant company like IBM have fallen so 
low? How could the company strengths that con-
tributed to its success have led to its fall? Why did 
IBM lose control of its customers and markets? To 
understand the problems that IBM currently faces, 
we need to look at IBM’s past and at the way its 
strategy and structure developed over time.
Before the Computer
In 1900, Charles Flint, a fi nancier and arms merchant, 
owned, among other businesses, the International Time 
Recording Company (ITR), a clock manufacturer, and 
Computing Scale Company of America, a weighing 
scale and food slicing machine manufacturer.1 These 
two business machine manufacturers formed the seeds 
of what was to become IBM. In the search for new 
markets for its products, ITR began to produce new 
kinds of time measuring machines that, among other 
things, permitted the rapidly expanding Bell telephone 
company to time its customers’ long-distance calls. By 
1910, ITR had become the leader in the time record-
ing industry and had sales over $1 million. Computing 
Scale’s main product was a scale that weighed items 
and calculated the cost per unit; the company also 
sold meat and cheese slicers to retail stores.2
Toward the end of the 19th century, an engineer 
named Herman Hollerith invented a calculating 
machine that sorted cards by punched holes. Any kind 
of data could be recorded by punching holes accord-
ing to a standard procedure; and then the data could 
be analyzed statistically to provide a picture of the 
overall results. Potential customers for this device were 
organizations, such as government agencies, railroads, 
and retail establishments, that needed a way of man-
aging and manipulating large amounts of information. 
The U.S. Census Bureau, for example, saw the poten-
tial of this device for handling its national data col-
lection efforts, and Hollerith was awarded a  contract 
for managing the data processing of the 1890 census. 
Holes were punched in cards to represent different 
census attributes, such as age, sex, and national origin. 
The cards were then sorted by the punched holes, and 
Hollerith’s calculating machine supplied the requested 
data, such as the statistics for the percentage of people 
in a certain age group in a certain state.
The punch card machine required a huge num-
ber of punched cards—in the census, one for every 
family unit—that could be used only once, so each 
machine sale provided card revenue. Thus, although 
the machines performed quickly and accurately, 
they were expensive to operate. Nevertheless, the 
potential uses of the machine were limitless because 
any kind of data could be recorded on these cards. 
James Powers, an employee of the U.S. Census 
Bureau, immediately saw the potential of the calcu-
lating machine; from his experience with Hollerith’s 
machines at the Census Bureau, he understood its 
strengths and weaknesses. Using this information, 
The Rise of IBM
Copyright © 2009 by Gareth R. Jones. All rights reserved; not to be copied or reproduced by any means physical or mechanical without 
the permission of the author.
For the most recent fi nancial results of the company discussed in this case, go to http://fi nance.yahoo.com, input the company’s stock 
symbol, and download the latest company report from its homepage.
C98

 
Case 8 The Rise of IBM 
C99
Powers stole a march on Hollerith by inventing an 
improved calculating machine; using his contacts at 
the Census Bureau, he managed to get the contract 
for the 1910 census.3
Hollerith was now in a diffi cult position; he had 
lost his principal customer and lacked the resources 
to improve his machine and fi nd new customers. He 
approached Flint to get him to invest in the busi-
ness, but Flint, seeing the opportunity to broaden 
his company’s line of business machines, decided to 
acquire Hollerith’s Tabulating Machine Company. 
In 1911, Flint merged it with ITR and Computing 
Scale to form the Computing Tabulating & Recording 
Company (CTR).4
Although Power’s machine was technologically 
better, Hollerith had developed the practice of only 
leasing his machines to customers. Customers liked 
this arrangement because it lowered their costs. 
Also, Hollerith provided a repair service for the 
machines, which were prone to breakdown. Using 
CTR’s resources, the calculating machines were 
continually improved over time, and the new and 
improved machines were leased to customers. These 
leases provided CTR with a continuing source of 
revenues, but, more importantly, each of CTR’s 
customers were required to buy their punch cards 
from CTR; 75% of the tabulating revenues came 
from the sale of the punched cards, while only 
25% came from the lease of the actual machines. 
In 1912, CTR’s profi ts were $541,000, with two-
thirds coming from ITR. Its time machine division, 
however, saw profi ts rise to $613,000 in 1913 with 
most of the increase coming from the calculators. 
This proved very important to CTR because the 
next year, 1914, profi ts plunged to $490,000 due to 
a decline in the time clock sector, and the calculat-
ing business kept the company afl oat.5
Thomas Watson Arrives at CTR
In 1914, to build CTR’s business, Flint agreed to hire 
Thomas Watson as the general manager of CTR.6 
Watson was a former employee of National Cash 
Register (NCR), another major business machine 
company, which Watson had joined in 1895 when 
he was 21 years old. Watson had a passion for sell-
ing and began selling pianos, sewing machines, and 
organs when he was 18. However, the opportunity to 
earn large commissions eventually led him to NCR, 
where a mentor took an interest in his career and 
helped him develop selling skills until he became the 
star salesman at NCR within three years. Watson 
became an NCR branch manager in 1899.7
To exploit Watson’s talents, NCR assigned him 
to create an independent company, called Watson’s 
Cash Register and Secondhand Exchange, using 
NCR funds to beat NCR’s competitors in the used 
cash register market. Just as NCR had a virtual 
monopoly over the sale of new cash registers, Watson 
set out to monopolize the used cash register mar-
ket by deliberately undercutting competitors’ prices. 
With their businesses failing, NCR then acquired its 
competitors. In 1912, Watson and 29 other NCR 
managers were indicted for a violation of antitrust 
laws. Watson was fi ned and sentenced to one year in 
jail; however, although he won an appeal, he decided 
to leave NCR. Watson had other offers in the boat, 
auto, and retail industries, but because he wanted to 
use his knowledge of business machines, he accepted 
the offer at CTR.8
Watson’s career at NCR was signifi cant because 
he implemented many of NCR’s sales practices 
at CTR. Although NCR’s competitors had higher 
quality cash registers than NCR, NCR consistently 
beat the competition because of the way it orga-
nized and rewarded its sales force. NCR had a 
strong sales force in which salespeople were granted 
exclusive territories and paid on commission. This 
made them aggressively pursue all sales opportuni-
ties in their territories. They continually called on 
customers and built strong, personal relationships 
with them. This sales strategy had been developed 
by the leader of NCR, John Patterson, who believed 
that a product was worthless until it was sold. 
Patterson insisted that NCR salespeople answer 
repair calls immediately and instilled in them that 
they were selling a service not just a product. NCR 
created a training school in 1894 for its salespeo-
ple; it also established the NCR “Hundred Point 
Club,” which recognized and rewarded salespeople 
who had exceeded their quotas. Members of the 
club received bonuses and trips to conventions in 
big cities, coverage in the company newspaper, and 
congratulations from Patterson.9 As described fol-
lowing, Watson took full advantage of his knowl-
edge of NCR’s sales practices at CTR. However, 
he also took full advantage of his entrepreneurial 
ability to sense unmet customer needs. He was fas-
cinated with the potential of the punch-card calcu-
lating machine.

C100  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
In 1904, Watson had seen a friend at Eastman 
Kodak using a Hollerith punch card calculating 
machine to monitor salespeople. Each time a sale 
was completed, all the data was entered onto a 
card, which was sorted and tabulated monthly to 
generate reports indicating what each person sold, 
which products were selling best in which regions, 
etc. The cards were permanent records that could 
be fi led, accumulated, and printed  automatically.10 
The punch card system eliminated boring jobs 
such as copying ledger entries and writing bills. 
Furthermore, the machines were relatively inex-
pensive compared to employing clerks to keep 
records, dependable, and fast. Thus as head of 
CTR, Watson was most interested in the calculat-
ing machine side of the business, even though the 
time measurement business generated the highest 
sales and profi ts.
When Watson became president of CTR in 
1915 after NCR, he convinced Flint that CTR 
should devote most of its resources to developing 
the tabulator side of the business. Watson imple-
mented a plan to develop new tabulators, recorders, 
and printers to print the output of the tabulating 
machine. To achieve this new plan, the company 
funded the development of a research laboratory to 
improve the tabulating machines and established a 
facility to train salespeople. His goal was to create 
a sales force like NCR’s sales force and make bet-
ter tabulating machines than CTR’s competitors. 
To help provide the revenue to achieve this, Watson 
licensed foreign companies to produce and sell the 
tabulators in foreign markets. The licensees paid a 
royalty to CTR based on sales. This was the begin-
ning of CTR’s international strategy. Within two 
years, CTR’s research laboratory created a new line 
of tabulators that were easier to use than competi-
tors’ models and priced below their prices, offered 
for lease on favorable terms. Powers was CTR’s 
major competitor at this time.
To compete with Powers, who had tabulators as 
good as CTR, Watson used the strategy that NCR 
had developed in the cash register business: Watson, 
like Patterson, emphasized that the salesperson’s role 
was to provide good quality customer service, not 
merely to lease and install a machine. He established 
the “100 Percent Club” to reward salespeople, and 
those who met quotas were honored at conven-
tions. Employees were also paid on commission, 
and quotas were increased each year.11 In addition, 
employees received a premium salary and good ben-
efi ts, and the company’s policy of internal promo-
tion made it possible for hard-working employees to 
advance quickly in the organization.12 These employ-
ment practices made it easy for CTR to attract and 
retain good employees and gain the commitment of 
its workforce.13
By 1917, CTR’s sales had increased to  
$8.3 million from $4.2 million in 1914. All three 
of its divisions were doing well. Computing Scale’s 
products were now used in shipyards and factories 
throughout the United States to measure the quan-
tity of products, such as nuts and bolts. ITR had 
record sales due to World War I. CTR had leased 
1,400  tabulators by the end of the war. Virtually 
all big insurance companies, railroads, and govern-
ment agencies used CTR’s tabulators. In addition to 
leasing the machines, sales of punch cards were also 
increasing and contributing to company revenues. In 
1919, CTR launched a new printer that displayed 
the data collected and analyzed in the Hollerith tab-
ulators and card sorters. The printer was also priced 
less than the machine made by Powers and was so 
successful that CTR had a backorder for the print-
ers. Watson planned to build a new production plant 
to meet the high demand.14
The large expenditures on research and devel-
opment (R&D) and developing a skilled national 
sales force put a severe strain on the company’s 
resources. It was so severe that when sales reve-
nues dropped from a record $16 million in 1920 
to $10.6 million in 1921 due to slump in the 
economy, CTR was in trouble and needed exter-
nal funds to survive. Fortunately for the company, 
Guaranty Trust Bank loaned CTR the money it 
needed to meet current liabilities. In 1922, sales 
revenues rebounded, and the company made a 
profi t. However, the company had to cut costs in 
every area, including sales and R&D. CTR learned 
not to let cash balances go too low and imple-
mented policies of low dividends, high revenues, 
and careful cost controls. In addition, the com-
pany intentionally refrained from introducing new 
products until a mass market had developed for its 
new range of tabulating machines.15
Watson became chairman of CTR in 1924 
and renamed the company International Business 
Machines (IBM). This new name not only presented 
an integrated image of the company’s three main 
product lines but also indicated the direction Watson 

 
Case 8 The Rise of IBM 
C101
planned for the company: providing advanced 
business machines for both domestic and foreign 
markets.
IBM’s strategy from the 1920s on was to produce 
and lease business machines that collected, processed, 
and presented large amounts of data. From 1924 to 
1941, IBM’s primary business was the production 
and lease of punch card tabulating machines, and 
punch cards contributed most to the revenues of the 
company. As the technology of punch card machines 
became more advanced, they could sort 400 cards 
a minute and print paychecks and address labels. 
Tabulating machines were increasingly used by large 
companies to keep records on their employees, sup-
pliers, and customer accounts.16 Companies usually 
leased IBM’s machines; IBM developed a specifi c 
punch card system to meet the needs of each individ-
ual customer.17 For example, IBM developed a cod-
ing system appropriate to each client’s information 
processing needs.
The potential of punch card tabulating machines 
had been recognized by other companies as well. 
Although the Powers Accounting Machine Corpo-
ration had long been IBM’s competitor, new 
 competitors included Burroughs, NCR, Remington 
Rand, and Underwood Elliot Fisher. Underwood, 
created in 1927, ruled the typewriter industry 
with its Model 5 and had a sales force as good as 
IBM’s, while Burroughs was the leader in adding 
machines. At this time, IBM was not interested in 
mass producing machines like typewriters and add-
ing machines unless such machines could be made 
part of the tabulating system. Its strategy was to 
lease its machines and then support the machines 
with trained service representatives who were 
available to handle customers’ problems and make 
suggestions for improving customers’ information 
processing as their individual businesses changed. 
Leasing gave IBM several competitive advantages 
over Burroughs, NCR, and Remington Rand who 
all sold machines. First, it allowed the company to 
retain control over outdated technology that could 
not be resold in the used market (a problem NCR 
had encountered). Second, leasing made it easier 
for the customers because they were not commit-
ted to a large capital outlay or purchasing out-
moded machines. Third, leasing provided IBM with 
a steady cash fl ow. Moreover, by leasing machines, 
IBM was also able to force customers to purchase 
the thousands of cards they used each month 
from IBM. The practice of making customers buy 
its cards led to an antitrust law suit in 1936. The 
Supreme Court ruled that IBM should discontinue 
requiring customers to buy cards from IBM alone. 
However, this ruling had no impact because IBM 
was the only effective supplier of cards, and its sales 
force made sure that customers were kept happy.
During the 1920s and 1930s, IBM also began 
to develop specialized tabulators to handle specifi c 
types of information processing needs for customers. 
For example, IBM developed a proofi ng machine for 
banks that could sort and add checks, a very labor-
intensive process. This proof machine, which was 
called the IBM 405 and launched in 1932, became 
IBM’s most profi table product at the time. The 
405 consisted of a punch, a sorter, and an account-
ing machine. Operators punched holes in cards 
to represent data. The sorter put the cards in the 
appropriate bins. The cards were then taken out of 
the bin and run through the accounting machines, 
which generated printouts of the data and could also 
print checks. Some customers rented verifi ers that 
attached to the punch to ensure the cards were prop-
erly prepared. IBM trained its customers’ employees 
on how to use the 405 at no cost to ensure a demand 
for their products.
By 1939, IBM was the biggest and most power-
ful business machine company in the United States. 
IBM owned about 80% of the keypunches, sorters, 
and accounting machines used for tabulating pur-
poses. By this time, Remington Rand and Burroughs 
were minor competitors, and the Powers company 
had disappeared, unable to match IBM’s strengths in 
sales and R&D.18
By 1939, Watson had also reorganized the com-
pany’s business divisions. The punch card tabulat-
ing division was now the center of the company’s 
business, and he was building the company’s other 
divisions around this division. For example, Watson 
decided to keep ITR, which sold time clocks among 
other things, because customers bought many 
time cards, which were similar to punched cards. 
However, he sold off the largest part of the scale 
division because it no longer fi t the company’s 
new direction. On the other hand, Watson bought 
Electromatic Typewriter Company because it was 
working on keypunch consoles. By 1945, IBM 
developed this company to become the United 
States leader in electric typewriters, which were 
sold by IBM’s large and well-trained sales force.19

C102  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
In 1939, total revenues were $34.8 million, 
and profi ts were $9.1 million. Sales of punch cards 
were about $5 million of this total and had higher 
profi t margins than any other product.20 However, 
the start of World War II accelerated the demand 
for IBM’s tabulating machines, and sales rose to 
$143.3 million by 1943. However, profi ts were 
only $9.7 million compared to $9.1 million due to 
the wartime excess profi ts tax. Higher sales were 
achieved because IBM created mobile punch card 
units that followed supply controllers across war 
zones, and bookkeeping was done on the battle-
fi eld.21 For example, a mobile unit would go to a 
Pacifi c island and compute the soldiers’ payrolls. 
The tabulators also recorded bombing results, casu-
alties, prisoners, displaced persons, and supplies. 
A punch card record was maintained on every man 
drafted and followed him until he was discharged 
from the military.22
The Computer Age
Toward the end of World War II, a research team 
at the University of Pennsylvania constructed a 
computer to solve math problems for the army; the 
machine, called the ENIAC, could compute ballistic 
tables for the big guns of World War II. In 1946, 
the ENIAC was the only working computer in the 
world. This computer was the size of a small house 
and had 18,000 vacuum tubes, which tended to 
burn out. The machine cost $3 million to build, 
took a long time to set up, and was very diffi cult to 
use. The inventors of the computer, J. Presper Eckert 
and John Mauchley, realized that computers could 
take the place of punch card tabulating machines 
and that they would eventually be used in business. 
They created a company to develop and manufac-
ture a computer for commercial use, the Univac 
(standing for UNIVersal Automatic Computer). In 
1948, they received an order from the U.S. Census 
Bureau for their computer (just as Hollerith had 
60 years before), and in the same year, Prudential 
Insurance also ordered a Univac.23 These organiza-
tions were two of IBM’s largest customers, and so 
IBM became interested in the new computer tech-
nology.24 However, in 1950, Remington Rand, which 
also sold typewriters, tabulators,  fi ling cabinets, and 
electric shavers, forestalled IBM and bought Eckert 
and Mauchley’s company to gain entry into the new 
computer market. Just as Watson had realized the 
potential of the punch card machine, so Remington 
realized the potential of the computer. The race was 
on to become the company that would dominate the 
next generation of business machines—computers.
IBM had not ignored technical developments in 
the tabulating industry. By 1948, it had developed an 
electromechanical machine called the MARK I that 
was 51 feet long by 8 feet high and cost $1 million. 
This machine was more advanced than a punch card 
machine, but it was still not a true computer. It was 
slower than the Univac.25
Tom Watson’s two sons, Tom Jr. and Arthur 
(“Dick”), joined IBM at the end of the war.26 Tom Jr. 
convinced his father that IBM would lose everything 
if it did not embrace the new technology and enter 
the computer market.27 Large insurance companies 
such as Prudential and Metropolitan Life were IBM 
companies that had been complaining for a long time 
that the punch card system required too much storage 
space and was becoming too slow and cumbersome 
to handle the volume of information these companies 
were generating. IBM began investigating new kinds 
of storage systems, such as magnetic tapes, and look-
ing at computers that used new electronic circuits 
to sort data and handle calculations. After looking 
at the ENIAC computer, which used the new elec-
tronic circuits, Watson Jr. encouraged IBM’s research 
laboratory managers to recruit more electronic spe-
cialists.28 He prodded IBM to incorporate electronic 
circuits in punch card machines because a primitive 
electronic circuit could perform 5,000  additions 
per second compared to 4 per second for the fastest 
mechanism in a punch card machine.
Working quickly, and with access to the com-
pany’s large resource base, IBM developed a new 
machine in 1946 that could compute payroll in one-
tenth the time a punch card machine could do it. 
The 603 Electronic Multiplier was not a true com-
puter; numbers were processed from punch cards 
rather than from signals recorded in the machine’s 
memory circuits. The machine was upgraded to the 
604, which had electronic circuits that could divide. 
When it was introduced in mid-1948, it sold by the 
thousands. Both machines matched IBM’s exist-
ing punch card equipment, which made it easy for 
IBM’s customers to upgrade to the new machines. 
The machine’s success convinced Tom Watson Jr. and 
Senior that electronics would grow even faster. From 

 
Case 8 The Rise of IBM 
C103
this time on, the company committed its resources to 
developing an advanced new computer system, just 
as 30 years before Tom Sr. had bet CTR’s future on 
advanced punch card machines.29
IBM began working on its fi rst family of electronic 
computers, called the 701 in 1949. Tom Jr. became 
president of the domestic division of IBM in 1952, 
the same year in which the 701 was launched.30 The 
701 was a scientifi c computer for use in laboratories, 
but it was not as advanced as the Univac. However, 
although Remington Rand was ahead in technology, 
the company lacked IBM’s vision, and Rand would 
not permit punch card salespeople to sell Univacs. 
Tom Jr., however, placed IBM’s sales force behind 
its computer and required both senior executives 
and engineers to help train its sales force in operat-
ing the new machine. By 1953, IBM installed 32 of 
its 701 computer machines and had 164 on order 
compared to Remington Rand’s 33 installations and 
24 orders.
The 702, a commercial computer for general 
accounting applications, was launched in 1954. 
This machine was faster than the Univac, and with 
this machine, IBM took the technological lead. By 
1956, IBM had 87 computers installed at various 
 businesses and 190 on order, compared to all other 
competitors combined installations of 41  and 
combined orders of 40 computers.31 Because all 
its machines were leased, it was easy for IBM to 
upgrade its customers to its new advanced machines. 
When the 705 was  developed to replace the 702, 
and the 704 to replace the 701, IBM retained and 
increased its  market share.32 Between 1950 and 
1956, IBM’s revenues tripled from $214.9 million 
to $743.3 million.33 The average growth rate of the 
company from 1946 to 1955 was 22%. Watson Jr. 
decided to expand IBM’s product line as fast as the 
market would allow.
IBM’s technological success was due to the way 
Watson Jr. had totally changed the company’s R&D 
thrust. IBM’s research lab had been dominated by 
engineers because its punch card machines oper-
ated on mechanical principles. None of its engi-
neers understood electronics, however, so Watson Jr. 
hired a new lab chief and increased the staff from 
500 mechanical engineers and technicians in 1950 
to more than 4,000 electrical engineers by 1956. 
Watson Jr. also created a smaller lab in California to 
specialize in storage devices. In less than three years, 
this lab invented the computer disk that stores data 
on magnetic tape that became the backbone of IBM’s 
future computer systems.
Watson Jr. also led the development of the IBM 
650 in 1956 that provided enough data processing 
power for most general commercial applications. 
The 650 was less powerful than the 700 series, but it 
was much cheaper. The 650 introduced thousands of 
punch card customers to computers. It was designed 
to work with ordinary punch card equipment but 
made the punch card system much more powerful 
and versatile. For example, life insurance companies 
compute insurance premiums from actuarial tables 
based upon the age, sex, and other customer factors. 
Using a 650, these actuarial tables could be loaded 
into the computer memory, and when the punch card 
containing information on a customer was loaded 
into the machine, the computer did the calculations 
and furnished the total.34 Previously, a clerk had 
to fi gure the totals and record the information on 
a punch card for recording purposes; the 650 did 
everything.
IBM put its huge sales force behind the 
650 machine, and as a result of its efforts, within a 
year almost 1,000 machines were sold. Most com-
puters were used in administrative offi ces and in fac-
tories for controlling the manufacturing process.35 
By the end of the 1950s, IBM had a 75% market 
share. The remaining market was divided among 
Remington Rand, Honeywell Electronics, NCR, and 
a few others. Although Underwood Typewriter and 
NCR attempted to launch small computers, the 650 
was a better performer.
The Transistor
In 1956, the transistor, developed by William 
Shockley at Bell Labs, weighed 100 times less than 
the vacuum tube. Compared to a vacuum tube, the 
transistor required a lot less electrical power, could 
perform calculations at a much faster rate, and had 
the potential to miniaturize computing systems. The 
transistor made it feasible both to design a more 
complex and powerful computer and sell it at a price 
that most companies could afford.36
IBM researchers had been successfully using the 
vacuum tube, and like the mechanical engineers before 
them, they were reluctant to change to a transistor-
based computer technology. Watson Jr. sent a memo 
to development personnel stating that no more 
IBM machines would be designed using vacuum 

C104  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
tubes.37 This memo started a whole new thrust in 
IBM’s research efforts that ultimately led to the 
7000  computer series, IBM’s fi rst computers based 
on transistors instead of vacuum tubes.38 However, 
scientists had a hard time wiring transistors together 
until the integrated circuit was invented in 1959 by a 
Fairchild Semiconductor engineer. The whole circuit 
board was the size of a fi ngernail. By the early 1960s, 
IBM computers guided Polaris missiles and air force 
jets. When integrated circuits were mass produced, 
their cost fell from $1,000 per circuit in 1960 to a 
few cents per circuit by 1970. IBM developed suc-
cessive generations of more powerful machines to 
exploit the new technology.39
Redeﬁ ning the Industry
By 1960, IBM’s computer division was disorga-
nized and had a product line consisting of eight 
newer transistor-based computers and several older 
vacuum tube machines. This caused several prob-
lems for IBM’s customers because the computers 
were not compatible. For example, if a customer 
expanded and wanted to upgrade to a larger or 
newer computer, the customer had to lease a whole 
new range of equipment and rewrite all the pro-
grams to make the computer work in the company. 
The disjointed product line was also causing prob-
lems for IBM’s personnel. Because IBM’s product 
line had grown so large, Watson Jr. decided to split 
the data processing division into two units: one for 
machines that rented for over $10,000 a month and 
one for machines that rented for less than $10,000 a 
month. However, this product division caused com-
petition between managers of the different product 
lines, each of whom fought to obtain resources to 
develop and improve their particular product line. 
This also led to a duplication of R&D efforts. The 
diverse range of computers made it more diffi cult 
for IBM’s sales force to learn the different systems 
associated with each computer and to effi ciently 
inform customers about their suitability for their 
particular business.
IBM’s technological thrust had outpaced the abil-
ity of the company to adequately service its prod-
ucts. Its attempt to become the leader in the industry 
resulted in the development of a fragmented product 
line that was confusing its customers and employ-
ees. The company needed a new strategy to grow. 
Watson Jr.’s answer was that IBM needed to build 
a line of computers that would cover the needs of 
the whole computer market. The project was called 
the System/360, representing 360 degrees in a circle, 
because IBM wanted to meet the needs of every user 
in both the scientifi c and business community. The 
360 was intended to make all other computers, both 
IBM’s and its competitor’s, obsolete. All of the 
360  computers would be compatible with one 
another. Moreover, they would all use the same 
operating language, software, disk drives, printers, 
etc. The goal of this design was to lock in customers 
to IBM’s computer systems and make it diffi cult for 
customers to change to competing products. Their 
incentive would be keep buying new IBM products 
when they wanted to upgrade their systems. The 
other goal of the system was to make better use 
of IBM’s R&D resources and make it easier for its 
sales force to sell an integrated package of products 
to customers. The project was challenging because 
hardware and software had to be coordinated, and 
IBM began producing its own electronic parts for 
the fi rst time.40 IBM opened six new plants around 
the world to manufacture the System/360 comput-
ers. Over a four-year period, $5 billion was invested, 
and 50,000 new employees were hired.41
The System/360 mainframe computer was 
launched in 1964 and captured 70% of the market.42 
The project was an immense success and put IBM way 
ahead of its competitors. Although before the 360, 
competitors such as RCA, Burroughs, Honeywell, 
Univac, and General Electric sold machines that 
performed much better than IBM computers for the 
same price, the compatible design and the power of 
the System/360 beat all competitors.43 Moreover, 
marketing played as large a role in the success of 
the project as did technology. Although all its com-
petitors had access to integrated circuits and could 
produce an advanced computer, only IBM had the 
capacity to sell a machine, install it correctly, and 
provide the quality service that allowed it to retain 
and lock in its customers.
Due to the success of the System/360 mainframes 
and the IBM sales force, IBM dominated the com-
puter industry.44 The 360 spurred growth in the whole 
industry. In 1963, there were only 11,700 computers 
in the United States, however; this fi gure doubled in 
1965 and redoubled in 1969. By 1969, IBM had reve-
nues of $7.196 billion and earnings of $934  million. 
Although, the situation was masked by increasing 
revenues from world trade and interest earned from 

 
Case 8 The Rise of IBM 
C105
investments, by 1970, IBM was starting to slow 
down. Its stock price actually declined in 1970. The 
company had grown at an annual rate of 22% from 
1946 to 1955, but its growth was only 16% per year 
from 1955 to 1970 and slowed further after 1970. 
The reason was that IBM was beginning to face 
competition from other companies who had begun 
to produce computers for other segments of the com-
puter market. Before we examine the new competi-
tion in the computer industry, it is useful to discuss 
the scope of IBM’s domestic and foreign operations 
to understand how large and complex the company 
had become.
Global Development
IBM’s movement into global markets began in 1908 
when Herman Hollerith made a licensing agree-
ment with the British Tabulating Company (BTC) 
to produce and sell Hollerith tabulators throughout 
the British Empire. Tom Watson Sr. continued with 
Hollerith’s vision of IBM as an international com-
pany and established IBM’s foreign department. 
After WWI, he began to build small manufactur-
ing plants in Germany, France, and Great Britain 
to evade the tariffs these countries levied on foreign 
imports. Sales and marketing agencies were also cre-
ated throughout Europe, Latin America, and parts 
of Asia. The branches were called Watson Business 
Machines and their function, as in the United States, 
was to provide the high level of customer service 
that supported IBM’s business machines. In 1935, 
foreign revenue was $1.6 million, with punch cards 
once again being the biggest contributor. By 1939, 
more than 12% of IBM’s revenues came from for-
eign operations.
During WWII, IBM’s plants in Europe and 
Japan were seized. However, even though IBM’s 
German plant, which contributed 50% of the for-
eign department’s revenue, was in ruins, by 1945, 
foreign  revenues were almost $2 million. After the 
war, IBM’s British plant became the largest facility 
outside North America. In 1949, IBM renegotiated 
the 1908 agreement with BTC whereby BTC, would 
receive a free, nonexclusive license on all current 
IBM products in exchange for letting IBM sell its 
new products through its own sales organization. 
This agreement resulted in the creation of a new 
subsidiary called IBM UK, which, selling IBM’s new 
advanced computers, soon came to dominate the 
British and European markets.
In 1949, Dick Watson, who spoke German, 
French, Italian, and Spanish, was put in charge of 
IBM’s international operations. In 1950, the for-
eign department was renamed the IBM World Trade 
Division and became an independent subsidiary that 
would receive product and fi nancial support from 
the IBM domestic Division but would operate on its 
own. By 1950, the World Trade Division had 10 fac-
tories producing machines and more than 20 facili-
ties making cards throughout the world. The World 
Trade Division operated in 58 countries through sub-
sidiaries such as IBM Deutschland, IBM France, and 
many smaller units in Latin America and Africa.45
Of World Trade’s 16,000 employees in 1954, 
only 200 were Americans because Dick Watson 
believed that most success would be achieved if each 
subsidiary was responsive to the needs of its own 
region or country. Dick Watson set high standards 
for the World Trade Division, hired good people 
as country managers, and was responsive to local 
customs. So, for example, the German subsidiary 
would be staffed by German nationals who could 
be responsive to the needs of its German customers 
and understand their specifi c problems.46 By 1967, 
foreign revenues were $1.6 billion and net earnings 
were $209 million. World Trade sales were equal 
to IBM’s domestic sales. Although IBM operated in 
130 countries, Europe accounted for two-thirds of 
foreign revenue.47 In 1970, Dick Watson resigned 
from IBM to become the United States ambassador to 
France. With his departure, the World Trade Division 
was further divided into world regions: Europe, 
the Middle East, Africa, the Americas, and the Far 
East. By 1970, foreign revenues had increased to 
$3.5 billion.48
Domestic Operations
IBM Domestic, which was led by Tom Watson Jr., 
was limited to operations in the continental United 
States, but as the parent company, it was also 
responsible for R&D and fi nancing operations for 
the entire company.49 The rapid growth of the com-
pany began to produce enormous problems for the 
company. By 1950, not only was IBM designing and 

C106  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
manufacturing many different models of computers, 
it was also designing and manufacturing many of the 
component parts used in the computers, such as disk 
drives and transistors peripheral equipment such as 
printers fi le storage, and servers. The range of the 
company’s activities had increased enormously, and 
IBM’s operating structure had lagged behind the 
growth in the company, which began to cause many 
problems.
Despite IBM’s growth (in 1955, the company 
reached $500 million in revenues), it was run by 
Tom Watson Sr. until he retired in 1955. Watson Sr. 
oversaw all of IBM’s operations, and a line of top 
managers was always waiting to see him. No formal 
organizational chart existed because Watson believed 
that people should be interested in all aspects of 
IBM’s activities rather than focusing on specifi c 
jobs. The company had no clear chain of command, 
no policy of decentralization that gave lower level 
managers the right to make independent decisions, 
and no formal planning process or business policies. 
Knowledge was simply in employees’ heads, and 
strategy emerged gradually over time from discus-
sions and negotiations between Watson Sr. and his 
top management team.
After Watson Sr.’s retirement, Tom Watson Jr. and 
Al Williams, IBM’s president at the time, decided to 
construct an organizational chart to see who reported 
to Watson. They found that 38 to 40 top managers 
had been reporting directly to him. It was obvious to 
them that this highly centralized management style 
could not continue if the rapidly growing company 
was going to stay on top of the computer industry. 
Unmade decisions were accumulating because man-
agers lacked the authority to make decisions.
Watson Jr. wanted to break with his father’s 
centralized, autocratic style of decision making and 
speed up the process, so he and Williams reorga-
nized IBM’s operating structure to decentralize con-
trol to managers who were given the responsibility 
of managing the different functional areas of the 
company. The organization chart they devised put 
Red Lamotte in charge of sales and R&D and Al 
Williams in charge of fi nance, while Watson Jr. would 
take control of the company’s strategy. However, 
this reorganization simply divided the chaos among 
three people instead of one; there were still far too 
many managers reporting to the three top managers, 
and they were unable to control IBM’s operations. 
So, in 1956, IBM was reorganized along divisional 
lines. IBM Domestic was broken up into fi ve indi-
vidual divisions: the fi eld engineering division, which 
primarily served commercial customers; the federal 
systems division, which primarily served government 
agencies; the systems manufacturing division, which 
manufactured the computers; the component manu-
facturing division, which manufactured the compo-
nents; and the research division, which performed 
the basic research and design activities. In each divi-
sion, a general manager would make decisions for 
the division. The World Trade Division would con-
tinue to operate separately from the now subdivided 
Domestic Division.50
This divisional structure ensured that each exec-
utive had clearly defi ned tasks. Watson Jr. created a 
top management team of six people, consisting of 
himself and the heads of the fi ve divisions to oversee 
the company. Each of the fi ve general managers was 
responsible for a major part of IBM, and Watson Jr. 
oversaw the entire company. Watson Jr. claimed 
that his ability to choose and retain an intelligent 
top management team was his greatest contribution 
to IBM.51 He created a corporate staff of experts in 
sales and marketing, fi nance, manufacturing, person-
nel, and communications to advise him and oversee 
the activities of the divisions. The corporate staff was 
seen as staff or advisory managers, while divisional 
managers were seen as line managers, with responsi-
bility for the bottom line operating results. The line 
managers were responsible for meeting production 
targets, beat sales quotas, and increase market share. 
The staff managers gave advice to line managers; 
the heads of the divisions, who were their superi-
ors, conveyed policy from corporate headquarters to 
the operating divisions and ensured that the proper 
objectives were in place and being met. Each line 
manager would be evaluated solely on his or her 
unit’s results, and each staff manager would be rated 
on his or her effort in making IBM a world leader.
IBM’s divisional structure produced many ten-
sions between corporate (staff) and divisional (line) 
personnel. For example, as a part of their roles, 
staff managers would often identify problems that 
needed to be addressed and would  write memos 
to line managers suggesting how to solve it. Line 
managers, however, viewed these moves as inter-
ference and intrusions into their areas of opera-
tions. They began to guard their territories from 
corporate personnel who had no direct authority 
over divisional managers. To resolve these tensions, 

 
Case 8 The Rise of IBM 
C107
Williams created a check and balance system in 
IBM called “contention management.” This system 
forced both staff and line managers to meet and 
encouraged them to debate the merits of an idea; no 
operating plan became fi nal without staff approval. 
When line and staff managers could not agree, the 
problem was sent to the corporate management  
committee—the top six executives. Over time, how-
ever, an increasing number of issues were sent to the 
top of the organization to resolve, and it became 
accepted that top management would resolve 
important strategic issues. Thus, despite Watson’s 
claimed policy of decentralizing authority to divi-
sional managers and their subordinates, much of 
IBM’s decision making remained centralized at 
the top of the organization. Managers from IBM’s 
mainframe division, its chief revenue earner, had the 
most power in shaping corporate decision making.
IBM’s policy of long-term employment, com-
mitment, and loyalty to the company’s objectives 
became entrenched during this period, and the com-
pany became known throughout the industry for 
its job security and good pay.52 With its high rate of 
growth, internal promotions were easy to come by, 
and employees rose rapidly throughout the corporate 
ranks. In 1955, employee stock options were offered 
for the fi rst time. In 1966, managers were required to 
attend an in-house IBM management school, where 
they were trained on IBM’s philosophy on commu-
nications, sales and service efforts, meetings, and 
employee treatment (such as visiting workers with 
sick spouses).53 This policy taught employees the 
IBM way and helped to cement IBM’s corporate cul-
ture and its style of doing business.
New Management 
and New Challenges
In 1970, Dick Watson resigned to become the United 
States ambassador to France, and Tom Watson Jr. 
suffered a heart attack that resulted in his retire-
ment in 1971. When Tom Watson Jr. appointed 
T. V. Learson as CEO in 1971, the period of the 
Watson family’s control over IBM came to an end. 
IBM was the largest, most successful computer 
company in the world and had achieved complete 
domination over the global computer industry. The 
question for Learson was, what new challenges could 
IBM confront? How should it use its vast resources to 
exploit a computer market that was growing by leaps 
and bounds? How could the company exploit its 
privileged position to dominate the computer market 
of the future? The answers were not long in coming.
Endnotes
 17. David Mercer, The Global IBM 31–42.
 18. Robert Sobel, IBM: Colossus in Transition, 72, 75–82, 
86–87, 92.
 19. Ibid.  83.
 20. Ibid. 84.
 21. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 31–42.
 22. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
112.
 23. “The Machine That Changed the World.”
 24. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
192.
 25. Ibid. 190.
 26. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 41–43.
 27. “The Machine That Changed the World.”
 28. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
24–35.
 29. Ibid. 136–137, 189, 192.
 30. Ibid.  24–35.
 31. Ibid. 243.
 32. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition, 127–128.
 1. David Mercer, The Global IBM (New York: Dodd, 
Mead & Co., 1988), 27–31.
 2. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus In Transition, (New York: 
Times Books, 1981), 11.
 3. Ibid. 15–19, 21.
 4. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 27–31.
 5. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition, 49–59.
 6. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 31–42.
 7. Robert Sobel, IBM: Colossus in Transition, 32–38.
 8. Ibid. 49–59, 61.
 9. Ibid.  24, 27–30.
 10. Thomas Watson Jr. and Peter Petre, Father Son & Co.: 
My Life At IBM And Beyond. (New York: Bantam 
Books, 1990), 70.
 11. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition,  49–59, 61.
 12. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 31–42.
 13. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition, 62.
 14. Ibid. 63.
 15. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 31–42.
 16. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 70.

C108  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
 33. David Mercer, The Global IBM,  46.
 34. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
244.
 35. “The Machine That Changed the World.”
 36. “The Machine That Changed the World.”
 37. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
24–35.
 38. Lewis, 92-98. BW 14 Feb. 1988, 92–98.
 39. “The Machine That Changed the World.”
 40. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
292, 346–350.
 41. David Mercer, The Global IBM,  51.
 42. Lewis, 92-98. BW 14 Feb. 1988, 92–98.
 43. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
346–350.
 44. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition,  169.
 45. Ibid. 131–137, 197–199, 202, 204.
 46. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 251–254.
 47. Robert Sober, IBM: Colossus in Transition,  131–137, 
197–199, 202, 204.
 48. Ibid. 203–204, 207.
 49. “The Intimate Tale of IBM’s First Family.” Fortune, 
14 June 1990, 92–132. Book Excerpt from Father, Son & 
Co.: My Life at IBM and Beyond, By Thomas Watson Jr. 
and Peter Petre, Bantam Books (1990).
 50. David Mercer, The Global IBM, 52–53.
 51. Thomas Watson Jr. & Peter Petre, Father Son & Co., 
24–35.
 52. Ibid.  288–289.
 53. Ibid.  24–35.

T. V. Learson took over as CEO of IBM after Tom 
Watson Jr. in 1971 and became the head of a com-
pany that had a 75% share of the world market 
for mainframe computers—computers powerful 
enough to manage the information processing needs 
of an entire company. Learson had made a major 
personal contribution to IBM’s emergence as the 
dominant global mainframe manufacturer when 
he led the development of IBM’s highly success-
ful System/360 mainframe series that led to the 
rapid rise in the company’s fortunes. IBM’s 360 
mainframes fully automated a company’s manual 
information processing systems, such as payroll, 
accounting, and customer record keeping,  making 
the punch card obsolete. As the former head of 
the 360 program, Learson understood the critical 
importance of research and development (R&D) in 
maintaining and defending IBM’s preeminent posi-
tion in the mainframe market. Because of this, he 
initiated and oversaw the development of IBM’s 
new, more powerful System/370 computer series.
Technical advances lowered the System/370’s 
price per calculation to 60% less than that of the 
System/360s, plus the 370 had a larger informa-
tion storage system. The 370s still used the software 
of the 360s however, making them primarily an 
upgrade rather than a replacement. Nevertheless, the 
370 machines became the backbone of IBM’s main-
frame product line from the early 1970s on. Most of 
the advances that IBM traded to its mainframe com-
puters from this time on were designed primarily to 
either improve the 370 machines’  processing power 
or the performance of its various components, such 
as its software, its printers, and, especially, its stor-
age capacity. The 370 series became the industry 
standard that IBM’s competitors tried to match and 
outperform.
Under Learson’s control, and then under the 
 control of Frank Cary who became CEO when 
Learson retired in 1973, IBM continued to enjoy its 
domination of the mainframe market. By 1980, IBM 
had a market value of $26 billion, four times its size 
in 1971.
Increasing Competition
Although IBM’s continued domination of the main-
frame market produced record increases in reve nues 
and profi ts every year, its performance masked some 
major problems that were developing during the 
1970s and 1980s. The fi rst major problem, which 
Cary had recognized as early as 1970, was that 
the mainframe computer market was starting to 
mature. Almost every large United States business 
possessed a mainframe computer, as did most scien-
tifi c and higher education institutions. Furthermore, 
IBM also had saturated the international market. 
As a result, IBM’s rate of growth was falling; even 
though its revenues were increasing, they were 
increasing at a decreasing rate. Competition was 
increasing from companies that were trying to fi nd 
ways to attract IBM’s customers and share in the 
The Fall of IBM
This case was prepared by Gareth R. Jones, Texas A&M University. Copyright © 2009 by Gareth R. Jones. All rights reserved; not to be 
copied or reproduced by any means physical or mechanical without the permission of the author.
For the most recent fi nancial results of the company discussed in this case, go to http://fi nance.yahoo.com, input the company’s stock 
symbol, and download the latest company report from its homepage.
9
C109

C110  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
huge revenues in the mainframe computer market. 
Its major competitors at the time were Amdahl, 
Honeywell, Burroughs, Univac, NCR, and Control 
Data.
Many of these companies began offering IBM’s 
customers mainframe systems at a lower cost than 
the expensive IBM systems. Initially, IBM faced com-
petition only from companies selling IBM- compatible 
peripheral equipment such as disk drives, storage 
devices, and printers at lower prices than IBM’s 
products. Its sales force had been able to ward off 
such threats. Now, however, the nature of competi-
tion was changing. IBM’s competitors began selling 
cheaper, higher performing, IBM-compatible central 
processing units (CPUs)—the brain of the computer 
and the source of its processing power. For the fi rst 
time, competitors were offering a low-price alterna-
tive to the IBM mainframe. At the same time, IBM 
was still pursuing its high-priced lease strategy, which 
was backed by excellent customer service. Another 
emerging low-price threat came from leasing com-
panies. These leasing companies would buy old 360s 
from IBM and lease them on better terms than IBM 
offered, attracting price-conscious IBM customers. 
While these competitive threats were small, they nev-
ertheless gave IBM cause for concern.
From 1970 on IBM became concerned about the 
threat of low-cost, foreign competition in the main-
frame computer market after witnessing the decline 
of several United States industries, including auto-
mobiles, due to the entry of low-cost Japanese com-
petitors. The price of integrated circuits, the heart of 
a mainframe computer, was plummeting at this time, 
and Japanese companies had the technical capabil-
ity to build a powerful computer that could match 
or exceed the IBM 370. The existence of a low-cost 
global competitor was a major threat to IBM’s dom-
ination of both the United States market and the 
global market.
In response to the threat of low-cost compe-
tition, Cary announced that IBM would spend 
$10 billion to build new automated plants to pro-
duce low-cost computers over a six-year period. In 
this way, IBM would be able to meet the challenge 
of low-priced computers should the threat materi-
alize and its customers start to switch to low-cost 
competitors. John Opel, who became IBM’s CEO in 
1981, was also concerned about competition from 
Japan and carried on with Cary’s low-cost producer 
strategy. Under his control IBM spent $32 billion 
from 1980 to 1985 to determine ways to reduce 
manufacturing costs.
IBM’s push to reduce manufacturing costs did 
not fi t well with its strategy of offering excellent 
customer service and using its very expensive sales 
force to sell and service its machines. It was unlikely 
that IBM would ever be able to compete on price 
with its competitors because its customer service and 
support activities raised its costs so much. Moreover, 
competing on price had never been a part of its strat-
egy; IBM always had competed on its unique abil-
ity to provide customers with an integrated, full-line 
computer service. Analysts wondered whether Opel 
was spending too much to lower manufacturing 
costs and whether the $32 billion could not be better 
spent in some other way.
Changes in Technology
Changes in mainframe technology also caused a 
change in IBM’s strategy during the 1970s. As a 
result of technological innovations, particularly the 
plunging costs of integrated circuits, the life span of 
a mainframe computer—the time it could be used 
until it was technologically outdated—was shorten-
ing rapidly, and development costs were increasing. 
Formerly, customers would use the same IBM main-
frame for several years. Now, however, IBM was 
forced to replace its leased computers every two or 
three years. This made it diffi cult to recoup devel-
opment costs and obtain the premium price on its 
machines that it was accustomed to.
Because the computer life span was getting shorter 
and because of the growth low-cost competition, 
IBM under Cary, and then Opel, decided to phase 
out IBM’s system of leasing machines to customers. 
Instead they decided to begin selling machines—a 
major change in IBM’s strategy. Although this move 
increased revenue in the short term, it had major 
repercussions for the company in the long term. 
First, the leasing system had tied IBM to its custom-
ers and ensured that when customers upgraded and 
expanded their computer systems, they would look 
fi rst at IBM machines. Moreover, leasing facilitated 
IBM’s strategy of providing customers with excel-
lent customer service and guaranteed the company 
a steady cash fl ow and control of the used machine 
market. With the end of leasing, IBM would be 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C111
more susceptible to fl uctuations in the demand for 
its products because its customers would be able to 
shop around.
From 1980 on, IBM began to face major compe-
tition from 370 clone manufacturers, large compa-
nies like Amdahl (which had a faster 370 processor 
than IBM), and Hitachi Data Systems (whose low-
price machine generated record sales throughout the 
1980s). IBM’s customers began to feel more comfort-
able about buying 370 clones from companies that 
also promised quality support and service at low 
cost. IBM’s sales growth for its biggest mainframe 
dropped from 12% annually in 1984 to 5% annu-
ally in 1990 as a result of the increased competition. 
Increased mainframe competition with Amdahl and 
Hitachi Data Systems also led to price discounting, 
despite the fact that IBM attempted to offer its cus-
tomers a unique package that included software and 
services via addition to hardware. The days when 
IBM could demand whatever price it wanted for its 
machines were over.
The end of its leasing program also led to 
increased competition from independent computer 
leasing companies that would buy older mainframes 
and then sell the older processors at a price that was 
frequently only 10% of the cost of IBM’s newest 
machine. These companies also disassembled main-
frames to make smaller computers; for example, 
they could make two smaller machines out of one 
larger machine. In response to this price competition, 
IBM was forced to reduce the price of its machines.
The end of leasing, combined with a growth in 
low-cost competition, changed the nature of indus-
try competition in ways that the company did not 
expect. IBM’s strategy was now to protect its main-
frame market from competitors and hang on to 
its customers at all costs. IBM devoted most of its 
immense resources to developing technically supe-
rior mainframe products, lowering the cost of pro-
duction, and supporting its very expensive but very 
successful sales force.
IBM’s focus on protecting its mainframe mar-
ket blinded it to threats from the emergence of new 
kinds of computers. Even when it did recognize 
the competitive threat, IBM’s operating structure 
and culture, shaped by its preeminent position as 
the world’s leading mainframe computer company, 
made it diffi cult for IBM’s managers to see emerg-
ing problems in its environment and react quickly 
to the changes that technology was bringing about 
in the computer industry. The way IBM handled 
the emerging threat from new kinds of computers, 
such as minicomputers, personal computers (PCs), 
and workstations, illustrates many of the problems 
it experienced as a result of a corporate mindset that 
“mainframes were king.”
The Minicomputer 
Market
One of the new computer markets that emerged in 
the 1970s was the minicomputer. Minicomputers 
were smaller and priced anywhere from $12,000 
to $700,000, which was signifi cantly cheaper than 
mainframe computers. The steadily falling price 
of integrated circuits during the 1960s and 1970s 
made it feasible to build a minicomputer that was 
affordable to small businesses or could be used in 
specialized technical or scientifi c applications. IBM 
had ignored this new market segment, preferring to 
focus its resources on developing and improving its 
profi table 360 and 370 series computers.
Two researchers from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology pioneered the development of a 
smaller, more powerful computer. They founded the 
Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), which, in 
1965, launched the PDP-8, a computer that could 
handle the smaller information processing needs 
and tasks of companies such as small businesses, 
offi ces, factories, and laboratories. The venture was 
very successful, and by 1968, DEC’s sales reached 
$57 million, and its earnings were $6.8 million. 
DEC’s computer competed with the lower end of the 
360 range. The computer sold well in research facili-
ties, but it did not do as well in business, because IBM 
dominated this market with its powerful sales force. 
However, DEC had plans to develop a more power-
ful machine. As it grew, it was quickly expanding its 
own national service network, imitating IBM’s.
To meet DEC’s challenge, which was still seen 
as a minor issue, Cary formed the General Systems 
Division in 1969. Its goal was to produce the 
System/3 which was to be IBM’s small, powerful 
minicomputer. IBM did not, however, rethink its 
technology or invest resources to develop new mini-
computer technology to make a product to suit this 

C112  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
new market segment. Rather, IBM tried to adapt its 
existing mainframe technology to the minicomputer 
market.
IBM’s top managers had risen up the ranks of 
IBM from the mainframe division and were condi-
tioned by the idea that the level of computing power 
was everything. “The bigger the better” was the phi-
losophy of these managers. Moreover, big machines 
meant big revenues. IBM’s mainframe managers saw 
the potential earning power of the minicomputer as 
insignifi cant when compared to the huge revenues 
generated by its mainframes. More fundamentally, 
however, IBM’s top managers did not want com-
petition from a new computer division inside the 
company that would absorb large amounts of the 
company’s resources and might change the  company’s 
future direction and strategy.
The result was that when the System/3s were 
developed, they were too big and too expensive 
to compete with DEC’s machine and too small to 
compete with IBM’s own mainframes. This caused 
them to fail to make much inroad into what was 
becoming a very big market segment. As the mini-
computer segment of the market continued to 
grow rapidly in the 1970s, Cary tried to increase 
the importance of the minicomputer group inside 
IBM’s corporate hierarchy by reorganizing IBM’s 
Data Processing Division and splitting it into two 
units: General Systems to make minicomputers and 
Data Systems to make the mainframes. He hoped 
that this change would force IBM managers to 
change their mindset and support the company’s 
move into the new markets.
So strong was the entrenched position of main-
frame managers that Cary’s change of structure 
created huge divisional rivalry between mainframe 
and minicomputer managers. The mainframe divi-
sion saw itself as being in direct competition for 
resources with the minicomputer division. Managers 
in both units failed to cooperate and share tech-
nological resources to develop the new range of 
machines. When the General Systems Division fi nally 
 produced a minicomputer called the 8100, it did not 
have a technological edge over the DEC machine. 
Nevertheless, it was successful, as many IBM cus-
tomers had large sums of money invested in IBM 
mainframes and were reluctant to switch suppliers. 
Moreover, IBM’s powerful sales force (although at 
fi rst reluctant to push minicomputers for fear of 
reducing their commissions) could service the needs 
of the minicomputer users. By the end of 1980, 
more than 100,000 minicomputers had been sold. 
IBM and DEC were the industry leaders, while the 
new companies that had sprung up, such as HP and 
Wang, were also increasing their market share.
In 1986, DEC introduced its new VAX 9000 
minicomputer. This new minicomputer shocked 
IBM’s mainframe managers because it had the same 
speed and capacity as IBM’s largest 370 mainframe, 
the 3090, but cost only 25% as much. For the fi rst 
time, mainframe managers were forced to accept the 
fact that minicomputers might be feasible substitutes 
for mainframes in many applications. Although DEC 
gained business with its new machine in market seg-
ments previously dominated solely by IBM, such as 
large fi nancial service companies and corporate data 
processing centers, it still could not seize many of 
IBM’s loyal customers who were locked into IBM 
systems. Nevertheless, DEC’s share of the minicom-
puter market grew from 19% in 1984 to 25% in 
1988, while IBM’s share dropped from 24% to 16% 
in the same period.
Finally, in 1988, IBM brought out the AS/400 
series, a minicomputer that was superior to DEC’s 
VAX. The AS/400 series was based on RISC (reduced 
instruction set computing) technology. Fast RISC 
chips could equal and exceed the speed of large main-
frames, including IBM’s own mainframes. Many large 
companies that had a great deal of money invested in 
IBM mainframes moved to adopt the IBM minicom-
puter system because it was compatible with their 
IBM mainframe systems. As a result of the success 
of its new minicomputers, IBM increased its market 
share from about 16% in 1988 to 28% in 1992, 
while DEC’s market share fell. DEC then planned 
to produce its own machines based on RISC, but 
in the interim, it introduced new machines to com-
pete with IBM’s AS/400s on price. IBM now had a 
$14 billion business in minicomputers, which have 
gross margins of 56%.
The Personal Computer
Another technological breakthrough, the micro-
processor or “computer on a chip,” sparked the 
development of the personal computer (PC), 
which was developed in 1977 by Steven Jobs 
and Stephen Wozniak, the cofounders of Apple 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C113
Computer. By 1980, Apple’s sales had grown to 
$117 million. Once again, IBM stood by and watched 
as a new market segment was created. This time, 
recognizing the mistakes it had made in the mini-
computer market by not moving quickly enough 
to develop a machine to compete with the industry 
leader, it decided to move quickly to create its own 
machine to compete with Apple’s.
In the mainframe market, IBM made its own chips, 
circuit boards, disk drives, terminals, tape drives, and 
printers; wrote its own proprietary  software for its 
machines; and helped to develop software to meet 
the needs of its customers. As a result, its machines 
were not compatible with those of its rivals that used 
their own proprietary hardware and software. The 
machines of different manufacturers would not work 
together. In 1981, however, in an effort to enter the 
PC market quickly, IBM outsourced and bought the 
inputs it needed from other companies make its PC. 
For example, Intel supplied the 8088 microchip that 
was the heart and Microsoft delivered MS-DOS, the 
programming language and software applications 
for the new IBM machine. Finally, computer stores, 
not the IBM sales force, were used to sell the new 
IBM PCs to get the machines to individual customers 
quickly.
IBM’s fi rst PC, more powerful than the fi rst Apple 
computer, was introduced at a price of $1,565  in 
1981. Intel’s 8088 chip had more main memory 
and was more powerful than the chip used in the 
Apple II computer, and Microsoft’s operating sys-
tem, MS-DOS, was better than the current industry 
standard. These features, combined with the power 
of the IBM brand name, made the IBM PC an imme-
diate success; it quickly became the industry stan-
dard for all other PCs. Backed by IBM’s legendary 
service, business users turned to the machines in the 
thousands. By 1984, IBM had seized 40% of the per-
sonal computer market, but the IBM PC still could 
not be produced or distributed fast enough to meet 
the enormous customer demand.
Even the runaway success of the IBM PC became 
a threat to the company because its competitors rap-
idly imitated it; soon clone manufacturers were sell-
ing IBM-compatible personal computers as powerful 
or more powerful than IBM’s own machines. For 
example, Compaq, founded in 1981, began to clone 
IBM PCs and produced a high-powered machine 
that seized a large share of the high-price business 
market. In 1986, Compaq beat IBM to the market 
with a machine using Intel’s powerful new 386 chip. 
At the same time, other clone makers, such as Zenith 
and Packard Bell, attacked the low-price segment of 
the computer market and began producing PCs that 
undercut IBM’s.
IBM, threatened both in the high-price and low-
price end of the PC markets fought back with the 
PS/2. It had a proprietary hardware channel that 
IBM made sure could not be imitated, as its fi rst 
personal computer had been. However, customers 
resisted buying the new PS/2. They did not want 
to become locked into a new IBM system that was 
not compatible with IBM’s old system and their 
other software or hardware investments. In the face 
of hostility from its customers, and losing market 
share, IBM was forced to back down. In 1988 IBM 
began producing PS/2s that were compatible with 
the  existing industry standard—ironically, its own 
older standard.
It was suddenly clear to IBM that it no longer 
controlled the rules of the competitive game in the 
personal computer industry. Nonetheless, it was still 
slow to change its strategy. Despite the fact that its 
cheaper rivals had machines that were as powerful 
as its own, IBM still attempted to charge a premium 
price for its product. In response, its customers went 
elsewhere. IBM’s share of PC sales in the United 
States dropped from about 37% in 1985 to 24% 
in 1988. Clone makers continued to improve IBM’s 
older standard, and IBM’s market share declined to 
16.5% in 1990.
In 1991, a major price war broke out in the PC 
market, brought on in large part by the steadily 
dropping price of computer hardware, such as Intel’s 
microprocessors. IBM reduced prices three times to 
compete, and prices of the PS/2 were cut by as much 
as 25%. Partly due to price competition, a typical 
386 PC, which had cost $3,500 in early 1991, cost 
$1,600 in late 1991 and only $1,200 in early 1992. 
In 1992, IBM also introduced new low-priced lines 
of computers such as the PS/Value Point. This com-
puter was targeted at the fastest growing segment of 
the computer market, the home market, and busi-
ness customers who did not need all the features 
of the high-end PS/2. These new models were very 
 successful and in great demand. Nonetheless, IBM 
did not hold a dominant position in the PC market; 
in 1992, its market share was 12%, the same as its 
rival Apple and about twice that of rivals like Dell, 
Compaq, and NEC.

C114  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
The PC price wars continued into 1993. In 
 February 1993, Dell Computer, a rapidly growing 
clone maker, introduced price cuts of 5% to 22% 
across its entire product line. In response, IBM cut 
prices by as much as 16% on some models, includ-
ing the PS/Value Point. Apple cut prices fi ve times 
in 1993, for a reduction of up to 33%, on its three 
highest-priced computers in an effort to increase 
United States sales. PC makers also battled over 
distribution and the offering of extras, such as war-
ranties. PCs ranged from $500 clones to $2,000 lap-
tops to $25,000 network hubs. PCs dominated the 
computer industry, with world sales of $93 billion 
in 1993 compared to mainframe sales of $50 billion. 
The laptop segment of the PC market alone reached 
$5.67 billion in 1990. IBM, however, did not have a 
product for this market segment until 1991. It also 
faced tough competition from market leader Toshiba 
as well as from Apple.
By 1992, it was clear to IBM and industry analysts 
that IBM was just one more competitor in a very com-
petitive market. Since 1990, IBM’s PC division had yet 
to show a profi t. This was due to intense price competi-
tion and because IBM’s costs were above competitors 
such as Compaq, which moved quickly to slash costs in 
1990 when the price of PCs began tumbling.
IBM’s response to competition in the personal 
computer industry throughout the 1980s clearly was 
affected by its “mainframe mindset.” Even though it 
was clear that new segments of the computer market 
were developing and that new uses for computers 
were being found, IBM managers still discounted 
the potential threat to mainframes from either the 
minicomputer or the personal computer. IBM was 
not alone in being unable to sense the signifi cance of 
changes in the environment. Kenneth Olsen, one of 
the founders of the minicomputer maker DEC, went 
on record saying, “Personal computers are just toys” 
in discounting the challenge of PCs to minicomput-
ers, just as IBM had discounted the threat of mini-
computers to mainframes 10 years earlier. The Olsen 
philosophy blinded IBM’s top management to the 
prospect that powerful PCs could become a threat 
to IBM’s main line of business mainframes. This pre-
dicament was somewhat surprising given that the 
computer industry always had been dominated by 
technological change. IBM’s success was itself the 
result of moving quickly and decisively to exploit 
the opportunities of new technology: the punch card 
machine, the transistor, and the integrated circuit.
Throughout the 1980s, IBM’s personal  computer 
division (which is the biggest personal computer 
operation in the world) could not respond quickly 
to the price cutting moves of its rivals and intro-
duce new kinds of personal computers because of 
its centralized decision making style. Whenever 
a competitor reduced prices, managers of the per-
sonal computer division had to get approval 
from the corporate management committee to cut 
prices, a process that sometimes took months. As a 
result, the PC division was never able to forestall its 
rivals. Moreover, just as in the case of minicomput-
ers, rivalry between PC and mainframe managers 
hampered efforts to quickly exploit the potential of 
the powerful new microprocessors.
IBM’s competitors moved quickly to increase 
the power of their PCs by exploiting the power of 
the new generation of microprocessors. They also 
encouraged the development of powerful new net-
ware software. This software could link PCs together 
and to a more powerful computer, such as a mini-
computer or a workstation, so that a network of PCs 
could work as effectively as a mainframe—but more 
conveniently and at only a fraction of the cost.
Workstations
Workstations are the fourth wave of computers 
 following mainframes, minicomputers, and PCs. 
While PCs are designed for individual jobs such as 
word processing and fi nancial analysis, workstations 
essentially are very powerful PCs designed to be con-
nected to each other and to a mainframe through 
software. Workstations can analyze fi nancial results 
and track inventories much faster than PCs and much 
more cheaply than minicomputers or mainframes. A 
network of workstations can also be linked to an 
even more powerful workstation (or minicomputer) 
called a fi le server, which contains a company’s fi les 
and databases or which can retrieve them from a 
company’s mainframe computer. Workstations, usu-
ally priced from $5,000 to $100,000, were fi rst devel-
oped for scientists and engineers but increasingly 
were utilized by business professionals. New network 
software links workstations so that many people can 
work together simultaneously on the same project. 
These desktop machines have “user friendly” graphic 
displays and allow people at different machines to 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C115
share data and software. By 1988, the workstation 
market was $4.7 billion.  Workstations have a 45% 
profi t margin compared to 58% for minicomputers.
Prior to 1989, IBM was a small player in this seg-
ment. Underestimating the potential power of personal 
computers and slow to develop powerful minicomput-
ers (its AS/400 series was not introduced until 1988), 
IBM managers once again failed to see the potential 
of an emerging market. IBM had only a 3.9% market 
share in 1987, compared to Sun Microsystems’s 29% 
and Apollo’s 21%, the two upstart companies that 
were the innovators of the workstation. Once they 
realized the importance of this market segment, both 
IBM and DEC introduced workstations based on 
RISC processors, which make machines two to three 
times faster by eliminating all insignifi cant instruc-
tions. IBM introduced the IBM RT PC workstation 
in 1986, but the machine failed due to an underpow-
ered microprocessor. Notwithstanding its problems, 
IBM launched the RS/6000 workstation in 1989 and 
captured 18% of the market by the end of 1991.
Competition in the workstation market was 
increasing as a result of market growth. This segment 
was growing 27% annually by 1992, compared to 5% 
for the computer industry as a whole. As the price of 
workstations fell, more and more small businesses, 
which could not afford to use mainframe or minicom-
puters, could afford workstations. The workstation 
market also was very important to large computer 
makers because workstations could be used in net-
works with larger mainframe computers. Thus, con-
trolling the workstation market protected a company’s 
mainframe market. By the end of 1991, the worksta-
tion market was $11.3 billion, and IBM was facing 
severe competition from DEC, Sun, Apollo, and  HP, all 
of which sold RISC workstations.
Software and Services
Designing software (the instructions that allow com-
puters to perform tasks) and providing customer 
service, particularly assistance in the design of pro-
grams to manage company-specifi c databases and 
systems, have been rapidly expanding segments of 
the computer industry for the past 20 years. IBM has 
always realized the importance of developing propri-
etary software that can link and join its  mainframes, 
 minicomputers, workstations, and personal comput-
ers to provide customers with a completely integrated 
computer package. It failed, however, to recognize 
the developing market for more general operating 
language and software applications.
By 1981, 33% of the total computer industry rev-
enue came from software and services, a fi gure that 
rose to an estimated 50% in 1993. Although soft-
ware and services accounted for 33% of IBM’s total 
revenues by 1990, 68% of this revenue came from 
supporting customers’ IBM mainframe computer 
systems, which represented a declining share of the 
computer market. Thus IBM, tied to software that 
supports mainframes, was not in a strong position to 
compete in the new software and services market.
IBM’s failure to realize the potential for soft-
ware seems surprising given that it had outsourced 
the operating language for its personal computer to 
Microsoft and saw the success of the MS-DOS oper-
ating system. IBM’s focus was mainframes and its 
continuing belief that its own proprietary hardware 
and software would become the industry standard 
seems to have been the source of its reluctance to 
enlarge and expand its software operations. In 1980, 
when IBM had the opportunity to indirectly control 
the software market by purchasing a large chunk of 
Microsoft stock at a low price, it declined to do so.
IBM soon found that developing new applica-
tions software was a diffi cult business to be in. First, 
IBM had a hard time recruiting talented program-
mers. They were not attracted to IBM’s bureaucratic 
and conservative corporate culture, in which central-
ized decision making limited their opportunities to 
be creative and take risks. Second, talented software 
programmers found they could make more money in 
business for themselves; any programmer who could 
develop a new system generally started his or her 
own company. Microsoft recognized this problem 
early on; consequently, Bill Gates, Microsoft’s chair-
man, gives his top programmers large stock options 
to encourage their best performance. Many of them 
have become millionaires as a result.
In today’s computer market, developing bet-
ter and more advanced software is crucial to selling 
more hardware or computers of all kinds. So, late as 
usual, IBM embarked on a program to forge alliances 
with many small, independent software companies to 
develop software for IBM machines quickly: main-
frames, minicomputers, workstations, and PCs. One 
of IBM’s goals was to rejuvenate sales of its mainframe 

C116  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
by  encouraging software companies to write programs 
that make mainframes the key part of a computer net-
work that links personal computers and workstations. 
IBM spent $100 million in 1989 to acquire equity 
stakes in 12 software developers, including Interactive 
Images for Graphics, Inc.; Polygen Corporation 
for scientifi c software; and American Management 
Systems, Inc., for mainframe software. Marketing 
agreements were also made with several other fi rms. 
IBM loaned software developers up to $50,000 for 
startup costs and took a seat on the developer’s board. 
For example, IBM was working on a project called 
Systems Application Architecture (SAA), which is a set 
of rules for links between programs and computers. 
SAA would facilitate the creation of networks with all 
types of machines, including mainframes and PCs.
In 1988, IBM created a new unit to launch appli-
cations software and established a position called 
“complementary resource marketing manager,” 
responsible for connecting software “business part-
ners” with IBM customers. Salespeople were expected 
to sell the products of these software partners as well 
as IBM products. Although most of the programs 
were for mainframes, many could be adapted to 
work with networks based on PCs. Software and ser-
vices accounted for 40% of IBM’s revenue in 1992. 
IBM wanted to achieve 50% of  revenues from soft-
ware and services by the year 2000.
Systems Integration 
and Outsourcing
Traditionally, IBM limited its service activities to pro-
viding support for its own proprietary software and 
hardware. It did not use its skills to analyze various 
aspects of a customer’s business, such as its inventory 
control or warehousing operations, and then custom 
design and install an appropriate mix of hardware 
and software to meet the customer’s needs, a service 
known as systems integration. Moreover, it had not 
recognized the developing market for outsourcing 
data processing, whereby one company agrees to 
take over and manage all aspects of the data pro-
cessing function for another company in return for 
a fee. By 1992, however, the systems integration and 
outsourcing market generated more revenues than 
the mainframe market.
IBM’s failure to see the developing market seg-
ment for systems integration and outsourcing had 
not been lost on one of IBM’s star salesmen, Ross 
Perot. When IBM capped the amount of money that 
Perot could earn from commissions in selling com-
puters and ignored his plan to start an IBM division 
whose function would be to provide data manage-
ment services to customers to advise them on ways 
to manage their data fi les and systems, Perot left IBM 
and started Electronic Data Services (EDS).
The systems integration market and outsourc-
ing market were now growing at 19% annually. 
IBM’s failure to enter this market early allowed 
its  competitors—principally EDS and Andersen 
Consulting, the accounting fi rm that early on estab-
lished a computer consulting division—to gain a 
fi rst-mover advantage and dominate the market. At 
the time, EDS had 50% of the outsourcing business 
of managing a company’s data storage and manage-
ment needs, compared to IBM’s 6%. Andersen dom-
inated the market for advising companies on their 
software and hardware needs. IBM led primarily in 
the market for government contracts.
To quickly develop a presence in this lucrative 
market, IBM began developing alliances with vari-
ous organizations. It formed a joint venture with 
 Coopers & Lybrand to provide management consult-
ing in selected industries. IBM also teamed with AT&T 
to make IBM’s mainframes work better with AT&T’s 
network management systems. IBM established the 
Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation subsidiary 
in 1991 to provide a platform for IBM to enter the 
data processing outsourcing market. Its business was 
increasing; for example, in 1992, it received a 10-year, 
$3 billion agreement to run the computer systems for 
McDonnell Douglas Corporation. The subsidiary did 
outsourcing for 30 companies, including Continental 
Bank. IBM would run all of a client company’s systems, 
from mainframes and workstations to voice and data 
telecommunication. It was aggressively advertising its 
strengths and services in this area.
The New Computer 
Industry
By 1990, IBM received about 50% of its gross profi t 
from mainframe hardware, software, peripherals, 
and maintenance; 6% from minicomputers; 18.5% 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C117
from PCs and workstations; and 12.4% from non-
maintenance software and services. However, the 
future revenue-generating potential of each of these 
market segments was uncertain as the boundaries 
between the segments grew less clear. Would work-
stations replace minicomputers? Would workstations 
and minicomputers replace mainframes? Would a 
network of PCs linked by advanced software to a 
mainframe eliminate the need for minicomputers or 
workstations? Obviously, IBM had the most to gain 
from making mainframes the center of a computer 
network, while its competitors had as much to gain 
from making minicomputers and powerful worksta-
tions the wave of the future.
By 1990, IBM was facing stiff competition in all 
the developing segments of the computer market, 
from companies that were mainly specialized in one 
market niche, for example, Microsoft in the software 
segment or Sun Computer in the workstation niche. 
IBM was fi ghting to increase its market share in each 
market segment but was suffering because of tough 
competition from strong competitors that had devel-
oped their own loyal customer following.
Moreover, the market for mainframe computers, 
IBM’s principal source of revenue, was declining as 
machines such as PCs and workstations were able to 
perform mainframe tasks at lower cost. It had been 
estimated that, while 80% of 1986 computer indus-
try profi ts were attributable to mainframe computer 
sales, by 1991, sales of mainframe computer systems 
accounted for only 20%. The PC revolution had 
reduced costs and allowed customers to buy much 
cheaper computer systems to do work previously per-
formed by expensive mainframes and  minicomputers.
As a result of this shift, suppliers of computer 
components such as chips and software were the 
winners, as their share of industry profi ts rose from 
20% in 1986 to 31% in 1991. Thus, for example, the 
share prices of Microsoft and Intel, which control the 
software and microprocessor markets, respectively, 
soared. Similar growth occurred in the share prices 
of Conner, Quantum, and Seagate, which dominated 
disk drives, as well as Andersen Consulting and EDS, 
which were the leaders in system integration. IBM’s 
share price, however, fell dramatically from a high of 
$160 in 1987 to less than $50 in 1992.
To fi ght the trend toward PCs and workstations, 
IBM attempted to make its 370 computer the cen-
tral component of a network of computers that link 
individual users to the mainframe. It did not succeed, 
however, as sales growth for its biggest mainframe, 
the 370, dropped from 4% per year in 1990 to less 
than 2% per year in 1992. Even many of IBM’s 
370 users began switching to IBM AS/400 minicom-
puters because they could perform the same task more 
easily and cheaply. The mainframe market was now the 
third-largest market behind PCs and minicomputers.
IBM Fights Back
In 1985, John Akers became CEO and was charged 
with the task of using IBM’s vast resources to make it 
the market leader in the new lucrative market segments 
of the computer industry and reduce IBM’s dependence 
on mainframes. He took over a company in which man-
agers were still arrogant and complacent and believed 
completely in IBM’s preeminence despite all the warn-
ing signs that it had lost its competitive edge. Its top 
management committee, staffed primarily by managers 
from its mainframe division, seemed unable to make 
the type of innovative decisions that would allow IBM 
to respond quickly to the rapidly changing computer 
environment. The result was a failure to develop prod-
ucts fast enough and a mistaken commitment to the 
mainframe computer. Even its renowned salespeople 
had become a problem for the company. Committed to 
the IBM product, they had become oriented to selling 
and servicing the mainframe; they were not oriented 
toward satisfying customer needs, which might be for a 
minicomputer or a workstation.
Akers launched a “year of the customer” in 1987 
to refocus the sales force on meeting the needs of 
the customer rather than the needs of the mainframe. 
Most importantly, Akers realized the need to restruc-
ture the company and change IBM’s highly central-
ized style of decision making if it was to innovate the 
next generation of products and emerge as a market 
leader in the new market segments. Akers recognized 
that the biggest problem for IBM was its highly 
bureaucratic organizational structure that slowed 
decision making and continually frustrated attempts 
to be innovative and entrepreneurial.
The 1998 Restructuring
To speed decision making, in January 1998, Akers 
reorganized IBM into seven divisions based on 
the main product market segments in which the 

C118  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
 company was competing: personal computer sys-
tems, mid-range systems, mainframes, information 
systems and communications, technology develop-
ment (such as microchips), programming, and soft-
ware. The idea behind the reorganization was to 
demolish the mainframe mindset by giving the man-
agers of each division the autonomy and responsibil-
ity for developing new products for their respective 
markets. No longer would mainframe managers be 
able to stifl e the pace of change and discourage the 
development of products that threatened the domi-
nance of the mainframe. The sales force, however, 
was to remain a separate entity whose job would still 
be to sell the whole line of IBM products. The logic 
for this was that the sales force could sell customers 
integrated IBM computer systems: networks of PCs, 
fi le servers, and mainframes and provide the com-
puter software, service, and systems consulting to 
tailor the system to customers’ individual needs.
The disadvantage of the single sales force was 
that each division would not be able to devise a sales 
strategy specifi c to its own competitive environ-
ment, and salespeople would not be able to focus 
on a single product line. IBM felt that the econo-
mies of scale and scope provided by a unifi ed sales 
force outweighed these disadvantages. Twenty-
 thousand employees were transferred from staff and 
lab  positions to the sales force, and the commission 
system was revamped so that salespeople were evalu-
ated on total revenue, not on the number of units 
rented or sold.
IBM’s Contention System
If the fi rst purpose of the reorganization was to focus 
IBM’s activities more closely on the main segments 
of the computer market, the second purpose was to 
shorten the product development cycle and speed 
products to market. Since the early 1970s, IBM had 
taken advantage of its dominance in the market to 
use a “contention” system to control new product 
development. In this system, two or more project 
teams designed competing product prototypes, and a 
series of committees at both the divisional level and 
the corporate level met over a period of months to 
debate the merits of each project. A project would 
be approved after six committee members rated the 
two processes, which could take months or years; 
then the committee met to fi nalize the product plan. 
During this process, if any committee member said, 
“I non-concur,” meaning that he or she disagreed 
with the project, it would be sent back for further 
review or scrapped.
The result of the contention system was that the 
projects that were approved were generally success-
ful. However, the time frame associated with mak-
ing the decision was generally so long that products 
were late to market, putting IBM at a competitive 
disadvantage. For example, the small, independent 
team charged with the development of the fi rst IBM 
PC launched the product in one year. However, 
once the PC group was put into the Information 
Systems and Communication Division and deci-
sion making became constrained by IBM’s conten-
tion system, the speed of the development process 
slowed signifi cantly. For example, the PS/2 was not 
introduced until 1987, missing the 1985 target. This 
delay allowed clone makers of the older PCs to gain 
33% of the market share in PCs. Other symptoms of 
IBM’s overly bureaucratic approach to decision mak-
ing included its failure to enter new market segments 
quickly. For example, IBM entered the PC market 
four years late; it was also a laggard in workstations. 
Similarly, IBM’s top managers refused to recognize 
the importance of the growth of minicomputers and 
were hesitant to launch products that would com-
pete with the mainframes.
The reorganization was designed to shorten the 
time it took to get a product to market and overcome 
the hurdles to product development. In the 1980s, 
IBM no longer had the luxury of taking a long time 
to make competitive decisions, as smaller and more 
agile competitors were forging ahead and the prod-
uct life cycle of computers was shortening.
In an attempt to cut costs, increase profi tability, 
get close to the customers, and reduce bureaucracy, 
Akers embarked on a major campaign to downsize 
the organization. The 1985 workforce of 405,000 
was reduced to 389,300 in 1988 through early 
retirement and attrition. In addition, overtime and 
temporary employees, equivalent to 12,500 full-time 
employees, were cut. Despite the fact that IBM closed 
plants, cut spending, and reduced capital outlays, 
costs grew faster than revenues during most of the 
reorganization. Moreover, analysts could not discern 
any noticeable change in IBM’s strategy or the way it 
made decisions. Products were still late to market.
The 1988 reorganization was a failure. Although 
each division was supposed to become more autono-
mous, in reality, most decisions still required approval 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C119
by IBM’s corporate headquarters managers— 
managers who had risen through the ranks from the 
powerful mainframe computer division. Products 
that might have cannibalized the sale of mainframes 
were still discouraged by corporate managers, who, 
having achieved their success during the mainframe 
era, were hesitant to introduce products to compete 
with mainframes. One example of the mainframe 
mindset involved the PC unit’s push to get into the 
laptop market in 1989 by competitively pricing their 
laptop at $4,995. Corporate headquarters insisted 
on a price of $5,995 to meet corporate profi t in mar-
gin targets. As a result, many competitors were able 
to price their products lower than IBM’s machines. 
Even though IBM later priced the machine lower, it 
never regained lost market share.
To allow the personal computer division to 
respond faster to the quickly changing PC market, 
Akers decided to place the PC business in a sepa-
rate operating unit. In 1991, Akers formed the IBM 
Personal Computer Company and gave it control 
over the design, production, distribution, and mar-
keting of IBM PCs. Prior to this change, distribution 
was performed by IBM’s large sales and marketing 
division. After the change, 1,200 former marketing 
and sales employees were transferred to the new PC 
unit, which also was to handle telephone sales. The 
corporate sales force was to continue to sell to big 
corporate customers. In decentralizing authority to 
managers in the PC division, Akers was showing 
managers his plans for the IBM of the future.
The 1991 Restructuring
IBM announced another restructuring at the end 
of 1991, which was aimed at decentralizing deci-
sion making authority to the divisions and reducing 
the role of IBM corporate headquarters in setting 
divisional strategy. Akers divided IBM into 13 sep-
arate divisions: nine divisions were based on the 
company’s main product lines, and four divisions 
were to be marketing and service operations orga-
nized geographically. The nine manufacturing divi-
sions were to supply the four marketing divisions. 
The goal of the restructuring effort was to make 
the divisions independent units operating under a 
broad IBM umbrella, thus freeing them from cor-
porate control.
Aker’s plan was that each division would be 
an autonomous operating unit that could freely 
negotiate transfer prices of inputs with other divi-
sions and, if a division wanted to, buy from and sell 
to outside companies. The divisions were to treat 
each other as they would outside companies; no 
favorable prices were to be granted to IBM divisions. 
Moreover, the performance of each division would 
be reported separately, and each division would be 
accountable for its individual profi ts and losses. The 
heads of the divisions were responsible for develop-
ing annual business plans and were to guarantee IBM 
a certain return on money invested in their division. 
In the past, most managers did not know the details, 
such as profi t and loss statements, of an individual 
division’s fi nancial performance. Each divisional 
manager signed a contract to meet objectives in rev-
enue growth, profi t, ROA (return on assets), cash 
fl ow, customer satisfaction, quality, and morale. If 
the divisional heads were successful, they would get 
a share of the profi ts. If they failed, their jobs were 
on the line. Financial results for all 13 units were to 
be made public by 1994.
The goal of this restructuring was to free up IBM’s 
powerful resources and make it more competitive. 
Division heads would have control over long-term 
development and business level strategy. For exam-
ple, the Personal Systems Division’s manager could 
decide how PCs and workstations were produced 
and designed, and the PC division’s R&D function 
would not compete directly with the mainframe divi-
sion for resources. The hope was that the divisions 
would be able to compete with their smaller, more 
entrepreneurial rivals once they were freed from cor-
porate bureaucracy.
The sales divisions would still be responsible for 
selling the whole range of IBM products, however, 
and control over sales would be centralized at cor-
porate headquarters. The logic, once again, was that 
customers wanted a sales force that could handle 
their entire computer needs, and there were syner-
gies from having one sales force provide a full set 
of products and services. IBM’s traditional focus 
on service was still a strong competitive advantage. 
Analysts were skeptical however, of having only one 
sales force, especially one in which representatives 
were still biased toward mainframes. Many analysts 
felt that one sales force was a mistake;  giving each 
division its own sales force would be a better source 
of competitive advantage. Moreover, the huge costs 
of operating the sales force could be hard to allocate 
between divisions, causing rivalry among them.

C120  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
To demonstrate the commitment of IBM’s thirteen 
operating divisions top management to IBM’s more 
autonomous and entrepreneurial approach to doing 
business, IBM’s PC division was given total control 
over its own sales and named an independent unit 
in 1992. James Cannavino, the head of the PC unit, 
took total control over the PC division’s strategy and 
organized the PC division around products instead of 
functions. The fi ve product groups of the PC division 
were the low cost Value Points; PS/2; PS/1, aimed at 
home and small business users; portable products; 
and Ambra, a line of PCs built by an Asian contrac-
tor and sold in Europe. Each product group was in 
charge of its own brand development, manufacturing, 
pricing, and marketing. This change was designed 
to allow the product groups to respond much more 
quickly to changes in the PC market, where products 
may have a life span of only six months to a year. In 
addition, Cannavino met with 32 CEOs of Silicon 
Valley startups and told them that he wanted to form 
alliances with them to speed the development of new 
hardware and software products, such as multimedia 
and CD-ROM products. The IBM PC division was 
the world’s largest company.
New Management 
and New Plans
Despite the 1991 organization, IBM’s profi ts and 
revenues continued to decline; 1991 revenues 
fell 5% from 1990, the fi rst decline since 1946. 
The company’s 1991 loss of $2.8 billion was the 
fi rst loss in IBM’s history. In 1992, IBM’s losses 
increased to $5 billion on $65 billion in revenues. 
In  January 1993, the stock fell below $46, the low-
est price in 17 years. Pressure for change at the top 
was increasing.
Under pressure from investors and the public, 
John Akers resigned in January 1993. Although Akers 
reorganized and restructured, critics claimed that he 
never went far enough in implementing the reforms 
that would really turn around IBM. For example, 
despite the fact that between 1985 to 1992 a total 
of 100,000 IBM workers were cut mainly through 
early retirement and that Akers had removed the 
whole of IBM’s former top management team to 
try to rid IBM of the “mainframe mindset,” critics 
claimed that Akers had avoided initiating the major 
layoffs that were needed to restore profi tability.
In 1993, the board of directors searched for a 
replacement for Akers. Shunning an insider for fear that 
he could not bring a fresh perspective to IBM’s prob-
lems, they chose an outsider to be the CEO of IBM, 
marking the fi rst time an outsider had  occupied the 
top job. Louis Gerstner, former CEO of RJR Nabisco, 
was recruited in March 1993. Gerstner had no experi-
ence in the computer industry, and IBM’s stock price 
dropped $3 to a new low when he took over.
Gerstner immediately hired outsiders to form a 
new top management team to run the company. Jerry 
York, former chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO) at Chrysler 
was recruited as IBM’s CFO. Gerry Czarnecki, who 
was in charge of cutbacks at Honolulu’s Honfed 
Bank, became a vice president. These outsiders were 
tough cost cutters, experienced at restructuring large 
companies. Gerstner hired another outsider, Abby 
Kohnstamm, a former senior vice president of card-
member marketing at American Express, to be vice 
president of corporate marketing.
Gerstner and his top management team spent all 
of 1993 analyzing how IBM worked as a prelude 
to “reengineering the corporation.” Reengineering 
refers to a two-step process whereby an organization 
fi rst identifi es and analyzes each of the core busi-
ness processes—manufacturing, marketing, R&D, 
and so on—that make a business work and then 
changes or reengineers them from the bottom up 
to improve the way they function. Gerstner formed 
an 11-person “corporate executive  committee” of 
IBM’s top  managers to spearhead the reengineer-
ing effort. Gerstner then gave each manager respon-
sibility for heading a task force. Eleven task forces 
were formed to analyze IBM’s main processes, 
which were modeled on the reengineering effort that 
Cannavino had performed in the PC division. As dis-
cussed previously, the result of that effort led to the 
move to a product group structure, in which each 
group took control over its own manufacturing and 
marketing—a change that had been very successful. 
Gerstner hoped that a  corporate-wide effort would 
also prove successful.
Despite the fact that most analysts felt Gerstner 
would continue with Akers’ approach of decentral-
izing decision making to the divisions, and even 
spinning off IBM’s businesses into independent 
companies, Gerstner showed no sign of following 
this strategy. Gerstner preferred to restructure the 

 
Case 9 The Fall of IBM 
C121
 relationship between the corporate center and the 
divisions. Moreover, Gerstner announced his belief 
that IBM should continue to follow its traditional 
strategy of providing customers with a full line of 
hardware and software products and services and 
announced his support for the mainframe division.
As a part of this full-line strategy, and despite 
expectations that he would decentralize IBM’s sales 
force and give each division responsibility for its own 
sales, Gerstner announced in 1993 that he would not 
change the current companywide sales force struc-
ture. The current sales force of 40,000 salespeople 
would still pursue the strategy of one face to a cus-
tomer because customers “do not want to be bothered 
by several salespeople.” Apparently, Gerstner and his 
top management team believed that IBM’s core strat-
egy of being a full service company was appropri-
ate. They believed the company’s main problem was 
that it was too big. To reduce size in 1992, Gerstner 
announced plans to shed 115,000 more jobs in 1993 
and 1994, reducing the workforce to 250,000 from 
a peak of 405,000 in 1985. Announcing in 1993 that 
“the last thing that IBM needs now is a corporate 
vision,” Gerstner nevertheless identifi ed four goals 
he had for IBM: (1) to get the company to the right 
size; (2) to spend more time with customers; (3) to 
determine the strategic issues by process reengineer-
ing; and (4) to build employee morale in the face of 
the huge layoffs.
Analysts wondered how Gerstner’s strategy would 
work. They wondered whether Gerstner understood 
the divisional rivalries that led to IBM’s problems 
and how he expected his new strategy to result in 
faster product development and the greater shar-
ing of ideas and resources between divisions. Some 
 critics argued that Gerstner should have aggressively 
pursued a strategy of breaking up IBM into fully 
independent operating units and that his new policy 
of encouraging the sharing of skills and resources 
between divisions would not work and was no break 
from the past. Moreover, they claimed he had been 
slow to reduce IBM’s operating costs and the lavish 
way in which it spent its resources. For example, IBM 
operated one of the largest fl eets of private jets in the 
corporate world, maintaining three country clubs for 
its employees, with its own management school com-
plete with skeet shooting and tennis courts.
Had Gerstner, in the fi rst six months of his reign 
as IBM’s CEO, bought into IBM’s culture in which 
the mainframe mindset still controlled the corpora-
tion? Gerstner contended that no amount of cost 
cutting would solve IBM’s problems unless IBM 
could change from the inside out. IBM still spent 
10% of its revenues on R&D and had many good 
ideas continually pouring from its development labs. 
According to Gerstner, the problem for the company 
was to use those ideas effectively, and the start of this 
was to reengineer the company to make better use of 
its resources. IBM also needed to increase integra-
tion among divisions so that they could share skills 
and resources more effectively. Gerstner believed that 
continuing Aker’s strategy of breaking IBM up into 
13 separate companies would do nothing to ensure 
the survival of the company in the long run.
On September 26, 1993, IBM announced a loss 
of $46 million for the third quarter, compared to a 
$40 million loss in 1992, bringing its total loss in 
1993 to $8.37 billion. Was Gerstner’s strategy work-
ing, and when could IBM’s investors and employees 
expect to see the results?

10
Since he became CEO of IBM in 2003, Sam 
Palmisano has worked hard to build a new global 
computer services company, which in 2009 was the 
largest and one of the most profi table in the world. In 
2009, IBM had a market capitalization of more than 
$119 billion and employed more than 319,000 peo-
ple worldwide in more than 150 countries. What 
kind of business model and strategies has Palmisano 
and his top management team pursued that allowed 
IBM to regain its position as an industry leader and 
wiped out memories of its disastrous performance in 
the 1980s? In addition, what challenges lie ahead if 
the company is to retain its competitive advantage 
and leading position in the global business computer 
services and consulting industry and keep rivals such 
as HP, Accenture, Dell, and Oracle at bay? That was 
the question Palmisano was grappling with in the 
spring of 2009 as the effects of the recession that 
started in 2008 started to bite into IBM’s revenues 
and profi ts.
Akers’s Last Stand
As discussed in “The Fall of IBM,” John Akers’ 
vision of IBM’s future was for the corporation to be 
broken up into 13 different companies that would 
be spun off to operate independently—essentially  
dismantling the IBM empire. While IBM’s top man-
agers developed a timetable to do this, Akers still 
faced the problem of how to keep it afl oat in the 
short run. In his fi nal desperate attempt to keep 
IBM viable, Akers continued to make drastic cost 
reductions, and between 1991 and 1993 an addi-
tional 80,000 employees were laid off as IBM 
sought to lower its cost structure. Its workforce 
was now less than half at its peak. The restructur-
ing charges associated with these layoffs resulted in 
record losses of more than $15 billion for IBM, and 
its stock price plunged to record lows as  investors 
decided the future lay not in mainframe computers 
but in networks of servers and client PCs. Moreover, 
by this time, its personal systems group that manu-
factured its PCs and the servers it was developing 
had become a liability. Competitors such as Dell, 
Gateway, and Sun had gained a major low-cost 
advantage over IBM’s PCs and servers, and the PC 
division was losing money.
By 1993, IBM’s performance still showed no 
signs of improvement, so Akers resigned; the board 
of directors searched for a successor with the strate-
gic skills necessary to fi nd the right business model 
to turnaround the declining company. They chose 
Louis Gerstner, an ex-management consultant who 
had engineered a major turnaround in the perfor-
mance of American Express and Nabisco, as the new 
CEO. Gerstner had no background in the comput-
ing industry and his appointment was viewed by 
many analysts—and by many of IBM’s powerful top 
 managers—as an enormous mistake. How could an 
outsider with no knowledge of the way IBM oper-
ated, develop a business model to compete against 
rivals in the rapidly changing computer sector?
IBM in 2009
Copyright © 2009 by Gareth R. Jones. All rights reserved; not to be copied or reproduced by any means physical, mechanical, or 
 electronic without the permission of the author.
For the most recent fi nancial results of the company discussed in this case, go to http://fi nance.yahoo.com, input the company’s stock 
symbol, and download the latest company report from its homepage.
C122

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C123
Gerstner’s Immediate 
Moves
IBM’s board chose Gerstner because they wanted a 
new CEO who would have a fresh perspective on the 
company’s problems—one who had not been a part 
of IBM’s slow-moving bureaucratic culture character-
ized by slow, centralized decision-making and power 
struggles between divisions. Gerstner’s task was to 
build the right business model for IBM— what kinds 
of products, customers, and distinctive competencies 
should IBM develop in the future if it was to remain 
as one company—or should IBM be broken up?
The major argument Akers had made in support 
of breaking up IBM into 13 different and independent 
companies was that the managers of each new com-
pany would be free to decide what business model to 
pursue to best compete against rivals in its particu-
lar industry. While this was one path to increasing 
returns to stockholders, before making this decision, 
Gerstner decided to closely study IBM’s different 
business groups, search out their strengths and weak-
nesses, and examine the fi t between them—what 
was the rationale for keeping IBM as a whole versus 
breaking it up into parts? Gerstner had a reputation 
for “hands-on” management involving frequent visits 
to talk to managers at all levels and in all divisions. He 
spent his fi rst months as CEO on a whistle-stop tour 
interviewing IBM’s managers; he also visited many of 
IBM’s largest corporate customers to discover what 
they wanted from IBM now and in the future.
Gerstner soon announced that he intended to 
keep IBM as a single united company. His strategic 
analysis led him to conclude that IBM’s ability to pro-
vide clients with a complete and comprehensive com-
puting or information technology (IT) solution that 
could be customized to each client’s particular needs 
was the source of its future competitive advantage. 
IBM’s principal problem was to fi nd a better way to 
integrate the activities of its hardware, software, and 
service (HS&S) groups to create more value for cus-
tomers. In other words, Gerstner decided that IBM 
needed to work toward offering clients an improved, 
more comprehensive IT package.
Once he made the decision to keep IBM intact, 
Gerstner’s main challenge was how to speed inno-
vation and decision making both within and across 
IBM’s HS&S groups. He quickly found that IBM’s 
top managers, accustomed to a slow-moving culture 
based on consensus decision making, could not 
respond to his demands fast enough. One IBM man-
ager described the old IBM’s decision-making pro-
cess as like “wading through a jar of peanut butter.” 
Gerstner announced IBM’s managers “just didn’t 
have what it takes.” He began to replace many senior 
IBM executives with managers from lower down its 
ranks. To reduce costs, however, he was forced to 
continue to lay off large numbers of employees in 
product areas that he felt could not compete success-
fully in the new advanced competitive IT industry.
Gerstner’s New 
Business Model
Over the next three years, Gerstner spent his time 
identifying IBM’s core set of distinctive competences 
and deciding what strategies to develop to build 
these competences and provide a solid foundation 
for IBM’s new integrated business model. What was 
Gerstner’s vision to rebuild IBM? His business model 
was that IBM should (1) provide a complete pack-
age of state-of-the-art computing solutions HS&S, 
especially outsourcing and consulting) that could 
be customized to a particular client’s needs and 
(2) to take advantage of the possibilities created by 
the Internet to create new markets for IBM’s prod-
ucts and services. Gerstner focused on making IBM 
a customer-driven company, by which he meant that 
every manager and employee had the responsibility 
to design, make, or sell those products or services 
that could best meet the needs of IBM’s clients. 
Given that sales of mainframes were declining and 
PCs and servers were becoming commodity products 
with low-profi t margins, what IBM had to do was to 
provide something unique so that customers would 
be willing to pay a premium price for its products 
and services. The challenge facing IBM was to learn 
how to customize products to the needs of custom-
ers if it was to be able to succeed in the new highly 
competitive computing environment.
Changes in Computer Hardware
Gerstner instructed his top managers to begin ini-
tiatives in all its IT groups to meet clients’ chang-
ing IT needs. In its traditional hardware business, 

C124  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
it faced two major problems. First, because main-
frame sales were declining because of the growing 
popularity of lower-cost network servers and PCs, 
Gerstner instructed hardware managers to do every-
thing possible to reduce the costs of mainframe 
computing while increasing the scalability of its 
computers. Scalability means that a computer can 
be customized and designed and built to suit the 
needs of  different-sized companies or different-sized 
computing tasks from managing global databases to 
operating a small chain of restaurants. IBM began 
to position its smaller mainframes as “enterprise 
 servers.” Sales reps were told to emphasize to clients 
that computers could be made at a size and price to 
suit their unique needs, but a large powerful main-
frame computer was still needed at the hub of a large 
company’s IT system. In addition, IBM wanted to 
sell its clients software and services such as main-
taining and upgrading their software and managing 
their databases, so it deliberately set the price of its 
hardware low, knowing it could make more money 
later in providing the new software and services.
Changes in Computer Software
The rapid pace of change in computer software 
resulted in a major challenge for Gerstner and his 
managers. Before IBM made the mistake of allowing 
Microsoft to provide the MS-DOS operating system 
for its own PC, it had been the largest seller of com-
puter software (principally for mainframes and main-
frame applications) in the world. Now Microsoft 
had usurped its position, but there were many other 
challenges as well from makers of specialized appli-
cations software such as Oracle, which is the market 
leader in database management software, and SAP, 
the German company whose Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) software was soaring in popularity. 
ERP software allows a company to link its value-
chain activities and connects mainframes to servers 
and servers to PCs. It gives a company’s managers 
at all levels extensive real-time information about a 
company’s activities; ERP software has become the 
backbone of most IT systems in large companies. IBM 
had little to offer clients in these software applica-
tions areas; these companies had gained a fi rst-mover 
advantage that was diffi cult for IBM to challenge.
Gerstner instructed the software division to 
focus its efforts on developing new business appli-
cations software that would improve a company’s 
 value-chain performance, along with “middleware” 
software that is designed to link all the different 
pieces of a company’s hardware—mainframes, serv-
ers, PCs, and laptops together. To catch up with com-
petitors in these areas, Gerstner acquired software 
companies that possessed unique solutions to pro-
vide clients with valuable new business applications 
and allow them to make better use of their computer 
networks. One of the companies IBM acquired at 
a cost of more than $3 billion in 1995 was Lotus, 
which had developed the popular Lotus Notes col-
laborative software. This software created a cor-
porate intranet, an information network inside a 
company that allows managers at all levels to share 
information quickly both inside their own depart-
ment and division and between divisions.
In his push to develop expertise in middleware, 
Gerstner also bought software companies that had 
the “middleware” software necessary to link the 
hardware and software provided by any computer 
company across all the levels of computing. In other 
words, he wanted IBM to control the middleware 
necessary to provide customers with a “seamless” 
solution to their computing needs regardless of their 
legacy system. A legacy system is a company’s cur-
rent IT system at any point in time. If IBM had the 
middleware necessary to link any kind of IT hard-
ware and software, it would be able to upgrade any 
client that wished to improve its legacy system to 
take advantage of new and advanced IT applica-
tions offered by any company. This revolutionary 
approach was part of Gerstner’s “open standards” 
strategy designed to make IBM’s own services avail-
able to all kinds of customers.
Changes in Services and Consulting
Gerstner’s drive to focus the efforts of all IBM 
employees on satisfying the needs of clients had 
been strongly infl uenced by the continued success of 
IBM’s computer services group, which contributed 
about 20% to IBM’s revenues in 1995. Gerstner 
recognized that this division possessed the customer-
focused business model that IBM needed to grow its 
revenues in the future, especially if sales of its hard-
ware and software declined. Moreover, Gerstner was 
familiar with the business model that Jack Welsh, 
former CEO of General Electric (GE), had developed 
for his company. GE would sell a product such as a 
turbine or aircraft or diesel engine at a relatively low 

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C125
price to increase sales because each sale would result 
in a profi table stream of future income from servic-
ing and maintaining the complex equipment it sold. 
Gerstner recognized that this model was viable in the 
new IT environment; he also recognized that in the IT 
sector, clients need expert help to decide which kind of 
computer solution best meets their current and future 
business needs. In IT, companies such as Electronic 
Data Services (EDS) and Accenture were the leaders 
and earned huge profi ts by providing companies with 
expert help; the market was increasing by double 
digits each year. For example, SAP could not satisfy 
the demand of large global clients to install its ERP 
software in its client’s companies. Clients were pay-
ing billions of dollars to consulting companies such as 
Accenture and Cap Gemini for their expert help.
In 1996, Gerstner renamed the services division to 
Global Services and charged it with the task of spear-
heading IBM’s push into the outsourcing and value-
chain management business to go head-to-head with 
competitors such as EDS and Accenture. Gerstner’s 
business model was now that Global Services would 
offer clients an outsourcing and business consultancy 
service based on assessing a customer’s current legacy 
system and its future computing needs. IBM consul-
tants would then design, plan, implement, maintain, 
and upgrade the client’s IT system over time to help 
reduce the client’s cost structure, improve its prod-
ucts, and build its competitive advantage. Gerstner 
also hoped that providing such expert services would 
once again build up switching costs and keep IBM’s 
clients loyal on a long-term basis because of its abil-
ity to show them how its comprehensive, custom-
ized computing solution could help increase their 
profi tability over time. Global services experienced 
continuing success throughout the 1990s and into 
the 2000s.
The New Global 
Services Division
Gerstner’s strategy was now focused on strengthen-
ing the global services division, led by Sam Palmisano, 
because he believed this was the new foundation on 
which IBM’s future success lay. Global services had 
three main lines of business: (1) strategic outsourc-
ing services that provide customers with competitive 
cost advantages by outsourcing customers’ processes 
and operations; (2) integrated technology services  
designs, implements, and maintains customers’ tech-
nology infrastructures; and (3) business consulting 
services deliver value to customers through business 
process innovation, application enablement, and 
integration services.
Gerstner’s business model for IBM was that the 
company would build such a broad and sophisti-
cated range of computer hardware and software, 
backed by the best consulting and service compe-
tencies in the industry, that it would overwhelm its 
competitors in the future. EDS and Accenture pro-
vide consultancy and service, for example, and HP, 
Dell, Sun, Oracle, and Microsoft produce computer 
hardware and software, but none of them had the 
capability to match the breadth and depth of IBM’s 
growing computer offerings. By the late 1990s, the 
ability to bundle products together was becoming a 
major advantage to clients seeking a seamless and 
cost-effective way of managing their IT systems; it 
has only become more important since.
In implementing this business model, Gerstner 
recognized that in many specifi c computer hard-
ware and software product areas IBM was no longer 
the industry leader. So he and Palmisano embarked 
on a strategy of offering IBM’s clients the best or 
“leading-edge” products currently available, such 
as SAP’s ERP software, Peoplesoft’s HRM software, 
Sun’s servers, or Dell’s PCs when they were either 
clearly better or lower priced than those supplied by 
IBM’s own divisions. Then, and crucially, IBM’s con-
sultants, as a result of its focus on developing exper-
tise in middleware that links any computer products 
together, were able to guarantee clients that they 
could install, maintain, and integrate them so that 
they worked together seamlessly.
In adopting this strategy, IBM was strengthen-
ing its commitment to “open standards” in the com-
puter industry by announcing publicly that in the 
future it would continue to work to make all the 
future software and hardware of all producers—
its competitors—compatible by strengthening its 
expertise in middleware. In doing so, Gerstner and 
IBM were also assuring clients that when they used 
IBM’s computer consulting services, they would not 
become locked into IBM’s proprietary hardware and 
software—no switching costs would arise from this 
source. However, Gerstner hoped at the same time 
that clients would be impressed by IBM’s ability to 

C126  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
provide such a complete service that they would 
become “locked in” because of the high quality of 
the service that it could provide.
An additional advantage of the open standards 
approach was that as IBM’s consultants went from 
client to client assessing their needs, they were able 
to provide detailed feedback to IBM’s other divi-
sions about whether their products were adequately 
meeting clients’ needs. So, if a consultant decided 
that a competitor’s software was more appropriate 
than that offered by IBM, the division making the 
software could now clearly recognize why its prod-
uct was not meeting customer needs—and what 
was necessary to improve its software to make it 
the “best of breed” or leading-edge product. Thus, 
Gerstner’s strong focus on being close to clients had 
the additional advantage of spurring innovation 
throughout the organization; managers had a clear 
goal to achieve; and they knew Gerstner and his top 
management team were watching their performance. 
If a division did not meet customer needs, its man-
agers might lose their jobs, or the division might be 
sold off or shut down.
E-Business at IBM
Another indicator of how well Gerstner was attuned 
to the changing IT environment was his early recogni-
tion that the growth of the Internet and e-commerce 
would become a dominant force dictating which 
kinds of IT would be most necessary in the future. 
IBM coined the term e-business, and Gerstner estab-
lished an Internet division in IBM in 1995 before 
most other IT companies. IBM’s early recognition of 
the future possibilities of e-business allowed its engi-
neers to adapt its software and hardware to serve 
Internet-related value-chain transactions before its 
competitors. Once again, being close to its clients 
helped IBM understand their changing needs and 
built its competitive advantage. Also, the acquisi-
tion of Lotus helped IBM understand the potential 
of the Internet. Lotus Notes was a company- specifi c 
or internal software collaboration application, while 
the Internet provided a major channel for collabora-
tion between different companies. It was by chance 
that IBM’s acquisition of Lotus revealed how the 
power of the Internet could shape supply-chain 
transactions between companies and their suppliers 
and distributors. The Lotus collaborative software 
provided a model for making IBM’s middleware 
software “Internet compatible.”
IBM embarked on its e-business initiative in 
1996 with a global marketing campaign aimed at 
showing companies how value-chain transactions 
with other companies and clients could be car-
ried out online. Soon companies recognized that 
its competency in e-business gave it a competitive 
advantage over companies such as SAP, Oracle, 
and HP, who now raced to catch up. As a result, it 
attracted a growing number of e-business clients, 
which resulted in a major increase in its global 
computer services revenue. First in line to adopt 
IBM’s e-business software were large corporations 
that needed to manage transactions with hundreds 
or even thousands of suppliers and distributors. 
Companies such as Walmart and Goodyear formed 
contracts with IBM to use its immense computing 
resources to manage their huge volume of online 
transactions.
IBM, however, also recognized that small and 
medium- sized businesses (SMBs) were another impor-
tant customer group for its computer  services—
especially as it had developed scaleable computer 
hardware and software that could be sold at a price 
that meets a client’s budget. IBM had developed less-
expensive software targeted at the needs of SMB cli-
ents. It now worked with the thousands of new dot.
com start-ups, such as Internet Web-design and Web-
hosting companies, to teach these companies how 
to install and maintain its software in SMBs. IBM 
hoped that once SMBs had made the connection 
with IBM, they would start to buy other kinds of 
its software, for example, to manage their databases 
and functional, value-chain tasks such as bookkeep-
ing and inventory control.
Palmisano Takes Over
In 2003, Lou Gerstner stepped down, and Sam 
Palmisano became IBM’s new CEO. Since then, 
IBM has continued to modify its strategies and 
reorganize the activities of its operating groups to 
strengthen its business model. Indeed, IBM’s grow-
ing global strength has forced its major competi-
tors to alter their business models to compete more 
effectively with IBM. For example, HP merged with 

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C127
Compaq and took over EDS in 2008 to be able to 
provide a combination of HS&S to compete with 
IBM. Oracle has spent more than $50 billion in the 
2000s taking over software and consulting compa-
nies such as PeopleSoft and BEA Systems for the 
same reasons. All major IT providers have had to 
adjust their business models to deal with the threat 
that IBM’s expanding global presence and IT offer-
ings have created.
Nevertheless, after years of growth, by 2005, 
IBM’s performance had started to fall. The problem 
Palmisano soon realized was that its now dominant 
global technology services group that had grown 
like wildfi re and provided the largest proportion 
of IBM’s revenues and profi ts had run into trou-
ble. As discussed following, its global outsourcing 
business had come under intense competition from 
low-priced overseas outsourcing companies, par-
ticularly Indian companies, at a time when its cost 
structure was quickly rising because of the rapid 
growth in the number of its employees, now more 
than 150,000 people worldwide. With the revenues 
of global services group plateauing, Palmisano had 
to search for new strategies to grow IBM’s revenues 
and profi ts and solve the problems of its global ser-
vices group.
Palmisano decided to change IBM’s business 
model and strategies in several ways. First, he decided 
to cut the cost structure of its global services group. 
Second, to make up for slowing revenues and profi ts, 
he accelerated the strategy he had begun in 2003— 
changing IBM’s business model so that all its operat-
ing groups focused on investing resources to move 
into higher profi t-margin IT businesses in which the 
specialized skills of IBM’s workforce could be used 
to develop higher value-added IT services, based on 
some combination of research, software, and services 
that would offer its customers greater value. Third, 
he decided to exit any hardware businesses in which 
profi t margins were thin and focus resources on 
strengthening and growing its core mainframe busi-
ness. Finally, he made globalization and the drive to 
increase IBM’s presence in every country in which it 
operated a major priority across the company. All 
IBM’s business groups were instructed to focus on 
cooperating to grow global sales of the HS&S pack-
age they offered customers, not just in the advanced 
G7 countries in North America, Europe, and Japan, 
but across all world regions, especially in the rapidly 
growing economies of India and China.
To achieve all these strategies, and especially to 
expand its global customer base quickly, Palmisano 
also changed IBM’s structure. In the early 2000s, 
IBM’s overseas divisions had operated indepen-
dently on a country-by-country basis; there was little 
cooperation between them. Palmisano built a more 
streamlined global structure in which IBM technical 
experts who specialized in certain business functions 
or industries were organized into “clusters of busi-
ness expertise.” These clusters might be in any coun-
try of the world but are connected to each other and 
to IBM’s HS&S groups through its own proprietary 
Lotus high-speed communications Intranet. Project 
managers can search worldwide for the HS&S 
experts with the right skills for a job located in dif-
ferent countries around the world and form teams 
of experts quickly to meet the needs of clients in 
any country. For example, IBM created global and 
regional teams of skilled experts in particular indus-
tries, from airlines to utilities, who travel as needed 
to consult on projects.
The many changes its new global structure 
brought about in the operations of its HS&S groups 
are discussed following, but one of the most important 
changes was that in 2007 Palmisano decided to split 
the global services group into two parts: the global 
technology services (GTS) group that was to special-
ize in IBM’s traditional kinds of IT services such as 
outsourcing maintenance and database  management; 
and the global business services (GBS) group that 
was to specialize in developing high- margin business 
and industry IT solutions customized to the needs of 
individual clients.
The Global Technology Services Group
Palmisano assigned all of IBM’s more traditional 
 “routine” lower-margin IT services to the global 
technology services (GTS) group. The GTS group 
handles value-chain infrastructure services and uses 
IBM’s global scale and its expertise in standardizing 
and automating transactions to manage outsourcing, 
integrated technology services such as logistics and 
data center management, and maintenance services 
for its global clients.
As noted previously, IBM was experiencing 
increasing low-cost competition in its outsourcing 
services business that provided it with billions of 
dollars of revenues from contracts with large global 
companies to manage their “non-core” business 

C128  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
functions such as distribution, logistics, and data 
center management. This intense competitive pres-
sure was coming from low-cost Indian companies 
such as Infosys, Tata Consulting Services, and Wipro, 
which had grown enormously in the 2000s because 
of their lower labor costs. Indeed, their profi t mar-
gins were more than 20%, while margins at IBM 
were half that and shrinking because of the compe-
tition. These companies gained such an advantage 
because labor costs were still about 70% to 80% of 
the total cost of traditional technology service con-
tracts involving activities such as maintaining and 
updating software and data centers for corporate 
clients. They were taking away billions of dollars in 
revenues from IBM.
IBM had to compete more effectively in this IT 
services segment, which had been a main source of 
the increasing revenues that had allowed it to rebuild 
its competitive advantage. Like most manufacturing 
companies, IBM was forced to eliminate 20,000 GTS 
jobs in Europe and the United States and move these 
jobs to India. Its Indian workforce grew from 30,000 
in 2004 to 45,000 in 2006. Then in June 2006, IBM 
announced it would triple its investment in India to 
$6 billion over the next three years to take advantage 
of its growing importance as a market for technology 
products and a source of high-technology workers. 
By 2009, it had more than 75,000 Indian employees.
IBM made the investment to establish huge, 
low-cost service delivery centers for its global cli-
ents, improve the software necessary to automate 
the management of networks and data centers, and 
develop IT to improve telecommunications, espe-
cially Internet services. From India, IBM runs a 
whole range of IT services for its global customers, 
including software delivery services such as upgrad-
ing and maintaining client software and managing 
and protecting database centers. For example, in 
Bangalore, IBM has a command center that moni-
tors the operation of the database server networks 
of more than 16,000 different clients, including the 
way thousands of its outsourcing software applica-
tions are performing around the world. It is the larg-
est of IBM’s three global IT services centers; the other 
two that are growing in size are in Brazil and China. 
Palmisano’s goal was to expand the scope of IBM’s 
traditional outsourcing operations and attract more 
and more global clients to compensate for reduced 
profi t margins so it can still increase profi ts from this 
group. And IBM has the global reputation necessary 
to convince customers it will be able to reduce their 
cost structure and improve their profi tability.
However, IBM moved to India not only to take 
advantage of lower labor costs but also because the 
country has a huge pool of talented software engi-
neers that IBM recruited to develop new, advanced 
software that can automate the IT jobs currently per-
formed by its Indian employees in logistics and data 
center management. In other words, IBM’s long-
term goal is not simply to replace skilled labor with 
lower-cost skilled labor but to use that skilled labor 
in combination with advanced automated software. 
This means that over time, although IBM’s Indian 
workforce will continue to increase in size, engi-
neers will be able to manage a much higher volume 
of global customer accounts more effi ciently, which 
will signifi cantly increase IBM’s profi t margins in its 
traditional services business. IBM has made dozens 
of acquisitions in the 2000s to help improve its skills 
in software automation and develop smarter, more 
customized software that allows it to maintain its 
 clients’, value-chain functions at lower cost to com-
pete with its Indian rivals.
Global Business Services Group
If the goal in its GTS group was to increase profi t 
margins and the number of customer accounts by 
being able to offer global customers lower prices and 
high-quality customer service, the goal of its global 
business services (GBS) group is to offer customers 
state-of-the-art value-creating software services that 
can be customized to their needs, albeit at a premium 
price. In other words, in creating the GBS group, 
Palmisano’s goal was accelerate its move into higher-
margin service activities, especially consulting and 
business transformation in which IBM could use the 
specialized skills of its United States software engi-
neers to offer customers IT services that increase their 
competitive advantage. Specifi cally, the GBS group’s 
strategy is to offer its customers professional, inno-
vative services that deliver value by providing them 
with state-of-the-art solutions that leverage IBM’s 
industry and business process expertise.
Such services include consulting, systems integra-
tion, and application management services that tap 
into IBM’s expertise in IT and apply it to fi elds such 
as utility grid optimization and energy conservation, 
genetics-based personalized medicine, fraud  detection 
and prediction, and even traffi c management. For 

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C129
example, one of IBM’s projects involved working 
with a Texas utility, CenterPoint Energy, to install 
computerized electric meters, sensors, and software 
in a “smart grid” IT project to improve service and 
conserve energy. Dozens of IBM’s industry experts 
from around the country moved to work on the proj-
ect to design and build advanced software tailored to 
the needs of a utility company. Because some of the 
programming work can be done in India, engineers 
are on the project team as well.
IBM plans to use the valuable skills learned and 
software written for the Texas smart-grid project in 
new projects with utility clients around the world, 
thus leveraging its skills in a high-profi t margin busi-
ness. In 2008, IBM announced it was entering into 
a new agreement with CenterPoint to develop the 
software platform necessary to supply the utilities 
rural customers with high-speed Internet connec-
tions through the power grid. By connecting their 
PCs to any electrical socket in their homes, they will 
be able to obtain broadband Internet service. Also, 
in 2008, IBM announced hundreds of new global 
 services contracts with diverse companies around the 
world, such as Philippines PSBank, the second-larg-
est savings bank in the country, PTT Chemical Public 
Company of Thailand, and Skynet in Lithuania to 
provide Internet protocol television. This was grow-
ing evidence of its increasing expertise in specialized 
IT services.
Building up its repertoire of skills across indus-
tries and across business functions is a key way 
in which IBM intends to grow its revenues and 
profi ts over time. And, its competitors recogniz-
ing its growing competitive advantage were forced 
to expand their capabilities to provide customers 
with a competitive HS&S package. For example, 
in 2008, HP acquired EDS, the third-largest IT ser-
vices company in the United States for $14 billion to 
add its 140,000 employees to the IT services group 
and improve its repertoire of IT skills and clients 
to compete better with IBM for global customers. 
HP, following IBM’s lead, has also divided its ser-
vice activities into those that improve the effi ciency 
of companies’ value-chain operations through out-
sourcing and logistics management and those that 
involve using its IT expertise to help companies 
innovate and fi nd new ways to improve their value-
creation skills. Of course, IBM continues to empha-
size that its combination of vast experience and IT 
expertise is unmatched on a global scale.
Another competitor that has also been aggressively 
expanding the breadth of its IT service and software 
lineup is the database management software leader, 
Oracle. Oracle has spent more than $50 billion since 
2004 to acquire companies such as PeopleSoft and 
BEA Systems to widen its ERP lineup and better com-
pete with its ERP archrival SAP. At the same time, how-
ever, Oracle’s new product lineup has resulted in more 
competition with IBM, especially in the server market. 
Increasing competition here has prompted IBM to 
develop closer ties with SAP. In 2009, IBM and SAP 
announced an agreement with British retailer Marks & 
Spencer (M&S) to implement a suite of SAP Retail 
applications. The program aims to provide M&S with 
accurate business intelligence data and state-of-the-art 
functional and industry IT solutions that will allow it 
to discover business improvement initiatives that will 
increase operating effi ciency and responsiveness to cus-
tomers. IBM will draw on its expertise in organization, 
process, and technology to provide end-to-end pro-
gram management, including change management and 
business process consulting services. SAP will provide 
its “Industry Solution for Retail,” a suite of business 
applications designed specifi cally to meet the unique 
requirements of large and sophisticated retailers. Also 
in 2009, IBM announced it would be the fi rst global 
IT company to fully adopt the Run SAP(R) method-
ology and that it would become a launch partner for 
SAP(R) Business Suite 7 software, SAP’s new fl exible 
and modular software suite. As global partners, SAP 
and IBM will jointly help customers reduce the total 
cost of running SAP’s ERP software.
Software Group
Clearly, the ability of IBM’s two global services 
groups to provide customers either low-cost tradi-
tional IT services or value-creating, customized con-
sulting solutions depends on it having the distinctive 
competence to develop state-of-the-art software 
applications across business processes and indus-
tries. Since 2005, Palmisano has emphasized the cen-
tral role advanced software development must play 
in IBM’s future business model to offset the slowing 
revenues from global services because of low-cost 
global competition. To spur its efforts in software 
development, and especially to increase its share 
of the high-margin services business, IBM began to 
make many acquisitions. By 2007, had IBM spent 
$11.8 billion to acquire 36 software and 18 service 

C130  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
companies in fi elds such as security, data manage-
ment, and Web commerce.
One particularly important acquisition occurred in 
2008 when IBM announced it had acquired Cognos, 
a leading maker of business intelligence software, 
for $4.9 billion. IBM’s acquisition came after SAP’s 
acquisition of Business Objects and Oracle’s takeover 
of Hyperion, the other two leading makers of business 
intelligence software in 2007. Business intelligence 
software sifts through huge masses of data and uses 
sophisticated problem solving procedures to identify 
and discover crucial events such as changes in the buy-
ing habits of a customer group or the “hidden” factors 
reducing the effi ciency of a company’s value-chain func-
tions or business processes. Cognos software is used 
by many retailers, including Home Depot, Amazon
.com, American Eagle Outfi tters, and 7-Eleven. Recent 
advances in IT have increased the power of business 
intelligence software to identify ongoing changes and 
forecast likely future events, an area in which IBM 
had no expertise. So, to prevent its competitors from 
gaining a possible future competitive advantage, IBM 
decided to make this acquisition, just as it had made 
the important decision to acquire Lotus Notes over 
a decade earlier. IBM will be able to incorporate 
Cognos software into all its software/service packages 
and hence strengthen its competitive advantage.
In October 2008, IBM unveiled new Express 
Advantage products aimed at SMBs, including HS&S 
packages specifi cally customized to the needs of SMB 
clients. For example, its new packages help SMB cli-
ents improve operational effi ciency, increase customer 
responsiveness, and continuously lower risk. In 2008, 
in a deal worth as much as $800 million over eight 
years, Amgen, the biotech company hired IBM to pro-
vide a HS&S package that will provide computer net-
works, software, messaging systems, helpdesk support, 
and other services.
In 2009, IBM announced a new “virtual world” IT 
initiative to make it easier for geographically dispersed 
people to interact and collaborate without the time 
and expense of in-person meetings. Virtual worlds are 
interactive, immersive Web sites based on the use of 
three-dimensional graphics. IBM was using selected 
clients to test its “Sametime 3D” virtual technology, 
which allows people inside and between companies to 
exchange instant messages, chat verbally, share real-
time presentations and ideas in private, virtual meeting 
spaces that exist permanently in real time so people 
can meet on regular, periodic, or impromptu bases.
In 2009, IBM also announced a new agreement 
with Amazon Web Services (AWS), a subsidiary of 
Amazon.com, to deliver IBM’s software to clients 
and developers via cloud computing. The new “pay-
as-you-go” model provides clients with access to 
development and production instances of IBM DB2, 
Informix Dynamic Server, WebSphere Portal, Lotus 
Web Content Management, WebSphere sMash, and 
Novell’s SUSE Linux operating system software in 
the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) 
environment, providing a comprehensive portfolio 
of products available on AWS.
In May 2009, IBM announced it had acquired 
Exeros, a privately held data discovery software 
maker and will wrap Exeros’ technology into its busi-
ness intelligence or analytics unit. Exeros software 
includes Discover X-Profi ler, an application that pro-
fi les data; Discovery Unifi ed Schema Builder, which 
allows users to prototype the combination of various 
data; and the Discovery Transformation Analyzer, 
which scans business rules and spots anomalies.
Systems and Technology Group
In its hardware division, Palmisano continued his 
strategy of focusing on high–profi t margin products 
that directly complemented its service and software 
offerings. As noted earlier, IBM had sold off its PC 
business to Lenovo for $1.25 billion and its disk 
drive business Hitachi for $2 billion. In 2007, IBM 
decided to spin off its printer business, which was 
suffering from intense competition from HP and 
Xerox, to Ricoh for $725 million.
Palmisano directed the systems and technology 
group to put its resources into developing new kinds 
of mainframes and servers that would appeal to a 
wider number of customers groups and expand global 
sales. IBM still receives about 25% of its $100 billion 
in annual revenue from sales, software, services, and 
fi nancing related to its mainframes and servers.
Mainframes, the hub of a large company’s 
IT system, crunch the massive amounts of data 
that are generated, for example, every time some-
one withdraws money from an automated teller 
machine, uses a credit card, or buys a product from 
a large retailer. Since 2005, IBM has been pursuing 
the strategy of constantly upgrading the performance 
of its large mainframes to offer its customers a bet-
ter value prospection, that is, to give them more and 
more power and fl exibility for each IT dollar they 

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C131
spend. And, beginning in 2006, it began to offer cus-
tomers the option of buying smaller and much-less 
expensive mainframes to drive sales to medium-sized 
global customers. In 2007, for example, it introduced 
its latest generation of mainframes, the powerful 
z10 Enterprise Class (z10EC) mainframe that retails 
for about $1 million and the smaller z10 Business Class 
(z10BC) mainframe that retails for about $100,000. 
The larger mainframe is twice as powerful as its pre-
decessor; the smaller one is 40% faster, has more than 
50% more total systems capacity, and up to four times 
the maximum main memory compared to the previ-
ous “mini-mainframe” IBM introduced in 2005. At a 
fraction of the cost of its large mainframe, the z10BC 
is also a way for IBM to offer more machines to more 
market segments. Priced at $100,000, the machine is 
not directed at small businesses that would use more 
inexpensive server rack confi gurations; it is highly 
attractive to smaller enterprises and midmarket com-
panies looking to consolidate multiple server racks in 
many data centers with one large machine.
IBM sells its large mainframes directly to custom-
ers through its own salesforce to protect the lucra-
tive software and service revenues that accompany 
these sales. The smaller mainframe, however, is sold 
through its 20 global channel partners, who also pro-
vide the software and service package customized to 
each  client’s needs. IBM pursued this strategy to accel-
erate the adoption of the machines throughout the 
world because global customers, particularly those 
in India and China, are the main targets for these 
$100,000 machines. Its strategy worked. IBM’s main-
frame installed base doubled from 2005 to 2009 
because of IBM’s ability to deliver increasing amounts 
of processing power to customers at a decreasing cost. 
In addition, the new mainframes used far less energy, 
something that is becoming increasingly important 
throughout the IT hardware industry.
In 2009, IBM was accused of purchasing soft-
ware maker Platform Solutions to stifl e competition 
in the mainframe market and protect its franchise. 
Platform Solutions had developed software that 
turned racks of servers into a linked system that could 
mimic the performance of IBM’s expensive main-
frames. IBM announced it would refuse to license its 
mainframe software to Platform that would allow 
its software to work. But when its legal attempt to 
stop Platform from gaining access to its software 
failed, IBM bought it for $150 million and then shut 
down work on the software. The Computer and 
Communications Industry Association, a trade group 
backed by Google, Oracle, and Microsoft, described 
the Platform deal as an attempt by IBM to purchase a 
company solely to foreclose competition in the main-
frame marketplace and protect its cash cow at the 
expense of consumers. IBM contends the continued 
popularity of its mainframes stems from its continu-
ous efforts to modernize them so that they can run 
more contemporary business software. Other com-
petitors, such as Sun, HP, and Microsoft, have also 
attempted to develop software for connected racks 
of linked servers to enable them to handle the huge 
number-crunching tasks mainframes can perform, 
but their efforts have had only limited success.
New software called virtualization technology is 
currently being developed, however, that may result in 
linked server racks being able to emulate the power of 
mainframes. This may be one reason that prompted 
IBM in 2009 to announce it would acquire Sun, still 
a leading maker of server HS&S for about $7 billion; 
the deal would also give IBM control over the key 
storage systems used for mainframes. In the end, how-
ever, the deal fell through when Oracle made a higher 
offer for Sun to gain control of all its server HS&S 
assets, including its Java software. It appears that Sun’s 
goal will be to expand the role of servers to also mimic 
the power of IBM’s mainframes, something that will 
intensify the competition between the two companies.
IBM has always been interested in the idea of 
hosting its client’s data on its own network of main-
frames and developed an IT service called “business 
on demand” to offer them this option. By the mid-
2000s, however, the cost of linked racks of servers 
(which might contain 10,000 powerful individual 
servers) was falling sharply as Intel and AMD intro-
duced ever-more advanced microprocessors, which 
when combined with Oracle’s database management 
software, made them low-cost alternatives to renting 
space on IBM’s mainframes. Also in the mid-2000s, 
the idea of cloud computing had been pioneered 
by Internet companies such as Google, Yahoo!, and 
Microsoft, and the concept was gaining in popular-
ity. In the cloud computing business model, Internet 
and other companies design their own customized 
data centers to store vast amounts of information that 
can be accessed and processed from afar using PCs, 
netbooks, cell phones, or other devices. For example, 
Google pioneered an online document hosting service 
in which both individuals and companies can upload 
documents that are stored in Google’s data centers on 

C132  
 Section B: Corporate Level Cases: Domestic and Global 
server racks and then can be accessed using word pro-
cessing or spreadsheet software programs and so on. 
Once again, these data centers are composed of tens 
or even hundreds of thousands of servers linked into 
racks, which are in turn connected together to provide 
immense amounts of storage and processing power.
What is unique about the cloud computing model, 
however, is that, cloud data centers require server 
racks that have been confi gured with the right HS&S 
to meet the needs of each individual company. These 
data centers are not “off-the-shelf” standardized prod-
ucts, such as IBM’s mainframes. Even more unique, 
the growing number of companies that are competing 
to offer these integrated server racks have developed a 
new business model in which these racks are housed in 
portable storage platforms that are housed in shipping 
containers similar to those used to deliver products 
around the world on ships and trucks. These storage 
platforms are then integrated into a company’s physi-
cal data center using networking hardware and soft-
ware. This business is growing fast; it is expected to be 
a multibillion-dollar business in the future.
Given that its business on demand initiative was 
not working, IBM was anxious to enter this market. 
It also is a major maker of server racks, and in 2008, 
IBM bought the cloud computing platform maker, 
Platform Systems, to provide new portable comput-
ing data centers. IBM calls its new product iDataPlex; 
it is a self-contained data center housed in different-
sized shipping containers that can hold 1,000 to 
10,000 server computers powered by Intel or AMD 
chips. One of its platforms offers customers the option 
of placing 1,500 server computers into 40-foot semi-
trailers that are ready to plug in from parking lots.
Developing hardware platforms that have to be 
customized to the needs of individual companies is 
a new strategy for IBM; however, its army of IT ser-
vices and software experts provide it with the compe-
tence necessary to do this. IBM claims its new cloud 
computer container platform costs only half as much 
in real estate, set-up, and construction costs than a 
similar physical data center. In addition, compared 
to the platform systems offered by competitors such 
as Dell, HP, and Rackable Systems, IBM claims its 
trailers have innovative water-cooling  mechanisms 
so that the servers do not heat up the data centers. 
This eliminates the need for most air-conditioning. 
As a result, IBM claims its systems consume 40% 
less power than standard servers and can pack more 
than twice as many computers into the same space. 
Companies trying out its platforms include Yahoo! 
and other Internet companies; companies in fi nance 
and other traditional industries are also testing them. 
In 2009, Google for the fi rst time publicly showed 
the design of its own cloud computing data centers, 
which are also technologically advanced, especially 
cooling wise. Clearly there is competition ahead.
Finally, in April 2009, IBM announced it was 
strengthening its strategic alliance with network 
equipment maker Brocade Communication. IBM 
sold its own networking equipment business to Cisco 
Systems in the early 2000s. However, innovations such 
as its cloud computing data center trailers, as well as 
the growing need to connect all the different kinds 
of IT hardware used by its clients seamlessly to the 
Internet and especially to remote data centers means 
IBM must have access to state-of-the-art networking 
products to align perfectly with its own software. In 
the future, IBM will rebrand Ethernet switching and 
Internet routing products made by Brocade as IBM 
products and sell them as a part of its complete IT 
HS&S package to its global customers. One more 
reason for this partnership is that rivalry with Cisco 
increased in 2009 after Cisco announced it was enter-
ing the server data center market and planned a “rev-
olutionary” new kind of self-contained rack server 
that would possess a huge amount of database stor-
age capacity and processing power linked to its own 
network communication hardware and software. 
Such a self-contained server would eliminate the need 
for expensive IT consulting and service; it would offer 
companies with a low-cost alternative, and, over time, 
companies could simply order as many of Cisco’s 
server racks as needed to operate or expand their 
business. Presumably Cisco will also offer a portable 
container-based platform solution.
IBM’s Recent 
Performance
By 2006, IBM’s performance was recovering as a 
result of Palmisano’s strategic initiatives, especially his 
decision to split apart the old global services group. 
Trimming its service workforce had signifi cantly 
reduced its cost structure, and sales of its new main-
frames were up by 25%. Software revenue rose 5%, 
helped by increasing sales of its popular WebSphere 

 
Case 10 IBM in 2009 
C133
software package that improves the performance of a 
company’s electronic commerce and business applica-
tions. In addition, its shift toward higher profi t-margin 
services and automating traditional business processes 
such as procurement, fi nance, and human resources 
was leading to increasing numbers of long-term ser-
vice contracts. In particular, its higher-profi t business 
transformation outsourcing grew by 45%. Palmisano 
commented that “the strength of our business model 
across hardware, software and services is paying off.” 
Geographically, IBM enjoyed solid growth of 5% in 
the G7 countries, but more rapid growth was occur-
ring in emerging markets. For example, sales in India 
were up by 50%.
IBM’s performance continued to improve 
through 2007 into 2008. IBM reported profi t rising 
12% on strong growth in software and services. Due 
to its success in selling higher-margin software and 
services, its profi t margins were steadily improving. 
Indeed, by 2008, IBM software’s revenue showed the 
biggest gain and had become the largest contribu-
tor to IBM’s profi ts. Palmisano announced that soft-
ware would be the driving force behind IBM’s future 
growth. Obviously, the ability to develop state-of-
the-art business software drives up IBM’s service rev-
enues and the sales of mainframes that are optimized 
to use its new software.
By May 2008, IBM stock was trading near its six-
year high level, and it seemed as though Palmisano’s 
new strategies had worked. However, then came 
the recession in the summer of 2008. Although, as 
expected, revenues from its hardware group fell 
sharply as large companies reduced their spending 
on mainframes and servers, IBM was not hurt as 
badly as its competitors because of its major push to 
globalization. In 2007, for example, it had reported 
that it enjoyed more than 10% growth in revenues in 
more than 50 countries.
In October 2008, analysts were surprised when 
IBM reported strong third-quarter profi ts despite the 
fi nancial services industry meltdown. As IBM’s CFO 
explained, although fi nancial services is IBM’s biggest 
customer segment contributing 28% to its revenues, and 
the one hit hardest by the economic downturn, 75% of 
that revenue came from outside the United States. Also, 
only 15% of those fi nancial institutions that had been 
severely impacted were IBM clients, so the company 
was not highly exposed to the meltdown. Moreover, 
even in the United States, IBM benefi tted from many 
new short-term contracts with fi nancial companies such 
as banks and brokers that increased their spending on 
risk analysis and compliance tools to try to weather the 
downturn. In fact, globally, IBM had signed more than 
$12.7 billion in new long-term services contracts in the 
last quarter of 2008, while short-term contract sign-
ings were up 13% to $6.1 billion. This showed IBM 
was able to generate new business despite tough eco-
nomic times.
In April 2009, Palmisano expressed more confi -
dence that the company was on track to achieve its 
projected earnings target for the full year despite 
uncertain markets worldwide. The company reported 
solid performance in a period of economic turmoil, 
helped by cost-cutting and its strategy of moving into 
higher profi t margin software and services businesses. 
Like most other large companies, in March 2009, 
IBM announced 5,000 job cuts in the United States, 
which accounted for more than 4% of its United 
States workforce—115,000 by the end of 2008. The 
cuts were mostly in IBM’s global services business 
and, as noted earlier, IBM has greatly expanded its 
business and employment in fast-growing markets 
such as India, China, Brazil, and Russia. At the begin-
ning of 2009, IBM had 75,000 workers in India and 
13,000 in China.
Similarly, the improving profi t margins IBM 
was enjoying in its expanding services and soft-
ware businesses were signifi cantly boosted by the 
100 acquisitions IBM had made since 2000, which 
had cost $20 billion, and its moves to aggressively pur-
sue opportunities in faster-growing markets abroad 
such as India and China. Also, of course, 40% to 
60% of its profi ts come from its long-term contracts 
with customers who pay a fi xed yearly fee for its 
value-chain management software and services. It is 
diffi cult to reduce this spending even in a recession. 
Indeed, the recession had sparked a lot of interest 
in the cost-saving outsourcing deals offered by its 
GTS group. One example is a $500 million, seven-
year contract IBM signed in March 2009 to manage 
data centers and software for Kaiser Permanente, a 
large hospital and managed health care company. In 
fact, in 2009, the market offering the strongest pos-
sibilities for revenue growth was the public sector, 
with government and state organizations, in which 
contracts were up 50% as countries around the 
world announced $5 trillion in economic stimulus 
programs to increase customer demand for technol-
ogy and other goods to increase spending and boost 
economic growth.

This page intentionally left blank 

I1
A
Absolute cost advantage, 59–60
ACE system, 197–198
Acquisition, 174
restructuring strategy and, 188, 192
strategic change and, 212–215
Activity ratios, C10
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), 65
Agency problem, 33, 34
Agency relationship, 34
Agency theory, 34
Agent, 33, 34
Airline industry
in decline stage, 72
deregulation of, 76
price wars in, 72
Alcan, 182
Alcoa, 182
Allard, Jay, 13
Aluminum industry, 182
Amazon.com
consolidation and, 131
customization at, 107
AMD, 65
Analogy, reasoning by, 18
Analyses. See External analysis; Internal 
analysis; and SWOT analysis
Andreesen, Mark, 13
Anticompetitive behavior, 43
Antitrust law, 42, 178
Apple Computer
case on, C13–C25
innovation at, 104
vertical integration at, 180
Arthur Andersen, 41
Asset, specialized, 182
Astra Zeneca, 220
AT&T, 193
Auditors, financial statements and, 
40–41
Auto industry
bargaining power in, 64
competitive advantage in, 85
local responsiveness and, 154, 159
Autonomous action, 12
Average collection period, C10
B
Baby boomers, 76
Backward vertical integration, 180, 184
Banana industry, 184
Bankruptcy regulations, 63
Bargaining power
of buyers, 63–64
horizontal integration and, 177–178
of Intel, 65
of suppliers, 64–65
of Walmart, 67
Barriers
to entry, 58, 182, 212
to exit, 63, 138
to imitation, 110
to mobility, 69
Bartz, Carol, 233
BEA Systems, 224
Behavior, anticompetitive, 43
Behavior control, 252
Bell, Alexander Graham, 13
Bias
cognitive, 17–18
prior hypothesis, 17–18
Bidding strategy, 215
Board of directors, 34, 38–39, 49
Boeing
ethics at, 44
globalization of production at, 147
stock options and, 40
Bombardier, 155
Bottom-up change, 205
Bowerman, Bill, 142
Brand loyalty, 58–59, 124
Breen, Edward, 35
Broad differentiator, 123
Budget, operating, 252
Buffet, Warren, 40
Burgelman, Robert, 12
Burns, Larry, 24
Business, defining, 30
Business ethics, 42
Business-level managers, 6
Business-level strategy, 10
competitive positioning and, 118–119, 
129–140
distinctive competence and, 119, 120, 
124, 127
at Nike, 142–143
types of, 120–129
at Walmart, 120
Business practice officer, 48
Business process, 201
Business unit, 6
Buyers’ bargaining power, 63–64
C
Cambridge Antibody Technology, 220
Canon, 206, 207
Capabilities, 108–109
Capacity, excess, 63, 133–134
Capital
productivity, 87
relational, 220
return on invested, 2
risk, 33
structure, C10
Carrefour, 151
Case study
analyzing, C2–C6
Case study analysis
explanation of, C1–C2
financial analysis role in, C8–C12
writing, C6–C8
Cash flow, C12
Caterpillar
customer responsiveness at, 92, 107
Cellular phone industry, 70
Centralization, 232–233
CEOs, 6
agency problem and, 34–38
board of directors and, 39
characteristics of good, 19–21
Cereal industry, 133
Chaining strategy, 130
Chevy Volt, 24–25
Chief executive officers. See CEOs
Cifera, 150
Cisco Systems
information systems at, 98
innovation at, 89
Citicorp, 190
Citigroup, 190–191
Coca-Cola
business definition and, 56–57
entry barriers and, 59
imitation at, 110
product development at, 136
Code of ethics, 47
Cognitive bias, 17–18
Commitment
credible, 220
escalating, 18
Communication problems, 235
Company infrastructure, 93, 100
Compaq, 174, 178
Compensation
pay for performance, 98
stock-based, 39–40
Competence, distinctive. See Distinctive 
competence
Competition, nonprice, 135–137
Competitive advantage, 2. See also 
Competitive positioning
building blocks of, 86–90. See also 
Value chain
business-level strategies and, 118–119
distinctive competencies and, 108–111
functional-level strategies and, 93–107
superior performance and, 2, 4
sustained, 4
of Walmart, 3–4
Index

I2  
Index
Competitive positioning. See also 
Business-level strategy
in different industry environments, 
129–140
nature of, 118–119
of Nike, 142–143
at Walmart, 120
Competitive structure, of industry, 61–62
Competitors. See also Five forces model
definition of, 56
potential, 58–60
Concentration on a single industry, 
173–180
Conglomerate, 192, 197
Consolidated industry, 61, 62
Contract law, 42
Control
illusion of, 18
organizational, 244–255
span of, 229
Convergys, 179
Cooper, Robert, 104
Cooperative outsourcing 
relationships, 186
Core competence. See Distinctive 
competence
Corporate governance, 28. See also Board 
of directors; CEOs
ethics and, 49
strategy and, 33–41
Corporate-level managers, 6, 201, 204, 
210. See also CEOs
Corporate-level strategy, 10, 201
Corruption, 44, 46
Cost advantage, absolute, 59–60
Cost conditions, industry, 62
Cost-leadership strategy, 121–122, 124–125
Cost reductions, pressures for, 153–154, 
156, 167–168
Costco, 3, 4
Costs
fixed, 62, 94, 138
operating, 175, 243–244
switching, 60
Cott Corporation, 59
Coyne, William, 190
Credible commitment, 220
Cross-functional product development 
teams, 105
Culture, organizational, 32, 46, 47–48
Currency exchange rates, 73–74
Current ratio, C10
Customer defection rates, 96–97
Customer needs, 56, 107, 118–119, 154
Customer-oriented business definition, 
31, 56
Customer response time, 90
Customer responsiveness, 90, 
106–107, 108
Customization, 96, 107
D
David, George, 192, 197, 198
Davidson, Dick, 233
Days Sales Outstanding (DSO), C10
Debt-to-assets ratio, C10–C11
Debt-to-equity ratio, C11
Decentralization, 232–233
Decentralized planning, 16–17
Decision making, strategic, 17–19, 48
Declining industry, 72, 137–140
Defection rates, customer, 96–97
Delegation, 20–21
Deliberate strategy, 14
Dell, Michael, 258–259
Dell Computers, 235, 236, 258–259
Dell versus SGI (Silicon Graphics 
International)
competition in server and cloud 
computing, case on, C27–C34
Demand, industry, 62
Demographic forces, 75–76
Devil’s advocacy, 18
Dialectic inquiry, 19
Differentiation, 228. See also Product 
differentiation
horizontal, 228, 234–244
integration and, 247
vertical, 228, 229–233
Differentiation strategy
cost leadership and, 124–125
explanation of, 122–124
Differentiator, broad, 123
Digital Equipment, 182
Directors, 34, 38–39, 49
Discount, diversification, 193
Disney, Walt, 255
Distinctive competence
business-level strategy and, 119, 120, 
124, 127
competitive advantage and, 108–111
diversification and, 188–189
entry mode and, 166–167
strategic change and, 205–208
Diversification
creating value through, 187–191
discount, 193
as entry mode, 173, 186
internal governance and, 187–188
related vs. unrelated, 191–192
restructuring and, 192–194
at 3M, 189, 190
Diversified company, 187
Divestment, 194
strategy, 138, 140
Dividend yield, C12
Divisional-level strategy. See 
Business-level strategy
Domino’s Pizza, 106
Downsizing, 192–194
DuPont, 247
Dyment, Roy, 107
E
eBay, 131
Economies, location, 149, 151
Economies of scale, 58, 94, 149
Economies of scope, 189–191
EDS, 179
Efficiency, 87, 93–100
Electronic Data Systems (EDS), 179
Elevonic 401, 197
Ellison, Larry, 223, 224
Embryonic industry, 70
Emergent strategy, 14–15
Emotional intelligence, 21
Empire building, 36
Employee productivity, 87, 97–98
Empowerment, 20–21
Enron, 37, 38, 41
Entry
barriers to, 58, 75, 212
modes of, 161–168
Environment
industry, 9
macro-, 9, 73–77
national, 9
Environmental degradation, 44
Escalating commitment, 18
Ethical dilemmas
definition of, 42
exercises, 9, 33, 66, 86, 129, 154, 
178, 220, 232
Ethics, 42
business, 42
code of, 47
officer, 48
Excess capacity, 63, 133–134
Exchange rates, currency, 73–74
Exit barrier, 63, 138
Exit strategies, 194
Exploitation, opportunistic, 44
Exporting, 161–162
Express mail delivery industry
exit barriers in, 63
fixed costs in, 62
External analysis, 7, 8, 9, 56
of industry life cycle, 69–73
of industry structure, 56–66
of macroenvironment, 73–77
strategic groups and, 66–69
External stakeholders, 28, 205
Exxon, 36
F
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 178
FedEx
excess capacity and, 63
fixed costs of, 62
vertical differentiation and, 231
Feedback loop, 11
Fiat-Chrysler, 125
Fill in the blanks, 206–207
Financial control, 241, 250–251
Financial statements, and auditors, 40–41
Fiorina, Carly, 178
Five forces model, 57–66, 122
Fixed costs, 62, 94, 138
Flat structure, 229
Flexible manufacturing technology, 96
Focus strategy, 120, 125–127
Ford, 220, 250
Forward vertical integration, 180, 181
Four Seasons hotel chain, 107

 
Index 
I3
“48 Hours,” 42
Fragmented industry, 61, 129–131
Franchising, 130–131, 163–164
FTC, 178
Fuji, 164
Full integration, 185
Functional-level managers, 5, 7
Functional-level strategy, 10
competitive advantage and, 93–107
obstacles to change and, 204
Functional structure, 234–236
G
GAAP, 35
Galvin, Christopher, 210
Gates, Bill, 11, 13, 19, 254
GE. See General Electric
General Electric (GE), 20
ivory tower approach and, 16
managers of, 6
strategic alliance and, 219
General managers, 5. See also 
specific types
General Motors (GM), 24, 36
from birth to bankruptcy in 2009, 
case on, C78–C89
imitation at, 110
innovation at, 105
market segmentation and, 119
multidivisional structure of, 242
vs. Toyota, 85, 86
vertical integration at, 184
Generally agreed-on accounting 
principles (GAAP), 35
Geographic structure, 238–239
Gillette, 136
Global automobile industry, in 2009
case on, C66–C77
Global environment, 75, 146–148
choosing strategy for, 156–161
competitive pressures in, 152–155
entry modes in, 161–168
increasing profitability through, 
148–152
Global standardization strategy, 
10, 156–157
GM. See General Motors
Goal, 32–33. See also specific control 
systems
Goldman, Daniel, 21
Google’s mission
ethical principles, and involvement 
in China, 52–53
Governance mechanisms, 34, 38–41, 
187–188
Government regulation, 60
Grove, Andy, 12, 111
Growth industry, 70–71, 129–131
Growth rate, 37
H
Hallmark Cards, 201
Hamel, Gary, 205, 206, 207–208
Hanson PLC, 215
Harvest strategy, 138, 139–140, 194
Heavyweight project manager, 105–106
Heinz, H. J., 122
Hewlett, Bill, 46
Hewlett-Packard
working conditions at, 46
Hiring, and ethics, 47
Holdup, risk of, 183
Home Depot, 36
Home video game industry
Atari Pong to Nintendo Wii, case on, 
C35–C51
Horizontal differentiation, 228, 234–244
Horizontal integration, 174–178
Horizontal merger, 131
HP Way, The, 46
HTML, 13
Hubris hypothesis, 18
Human resources strategy, 93, 97–98
Hypertext markup language (HTML), 13
I
IBM, 214
fall of, case on, C109–C121
location economies and, 151
mission of, 31
rise of, case on, C98–C107
in 2009, case on, C122–C133
vertical integration at, 180, 182
IKEA, 169–170
case on, C90–C96
Illusion of control, 18
Imitation, barriers to, 110
Immelt, Jeffrey, 6, 251
Industry, 56
analyzing structure of, 56–66
competitive structure of, 61–62
concentration on a single, 173–180
consolidated, 61, 62
cost conditions of, 62
declining, 72, 137–140
demand in, 62
environment of, 73–77
fragmented, 61, 129–131
growth, 70–71, 129–131
life cycle of, 69–73
Inflation, price, 74
Information asymmetry, 34
Information distortion, 231, 243
Information manipulation, 43
Information systems, 93, 98, 100
Infrastructure, company, 93, 100
Innovation, 89–90
increasing, 103–106
process, 89
product, 89, 103–104
at 3M, 108
Inputs, 87
Inside directors, 38–39
Intangible resources, 108, 110
Integration, 228
acquisition and, 215
differentiation and, 247
full, 185
horizontal, 174–178
managers and, 247
organizational control and, 
244–247
postacquisition, 213–214
taper, 185
vertical, 173, 180–186
Intel, 12
bargaining power of, 65
innovation in, 89
Intellectual property law, 42
Intelligence, emotional, 21
Intended strategy, 14–15
Internal analysis, 7, 8, 9–10
Internal governance, 187–188
Internal new ventures, 208–212
Internal stakeholders, 28, 205
International licensing, 162
International strategy, 159–160
Internet, and fragmented industries, 131
Internet Explorer, 13, 44
Inventory system, JIT, 97, 102
Inventory turnover, C10
Iridium project, 210
Ito, Yuzuru, 197
Iverson, Ken, 20
Ivory tower approach, 16–17
J
Java, 13
JIT inventory system, 97, 102
Joint venture, 164–165, 215
Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company, 122
Just-in-time (JIT) inventory system, 
97, 102
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 19
Kamprad, Ingvar, 169
Kelleher, Herb, 20
Klippan love seat, 170
Kmart, 67
Knight, Phil, 142
Kodak
mission of, 30, 31
vertical integration at, 184
Kozlowski, Dennis, 35
Kroc, Ray, 20
L
Laws, business, 42, 178
Leadership
price, 134–135
strategic, 19–21, 47–48, 100. See also 
specific leaders
Leadership strategy, 138–139
Lean production, 89–90, 96
Learning effects, 94–95
Legal/political forces, 76–77
Leverage ratios, C10–C11

I4  
Index
Liaison role, of manager, 245
Licensing, 162–163
Life cycle, industry, 69–73
Liquidation strategy, 194
Liquidity ratios, C9–C10
Loblaws, 59
Local responsiveness, pressures 
for, 152–153, 154–155, 156
Localization strategy, 157–159, 160
Location
economies, 149, 151
and organization structure, 236
Logistics, 92, 97
Long-term contracting, 194
Low cost structure, 86, 96
Lutz, Bob, 24–25
M
Macroeconomic forces, 73–74
Macroenvironment, 9, 73–77
Managers
business-level, 6
corporate-level, 6, 201, 204, 210. 
See also CEOs
functional-level, 5, 7
heavyweight project, 105–106
integration and, 248
liaison role of, 245
motivation of, 231
Market development, 136–137
Market niche, 125. See also Focus 
strategy
Market penetration, 136
Market segmentation, 119, 120
Market-to-book value, C11
Marketing, 92, 96–97
strategy, 96–97
Mass customization, 96
Materials management, 92, 97
Matsushita, TQM at, 197
Mature industry, 72, 131–137
Maytag, 237
Mazda, 220
MBO, 194
McDonald’s
and critics (1973–2009), case on, 
C53–C63
franchising and, 163
global expansion at, 149, 152
strategic leadership at, 20
vertical integration at, 184
McKinnell, Hank, 36
Measurement systems, 235
Mega-opportunities, 206, 207–208
Merger, 131, 174, 233. See also specific 
mergers
Microsoft, 19
economies of scale and, 94, 149
ethics at, 44
flexible strategic planning at, 11, 13
international strategy and, 160
mission of, 9
organizational values at, 254
permanent teams at, 246
stock options and, 40
strategic alliance and, 217
Mintzberg, Henry, 14, 15, 245
Mission, 30–31
Mission statement, 9, 29–32
Mobility barriers, 69
Model T Ford, 94
Monaghan, Tom, 106
Monsanto, 207, 208
Moral courage, 49
Mosaic, 13
Motivation, and organization 
structure, 231
Motorola, 204, 210, 217, 220
MTV, 158
Mulally, Alan, 250
Multidivisional company, 5, 240–244
Murdock, Rupert, 174
N
Nardelli, Bob, 36
National environment, 9
Naval, 139
Needs, customer, 56, 107, 118–119, 
154
Neiman Marcus, 238–239
Netscape Navigator, 13
News Corp, 174, 216
News industry
acquisition strategy and, 216
horizontal integration and, 174
technical change in, 75
Niche strategy, 138, 139
Nike
business-level strategies at, 142–143
ethics at, 42
outsourcing and, 179
Noblesse oblige, 43
Nonprice competition, 135–137
Nordstrom, 86
Norms, organizational, 254
Nucor Steel
distinctive competencies of, 109
human resources at, 97, 98
leadership of, 20
values of, 32
O
Odle, Stephanie, 45
On-the-job consumption, 35–36
Operating budget, 252
Operating costs
horizontal integration and, 175
organization structure and, 243–244
Operating responsibility, 241
Opportunistic exploitation, 44
Opportunities, 56, 207–208. See also 
specific opportunities
Oracle, 177
Oracle Corporation, 223–224
Organizational control, 32
behavior controls and, 252
ethics and, 46, 47–48
integration and, 244–247
leadership, 254–255
nature of, 247–255
at Walmart, 255–256
Organizational design, 227. See 
also Organizational structure; 
Organizational control
Organizational norms, 254
Organizational structure, 227
building blocks of, 228–229
horizontal differentiation in, 234–244
operating costs and, 243–244
role of, 227–229
vertical differentiation in, 229–233
Organizational values, 254
Output, 87
Output control, 251–252
Outside directors, 38, 39
Outside view, 19
Outsourcing, 178–180, 186, 202
P
Packard, David, 46
Palm, 89
Partner selection, 218–219
Patents, 110
Pay for performance compensation, 98
PeopleSoft, 223
PepsiCo
entry barriers and, 59
product development at, 136
Permanent teams, 245–246
Perrier, 92
Personal computer industry
bargaining power in, 65
price signaling in, 134
value-added chain in, 181
vertical integration in, 180
Personal ethics, 46, 47
Pfeffer, Jeffery, 21
Pfizer, 36
Pharmaceutical industry
bargaining power in, 64
closing case of, 79–80
global expansion in, 155
strategic groups in, 66–67, 68
Philip Morris, 76, 138, 188–189
Planning
scenario, 15–16
strategic, 7–11, 13, 16, 17, 236, 241
Polaroid, 108
Political/legal forces, 76–77
Porsche, 126
Porter, Michael E., 57, 86. See also Five 
forces model
Portfolio of core competences, 205–208
Positioning strategy, 104
Postacquisition integration, 213–214
Prahalad, C. K., 205, 206, 207–208
Premier plus 10, 206, 207
Premium price, 123
Price
cutting of, 133
inflation of, 74

 
Index 
I5
reservation, 84
stock, 250
Price-earnings ratio, C11
Price leadership, 134–135
Price signaling, 134
Price war, 61, 71, 72
Pricing, transfer, 243
Primary activities, 91–92
Principal, 34–35, 37–38
Principle of the minimum chain of 
command, 231
Prior hypothesis bias, 17–18
Process, business, 201
Process innovation, 89
Procter & Gamble
economies of scope at, 189, 191
global expansion at, 148, 157, 
158, 160
market penetration and, 136
vertical differentiation and, 231
Product
bundling of, 176–177
development of, 136. See also 
Innovation; Research and 
development
quality of. See Quality, product
structure of, 236–237
substitute, 65–66
Product development team, 105
Product differentiation, 86, 89, 100, 103, 
118–119, 120, 176–177
Product innovation, 89, 103–104
Product-oriented business definition, 
30–31
Product proliferation, 132–133, 137
Product-team structure, 237–238
Production, in value chain, 92
efficiency and, 94–95, 96
globalization of, 147
Productivity
capital, 87
employee, 87, 97–98
Profit ratios, C8–C9
Profitability, 2, 39
global expansion and, 148–152
long-run. See specific strategies
revenue growth rates and, 37
scale of entry and, 209–210
Promotion, 47
Q
Quality, product, 88, 89, 137
franchising and, 164
increasing, 100–103
vertical integration and, 184
Quality as excellence, 88–89, 103
Quality as reliability, 88–89, 100–102
Quantum Corporation, 106
Quick ratio, C10
R
Raymond, Lee, 36
RCA, 163
Realized strategy, 14
Reasoning by analogy, 18
Reengineering, 201–202
Related diversification, 191–192
Relational capital, 220
Representativeness, 19
Research and development, 91, 94, 211
efficiency and, 94
organization structure and, 243
Reservation price, customer’s, 84
Resources
competition for, 243
intangible, 108, 110
tangible, 108
Responsibility, strategic, 241
Restructuring, 192–194, 202
Retail industry
competitive advantage in, 84
strategic groups in, 68
Return on invested capital (ROIC), 
2, C9
Return on investment (ROI), 250
Return on stockholders equity (ROE), C9
Return on total assets (ROA), C9
Risk capital, 33
Risk of holdup, 183
Rivalry, 61–63, 177
ROI, 250
ROIC, 2
Roll, Richard, 18
Royal Crown Cola, 59, 136
Royal Dutch Shell, 15
S
Sales, in value chain, 92
Sam’s Choice, 59
Sam’s Club, 4
SAP, 223–224
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 39, 41
Scale, economies of, 58, 94
Scale of entry, 209–210
Scenario planning, 15–16
Scenarios, “what if,” 15
Schultz, Howard, 113
Scope, economies of, 189–191
Screening, 214–215
SEC, 35, 40
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 35, 40
Securities law, 42
Segmentation, market, 118–119, 120
Self-dealing, 43
Self-managing team, 98
SGI (Silicon Graphics International) 
versus Dell
competition in server and cloud 
computing, case on, C27–C34
Shakeout stage, of industry, 71
Shareholder-return ratios, C11–C12
Siebel Systems, 223
Signaling, price, 134
Singapore Airlines, 103
Sinofsky, Steve, 13
Six Sigma methodology, 100–102
SKUs, 67
Sloan, Alfred, 242
Smith Corona, 31
Snecma, 219
Social forces, 76
Soft drink industry
entry barriers in, 59
structure of, 56
Southwest Airlines, 20, 97
Span of control, 229
Specialization, 94
Specialized asset, 182
Spinoff, 194
Stakeholders, 28
rights of, 42
types of, 28–29. See also specific types
Standardization, 253
Starbucks, 113–114, 149
Steel industry, 72, 137, 138
Stock-based compensation, 39–40
Stock keeping units (SKUs), 67
Stock options, 39–40
Stock price, 250
Stockholders, 28, 29, 33, 34, 42
Strategic alliances, 215–220
Strategic change, 201–205
distinctive competences and, 205–208
through acquisitions, 212–215
through internal new ventures, 208–212
through strategic alliances, 215–220
Strategic control systems, 248–250
Strategic groups, 66–69
Strategic leadership, 19–21. See also 
specific leaders
customer focus and, 106–107
ethics and, 47–48
Strategic managers, 5–7. See also specific 
types
Strategic planning, 7–11
at Microsoft, 11, 12
organization structure and, 236, 241
Strategic responsibility, 241
Strategy, 2. See also specific strategies
corporate governance and, 33–41
in declining industries, 137–140
as emergent process, 11–15
ethics and, 42–49
process for planning, 7–11
Strategy formulation, 8
Strategy implementation, 8, 10–11
Structure(s)
analyzing industry, 56–66. See also 
specific types
flat, 229
functional, 234–236
geographic, 238–239
low cost, 86, 89, 100, 104
multidivisional, 5, 240–244
product, 236–237
product-team, 237–238
tall, 229–231
Stuck in the middle, 128
Substandard working conditions, 44
Substitute products, 65–66
Sun Microsystems, 13
Sunderstrand, 198
Sundown rule, Walmart’s, 99

I6  
Index
Suppliers’ bargaining power, 64–65
Support activities, 92–93
Sustained competitive advantage, 4, 84
Swartz, Mark, 35
Switching costs, 60
SWOT analysis, 8, 10, 203, C3
T
Takeover constraint, 41
Tall structure, 229–231
Tangible resources, 108
Taper integration, 185
Target, 3, 4
Task force, 245
Teams
permanent, 245–246
self-managing, 98
Technological change, 75
Telephone industry, 60
Texas Instruments, 94
ThinkPad, 151
Threats, 56, 203. See also specific threats
3M, 12
diversification at, 189, 190
innovation at, 108
Tie in sales, 44
Time Warner, 213
Times-covered ratio, C11
Titanium Metals Corp, 44
Tit-for-tat strategy, 134
Tobacco industry
in decline stage, 137
social forces and, 76
Top-down change, 205
Tort laws, 42
Toshiba, 217, 219, 220
Total quality management (TQM), 
100–101, 202
Total shareholder returns, C11
Toyota, 24, 25
bargaining power of, 64
global expansion at, 148, 149, 
154, 156
vs. GM, 85, 86
lean production system of, 89
market segmentation and, 119
quality and, 88
TQM, 100–101, 202
Transfer pricing, 243
Transnational strategy, 159
Travelers, 190
TRW Systems, 220
Tyco, 35, 37
U
Unilever
code of ethics at, 47–48, 49
Union Pacific (UP), 233
Unit, business, 6
United States Steel Industry 
Association, 77
United Technologies Corporation (UTC), 
192, 197–198
Universal needs, 154
Unrelated diversification, 191–192
UPS, 63
V
Vacuum tube industry, 138
Value chain, 90–93, 180, 181
Value creation, 84–86. See also specific 
functions
Value creation through diversification, 
187–191
through horizontal integration, 
174–178
through vertical integration, 173, 
180–186
Values, 32, 254
Verizon Wireless
customer defection rates and, 96
Vertical differentiation, 229–233
Vertical integration, 173, 180–186
Virtual corporation, 179
Vision, 31
Volvo, 103
W
Walmart
bargaining power of, 67
competitive advantage of, 3–4
and competitive positioning, 120
efficiency at, 97
employees of, 99
entry barriers and, 59
global expansion at, 149, 150–151, 
152, 153
leadership of, 19, 20. See also 
Walton, Sam
organizational culture of, 255–256
profitability of, 2
support activities in, 92, 93
working conditions at, 45
Walton, Sam, 3–4, 19, 20, 45, 67, 99, 
120, 255–256
Wang, Jerry, 233
Welch, Jack, 19, 20
Western Union, 13
What if” scenarios, 15
White space, 206, 207
Wholly owned subsidiary, 165
Wilson, Charles, 36
Windows, 44, 45, 67, 99
Wireless telecommunications industry
customer defection rates in, 
96–97
infrastructure differences in, 155
Wookey, John, 223, 224
Working conditions
at Hewlett-Packard, 46
at Nike, 42, 44
substandard, 44
at Unilever, 47
at Walmart, 45
World cars, 154
Wrapp, Edward, 21
X
Xbox, 12
Xerox
international strategy and, 
160, 164
Y
Yahoo!, 189, 233

T
he credit collapse. Tumbling markets. 
Bailouts and bankruptcies. Surging 
unemployment. Political debate. Today’s 
ﬁ nancial turmoil transforms academic 
theory into breaking news that affects 
every family and business sector — from 
Wall Street to Shanghai.
Cengage Learning’s Global Economic 
Watch brings these pivotal current events 
into the classroom. It helps you answer 
the key questions of the day, including: 
“How did we get here?” and “Where do 
we go from here?”
The Watch, a ﬁ rst of its kind resource, stimulates 
discussion and understanding of the global 
downturn with easy-to-integrate learning solutions:
•  A content-rich blog of breaking news, expert 
analysis and commentary — updated multiple 
times daily — plus links to many other blogs 
•  A powerful real-time database of hundreds 
of relevant and vetted journal, newpaper and 
periodical articles, videos, and podcasts — 
updated four times every day
•  A thorough overview and timeline of events 
leading up to the global economic crisis
•  Student forums for sharing questions, ideas, 
and opinions
History is happening now. Experience it in the classroom. 
For more information on the power of The Watch, please visit www.cengage.com/thewatch.

