
Mary Ellen Guffey
Professor Emerita of Business
Los Angeles Pierce College
Dana Loewy
Contributing Editor
Business Communication Program
California State University, Fullerton
Essentials of 
Business Communication
Eighth Edition

Essentials of Business Communication,  
Eighth Edition
Mary Ellen Guffey
Vice President of Editorial, Business:  
Jack W. Calhoun
Editor-in-Chief: Melissa S. Acuña 
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Erin Joyner
Senior Developmental Editor: Mary Draper 
Executive Marketing Manager:  
Kimberly Kanakes
Marketing Manager: Mike Aliscad 
Marketing Communications Manager:  
Sarah Greber
Senior Content Project Manager:  
Tamborah Moore
Managing Media Editor: Pam Wallace
Media Editor: John Rich
Manufacturing Coordinator: Diane Gibbons/ 
Beverly Breslin
Production Service: LEAP Publishing 
Services, Inc. 
Compositor: ICC Macmillan, Inc.
Permissions Account Manager, Text:  
Roberta Broyer
Permissions Account Manager, Images:  
Amanda Groszko 
Photo Researcher: Terri Miller 
Senior Art Director: Stacy Jenkins Shirley
Cover and Internal Designer:  
Craig Ramsdell
Cover Image: © Veer/PhotoAlto 
© 2010, 2007 South-Western, a part of Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright hereon 
may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means—graphic, electronic, 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, Web distribution, 
information storage and retrieval systems, or in any other manner—except as 
may be permitted by the license terms herein.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at  
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. Windows is 
a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation used herein under 
license. Macintosh and Power Macintosh are registered trademarks of Apple 
Computer, Inc. used herein under license.
© 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2008940428
Pkg ISBN-13: 978-0-324-58800-2
Pkg ISBN-10: 0-324-58800-3
ISBN-13: 978-0-324-58799-9
ISBN-10: 0-324-58799-6
South-Western Cengage Learning
5191 Natorp Boulevard
Mason, OH 45040
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by  
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit academic.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.ichapters.com
Printed in the United States of America 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 09 08

Dear Business Communication Students:   
Essentials of Business Communication, 8e, brings 
you a four-in-one learning package including (a) an 
authoritative textbook, (b) a convenient workbook, 
(c) a self-teaching grammar/mechanics handbook, 
and (d) a fully supported student Web site at 
www.meguffey.com.
Although much copied, Essentials maintains its leadership in post-secondary markets 
because of its effective grammar review, practical writing instruction, and exceptional support 
materials. In revising this Eighth Edition, we examined every topic and added new coverage 
with two themes in mind: professionalism and the relevance of this course to your future 
career success. Let me describe a few of the major improvements and features in the 
Eighth Edition:
     •  Workplace relevance. At the request of reviewers, this edition stresses the practical 
and immediate importance of this course to success in your career. 
     •  Office Insider feature. To help you understand employers’ expectations and to better 
connect what you are learning to your future job performance, Office Insider presents 
workplace facts and advice.
     •  Updated communication technologies. The Eighth Edition updates and expands 
coverage of blogs, instant messaging, wikis, and other current technologies.
     •  New grammar and writing improvement exercises. Many new grammar review 
and writing improvement exercises help you review the basics and hone your skills.
     •  New chapter on professionalism. To reinforce the focus on marketable skills 
and career success, this edition teaches business etiquette, team behavior, and other 
professional soft skills.
     •  Job-search and interviewing coverage. The Eighth Edition presents the latest 
trends in résumés and employment interviews.
     •  Premier Web site at www.meguffey.com. All students with new books have access to 
chapter review quizzes, PowerPoint slides, and a wide assortment of learning resources.
The many examples and model documents in Essentials of Business Communication, 
including résumés and cover letters, have made this book a favorite to keep as an on-the-job 
reference. 
I wish you well in your studies!
Cordially,
Mary Ellen Guffey 
 
iii

This page intentionally left blank 

 
v
UNDERSTANDING THE IMPORTANCE OF GOOD COMMUNICATION… 
IT’S JUST THAT EASY!
Strong business communication skills will serve 
you well throughout college, your careers, and 
entire lives. Guffey helps you learn to commu-
nicate effectively and professionally in today’s 
workplace, no matter what career path you 
choose to follow. The exciting, new Essentials 
of Business Communication, 8e, is packed with 
resources to make learning business communica-
tion easier and more enjoyable. With the book’s 
grammar focus, coverage of current workplace 
technologies, and an unmatched ancillary 
package, you will ﬁ nd that learning business 
communication can be … just that easy.
Essentials offers a four-in-one 
learning package that gets results:
• Authoritative textbook
• Practical workbook
• Self-teaching grammar/mechanics handbook
•  Fully supported student support Web site 
– www.meguffey.com
      Emphasis on Grammar
Throughout the 
text, you are 
encouraged to 
build on your 
basic grammar 
skills. Grammar/
Mechanics Check-
ups, Grammar/
Mechanics Challenges, and Web-based 
grammar activities help you practice and 
sharpen your skills. 
      Emphasis on Writing Plans
Ample, step-
by-step writing 
plans help you get 
started quickly 
on organizing 
and formatting 
messages.
Mary Ellen Guffey continues to be 
your partner in learning. 
Award-winning author Mary Ellen Guffey pro-
vides unparalleled resources to help you learn 
and retain business writing techniques. When 
you use a Guffey text, you get dynamic learning 
resources that help you succeed in the course.
In this edition Dr. Dana Loewy joins Mary 
Ellen as a major contributor and coauthor. 
Learn more about both authors on the 
“About the Authors” page. 

Learning with Guffey… It’s Just 
rom the emphasis on professionalism to new Workplace in 
Focus photo essays, Guffey has updated tools and created 
new ways to keep you interested and engaged. The 
following six pages describe features that will help make 
learning with Guffey… just that easy.
F
Ofﬁ ce Insider 
To accentuate how 
excellent communica-
tion skills translate into 
career success, the Ofﬁ ce 
Insider demonstrates 
the importance of 
communication skills in 
real-world practice.
vi

That Easy!
Emphasis on Professionalism  
The Eighth Edition increases its emphasis on 
professional workplace behaviors and illustrates 
the importance of professionalism. Businesses 
have a keen interest in a professional workforce 
that effectively works together to deliver positive 
results that ultimately boost proﬁ ts and bolster a 
company’s image. In this edition, you’ll discover 
the professional characteristics most valued in 
today’s competitive workplace.
Career Relevance   
Because employers often rank communication 
skills among the most requested competencies, 
the Eighth Edition emphasizes the link between 
excellent communication skills and career 
success—helping you see for yourself the 
critical role business communication will play 
in your life.
Abundant Activities and Cases   
Chapter concepts are translated into action as 
you try out your skills in activities designed to 
mirror “real-world” experiences.
“”
I really like the updates in Essentials, and the focus 
on using technology as a communication medium 
in the 21st century workplace and classroom.
— DEBORAH J. BUELL, CY-FAIR COLLEGE, NORTH HARRIS MONTGOMERY COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT, TEXAS
 
vii

Learning with Guffey… It’s Just 
More Before-
and-After Model 
Documents 
Before-and-after sample 
documents and descrip-
tive callouts create a 
road map to the writing 
process, demonstrating 
the effective use of the 
skills being taught, as 
well as the signiﬁ cance 
of the revision process.
viii

That Easy!
Communication 
Workshops 
Communication Work-
shops develop critical 
thinking skills and pro-
vide insight into special 
business communication 
topics such as ethics, 
technology, career skills, 
and collaboration.
“
”
I’m really enjoying using Essentials. The detail and 
pedagogical design of the book are truly inspiring. 
I really get a kick out of reading all of the positive 
and grateful student comments about the book at 
the end of the semester when I distribute an 
instructor/course evaluation.  
— BRIAN WILSON, COLLEGE OF MARIN, CALIFORNIA
 
ix

New Workplace 
in Focus Photo 
Essays 
Vivid photos with 
intriguing stories 
demonstrate real-world 
applicability of business 
communication con-
cepts. Each photo 
essay concludes with 
a critical thinking 
question.
Learning with Guffey… It’s Just 
x

That Easy!
Tips for Preparing 
Business 
Messages
Tips boxes summarize 
practical suggestions 
for creating effective 
business messages. 
Study them before 
completing your 
writing assignments.
Writing Improve-
ment Exercises
These exercises will 
develop your writing 
skills and allow you to 
practice the concepts 
explained in the chapter.
 
xi

Technology with Guffey… It’s 
NEW! Student 
Support Web Site
www.meguffey.com gives 
you one convenient place to 
ﬁ nd the support you need. 
You can study with self-
teaching grammar/
mechanics activities, 
PowerPoint® slides, chapter 
review quizzes, Beat the 
Clock quizzes, and other 
valuable study tools.  
uffey helps you learn to communicate effectively and 
professionally in today’s workplace, no matter what 
career path you choose to follow. The exciting, new 
Essentials of Business Communication, 8e, is packed 
with resources to make learning business communication 
easier and more enjoyable. The all-new student Web site 
houses powerful resources to help make learning with 
Guffey …  just that easy.
G
xii

Just That Easy!
Beat-the-Clock Interactive Quizzes 
These fun but challenging interactive quizzes, 
available at www.meguffey.com, give you an 
opportunity to review chapter concepts 
and make quick decisions in a game-like 
environment.
Chapter Review Quizzes 
Chapter review quizzes help you prepare for 
tests and check your understanding of the most 
important concepts in each chapter. Plus, each 
question includes feedback to help you under-
stand why your answers are right or wrong.
Grammar/Mechanics Checkups
Improve your grammar skills by completing 
these Grammar/Mechanics Checkups. Available 
in the textbook and at the student Web site, 
these Checkups review all sections of the 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook.
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 
Documents  
Build your language skills by ﬁ nding and 
correcting errors in the Grammar/Mechanics 
Challenge Documents. Save time re-keying 
these documents by downloading them from 
the Web site. 
Personal Language Trainer
Our Personal Language Trainer program helps 
you improve your language skills through a 
three-part plan that reviews, strengthens, and 
measures your knowledge. With immediate feed-
back, it’s like having your own private language 
trainer coaching you as you work at a comfort-
able pace.
Online Writing Labs
This rich collection of Web sites provides rele- 
vant and publicly accessible online “handouts,” 
style guides, and writing tips to help you in this 
course. You will ﬁ nd a variety of topics includ-
ing citation formats, test-taking tips, grammar, 
and the writing process.
Dr. Guffey’s Business 
Etiquette Guide
Do your table manners need to be polished 
before your next business dinner? Dr. Guffey 
explores 17 different business etiquette topics, 
including business dining, of interest to both 
workplace newcomers and veterans.
PowerPoint® Slides 
You can review the most important topics of 
each chapter in these professionally designed 
PowerPoint slides.  Study them before tests to 
check your understanding of key concepts. 
“
”
I have used the 
Guffey textbooks for 
years, and I think 
they offer the best 
exercises and supple-
mental materials in 
the market.
—  DEBRA BOHLMAN, RASMUSSEN COLLEGE, 
ST. CLOUD, MINNESOTA
 
 
xiii

Technology with Guffey… It’s 
ccessing the Guffey Student Web site is just that easy. 
Follow the steps below to reach all of the study 
resources available.
A
Accessing the Guffey 
Student Web Site
1. Go to www.meguffey.com.
2.  Click on the book cover for Essentials of 
Business Communication, 8e. 
Then click Student: Companion Site.
3. Click Register.
4.  Follow the online prompts to create an 
account and enter your Access Code exactly 
as it appears on the access card that came 
with your new textbook.
5.  Record your e-mail address and password 
and store it in a secure location for future 
visits.
xiv

Just That Easy!
Now that you’ve bought the textbook . . . 
Get the best grade in the shortest time possible!
Visit www.iChapters.com to receive 25 percent off over 10,000 print, digital, and audio study tools 
that allow you to practice, review, and master course concepts using printed guides and manuals that 
work hand in hand with each chapter of your textbook.
Join the thousands of students who have beneﬁ ted from www.iChapters.com. Just search by author, 
title, or ISBN, and then ﬁ lter the results by “Study Tools” and select the format best suited for you. 
www.iChapters.com 
 
xv

xvi
Unit 1: Communicating in Today’s Workplace 
1
 1. Career Success Begins With Communication Skills  2
Unit 2: The Writing Process 
31
 2. Planning Business Messages  32
 3. Composing Business Messages  53
 4. Revising Business Messages  75
Unit 3: Communicating at Work 
97
 5. Electronic Messages and Memorandums  98
 6. Positive Messages  133
 7. Negative Messages  161
 8. Persuasive Messages  193
Unit 4: Reporting Workplace Data 
221
 9. Informal Reports  222
 10. Proposals and Formal Reports  253
Unit 5:  Professionalism, Teamwork, Meetings, 
and Speaking Skills 
303
 11. Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, 
and Meetings  304
 12. Business Presentations  336
Unit 6: Communication Employment 
371
 13. The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters  372
 14. Interviewing and Following Up  414
Appendixes 
A-1
 A. A Guide to Document Formats  A-1
 B. Correction Symbols and Proofreading Marks  A-12
 C. Documentation Formats  A-15
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook  GM-1
Key to Grammar/Mechanics Checkups  K-1
Notes  N-1
Acknowledgments  ACK-1
Index  I-1
Brief Contents

 
xvii
Contents
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins 
With Communication Skills 2
Communication Skills: Your Ticket to Work or Your 
Ticket Out the Door 2
Understanding the Communication Process 7
Improving Listening Skills 11
Enhancing Your Nonverbal Communication Skills 12
How Culture Affects Communication 15
Capitalizing on Workforce Diversity 21
Summing Up and Looking Forward 23
Critical Thinking 23
Chapter Review 23
Activities and Cases 25
Video Resources 27
Career Success Starts With Communication Foundations 27
Intercultural Communication at Work 27
Understanding Teamwork: Cold Stone Creamery 27
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 28
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 29
Communication Workshop: Technology (Using Job 
Boards to Learn About Employment Possibilities in Your Field) 30
Unit 1: Communicating in Today’s Workplace 1
Chapter 2: Planning Business 
Messages 32
The Basics of Business Writing 32
The Writing Process for Business Messages and Oral 
Presentations 33
Analyzing the Purpose and the Audience 34
Anticipating the Audience 36
Adapting to the Task and Audience 38
Summing Up and Looking Forward 45
Critical Thinking 45
Chapter Review 45
Activities 47
Writing Improvement Exercises 47
Video Resource:
Guffey’s 3-x-3 Writing Process Develops Fluent Workplace 
Skills 50
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 50
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 51
Communication Workshop: Career Skills 
(Sharpening Your Skills for Critical Thinking, Problem 
Solving, and Decision Making) 52
Chapter 3: Composing 
Business Messages 53
Collecting Information to Compose Messages 53
Organizing to Show Relationships 55
Composing Effective Sentences 58
Improving Writing Techniques 60
Drafting Powerful Paragraphs 64
Composing the First Draft 66
Summing Up and Looking Forward 66
Critical Thinking 66
Chapter Review 67
Writing Improvement Exercises 68
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 72
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 73
Communication Workshop: Ethics (Using Ethical 
Tools to Help You Do the Right Thing) 74
Chapter 4: Revising Business 
Messages 75
Understanding the Process of Revision 75
Revising for Conciseness 76
Revising for Clarity 78
Revising for Vigor and Directness 80
Designing Documents for Readability 81
Understanding the Process of Proofreading 85
Summing Up and Looking Forward 87
Critical Thinking 87
Chapter Review 88
Writing Improvement Exercises 89
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 92
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 93
Communication Workshop: Technology (Using 
Word’s Track Changes and Comment Features to Edit and 
Revise Documents) 94
Unit 2: The Writing Process 31

xviii 
Contents
Unit 3: Communicating at Work 97
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages 
and Memorandums 98
How Organizations Exchange Messages and Information 98
Organizing E-Mail Messages and Memos 100
Applying E-Mail and Memo Formats 102
Using the Writing Process to Create Effective Internal 
Messages 107
Best Practices for Using E-Mail Smartly, Safely, and 
Professionally 108
Using Instant Messages Professionally 112
Writing Information and Procedure E-Mail Messages 
and Memos 114
Writing Request and Reply E-Mail Messages and 
Memos 116
Summing Up and Looking Forward 119
Critical Thinking 119
Chapter Review 119
Writing Improvement Exercises 121
Writing Improvement Cases 122
Activities and Cases 125
Video Resources:
Smart E-Mail Messages and Memos Advance Your 
Career 129
Innovation, Learning, and Communication: A Study of 
Yahoo 129
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 129
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 131
Communication Workshop: Ethics (Should Employers 
Restrict E-Mail, Instant Messaging, and Internet Use?) 132
Chapter 6: Positive Messages 133
Sending Positive Written Messages Outside Your 
Organization 133
Direct Requests for Information and Action 135
Direct Claims 137
Direct Replies 138
Adjustment Letters 141
Goodwill Messages 145
Summing Up and Looking Forward 148
Critical Thinking 148
Chapter Review 149
Writing Improvement Exercises 150
Writing Improvement Cases 151
Activities and Cases 153
Video Resources:
Social Responsibility and Communication at Ben & Jerry’s 158
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 158
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 159
Communication Workshop: Career Skills 
(Dr. Guffey’s Guide to Business Etiquette and Workplace 
Manners) 160
Chapter 7: Negative Messages 161
Strategies for Delivering Bad News 161
Techniques for Delivering Bad News Sensitively 165
Refusing Direct Requests and Claims 170
Delivering Bad News to Customers 172
Delivering Bad News Within Organizations 177
Ethics and the Indirect Strategy 179
Summing Up and Looking Forward 180
Critical Thinking 180
Chapter Review 181
Writing Improvement Exercises 182
Writing Improvement Cases 183
Activities and Cases 186
Video Resource:
Bad News: BuyCostumes 189
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 190
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 191
Communication Workshop: Intercultural Issues 
(Presenting Bad News in Other Cultures) 192
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 193
Making Persuasive Requests 193
Writing Sales and Marketing Messages 200
Writing Sucessful Online Sales and Marketing 
Messages 204
Summing Up and Looking Forward 207
Critical Thinking 207
Chapter Review 208
Writing Improvement Exercises 209
Writing Improvement Cases 210
Activities and Cases 212
Video Resources:
Persuasive Request: Hard Rock Cafe 217
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 217
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 219
Communication Workshop: Ethics (What Is Legal 
and What Is Not in Sales Letters) 220
Unit 4: Reporting Workplace Data 221
Chapter 9: Informal Reports 222
Understanding Report Basics 222
Defining the Purpose and Gathering Data 228
Choosing a Report Writing Style and Creating 
Headings 230
Preparing Typical Informal Reports 233
Summing Up and Looking Forward 242
Critical Thinking 242
Chapter Review 243
Writing Improvement Exercises 244

Contents 
xix
Activities and Cases 245
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 249
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 250
Communication Workshop: Collaboration (Laying 
the Groundwork for Team Writing Projects) 251
Chapter 10: Proposals and 
Formal Reports 253
Understanding Business Proposals 253
Informal Proposals 254
Formal Proposals 258
Preparing to Write Formal Reports 258
Researching Secondary Data 259
Generating Primary Data 262
Documenting Data 264
Organizing and Outlining Data 267
Illustrating Data 270
Presenting the Final Report 277
Summing Up and Looking Forward 289
Critical Thinking 289
Chapter Review 289
Activities and Cases 291
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 298
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 299
Communication Workshop: Technology (Trash or 
Treasure: Assessing the Quality of Web Documents) 300
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: 
Business Etiquette, Ethics, 
Teamwork, and Meetings 304
Recognizing the Importance of Professionalism, 
Business Etiquette, and Ethical Behavior 304
Becoming a Professional Communicator in Face-to-Face 
Settings 308
Practicing Professional Telephone, Cell Phone, and 
Voice Mail Etiquette 313
Becoming a Team Player in Professional Groups and 
Teams 317
Conducting Productive Business and Professional 
Meetings 321
Summing Up and Looking Forward 327
Critical Thinking 327
Chapter Review 327
Activities and Cases 329
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 332
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 333
Communication Workshop: Career Skills (Five Rules 
for Resolving Workplace Conflicts) 334
Chapter 12: Business Presentations 336
Getting Ready for an Oral Presentation 337
Organizing Content for a Powerful Impact 338
Building Rapport Like a Pro 343
Planning Visual Aids 345
Designing an Impressive Multimedia Presentation 347
Polishing Your Delivery and Following Up 356
Summing Up and Looking Forward 360
Critical Thinking 361
Chapter Review 361
Activities and Cases 362
Video Resource:
Building Workplace Skills: Effective On-the-Job Oral 
Presentations 366
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 367
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 368
Communication Workshop: Collaboration 
(Techniques for Taking Part in Effective and Professional 
Team Presentations) 369
Unit 5: Professionalism, Teamwork, Meetings, and Speaking Skills 303
Chapter 13: The Job Search, 
Résumés, and Cover Letters 372
Preparing for Employment 372
Creating a Customized Résumé 378
Optimizing Your Résumé for Today’s Technologies 385
Applying the Final Touches to Your Résumé 395
Creating a Customized, Persuasive Cover Letter 398
Summing Up and Looking Forward 404
Critical Thinking 404
Chapter Review 405
Activities and Cases 406
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 410
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 411
Communication Workshop: Career Skills (Network 
Your Way to a Job in the Hidden Market) 412
Chapter 14: Interviewing and 
Following Up 414
Types of Employment Interviews 415
Before the Interview 416
During the Interview 421
After the Interview 429
Other Employment Documents 432
Summing Up and Looking Forward 435
Critical Thinking 435
Chapter Review 435
Activities and Cases 437
Unit 6: Employment Communication 371

xx 
Contents
Appendixes A-1
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats A-1
Appendix B: Correction Symbols and Proofreading 
Marks A-12
Appendix C: Documentation Formats A-15
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook GM-1
Key to Grammar/Mechanics Checkups K-1
Endnotes N-1
Acknowledgments ACK-1
Index I-1
Video Resource:
Building Workplace Skills: Sharpening Your Interview Skills 440
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 440
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 442
Communication Workshop: Career Skills (Let’s Talk 
Money: Negotiating a Salary) 443

 
xxi
Dr. Mary Ellen Guffey
A dedicated professional, Mary Ellen Guffey has taught business communication 
and business English topics for over thirty years. She received a bachelor’s degree, 
summa cum laude, from Bowling Green State University; a master’s degree from the 
University of Illinois, and a doctorate in business and economic education from the 
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). She has taught at the University of 
Illinois, Santa Monica College, and Los Angeles Pierce College.
Now recognized as the world’s leading business communication author, Dr. 
Guffey corresponds with instructors around the globe who are using her books. She 
is the author of the award-winning Business Communication: Process and Product,
the leading business communication textbook in this country and abroad. She has 
also written Business English, which serves more students than any other book in 
its field; Essentials of College English (with Carolyn M. Seefer), and Essentials of 
Business Communication, the leading text/workbook in its market. Dr. Guffey is 
active professionally, serving on the review boards of the Business Communication 
Quarterly and The Journal of Business Communication, participating in all national 
Association for Business Communication meetings, and sponsoring business com-
munication awards.
A teacher’s teacher and leader in the field, Dr. Guffey acts as a partner and 
mentor to hundreds of business communication instructors nationally and interna-
tionally. Her workshops, seminars, teleconferences, newsletters, articles, teaching 
materials, and Web sites help novice and veteran business communication instruc-
tors achieve effective results in their courses.
Dr. Dana Loewy
New to this edition, Dana Loewy brings extensive international expertise, broad 
business communication teaching experience, and exceptional writing skills. Born 
in former Czechoslovakia and raised in Germany, Dana Loewy earned a magister 
artium (M.A.) degree in English, linguistics, and communication from Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, where she also studied Slavic languages and 
literatures and took business administration courses. Before receiving a master’s 
degree and PhD from the University of Southern California, Dr. Loewy gained con-
siderable teaching experience in freshman writing at USC. She also taught English—
composition, reading, and grammar—at local two-year colleges. 
A longtime professional translator, writer, and consultant, Dr. Loewy has pub-
lished several books, articles, and translations, both poetry and prose. For the last 
13 years, she has been teaching business communication at the largest business col-
lege on the West Coast, California State University, Fullerton. Dr. Loewy is excited 
to join Dr. Guffey, whom she considers a mentor and leader in the discipline. 
About the Authors

Acknowledgments
I gratefully acknowledge the following reviewers whose excellent advice and 
constructive suggestions helped shape the Eighth Edition of Essentials of Business 
Communication:
Mary Y. Bowers
Northern Arizona University
Maryann Egan Longhi
Dutchess Community College
JoAnn Foth
Milwaukee Area Technical College
Gail Garton
Ozarks Technical Community College
Bonnie Jeffers
Mt. San Antonio College
Pamela R. Johnson 
California State University, Chico
Rose Marie Kuceyeski
Owens Community College
Ruth E. Levy
Westchester Community College
Paula Marchese
State University of New York College at Brockport
For their contributions to previous editions, I warmly thank the following 
professionals:
Faridah Awang
Eastern Kentucky University
Joyce M. Barnes
Texas A & M University—Corpus Christi
Patricia Beagle
Bryant & Stratton Business Institute
Nancy C. Bell
Wayne Community College
Ray D. Bernardi
Morehead State University
Karen Bounds
Boise State University
Jean Bush-Bacelis
Eastern Michigan University
Cheryl S. Byrne
Washtenaw Community College
Steven V. Cates
Averett University
Lise H. Diez-Arguelles
Florida State University
Dee Anne Dill
Dekalb Technical Institute
Jeanette Dostourian
Cypress College
Nancy J. Dubino
Greenfield Community College
Cecile Earle
Heald College
Valerie Evans
Cuesta College
Bartlett J. Finney
Park University
Christine Foster
Grand Rapids Community College
Pat Fountain
Coastal Carolina Community College
Marlene Friederich
New Mexico State University—Carlsbad
Nanette Clinch Gilson
San Jose State University
Robert Goldberg
Prince George’s Community College
Margaret E. Gorman
Cayuga Community College
Judith Graham
Holyoke Community College
Bruce E. Guttman
Katharine Gibbs School, Melville, New York
Tracey M. Harrison
Mississippi College
Debra Hawhee
University of Illinois
xxii

L. P. Helstrom
Rochester Community College
Jack Hensen
Morehead State University
Rovena L. Hillsman
California State University, Sacramento
Karen A. Holtkamp
Xavier University
Michael Hricik
Westmoreland County Community College
Sandie Idziak
University of Texas, Arlington
Karin Jacobson
University of Montana
Edna Jellesed
Lane Community College
Edwina Jordan
Illinois Central College
Sheryl E. C. Joshua
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
Diana K. Kanoy
Central Florida Community College
Ron Kapper
College of DuPage
Lydia Keuser
San Jose City College
Linda Kissler
Westmoreland County Community College
Deborah Kitchin
City College of San Francisco
Frances Kranz
Oakland University
Keith Kroll
Kalamazoo Valley Community College
Richard B. Larsen
Francis Marion University
Mary E. Leslie
Grossmont College
Nedra Lowe
Marshall University
Elaine Lux
Nyack College
Margarita Maestas-Flores
Evergreen Valley College
Jane Mangrum
Miami-Dade Community College
Maria Manninen
Delta College
Tim March
Kaskaskia College
Paula Marchese
SUNY College at Brockport
Kenneth R. Mayer
Cleveland State University
Karen McFarland
Salt Lake Community College
Bonnie Miller
Los Medanos College
Mary C. Miller
Ashland University
Willie Minor
Phoenix College
Nancy Moody
Sinclair Community College
Nancy Mulder
Grand Rapids Junior College
Paul W. Murphey
Southwest Wisconsin Technical College
Jackie Ohlson
University of Alaska—Anchorage
Richard D. Parker
Western Kentucky University
Martha Payne
Grayson County College
Catherine Peck
Chippewa Valley Technical College
Carol Pemberton
Normandale Community College
Carl Perrin
Casco Bay College
Jan Peterson
Anoka-Hennepin Technical College
Kay D. Powell
Abraham Baldwin College
Jeanette Purdy
Mercer County College
Carolyn A. Quantrille
Spokane Falls Community College
Susan Randles
Vatterott College
Diana Reep
University of Akron
Ruth D. Richardson
University of North Alabama
Carlita Robertson
Northern Oklahoma College
Acknowledgments 
xxiii 

xxiv 
Acknowledgments
Vilera Rood
Concordia College
Rich Rudolph
Drexel University
Joanne Salas
Olympic College
Rose Ann Scala
Data Institute School of Business
Joseph Schaffner
SUNY College of Technology, Alfred
Susan C. Schanne
Eastern Michigan University
James Calvert Scott
Utah State University
Laurie Shapero
Miami-Dade Community College
Lance Shaw
Blake Business School
Cinda Skelton
Central Texas College
Estelle Slootmaker
Aquinas College
Clara Smith
North Seattle Community College
Nicholas Spina
Central Connecticut State University
Marilyn St. Clair
Weatherford College
Judy Sunayama
Los Medanos College
Dana H. Swensen
Utah State University
James A. Swindling
Eastfield College
David A. Tajerstein
SYRIT College
Marilyn Theissman
Rochester Community College
Lois A. Wagner
Southwest Wisconsin Technical College
Linda Weavil
Elan College
William Wells
Lima Technical College
Gerard Weykamp
Grand Rapids Community College
Beverly Wickersham
Central Texas College
Leopold Wilkins
Anson Community College
Charlotte Williams
Jones County Junior College
Almeda Wilmarth
State University of New York—Delhi
Barbara Young
Skyline College
In addition to honoring these friends and colleagues, I extend my warmest thanks 
to the many skillful professionals at Cengage Learning/South-Western including 
president Jonathan Hulbert; vice president of editorial business, Jack Calhoun; editor 
in chief, Melissa Acuña; acquisitions editor, Erin Joyner; marketing manager, Mike 
Aliscad; senior content project manager, Tamborah Moore; senior art director, Stacy 
Shirley, and media editor, John Rich. Special gratitude goes to my unsurpassed devel-
opmental editor and friend, Mary Draper for her remarkable insights, unflappable 
manner, professional support, steady guidance, and always sunny disposition.
For their outstanding work in developing testing and quiz materials, I thank 
Carolyn Seefer, Diablo Valley College; Catherine Peck and Jane Flesher, Chippewa 
Valley Technical College; and John Donnellan, University of Texas. For the exciting 
PowerPoint program, I am indebted to Corinne Livesay, Bryan College, and Dana 
Loewy, California State University, Fullerton. In recognition of excellent editing, 
I commend Malvine Litten and her staff at LEAP Publishing Services Inc. I am 
especially grateful to Dr. Dana Loewy, my coauthor, who brings to this edition a 
remarkable combination of teaching, international, and writing expertise.
Finally, I express deep gratitude to my husband, Dr. George R. Guffey, professor 
emeritus of English, University of California, Los Angeles, for his continuing techni-
cal and editorial advice, and, most of all, for his love, strength, and wisdom.
Mary Ellen Guffey

Chapter 1
Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
Communicating in Today’s Workplace
1
U N I T  1
© IMaGe soUrce

2 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
© IsTocKPHoTo.coM / JÁnos GeHrInG
OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Understand the importance of education and especially the value of communication 
skills in relation to your income and success in today’s changing workplace.
• Clarify the process of communication.
• Discuss techniques for becoming an effective listener.
• Analyze nonverbal communication and explain techniques for improving 
nonverbal communication skills.
• Explain how culture affects communication and describe methods to improve 
intercultural communication.
• Identify specific techniques that improve effective communication among diverse 
workplace audiences.
Communication Skills: Your Ticket to 
Work or Your Ticket Out the Door
Whether you are already working or are about to enter today’s workplace, one of 
the fastest ways to ensure your career success is to develop excellent communica-
tion skills. Today’s workplace revolves around communication. How good are your 
skills? If your communication skills are top notch, they can be your ticket to work. 
If not, they can be your ticket out the door. This textbook and this course can 
immediately help you improve your communication skills. Because the skills you 
are learning will make a huge difference in your ability to find a job and to be pro-
moted, this will be one of the most important courses in your entire college career.
The Importance of Communication 
Skills to Your Career
Surveys of employers consistently show that communication skills are critical to 
effective job placement, performance, career advancement, and organizational 
success.1 In making hiring decisions, employers often rank communication skills 
among the most requested competencies. Many job advertisements specifically ask 
for excellent oral and written communication skills. In a poll of recruiters, oral and 
Career Success 
Begins With 
Communication 
Skills
1
C H A P T E R  1
Communication skills 
are critical to your job 
placement, performance, 
career advancement, and 
organizational success.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
3 
written communication skills were by a large margin the top skill set sought.2 In 
another poll, executives were asked what they looked for in a job candidate. The 
top choices were teamwork skills, critical thinking, analytical reasoning skills, and 
oral and written communication skills.3
When we discuss communication skills, we generally mean reading, listening, 
nonverbal, speaking, and writing skills. In this book we focus on listening, non-
verbal, speaking, and writing skills. We devote special attention to writing skills 
because they are difficult to develop and increasingly significant.
Why Are Writing Skills Increasingly Important?
Writing skills are particularly important on the job today because people are writ-
ing more than ever before. Technology enables us to transmit messages faster, far-
ther, and more easily than in the past. You will probably be writing many e-mail 
messages, such as that shown in Figure 1.1. In fact, e-mail is “today’s version of 
the business letter or interoffice memo.”4 Because electronic mail has become the 
primary channel of communication in today’s workplace, business e-mail messages 
must be clear, concise, and professional. Notice that the message in Figure 1.1 is 
more businesslike and more professional than the quick e-mail messages you might 
send to friends. Learning to write professional e-mail messages will be an important 
part of this course.
Writing skills are also increasingly significant today because many people work 
together but are not physically together. They stay connected through spoken and 
written messages. Writing skills, which were always a career advantage, are now a 
necessity.5 A survey of American corporations revealed that two thirds of salaried 
employees have some writing responsibility. About one third of them, however, do 
not meet the writing requirements for their positions.6
“Businesses are crying out—they need to have people who write better,” said 
Gaston Caperton, business executive and College Board president.7 The ability to 
write opens doors to professional employment. People who cannot write and com-
municate clearly will not be hired. If already working, they are unlikely to last long 
enough to be considered for promotion. Writing is a marker of high-skill, high-wage, 
professional work, according to Bob Kerrey, president of New School University in 
New York and chair of the National Commission on Writing. If you can’t express 
yourself clearly, he says, you limit your opportunities for many positions.8
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
Today’s graduates are light-years ahead when it 
comes to computer know-how. However, the long 
hours they spend instant messaging and “twittering” 
could be hampering important career skills. nearly 
two thirds of employers say that college students 
are not prepared to work in the global economy, 
and communication is the skill that professionals find 
most lacking among new recruits. Tech-savvy youth 
are certainly expert at sending cryptic text messages 
at rapid-fire speed; however, analysts spot a 
correlation between prolonged use of electronic 
communication and the erosion of solid writing and 
speaking abilities. What specific communication 
skills are essential for career success?
© JacK HollInGsWorTH / PHoTodIsc / GeTTy IMaGes
Note: Small superscript 
numbers in the text 
announce information 
sources. Full citations 
begin on page N-1 near 
the end of the book. This 
edition uses a modiﬁ ed 
American Psychological 
Association (APA) format.
Advancements in technology 
mean that writing skills 
are increasingly important 
because more messages 
are being transmitted.

4 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
The founder of a New York 
public relations firm was 
shocked at how many college 
graduates failed the writing 
test he gives job applicants. 
He said, “We don’t have the 
time to teach basic writing 
skills here.”
Note: Sources for “Ofﬁ ce Insider” 
are located in the Acknowledgments 
at the end of the book.
FIGURE 1.1 Businesslike, Professional E-Mail Message
Because e-mail messages are rapidly replacing business letters and interoffice memos, they must be written carefully, provide complete 
information, and sound businesslike and professional. Notice that this message is more formal in tone than e-mail messages you might 
send to friends.
You may be thinking that jobs in technical fields do not require communica-
tion skills. For example, communication has traditionally NOT been a neces-
sary skill for finance and accounting professionals. However, times are chang-
ing. A recent poll of 1,400 chief financial officers sponsored by Accountemps 
revealed that 75 percent said that verbal, written, and interpersonal skills are 
more important today than they were in the past.9 Even technical specialists 
must be able to communicate with others and explain their work clearly. A sur-
vey of Web professionals showed that those with writing and copyediting skills 
were far less likely to have their jobs sent offshore.10 Another survey conducted 
by the Society for Information Management revealed that network professionals 
ranked written and oral communication skills among the top five most desired 
skills for new-hires.11
Professionalism Counts With Employers
In addition to expecting employees to write clearly, businesses expect employees to 
act in a businesslike and professional manner on the job. One employer was sur-
prised that many of her new-hires had no idea that excessive absenteeism or tardiness 

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
5 
was grounds for termination. The new employees also didn’t seem to know that they 
were expected to devote their full energy to duties when on the job. One young man 
wanted to read Harry Potter novels when things got slow.12
Projecting and maintaining a professional image can make a real difference 
in helping you obtain the job of your dreams. Once you get that job, you are 
more likely to be taken seriously and promoted if you look and sound pro-
fessional. New-hires can sabotage their careers when they carry poor college 
habits into the business world. Banish the flip-flops, sloppy clothes, and IM 
abbreviations. Think twice about sprinkling your conversation with like, you 
know, and uptalk (making declarative sentences sound like questions). You 
don’t want to send the wrong message with unwitting and unprofessional 
behavior. Figure 1.2 reviews areas you will want to check to be sure you are 
projecting professionalism. 
How Does Your Education Affect Your Income?
Because the U.S. economy is increasingly knowledge based, education is extremely 
important. Two thirds of all new jobs require some kind of postsecondary educa-
tion. The more education you have, the more you can expect to earn and the less 
likely you will be unemployed, as shown in Figure 1.3. Notice that graduates with 
bachelor’s degrees can expect to earn nearly three times as much as high school 
dropouts.
Writing is one aspect of education that is particularly well rewarded. A Fortune
magazine article reported this finding: “Among people with a two- or four-year 
Looking and sounding 
professional gains you 
credibility on the job.
FIGURE 1.2 Projecting Professionalism When You Communicate
Unprofessional
Professional
Speech habits
speaking in uptalk, a singsong speech 
pattern that has a rising inflection making 
sentences sound like questions, using like  
to fill in mindless chatter, substituting go for 
said, relying on slang, or letting profanity 
slip into your conversation.
recognizing that your credibility can 
be seriously damaged by sounding 
uneducated, crude, or adolescent.
E-mail
Writing messages with incomplete 
sentences, misspelled words, exclamation 
points, IM slang, and senseless chatting. 
sloppy, careless messages send a 
nonverbal message that you don’t care, 
don’t know, or aren’t smart enough to know 
what is correct.
Including subjects, verbs, and 
punctuation marks. employers don’t 
recognize IM abbreviations. call it crazy, 
but they value conciseness and correct 
spelling, even in brief e-mail messages.
Internet
Using an e-mail address such as hotbabe@
hotmail.com, supasnugglykitty.@yahoo.com, 
or buffedguy@aol.com.
an e-mail address should include your 
name or a relevant, positive, businesslike 
expression. It should not sound cute or 
like a chat room nickname.
Voice mail
an outgoing message with strident 
background music, weird sounds, or a joke 
message.
an outgoing message that states your 
name or phone number and provides 
instructions for leaving a message.
Telephone
soap operas, thunderous music, or a 
TV football game playing noisily in the 
background when you answer the phone.
a quiet background when you answer the 
telephone, especially if you are expecting 
a prospective employer’s call.
Cell and smart phones
Taking or placing calls during business 
meetings or during conversations with 
fellow employees; raising your voice (cell 
yell) or engaging in cell calls when others 
must reluctantly overhear; using a Pda 
during meetings.
Turning off phone and message 
notification, both audible and vibrate, 
during meetings; using your cell only 
when conversations can be private.
Those with four-year 
degrees will earn nearly 
three times as much as 
high school dropouts.

6 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
 college degree, those in the highest 20 percent in writing ability earn, on aver-
age, more than three times what those with the worst writing skills make.”13 One 
corporate president explained that many people climbing the corporate ladder are 
good. When he faced a hard choice between candidates, he used writing ability as 
the deciding factor. He said that sometimes writing is the only skill that separates a 
candidate from the competition.
Using This Book to Build Your 
Career Communication Skills
This book focuses on developing basic writing skills. You will also learn to improve 
your listening, nonverbal, and speaking skills. The abilities to read, listen, speak, 
and write effectively, of course, are not inborn. When it comes to communication, 
it is more nurture than nature. Good communicators are not born; they are made. 
Thriving in the dynamic and demanding new world of work will depend on many 
factors, some of which you cannot control. One factor that you DO control, how-
ever, is how well you communicate.
The goal of this book is to teach you basic business communication skills. These 
include learning how to write an e-mail, letter, or report and how to make a pre-
sentation. Anyone can learn these skills with the help of instructional materials 
and good model documents, all of which you will find in this book. You also need 
practice—with meaningful feedback. You need someone such as your instructor to 
tell you how to modify your responses so that you can improve.
We have designed this book, its supplements, and a new companion Web site at 
www.meguffey.com to provide you and your instructor with everything necessary 
to make you a successful business communicator in today’s dynamic but demanding 
workplace. Given the increasing emphasis on communication, many businesses are 
paying large amounts to communication coaches and trainers to teach employees 
the very skills that you are learning in this course. Your instructor is your coach. So, 
get your money’s worth! Pick your instructor’s brains.
To get started, this first chapter presents an overview. You will take a quick look 
at the changing workplace, the communication process, listening, nonverbal com-
munication, culture and communication, and workplace diversity. The remainder of 
the book is devoted to developing specific writing and speaking skills.
Succeeding in the Changing World of Work
The world of work is changing dramatically. The kind of work you will do, the 
tools you will use, the form of management you will work under, the environment 
in which you will be employed, the people with whom you will interact—all are 
undergoing a pronounced transformation. Many of the changes in this dynamic 
workplace revolve around processing and communicating information. As a result, 
the most successful players in this new world of work will be those with highly 
developed communication skills. The following business trends illustrate the impor-
tance of excellent communication skills:
Because communication 
skills are learned, 
you control how well 
you communicate.
Developing career-boosting 
communication skills 
requires instruction, 
practice, and feedback 
from a specialist.
Trends in the new world 
of work emphasize 
the importance of 
communication skills.
Education
Weekly Salary
Unemployment Rate
High school dropout
$ 522
7.1%
High school diploma
 
704
4.4%
associate’s degree
 
846
3.5%
Bachelor’s degree or higher
 1,393
2.1%
source:  e. l. chao (2007, september 3). Knowledge fuels U.s. work force. santa Barbara news-Press, p. a9. 
FIGURE 1.3 Income and Unemployment in Relation to Education

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
7 
• Flattened management hierarchies. To better compete and to reduce expenses, 
businesses have for years been trimming layers of management. This means that 
as a frontline employee, you will have fewer managers. You will be making 
decisions and communicating them to customers, to fellow employees, and to 
executives.
• More participatory management. Gone are the days of command-and-control 
management. Now, even new employees like you will be expected to understand 
and contribute to the big picture. Improving productivity and profitability will 
be everyone’s job, not just management’s.
• Increased emphasis on self-directed work groups and virtual teams. Businesses 
today are often run by cross-functional teams of peers. You can expect to work 
with a team in gathering information, finding and sharing solutions, implement-
ing decisions, and managing conflict. You may even become part of a virtual 
team whose members are in remote locations and who communicate almost 
exclusively electronically. Good communication skills are extremely important 
in working together successfully in all team environments, especially if members 
do not meet face-to-face.
• Heightened global competition. Because American companies are moving 
beyond local markets, you may be interacting with people from many cultures. 
As a successful business communicator, you will want to learn about other cul-
tures. You will also need to develop intercultural skills including sensitivity, flex-
ibility, patience, and tolerance.
• Innovative communication technologies. E-mail, fax, instant messaging, text 
messaging, the Web, company intranets, audio- and videoconferencing, wikis, 
voice recognition—all these innovative technologies are reshaping the way we 
communicate at work, as illustrated in Figure 1.4. You can expect to be com-
municating more often and more rapidly than ever before. Your writing and 
speaking skills will be showcased as never before.
• New work environments. Mobile technologies and the desire for a better bal-
ance between work and family have resulted in flexible working arrangements. 
You may become part of an increasing number of workers who are telecom-
muters or virtual team members. Working as a telecommuter or virtual team 
member requires even more communication, because staying connected with 
the office or with one another means exchanging many messages. Another 
work environment trend is the movement toward open offices divided into 
small work cubicles. Working in cubicles requires new rules of office etiquette 
and civility.
• Focus on information and knowledge as corporate assets. Corporate America 
is increasingly aware that information is the key to better products and increased 
profitability. You will be expected to gather, sort, store, and disseminate data in 
a timely and accurate fashion. This is the new way of business life.
Understanding the Communication Process
As you can see, you can expect to be communicating more rapidly, more often, and 
with greater numbers of people than ever before. The most successful players in 
this new world of work will be those with highly developed communication skills. 
Because good communication skills are essential to your success, we need to take a 
closer look at the communication process.
Just what is communication? For our purposes communication is “the trans-
mission of information and meaning from one individual or group to another.” 
The crucial element in this definition is meaning. Communication has as its central 
objective the transmission of meaning. The process of communication is successful 
only when the receiver understands an idea as the sender intended it. This process 
generally involves five steps, discussed here and shown in Figure 1.5 on page 10.
Today’s employees must 
contribute to improving 
productivity and proﬁ tability.
Increasing global 
competition and 
revolutionary technologies 
demand intercultural 
communication skills.
Communication is 
the transmission of 
information and meaning 
from one individual or 
group to another.

Company Intranets
To share insider
information, many
companies provide their
own protected Web sites
called intranets. An intranet
may handle company
e-mail, announcements, an
employee directory,
a policy handbook, frequently asked questions, personnel
forms and data, employee discussion forums, shared
documents, and other employee information.
Voice Recognition
Computers equipped with voice recognition software enable users to dictate up
to 160 words a minute with accurate transcription. Voice recognition is particularly
helpful to disabled workers and to professionals with heavy dictation loads, such as
physicians and attorneys. Users can create
documents, enter data, compose and send
e-mails, browse the Web, and control the
desktop—all by voice.
Open Oﬃces
Widespread use of laptop computers,
wireless technology, and VoIP have led to
more ﬂuid, ﬂexible, and open workspaces.
Smaller computers and ﬂat-screen monitors
enable designers to save space with
boomerang-shaped workstations and
cockpit-style work surfaces rather than
space-hogging corner work areas. Smaller
breakout areas for impromptu meetings are
taking over some cubicle space, and digital
databases are replacing ﬁle cabinets.
Telephony: VoIP
Savvy businesses are switching from traditional phone
service to voice over internet protocol (VoIP). This technology allows callers to
communicate using a broadband Internet connection, thus eliminating long-
distance and local telephone charges. Higher-end VoIP systems now support
uniﬁed voice mail, e-mail, click-to-call capabilities, and softphones (phones using
computer networking). Free or low-cost Internet telephony sites, such as the
 popular Skype, are also increasingly used by businesses.
Today's workplace is changing dramatically as a result of innovative software, superfast wireless networks, 
and numerous technologies that allow workers to share information, work from remote locations, and be 
more productive in or away from the oﬃce. We are seeing a gradual progression from basic capabilities, 
such as e-mail, instant messaging, and calendaring, to deeper functionality, such as remote database 
access, multifunctional devices, and Web-based collaborative applications. Becoming familiar with 
modern oﬃce and collaboration technologies can help you be successful in today's digital workplace. 
Electronic Presentations
Business presentations in PowerPoint can be projected from a laptop or PDA or posted
online. Sophisticated presentations may include animations, sound eﬀects, digital
photos, video clips, or hyperlinks to Internet sites. In some industries, PowerPoint slides
(“decks”) are replacing or supplementing traditional hard-copy reports.
T
a
s
a
Open Oﬃces
Communication Technologies: Reshaping the World of Work
Multifunctional Printers
Stand-alone copiers, fax machines, scanners, and
printers have been replaced with multifunctional
devices. Oﬃces are transitioning from a “print
and distribute” environment to a “distribute and
print” environment. Security measures include
pass codes and even biometric thumbprint
scanning to make sure data streams are not
captured, interrupted, or edited.
d
e
d
RESHAPING- © CREATAS / PHOTOLIBRARY GROUP / INDEX STOCK IMAGERY; TELEPHONY- © JOCHEN TACK / ALAMY; OPEN OFFICES- ©  ABLESTOCK / DYNAMIC GRAPHICS / JUPITERIMAGES; MULTIFUNCTIONAL PRINTER- © APPLY PICTURES / ALAMY;
HANDHELD WIRELESS- © UPI / LANDOV; COMPANY INTRANET- © TERRI MILLER / E-VISUAL COMMUNICATIONS, INC.; VOICE RECOGNITION- © TOSHIFUMI KITAMURA / AFP / GETTY IMAGES; ELECTRONIC PRESENTATION- © IMAGE SOURCE / ALAMY
Handheld Wireless Devices
A new generation of lightweight, handheld 
smartphones provide phone, e-mail, Web browsing, 
and calendar options anywhere there is a wireless 
network. Devices such as the BlackBerry, the iPhone, 
and the Palm Treo now allow you to tap into corporate 
databases and intranets from remote locations. You 
can check customers' ﬁles, complete orders, and send 
out receipts without returning to the oﬃce. 
d
,
s
,
e
u
d
FIGURE 1.4 Communication and Collaborative Technologies
8 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills

Video Phones
Using advanced video compression
technology, video phones transmit
real-time audio and video so that
communicators can see each other
as they collaborate. With a video
phone, people can videoconference
anywhere in the world over a
broadband IP (Internet Protocol)
connection without a computer or a
television screen.
Videoconferencing
Videoconferencing allows participants
to meet in special conference
rooms equipped with cameras
and television screens. Groups see
each other and interact in real time
although they may be continents
apart. Faster computers, rapid Internet
connections, and better cameras now
enable 2 to 200 participants to sit at
their own PCs and share applications,
spreadsheets, presentations, and
photos.
Web Conferencing
With services such as GoToMeeting, WebEx, Microsoft LiveMeeting, or the free Skype, all
you need are a PC and an Internet connection to hold a meeting (webinar) with customers
or colleagues in real time. Although the functions
are constantly evolving, Web conferencing
currently incorporates screen sharing, chats,
slide presentations, text messaging, and
application sharing.
Voice Conferencing
Telephone “bridges” allow two or more
callers from any location to share the
same call. Voice conferencing (also called
audioconferencing, teleconferencing,
or just plain conference calling) enables
people to collaborate by telephone.
Communicators at both ends use
enhanced speakerphones to talk and be
heard simultaneously.
Blogs, Podcasts, and Wikis
Global competition, expanding markets, and the ever-increasing pace of business accelerate the
development of exciting collaboration tools. New tools make it possible to work together without
being together. Your colleagues may be down the hall, across the country, or around the world. With
today’s tools, you can exchange ideas, solve problems, develop products, forecast future performance,
and complete team projects any time of the day or night and anywhere in the world. Blogs and wikis,
part of the so-called Web 2.0 era, are social tools that create multidirectional conversations among
customers and employees. Web 2.0 moves Web applications from “read only” to “read-write,” thus
enabling greater participation and collaboration.
Presence Technology
Presence technology makes it possible to
locate and identify a computing device
as soon as users connect to the network.
This technology is an integral part of
communication devices including cell
phones, laptop computers, PDAs, pagers,
and GPS devices. Collaboration is possible
wherever and whenever users are online.
o
a
c
s
a
Videoconferencing
Collaboration Technologies: Rethinking the Way We Work Together
RETHINKING THE WAY- © GEORGE DOYLE / STOCKBYTE SILVER / GETTY IMAGES; BLOGS- GENERAL MOTORS CORP. USED WITH PERMISSION, GM MEDIA ARCHIVES; VOICE CONFERENCING- © BANANASTOCK / ALAMY; WEB CONFERENCING- © JIM CRAIGMYLE / CORBIS; 
VIDEO CONFERENCING- © TRIANGLE IMAGES / DIGITAL VISION / GETTY IMAGES; VIDEO PHONES- © THIERRY DOSOGNE / PHOTOGRAPHER'S CHOICE / GETTY IMAGES; PRESENCE TECHNOLOGY- © ERIK VON WEBER / DIGITAL VISION / GETTY IMAGES
A blog is a Web site with journal entries 
usually written by one person and 
comments by others. Businesses use 
blogs to keep customers and employees 
informed and to receive feedback. Company developments can be posted, updated, and categorized 
for easy cross-referencing. Podcasts are usually short audio or video clips that users can either watch on 
a company Web site or download and view or listen to on their computers or MP3 players on the go. 
A wiki is a Web site that allows multiple users to collaboratively create and edit pages. Information gets 
lost in e-mails, but blogs and wikis provide an easy way to communicate and keep track of what is said. 
RSS (really simple syndication) feeds allow businesspeople and customers to receive updates automati-
cally whenever podcasts, news stories, or blog entries become available on their favorite Web sites. 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
9 

10 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
 1. Sender has an idea. The form of the idea may be influenced by the sender’s 
mood, frame of reference, background, culture, and physical makeup, as well 
as the context of the situation.
 2. Sender encodes the idea in a message. Encoding means converting the idea 
into words or gestures that will convey meaning. A major problem in communi-
cating any message verbally is that words have different meanings for different 
people. That’s why skilled communicators try to choose familiar words with 
concrete meanings on which both senders and receivers agree.
 3. Message travels over a channel. The medium over which the message is trans-
mitted is the channel. Messages may be sent by computer, telephone, letter, or 
memorandum. They may also be sent by means of a report, announcement, 
picture, spoken word, fax, or other channel. Because both verbal and nonverbal 
messages are carried, senders must choose channels carefully. Anything that 
disrupts the transmission of a message in the communication process is called 
noise. Channel noise ranges from static that disrupts a telephone conversation 
to spelling errors in an e-mail message. Such errors damage the credibility of the 
sender.
 4. Receiver decodes message. The person for whom a message is intended is the 
receiver. Translating the message from its symbol form into meaning involves 
decoding. Successful communication takes place only when a receiver under-
stands the meaning intended by the sender. Such success is often hard to achieve 
because no two people share the same background. Success is further limited 
because barriers and noise may disrupt the process.
 5. Feedback travels to sender. The verbal and nonverbal responses of the receiver 
create feedback, a vital part of the entire communication process. Feedback 
helps the sender know that the message was received and understood. Senders 
can encourage feedback by asking questions such as, “Am I making myself 
clear?” and, “Is there anything you don’t understand?” Senders can further 
FIGURE 1.5 The Communication Process
Sender
has
idea
Sender
encodes
idea in
message
Message
travels
over
channel
Receiver
decodes
message
1
2
3
4
Possible
additional
feedback
to receiver
6
5
Feedback
travels
to sender
noise
n
noise
no s
noise
no s
noise
no s
The communication 
process has ﬁ ve steps: 
idea formation, message 
encoding, message 
transmission, message 
decoding, and feedback.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
11
improve feedback by delivering the message at a time when receivers can 
respond. Senders should provide only as much information as a receiver can 
handle. Receivers can improve the process by paraphrasing the sender’s mes-
sage. They might say, “Let me try to explain that in my own words,” or, “My 
understanding of your comment is . . .”
Improving Listening Skills
An important part of the communication process is listening. By all accounts, how-
ever, most of us are not very good listeners. Do you ever pretend to be listening 
when you are not? Do you know how to look attentive in class when your mind 
wanders far away? How about “tuning out” people when their ideas are boring or 
complex? Do you find it hard to focus on ideas when a speaker’s clothing or man-
nerisms are unusual?
You probably answered yes to one or more of these questions because many of 
us have developed poor listening habits. In fact, some researchers suggest that we 
listen at only 25 percent efficiency. Such poor listening habits are costly in business. 
Messages must be rewritten, shipments reshipped, appointments rescheduled, con-
tracts renegotiated, and directions restated.
To improve listening skills, we must first recognize barriers that prevent effective 
listening. Then we need to focus on specific techniques that are effective in improv-
ing listening skills.
Barriers to Effective Listening 
As you learned earlier, barriers and noise can interfere with the communication 
process. Have any of the following barriers and distractions prevented you from 
hearing what has been said?
• Physical barriers. You cannot listen if you cannot hear what is being said. Physical 
impediments include hearing disabilities, poor acoustics, and noisy surroundings. It 
is also difficult to listen if you are ill, tired, uncomfortable, or worried.
• Psychological barriers. Everyone brings to the communication process a unique 
set of cultural, ethical, and personal values. Each of us has an idea of what is right 
and what is important. If other ideas run counter to our preconceived thoughts, we 
tend to “tune out” the speaker and thus fail to receive them.
• Language problems. Unfamiliar words can destroy the communication pro-
cess because they lack meaning for the receiver. In addition, emotion-laden or 
“charged” words can adversely affect listening. If the mention of words such as 
abortion or overdose has an intense emotional impact, a listener may be unable 
to think about the words that follow.
• Nonverbal distractions. Many of us find it hard to listen if a speaker is differ-
ent from what we view as normal. Unusual clothing, speech mannerisms, body 
twitches, or a radical hairstyle can cause enough distraction to prevent us from 
hearing what the speaker has to say.
• Thought speed. Because we can process thoughts at least three times faster than 
speakers can say them, we can become bored and allow our minds to wander.
• Faking attention. Most of us have learned to look as if we are listening even 
when we are not. Such behavior was perhaps necessary as part of our socializa-
tion. Faked attention, however, seriously threatens effective listening because it 
encourages the mind to engage in flights of unchecked fancy. Those who practice 
faked attention often find it hard to concentrate even when they want to.
• Grandstanding. Would you rather talk or listen? Naturally, most of us would 
rather talk. Because our own experiences and thoughts are most important to 
us, we grab the limelight in conversations. We sometimes fail to listen carefully 
because we are just waiting politely for the next pause so that we can have our 
turn to speak.
Most individuals listen at 
only 25 percent efﬁ ciency.
Barriers to listening may 
be physical, psychological, 
verbal, or nonverbal.
Most North Americans speak 
at about 125 words per 
minute. The human brain 
can process information at 
least three times as fast.

12 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
Keys to Building Powerful Listening Skills
You can reverse the harmful effects of poor habits by making a conscious effort to 
become an active listener. This means becoming involved. You can’t sit back and 
hear whatever a lazy mind happens to receive. The following keys will help you 
become an active and effective listener:
• Stop talking. The first step to becoming a good listener is to stop talking. Let 
others explain their views. Learn to concentrate on what the speaker is saying, 
not on what your next comment will be.
• Control your surroundings. Whenever possible, remove competing sounds. Close 
windows or doors, turn off TVs and iPods, and move away from loud people, 
noisy appliances, or engines. Choose a quiet time and place for listening.
• Establish a receptive mind-set. Expect to learn something by listening. Strive 
for a positive and receptive frame of mind. If the message is complex, think of 
it as mental gymnastics. It is hard work but good exercise to stretch and expand 
the limits of your mind.
• Keep an open mind. We all sift and filter information through our own biases 
and values. For improved listening, discipline yourself to listen objectively. Be fair 
to the speaker. Hear what is really being said, not what you want to hear.
• Listen for main points. Heighten your concentration and satisfaction by looking 
for the speaker’s central themes. Congratulate yourself when you find them!
• Capitalize on lag time. Make use of the quickness of your mind 
by reviewing the speaker’s points. Anticipate what is coming 
next. Evaluate evidence the speaker has presented. Don’t allow 
yourself to daydream. Try to guess what the speaker’s next 
point will be.
• Listen between the lines. Focus both on what is spoken and 
what is unspoken. Listen for feelings as well as for facts.
• Judge ideas, not appearances. Concentrate on the content of 
the message, not on its delivery. Avoid being distracted by the 
speaker’s looks, voice, or mannerisms.
• Hold your fire. Force yourself to listen to the speaker’s entire 
argument or message before reacting. Such restraint may enable 
you to understand the speaker’s reasons and logic before you 
jump to false conclusions.
• Take selective notes. In some situations thoughtful notetaking may be neces-
sary to record important facts that must be recalled later. Select only the most 
important points so that the notetaking process does not interfere with your 
concentration on the speaker’s total message.
• Provide feedback. Let the speaker know that you are listening. Nod your head and 
maintain eye contact. Ask relevant questions at appropriate times. Getting involved 
improves the communication process for both the speaker and the listener.
Enhancing Your Nonverbal 
Communication Skills
Understanding messages often involves more than merely listening to spoken words. 
Nonverbal cues, in fact, can speak louder than words. These cues include eye contact, 
facial expression, body movements, space, time, territory, and appearance. All these 
nonverbal cues affect how a message is interpreted, or decoded, by the receiver.
Just what is nonverbal communication? It includes all unwritten and unspoken mes-
sages, whether intended or not. These silent signals have a strong effect on receivers. But 
understanding them is not simple. Does a downward glance indicate modesty? Fatigue? 
Does a constant stare reflect coldness? Dullness? Aggression? Do crossed arms mean 
defensiveness? Withdrawal? Or do crossed arms just mean that a person is shivering?
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Listening is hard work. Unlike 
hearing, it demands total 
concentration. It is an active 
search for meaning, while 
hearing is passive.
“How can I listen to you if you don’t 
say the things I want to hear?”
© Ted GoFF WWW.TedGoFF.coM
Nonverbal communication 
includes all unwritten 
and unspoken messages, 
intended or not.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
13
Messages are even harder to decipher when the verbal codes and nonverbal cues 
do not agree. What will you think if Scott says he is not angry, but he slams the door 
when he leaves? What if Alicia assures the hostess that the meal is excellent, but 
she eats very little? The nonverbal messages in these situations speak more loudly 
than the words.
When verbal and nonverbal messages conflict, receivers put more faith in nonverbal 
cues. In one study speakers sent a positive message but averted their eyes as they spoke. 
Listeners perceived the total message to be negative. Moreover, they thought that averted 
eyes suggested lack of affection, superficiality, lack of trust, and nonreceptivity.14
Successful communicators recognize the power of nonverbal messages. Although 
it is unwise to attach specific meanings to gestures or actions, some cues broadcast by 
body language are helpful in understanding the feelings and attitudes of senders.
How the Eyes, Face, and Body Send Silent Messages
Words seldom tell the whole story. Indeed, some messages are sent with no words 
at all. The eyes, face, and body can convey a world of meaning without a single 
syllable being spoken.
Eye Contact. The eyes have been called the windows to the soul. Even if they 
don’t reveal the soul, the eyes are often the best predictor of a speaker’s true feelings. 
Most of us cannot look another person straight in the eyes and lie. As a result, in 
American culture we tend to believe people who look directly at us. Sustained eye 
contact suggests trust and admiration; brief eye contact signals fear or stress. Good 
eye contact enables the message sender to see whether a receiver is paying attention, 
showing respect, responding favorably, or feeling distress. From the receiver’s view-
point, good eye contact, in North American culture, reveals the speaker’s sincerity, 
confidence, and truthfulness.
Facial Expression. The expression on a person’s face can be almost as 
revealing of emotion as the eyes. Experts estimate that the human face can display 
over 250,000 expressions.15 To hide their feelings, some people can control these 
expressions and maintain “poker faces.” Most of us, however, display our emotions 
openly. Raising or lowering the eyebrows, squinting the eyes, swallowing nervously, 
clenching the jaw, smiling broadly—these voluntary and involuntary facial expres-
sions can add to or entirely replace verbal messages.
Posture and Gestures. A person’s posture can convey anything from high 
status and self-confidence to shyness and submissiveness. Leaning toward a speaker 
suggests attraction and interest; pulling away or shrinking back denotes fear, distrust, 
anxiety, or disgust. Similarly, gestures can communicate entire thoughts via simple 
movements. However, the meanings of some of these movements differ in other cul-
tures. Unless you know local customs, they can get you into trouble. In the United States 
and Canada, for example, forming the thumb and forefinger in a circle means every-
thing is OK. But in Germany and parts of South America, the OK sign is obscene.
When verbal and nonverbal 
messages clash, listeners 
tend to believe the 
nonverbal message.
The eyes are thought to 
be the best predictor of a 
speaker’s true feelings.
Nonverbal messages often 
have different meanings 
in different cultures.
dIlBerT: © scoTT adaMs / dIsT. By 
UnITed FeaTUre syndIcaTe, Inc.
dIlBerT 
By scott adams

14 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
What does your own body language say about you? To take 
stock of the kinds of messages being sent by your body, ask a 
classmate to critique your use of eye contact, facial expression, 
and body movements. Another way to analyze your nonverbal 
style is to videotape yourself making a presentation. Then study 
your performance. This way you can make sure your nonverbal 
cues send the same message as your words.
How Time, Space, and Territory 
Send Silent Messages
In addition to nonverbal messages transmitted by your body, 
three external elements convey information in the communica-
tion process: time, space, and territory.
Time. How we structure and use time tells observers about 
our personalities and attitudes. For example, when Donald 
Trump, multimillionaire real estate developer, gives a visitor a 
prolonged interview, he signals his respect for, interest in, and 
approval of the visitor or the topic to be discussed.
Space. How we order the space around us tells something 
about ourselves and our objectives. Whether the space is a 
bedroom, a dorm room, an office, or a department, people reveal themselves 
in the design and grouping of their furniture. Generally, the more formal the 
arrangement, the more formal and closed the communication style. The way 
office furniture is arranged sends cues about how communication is to take place. 
Former FBI director J. Edgar Hoover used to make his visitors sit at a small table 
below his large, elevated desk. Clearly, he did not want office visitors to feel 
equal to him.16
Territory. Each of us has a certain area that we feel is our own territory, whether 
it is a specific spot or just the space around us. Your father may have a favorite 
chair in which he is most comfortable, a cook might not tolerate intruders in the 
kitchen, and veteran employees may feel that certain work areas and tools belong 
to them. We all maintain zones of privacy in which we feel comfortable. Figure 1.6 
illustrates the four zones of social interaction among Americans, as formulated by 
anthropologist Edward T. Hall.17 Notice that Americans are a bit standoffish; only 
intimate friends and family may stand closer than about 1½   feet. If someone violates 
that territory, Americans feel uncomfortable and defensive and may step back to 
reestablish their space.
“sorry, ridgely, but this area is my personal space.”
© scIencecarToonsPlUs.coM
The distance required for 
comfortable social 
interaction is controlled 
by culture.
FIGURE 1.6 Four Space Zones for Social Interaction
Intimate Zone
(1 to 11/2 feet)
Social Zone
(4 to 12 feet)
Public Zone
(12 or more feet)
Personal Zone
(11/2 to 4 feet)
© arIel sKelley / GeTTy IMaGes; © dynaMIc GraPHIcs GroUP / IT sTocK 
Free / alaMy; © roMIlly locKyer / THe IMaGe BanK / GeTTy IMaGes; 
© PHIl BoorMan / TaXI / GeTTy IMaGes

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
15
How Appearance Sends Silent Messages
The physical appearance of a business document, as well as the personal appearance 
of an individual, transmits immediate and important nonverbal messages.
Appearance of Business Documents. The way a letter, memo, or report 
looks can have either a positive or a negative effect on the receiver. Sloppy e-mail mes-
sages send a nonverbal message that you are in a terrific hurry or that you do not care 
about the receiver. Envelopes—through their postage, stationery, and printing—can 
suggest routine, important, or junk mail. Letters and reports can look neat, profes-
sional, well organized, and attractive—or just the opposite. In succeeding chapters 
you will learn how to create business documents that send positive nonverbal mes-
sages through their appearance, format, organization, readability, and correctness.
Personal Appearance. The way you look—your clothing, grooming, and 
posture—telegraphs an instant nonverbal message about you. Based on what they 
see, viewers make quick judgments about your status, credibility, personality, and 
potential. If you want to be considered professional, think about how you present 
yourself. One marketing manager said, “I’m young and pretty. It’s hard enough to be 
taken seriously, and if I show up in jeans and a teeshirt, I don’t stand a chance.”18 As 
a businessperson, you will want to think about what your appearance says about you. 
Although the rules of business attire have loosened up, some workers show poor judg-
ment. You will learn more about professional attire and behavior in later chapters.
Keys to Building Strong Nonverbal Skills
Nonverbal communication can outweigh words in the way it influences how others 
perceive us. You can harness the power of silent messages by reviewing the follow-
ing tips for improving nonverbal communication skills:
• Establish and maintain eye contact. Remember that in the United States and 
Canada, appropriate eye contact signals interest, attentiveness, strength, and 
credibility.
• Use posture to show interest. Encourage communication interaction by leaning 
forward, sitting or standing erect, and looking alert.
• Improve your decoding skills. Watch facial expressions and body language to 
understand the complete verbal and nonverbal messages being communicated.
• Probe for more information. When you perceive nonverbal cues that contra-
dict verbal meanings, politely seek additional cues (“I’m not sure I understand,” 
“Please tell me more about . . . ,” or “Do you mean that . . .”).
• Avoid assigning nonverbal meanings out of context. Don’t interpret nonverbal 
behavior unless you understand a situation or a culture.
• Associate with people from diverse cultures. Learn about other cultures to 
widen your knowledge and tolerance of intercultural nonverbal messages.
• Appreciate the power of appearance. Keep in mind that the appearance of your 
business documents, your business space, and yourself sends immediate positive 
or negative messages to receivers.
• Observe yourself on video. Ensure that your verbal and nonverbal messages are 
in sync by recording and evaluating yourself making a presentation.
• Enlist friends and family. Ask friends and family to monitor your conscious and 
unconscious body movements and gestures to help you become an effective com-
municator.
How Culture Affects Communication
Comprehending the verbal and nonverbal meanings of a message is difficult even 
when communicators are from the same culture. When they come from different 
cultures, special sensitivity and skills are necessary.
The appearance of a 
message and of an 
individual can convey 
positive or negative 
nonverbal messages.
Verbal and nonverbal 
messages are even more 
difﬁ cult to interpret 
when people come from 
different cultures.
Because nonverbal cues 
can mean more than spoken 
words, learn to use nonverbal 
communication positively.

16 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
Negotiators for a North American company learned this lesson when they were 
in Japan looking for a trading partner. The North Americans were pleased after their 
first meeting with representatives of a major Japanese firm. The Japanese had nod-
ded assent throughout the meeting and had not objected to a single proposal. The 
next day, however, the North Americans were stunned to learn that the Japanese 
had rejected the entire plan. In interpreting the nonverbal behavioral messages, the 
North Americans made a typical mistake. They assumed the Japanese were nodding 
in agreement as fellow North Americans would. In this case, however, the nods of 
assent indicated comprehension—not approval.
Every country has a unique culture or common heritage, joint experience, and 
shared learning that produce its culture. Their common experience gives members 
of that culture a complex system of shared values and customs. It teaches them 
how to behave; it conditions their reactions. Global business, new communica-
tion technologies, the Internet, and even Hollywood are spreading Western values 
throughout the world. However, cultural differences can still cause significant 
misunderstandings.
The more you know about culture in general and your own culture in particular, 
the better able you will be to adopt an intercultural perspective. In this book it is 
impossible to cover fully the infinite facets of culture. However, we can outline some 
key dimensions of culture and look at them from various points of view.
So that you will better understand your culture and how it contrasts with other 
cultures, we will describe five key dimensions of culture: context, individualism, 
formality, communication style, and time orientation.
Context
Context is one of the most important cultural dimensions, yet it is among the most 
difficult to define. In a model developed by cultural anthropologist Edward T. Hall, 
context refers to the stimuli, environment, or ambience surrounding an event. Hall 
arranged cultures on a continuum, shown in Figure 1.7, from low to high in rela-
tion to context. Our figure also summarizes key comparisons for today’s business 
communicators.
Communicators in low-context cultures (such as those in North America, 
Scandinavia, and Germany) depend little on the context of a situation to convey 
their meaning. They assume that listeners know very little and must be told practi-
cally everything. Low-context cultures tend to be logical, analytical, and action ori-
ented. Business communicators stress clearly articulated messages that they consider 
to be objective, professional, and efficient. Words are taken literally.
© FredrIK renander / alaMy
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
With more than 1 billion people and a growing 
reputation as the second-largest english-speaking 
country, India has become a hot market for 
outsourced call center jobs. To accommodate the 
high demand for international customer support 
professionals in India, the city of delhi offers more 
than 300,000 english and communication skills 
classes—and that is in addition to call center training 
offered locally through multinational corporations 
such as IBM and Wipro. What challenges do India’s 
call center professionals face when communicating 
with customers from across the globe?
Low-context cultures (such 
as those in North America 
and Western Europe) depend 
less on the environment of a 
situation to convey meaning 
than do high-context cultures 
(such as those in China, 
Japan, and Arab countries).

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
17
Communicators in high-context cultures (such as those in China, Japan, and 
Arab countries) assume that the listener is already “contexted” and does not need 
much background information.19 Communicators in high-context cultures are more 
likely to be intuitive and contemplative. They may not take words literally. Instead, 
the meaning of a message may be implied from the social or physical setting, the 
relationship of the communicators, or nonverbal cues. For example, a Japanese 
communicator might say yes when he really means no. From the context of the situ-
ation, the Japanese speaker would indicate whether yes really meant yes or whether 
it meant no. The context, tone, time taken to answer, facial expression, and body 
cues would convey the meaning of yes.20 Communication cues are transmitted by 
posture, voice inflection, gestures, and facial expression.
Individualism
An attitude of independence and freedom from control characterizes individualism. 
Members of low-context cultures, particularly Americans, tend to value individual-
ism. They believe that initiative, self-assertion, and competence result in personal 
achievement. They believe in individual action and personal responsibility, and they 
desire a large degree of freedom in their personal lives.
Members of high-context cultures are more collectivist. They emphasize mem-
bership in organizations, groups, and teams; they encourage acceptance of group 
values, duties, and decisions. They typically resist independence because it fosters 
Members of many low-
context cultures value 
independence and 
freedom from control.
FIGURE 1.7 Comparing High- and Low-Context Business Communicators
Culture has a powerful effect on business communicators. The following observations point out selected differences. Remember, however, that 
these are simplifications and that practices within a given culture vary considerably. Moreover, as globalization expands, low- and high-context 
cultures are experiencing change, and differences may be less pronounced.
Business Communicators in Low-Context Cultures
Business Communicators in High-Context Cultures
assume listeners know little and must be told everything directly.
assume listeners are highly “contexted” and require little 
background.
Value independence, initiative, self-assertion.
Value consensus, group decisions.
rely on facts, data, and logic.
rely on relationships rather than objective data.
Value getting down to business and achieving results. 
Value relationships, harmony, status, and saving face.
Keep business and social relationships separate.
Intermix business and social relationships.
expect negotiated decisions to be final and ironclad.
expect to reopen discussions of decisions previously made.
Hold relaxed view toward wealth and power.
defer to others based on wealth, position, seniority, and age.
Value competence regardless of position or status.
May value position and status over competence.
Have little problem confronting, showing anger, or making 
demands. 
avoid confrontation, anger, and emotion in business 
transactions.
analyze meanings and attach face value to words. 
May not take words literally; may infer meanings.
German
North American
French
Spanish
Greek
Chinese
Scandinavian
British
Italian
Mexican
High-
Context
Cultures
Low-
Context
Cultures
Arab
Swiss-German
Japanese

18 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
competition and confrontation instead of consensus. In group-oriented cultures 
such as those in many Asian societies, for example, self-assertion and individual 
decision making are discouraged. “The nail that sticks up gets pounded down” is 
a common Japanese saying.21 Business decisions are often made by all who have 
competence in the matter under discussion. Similarly, in China managers also focus 
on the group rather than on the individual, preferring a “consultative” management 
style over an autocratic style.22
Many cultures, of course, are quite complex and cannot be characterized as 
totally individualistic or group oriented. For example, European Americans are 
generally quite individualistic, whereas African Americans are less so, and Latin 
Americans are closer to the group-centered dimension.23
Formality
People in some cultures place less emphasis on tradition, ceremony, and social rules 
than do members of other cultures. Americans, for example, dress casually and are 
soon on a first-name basis with others. Their lack of formality is often character-
ized by directness. In business dealings Americans come to the point immediately; 
indirectness, they feel, wastes time, a valuable commodity in American culture.
This informality and directness may be confusing abroad. In Mexico, for 
instance, a typical business meeting begins with handshakes, coffee, and an expan-
sive conversation about the weather, sports, and other light topics. An invitation to 
“get down to business” might offend a Mexican executive.24 In Japan signing docu-
ments and exchanging business cards are important rituals. In Europe first names 
are used only after long acquaintance and by invitation. In Arab, South American, 
and Asian cultures, a feeling of friendship and kinship must be established before 
business can be transacted.
In Western cultures people are more relaxed about social status and the appear-
ance of power.25 Deference is not generally paid to individuals merely because of 
their wealth, position, seniority, or age. In many Asian cultures, however, these 
characteristics are important and must be respected. Deference and respect are paid 
to authority and power. Recognizing this cultural pattern, Marriott Hotel managers 
learned to avoid placing a lower-level Japanese employee on a floor above a higher-
level executive from the same company.
Communication Style
People in low- and high-context cultures tend to communicate differently with 
words. To Americans and Germans, words are very important, especially in con-
tracts and negotiations. People in high-context cultures, on the other hand, place 
more emphasis on the surrounding context than on the words describing a negotia-
tion. A Greek may see a contract as a formal statement announcing the intention to 
build a business for the future. The Japanese may treat contracts as statements of 
intention, and they assume changes will be made as a project develops. Mexicans 
may treat contracts as artistic exercises of what might be accomplished in an ideal 
world. They do not necessarily expect contracts to apply consistently in the real 
world. An Arab may be insulted by merely mentioning a contract; a person’s word 
is more binding.26
In communication style North Americans value straightforwardness, are suspi-
cious of evasiveness, and distrust people who might have a “hidden agenda” or who 
“play their cards too close to the chest.”27 North Americans also tend to be uncom-
fortable with silence and impatient with delays. Some Asian businesspeople have 
learned that the longer they drag out negotiations, the more concessions impatient 
North Americans are likely to make.
Time Orientation
North Americans consider time a precious commodity. They correlate time with 
productivity, efficiency, and money. Keeping people waiting for business appoint-
ments wastes time and is also rude.
Tradition, ceremony, 
and social rules are 
more important in some 
cultures than in others.
Words are used differently 
by people in low- and 
high-context cultures.
North Americans value 
a direct, straightforward 
communication style.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
19
In other cultures time may be perceived as an unlimited and never-ending 
resource to be enjoyed. A North American businessperson, for example, was kept 
waiting two hours past a scheduled appointment time in South America. She wasn’t 
offended, though, because she was familiar with Hispanics’ more relaxed concept 
of time.
The perception of time and how it is used are culturally learned. In some cultures 
time is perceived analytically. People account for every minute of the day. In other 
cultures, time is holistic and viewed in larger chunks. Western cultures tend to be 
more analytical, scheduling appointments at 15- to 30-minute intervals. Eastern 
cultures tend to be more holistic, planning fewer but longer meetings. People in one 
culture may look at time as formal and task oriented. In another culture, time is seen 
as an opportunity to develop an interpersonal relationship. In the announcements 
of some international meetings, a qualifier may be inserted after the meeting time. 
For example, “The meeting starts at 10 a.m. Malaysian time.” This tells participants 
whether to expect fixed or fluid scheduling.
Controlling Ethnocentrism and Stereotyping
The process of understanding and interacting successfully with people from other 
cultures is often hampered by two barriers: ethnocentrism and stereotyping. These 
two barriers, however, can be overcome by developing tolerance, a powerful and 
effective aid to communication.
Ethnocentrism. The belief in the superiority of one’s own culture is known as 
ethnocentrism. This natural attitude is found in all cultures. Ethnocentrism causes 
us to judge others by our own values. If you were raised in North America, the val-
ues described in the preceding sections probably seem “right” to you, and you may 
wonder why the rest of the world doesn’t function in the same sensible fashion. A 
North American businessperson in an Arab or Asian country might be upset at time 
spent over coffee or other social rituals before any “real” business is transacted. In 
these cultures, however, personal relationships must be established and nurtured 
before earnest talks may proceed.
Stereotypes. Our perceptions of other cultures sometimes cause us to form 
stereotypes about groups of people. A stereotype is an oversimplified perception 
of a behavioral pattern or characteristic applied to entire groups. For example, 
the Swiss are hard-working, efficient, and neat; Germans are formal, reserved, and 
blunt; Americans are loud, friendly, and impatient; Canadians are polite, trusting, 
and tolerant; Asians are gracious, humble, and inscrutable. These attitudes may or 
may not accurately describe cultural norms. But when applied to individual business 
communicators, such stereotypes may create misconceptions and misunderstand-
ings. Look beneath surface stereotypes and labels to discover individual personal 
qualities.
Tolerance. Working with people from other cultures demands tolerance and 
flexible attitudes. As global markets expand and as our society becomes increasingly 
multiethnic, tolerance becomes critical. Tolerance, here, does not mean “putting up 
with” or “enduring,” which is one part of its definition. Instead, we use tolerance
in a broader sense. It means learning about beliefs and practices different from our 
own and appreciating them. One of the best ways to develop tolerance is to practice 
empathy. This means trying to see the world through another’s eyes. It means being 
nonjudgmental, recognizing things as they are rather than as they “should be.” 
For example, in China, the American snack foods manufacturer Frito-Lay had to 
accommodate yin and yang, the Chinese philosophy that nature and life must balance 
opposing elements. Chinese consider fried foods to be hot and avoid them in summer 
because two “hots” don’t balance. They prefer “cool” snacks in summer; therefore, 
Frito-Lay created “cool lemon” potato chips dotted with lime specks and mint. The 
yellow, lemon-scented chips are delivered in a package showing breezy-blue skies and 
Developing intercultural 
tolerance means 
practicing empathy, 
being nonjudgmental, 
and being patient.
Ethnocentrism is the belief 
in the superiority of one’s 
own culture and group.
A stereotype is an 
oversimpliﬁ ed behavioral 
pattern applied to entire 
groups.

20 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
“He doesn’t understand you.  
Try shouting a little louder.”
Berry’s World: © By nea, Inc.
rolling green grass.28 Instead of imposing the American view that potato chips are fine 
as a summer snack, Frito-Lay looked at its product through the eyes of its Chinese 
consumers and adjusted accordingly.
The following suggestions can help you prevent miscommunication in oral and 
written transactions across cultures.
How to Minimize Oral Miscommunication  
Among Intercultural Audiences
When you have a conversation with someone from another culture, you can reduce 
misunderstandings by following these tips:
• Use simple English. Speak in short sentences (under 20 words) with familiar, 
short words. Eliminate puns, sports and military references, slang, and jargon 
(special business terms). Be especially alert to idiomatic expressions that can’t be 
translated, such as burn the midnight oil and under the weather.
• Speak slowly and enunciate clearly. Avoid fast speech, but don’t raise your voice. 
Overpunctuate with pauses and full stops. Always write numbers for all to see.
• Encourage accurate feedback. Ask probing questions, and encourage the lis-
tener to paraphrase what you say. Don’t assume that a yes, a nod, or a smile 
indicates comprehension or assent.
• Check frequently for comprehension. Avoid waiting until you finish a long 
explanation to request feedback. Instead, make one point at a time, pausing to 
check for comprehension. Don’t proceed to B until A has been grasped.
• Observe eye messages. Be alert to a glazed expression or wandering 
eyes. These tell you the listener is lost.
• Accept blame. If a misunderstanding results, graciously accept the blame 
for not making your meaning clear.
• Listen without interrupting. Curb your desire to finish sentences or to fill 
out ideas for the speaker. Keep in mind that North Americans abroad are 
often accused of listening too little and talking too much.
• Smile when appropriate. Roger Axtell, international behavior expert, 
calls the smile the single most understood and most useful form of com-
munication in either personal or business transactions. In some cultures, 
however, excessive smiling may seem insincere.29
• Follow up in writing. After conversations or oral negotiations, confirm 
the results and agreements with follow-up letters. For proposals and 
contracts, engage a qualified translator to prepare copies in the local 
language.
How to Minimize Written Miscommunication  
Among Intercultural Audiences
When you write to someone from a different culture, you can improve your chances 
of being understood by following these suggestions:
• Consider local styles. Learn how documents are formatted and how letters are 
addressed and developed in the intended reader’s country. Decide whether to use 
your organization’s preferred format or adjust to local styles.
• Consider hiring a translator. Engage a professional translator if (a) your docu-
ment is important, (b) your document will be distributed to many readers, or (c) 
you must be persuasive.
• Use short sentences and short paragraphs. Sentences with fewer than 20 words 
and paragraphs with fewer than 8 lines are most readable.
• Avoid ambiguous wording. Include relative pronouns (that, which, who) for clar-
ity in introducing clauses. Stay away from contractions (especially ones such as 
Here’s the problem). Avoid idioms (once in a blue moon), slang (my presentation 
really bombed), acronyms (ASAP for as soon as possible), abbreviations (DBA 
for doing business as), and jargon (input, output, clickstream). Use action-specific 
verbs (purchase a printer rather than get a printer).

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
21
• Cite numbers carefully. For international trade it is a good idea to learn and use 
the metric system. In citing numbers, use figures (15) instead of spelling them 
out (fifteen). Always convert dollar figures into local currency. Avoid using fig-
ures to express the month of the year. In North America, for example, March 5, 
2009, might be written as 3/5/09, while in Europe the same date might appear as 
5.3.09. For clarity, always spell out the month.
Capitalizing on Workforce Diversity
As global competition opens world markets, North American businesspeople will 
increasingly interact with customers and colleagues from around the world. At 
the same time, the North American workforce is also becoming more diverse—in 
race, ethnicity, age, gender, national origin, physical ability, and countless other 
characteristics. No longer, say the experts, will the workplace be predominantly 
male or Anglo-oriented. By 2020 many groups now considered minorities (African 
Americans, Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans) are projected to become 36 per-
cent of the U.S. population. By 2050 these same groups are expected to surge to 
47 percent of the U.S. population.30 Women will become nearly 50 percent of the 
workforce. Moreover, it is estimated that the share of the population over 65 will 
jump dramatically from 13 percent now to 20 percent in 2050. Trends suggest that 
many of these older people will remain in the workforce.
While the workforce is becoming more diverse, the structure of businesses in 
North America is also changing. As you learned earlier, many workers are now orga-
nized by teams. Organizations are flatter, and rank-and-file workers are increasingly 
making decisions among themselves. What does all this mean for you as a future 
business communicator? Simply put, your job may require you to interact with col-
leagues and customers from around the world. Your work environment will probably 
demand that you cooperate effectively with small groups of coworkers. What’s more, 
these coworkers may differ from you in race, ethnicity, gender, age, and other ways.
Benefits of a Diverse Workforce
A diverse work environment offers many benefits. Consumers want to deal with 
companies that respect their values and create products and services tailored to their 
needs. Organizations that hire employees with various experiences and backgrounds 
are better able to create the products these consumers desire.
At Procter & Gamble a senior marketing executive hit the nail on the head when 
he said, “I don’t know how you can effectively market to the melting pot that this 
country represents without a workforce and vendors who have a gut-level under-
standing of the needs and wants of all of these market segments. . . . When we started 
getting a more diverse workforce, we started getting richer [marketing] plans, because 
they came up with things that white males were simply not going to come up with 
on their own.”31 At PepsiCo, work teams created new products inspired by diversity 
efforts. Those products included guacamole-flavored Doritos chips and Gatorade 
Xtremo aimed at Hispanics, as well as Mountain Dew Code 
Red, which appeals to African Americans. One Pepsi execu-
tive said that companies that “figure out the diversity chal-
lenge first will clearly have a competitive advantage.”32
In addition, organizations that set aside time and resources 
to cultivate and capitalize on diversity will suffer fewer dis-
crimination lawsuits, fewer union clashes, and less government 
regulatory action. Most important, though, is the growing 
realization among organizations that diversity is a critical 
 bottom-line business strategy to improve employee relation-
ships and to increase productivity. Developing a diverse staff 
that can work together cooperatively is one of the biggest 
challenges facing business organizations today.
You can expect to be 
interacting with customers 
and colleagues who may 
differ from you in race, 
ethnicity, age, gender, 
national origin, physical 
ability, and many other 
characteristics.
“We need to focus on diversity. your goal is to hire 
people who all look different, but think just like me.”
© randy GlasBerGen WWW.GlasBerGen.coM

22 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
Improving Communication Among 
Diverse Workplace Audiences
Integrating all this diversity into one seamless workforce is a formidable but vital 
task. Harnessed effectively, diversity can enhance productivity and propel a com-
pany to success well into the twenty-first century. Mismanaged, it can become a 
tremendous drain on a company’s time and resources. How companies deal with 
diversity will make all the difference in how they compete in an increasingly global 
environment. This means that organizations must do more than just pay lip service 
to these issues. Harmony and acceptance do not happen automatically when people 
who are dissimilar work together. The following suggestions can help you and your 
organization find ways to improve communication and interaction:
• Understand the value of differences. Diversity makes an organization innova-
tive and creative. Sameness fosters an absence of critical thinking called “group-
think.” Case studies, for example, of the Challenger shuttle disaster suggest that 
groupthink prevented alternatives from being considered. Even smart people 
working collectively can make dumb decisions if they do not see different per-
spectives.33 Diversity in problem-solving groups encourages independent and 
 creative thinking.
• Seek training. Especially if an organization is experiencing diversity problems, 
awareness-raising sessions may be helpful. Spend time reading and learning 
about workforce diversity and how it can benefit organizations. Look upon 
diversity as an opportunity, not a threat. Intercultural communication, team 
building, and conflict resolution are skills that can be learned in diversity train-
ing programs.
• Learn about your cultural self. Begin to think of yourself as a product of your 
culture, and understand that your culture is just one among many. Try to stand 
outside and look at yourself. Do you see any reflex reactions and automatic thought 
patterns that are a result of your upbringing? These may be invisible to you until 
challenged by people who are different from you. Remember, your culture was 
designed to help you succeed and survive in a certain environment. Be sure to keep 
what works and yet be ready to adapt as your environment changes.
• Make fewer assumptions. Be careful of seemingly insignificant, innocent work-
place assumptions. For example, don’t assume that everyone wants to observe the 
holidays with a Christmas party and a decorated tree. Celebrating only Christian 
holidays in December and January excludes those who honor Hanukkah, 
Kwanzaa, and the Lunar New Year. Moreover, in workplace discussions don’t 
assume that everyone is married or wants to be or is even hetero sexual, for that 
matter. For invitations, avoid phrases such as managers and their wives. Spouses
or partners is more inclusive. Valuing diversity means making fewer assumptions 
that everyone is like you or wants to be like you.
• Build on similarities. Look for areas in which you and others not like you can 
agree or at least share opinions. Be prepared to consider issues from many per-
spectives, all of which may be valid. Accept that there is room for various points 
of view to coexist peacefully. Although you can always find differences, it is 
much harder to find similarities. Look for common ground in shared experiences, 
mutual goals, and similar values. Concentrate on your objective even when you 
may disagree on how to reach it.34
Successful communicators 
understand the value 
of differences, seek 
training, learn about 
their own cultures, make 
fewer assumptions, and 
build on similarities.
In times of conﬂ ict, look 
for areas of agreement 
and build on similarities.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
23
 6. What percentage of new jobs require postsecondary education?
 7. are communication skills acquired by nature or by nurture? explain.
 8. list seven trends in the workplace that affect business communicators. Be prepared to discuss how 
they might affect you in your future career.
This chapter described the importance of communication 
skills in today’s information economy. Writing skills are par-
ticularly important because businesspeople are doing more 
writing than ever before. In addition, many of the changes in 
today’s dynamic workplace revolve around processing and 
communicating information. Flattened management hierar-
chies, participatory management, increased emphasis on 
work teams, heightened global competition, and innovative 
communication technologies are all trends that increase 
the need for good communication skills. To improve your 
skills, you should understand the communication process. 
communication doesn’t take place unless senders encode 
meaningful messages that can be decoded and understood 
by receivers.
one important part of the communication process is lis-
tening. you can become a more active listener by keeping 
an open mind, listening for main points, capitalizing on lag 
time, judging ideas and not appearances, taking selective 
notes, and providing feedback. The chapter also described 
ways to help you improve your nonverbal communication 
skills.
you learned about the powerful effect that culture has on 
communication, and you became more aware of the cultural 
dimensions of context, individualism, formality, communica-
tion style, and time orientation. Finally, the chapter discussed 
ways that businesses and individuals can capitalize on work-
force diversity.
The following chapters present the writing process. you 
will learn specific techniques to help you improve your writ-
ten and oral expression. remember, communication skills are 
not inherited. They are learned, and anyone can learn to be 
a good communicator. Writing skills are critical because they 
function as a gatekeeper. Poor skills keep you in low-wage, 
dead-end work. Good skills open the door to high wages and 
career advancement.35
 1. Why is it important for business and professional students 
to develop good communication skills, and why are writing 
skills especially essential?
 2. recall a time when you experienced a problem as a result of 
poor communication. What were the causes of and possible 
remedies for the problem?
 3. How are listening skills important to employees, super-
visors, and executives? Who should have the best listening 
skills?
 4. What arguments could you give for or against the idea 
that body language is a science with principles that can 
be interpreted accurately by specialists?
 5. Because english is becoming the international language 
of business and because the United states is a dominant 
military and trading force, why should americans bother 
to learn about other cultures?
S
Summing Up and Looking Forward
C
Critical Thinking
C
Chapter Review

24 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
 9. Give a brief definition of the following words:
  
a. encode 
  
b. channel 
  
c. decode 
 10. list 11 techniques for improving your listening skills. Be prepared to discuss each.
 11. When verbal and nonverbal messages conflict, which are receivers more likely to believe? Give an 
original example.
 12. Would your culture be classified as high- or low-context? Why?
 13. What is ethnocentrism, and how can it be reduced?
 14. list seven or more suggestions for enhancing comprehension when you are talking with nonnative 
speakers of english. Be prepared to discuss each.
 15. list five suggestions for improving communication among diverse workplace audiences. Be prepared 
to discuss each.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
25
1.1 Pumping Up Your Basic Language Muscles
you can enlist the aid of your author to help you pump up your basic language skills. as your personal trainer, dr. Guffey 
provides a three-step workout plan and hundreds of interactive questions to help you brush up on your grammar and 
mechanics skills. you receive immediate feedback in the warm-up sessions, and when you finish a complete workout, you 
can take a short test to assess what you learned. These workouts are completely self-taught, which means you can review 
at your own pace and repeat as often as you need. Your Personal Language Trainer is available at your premium Web site, 
www.meguffey.com. In addition to pumping up your basic language muscles, you can also use Spell Right! and Speak Right!
to improve your spelling and pronunciation skills.
Your Task. Begin using Your Personal Language Trainer to brush up on your basic grammar and mechanics skills by complet-
ing one to three workouts per week or as many as your instructor advises. Be prepared to submit a printout of your “fitness” 
(completion) certificate when you finish a workout module. If your instructor directs, complete the spelling exercises in Spell 
Right! and submit a certificate of completion for the spelling final exam.
E-MAIL
1.2 Getting to Know You
your instructor wants to know more about you, your motivation for taking this course, your career goals, and your writing 
skills.
Your Task. send an e-mail or write a memo of introduction to your instructor. see chapter 5 for formats and tips on preparing 
e-mail messages. In your message include the following:
 a. your reasons for taking this class
 b. your career goals (both temporary and long-term)
 c. a brief description of your employment, if any, and your favorite activities
 d. an assessment and discussion of your current communication skills, including your strengths and weaknesses
For online classes, write a letter of introduction about yourself with the preceding information. Post your letter to your discus-
sion board. read and comment on the letters of other students. Think about how people in virtual teams must learn about 
each other through online messages.
TEAM
1.3 Small-Group Presentation: Getting to Know Each Other
Many business organizations today use teams to accomplish their goals. To help you develop speaking, listening, and team-
work skills, your instructor may assign team projects. one of the first jobs in any team is selecting members and becoming 
acquainted.
Your Task. your instructor will divide your class into small groups or teams. at your instructor’s direction, either (a) interview 
another group member and introduce that person to the group or (b) introduce yourself to the group. Think of this as an 
informal interview for a team assignment or for a job. you will want to make notes from which to speak. your introduction 
should include information such as the following:
 a. Where did you grow up?
 b. What work and extracurricular activities have you engaged in?
 c. What are your interests and talents? What are you good at doing?
 d. What have you achieved?
 e. How familiar are you with various computer technologies?
 f. What are your professional and personal goals? Where do you expect to be five years from now?
To develop listening skills, team members should practice the good listening techniques discussed in this chapter and take 
notes. They should be prepared to discuss three important facts as well as remember details about each speaker.
1.4 Class Listening
Have you ever consciously observed the listening habits of others?
Your Task. In one of your classes, study student listening habits for a week. What barriers to effective listening did you 
observe? How many of the suggestions described in this chapter are being implemented by listeners in the class? Write 
a memo or an e-mail message to your instructor briefly describing your observations. (see chapter 5 to learn more about 
e-mail messages and memos.)
A
Activities and Cases

26 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
1.5 How Good Are Your Listening Skills? Self-Checked Rating Quiz
you can learn whether your listening skills are excellent or deficient by completing a brief quiz.
Your Task. Take dr. Guffey’s listening Quiz at www.meguffey.com. What two listening behaviors do you think you need 
to work on the most?
1.6 Silent Messages
Becoming more aware of the silent messages you send helps you make them more accurate.
Your Task. analyze the kinds of silent messages you send your instructor, your classmates, and your employer. How do 
you send these messages? Group them into categories, as suggested by what you learned in this chapter. What do these 
messages mean? Be prepared to discuss them in small groups or in a memo to your instructor.
1.7 Body Language
can body language be accurately interpreted?
Your Task. What attitudes do the following body movements suggest to you? do these movements always mean the same 
thing? What part does context play in your interpretations?
 a. Wringing hands, tugging ears 
 b. Bowed posture, twiddling thumbs 
 c. steepled hands, sprawling sitting position 
 d. rubbing hand through hair 
 e. open hands, unbuttoned coat 
1.8 Universal Sign for “I Goofed” 
In an effort to promote peace and tranquillity on the highways, motorists submitted the following suggestions to a newspaper 
columnist.36
Your Task. In small groups consider the pros and cons of each of the following gestures intended as an apology when a 
driver makes a mistake. Why would some fail?
 a. lower your head slightly and bonk yourself on the forehead with the side of your closed fist. The message is clear: “I’m 
stupid. I shouldn’t have done that.”
 b. Make a temple with your hands, as if you were praying.
 c. Move the index finger of your right hand back and forth across your neck—as if you were cutting your throat.
 d. Flash the well-known peace sign. Hold up the index and middle fingers of one hand, making a V, as in Victory.
 e. Place the flat of your hands against your cheeks, as children do when they have made a mistake.
 f. clasp your hand over your mouth, raise your brows, and shrug your shoulders.
 g. Use your knuckles to knock on the side of your head. Translation: “oops! engage brain.”
 h. Place your right hand high on your chest and pat a few times, like a basketball player who drops a pass or a football 
player who makes a bad throw. This says, “I’ll take the blame.”
 i. Place your right fist over the middle of your chest and move it in a circular motion. This is universal sign language for “I’m sorry.”
 j. open your window and tap the top of your car roof with your hand.
 k. smile and raise both arms, palms outward, which is a universal gesture for surrender or forgiveness.
 l. Use the military salute, which is simple and shows respect.
 m. Flash your biggest smile, point at yourself with your right thumb and move your head from left to right, as if to say, “I can’t 
believe I did that.”
1.9 Workplace Writing: Separating Myths From Facts
Today’s knowledge workers are doing more writing on the job than ever before. Flattened management hierarchies, height-
ened global competition, expanded team-based management, and heavy reliance on e-mail have all contributed to more 
written messages.
Your Task. In teams or in class, discuss the following statements. are they myths or facts?
 a. Because I’m in a technical field, I will work with numbers, not words.
 b. secretaries will clean up my writing problems.
 c. Technical writers do most of the real writing on the job.
 d. computers can fix any of my writing mistakes.
 e. I can use form letters for most messages.

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
27
1.10 Translating Idioms
Many languages have idiomatic expressions that do not always make sense to outsiders.
Your Task. explain in simple english what the following idiomatic expressions mean. assume that you are explaining them 
to nonnative speakers of english.
 a. can’t hold a candle 
 b. class act 
 c. grey area 
 d. cold shoulder 
 e. early bird 
 f. get your act together 
 g. go ape 
 h. soldier on 
 i. the bottom of the barrel 
E-MAIL
1.11 Analyzing Diversity at Reebok
reebok grew from a $12 million a year sport shoe company into a $3 billion footwear and apparel powerhouse without giving 
much thought to the hiring of employees. “When we were growing very, very fast, all we did was bring another friend into 
work the next day,” recalled sharon cohen, reebok vice president. “everybody hired nine of their friends. Well, it happened 
that nine white people hired nine of their friends, so guess what? They were white, all about the same age. and then we 
looked up and said, ‘Wait a minute. We don’t like the way it looks here.’ That’s the kind of thing that can happen when you 
are growing very fast and thoughtlessly.”37
Your Task. In what ways would reebok benefit by diversifying its staff? What competitive advantages might it gain? outline 
your reasoning in an e-mail message to your instructor.
V
Video Resources
Two video libraries accompany Guffey’s Essentials of Business 
Communication, 8e. These videos take you beyond the class-
room to build the communication skills you will need to suc-
ceed in today’s rapidly changing workplace.
Video Library 1, Building Workplace Skills, includes seven 
videos that introduce and reinforce concepts in selected 
chapters. These excellent tools ease the learning load by 
demonstrating chapter-specific material to strengthen your 
comprehension and retention of key ideas.
The recommended video for this chapter is Communica-
tion Foundations, which illustrates how strong communi-
cation skills can help you advance your career in today’s 
challenging world of work. Be prepared to discuss critical-
thinking questions your instructor may provide.
Video Library 2, Bridging the Gap, presents six videos 
transporting you inside high-profile companies such as cold 
stone creamery, Ben & Jerry’s, and Hard rock cafe. you 
will be able to apply your new skills in structured applications 
aimed at bridging the gap between the classroom and the 
real world of work.
We recommend three videos for this chapter:
Video Library 1: Career Success Starts With Communication 
Foundations. Made especially for Guffey books, this film illus-
trates the changing business world, flattened management 
hierarchies, the communication process, communication flow, 
ethics, listening, nonverbal communication, and other topics 
to prepare you for today’s workplace. The film is unique in 
that many concepts are demonstrated through role-playing. 
Be prepared to discuss critical-thinking questions at the film’s 
conclusion.
Video Library 1: Intercultural Communication at Work. 
This film illustrates intercultural misunderstandings when 
a Japanese businessman visits an american advertising 
agency that seeks his business. The agency owners, rob 
and ella, as well as the receptionist, stephanie, make numer-
ous cultural blunders because they are unaware of the differ-
ences between high- and low-context cultures. at the film’s 
conclusion you will have an opportunity to make suggestions 
for improving rob and ella’s cultural competence.
Video Library 2: Understanding Teamwork: Cold Stone 
Creamery. This video highlights teamwork at cold stone 
creamery, a fast-growing ice cream specialty chain. It shows 
team members behind the counter but also provides the 
inside scoop through the insights of Kevin Myers, vice presi-
dent, marketing. Viewers see how teamwork permeates every 
facet of cold stone’s corporate culture. look for a definition 
of team, as well as six kinds of teams and the characteristics 
of successful teams.

28 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
These checkups are designed to improve your control of grammar and mechanics. They system-
atically review all sections of the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. answers are provided near the 
end of the book. you will find advanced Grammar/Mechanics checkups with immediate feedback 
at your premium Web site, www.meguffey.com.
Nouns
review sections 1.02–1.06 in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. Then study each of the 
following statements. Underscore any inappropriate form, and write a correction in the space 
provided. also record the appropriate G/M section and letter to illustrate the principle involved. 
If a sentence is correct, write C. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. 
If your answers differ, study carefully the principles shown in parentheses.
Example attornies seem to be the only ones who benefit from class action suits.
 1. a huge number of inquirys overwhelmed their two Web sites.
 2. Banks are installing multilingual aTMs to serve customers.
 3. some companys are giving up land lines for cell phones.
 4. Business is better on saturday’s than on sundays.
 5. Frozen turkies fill the grocery’s lockers at Thanksgiving.
 6. only the Bushs and the sanchezes brought their entire families.
 7. during the 2000’s stock prices fluctuated extremely.
 8. Both editor in chiefs instituted strict proofreading policies.
 9. luxury residential complexs are part of the architect’s plan.
 10. Voters in three countys are likely to approve new school taxes.
 11. The instructor was surprised to find two cassidy’s in one class.
 12. andré sent digital photos of two valleys in France before we planned our trip.
 13. Most companies have copies of statements showing their assets and liabilitys.
 14. My flat-screen monitor makes it difficult to distinguish between o’s and a’s.
 15. Both of her sisters-in-law were woman with high principles.
attorneys 
(1.05d)
G
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 1

Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills 
29
The following letter has intentional errors in spelling, proofreading, noun plurals, and sen-
tence structure. you may either (a) use standard proofreading marks (see appendix B) to 
correct the errors here or (b) download the document from your companion Web site and 
revise at your computer. study the guidelines in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to 
sharpen your skills.
G
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 1
FOREST COMMUNICATION SERVICES
259 Elm Street, Suite 400
Cambridge, MA 02124
(617) 830-2871
conferencing@forest.com
April 12, 200x
Ms. Rachel M. Fisher
Workplace Monthly Magazine
302 Northland Boulevard
Cincinnati, OH 45246
Dear Ms. Fletcher:
Thank you for giving Forrest Communication Services opportunity to contribute to the 
magazine article. That you are writing about Web conferencing for Workplace Monthly
Magazine. My specialty here at Forest Communication is conferencing service’s for North 
America.
Online meetings are definitely becomming more frequent. Web conferencing began in the
1990’s, but it has grown rapidly in the 2000’s. Many companys find that such meeting 
save time and money. Participants can hold live, interactive meetings and share documents 
and presentations.  Without ever leaving their offices or homes. Web conferencing is simply 
more convenient then having to attend meeting in person. Let me summarize a few Web 
conferencing feature:
•
Participant ID. This feature displays on your screen the name of all attendee’s 
 
and indicates who is talking over the phone line.
•
PowerPoints/Document Sharring. Presenters can show batchs of Web-based 
 
visuals and describe them by talking on the telephone. 
•
Polling/Surveys.  A virtual “show of hands” can speed consensus and shorten a 
 
meeting. Many users consider this feature one of the real luxurys of Web conferencing. 
Businessmen and businesswoman from countrys around the world are turning to Web 
conferances because of the many plus’s and few minus’s. Do you plan to discuss the 
pro’s and con’s of conferencing in your article? Our Web site has a list of FAQ’s that you 
might find interesting. I would be happy to provide more information if you call me at 
(617) 830-8701.
Cordially,
Tamara Lippman
Director, Conferencing Services

30 
Chapter 1: Career Success Begins With Communication Skills
Using Job Boards to Learn About Employment 
Possibilities in Your Field
nearly everyone looking for a job today starts with the Web. This communication workshop 
will help you use the Web to study job openings in your field. looking for jobs or intern-
ships on the Web has distinct advantages. For a few job seekers, the Web leads to big-
ger salaries, wider opportunities, and faster hiring. The Web, however, can devour huge 
chunks of time and produce slim results.
In terms of actually finding a job, the Web does not always result in success. Web 
searching seems to work best for professionals looking for similar work in their current 
fields and for those who are totally flexible about location. However, the Web is an excel-
lent place for any job seeker to learn what is available, what qualifications are necessary, 
and what salaries are being offered. Thousands of job boards with many job listings from 
employers across the United states and abroad are available on the Web.
Career Application. assume that you are about to finish your degree or certification 
program and you are now looking for a job. at the direction of your instructor, conduct a 
survey of electronic job advertisements in your field. What’s available? How much is the 
salary? What are the requirements?
Your Task
Visit Monster.com (http://www.monster.com), one of the most popular job boards.
Study the opening page. Ignore the clutter and banner ads or pop-ups. close any 
pop-up boxes.
Select keyword, category, city, and state. decide whether you want to search by a 
job title (such as nurse, accountant, project manager) or a category (such as Accounting/
Finance, Administrative/Clerical, Advertising/Marketing). enter your keyword job title or 
select a category—or do both. enter a city, state, or region. click Search.
Study the job listings. click Expand to read more about a job opening. click More to 
see a full description of the job.
Read job search tips. For many helpful hints on precise searching, click Job search 
tips. Browsing this information may take a few minutes, but it is well worth the effort 
to learn how to refine your search. close the box by clicking the X in the upper right 
corner.
Select best ads. In your career and geographical area, select the three best ads and 
print them. If you cannot print, make notes on what you find.
Visit another site. Try http://www.collegerecruiter.com, which claims to be the  highest- 
traffic entry-level job site for students and graduates, or http://www.careerbuilder.com, 
which says it is the nation’s largest employment network. Become familiar with the site’s 
searching tools, and look for jobs in your field. select and print three ads.
Analyze the skills required. How often do the ads you printed mention communica-
tion, teamwork, computer skills, or professionalism? What tasks do the ads mention? 
What is the salary range identified in these ads for this position? your instructor may 
ask you to submit your findings and/or report to the class.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Technology
communication Workshops (such as the one on this page) provide insight into 
special business communication topics and skills not discussed in the chap-
ters. These topics cover ethics, technology, career skills, and collaboration. each 
workshop includes a career application to extend your learning and help you 
develop skills relevant to the workshop topic.

Chapter 2
Planning Business Messages
Chapter 3
Composing Business Messages
Chapter 4
Revising Business Messages
The Writing Process
2
u N i T  2
© JUSTIN PUMFREY / ICONICA / GETTY IMAGES

32 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
The Basics of Business Writing
Business writing differs from other writing you may have done. In preparing high school 
or college compositions and term papers, you probably focused on discussing your 
feelings or displaying your knowledge. Your instructors wanted to see your thought 
processes, and they wanted assurance that you had internalized the subject matter. You 
may have had to meet a minimum word count. Business writers, however, have differ-
ent goals. For business messages and oral presentations, your writing should be:
• Purposeful. You will be writing to solve problems and convey information. You 
will have a definite purpose to fulfill in each message.
• Persuasive. You want your audience to believe and accept your message.
• Economical. You will try to present ideas clearly but concisely. Length is not 
rewarded.
• Audience oriented. You will concentrate on looking at a problem from the per-
spective of the audience instead of seeing it from your own.
These distinctions actually ease the writer’s task. You will not be searching 
your imagination for creative topic ideas. You won’t be stretching your ideas to 
make them appear longer. Writing consultants and businesspeople complain that 
many college graduates entering industry have at least an unconscious perception 
that quantity enhances quality. Wrong! Get over the notion that longer is better. 
Conciseness and clarity are what counts in business.
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Understand that business messages should be purposeful, persuasive, 
economical, and audience oriented.
• Identify and implement the three phases of the writing process.
• Appreciate the importance of analyzing the task and profiling the audience for 
business messages.
• Create messages that spotlight audience benefits and cultivate a “you” view.
• Develop a conversational tone and use positive, courteous language.
• Create messages that include inclusive language, plain expression, and familiar 
words.
Planning 
Business 
Messages
2
C H A P T e r  2
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / ZSOLT NYULASZI
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
When asked what 
communication skills 
employees needed, one 
recruiter said that new-
hires “need the ability to 
take something that is 
awkwardly written and make 
it flow smoothly—to express 
business ideas in writing that 
is 180 degrees [different] 
from writing for English 
classes.”

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
33
The ability to prepare concise, audience-centered, persuasive, and purposeful 
messages does not come naturally. Very few people, especially beginners, can sit 
down and compose a terrific letter or report without training. However, following 
a systematic process, studying model messages, and practicing the craft can make 
nearly anyone a successful business writer or speaker.
The Writing Process for Business 
Messages and Oral Presentations
Whether you are preparing an e-mail message, memo, letter, or oral presentation, 
the process will be easier if you follow a systematic plan. Our plan breaks the entire 
task into three phases: prewriting, writing, and revising. As you can see in Figure 2.1, 
however, the process is not always linear. It does not always proceed from Step 1 to 
Step 2; often the writer must circle back and repeat an earlier step.
To illustrate the writing process, let’s say that you own a popular local McDonald’s 
franchise. At rush times, you face a problem. Customers complain about the chaotic 
multiple waiting lines to approach the service counter. You once saw two customers 
nearly get into a fistfight over cutting into a line. What’s more, customers often are so 
intent on looking for ways to improve their positions in line that they fail to examine 
the menu. Then they are undecided when their turn arrives. You want to convince 
other franchise owners that a single-line (serpentine) system would work better. You 
could telephone the other owners. But you want to present a serious argument with 
good points that they will remember and be willing to act on when they gather for 
their next district meeting. You decide to write a letter that you hope will win their 
support.
Prewriting
The first phase of the writing process prepares you to write. It involves analyzing the 
audience and your purpose for writing. The audience for your letter will be other fran-
chise owners, some highly educated and others not. Your purpose in writing is to con-
vince them that a change in policy would improve customer service. You are convinced 
that a single-line system, such as that used in banks, would reduce chaos and make 
customers happier because they would not have to worry about where they are in line.
Prewriting also involves anticipating how your audience will react to your mes-
sage. You are sure that some of the other owners will agree with you, but others 
might fear that customers seeing a long single line might go elsewhere. In adapting
your message to the audience, you try to think of the right words and the right tone 
that will win approval.
The writing process has 
three parts: prewriting, 
writing, and revising.
2
3
PREWRITING
WRITING
REVISING
Analyzing
Anticipating
Adapting
1
Researching
Organizing
Composing
Revising
Proofreading
Evaluating
Figure 2.1 The Writing Process
The ﬁ rst phase of the 
writing process involves 
analyzing and anticipating 
the audience and then 
adapting to that audience.

34 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Writing
The second phase involves researching, organizing, and then composing the mes-
sage. In researching information for this letter, you would probably investigate 
other kinds of businesses that use single lines for customers. You might check out 
your competitors. What are Wendy’s and Burger King doing? You might do some 
calling to see whether other franchise owners are concerned about chaotic lines. 
Before writing to the entire group, you might brainstorm with a few owners to see 
what ideas they have for solving the problem.
Once you have collected enough information, you would focus on organizing 
your letter. Should you start out by offering your solution? Or should you work up 
to it slowly, describing the problem, presenting your evidence, and then ending with 
the solution? The final step in the second phase of the writing process is actually 
composing the letter. Naturally, you will do it at your computer so that you can 
make revisions easily.
revising 
The third phase of the process involves revising, proofreading, and evaluating your 
message. After writing the first draft, you will spend a lot of time revising the mes-
sage for clarity, conciseness, tone, and readability. Could parts of it be rearranged 
to make your point more effectively? This is the time when you look for ways to 
improve the organization and sound of your message. Next, you will spend time 
proofreading carefully to ensure correct spelling, grammar, punctuation, and for-
mat. The final phase involves evaluating your message to decide whether it accom-
plishes your goal.
Scheduling the Writing Process 
Although Figure 2.1 shows the three phases of the writing process equally, the time 
you spend on each varies depending on the complexity of the problem, the purpose, 
the audience, and your schedule. One expert gives these rough estimates for sched-
uling a project:
• Prewriting—25 percent (planning and worrying)
• Writing—25 percent (organizing and composing)
• Revising—50 percent (45 percent revising and 5 percent proofreading)
These are rough guides, yet you can see that good writers spend most of 
their time on the final phase of revising and proofreading. Much depends, of 
course, on your project, its importance, and your familiarity with it. What’s 
critical to remember, though, is that revising is a major component of the writ-
ing process.
It may appear that you perform one step and progress to the next, always fol-
lowing the same order. Most business writing, however, is not that rigid. Although 
writers perform the tasks described, the steps may be rearranged, abbreviated, or 
repeated. Some writers revise every sentence and paragraph as they go. Many find 
that new ideas occur after they have begun to write, causing them to back up, alter 
the organization, and rethink their plan.
Analyzing the Purpose and the Audience
We have just taken a look at the total writing process. As you begin to develop 
your business writing skills, you should expect to follow this process closely. With 
experience, though, you will become like other good writers and presenters who 
alter, compress, and rearrange the steps as needed. At first, however, following a 
plan is very helpful. The remainder of this chapter covers the first phase of the writ-
ing process. You will learn to analyze the purpose for writing, anticipate how your 
audience will react, and adapt your message to the audience.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“There is such a heavy 
emphasis on effective 
communication in the 
workplace that college 
students who master these 
skills can set themselves 
apart from the pack when 
searching for employment.”
Because revising is the 
most important part of 
the writing process, it 
takes the most time.

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
35
identifying Your Purpose
As you begin to compose a message, ask yourself two important questions: (a) Why 
am I sending this message? and (b) What do I hope to achieve? Your responses will 
determine how you organize and present your information.
Your message may have primary and secondary purposes. For college work your 
primary purpose may be merely to complete the assignment; secondary purposes 
might be to make yourself look good and to get a good grade. The primary purposes 
for sending business messages are typically to inform and to persuade. A secondary 
purpose is to promote goodwill: you and your organization want to look good in 
the eyes of your audience.
Selecting the Best Channel
After identifying the purpose of your message, you need to select the most appro-
priate communication channel. Some information is most efficiently and effectively 
delivered orally. Other messages should be written, and still others are best deliv-
ered electronically. Whether to set up a meeting, send a message by e-mail, or write 
a report depends on some of the following factors:
• Importance of the message
• Amount and speed of feedback and interactivity required
• Necessity of a permanent record
• Cost of the channel
• Degree of formality desired
• Confidentiality and sensitivity of the message
An interesting theory, called media richness, describes the extent to which a 
channel or medium recreates or represents all the information available in the 
original message. A richer medium, such as face-to-face conversation, permits 
more interactivity and feedback. A leaner medium, such as a report or proposal, 
presents a flat, one-dimensional message. Richer media enable the sender to pro-
vide more verbal and visual cues, as well as allow the sender to tailor the message 
to the audience.
Many factors help you decide which of the channels shown in Figure 2.2 is most 
appropriate for delivering a workplace message.
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
With energy independence at the forefront of 
international concerns, many leaders have high 
expectations for Suncor Energy, a Canadian firm 
with a high-tech process for extracting oil from 
Alberta’s bitumen-rich sands. The company recently 
rolled out “Oil Sands: The Next Generation,” a 
communications blitz conveying Suncor’s forward-
looking vision to more than 3,000 employees. The 
campaign included keynote speeches, newsletter 
inserts, offsite breakout meetings, and a Star Trek 
parody to motivate workers to double Suncor’s oil 
sands production. Employee feedback surveys 
provided managers with a gauge of the campaign’s 
effectiveness. Why might organizations use multiple 
communication channels to transmit messages?
© DAN LAMONT / CORBIS
The primary purpose of 
most business messages 
is to inform or to persuade; 
the secondary purpose 
is to promote goodwill.
Choosing an appropriate 
channel depends on the 
importance of the message, 
the feedback required, the 
need for a permanent record, 
the cost, and the degree of 
formality, conﬁ dentiality, 
and sensitivity needed.

36 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Switching to Faster Channels
Technology and competition continue to accelerate the pace of 
business today. As a result, communicators are switching to ever-
faster means of exchanging information. In the past business 
messages within organizations were delivered largely by hard-
copy memos. Responses would typically take a couple of days. 
However, that’s too slow for today’s communicators. They want 
answers and action now! Cell phones, instant messaging, faxes, 
Web sites, and especially e-mail can deliver that information much 
faster than can traditional channels of communication.
Within many organizations, hard-copy memos are still written, 
especially for messages that require persuasion, permanence, or 
formality. They are also prepared as attachments to e-mail mes-
sages. Clearly, the channel of choice for corporate communicators 
today is e-mail. It’s fast, inexpensive, and easy. Thus, fewer hard-copy memos are 
being written. Fewer letters to customers are also being written. That’s because many 
customer service functions can now be served through Web sites or by e-mail.
Whether your channel choice is e-mail, a hard-copy memo, or a report, you will 
be a more effective writer if you spend sufficient time in the prewriting phase.
Anticipating the Audience
A good writer anticipates the audience for a message: What is the reader or listener 
like? How will that person react to the message? Although you can’t always know 
Figure 2.2 Choosing Communication Channels 
Channel
Best use
Blog
When one person needs to present digital information easily so that it is available to others.
E-mail
When you need feedback but not immediately. Lack of security makes it problematic for personal, 
emotional, or private messages.
Face-to-face conversation
When you need a rich, interactive medium. Useful for persuasive, bad-news, and personal messages.
Face-to-face group meeting
When group decisions and consensus are important. Inefficient for merely distributing information.
Fax
When your message must cross time zones or international boundaries, when a written record is 
significant, or when speed is important.
Instant message
When you are online and need a quick response. Useful for learning whether someone is available 
for a phone conversation.
Letter
When a written record or formality is required, especially with customers, the government, suppliers, 
or others outside an organization.
Memo
When you want a written record to clearly explain policies, discuss procedures, or collect 
information within an organization.
Phone call
When you need to deliver or gather information quickly, when nonverbal cues are unimportant, and 
when you cannot meet in person.
Report or proposal
When you are delivering considerable data internally or externally.
Voice mail message
When you wish to leave important or routine information that the receiver can respond to when 
convenient.
Video- or teleconference
When group consensus and interaction are important but members are geographically dispersed.
Wiki
When digital information must be made available to others. Useful for collaboration because 
participants can easily add, remove, and edit content.
“I sent you an e-mail and forwarded a copy to 
your PDA, cell phone, and home computer. I 
also faxed a copy to your office, your assistant, 
and laptop. Then I snail-mailed hard copies to 
you on paper, floppy, and CD. But in case you 
don’t receive it, I’ll just tell you what it said...”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
37
exactly who the receiver is, you can imagine some of that person’s characteristics. Even 
writers of direct-mail sales letters have a general idea of the audience they wish to tar-
get. Picturing a typical reader is important in guiding what you write. One copywriter 
at Lands’ End, the catalog company, pictures his sister-in-law whenever he writes prod-
uct descriptions for the catalog. By profiling your audience and shaping a message to 
respond to that profile, you are more likely to achieve your communication goals.
Profiling the Audience
Visualizing your audience is a pivotal step in the writing process. The questions in 
Figure 2.3 will help you profile your audience. How much time you devote to answer-
ing these questions depends greatly on your message and its context. An analytical 
report that you compose for management or an oral presentation before a big group 
would, of course, demand considerable audience anticipation. On the other hand, an 
e-mail message to a coworker or a letter to a familiar supplier might require only a 
few moments of planning. No matter how short your message, though, spend some 
time thinking about the audience so that you can tailor your words to your readers 
or listeners. Remember that most readers or listeners will be thinking, “What’s in it 
for me?” or, “What am I supposed to do with this information?”
responding to the Profile
Profiling your audience helps you make decisions about shaping the message. You 
will discover what kind of language is appropriate, whether you are free to use spe-
cialized technical terms, whether you should explain everything, and so on. You will 
decide whether your tone should be formal or informal, and you will select the most 
desirable channel. Imagining whether the receiver is likely to be neutral, positive, or 
negative will help you determine how to organize your message.
Another advantage of profiling your audience is considering the possibility of a 
secondary audience. For example, let’s say you start to write an e-mail message to your 
supervisor, Sheila, describing a problem you are having. Halfway through the message 
you realize that Sheila will probably forward this message to her boss, the vice presi-
dent. Sheila will not want to summarize what you said; instead she will take the easy 
route and merely forward your e-mail. When you realize that the vice president will 
probably see this message, you decide to back up and use a more formal tone. You 
remove your inquiry about Sheila’s family, you reduce your complaints, and you tone 
down your language about why things went wrong. Instead, you provide more back-
ground information, and you are more specific in identifying items the vice president 
might not recognize. Analyzing the task and anticipating the audience help you adapt 
your message so that you can create an efficient and effective message.
By proﬁ ling your audience 
before you write, you can 
identify the appropriate 
tone, language, and channel 
for your message.
After proﬁ ling the audience, 
you can decide whether 
the receiver will be 
neutral, positive, or hostile 
toward your message.
Figure 2.3 Asking the Right Questions to Profile Your Audience
Primary Audience
Secondary Audience 
Who is my primary reader or listener?
Who might see or hear this message in addition to the primary 
audience?
What are my personal and professional relationships with that 
person?
How do these people differ from the primary audience?
What position does the person hold in the organization?
Do I need to include more background information?
How much does that person know about the subject?
How must I reshape my message to make it understandable 
and acceptable to others to whom it might be forwarded?
What do I know about that person’s education, beliefs, culture, 
and attitudes?
Should I expect a neutral, positive, or negative response to my 
message?

38 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Adapting to the Task and Audience 
After analyzing your purpose and anticipating your audience, you must convey your 
purpose to that audience. Adaptation is the process of creating a message that suits 
your audience.
One important aspect of adaptation is tone. Conveyed largely by the words 
in a message, tone affects how a receiver feels upon reading or hearing a mes-
sage. Skilled communicators create a positive tone in their messages by using a 
number of adaptive techniques, some of which are unconscious. These include 
spotlighting audience benefits, cultivating a “you” attitude, sounding conversa-
tional, and using positive, courteous expression. Additional adaptive techniques 
include using inclusive language and preferring plain language with familiar 
words.
Audience Benefits
Focusing on the audience sounds like a modern idea, but 
actually one of America’s early statesmen and authors recog-
nized this fundamental writing principle over 200 years ago. 
In describing effective writing, Ben Franklin observed, “To be 
good, it ought to have a tendency to benefit the reader.”1 These 
wise words have become a fundamental guideline for today’s 
business communicators. Expanding on Franklin’s counsel, a 
contemporary communication consultant gives this solid advice 
to his business clients: “Always stress the benefit to the audi-
ence of whatever it is you are trying to get them to do. If you 
can show them how you are going to save them frustration or 
help them meet their goals, you have the makings of a power-
ful message.”2
Adapting your message to the receiver’s needs means putting 
yourself in that person’s shoes. It’s called empathy. Empathic 
senders think about how a receiver will decode a message. They 
try to give something to the receiver, solve the receiver’s problems, save the receiver’s 
money, or just understand the feelings and position of that person. Which version of 
the following messages is more appealing to the audience?
Sender Focus
The Human Resources Department 
requires that the enclosed question-
naire be completed immediately so 
that we can allocate our training 
resource funds to employees.
Our warranty becomes effective 
only when we receive an owner’s 
registration.
We are proud to announce our new 
software virus checker that we think 
is the best on the market!
Audience Focus
By filling out the enclosed question-
naires, you can be one of the first 
employees to sign up for our train-
ing resource funds.
Your warranty begins working for 
you as soon as you return your 
owner’s registration.
Now you can be sure that all your 
computers will be protected with 
our real-time virus scanning.
“You” View
Notice that many of the previous audience-focused messages included the word 
you. In concentrating on receiver benefits, skilled communicators naturally develop 
the “you” view. They emphasize second-person pronouns (you, your) instead of 
first-person pronouns (I/we, us, our). Whether your goal is to inform, persuade, or 
promote goodwill, the catchiest words you can use are you and your. Compare the 
following examples.
“You haven’t been listening. I keep telling you 
that I don’t want a product fit for a king.”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
Because receivers are most 
interested in themselves, 
emphasize the word you to 
promote audience beneﬁ ts.
empathy involves shaping 
a message that appeals 
to the receiver.

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
39
“I / We” View
I’m asking all employees to respond 
to the attached survey about work-
ing conditions.
I have granted you permission to 
attend the communication seminar.
We have shipped your order by UPS, 
and we are sure it will arrive in time 
for your sales promotion December 1.
“You” View
Because your ideas count, please 
complete the attached survey about 
working conditions.
You may attend the seminar to 
improve your communication skills.
Your order will be delivered by UPS 
in time for your sales promotion 
December 1.
Although you want to focus on the reader or listener, don’t overuse or misuse 
the second-person pronoun you. Readers and listeners appreciate genuine inter-
est; on the other hand, they resent obvious attempts at manipulation. Some sales 
messages, for example, are guilty of overkill when they include you dozens of 
times in a direct-mail promotion. What’s more, the word can sometimes create 
the wrong impression. Consider this statement: You cannot return merchan-
dise until you receive written approval. The word you appears twice, but the 
reader feels singled out for criticism. In the following version the message is less 
personal and more positive: Customers may return merchandise with written 
approval.
Another difficulty in emphasizing the “you” view and de-emphasizing we/I is 
that it may result in overuse of the passive voice. For example, to avoid We will 
give you (active voice), you might write You will be given (passive voice). The active 
voice in writing is generally preferred because it identifies who is doing the acting. 
You will learn more about active and passive voice in Chapter 3.
In recognizing the value of the “you” attitude, writers do not have to steril-
ize their writing and totally avoid any first-person pronouns or words that show 
their feelings. Skilled communicators are able to convey sincerity, warmth, and 
enthusiasm by the words they choose. Don’t be afraid to use phrases such as I’m 
happy or We’re delighted, if you truly are. When speaking face-to-face, com-
municators show sincerity and warmth with nonverbal cues such as a smile and 
a pleasant voice tone. In letters, memos, and e-mail messages, however, only 
expressive words and phrases can show these feelings. These phrases suggest hid-
den messages that say You are important, I hear you, and I’m honestly trying to 
please you.
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
Employers are working hard to attract and retain 
Generation Y graduates for their organizations. 
Now reaching their mid-twenties, Gen Y-ers 
are generally optimistic, entrepreneurial, team 
oriented, and tech savvy. But they also have 
high workplace expectations and short attention 
spans—traits linked to the gotta-have-it-now 
digital culture. Accounting firms have begun 
using rap videos, online chat, and alternative work 
arrangements to recruit these young graduates 
before they lose interest and go elsewhere. 
When creating a message for a Generation Y 
audience, what benefits would you stress?
© JON FEINGERSH / ICONICA / GETTY IMAGES
emphasize you but 
don’t eliminate all I 
and we statements.

40 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Conversational but Professional
Most instant messages, e-mail messages, business letters, memos, and reports 
replace conversation. Thus, they are most effective when they convey an infor-
mal, conversational tone instead of a formal, pretentious tone. Workplace mes-
sages should not, however, become so casual that they sound low-level and 
unprofessional.
Instant messaging (IM) enables coworkers to have informal, spontaneous con-
versations. Some companies have accepted IM as a serious workplace tool. With 
the increasing use of instant messaging and e-mail, however, a major problem has 
developed. Sloppy, unprofessional expression appears in many workplace messages. 
You will learn more about the dangers of e-mail in Chapter 5. At this point, though, 
we focus on the tone of the language.
To project a professional image, you must sound educated and mature. Overuse 
of expressions such as totally awesome, you know, and like, as well as reliance on 
needless abbreviations (BTW for by the way), make a businessperson sound like a 
teenager. Professional messages do not include IM abbreviations, slang, sentence 
fragments, and chitchat. We urge you to strive for a warm, conversational tone 
that avoids low-level diction. Levels of diction, as shown in Figure 2.4, range from 
unprofessional to formal.
Your goal is a warm, friendly tone that sounds professional. Although some 
writers are too casual, others are overly formal. To impress readers and listeners, 
they use big words, long sentences, legal terminology, and third-person construc-
tions. Stay away from expressions such as the undersigned, the writer, and the 
affected party. You will sound friendlier with familiar pronouns such as I, we, and 
you. Study the following examples to see how to achieve a professional, yet con-
versational tone:
Unprofessional
Hey, boss, Gr8 news! Firewall now 
installed!! BTW, check with me b4 
announcing it.
Look, dude, this report is totally 
bogus. And the figures don’t look 
kosher. Show me some real stats. 
Got sources?
Professional
Mr. Smith, our new firewall soft-
ware is now installed. Please check 
with me before announcing it.
Because the figures in this report 
seem inaccurate, please submit the 
source statistics.
Strive for conversational 
expression, but also 
remember to be professional.
Figure 2.4 Levels of Diction
unprofessional 
(low-level diction)
Conversational 
(midlevel diction)
Formal 
(high-level diction)
badmouth
criticize
denigrate
guts
nerve
courage
pecking order
line of command
dominance hierarchy
ticked off
upset
provoked
rat on
inform
betray
rip off
steal
expropriate
Sentence example:
If we just hang in there, 
we can snag the contract.
Sentence example:
If we don’t get discouraged, 
we can win the contract.
Sentence example:
If the principals persevere, 
they can secure the 
contract.

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
41
Overly Formal
All employees are herewith instructed 
to return the appropriately designated 
contracts to the undersigned.
Pertaining to your order, we must 
verify the sizes that your organiza-
tion requires prior to consignment 
of your order to our shipper.
Conversational
Please return your contracts to me.
We will send your order as soon as 
we confirm the sizes you need.
Positive Language
The clarity and tone of a message are considerably improved if you use positive rather 
than negative language. Positive language generally conveys more information than 
negative language does. Moreover, positive messages are uplifting and pleasant to 
read. Positive wording tells what is and what can be done rather than what isn’t and 
what can’t be done. For example, Your order cannot be shipped by January 10 is not 
nearly as informative as Your order will be shipped January 20. Notice in the following 
examples how you can revise the negative tone to reflect a more positive impression.
Negative
You failed to include your credit 
card number, so we can’t mail your 
order.
Your letter of May 2 claims that 
you returned a defective headset.
You cannot park in Lot H until 
April 1.
You won’t be sorry that . . .
Positive
We look forward to completing 
your order as soon as we receive 
your credit card number.
Your May 2 letter describes a head-
set you returned.
You may park in Lot H starting 
April 1.
You will be happy that . . .
Courteous Language
Maintaining a courteous tone involves not just guarding against rudeness but also 
avoiding words that sound demanding or preachy. Expressions such as you should,
you must, and you have to cause people to instinctively react with Oh, yeah? One 
remedy is to turn these demands into rhetorical questions that begin with Will you 
please . . . . Giving reasons for a request also softens the tone.
Even when you feel justified in displaying anger, remember that losing your tem-
per or being sarcastic will seldom accomplish your goals as a business communicator: 
to inform, to persuade, and to create goodwill. When you are irritated, frustrated, 
or infuriated, keep cool and try to defuse the situation. In dealing with customers in 
telephone conversations, use polite phrases such as It was a pleasure speaking with 
you, I would be happy to assist you with that, and Thank you for being so patient.
Less Courteous
You must complete the report 
before Friday.
You should organize a car pool in 
this department
This is the second time I’ve written. 
Can’t you get anything right?
Am I the only one who can read the 
operating manual?
More Courteous and Helpful
Will you please complete the report 
by Friday.
Organizing a car pool will reduce 
your transportation costs and help 
preserve the environment.
Please credit my account for $450. 
My latest statement shows that the 
error noted in my letter of April 2 
has not been corrected.
Let’s review the operating manual 
together so that you can get your doc-
uments to print correctly next time.
Positive language creates 
goodwill and gives more 
options to receivers.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“Negative tone can hurt your 
company in many ways. It 
can lose customers, it can 
generate lawsuits and, if 
inflammatory rhetoric is 
found in a discoverable e-mail 
or log notes, a few words 
might cost your company a 
whopping settlement and 
punitive damages in a bad-
faith lawsuit.”

42 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
inclusive Language
A business writer who is alert and empathic will strive to use words that include 
rather than exclude people. Some words have been called sexist because they seem 
to exclude females. Notice the use of the masculine pronouns he and his in the fol-
lowing sentences:
If a physician is needed, he will be called.
Every renter must read his rental agreement carefully.
These sentences illustrate an age-old grammatical rule called “common gender.” When 
a speaker or writer did not know the gender (sex) of an individual, masculine pronouns 
(such as he or his) were used. Masculine pronouns were understood to indicate both men 
and women. Today, however, sensitive writers and speakers replace common-gender 
pronouns with alternate inclusive constructions. You can use any of four alternatives.
Sexist/Noninclusive 
Every attorney has ten minutes for his summation.
Alternative 1 
 All attorneys have ten minutes for their summations. 
(Use a plural noun and plural pronoun.)
Alternative 2 
 Attorneys have ten minutes for summations. (Omit the 
pronoun entirely.)
Alternative 3 
 Every attorney has ten minutes for a summation. (Use 
an article instead of a pronoun.)
Alternative 4 
 Every attorney has ten minutes for his or her summa-
tion. (Use both a masculine and a feminine pronoun.)
Note that the last alternative, which includes a masculine and a feminine pronoun, 
is wordy and awkward. Try not to use it frequently.
Other words are considered sexist because they suggest stereotypes. For exam-
ple, the nouns fireman and mailman suggest that only men hold these positions. 
You can avoid offending your listener or reader by using neutral job titles, such as 
those shown here:
Noninclusive Job Titles
chairman 
stewardess
fireman 
waiter, waitress
mailman 
workman
policeman
Inclusive, Neutral Job Titles
department head 
flight attendant
firefighter 
server
letter carrier 
worker
police officer
Plain english
Business communicators who are conscious of their audience try to use plain language 
that expresses clear meaning. They avoid showy words, long sentences, and confusing 
expressions. Some business, legal, and government documents, however, are written 
in an inflated and confusing style that obscures meaning. This style of writing has 
been given various terms such as legalese, federalese, bureaucratic gobbledygook, 
doublespeak, and the official style.
Over the past 30 years, consumer groups and the government have joined forces 
in the Plain English movement. It encourages businesses, professional organiza-
tions, and government bodies to write any official document—such as a contract, 
warranty, insurance policy, or lease—in clear, concise language.3 As a result of the 
Plain English movement, numerous states have passed laws requiring that business 
contracts and public documents be written in plain language. The nonprofit Center 
for Plain Language in Washington, D.C., urges government and business officials to 
use clear, understandable language in laws and business documents so that people 
can “find what they need, understand what they find, and act on that understand-
ing.”4 That’s exactly what business writers should do.
Sensitive communicators 
avoid language that 
excludes people.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“Simple changes can have 
profound results. . . . Plain 
talk isn’t only rewriting. It’s 
rethinking your approach 
and really personalizing your 
message to the audience and 
to the reader.”

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
43
One branch of the government, the Securities and Exchange Commission, has even 
written “A Plain English Handbook.” This booklet illustrates many of the principles 
of good writing, some of which are shown in Figure 2.5. Throughout this textbook 
we will be practicing these principles to help you improve your writing skills.
Don’t be impressed by high-sounding language and legalese such as aforemen-
tioned, herein, thereafter, hereinafter, and similar expressions. Your writing will be 
better understood if you use plain English.
Familiar Words
Clear messages contain words that are familiar and meaningful to the receiver. 
How can we know what is meaningful to a given receiver? Although we can’t know 
with certainty, we can avoid long or unfamiliar words that have simpler synonyms. 
Whenever possible in business communication, substitute short, common, simple 
words. Don’t, however, give up a precise word if it says exactly what you mean.
Although you yourself may not use some of the words in the following list of 
unfamiliar words, you may see them in business documents. Remember that the 
simple alternatives shown here will make messages more readable for most people.
Less Familiar 
Words
ascertain
compensate
conceptualize
encompass
hypothesize
monitor
operational
Simple 
Alternatives
learn
pay
see
include
guess
check
working
Less Familiar 
Words
perpetuate
perplexing
reciprocate
remuneration
stipulate
terminate
vis-à-vis
Simple 
Alternatives
continue
troubling
return
salary
require
end
in relation to, 
about
© SCOTT ADAMS / DIST. BY UNITED FEATURE SYNDICATE, INC.
Use the active voice with strong verbs 
(instead of the stock was acquired by 
the investor, write the investor bought 
the stock).
Don’t be afraid of personal pronouns 
(e.g., I, we, and you).
Bring abstractions down to earth 
(instead of asset, write one share of 
IBM common stock).
•
•
•
Omit superfluous words (instead of in the 
event that, write if ).
Use positive expression (instead of it is 
not unlike, write it is similar ).
Prefer short sentences.
Remove jargon and legalese.
Keep the subject, verb, and object close 
together.
Keep sentence structure parallel.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 2.5 Plain English Pointers
Familiar words are 
more meaningful to 
readers and listeners.

44 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
As you revise a message, you will have a chance to correct any writing problems. 
Notice in Figure 2.6 what a difference revision makes. Before revision, the message 
failed to use familiar language. Many negative ideas could have been expressed posi-
tively. After revision, the message is shorter, is more conversational, and emphasizes 
audience benefits.
Figure 2.6 Improving the Tone in an E-Mail Message

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
45
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
In this chapter you learned that good business writing is audi-
ence centered, purposeful, persuasive, and economical. To 
achieve these results, business communicators typically fol-
low a systematic writing process. This process includes three 
phases: prewriting, writing, and revising. In the prewriting 
phase, communicators analyze the task and the audience. 
They select an appropriate channel to deliver the message, 
and they consider ways to adapt their message to the task 
and the audience. Effective techniques include spotlighting 
audience benefits, cultivating the “you” view, striving to use 
conversational language, and expressing ideas positively. 
Good communicators also use courteous and inclusive lan-
guage, plain English, and familiar words.
The next chapter continues to examine the writing pro-
cess. It presents additional techniques to help you become 
a better writer. You will learn how to eliminate repetitious and 
redundant wording, as well as how to avoid wordy preposi-
tional phrases, long lead-ins, needless adverbs, and mis-
placed modifiers.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. Why do you think employers prefer messages that are not 
written like high school and college essays?
 2. How can the three-phase writing process help the writer 
of a business report as well as the writer of an oral 
presentation?
 3. Discuss the following statement: “The English language 
is a land mine—it is filled with terms that are easily 
misinterpreted as derogatory and others that are blatantly 
insulting. . . . Being fair and objective is not enough; 
employers must also appear to be so.”5
 4. Why is writing in a natural, conversational tone difficult for 
many people?
 5. If computer software is increasingly able to detect writing 
errors, can business communicators stop studying writing 
techniques? Why or why not?
C
Chapter review
 6. How can a writer make a message audience oriented and develop audience benefits? Provide an 
original example.
 7. List the three phases of the writing process and summarize what happens in each phase. Which phase 
requires the most time?
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S

46 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
 8. What six factors are important in selecting an appropriate channel to deliver a message? What makes 
one channel richer than another?
 9. How does profiling the audience help a business communicator prepare a message?
 10. List three specific techniques for developing a warm, friendly, and conversational tone in business 
messages.
 11. Why is it OK to use instant messaging abbreviations (such as BTW ) and happy faces in messages 
to friends but not OK in business messages?
 12. Why does positive language usually tell more than negative language? Give an original example.
 13. List five examples of sexist pronouns and nouns.
 14. List at least five principles of the Plain English movement.
 15. Why should business writers strive to use short, common, simple words? Does this “dumb down” 
business messages?

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
47
Selecting Communication Channels
Your Task. Using Figure 2.2, suggest the best communication channels for the following messages. Assume that all channels 
are available. Be prepared to explain your choices.
 16. You want to know what team members are available immediately for a quick teleconference meeting. They are all 
workaholics and stuck to their computers.
 17. As a manager during a company reorganization, you must tell nine workers that their employment is being terminated.
 18. You need to know whether Thomas in Reprographics can produce a rush job for you in two days.
 19. A prospective client in Italy wants price quotes for a number of your products—pronto!
 20. As assistant to the vice president, you are to investigate the possibility of developing internship programs with several 
nearby colleges and universities.
 21. You must respond to a notice from the Internal Revenue Service insisting that you did not pay the correct amount for last 
quarter’s employer’s taxes.
A
Activities
W
Writing improvement exercises
Audience Benefits and the “You” View
Your Task. Revise the following sentences to emphasize the perspective of the audience and the “you” 
view.
 22. We regret to announce that the bookstore will distribute free iPods only to students in classes in 
which the instructor has requested these devices as learning tools.
 23. Our safety policy forbids us from renting power equipment to anyone who cannot demonstrate 
proficiency in its use.
 24. To prevent us from possibly losing large sums of money in stolen identity schemes, our bank now 
requires verification of any large check presented for immediate payment.
 25. So that we may bring our customer records up-to-date and eliminate the expense of duplicate 
mailings, we are asking you to complete and return the enclosed card.

48 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
 26. For just $219 per person, we have arranged a four-day, three-night getaway package to Orlando that 
includes hotel accommodations, theme park tickets, and complimentary breakfasts.
 27. We find it necessary to request that all employees complete the enclosed questionnaire so that we 
may develop a master schedule for summer vacations.
 28. To enable us to continue our policy of selling name brands at discount prices, we can give store 
credit but we cannot give cash refunds on returned merchandise
Conversational, Professional Tone
Your Task. Revise the following sentences to make the tone conversational yet professional.
 29. Per your recent e-mail, the undersigned takes pride in informing you that we are pleased to be able 
to participate in the Toys for Tots drive.
 30. Pursuant to your message of the 15th, please be advised that your shipment was sent August 14.
 31. Yo, Jeff! Look, dude, I need you to pound on Ramona so we can drop this budget thingy in her 
lap.
 32. BTW, Danika was totally ticked off when the manager accused her of ripping off office supplies. She 
may split.
 33. He didn’t have the guts to badmouth her 2 her face.
 34. The undersigned respectfully reminds affected individuals that employees desirous of changing their 
health plans must do so before November 1.
Positive and Courteous Language 
Your Task. Revise the following statements to make them more positive and courteous.
 35. Employees are not allowed to use instant messaging until a company policy is established.
 36. We must withhold authorizing payment of your consultant’s fees because our CPA claims that your 
work is incomplete.
 37. Plans for the new health center cannot move forward without full community support.

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
49
 38. This is the last time I’m writing to try to get you to record my October 3 payment of $359.50 to my 
account! Anyone who can read can see from the attached documents that I’ve tried to explain this 
to you before.
 39. Although you apparently failed to read the operator’s manual, we are sending you a replacement 
blade for your food processor. Next time read page 18 carefully so that you will know how to attach 
this blade.
 40. Everyone in this department must begin using new passwords as of midnight June 15. Because of 
flagrant password misuse, we find it necessary to impose this new rule so that we can protect your 
personal information and company records.
Inclusive Language
Your Task. Revise the following sentences to eliminate terms that are considered sexist or that suggest 
stereotypes.
 41. Every employee must wear his photo ID on the job.
 42. Media Moguls hired Sheena Love, an African American, for the position of project manager.
 43. A skilled assistant proofreads her boss’s documents and catches any errors he makes.
 44. The conference will include special excursions for the wives of executives.
 45. Serving on the panel are a lady veterinarian, a female doctor, two businessmen, and an Indian CPA.
Plain English and Familiar Words
Your Task. Revise the following sentences to use plain expression and more familiar words.
 46. The salary we are offering is commensurate with remuneration for other managers.
 47. To expedite ratification of this agreement, we urge you to vote in the affirmative.
 48. In a dialogue with the manager, I learned that you plan to terminate our contract.
 49. Did the braking problem materialize subsequent to our recall effort?
 50. Pursuant to your invitation, we will interrogate our agent.

50 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Pronouns
Review Sections 1.07–1.09 in the Grammar Review section of the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. 
Then study each of the following statements. In the space provided, write the word that com-
pletes the statement correctly and the number of the G/M principle illustrated. When you finish, 
compare your responses with those provided near the end of the book. If your responses differ, 
study carefully the principles in parentheses.
Example The Employee Development Committee will make (its, their) recommendation soon.
 1. I hoped Rhonda would call. Was it (she, her) who left the message?
 2. Everyone on the men’s soccer team must be fitted for (his, their) uniform.
 3. Even instant messages sent between the manager and (he, him) will be revealed in the 
court case.
 4. Does anyone in the office know for (who, whom) these DVDs were ordered?
 5. It looks as if (her’s, hers) is the only report that cites electronic sources correctly.
 6. Thomas asked Matt and (I, me, myself) to help him complete his report.
 7. My friend and (I, me, myself) were also asked to work on Saturdays.
 8. Both printers were sent for repairs, but (yours, your’s) will be returned shortly.
 9. Give the budget figures to (whoever, whomever) asked for them.
 10. Everyone except the broker and (I, me, myself) claimed a share of the commission.
 11. No one knows that problem better than (he, him, himself).
 12. Investment brochures and information were sent to (we, us) shareholders.
 13. If any one of the female tourists has lost (their, her) scarf, she should see the driver.
 14. Neither the glamour nor the excitement of the position had lost (its, it’s, their) appeal.
 15. Any new subscriber may cancel (their, his or her) subscription within the first month.
Video Library 1, Building Workplace Communication 
Skills. Your instructor may show you a video titled Guffey’s 
3-x-3 Writing Process Develops Fluent Workplace Skills. 
It shows three phases of the writing process including pre-
writing, writing, and revising. You will see how the writing 
process guides the development of a complete message. 
This video illustrates concepts in Chapters 2, 3, and 4.
V
Video resource
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 2
its 
(1.09d)

Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages 
51
The following e-mail message has errors in spelling, proofreading, noun plurals, conversa-
tional tone, unfamiliar words, and other writing techniques studied in this chapter. You may 
either (a) use standard proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or 
(b) download the document from your companion Web site and revise at your computer. 
Study the guidelines in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 2
Max Westerﬁeld <max.westerﬁeld@cola.com>
Max,
Herewith is a summation of the research project assigned to Richard Adams and I vis-à-vis
Pepsi XL. As you know, this is the reduced-sugar cola drink being introduced by our 
company’s No. 1 competitor. 
In just under one year, Pepsi-Cola developed this innovative drink. It contains mix of 50 
percent sugar (high-fructose corn syrup) and 50 percent artiﬁcial sweetener (aspartame). 
Apparently, Pepsi-Cola plans to spend over $8 million to introduce the drink and to ascertain 
consumers’ reactions to it. It will be tested on the shelfs of grocerys, mass merchants, and 
conveneince stores in ﬁve citys in Florida.
The company’s spokesperson said, “The ‘X’ stands for excelent taste, and the ‘L’ for less 
sugar.” Aimed at young adults who don’t like the taste of aspartame but who want to control 
calorys, the new cola is a hybrid sugar and diet drink. Our studys have shown that similar 
drinks tried in this country in the 1990s were unsuccessful. However, a 50-calorie low-sugar 
cola introduced in Canada two year ago was well received. In Japan a 40-calorie soda was not 
successful until it was marketed heavily. 
Neither Mr. Adams nor myself hypothesize that this country’s consumers will be interested in 
a midcalorie cola at this time. In fact, all of we analysts in the lab were ﬂabbergasted at Wall 
Street’s favorable response to the Pepsi announcement. Pepsi-Cola’s stock value augmented 
sharply. 
If the decision were up to Mr. Adams or I, him and I would take a wait-and-see attitude 
toward the introduction of our own low-sugar drink. We do not want to badmouth the new 
drink, but we believe it is smarter to consider our own drink after we monitor the success of 
Pepsi XL. We cannot send our full report until June 1.
Gil
Gilbert W. Ho
Research and Development
Ofﬁce: (914) 682-9811
Cell: (914) 358-3802
Gilbert W. Ho <gilbert.ho@cola.com>
Analysis of Pepsi XL

52 
Chapter 2: Planning Business Messages
Sharpening Your Skills for Critical Thinking, 
Problem Solving, and Decision Making
Gone are the days when management expected workers to check their brains at the door 
and do only as told. Today, you will be expected to use your brains when thinking critically. 
You will be solving problems and making decisions. Much of this book is devoted to help-
ing you solve problems and communicate those decisions to management, fellow workers, 
clients, the government, and the public. Faced with a problem or an issue, most of us do a 
lot of worrying before separating the issues or making a decision. You can change all that 
worrying to directed thinking by channeling it into the following procedure:
Identify and clarify the problem. Your first task is to recognize that a problem exists. 
Some problems are big and unmistakable, such as failure of an air-freight delivery ser-
vice to get packages to customers on time. Other problems may be continuing annoy-
ances, such as regularly running out of toner for an office copy machine. The first step 
in reaching a solution is pinpointing the problem area.
Gather information. Learn more about the problem situation. Look for possible causes 
and solutions. This step may mean checking files, calling suppliers, or brainstorming 
with fellow workers. For example, the air-freight delivery service would investigate the 
tracking systems of the commercial airlines carrying its packages to determine what 
is going wrong.
Evaluate the evidence. Where did the information come from? Does it represent vari-
ous points of view? What biases could be expected from each source? How accurate 
is the information gathered? Is it fact or opinion? For example, it is a fact that packages 
are missing; it is an opinion that they are merely lost and will turn up eventually.
Consider alternatives and implications. Draw conclusions from the gathered evidence 
and pose solutions. Then weigh the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative. 
What are the costs, benefits, and consequences? What are the obstacles, and how can 
they be handled? Most important, what solution best serves your goals and those of your 
organization? Here is where your creativity is especially important.
Choose the best alternative and test it. Select an alternative, and try it out to see if 
it meets your expectations. If it does, implement your decision and put it into action. 
If it doesn’t, rethink your alternatives. The freight company decided to give its unhappy 
customers free delivery service to make up for the lost packages and downtime. Be 
sure to continue monitoring and adjusting the solution to ensure its effectiveness over 
time.
Career Application. Let’s return to the McDonald’s problem (discussed on page 33) in 
which some franchise owners are unhappy with the multiple lines for service. Customers 
don’t seem to know where to stand to be the next served. Tempers flare when aggressive 
customers cut in line, and other customers spend so much time protecting their places in 
line that they are not ready to order. As a franchise owner, you want to solve this problem. 
Any new procedures, however, must be approved by a majority of McDonald’s owners in 
a district. You know that McDonald’s management feels that the multiline system accom-
modates higher volumes of customers more quickly than a single-line system. In addition, 
customers are turned off when they see a long line.
Your Task
Individually or with a team, use the critical-thinking steps outlined here. Begin by clarify-
ing the problem.
Where could you gather information? Would it be wise to see what your competitors are 
doing? How do banks handle customer lines? Airlines?
Evaluate your findings and consider alternatives. What are the pros and cons of each 
alternative?
Within your team choose the best alternative. Present your recommendation to your 
class and give your reasons for choosing it.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Career Skills

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
53
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / WEBPHOTOGRAPHEER
Collecting Information to Compose Messages
Because all business and professional people—even those in technical positions—are 
exchanging more messages than ever before, you can expect to be doing your share 
of writing on the job. The more quickly you can put your ideas down and the more 
clearly you can explain what needs to be said, the more successful and happy you 
will be in your career. Being able to write is also critical to promotions. That’s why 
we devote three chapters to teaching you a writing process, summarized in Figure 
3.1. This process guides you through the steps necessary to write rapidly but, more 
important, clearly. Instead of struggling with a writing assignment and not knowing 
where to begin or what to say, you are learning an effective process that you can 
use in school and on the job.
The previous chapter focused on the prewriting stage of the writing process. You 
studied the importance of using a conversational tone, positive language, plain and 
courteous expression, and familiar words. This chapter addresses the second stage 
of the process: gathering information, organizing it into outlines, and composing 
messages.
No smart businessperson would begin writing a message before collecting the 
needed information. We call this collection process research, a rather formal-sounding 
term. For simple documents, though, the process can be quite informal. Research is 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Contrast formal and informal methods of researching data and generating ideas 
for messages.
• Organize information into outlines.
• Compare direct and indirect patterns for organizing ideas.
• Write effective sentences using four sentence types while avoiding three 
common sentence faults.
• Understand how to emphasize ideas, use active and passive voice effectively, 
achieve parallelism, and avoid dangling and misplaced modifiers. 
• Draft powerful paragraphs that incorporate topic sentences, support sentences, 
and transitional expressions to build coherence.
Composing 
Business 
Messages
3
C H A P T E R  3
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“You can’t move up without 
writing skills.”

54 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
necessary before beginning to write because the information you collect helps shape 
the message. Discovering significant data after a message is completed often means 
starting over and reorganizing. To avoid frustration and inaccurate messages, collect 
information that answers these questions:
• What does the receiver need to know about this topic?
• What is the receiver to do?
• How is the receiver to do it and when?
• What will happen if the receiver doesn’t do it?
Whenever your communication problem requires more information than you have 
in your head or at your fingertips, you must conduct research. This research may 
be formal or informal.
Formal Research Methods
Long reports and complex business problems generally require some use of formal 
research methods. Let’s say you are a market specialist for Coca-Cola, and your boss 
asks you to evaluate the impact on Coke sales of private-label or generic soft drinks 
(the bargain-basement-brand knockoffs sold at Kmart and other outlets). Or, assume 
you must write a term paper for a college class. Both tasks require more data than you 
have in your head or at your fingertips. To conduct formal research, you could:
FIGURE 3.1 The Writing Process
2
3
PREWRITING
WRITING
REVISING
Analyzing
Anticipating
Adapting
1
Researching
Organizing
Composing
Revising
Proofreading
Evaluating
© AP IMAGES / JUNJI KUROKAWA
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
International product teams at PepsiCo recently 
introduced a new cola with a unique name: Pepsi 
Ice Cucumber. This is definitely not your garden-
variety soda. With its emerald green color, vegetable 
flavor, and ice crystal packaging, Ice Cucumber 
is formulated to keep consumers feeling cool and 
refreshed in the summer heat. If cucumber-flavored 
cola doesn’t sound very refreshing, you are probably 
not living in Japan. Pepsi’s limited edition veggie 
drink was developed specifically for Japanese 
tastes. What role does research play in creating new 
products and their brand-promotion messages?
Formal research may 
include searching libraries 
and electronic databases 
or investigating primary 
sources (interviews, 
surveys, and experiments).

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
55
• Search manually. You will find helpful background and supplementary informa-
tion through manual searching of resources in public and college libraries. These 
traditional sources include books and newspaper, magazine, and journal articles. 
Other sources are encyclopedias, reference books, handbooks, dictionaries, direc-
tories, and almanacs.
• Access electronically. Much of the printed material just described is now avail-
able from the Internet, databases, CDs, or DVDs that can be accessed by com-
puter. College and public libraries subscribe to retrieval services that permit you 
to access most periodic literature. You can also find extraordinary amounts of 
information by searching the Web. You will learn more about using electronic 
sources in Chapters 9 and 10.
• Go to the source. For firsthand information, go directly to the source. For the 
Coca-Cola report, for example, you could find out what consumers really think by 
conducting interviews or surveys, by putting together questionnaires, or by orga-
nizing focus groups. Formal research includes structured sampling and controls 
that enable investigators to make accurate judgments and valid predictions.
• Conduct scientific experiments. Instead of merely asking for the target audience’s 
opinion, scientific researchers present choices with controlled variables. Let’s say, for 
example, that Coca-Cola wants to determine at what price and under what circum-
stances consumers would switch from Coca-Cola to a generic brand. The results of 
experimentation would provide valuable data for managerial decision making.
Because formal research techniques are particularly necessary for reports, you 
will study resources and techniques more extensively in Chapters 9 and 10.
Informal Research and Idea Generation
Most routine tasks—such as composing e-mail messages, memos, letters, informa-
tional reports, and oral presentations—require data that you can collect informally. 
Here are some techniques for collecting informal data and for generating ideas:
• Look in the files. If you are responding to an inquiry, you often can find the answer 
to the inquiry by investigating the company files or by consulting colleagues.
• Talk with your boss. Get information from the individual making the assignment. 
What does that person know about the topic? What slant should be taken? What 
other sources would he or she suggest?
• Interview the target audience. Consider talking with individuals at whom the 
message is aimed. They can provide clarifying information that tells you what 
they want to know and how you should shape your remarks.
• Conduct an informal survey. Gather unscientific but helpful information by 
using questionnaires or telephone surveys. In preparing a memo report predicting 
the success of a proposed fitness center, for example, circulate a questionnaire 
asking for employee reactions.
• Brainstorm for ideas. Alone or with others, discuss ideas for the writing task at 
hand, and record at least a dozen ideas without judging them. Small groups are 
especially fruitful in brainstorming because people spin ideas off one another.
Organizing to Show Relationships
Once you have collected data, you must find some way to organize it. Organizing 
includes two processes: grouping and patterning. Well-organized messages group 
similar items together; ideas follow a sequence that helps the reader understand rela-
tionships and accept the writer’s views. Unorganized messages proceed free-form, 
jumping from one thought to another. Such messages fail to emphasize important 
points. Puzzled readers can’t see how the pieces fit together, and they become frus-
trated and irritated. Many communication experts regard poor organization as the 
greatest failing of business writers. Two simple techniques can help you organize 
data: the scratch list and the outline.
Good sources of primary 
information are interviews, 
surveys, questionnaires, 
and focus groups.
Informal research may 
include looking in the ﬁ les, 
talking with your boss, 
interviewing the target 
audience, conducting 
an informal survey, 
and brainstorming.
Writers of well-organized 
messages group similar 
ideas together so that 
readers can see relationships 
and follow arguments.

56 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
In developing simple messages, some writers make a quick scratch list of the 
topics they wish to cover. They then compose a message at their computers directly 
from the scratch list. Most writers, though, need to organize their ideas—especially 
if the project is complex—into a hierarchy, such as an outline. The beauty of pre-
paring an outline is that it gives you a chance to organize your thinking before you 
get bogged down in word choice and sentence structure. Figure 3.2 above shows a 
format for an outline.
The Direct Pattern
After developing an outline, you will need to decide where in the message to place the 
main idea. Placing the main idea at the beginning of the message is called the direct 
pattern. In the direct pattern the main idea comes first, followed by details, an expla-
nation, or evidence. Placing the main idea later in the message (after the details, expla-
nation, or evidence) is called the indirect pattern. The pattern you select is determined 
by how you expect the audience to react to the message, as shown in Figure 3.3.
In preparing to write any message, you need to anticipate the audience’s reaction 
to your ideas and frame your message accordingly. When you expect the reader to 
be pleased, mildly interested, or, at worst, neutral—use the direct pattern. That is, 
put your main point—the purpose of your message—in the first or second sentence. 
Compare the direct and indirect patterns in the following memo openings. Notice 
how long it takes to get to the main idea in the indirect opening.
Indirect Opening
For the past several years, we have 
had a continuing problem scheduling 
vacations, personal days, and sick 
time. Our Human Resources people 
struggle with unscheduled absences. 
After considerable investigation, the 
Management Council has decided 
to try a centralized paid time-off 
program starting January 1. This 
memo will describe its benefits and 
procedures.
Direct Opening
To improve the scheduling of 
absences, a new paid time-off pro-
gram will begin January 1. The pro-
cedures and benefits are as follows.
FIGURE 3.2 Format for an Outline
Title: Major Idea or Purpose
I. First major component
 
A. First subpoint
 
 
1. Detail, illustration, evidence
 
 
2. Detail, illustration, evidence
 
 
3. Detail, illustration, evidence
 
B. Second subpoint
 
 
1.
 
 
2.
II. Second major component
 
A. First subpoint
 
 
1.
 
 
2.
 
B. Second subpoint
 
 
1.
 
 
2.
 
 
3.
Tips for Making Outlines
Define the main topic in the title.
Divide the topic into main points, preferably three 
to five.
Break the components into subpoints.
Don’t put a single item under a major component 
if you have only one subpoint; integrate it with the 
main item above it or reorganize.
Strive to make each component exclusive (no 
overlapping).
Use details, illustrations, and evidence to support 
subpoints.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Business messages typically 
follow either (a) the direct 
pattern, with the main idea 
ﬁ rst, or (b) the indirect 
pattern, with the main idea 
following an explanation 
and evidence.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Writing today is not a frill for 
the few, but an essential skill 
for the many.”

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
57
Explanations, background, and details should follow the direct opening. What’s 
important is getting to the main idea quickly. This direct method, also called front-
loading, has at least three advantages:
• Saves the reader’s time. Many of today’s businesspeople can devote only a few 
moments to each message. Messages that take too long to get to the point may 
lose their readers along the way.
• Sets a proper frame of mind. Learning the purpose up front helps the reader put 
the subsequent details and explanations in perspective. Without a clear opening, 
the reader may be thinking, Why am I being told this?
• Prevents frustration. Readers forced to struggle through excessive verbiage 
before reaching the main idea become frustrated. They resent the writer. Poorly 
organized messages create a negative impression of the writer.
This frontloading technique works best with audiences who are likely to be 
receptive to or at least not likely to disagree with what you have to say. Typical 
business messages that follow the direct pattern include routine requests and 
responses, orders and acknowledgments, nonsensitive memos, e-mail messages, 
informational reports, and informational oral presentations. All these tasks 
have one element in common: none has a sensitive subject that will upset the 
reader.
The Indirect Pattern 
When you expect the audience to be uninterested, unwilling, displeased, or perhaps 
even hostile, the indirect pattern is more appropriate. In this pattern you don’t 
reveal the main idea until after you have offered an explanation and evidence. This 
approach works well with three kinds of messages: (a) bad news, (b) ideas that 
require persuasion, and (c) sensitive news, especially when being transmitted to 
superiors. The indirect pattern has these benefits:
FIGURE 3.3 Audience Response Determines Pattern of Organization
If displeased
or disappointed
Direct
Pattern
Indirect
Pattern
If hostile
If mildly
interested
If pleased
If unwilling
or uninterested
If neutral
Good news
or main idea
Bad news
or main idea
Frontloading saves the 
reader’s time, establishes 
the proper frame of mind, 
and prevents frustration.
The indirect pattern works 
best when the audience may 
be uninterested, unwilling, 
displeased, or even hostile.

58 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
• Respects the feelings of the audience. Bad news is always painful, but the 
trauma can be lessened when the receiver is prepared for it.
• Encourages a fair hearing. Messages that may upset the reader are more likely 
to be read when the main idea is delayed. Beginning immediately with a piece 
of bad news or a persuasive request, for example, may cause the receiver to stop 
reading or listening.
• Minimizes a negative reaction. A reader’s overall reaction to a negative message 
is generally improved if the news is delivered gently.
Typical business messages that could be developed indirectly include letters and 
memos that refuse requests, reject claims, and deny credit. Persuasive requests, sales 
letters, sensitive messages, and some reports and oral presentations also benefit from 
the indirect strategy. You will learn more about how to use the indirect pattern in 
Chapters 7 and 8.
In summary, business messages may be organized directly, with the main idea 
first, or indirectly, with the main idea delayed. Although these two patterns cover 
many communication problems, they should be considered neither universal nor 
unquestionable. Every business transaction is distinct. Some messages are mixed: 
part good news, part bad; part goodwill, part persuasion. In upcoming chapters 
you will practice applying the direct and indirect patterns in typical situations. 
Eventually, you will have the skills and confidence to evaluate communication 
problems and choose a pattern based on your goals.
Composing Effective Sentences
The most compelling and effective messages contain a variety of sentences rather 
than just one repeated pattern. Effective messages also avoid common sentence 
faults, and they achieve emphasis and parallelism with special sentence-writing 
techniques.
Achieving Variety With Four Sentence Types
Messages that repeat the same sentence pattern soon become boring. The way you 
construct your sentences can make your messages interesting and readable. To avoid 
monotony and to add spark to your writing, use a variety of sentence types. You 
have four sentence types from which to choose: simple, compound, complex, and 
compound-complex.
Vary your sentences to 
make your messages 
interesting and readable.
JOE RAEDLE / GETTY IMAGES
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
Home mortgage giant Fannie Mae recently issued 
a warning to “walkaway” borrowers who return keys 
to lenders and stop making house payments. The 
announcement opened with Fannie’s mission to 
“provide stability and affordability to the mortgage 
finance system in good times and turbulent times.” 
Then it delivered some tough news: foreclosed 
borrowers are not eligible to obtain another mortgage 
through the company for up to five years. In what 
circumstances is it necessary for communicators 
to delay the delivery of a message’s main idea?

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
59
A simple sentence, shown in the following example, contains one complete 
thought (an independent clause) with a subject (underlined once) and predicate verb 
(underlined twice):
Our team completed the project.
A compound sentence contains two complete but related thoughts. The two 
thoughts (independent clauses) may be joined (a) by a conjunction such as and, but, 
or or; (b) by a semicolon; or (c) by a conjunctive adverb such as however, conse-
quently, and therefore. Notice the punctuation in these examples:
The team project was challenging, and we were happy with the results.
The team project was challenging; we were happy with the results.
The team project was challenging; however, we were happy with the results.
A complex sentence contains an independent clause (a complete thought) 
and a dependent clause (a thought that cannot stand by itself). Dependent clauses 
are often introduced by words such as although, since, because, when, and if.
When dependent clauses precede independent clauses, they always are followed 
by a comma.
When we finished the team project, we held a team party.
A compound-complex sentence contains at least two independent clauses 
and one dependent clause. Because these sentences are usually long, use them 
sparingly.
Although this team project is completed, soon we will begin work on another; 
however, it will be less challenging.
Controlling Sentence Length
Regardless of the type of sentence, remember that sentence length can influence 
readability. Because your goal is to communicate clearly, try to limit your sentences 
to about 20 or fewer words. The American Press Institute reports that reader com-
prehension drops off markedly as sentences become longer:
Sentence Length
 8 words
15 words
19 words
28 words
Comprehension Rate
100%
 90%
 80%
 50%
Avoiding Three Common Sentence Faults
As you craft your sentences, beware of three common traps: fragments, run-on (fused) 
sentences, and comma-splice sentences. If any of these faults appears in a business 
message, the writer immediately loses credibility.
Fragments. One of the most serious errors a writer can make is punctuating a 
fragment as if it were a complete sentence. A fragment is usually a broken-off part 
of a complex sentence.
Fragment
Because most transactions require 
a permanent record. Good writing 
skills are critical.
The recruiter requested a writing 
sample. Even though the candidate 
seemed to communicate well.
Revision
Because most transactions require 
a permanent record, good writing 
skills are critical.
The recruiter requested a writing 
sample even though the candidate 
seemed to communicate well.
Sentences of 20 or fewer 
words have the most impact.
Fragments are broken-off 
parts of sentences and 
should not be punctuated 
as sentences.

60 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
Fragments often can be identified by the words that introduce them—words such as 
although, as, because, even, except, for example, if, instead of, since, such as, that, 
which, and when. These words introduce dependent clauses. Make sure such clauses 
always connect to independent clauses.
Run-On (Fused) Sentences. A sentence with two independent clauses must 
be joined by a coordinating conjunction (and, or, nor, but) or by a semicolon (;). 
Without a conjunction or a semicolon, a run-on sentence results.
Run-On
Most job seekers present a printed 
résumé some are also using Web 
sites as electronic portfolios
One candidate sent an e-mail résumé 
another sent a traditional résumé.
Revision
Most job seekers present a printed 
résumé. Some are also using Web 
sites as electronic portfolios.
One candidate sent an e-mail résumé; 
another sent a traditional résumé.
Comma-Splice Sentences. A comma splice results when a writer joins 
(splices together) two independent clauses with a comma. Independent clauses 
may be joined with a coordinating conjunction (and, or, nor, but) or a conjunctive 
adverb (however, consequently, therefore, and others). Notice that clauses joined by 
coordinating conjunctions require only a comma. Clauses joined by a coordinating 
adverb require a semicolon. Here are three ways to rectify a comma splice:
Comma Splice
Some employees 
responded by e-mail, 
others picked up the 
telephone.
Possible Revisions
Some employees 
responded by e-mail, 
and others picked up 
the telephone.
Some employees 
responded by e-mail; 
however, others picked 
up the telephone.
Some employees 
responded by e-mail; 
others picked up the 
telephone.
Improving Writing Techniques
Writers can significantly improve their messages by working on a few writing tech-
niques. In this section we focus on emphasizing and de-emphasizing ideas, using 
active and passive voice strategically, developing parallelism, and avoiding dangling 
and misplaced modifiers.
Developing Emphasis
When you are talking with someone, you can emphasize your main ideas by saying 
them loudly or by repeating them slowly. You could even pound the table if you 
want to show real emphasis! Another way you could signal the relative importance 
of an idea is by raising your eyebrows or by shaking your head or whispering in a 
low voice. But when you write, you must rely on other means to tell your readers 
which ideas are more important than others. Emphasis in writing can be achieved 
primarily in two ways: mechanically or stylistically.
Achieving Emphasis Through Mechanics. To emphasize an idea in 
print, a writer may use any of the following devices:
“Sentence fragments, comma splices, run-ons — who cares? 
I know what I meant!”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
When two independent 
clauses are run together 
without punctuation or 
a conjunction, a run-on 
(fused) sentence results.
When two independent 
clauses are joined by 
a comma without a 
conjunction, a comma 
splice results.

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
61
Underlining 
Underlining draws the eye to a word.
Italics and boldface 
Using italics or boldface conveys special meaning.
Font changes 
 Selecting a large, small, or diﬀ erent font draws interest.
All caps 
Printing words in ALL CAPS is like shouting them.
Dashes 
Dashes—used sparingly—can be effective.
Tabulation 
Listing items vertically makes them stand out:
 
1. First item
 
2. Second item
 
3. Third item
Other means of achieving mechanical emphasis include the arrangement of space, 
color, lines, boxes, columns, titles, headings, and subheadings. Today’s software 
and color printers provide a wonderful array of capabilities for setting off ideas. 
More tips on achieving emphasis are coming in Chapter 4, where we cover docu-
ment design.
Achieving Emphasis Through Style. Although mechanical means are 
occasionally appropriate, more often a writer achieves emphasis stylistically. That 
is, the writer chooses words carefully and constructs sentences skillfully to empha-
size main ideas and de-emphasize minor or negative ideas. Here are four suggestions 
for emphasizing ideas stylistically:
• Use vivid words. Vivid words are emphatic because the reader can picture ideas 
clearly.
General
One business uses personal selling 
techniques
Someone will contact you as soon 
as possible.
Vivid
Avon uses face-to-face selling 
techniques.
Ms. Stevens will telephone you 
before 5 P.M. tomorrow, May 3.
• Label the main idea. If an idea is significant, tell the reader.
Unlabeled
Consider looking for a job online, 
but also focus on networking.
We shop here because of the cus-
tomer service and low prices.
Labeled
Consider looking for a job online; 
but, most important, focus on 
networking.
We like the customer service, but 
the primary reason for shopping 
here is low prices.
• Place the important idea first or last in the sentence. Ideas have less com-
petition from surrounding words when they appear first or last in a sentence. 
Observe how the concept of productivity can be emphasized by its position in the 
sentence:
Unemphatic
Profit-sharing plans are more 
effective in increasing productivity 
when they are linked to individual 
performance rather than to group 
performance.
Emphatic
Productivity is more likely to be 
increased when profit-sharing 
plans are linked to individual 
performance rather than to group 
performance.
Profit-sharing plans linked to indi-
vidual performance rather than to 
group performance are more effec-
tive in increasing productivity.
You can emphasize an 
idea mechanically by using 
underlining, italics, boldface, 
font changes, all caps, 
dashes, and tabulation.
You can emphasize ideas 
stylistically by using vivid 
words, labeling the main 
idea, and positioning the 
main idea strategically.

62 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
• Place the important idea in a simple sentence or in an independent clause.
Don’t dilute the effect of the idea by making it share the spotlight with other 
words and clauses.
Unemphatic
Although you are the first trainee 
we have hired for this program, 
we had many candidates and 
expect to expand the program in 
the future. (Main idea is lost in a 
dependent clause.)
Emphatic
You are the first trainee we have 
hired for this program. (Simple 
sentence)
Although we considered many 
can didates, you are the first 
trainee we have hired for this 
program. (Independent clause 
contains main idea.)
De-emphasizing When Necessary. To de-emphasize an idea, such as 
bad news, try one of the following stylistic devices:
• Use general words.
De-emphasizes Harsh Statement
Our records indicate that your 
employ ment status has recently 
changed.
Emphasizes Harsh Statement
Our records indicate that you 
were recently fired.
• Place the bad news in a dependent clause connected to an independent 
clause with something positive. In sentences with dependent clauses, the main 
emphasis is always on the independent clause.
De-emphasizes Bad News
Although credit cannot be issued 
at this time, you can fill your 
immediate needs on a cash basis 
with our special plan.
Emphasizes Bad News
We cannot issue you credit at this 
time, but we have a special plan 
that will allow you to fill your 
immediate needs on a cash basis.
Using Active and Passive Voice
In composing messages, you may use active or passive voice to express your mean-
ing. In active voice, the subject is the doer of the action (The manager hired Jim). 
In passive voice, the subject is acted upon (Jim was hired [by the manager]). Notice 
that in the passive voice the attention shifts from the doer to the receiver of the 
action. You don’t even have to reveal the doer if you choose not to. Writers gener-
ally prefer active voice because it is more direct, clear, and concise. Nevertheless, 
passive voice is useful in certain instances, such as the following:
• To emphasize an action or the recipient of the action. An investigation was 
launched. 
• To de-emphasize negative news. Cash refunds cannot be made.
• To conceal the doer of an action. An error was made in our sales figures.
How can you tell whether a verb is active or passive? Identify the subject of the 
sentence and decide whether the subject is doing the acting or is being acted upon. 
For example, in the sentence An appointment was made for January 1, the subject is 
appointment. The subject is being acted upon; therefore, the verb (was made) is pas-
sive. Another clue in identifying passive-voice verbs is that they generally include a to 
be helping verb, such as is, are, was, were, be, being, or been. Figure 3.4 summarizes 
effective uses for active and passive voice.
Achieving Parallelism
Parallelism is a skillful writing technique that involves balanced writing. Sentences written 
so that their parts are balanced or parallel are easy to read and understand. To achieve 
You can de-emphasize 
ideas by using general 
words and placing the ideas 
in dependent clauses.
Active-voice sentences 
are preferred because the 
subject is the doer of the 
action.

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
63
parallel construction, use similar structures to express similar ideas. For example, the 
words computing, coding, recording, and storing are parallel because the words all end 
in -ing. To express the list as computing, coding, recording, and storage is disturbing 
because the last item is not what the reader expects. Try to match nouns with nouns, 
verbs with verbs, and clauses with clauses. Avoid mixing active-voice verbs with passive-
voice verbs. Your goal is to keep the wording balanced when expressing similar ideas.
Lacks Parallelism
The policy affected all vendors, suppli-
ers, and those involved with consulting.
Our primary goals are to increase 
productivity, reduce costs, and the 
improvement of product quality.
We are scheduled to meet in Dallas 
on January 5, we are meeting in 
Montreal on the 15th of March, and 
in Chicago on June 3.
Shelby audits all accounts lettered 
A through L; accounts lettered M 
through Z are audited by Andrew.
Our Super Bowl ads have three 
objectives:
1.  We want to increase product use.
2.  Introduce complementary 
products.
3.  Our corporate image will be 
enhanced.
Improved
The policy affected all vendors, suppli-
ers, and consultants. (Matches nouns)
Our primary goals are to increase pro-
ductivity, reduce costs, and improve 
product quality. (Matches verbs)
We are scheduled to meet in Dallas 
on January 5, in Montreal on March 
15, and in Chicago on 
June 3. (Matches phrases)
Shelby audits all accounts 
lettered A through L; 
Andrew audits accounts 
lettered M through Z. 
(Matches clauses)
Our Super Bowl ads have 
three objectives:
1. Increase product use
2.  Introduce complementary 
products
3.  Enhance our corporate image 
(Matches verbs in listed items)
FIGURE 3.4 Using Active and Passive Voice Effectively
Use active voice for directness, vigor, and clarity.
Direct and Clear in Active Voice
Indirect and Less Clear in Passive Voice
The manager completed performance reviews for all employees.
Performance reviews were completed for all employees by the 
manager.
Evelyn initiated a customer service blog last year.
A customer service blog was initiated last year.
IBM will accept applications after January 1.
Applications will be accepted after January 1 by IBM.
Coca-Cola created a Sprite page in Facebook to advertise its 
beverage.
A Sprite page was created in Facebook by Coca-Cola to 
advertise its beverage.
Use passive voice to be tactful or to emphasize the action rather than the doer.
Less Tactful or Effective in Active Voice
More Tactful or Effective in Passive Voice
We cannot grant you credit.
Credit cannot be granted.
The CEO made a huge error in projecting profits.
A huge error was made in projecting profits.
I launched a successful fitness program for our company last 
year.
A successful fitness program was launched for our company 
last year.
We are studying the effects of the Sarbanes/Oxley Act on our 
accounting procedures.
The effects of the Sarbanes/Oxley Act on our accounting 
procedures are being studied.
Indirect and Less Clear in Passive Voice
Performance reviews were completed for all employees by the
manager.
A customer service blog was initiated last year.
Applications will be accepted after January 1 by IBM.
A Sprite page was created in Facebook by Coca-Cola to
advertise its beverage.
More Tactful or Effective in Passive Voice
Credit cannot be granted.
A huge error was made in projecting profits.
A successful fitness program was launched for our company
last year.
The effects of the Sarbanes/Oxley Act on our accounting
procedures are being studied.
“To make this easy to read, I have 
divided it into three parts: A, B, and 3.
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
Balanced wording helps 
the reader anticipate and 
comprehend your meaning.

64 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
Avoiding Dangling and Misplaced Modifiers
For clarity, modifiers must be close to the words they describe or limit. A modifier 
dangles when the word or phrase it describes is missing from its sentence (After 
working overtime, the report was finally finished). This sentence says the report was 
working overtime. Revised, the sentence contains a logical subject: After working 
overtime, we finally finished the report.
A modifier is misplaced when the word or phrase it describes is not close enough 
to be clear (Firefighters rescued a dog from a burning car that had a broken leg). 
Obviously, the car did not have a broken leg. The solution is to position the modifier 
closer to the word(s) it describes or limits: Firefighters rescued a dog with a broken 
leg from a burning car.
Introductory verbal phrases are particularly dangerous; be sure to follow them 
immediately with the words they logically describe or modify. Try this trick for 
detecting and remedying many dangling modifiers. Ask the question Who? or 
What? after any introductory phrase. The words immediately following should tell 
the reader who or what is performing the action. Try the who? test on the first three 
danglers here:
Dangling or Misplaced Modifier
Skilled at graphic design, the contract 
went to DesignOne.
Working together as a team, the 
project was finally completed.
To meet the deadline, your Excel 
figures must be received by 
May 1.
The recruiter interviewed candidates 
who had excellent computer skills in 
the morning.
As an important customer to us, we 
invite you to our spring open house.
Revision
Skilled at graphic design, DesignOne 
won the contract.
Working together as a team, we 
finally completed the project.
To meet the deadline, you must 
send us your Excel figures by 
May 1.
In the morning the recruiter inter-
viewed candidates with excellent 
computer skills.
As you are an important customer 
to us, we invite you to our spring 
open house. OR: As an important 
customer to us, you are invited to 
our spring open house.
Drafting Powerful Paragraphs
A paragraph is a group of sentences about one idea. Paragraphs are most effec-
tive when they contain (a) a topic sentence, (b) support sentences that expand and 
explain only the main idea, and (c) techniques to build coherence.
Crafting Topic Sentences
A topic sentence states the main idea of the paragraph. Business writers gen-
erally place the topic sentence first in the paragraph. It tells readers what to 
expect and helps them understand the paragraph’s central thought immediately. 
In the revision stage, you will check to be sure each paragraph has a topic sen-
tence. Notice in the following examples how the topic sentence summarizes the 
main idea, which will be followed by support sentences explaining the topic 
sentence:
Flexible work scheduling could immediately increase productivity and enhance 
employee satisfaction in our entire organization. [Support sentences explaining 
flex scheduling would expand the paragraph.]
Modiﬁ ers must be 
close to the words they 
describe or limit.
The most readable 
paragraphs contain a 
topic sentence, support 
sentences, and techniques 
to build coherence.

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
65
The chat function at our main Web site is not functioning as well as we had 
expected. [Support sentences would describe existing problems in the Web chat 
function.]
Developing Support Sentences
Topic sentences summarize the main idea of a paragraph. Support sentences illus-
trate, explain, or strengthen the topic sentence. One of the hardest things for begin-
ning writers to remember is that all support sentences in the paragraph must relate 
to the topic sentence. Any other topics should be treated separately. Support sen-
tences provide specific details, explanations, and evidence:
Flexible work scheduling could immediately increase productivity and enhance 
employee satisfaction in our entire organization. Managers would be required 
to maintain their regular hours. For many other employees, though, flexible 
scheduling permits extra time to manage family responsibilities. Feeling less 
stress, employees are able to focus their attention better at work; therefore, they 
become more relaxed and more productive.
Building Paragraph Coherence
Paragraphs are coherent when ideas are linked—that is, when one idea leads logi-
cally to the next. Well-written paragraphs take the reader through a number of 
steps. When the author skips from Step 1 to Step 3 and forgets Step 2, the reader is 
lost. Several techniques allow the reader to follow your ideas:
• Repeat a key idea by using the same expression or a similar one: Employees 
treat guests as VIPs. These VIPs are never told what they can or cannot do.
• Use pronouns to refer to previous nouns: All new employees receive a two-
week orientation. They learn that every staffer has a vital role.
• Show connections with transitional expressions: however, as a result, conse-
quently, and meanwhile. For a complete list, see Figure 3.5.
Controlling Paragraph Length
Although no rule regulates the length of paragraphs, business writers recognize the 
value of short paragraphs. Paragraphs with eight or fewer printed lines look invit-
ing and readable. Long, solid chunks of print appear formidable. If a topic can’t 
be covered in eight or fewer printed lines (not sentences), consider breaking it into 
smaller segments.
To Add or 
Strengthen
To Show Time 
or Order
To Clarify
To Show Cause 
and Effect
To Contradict
To Contrast
additionally
after
for example
accordingly
actually
as opposed to
accordingly
before
for instance
as a result
but
at the same time
again
earlier
I mean
consequently
however
by contrast
also
finally
in other words
for this reason
in fact
conversely
beside
first
put another way
hence
instead
on the contrary
indeed
meanwhile
that is
so
rather
on the other hand
likewise
next
this means
therefore
still
previously
moreover
now
thus
thus
yet
similarly
FIGURE 3.5 Transitional Expressions to Build Coherence
The most readable 
paragraphs contain eight 
or fewer printed lines.

66 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
Composing the First Draft
Once you have researched your topic, organized the data, and selected a pattern of 
organization, you are ready to begin composing. Communicators who haven’t com-
pleted the preparatory work often suffer from “writer’s block” and sit staring at a 
piece of paper or at the computer screen. Getting started is easier if you have orga-
nized your ideas and established a plan. Composition is also easier if you have a quiet 
environment in which to concentrate. Businesspeople with messages to compose set 
aside a given time and allow no calls, visitors, or other interruptions. This is a good 
technique for students as well.
As you begin composing, keep in mind that you are writing the first draft, not 
the final copy. Some experts suggest that you write quickly (freewriting). If you get 
your thoughts down quickly, you can refine them in later versions. Other writers, 
such as your author, prefer to polish sentences as they go. Different writers have 
different styles. Whether you are a freewriter or a polisher, learn to compose your 
thoughts at your keyboard. You might be tempted to write a first draft by hand 
and then transfer it to the computer. This wastes time and develops poor habits. 
Businesspeople must be able to compose at their keyboards, and now is the time to 
develop that confidence and skill.
Create a quiet place in which 
to write. Experts recommend 
freewriting for ﬁ rst drafts.
S
Summing Up and Looking Forward
This chapter explained the second phase of the writing pro-
cess, which includes researching, organizing, and compos-
ing. Before beginning a message, every writer collects data, 
either formally or informally. For most simple messages, 
you would look in the files, talk with your boss, interview the 
target audience, or possibly conduct an informal survey. 
Information for a message is then organized into a list or an 
outline. Depending on the expected reaction of the receiver, 
the message can be organized directly (for positive reac-
tions) or indirectly (for negative reactions or when persuasion 
is necessary).
In composing the first draft, writers should use a variety of 
sentence types and avoid fragments, run-ons, and comma 
splices. Emphasis can be achieved through mechanics 
(underlining, italics, font changes, all caps, and so forth) 
or through style (using vivid words, labeling the main idea, 
and positioning the important ideas). Important writing tech-
niques include skillfully using active- and passive-voice 
verbs, developing parallelism, and avoiding dangling or mis-
placed modifiers. Powerful paragraphs result from crafting a 
topic sentence, developing support sentences, and building 
coherence with the planned repetition of key ideas, proper 
use of pronouns, and inclusion of transitional expressions.
In the next chapter you will learn helpful techniques for the 
third phase of the writing process, which includes revising 
and proofreading.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. “Writing is both a ‘marker’ of high-skill, high-wage, pro-
fes sional work and a ‘gatekeeper’ with clear equity impli-
cations,” said Bob Kerry, chair of the Commission on 
Writing.1 What does this statement mean in relation to your 
career field?
 2. Why is audience analysis so important in choosing the direct 
or indirect pattern of organization for a business message?
 3. How are speakers different from writers in the way they 
emphasize ideas?
 4. Why are short sentences and short paragraphs appropriate 
for business communication?
 5. When might it be unethical to use the indirect method of 
organizing a message?
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
67
 6. Compare the first phase of the writing process with the second phase.
 7. For routine writing tasks, what are some techniques for collecting informal data and generating 
ideas?
 8. What is the difference between a list and an outline?
 9. Why do many readers prefer the direct method for organizing messages?
 10. When is the indirect method appropriate, and what are the benefits of using it?
 11. List four techniques for achieving emphasis through style.
 12. What is parallelism? Give an original example.
 13. What are the four sentence types, and what do they consist of?
 14. What is a topic sentence, and where is it usually found in business messages?
 15. List three techniques for developing paragraph coherence.
C
Chapter Review

68 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
Sentence Type
For each of the numbered sentences, select the letter that identifies its type:
 
a Simple 
c Complex
 
b Compound 
d Compound-complex
 16. Many companies are now doing business in international circles.
 17. If you travel abroad on business, you may bring gifts for business partners.
 18. In Latin America a knife is not a proper gift; it signifies cutting off a relationship.
 19. When Arabs, Middle Easterners, and Latin Americans talk, they stand close to each other.
 20. Unless they are old friends, Europeans do not address each other by first names; consequently, 
businesspeople should not expect to do so.
 21. In the Philippines men wear a long embroidered shirt called a barong, and women wear a dress 
called a terno.
Sentence Faults
In the following, identify the sentence fault (fragment, run-on, comma splice). Then revise to remedy the 
fault.
 22. Because 90 percent of all business transactions involve written messages. Good writing skills are 
critical.
 23. The recruiter requested a writing sample. Even though the candidate seemed to communicate well 
orally.
 24. Major soft-drink companies considered a new pricing strategy, they tested vending machines that 
raise prices in hot weather.
 25. Thirsty consumers may think that variable pricing is unfair they may also refuse to use the machine.
 26. About half of Pizza Hut’s 7,600 outlets make deliveries, the others concentrate on walk-in 
customers.
 27. McDonald’s sold its chain of Chipotle Mexican Grill restaurants the chain’s share price doubled on 
the next day of trading.
Emphasis
For each of the following sentences, circle (a) or (b). Be prepared to justify your choice.
 28. Which is more emphatic?
 
 a. Our dress code is good.
 
 b. Our dress code reflects common sense and good taste.
W
Writing Improvement Exercises

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
69
 29. Which is more emphatic?
 
 a. A budget increase would certainly improve hiring.
 
 b. A budget increase of $70,000 would enable us to hire two new people.
 30. Which is more emphatic?
 
 a. The committee was powerless to act.
 
 b. The committee was unable to take action.
 31. Which de-emphasizes the refusal?
 
 a.  Although our resources are committed to other projects this year, we hope to be able to contribute 
to your worthy cause next year.
 
 b. We can’t contribute to your charity this year. 
 32. Which sentence places more emphasis on the date?
 
 a. The deadline is November 30 for health benefit changes.
 
 b. November 30 is the deadline for health benefit changes. 
 33. Which is less emphatic?
 
 a. One division’s profits decreased last quarter.
 
 b. Profits in beauty care products dropped 15 percent last quarter.
 34. Which sentence de-emphasizes the credit refusal?
 
 a.  We are unable to grant you credit at this time, but we welcome your cash business and encourage 
you to reapply in the future.
 
 b.  Although credit cannot be granted at this time, we welcome your cash business and encourage 
you to reapply in the future.
 35. Which sentence gives more emphasis to leadership?
 
 a. Jason has many admirable qualities, but most important is his leadership skill.
 
 b. Jason has many admirable qualities, including leadership skill, good judgment, and patience.
 36. Which is more emphatic?
 
 a. We notified three departments: (1) Marketing, (2) Accounting, and (3) Distribution.
 
 b. We notified three departments:
 
  
1. Marketing
 
  
2. Accounting
 
  
3. Distribution
Active Voice
Business writing is more forceful if it uses active-voice verbs. Revise the following sentences so that verbs 
are in the active voice. Put the emphasis on the doer of the action.
Passive Antivirus software was installed by Craig on his computer.
Active 
Craig installed antivirus software on his computer.
 37. Employees were given their checks at 4 P.M. every Friday by the manager.
 38. New spices and cooking techniques were tried by McDonald’s to improve its hamburgers.
 39. Our new company logo was designed by my boss.
 40. The managers with the most productive departments were commended by the CEO.
Passive Voice
Revise the following sentences so that they are in the passive voice.
 41. The auditor discovered a computational error in the company’s tax figures.

70 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
 42. We cannot ship your order for ten monitors until June 15.
 43. Stacy did not submit the accounting statement on time.
 44. The Federal Trade Commission targeted deceptive diet advertisements by weight-loss marketers.
Parallelism
Revise the following sentences so that their parts are balanced.
 45. (Hint: Match adjectives.) To be hired, an applicant must be reliable, creative, and show 
enthusiasm.
 46. (Hint: Match active voice.) If you have decided to cancel our service, please cut your credit card in 
half and the pieces should be returned to us. 
 47. (Hint: Match verbs.) Guidelines for improving security at food facilities include inspecting 
incoming and outgoing vehicles, restriction of access to laboratories, preventing workers from 
bringing personal items into food-handling areas, and inspection of packaging for signs of 
tampering.
 48. (Hint: Match adjective–noun expressions.) The committee will continue to monitor merchandise 
design, product quality, and check the feedback of customers.
 49. (Hint: Match verb clauses.) To use the fax copier, insert your meter, the paper trays must be loaded, 
indicate the number of copies needed, and your original sheet should be inserted through the 
feeder.
 50. (Hint: Match ing verbs.) Sending an e-mail establishes a more permanent record than to make a 
telephone call.
Dangling and Misplaced Modifiers
Revise the following to avoid dangling and misplaced modifiers.
 51. After leaving the midtown meeting, Angela’s car would not start.
 52. Walking up the driveway, the Hummer parked in the garage was immediately spotted by the 
detectives.
 53. To complete the project on time, a new deadline was established by the team.

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
71
 54. Acting as manager, several new employees were hired by Mr. Lopez.
 55. Michelle Mitchell presented a talk about workplace drug problems in our boardroom.
Organizing Paragraph Sentences
In a memo to the college president, the athletic director argues for a new stadium scoreboard. One 
paragraph will describe the old scoreboard and why it needs to be replaced. Study the following list of 
ideas for that paragraph.
1. The old scoreboard is a tired warhorse that was originally constructed in the 1970s.
2. It is now hard to find replacement parts when something breaks.
3. The old scoreboard is not energy efficient.
4. Coca-Cola has offered to buy a new sports scoreboard in return for exclusive rights to sell soda pop 
on campus.
5. The old scoreboard should be replaced for many reasons.
6. It shows only scores for football games.
7. When we have soccer games or track meets, we are without any functioning scoreboard.
 56. Which sentence should be the topic sentence? 
 57. Which sentence(s) should be developed in a separate paragraph? 
 58. Which sentences should become support sentences?
Building Coherent Paragraphs
 59. Use the information from the preceding sentences to write a coherent paragraph about replacing 
the sports scoreboard. Strive to use three devices to build coherence: (a) repetition of key words, 
(b) pronouns that clearly refer to previous nouns, and (c) transitional expressions.
 60. Revise the following paragraph. Add a topic sentence and improve the organization. Correct problems 
with pronouns, parallelism, wordiness, and misplaced or dangling modifiers. Add transitional expressions 
if appropriate.
You may be interested in applying for a new position within the company. The Human Resources 
Department has a number of jobs available immediately. The positions are at a high level. Current 
employees may apply immediately for open positions in production, for some in marketing, and jobs 
in administrative support are also available. To make application, these positions require immediate 
action. Come to the Human Resources Department. We have a list showing the open positions, what 
the qualifications are, and job descriptions are shown. Many of the jobs are now open. That’s why 
we are sending this now. To be hired, an interview must be scheduled within the next two weeks.

72 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
 61. Revise the following paragraph. Add a topic sentence and improve the organization. Correct problems 
with pronouns, parallelism, wordiness, and misplaced or dangling modifiers.
As you probably already know, this company (Lasertronics) will be installing new computer software 
shortly. There will be a demonstration April 18, which is a Tuesday. You are invited. We felt this was 
necessary because this new software is so different from our previous software. It will be from 9 to 
12 a.m. in the morning. This will show employees how the software programs work. They will learn 
about the operating system, and this should be helpful to nearly everyone. There will be information 
about the new word processing program, which should be helpful to administrative assistants and 
product managers. For all you people who work with payroll, there will be information about the new 
database program. We can’t show everything the software will do at this one demo, but for these 
three areas there will be some help at the Tuesday demo. Presenting the software, the demo will 
feature Paula Roddy. She is the representative from Quantum Software.
Verbs
Review Sections 1.10–1.15 in the Grammar Review section of the Grammar/Mechanics 
Handbook. Then study each of the following statements. Underline any verbs that are used 
incorrectly. In the space provided write the correct form (or C if correct) and the number of the 
G/M principle illustrated. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided near 
the end of the book. If your responses differ, study carefully the principles in parentheses.
Example Not one of our customers have ever complained about lost e-mail messages.  
 1. A large group of our e-mail messages were recently blocked by spam filters.
 2. Although Mark acts as if he was the manager, he doesn’t know what to do about the e-mail 
disruption dilemma.
 3. If even one of my e-mail messages are blocked by spam controls, I am unhappy.
 4. Verizon, together with many other large ISPs, were singled out for using overzealous spam 
blockers.
 5. Neither the sender nor the receiver of blocked messages know what has happened.
 6. A typical e-mail user has wrote several messages that were never delivered.
 7. Time and energy is required to follow up on e-mail messages.
 8. Either the message or its attachment has triggered the spam-blocking software.
 9. After many of its customers had began to complain about lost messages, one company sued.
 10. If you could have saw the number of nondelivery error messages, you would have been 
upset also.
 11. Ramon discovered that a lot of his legitimate e-mail had went to junk folders that he never 
checked.
In the space provided write the letter of the sentence that illustrates consistency in subject, 
voice, and verb form.
 12. a. When Mason sent an e-mail message, its delivery was expected.
 
 b. When Mason sent an e-mail message, he expected it to be delivered.
 13. a. All employees must wear photo identification; only then will you be admitted.
 
 b. All employees must wear photo identification; only then will they be admitted.
 14. a. First, check all computers for viruses; then, install a firewall.
 
 b. First, check all computers for viruses; then, a firewall must be installed.
 15. a. When Tina examined the computers, the spyware was discovered.
 
 b. When Tina examined the computers, she discovered the spyware.
G
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 3
has for have 
(1.10c)

Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages 
73
The following letter has errors in spelling, proofreading, verbs, sentence structure, parallel-
ism, and other writing techniques studied in this chapter. You may either (a) use standard 
proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or (b) download the docu-
ment from your companion Web site and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in 
the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
G
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 3
 
 
 
 
June 4, 200x
Mr. Allen C. Fineberg
3250 Ponciana Way
Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33410
Dear Mr. Fineburg:
You probably choose Body Fitness because it has became one of the top-rated gyms in 
the Palm Beach area. Making your work out enjoyable has always been our principal goal. 
To continue to provide you with the best equipment and programs, your feedback is 
needed by my partner and myself.
We have build an outstanding program with quality equipment, excellent training programs, 
and our support staff is very helpful. We feel, however, that we could have a more positive 
affect and give more individual attention if we could extend our peak usage time. You have 
probable noticed that attendance at the gym raises from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. We wish it was 
possible to accommodate all our customers on their favorite equipment during those hours. 
Although we can’t stretch an hour. We would like to make better use of the time between 
8 p.m. and 11 p.m. With more members’ coming later, we would have less crush from 4 to 
8 p.m. Our exercise machines and strength-training equipment is lying idle later in the evening.
To encourage you to stay later, security cameras for our parking area are being considered 
by us. Cameras for some inside facilitys may also be added. We have gave this matter a 
great deal of thought. Although Body Fitness have never had an incident that endangered 
a member. We have went to considerable trouble to learn about security cameras. Because 
we think that you will feel more comfortable with them in action.
Please tell us what you think, fill out the enclosed questionnaire, and drop it the ballot box 
during your next visit at the desk. We are asking for your feed back about scheduling your 
workouts, selecting your equipment, and if you would consider coming later in the evening.
If you have any other suggestions for reducing the crush at peak times. Please tell us on 
the enclosed form.
Cordially,
Nicolas Barajas, Manager
Enclosure
Body Fitness
Training Massage Wellness
3392 Econlockhatchee Trail • Orlando, FL 32822 • (407) 551-8791

74 
Chapter 3: Composing Business Messages
Using Ethical Tools to Help You Do the Right Thing
In your career you will no doubt face times when you are torn by ethical dilemmas. Should 
you tell the truth and risk your job? Should you be loyal to your friends even if it means 
bending the rules? Should you be tactful or totally honest? Is it your duty to help your 
company make a profit, or should you be socially responsible?
Being ethical, according to the experts, means doing the right thing given the circum-
stances. Each set of circumstances requires analyzing issues, evaluating choices, and 
acting responsibly. Resolving ethical issues is never easy, but the task can be made less 
difficult if you know how to identify key issues. The following questions may be helpful.
Is the action you are considering legal? No matter who asks you to do it or how 
important you feel the result will be, avoid anything that is prohibited by law. Giving a 
kickback to a buyer for a large order is illegal, even if you suspect that others in your 
field do it and you know that without the kickback you will lose the sale.
How would you see the problem if you were on the opposite side? Looking at both 
sides of an issue helps you gain perspective. By weighing both sides of an issue, you 
can arrive at a more equitable solution.
What are the alternative solutions? Consider all dimensions of other options.
Would the alternative be more ethical? Under the circumstances, is the alternative 
feasible?
Can you discuss the problem with someone whose opinion you value? Suppose 
you feel ethically bound to report accurate information to a client—even though your 
boss has ordered you not to do so. Talking about your dilemma with a coworker or with a 
colleague in your field might give you helpful insights and lead to possible alternatives.
How would you feel if your family, friends, employer, or coworkers learned of your 
action? If the thought of revealing your action publicly produces cold sweats, your 
choice is probably not a wise one. Losing the faith of your friends or the confidence of 
your customers is not worth whatever short-term gains might be realized.
Career Application. One of the biggest accounting firms uses an ethical awareness 
survey that includes some of the following situations. You may face similar situations with 
ethical issues on the job or in employment testing.
Your Task
In teams or individually, decide whether each of the following ethical issues is (a) very impor-
tant, (b) moderately important, or (c) unimportant. Then decide whether you (a) strongly 
approve, (b) are undecided, or (c) strongly disapprove of the action taken.2 Apply the ethical 
tools presented here to determine whether the course of action is ethical. What alternatives 
might you suggest?
Recruiting. You are a recruiter for your company. Although you know company morale 
is low, the turnover rate is high, and the work environment in many departments is 
deplorable, you tell job candidates that it is “a great place to work.”
Training program. Your company is offering an exciting training program in Hawaii. 
Although you haven’t told anyone, you plan to get another job shortly. You decide to 
participate in the program anyway because you have never been to Hawaii. One of the 
program requirements is that participants must have “long-term career potential” with 
the firm.
Thievery. As a supervisor, you suspect that one of your employees is stealing. You 
check with a company attorney and find that a lie detector test cannot be legally used. 
Then you decide to scrutinize the employee’s records. Finally, you find an inconsis-
tency in the employee’s records. You decide to fire the employee, although this incon-
sistency would not normally have been discovered.
Downsizing. As part of the management team of a company that makes potato chips, 
you are faced with the rising prices of potatoes. Rather than increase the cost of your 
chips, you decide to decrease slightly the size of the bag. Consumers are less likely to 
notice a smaller bag than a higher price.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Ethics

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
75
© iStOCKPHOtO.COM / DMitRiy SHiRONOSOv
understanding the process of revision
To be successful in the business world, you must be able to create messages and 
presentations that are concise, clear, and vigorous. This chapter focuses on writ-
ing techniques that achieve those qualities. These techniques are part of the third 
phase of the writing process, which centers on revising and proofreading. Revising 
means improving the content and sentence structure of your message. It may include 
adding, cutting, recasting, reformatting, and redesigning what you have written. 
Proofreading involves improving the grammar, spelling, punctuation, and mechanics 
of your messages.
Both revising and proofreading require practice to develop your skills. Notice 
how the revised version of the memo in Figure 4.1 is clearer, more concise, and more 
vigorous because we removed much deadwood. Major ideas stand out when they 
are not lost in a forest of words.
Rarely is the first or even the second version of a message satisfactory. Experts 
say that only amateurs expect writing perfection on the first try. The revision stage 
is your chance to make sure your message is clear, forceful, and readable. This is 
the time when you will see how to draw out the major point and perhaps make a 
list so that the reader sees quickly what you mean.
Many professional writers compose the first draft quickly without worrying 
about language, precision, or correctness. Then they revise and polish extensively. 
oBJecTiVes
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Understand the revision phase of the writing process and employ techniques 
that enhance message conciseness such as eliminating flabby expressions, 
limiting long lead-ins, dropping fillers, and avoiding redundancies.
• Revise messages to improve clarity by dumping trite business phrases, using 
jargon judiciously, avoiding slang, and dropping clichés.
• Revise messages to improve vigor and directness by unburying verbs, 
controlling exuberance, and choosing precise words.
• Understand document design and be able to use white space, margins, typefaces, 
fonts, numbered and bulleted lists, and headings to improve readability.
• Apply effective techniques for proofreading routine and complex documents.
Revising 
Business 
Messages
4
c H a p T e r  4
revision involves improving 
content, sentence structure, 
and design; proofreading 
involves improving grammar, 
spelling, punctuation, 
and mechanics.

76 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
Other writers, however, prefer to revise as they go—particularly for shorter business 
documents. Whether you revise as you go or do it when you finish a document, you 
will want to focus on concise wording.
revising for conciseness
In business, time is indeed money. Translated into writing, this means that concise 
messages save reading time and, thus, money. In addition, messages that are written 
directly and efficiently are easier to read and comprehend. In the revision process 
look for shorter ways to say what you mean. Examine every sentence that you write. 
Could the thought be conveyed in fewer words? Your writing will be more concise 
if you eliminate flabby expressions, drop unnecessary introductory words, and get 
rid of redundancies.
eliminating Flabby expressions
As you revise, focus on eliminating flabby expressions. This takes conscious effort. 
As one expert copyeditor observed, “Trim sentences, like trim bodies, usually 
require far more effort than flabby ones.”1 Turning out slim sentences and lean 
messages means that you will strive to “trim the fat.” For example, notice the flab-
biness in this sentence: Due to the fact that sales are booming, profits are good. It 
could be said more concisely: Because sales are booming, profits are good. Many 
flabby expressions can be shortened to one concise word, as shown in Figure 4.2.
limiting long lead-ins
Another way to create concise sentences is to delete unnecessary introductory 
words. Consider this sentence: I am sending you this e-mail to announce that a new 
Figure 4.1 Revising a Memo for Conciseness
NorthStar Telecommunication Services
Interoffice Memo
DATE:
November 12, 200x
TO:
Phillip Larios
FROM:
Danika Freedman
SUBJECT:
Investigation of Web Sites of Some of Our Competitors
This is just a short note to inform you that, as you requested, I have made an investigation of
several of our competitors’ Web sites. Attached hereto is a summary of my findings
of my investigation. I was really most interested in making a comparison of the employment of 
strategies for marketing as well as the use of navigational graphics used to guide visitors 
through the sites. In view of the fact that we will be revising our own Web site in the near future,
I was extremely intrigued by the organization, kind of marketing tactics, and navigation at 
each and every site I visited.
In the event that  you would like to discuss this information with me, feel free to call me at 
Extension 219.
Attachment
Main points are easier 
to understand in 
concise messages.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Regardless of what you 
may have been taught in 
school, writing more doesn’t 
necessarily equate to writing 
better—especially in a 
business environment, where 
time is precious. Don’t bury 
your important points under 
unnecessary verbiage.”

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
77
manager has been hired. A more concise and more direct sentence deletes the long 
lead-in: A new manager has been hired. The meat of the sentence often follows the 
words that or because, as shown in the following:
Wordy
This e-mail message is being sent 
to all of you to let you know that 
new parking permits will be issued 
January 1
You will be interested to learn that 
you can now be served at our Web 
site.
I am writing this letter because 
Dr. Mara Evans suggested that your 
organization was hiring trainees.
Concise
New parking permits will be issued 
January 1.
You can now be served at our Web 
site.
Dr. Mara Evans suggested that your 
organization was hiring trainees.
Dropping unnecessary There is/are and It is/was Fillers
In many sentences the expressions there is/are and it is/was function as unnecessary 
fillers. In addition to taking up space, these fillers delay getting to the point of the 
sentence. Eliminate them by recasting the sentence. Many—but not all—sentences 
can be revised so that fillers are unnecessary.
Wordy
There is only one candidate who 
passed the test.
There is an unused computer in the 
back office.
It was our auditor who discovered 
the theft.
Concise
Only one candidate passed the test.
An unused computer is in the back 
office.
Our auditor discovered the theft.
getting rid of redundancies
The use of words whose meanings are clearly implied by other words is a writing 
fault called redundancy. For example, in the expression final outcome, the word 
avoid long lead-ins that 
prevent the reader from 
reaching the meaning 
of the sentence.
Figure 4.2 Slimming Down Flabby Expressions
Wordy
concise
Wordy
concise
afford an opportunity  
allow
in addition to the above
also
are of the opinion
believe, think
in all probability
probably
as a general rule
generally
in spite of the fact that
although
at a later date
later
in the event that
if
at this point in time
now, presently
in the amount of
for
despite the fact that
although
in the near future
soon
due to the fact that
because
in the normal course of events
normally
feel free to
please
in very few cases
seldom
for the period of
for
in view of the fact that
because
fully cognizant 
aware 
inasmuch as
since
in a careful manner
carefully
until such time as
until
redundancies convey a 
meaning more than once.

78 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
final is redundant and should be omitted because outcome implies finality. As you 
revise, look for redundant expressions such as the following:
Redundant 
absolutely essential
adequate enough
basic fundamentals
big in size
combined together
exactly identical
each and every
necessary prerequisite
new beginning
refer back
repeat again
true facts
Concise
essential
adequate
fundamentals or basics
big
combined
identical
each or every
prerequisite
beginning
refer
repeat
facts
revising for clarity
Business writers appreciate clear messages that are immediately understandable. 
Techniques that improve clarity include dumping trite business phrases and avoid-
ing slang, jargon, and clichés.
Dumping Trite Business phrases
To sound “businesslike,” many writers repeat the same stale expressions that other 
writers have used over the years. Your writing will sound fresher and more vigorous 
if you eliminate these phrases or find more original ways to convey the idea. 
Trite Phrase
as per your request
pursuant to your request
enclosed please find
every effort will be made
in accordance with your wishes
in receipt of
please do not hesitate to
thank you in advance
under separate cover
with reference to
Improved Version
as you request
at your request
enclosed is
we’ll try
as you wish
have received
please
thank you
separately
about
avoiding Jargon and slang
Except in certain specialized contexts, you should avoid jargon and unnecessary tech-
nical terms. Jargon is special terminology that is peculiar to particular activities or 
professions. For example, geologists speak knowingly of exfoliation, calcareous ooze,
and siliceous particles. Engineers are familiar with phrases such as infrared processing 
flags, output latches, and movable symbology. Telecommunication experts use such 
words and phrases as protocols, clickstream, neural networks, and asynchronous 
transmission.
Every field has its own special vocabulary. Using that vocabulary within the field 
is acceptable and even necessary for accurate, efficient communication. Don’t use 
specialized terms, however, if you think your audience may misunderstand them.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“Employees, customers and 
investors increasingly want 
to be addressed in a clear 
and genuine way. Fuzzy and 
bombastic writing alienates 
these stakeholders.”
Train yourself not to 
use these trite business 
expressions.
Jargon, which is terminology 
unique to certain professions, 
should be reserved for 
individuals who understand it.

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
79
Slang is composed of informal words with arbitrary and extravagantly changed 
meanings. Slang words quickly go out of fashion because they are no longer appeal-
ing when everyone begins to understand them. Consider the following statement 
of a government official who had been asked why his department was dropping a 
proposal to lease offshore oil lands: “The Administration has an awful lot of other 
things in the pipeline, and this has more wiggle room so they just moved it down 
the totem pole.” He added, however, that the proposal might be offered again since 
“there is no pulling back because of hot-potato factors.”
The meaning here, if the speaker really intended to impart any, is considerably 
obscured by the use of slang. Good communicators, of course, aim at clarity and 
avoid unintelligible slang. If you want to sound professional, avoid expressions such 
as snarky, lousy, blowing the budget, bombed, and getting burned.
Dropping clichés 
Clichés are expressions that have become exhausted by overuse. Many cannot be 
explained, especially to those who are new to our culture. Clichés lack not only fresh-
ness but also clarity. Instead of repeating clichés such as the following, try to find 
another way to say what you mean.
below the belt
better than new
beyond a shadow of a doubt
easier said than done
exception to the rule
fill the bill
Workplace in Focus
ask computer shoppers if they want a laptop 
with a microprocessor containing two or more 
cores that process multiple data streams into rich 
multimedia content fast, and you will encounter 
only blank stares. But ask if they want a laptop 
with multiple brains that can download songs, 
play videos, and allow the user to instant message 
with friends at the same time, and you have made 
a sale. In what situations should communicators 
avoid using complex or technical language?
© GEORGE FREy / BLOOMBERG NEWS / LaNDOv
slang sounds fashionable, 
but it lacks precise meaning 
and should be avoided 
in business writing.
DiLBERt: © SCOtt aDaMS / DiSt. By uNitED FEatuRE SyNDiCatE, iNC.

80 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
first and foremost
good to go
last but not least
make a bundle
pass with flying colors
quick as a flash
shoot from the hip
stand your ground
think outside the box
true to form
revising for Vigor and Directness
Clear, effective business writing reads well and is immediately understood. You 
have already studied techniques for improving clarity and conciseness. You can also 
strengthen the vigor and directness of your writing by unburying verbs, controlling 
exuberance, and choosing precise words.
unburying Verbs
Buried verbs are those that are needlessly converted to wordy noun expressions. 
This happens when verbs such as acquire, establish, and develop are made into 
nouns such as acquisition, establishment, and development. Such nouns often 
end in -tion, -ment, and -ance. Using these nouns increases sentence length, 
drains verb strength, slows the reader, and muddies the thought. Notice how 
you can make your writing cleaner and more forceful by avoiding wordy verb/
noun conversions:
Buried Verbs
conduct a discussion of
create a reduction in
engage in the preparation of
give consideration to
make an assumption of
make a discovery of
perform an analysis of
reach a conclusion about
take action on
Unburied Verbs
discuss
reduce
prepare
consider
assume
discover
analyze
conclude
act
controlling exuberance
Occasionally we show our exuberance with words such as very, definitely, quite, 
completely, extremely, really, actually, and totally. These intensifiers can emphasize 
and strengthen your meaning. Overuse, however, sounds unbusinesslike. Control 
your enthusiasm and guard against excessive use.
Excessive
We totally agree that we actually 
did not really give his proposal a 
very fair trial.
The manufacturer was extremely 
upset to learn that its printers were 
definitely being counterfeited.
Businesslike
We agree that we did not give his 
proposal a fair trial.
The manufacturer was upset to 
learn that its printers were being 
counterfeited.
choosing clear, precise Words
As you revise, make sure your words are precise so that the audience knows exactly 
what you mean. Clear writing creates meaningful images in the mind of the reader. 
Such writing is sparked by specific verbs, concrete nouns, and vivid adjectives. 
Foggy messages are marked by sloppy references that may result in additional inqui-
ries to clarify what was meant.
Burying verbs in wordy 
noun expressions weakens 
business writing.
avoid excessive use of 
adverb intensiﬁ ers.
Drop clichés that are dull 
and often ambiguous.

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
81
Unclear
He asked everyone to help out.
They will consider the problem 
soon.
We received many responses.
Someone called about the meeting.
More Precise
Our manager begged each team 
member to volunteer.
Our steering committee will consider 
the recruitment problem in one week.
We received 28 job applications.
Russell Vitello called about the June 
12 sales meeting
Designing Documents for readability
Well-designed documents improve your messages in two important ways. First, they 
enhance readability and comprehension. Second, they make readers think you are a well-
organized and intelligent person. In the revision process, you have a chance to adjust 
formatting and make other changes so that readers grasp your main points quickly. 
Significant design techniques to improve readability include appropriate use of white 
space, margins, typefaces, numbered and bulleted lists, and headings for visual impact.
employing White space
Empty space on a page is called white space. A page crammed full of text or  graphics 
appears busy, cluttered, and unreadable. To increase white space, use headings, bul-
leted or numbered lists, short paragraphs, and effective margins. As discussed earlier, 
short sentences (20 or fewer words) and short paragraphs (eight or fewer printed 
lines) improve readability and comprehension. As you revise, think about shortening 
long sentences. Also consider breaking up long paragraphs into shorter chunks. Be 
sure, however, that each part of the divided paragraph has a topic sentence.
understanding Margins and Text alignment
Margins determine the white space on the left, right, top, and bottom of a block 
of type. They define the reading area and provide important visual relief. Business 
letters and memos usually have side margins of 1 to 1½   inches.
Your word processing program probably offers these forms of margin alignment: 
(a) lines aligned only at the left, (b) lines aligned only at the right, (c) lines aligned 
at both left and right (justified), and (d) centered lines. Nearly all text in Western 
cultures is aligned at the left and reads from left to right. The right margin may be 
justified or ragged right. The text in books, magazines, and other long works is often 
justified on both the left and right for a formal appearance.
However, justified text may require more attention to word spacing and hyphen-
ation to avoid awkward empty spaces or “rivers” of spaces running through a docu-
ment. When right margins are “ragged”—that is, without alignment or  justification—
they provide more white space and improve readability. Therefore, you are best 
served by using left-justified text and ragged-right margins without justification. 
Centered text is appropriate for headings but not for complete messages.
choosing appropriate Typefaces
Business writers today may choose from a number of typefaces on their word proces-
sors. A typeface defines the shape of text characters. As shown in Figure 4.3, a wide 
range of typefaces is available for various purposes. Some are decorative and useful 
for special purposes. For most business messages, however, you should choose from 
serif or sans serif categories.
Serif typefaces have small features at the ends of strokes. The most common serif 
typeface is Times New Roman. Other popular serif typefaces are Century, Georgia, 
and Palatino. Serif typefaces suggest tradition, maturity, and formality. They are fre-
quently used for body text in business messages and longer documents. Because books, 
newspapers, and magazines favor serif typefaces, readers are familiar with them.
successful document 
design improves readability, 
strengthens comprehension, 
and enhances your image.
You can improve document 
readability with ample 
white (empty) space. 
Business documents 
are most readable with 
left-aligned text and 
ragged-right margins.
Times new roman is a 
typeface with serifs; arial 
is a typeface without 
serifs (sans serif ).

82 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
Sans serif typefaces include Arial, Gothic, Tahoma, and Univers. These charac-
ters are cleaner and are widely used for headings, signs, and material where continu-
ous reading is not required. Web designers often prefer sans serif typefaces for clean, 
pure pages. For longer documents, however, sans serif typefaces may seem colder 
and less accessible than familiar serif typefaces.
For less formal messages or special decorative effects, you might choose one of 
the happy fonts such as Comic Sans or a bold typeface such as Impact. You can 
simulate handwriting with a script typeface. Despite the wonderful possibilities 
available on your word processor, don’t get carried away with fancy typefaces. All-
purpose sans serif and traditional serif typefaces are most appropriate for your busi-
ness messages. Generally, use no more than two typefaces within one document. 
capitalizing on Type Fonts and sizes
Font refers to a specific typeface in a specific style, as shown in these examples:
Typeface: Time Roman   Font: Times Roman italic
Within a typeface, you may choose from many font styles, such as italic, bold, and 
all caps. You may select CAPITALIZATION, small caps, boldface, italic, and 
underline, as well as fancier fonts such as 
 and 
.
As discussed in Chapter 3, font styles are a mechanical means of adding emphasis 
to your words. All caps and small caps are useful for headings, subheadings, and single 
words or short phrases in the text. ALL CAPS, HOWEVER, SHOULD NEVER BE 
USED FOR LONG STRETCHES OF TEXT BECAUSE ALL THE LETTERS ARE THE 
SAME HEIGHT, MAKING IT DIFFICULT FOR READERS TO DIFFERENTIATE 
Figure 4.3 Typefaces With Different Personalities for Different Purposes
all purpose 
sans serif
Traditional 
serif
Happy, creative 
script/Funny
assertive, Bold 
Modern Display
plain  
Monospaced
Brush Script
Courier
Garamond
Broadway
Letter 
Gothic
Helvetica
Gigi
Elephant
Tahoma
Goudy 
Jokerman
Impact
Prestige 
Elite
Univers
Palatino
Times New 
Roman
Kristen
Showcard
DiLBERt: © SCOtt aDaMS/DiSt. By uNitED FEatuRES SyNDiCatE, iNC.
Fonts include caps, 
boldface, italic, underline, 
outline, and shadow. 

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
83
WORDS. In addition, excessive use of all caps feels like shouting and irritates readers. 
Boldface, italics, and underlining are effective for calling attention to important points 
and terms. Be cautious, however, when using fancy or an excessive number of font 
styles. Don’t use them if they will confuse, annoy, or delay readers.
During the revision process, think about type size. Readers are generally most 
comfortable with 10-point or 12-point type for body text. Small type enables you to 
fit more words into a space. Tiny type, however, makes text look dense and unappeal-
ing. Slightly larger type makes material more readable. Overly large type (14 points or 
more), however, looks amateurish and out of place for body text in business messages. 
It is appropriate for headings.
numbering and Bulleting lists for Quick comprehension
One of the best ways to ensure rapid comprehension of ideas is through the use of 
numbered or bulleted lists. Lists provide high “skim value.” This means that readers 
can browse quickly and grasp main ideas. By breaking up complex information into 
smaller chunks, lists improve readability, understanding, and retention. They also 
force the writer to organize ideas and write efficiently.
In the revision process, look for items that could be converted to lists and follow 
these techniques to make your lists look professional:
• Numbered lists: Use for items that represent a sequence or reflect a numbering 
system.
• Bulleted lists: Use to highlight items that don’t necessarily show a chronology.
• Capitalization: Capitalize the initial word of each line.
• Punctuation: Add end punctuation only if the listed items are complete sentences.
• Parallelism: Make all the lines consistent; for example, start each with a verb.
In the following examples, notice that the list on the left presents a sequence of 
steps with numbers. The bulleted list does not show a sequence of ideas; therefore, 
bullets are appropriate. Also notice the parallelism in each example. In the numbered 
list each item begins with a verb. In the bulleted list each item follows an adjective/
noun sequence. Business readers appreciate lists because they focus attention. Be care-
ful, however, not to use so many that your messages look like grocery lists.
Numbered List
Our recruiters follow these steps 
when hiring applicants:
1. Examine the application.
2. Interview the applicant.
3. Check the applicant’s references.
Bulleted List
To attract upscale customers, we 
feature the following:
• Quality fashions
• Personalized service
• A generous return policy
adding Headings for Visual impact
Headings are an effective tool for highlighting information and improving read-
ability. They encourage the writer to group similar material together. Headings help 
the reader separate major ideas from details. They enable a busy reader to skim 
familiar or less important information. They also provide a quick preview or review. 
Headings appear most often in reports, which you will study in greater detail in 
Chapters 9 and 10. However, main headings, subheadings, and category headings 
can also improve readability in e-mail messages, memos, and letters. In the follow-
ing example they are used with bullets to summarize categories: 
Category Headings
Our company focuses on the following areas in the employment process:
• Attracting applicants. We advertise for qualified applicants, and we also 
encourage current employees to recommend good people.
• Interviewing applicants. Our specialized interviews include simulated cus-
tomer encounters as well as scrutiny by supervisors.
improve the “skim” value 
of a message by adding 
high-visibility vertical lists.
numbered lists represent 
sequences; bulleted lists 
highlight items that may 
not show a sequence.
Headings help writers 
to organize information 
and enable readers to 
absorb important ideas.

84 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
• Checking references. We investigate every applicant thoroughly; we contact 
former employers and all listed references.
In Figure 4.4 the writer was able to convert a dense, unappealing e-mail message 
into an easier-to-read version by applying document design. Notice that the all-caps 
Figure 4.4 Using Document Design to Improve Readability

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
85
font in the first paragraph makes its meaning difficult to decipher. Justified margins 
and lack of white space further reduce readability. In the revised version, the writer 
changed the all-caps font to upper- and lowercase and also used ragged-right mar-
gins to enhance visual appeal. One of the best document design techniques in this 
message is the use of headings and bullets to help the reader see chunks of informa-
tion in similar groups. All of these improvements are made in the revision process. 
You can make any message more readable by applying the document design tech-
niques presented here.
understanding the process of proofreading
Once your message is in its final form, set aside time to proofread. Don’t proofread 
earlier because you may waste time checking items that eventually are changed or 
omitted. 
What to Watch for in proofreading
Careful proofreaders check for problems in these areas: 
• Spelling. Now is the time to consult the dictionary. Is 
recommend spelled with one or two c’s? Do you mean 
affect or effect? Use your computer spell checker, but 
don’t rely on it totally. 
• Grammar. Locate sentence subjects; do their verbs 
agree with them? Do pronouns agree with their anteced-
ents? Review the principles in the Grammar/Mechanics 
Handbook if necessary. Use your com puter’s grammar 
checker, but don’t let it replace careful manual proof-
reading.
• Punctuation. Make sure that introductory clauses 
are followed by commas. In compound sentences put 
commas before coordinating conjunctions (and, or, 
but, nor). Double-check your use of semicolons and 
colons.
• Names and numbers. Compare all names and numbers with their sources 
because inaccuracies are not immediately visible. Especially verify the spelling of 
proofreading before a 
document is completed is 
generally a waste of time.
Workplace in Focus
Editorial blunders are funny in Jay Leno’s 
“Ridiculous Headlines” skit, but in the real world 
proofreading errors can be costly. Misprints, 
typos, and unfortunate turns of phrase lead to 
embarrassing situations that require corrections 
and retractions. Some high-profile flubs have 
made headline news, such as the marquee-sized 
misspelling of funnyman Will Ferrell’s name at a 
recent Oscars ceremony. The New York Times has 
even admitted to misspelling “Neiman Marcus” in 
at least 195 articles since 1930. What tips can help 
writers catch mistakes before they are published?
© NEW LiNE CiNEMa / COuRtESy EvEREtt COLLECtiON
“But there can’t be any errors. My grammar 
and spell checkers found nothing wrong!”
© RaNDy GLaSBRGEN. WWW.GLaSBERGEN.COM

86 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
the names of individuals receiving the message. Most of us are offended when 
someone misspells our name. 
• Format. Be sure that letters, printed memos, and reports are balanced on the 
page. Compare their parts and formats with those of standard documents shown 
in Appendix A. If you indent paragraphs, be certain that all are indented. 
How to proofread routine Documents
Most routine messages, including e-mails, require a light proofreading. Use the down 
arrow to reveal one line at a time, thus focusing your attention at the bottom of the 
screen. Read carefully for faults such as omitted or doubled words. Be sure to use your 
spell checker.
For routine messages such as printed letters or memos, a safer proofreading 
method is reading from a printed hard copy. You are more likely to find errors and 
to observe the tone. “Things really look different on paper,” observed veteran writer 
Louise Lague at People magazine. “Don’t just pull a letter out of the printer and stick 
it in an envelope. Read every sentence again. You will catch bad line endings, strange 
page breaks, and weird spacing. You can also get a totally different feeling about 
what you have said when you see it in print. Sometimes you can say something with 
a smile on your face; but if you put the same thing in print, it won’t work.”2 Use 
standard proofreading marks, shown in Figure 4.5, to indicate changes. 
How to proofread complex Documents
Long, complex, or important documents demand more careful proofreading using 
the following techniques: 
• Print a copy, preferably double-spaced, and set it aside for at least a day. You will 
be more alert after a breather. 
• Allow adequate time to proofread carefully. A common excuse for sloppy proof-
reading is lack of time. 
routine documents need 
a light proofreading.
For both routine and 
complex documents, it 
is best to proofread from 
a printed copy, not on 
a computer screen.
Figure 4.5 Proofreading Marks
This is to inform you that beginning september 1 the doors
leading to the Westside of the building will have alarms.
Because of the fact that these exits also function as fire exits
they can not actually be locked consequently we are instaling
alrams. Please utilize the east side exists to avoid setting off
the ear piercing alarms.
Marked Copy
Insert
Insert space
Insert punctuation
Insert period
Start paragraph
Delete
Capitalize
Lowercase (don’t capitalize)
Transpose
Close up
Most proofreaders use 
these standard marks 
to indicate revisions.

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
87
• Be prepared to find errors. One student confessed, “I can find other people’s 
errors, but I can’t seem to locate my own.” Psychologically, we don’t expect to 
find errors, and we don’t want to find them. You can overcome this obstacle by 
anticipating errors and congratulating, not criticizing, yourself each time you find 
one. 
• Read the message at least twice—once for word meanings and once for grammar/
mechanics. For very long documents (book chapters and long articles or reports), 
read a third time to verify consistency in formatting. 
• Reduce your reading speed. Concentrate on individual words rather than ideas. 
• For documents that must be perfect, have someone read the message aloud. The 
reader should spell names and difficult words, note capitalization, and read punc-
tuation. 
• Use standard proofreading marks, shown in Figure 4.5, to indicate changes. 
Your computer word processing program may include a style or grammar checker. 
These programs generally analyze aspects of your writing style, including readabil-
ity level and the use of passive voice, trite expressions, split infinitives, and wordy 
expressions. To do so, they use sophisticated algorithms (step-by-step procedures) to 
identify significant errors. In addition to finding spelling and typographical errors, 
grammar checkers can find subject–verb lack of agreement problems, word misuse, 
spacing irregularities, punctuation problems, and many other faults. However, they 
won’t find everything. Although grammar and spell checkers can help you a great 
deal, you are the final proofreader.
Revision is the most important part of the writing process. to 
revise for conciseness, look for flabby phrases that can be 
shortened (such as at this point in time). Eliminate long lead-ins 
(This is to inform you that), fillers (There are), and redundancies 
(combined together). to revise for clarity, dump trite business 
phrases (pursuant to your request), confusing jargon, slang, and 
clichés (think outside the box). to revise for vigor and direct-
ness, unbury verbs (make an examination), control exuberance, 
and choose precise words.
to improve readability, employ document design prin-
ciples. use ample white space, ragged-right margins, and 
appropriate typefaces and fonts. include numbered lists and 
bulleted lists as well as headings to help readers compre-
hend messages quickly.
after revising a message, you are ready for the last step 
in the writing process: proofreading. Watch for irregularities 
in spelling, grammar, punctuation, names and numbers, and 
format. although routine messages may be proofread on the 
screen, you will have better results if you proofread from a 
printed copy. Complex documents should be printed, put 
away for a day or so, and then proofread several times.
in these opening chapters you have studied the writing 
process. you have also learned many practical techniques 
for becoming an effective business communicator. Now you 
can put these techniques to work. Chapter 5 introduces you 
to writing e-mail messages and memorandums, the most 
frequently used forms of communication for most business-
people. Later chapters present letters and reports.
S
summing up and looking Forward
C
critical Thinking
 1. your deadline is due, but your document needs proof-
reading. Should you spend the time necessary to proof-
read and miss the deadline?
 2. Do you agree that good writers can sit down at a computer 
and turn out perfect documents on the first try? Why or 
why not?
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S

88 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
 6. What tasks are involved in revising a message?
 7. Why is conciseness especially important in business?
 8. What is a long lead-in? Give an original example.
 9. What is wrong with this sentence: There is no one who can do the job better than you.
 10. What is a redundancy? Give an example.
 11. What happens when a verb (such as describe) is converted to a noun expression (to make a descrip-
tion) ? Give an original example.
 12. Name five design techniques that can improve readability of printed messages. Be prepared to 
explain each.
 13. What is the difference between serif and sans serif typefaces? What is the most common use for 
each?
 14. What five areas should you especially pay attention to when you proofread?
 15. How does the proofreading of routine documents differ from that of complex documents?
 3. Because clichés are familiar and have stood the test of 
time, do they help clarify writing?
 4. Study the following sentence from an actual message: 
Management was the driving farce behind the project.3 How 
could this proofreading error be costly?
 5. is it unethical to help a friend revise a report when you 
know that the friend will be turning that report in for a 
grade?
C
chapter review

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
89
Flabby Expressions
Revise the following sentences to eliminate flabby phrases.
 16. Despite the fact that we lost the contract, we must at this time move forward.
 17. inasmuch as prices are falling, we will invest in the very near future.
 18. We cannot fill the order until such time as payment is received for previous shipments.
 19. Due to the fact that our manager is acquainted with your sales rep, we are fully cognizant of your price 
increases.
 20. as a general rule, we would not accept the return; however, we will in all probability make an 
exception in this case.
Long Lead-Ins
Revise the following to eliminate long lead-ins.
 21. this message is to let you know that i received your e-mail and its attachments.
 22. this memo is to notify everyone that we will observe Monday as a holiday.
 23. i am writing this letter to inform you that your homeowners’ coverage expires soon.
 24. this is to warn everyone that the loss of laptops endangers company security.
There is/It is Fillers
Revise the following to avoid unnecessary there is/it is fillers.
 25. there are many businesses that are implementing strict e-mail policies.
 26. it is the CEO who must give her approval to the plan.
 27. there are several Web pages you must update.
 28. the manager says that there are too many employees who are taking long breaks.
Redundancies
Revise the following to avoid redundancies.
 29. Because the proposals are exactly identical, we need not check each and every item.
W
Writing improvement exercises

90 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
 30. We will let you know the dollar amount of the remodeling charges.
 31. the office walls were painted beige in color.
 32. Our supervisor requested that all team members return back to the office.
Trite Business Phrases
Revise the following sentences to eliminate trite business phrases.
 33. as per your request, we will no longer send e-mail offers.
 34. thank you in advance for considering our plea for community support.
 35. Pursuant to your request, we are sending the original copies under separate cover.
 36. Enclosed please find a check in the amount of $700.
Jargon, Slang, Clichés
Revise the following sentences to avoid confusing jargon, slang, clichés, and wordiness.
 37. although our last presentation bombed, we think that beyond the shadow of a doubt our new 
presentation will fly.
 38. Our team must be willing to think outside the box in coming up with marketing ideas that pop.
 39. true to form, our competitor has made a snarky claim that we think is way below the belt.
 40. if you will refer back to the budget, you will see that there are provisions that prevent blowing the 
budget.
Buried Verbs
Revise the following to unbury the verbs.
 41. Ms. Nelson gave an appraisal of the home’s value.
 42. the board of directors will give consideration to the contract at its next meeting.
 43. Web-based customer service causes reduction in overall costs.
 44. in preparing this proposal, we must make an application of new government regulations.

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
91
 45. Management made a recommendation affirming abandonment of the pilot project.
 46. the insurance investigator made a determination of the fire damages.
Precise, Direct Words
Revise the following sentences to improve clarity and precision. use your imagination to add appropriate 
words.
Example They said it was a long way off.
Revision Management officials announced that the merger would not take place for two years.
 47. Soon we will be in our new location.
 48. an employee from that company notified us about the change in date.
 49. Please contact us soon.
 50. they said that the movie they saw was good.
 51. the report was weak.
Lists, Bullets, and Headings
Revise the following sentences and paragraphs using techniques presented in this chapter. improve 
parallel construction and reduce wordiness if necessary. 
 52. Revise the following by incorporating a bulleted list.
 
 yellin Resources specializes in preemployment background reports. among our background reports 
are ones that include professional reference interviews, criminal reports, driving records, and employ-
ment verification.
 53. Revise the following by incorporating a numbered list.
 
 When writing to customers granting approval for loans, you should follow four steps that include 
announcing that loan approval has been granted. then you should specify the terms and limits. Next 
you should remind the reader of the importance of making payments that are timely. Finally, a phone 
number should be provided for assistance.

92 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
 54. Revise the following by incorporating a bulleted list.
 
 the american automobile association makes a provision of the following tips for safe driving. you 
should start your drive well rested. you should wear sunglasses in bright sunshine. to provide exercise 
breaks, plan to stop every two hours. Be sure not to drink alcohol or take cold and allergy medications 
before you drive.
 55. Revise the following by incorporating bulleted items with category headings. 
 
 Our attorney made a recommendation that we consider several things to avoid litigation in regard 
to sexual harassment. the first thing he suggested was that we should take steps regarding the 
establishment of an unequivocal written policy prohibiting sexual harassment within our organization. 
the second thing we should do is make sure training sessions are held for supervisors regarding a 
proper work environment. Finally, some kind of official procedure for employees to lodge complaints 
is necessary. this procedure should include investigation of complaints. 
G
grammar/Mechanics checkup 4
Adjectives and Adverbs
Review Sections 1.16 and 1.17 of the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. then study each of the 
following statements. underscore any inappropriate forms. in the space provided write the 
correct form (or C if correct) and the number of the G/M principle illustrated. you may need to 
consult your dictionary for current practice regarding some compound adjectives. When you 
finish, compare your responses with those provided at the end of the book. if your answers 
differ, carefully study the principles in parentheses.
Example Most of our seven year old equipment is still working.
 1. Our newly redecorated offices featured state of the art equipment.
 2. Contractors may submit only work related expenses.
 3. all applicants will be treated equal in the hiring process.
 4. Many applicants submitted there résumés by e-mail.
 5. vice President Wilson said that we only had five days to finish the proposal. 
 6. We tried to make a point by point comparison of the programs.
 7. tyler and Joanna said that they’re planning to start there own business next year.
 8. trevor made a spur of the moment decision regarding the equipment.
 9. Not all decisions that are made on the spur of the moment turn out badly.
 10. the committee offered a well thought out plan to revamp online registration.
 11. you must complete a change of address form when you move.
 12. Each decision will be made on a case by case basis.
 13. i could be more efficient if my printer were more nearer my computer.
 14. if you reject her offer to help, Kristen will feel badly.
 15. the truck’s engine is running smooth after its tune-up.
seven-year-old 
(1.17e)

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
93
the following letter has errors in grammar, punctuation, conversational language, out-
dated expressions, sexist language, concise wording, long lead-ins, and other prob-
lems. you may either (a) use standard proofreading marks (see appendix B) to correct 
the errors here or (b) download the document from your companion Web site and revise 
at your computer. Study the guidelines in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to sharpen 
your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics challenge 4
June 9, 200x
Ms. Bonnie Jeffers
First Trust Guaranty, Inc.
1359 North Grand Avenue
Walnut, CA 91790
Dear Ms. Jeffer:
We are in appreciation of the fact that you have shown patience with us during the time
of our merger with Capital One.
Pursuant to our telephone conversation this morning, this is to advise that two (2)
agent’s packages will be delivered to you next week. Due to the fact that new forms
had to be printed; we do not have them immediately available.
Although we cannot offer a 50/50 commission split, we are able to offer new agents a
60/40 commission split. There are two new agreement forms that show this commission
ratio. When you get ready to sign up a new agent have her ﬁll in these up to date
forms.
When you send me an executed agency agreement please make every effort to tell me
what agency package was assigned to the agent. On the last form that you sent you
overlooked this information. We need this information to distribute commissions in an
expeditious manner.
If you have any questions, don’t hesitate to call on me.
Yours very sincerely,
Brian Simpson
Senior Sales Manager
FIRST FINANCIAL SERVICES
3410 Willow Grove Boulevard
Philadelphia, PA 19137
215.593.4400
www.firstfinancial.com

94 
Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages
Using Word’s Track Changes and Comment Features 
to Edit and Revise Documents
Collaborative writing and editing projects are challenging. Fortunately, Microsoft Word 
offers many useful tools to help team members edit and share documents electronically. 
three simple but useful editing tools are Highlight, Font Color, and Strikethrough. these 
tools, included on the Formatting toolbar, enable reviewers to point out editing problems. 
For example, notice how you can use Strikethrough to delete a wordy lead-in or use yel-
low highlighting to call attention to a misspelled word:
this is just a note to let you know that i would appreciate  you’re  help in preparing the 
announcement about tornado safety tips.
Complex projects, however, may require more advanced editing tools such as Track 
Changes and Insert Comments.
Track Changes. to suggest specific editing changes to other team members, Track 
Changes is handy. the revised wording is visible on the screen, and deletions show 
up in callout balloons in the right-hand margin, as shown in the following document. 
Suggested revisions offered by different team members are identified and dated. the 
original writer may accept or reject these changes. in recent versions of Word, you will 
find Track Changes on the Tools menu. 
Insert Comments. By using Insert Comments, you can point out problematic passages 
or errors, ask or answer questions, and share ideas without changing or adding text. 
When more than one person adds comments, the comments appear in different colors 
and are identified by the individual writer’s name and a date/time stamp. to use this tool 
in Word 2003, each reviewer clicks Tools, Options, and fills in the User Information sec-
tion. to facilitate adding, reviewing, editing, or deleting comments, Word provides a spe-
cial toolbar. you can activate it by using the View pull-down menu (click Toolbars and b. 
On the Reviewing toolbar, click New Comment. then type your comment, which can be 
seen in the Web or print layout view (click View and Print Layout or Web Layout).
if you would like to comment on a text in Word 2007, click the Review tab, and you will 
find the New Comment icon in the second panel from the left. See the figure on page 95 
illustrating the Comment feature.
Career Application. On the job, you will likely be working with others on projects that 
require written documents. During employment interviews, employers may ask whether 
you have participated in team projects using collaborative software. to be able to answer 
that question favorably, take advantage of this opportunity to work on a collaborative 
document using some of the features described here.
Your Task
Divide into two-person teams. Each partner edits the Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 
letter. you may download the file from your companion Web site, or you may keyboard 
it from the textbook. Edit the letter, making all necessary corrections. Save the letter with 
a file name such as YourName-GM4. Send an e-mail message to your partner with the 
attached file. ask your partner to make any further edits. the receiving partner uses font 
color, strikethrough, and the Comment feature to edit the partner’s message. Print a copy 
of your partner’s edited letter before you edit it. Submit that copy along with a copy of your 
partner’s letter with your edits. Be sure to label each carefully.
communication Workshop: Technology

Chapter 4: Revising Business Messages 
95
Team-Written Document Showing MS Word Comment Feature

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 5
Electronic Messages and Memorandums
Chapter 6
Positive Messages
Chapter 7
Negative Messages
Chapter 8
Persuasive Messages
Communicating at Work
3
u N i T  3
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / JACOB WACKERHAUSEN

98 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
OBJECTiVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Understand how organizations exchange paper-based and electronic messages.
• Know when to send and how to organize e-mail messages and memos.
• Describe appropriate formats of e-mail messages and memos.
• Analyze the writing process and explain how it helps you produce effective 
internal messages.
• Identify smart e-mail practices, including getting started; content, tone, and 
correctness; netiquette; reading and replying to e-mail; personal use; and other 
practices.
• Explain the pros and cons of instant messaging and how to use it professionally.
• Write information and procedure e-mail messages and memos.
• Write request and reply e-mail messages and memos.
How Organizations Exchange 
Messages and information
People working in organizations exchange information both externally and inter-
nally. External messages go to customers, suppliers, other businesses, and govern-
ment agencies. Internal messages go to fellow employees. These internal messages 
are increasing in number and importance because organizations are downsizing, 
flattening chains of command, forming work teams, and empowering rank-and-file 
employees. Given more power in making decisions, employees find that they need 
more information. In today’s workplace you will be expected to collect, evaluate, 
and exchange information in clearly written messages.
Written messages fall into two main categories: paper-based and electronic. Paper-
based messages include business letters and memos. Electronic messages include 
e-mail, instant messaging, and text messaging. Electronic information may also be 
exchanged through podcasts, blogs, and wikis. Knowing what channel to use and 
how to prepare an effective message can save you time, reduce stress, and make you 
look professional.
Electronic 
Messages and 
Memorandums
5
C H A P T E r  5
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / JACOB WACKERHAUSEN
Paper-based messages 
include business letters and 
memos. Electronic messages 
include e-mail, instant 
messaging, text messaging, 
podcasts, blogs, and wikis.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
99
Communicating With Paper-Based Messages
Although the business world is quickly switching to electronic communication chan-
nels, paper-based documents still have definite functions.
• Business letters. Writers prepare business letters on letterhead stationery. This 
is the best channel when a permanent record is necessary, when confidentiality 
is important, when sensitivity and formality are essential, and when you need to 
make a persuasive, well-considered presentation. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 cover vari-
ous business letters that you may write in today’s workplace.
• Interoffice memos. Paper-based interoffice memos were once the chief form 
of internal communication. Today, employees use memos primarily to con-
vey confidential information, emphasize ideas, deliver lengthy documents, or 
lend importance to a message. Memos are especially appropriate for explain-
ing organizational procedures or policies that become permanent guidelines. 
Later in this chapter you will study various components in everyday interoffice 
memos.
Communicating With Electronic Messages
A number of electronic communication channels enable businesspeople to exchange 
information rapidly and efficiently. All of these new electronic channels display your 
writing skills.
• E-mail. E-mail involves the transmission of messages through computers and 
networks. Users can send messages to a single recipient or broadcast them to 
multiple recipients. When messages arrive in a simulated mailbox, recipients 
may read, print, forward, store, or delete them. E-mail is most appropriate for 
short messages that deliver routine requests and responses. It is inappropriate 
for sensitive, confidential, or lengthy documents. Used professionally, e-mail is a 
powerful business tool. You will learn more about safe and smart e-mail practices 
shortly.
• Instant messaging. More interactive than e-mail, instant messaging (IM) 
involves the exchange of text messages in real time between two or more 
people logged into an IM service. IM creates a form of private chat room 
so that individuals can carry on conversations similar to telephone calls. 
IM is especially useful for back-and-forth online conversations, such as a 
WOrKPLACE iN FOCuS
When it comes to automobiles, it isn’t easy being 
green. Despite winning the 2008 Green Car of the 
Year award for its Chevy Tahoe Hybrid, General 
Motors has been questioned about its dedication 
to green manufacturing. Critics gained ammunition 
when GM vice chairman Robert Lutz doubted 
publicly that humans cause climate change, 
calling global warming “a total crock.” But when 
activists began using the comments to paint GM 
as environmentally irresponsible, Lutz quickly 
responded on the company’s blog, stating that 
his views were personal and did not reflect GM 
policy. In what situations might companies choose 
to communicate with the public using blogs?
© MAX MORSE / REUTERS / LANDOV
Appropriate for brief 
comments, instant 
messaging is faster and 
more interactive than 
e-mail.

100 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
customer communicating with a tech support person to solve a problem. 
Like e-mail, instant messaging creates a permanent text record and must be 
used carefully.
• Text messaging. Sending really short messages (160 or fewer characters) from 
mobile phones and other wireless devices is called text messaging. This method 
uses Short Message Service (SMS) and is available on most digital mobile 
phones and some personal digital assistants with wireless telecommunications. 
SMS gateways exist to connect mobile phones with instant message services, the 
Web, desktop computers, and even landline telephones. Busy communicators use 
text messaging for short person-to-person inquiries and responses that keep them 
in touch while away from the office.
• Podcasts. A podcast is a digital media file that is distributed over the Internet 
and downloaded on portable media players and personal computers. Podcasts 
are distinguished by their ability to be syndicated, subscribed to, or downloaded 
automatically when new content is added. In business, podcasts are useful for 
improving customer relations, marketing, training, product launches, and “viral” 
marketing (creating online “buzz” about new products).
• Blogs. A blog is a Web site with journal entries usually written by one per-
son with comments added by others. It may combine text, images, and links 
to other blogs or Web pages. Businesses use blogs to keep customers and 
employees informed and to receive feedback. Company news can be posted, 
updated, and categorized for easy cross-referencing. Blogs may be a useful 
tool for marketing and promotion as well as for showing a company’s per-
sonal side.
• Wikis. A wiki is a Web site that enables multiple users to collaboratively create 
and edit pages. A wiki serves as a central location where shared documents can 
be viewed and revised by a large or dispersed team. Because a wiki can be used 
to manage and organize meeting notes, team agendas, and company calendars, 
it is a valuable project management tool.
Organizing E-Mail Messages and Memos
E-mail messages and memos are standard forms of communication within organiza-
tions. As such, they will probably become your most common business communica-
tion channel. These messages perform critical tasks such as informing employees, 
requesting data, supplying responses, confirming decisions, and giving directions. 
They generally follow a similar structure and formatting.
Knowing When to Send an E-Mail or a Memo
Before sending any message, you must choose a communication channel, as discussed 
in Chapter 2. Although both e-mail and memos deliver internal information, they are 
not interchangeable.
E-mail is appropriate for short, informal messages that request information and 
respond to inquiries. It is especially effective for messages to multiple receivers and 
messages that must be archived (saved). An e-mail is also appropriate as a cover 
document when sending longer attachments. E-mail, however, is not a substitute for 
face-to-face conversations, telephone calls, business letters, or memorandums. Face-
to-face conversations or telephone calls are better channel choices if your goal is to 
convey enthusiasm or warmth, explain a complex situation, present a persuasive 
argument, or smooth over disagreements.
Interoffice memos are appropriate for a number of purposes. If you are deliver-
ing confidential data, such as salary or employee review information, a memo is 
suitable. If you are sending a lengthy report to others within your organization, 
memo formatting is proper. Memos are equally useful when you need to emphasize 
your ideas or send an internal message that is important or formal.
E-mail messages and memos 
inform employees, request 
data, give responses, 
conﬁ rm decisions, and 
provide directions. 
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“When people find themselves 
spending a lot of time 
searching for precisely the 
right words, it’s often a sign 
that the topic warrants an 
in-person discussion.”

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
101
A final consideration in deciding whether to send an e-mail message or a memo 
is your receiver’s preference and your organization’s choice. Choose a channel that 
is comfortable to the receiver and appropriate for the organization.
Components of E-Mail Messages and Memos
Whether electronic or hard copy, direct internal messages generally contain four 
parts: (a) an informative subject line that summarizes the message, (b) an opening 
that reveals the main idea immediately, (c) a body that explains and justifies the 
main idea, and (d) an appropriate closing. Remember that direct messages deliver 
good news or standard information.
Writing the Subject Line. In e-mails and memos an informative subject 
line is mandatory. It summarizes the central idea, thus providing quick identification 
for reading and for filing. In e-mail messages, a good subject line is critical. It often 
determines whether and when the message is read. Messages without subject lines 
may be automatically deleted.
What does it take to get your message read? For one thing, stay away from mean-
ingless or dangerous words. A sure way to have your message deleted or ignored is 
to use a one-word heading such as Issue, Problem, Important, or Help. Including 
a word such as Free is dangerous because it may trigger spam filters. Try to make 
your subject line “talk” by including a verb. Explain the purpose of the message 
and how it relates to the reader. Remember that a subject line is usually written in 
an abbreviated style, often without articles (a, an, the). It need not be a complete 
sentence, and it does not end with a period.
Poor Subject Line
Trade Show
Staff Meeting
Important!
Parking Permits
Improved Subject Line
Need You to Showcase Two Items 
at Our Next Trade Show
Rescheduling Staff Meeting for 1 p.m. 
on May 12
Please Respond to Job Satisfaction 
Survey
Obtain New Employee Parking 
Permits From HR
Opening With the Main idea. Most e-mails and memos cover nonsensi-
tive information that can be handled in a straightforward manner. Begin by front-
loading; that is, reveal the main idea immediately. Even though the purpose of 
the e-mail or memo is summarized in the subject line, that purpose should be 
restated—and amplified—in the first sentence. Busy readers want to know immedi-
ately why they are reading a message. As you learned in Chapter 3, most messages 
should begin directly. Notice how the following indirect opener can be improved 
by frontloading. 
Indirect Opening
For the past six months the Human 
Resources Development Department 
has been considering changes in our 
employee benefit plan.
Direct Opening
Please review the following proposal 
regarding employee benefits, and let 
me know by May 20 if you approve 
these changes. 
Explaining in the Body. The body provides more information about the 
reason for writing. It explains and discusses the subject logically. Effective e-mail 
messages and memos generally discuss only one topic. Limiting the topic helps the 
receiver act on the subject and file it appropriately. A writer who, for example, 
describes a computer printer problem and also requests permission to attend a 
Subject lines summarize 
the purpose of the message 
in abbreviated form.
Direct e-mails and memos 
open by revealing the 
main idea immediately.
Designed for easy 
comprehension, the body 
explains one topic.

102 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
conference runs a 50 percent failure risk. The reader may respond to the printer 
problem but delay or forget about the conference request. 
The body of e-mail messages and memos should have high “skim value.” This 
means that information should be easy to read and comprehend. As covered in the 
section on document design in Chapter 4, many techniques improve readability. 
You can use white space, bulleted lists, enumerated lists, appropriate typefaces and 
fonts, and headings. In the revision stage you will see many ways to improve the 
readability of the body of your message.
Closing With a Purpose. Generally close an e-mail message or a memo 
with (a) action information, dates, or deadlines; (b) a summary of the message; or 
(c) a closing thought. Here again the value of thinking through the message before 
actually writing it becomes apparent. The closing is where readers look for dead-
lines and action language. An effective memo or e-mail closing might be, Please 
submit your written report to me by June 15 so that we can have your data before 
our July planning session.
In more complex messages a summary of main points may be an appropriate 
closing. If no action request is made and a closing summary is unnecessary, you 
might end with a simple concluding thought (I’m glad to answer your questions or
This sounds like a useful project). You need not close messages to coworkers with 
goodwill statements such as those found in letters to customers or clients. However, 
some closing thought is often necessary to prevent a feeling of abruptness. Closings 
can show gratitude or encourage feedback with remarks such as I sincerely appreci-
ate your help or What are your ideas on this proposal? Other closings look forward 
to what’s next, such as How would you like to proceed? Avoid closing with over-
used expressions such as Please let me know if I may be of further assistance. This 
ending sounds mechanical and insincere. 
Putting it All Together. To see the development of a complete internal 
message, look at Figure 5.1. It shows the first draft and revision of an e-mail mes-
sage that Madeleine Espinoza, senior marketing manager, wrote to her boss, Keith 
Milton. Although it contained solid information, the first draft was so wordy and 
dense that the main points were lost.
In the revision stage Madeleine realized that she needed to reorganize her mes-
sage into an opening, body, and closing. She desperately needed to improve the 
readability. In studying what she had written, she recognized that she was talking 
about two main problems. She discovered that she could present a three-part solu-
tion. These ideas didn’t occur to her until she had written the first draft. Only in the 
revision stage was she able to see that she was talking about two separate problems 
as well as a three-part solution. The revision process can help you think through a 
problem and clarify a solution.
As she revised, Madeleine was more aware of the subject line, opening, body, 
and closing. She used an informative subject line and opened directly by explain-
ing why she was writing. Her opening outlined the two main problems so that her 
reader understood the background of the following recommendations. In the body 
of the message, Madeleine identified three corrective actions, and she highlighted 
them for improved readability. Notice that she listed her three recommendations 
using numbers with boldface headings. Bullets don’t always transmit well in e-mail 
messages. Madeleine closed her message with a deadline and a reference to the next 
action to be taken.
Applying E-Mail and Memo Formats
E-mail messages and hard-copy memos are similar in content and development, but 
their formats are slightly different.
Messages should close 
with (a) action information 
including dates and 
deadlines, (b) a summary, 
or (c) a closing thought.
revision helps you think 
through a problem, 
clarify a solution, and 
express it clearly.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
103 
Formatting E-Mail Messages
Although e-mail is a relatively new communication channel, people are beginning 
to agree on specific formatting and usage conventions. The following suggestions 
identify current formatting standards. Always check with your organization, how-
ever, to observe its practices.
FigurE 5.1 Revising an Information E-Mail Message

104 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
guide Words. E-mail programs provide a set of guide words to help you create 
your message. Following the guide word To, some writers insert just the recipient’s 
electronic address, such as mphilly@accountpro.com. Other writers prefer to include 
the receiver’s full name plus the electronic address, as shown in Figure 5.2. By includ-
ing full names in the To and From slots, both receivers and senders are better able 
to identify the message. By the way, the order of Date, To, From, Subject, and other 
guide words varies depending on your e-mail program and whether you are sending 
or receiving the message.
Most e-mail programs automatically add the current date after Date. On the Cc
line (which stands for carbon copy or courtesy copy), you can type the address of 
anyone who is to receive a copy of the message. Remember, though, to send copies 
only to those people directly involved with the message. Most e-mail programs also 
include a line for Bcc (blind carbon copy). This sends a copy without the addressee’s 
An e-mail contains guide 
words, an optional greeting, 
and a concise and easy-to-
read message.
FigurE 5.2 Formatting an E-Mail Request 

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
105
knowledge. Savvy writers today use Bcc for the names and addresses of a list of 
receivers, a technique that avoids revealing the addresses to the entire group. On the 
subject line, identify the subject of the memo. Be sure to include enough information 
to be clear and compelling.
greeting. Begin your message with a greeting such as the following:
Hi, Kevin,
Greetings, Amy,
Leslie,
Thank you, Haley,
Dear Mr. Cotter, 
Dear Leslie,
In addition to being friendly, a greeting provides a visual cue marking the beginning 
of the message. Many messages are transmitted or forwarded with such long headers 
that finding the beginning of the message can be difficult. A greeting helps, even if is 
just the receiver’s name, as shown in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Body. When keying the body of an e-mail message, use standard caps and lower-
case characters—never all uppercase or all lowercase characters. Cover just one 
topic, and try to keep the total message under three screens in length. Remember 
to double-space between paragraphs. For longer messages prepare a separate file to 
be attached. Use the e-mail message only as a cover document. To assist you in pre-
paring your message, many e-mail programs have basic text-editing features, such 
as cut, copy, paste, and word-wrap. However, avoid graphics, font changes, bold-
face, and italics unless your reader’s system can handle them. As more and more 
programs offer HTML formatting options, writers are able to use all the graphics, 
colors, and fonts available in their word processing programs.
Closing Lines. Some people sign off their e-mail messages with a cordial 
expression such as Cheers, All the best, or Warm Regards. Regardless of the closing, 
be sure to sign your name. Messages without names become very confusing when 
forwarded or when they are part of a thread (string) of responses. To avoid further 
confusion, include a signature block with your contact information. This might 
include your name, title, organization, address, e-mail address, telephone number, 
cell phone number, and fax number. Decide what information is most important. 
Then prepare a signature block with five or fewer lines. Although you might be 
tempted to omit your e-mail address, it is wise to include it because some systems 
do not transmit your address automatically. When your message is forwarded, your 
e-mail address may be lost.
Formatting interoffice Memorandums
In the past interoffice memorandums were the primary communication channel for 
delivering information within organizations. Although e-mail is more often used 
today, memos are still useful for important internal messages that require a perma-
nent record or formality. For example, organizations use memos to deliver changes 
in procedures, official instructions, reports, and long internal documents.
Memo Forms and Margins. Some organizations use printed interoffice 
memo forms. In addition to the name of the organization, these forms include the 
basic elements of Date, To, From, and Subject. Large organizations may include 
other identifying headings, such as File Number, Floor, Extension, Location, and 
Distribution. Because of the difficulty of aligning computer printers with preprinted 
forms, business writers may use default templates available on their word proces-
sors. Writers can customize these templates with their organization’s name.
If you are preparing a memo on plain paper, set 1-inch top and bottom mar-
gins and left and right margins of 1.25 inches. Provide a heading that includes the 
name of the company plus “Memo” or “Memorandum.” Begin the guide words 
a triple space (two blank lines) below the last line of the heading. Key in bold the 
guide words: Date:, To:, From:, and Subject: at the left margin. The guide words 
An e-mail greeting 
shows friendliness and 
indicates the beginning 
of the message.
E-mail messages are 
most helpful when they 
conclude with the writer’s 
full contact information.
Hard-copy memos are 
useful for internal messages 
that require a permanent 
record or formality.

106 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
may appear in all caps or with only the initial letter capitalized. Triple-space (set 
two blank lines) after the last line of the heading. Do not justify the right margins. 
As discussed in the document design section of Chapter 4, ragged-right margins 
in printed messages are easier to read. Single-space the message, and double-space 
between paragraphs, as shown in Figure 5.3.
FigurE 5.3 Interoffice Memo That Responds to Request

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
107
Preparing Memos as E-Mail Attachments. E-mail has become increas-
ingly important for exchanging internal messages. However, it is inappropriate for 
long documents or for items that require formality or permanence. For such mes-
sages, writers may prepare the information in standard memo format and send it as 
an attachment to a cover e-mail.
In preparing e-mail attachments, be sure to include identifying informa-
tion. Because the cover e-mail message may become separated from the attach-
ment, the attachment must be fully identified. Preparing the e-mail attachment 
as a memo provides a handy format that identifies the date, sender, receiver, 
and subject.
using the Writing Process to Create 
Effective internal Messages
Internal electronic messages and hard-copy memos usually carry direct messages that 
are neither sensitive nor persuasive. Although these messages are straight forward, 
they require careful writing to be clearly and quickly understood. By following the 
three-phase writing process, you can speed up your efforts and greatly improve the 
product.
Analyzing, Anticipating, and Adapting
In the prewriting phase you will spend some time analyzing your task. It is amazing 
how many of us are ready to put our pens or computers into gear before engaging 
our minds. Before writing, ask yourself these important questions: 
• Do I really need to write this e-mail or memo? A phone call or a quick visit 
to a nearby coworker might solve the problem—and save the time and expense 
of a written message. On the other hand, some written messages are needed to 
provide a permanent record. 
• Why am I writing? Know why you are writing and 
what you hope to achieve. This will help you recog-
nize what the important points are and where to 
place them.
• How will the reader react? Visualize the reader and 
the effect your message will have. In writing e-mail 
messages and memos, imagine that you are sitting 
and talking with your reader. Avoid speaking bluntly, 
failing to explain, or ignoring your reader’s needs. 
Consider ways to shape the message to benefit the 
reader. Also be careful about what you say because 
your message may very well be forwarded to some-
one else—or may be read by your boss.
• How can I save my reader’s time? Think of ways to make your message easier to 
comprehend at a glance. Use bullets, lists, headings, and white space to improve 
readability.
researching, Organizing, and Composing
Phase 2, writing, involves gathering documentation, organizing, and actually com-
posing the first draft. Although some of your electronic messages and memos will be 
short, you can ensure a more effective message by following these steps:
• Conduct research. Check the files, talk with your boss, and possibly consult the 
target audience to collect information before you begin to write. Gather any docu-
mentation necessary to support your message.
To deliver a long or formal 
document, send a cover 
e-mail with an attachment.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
In complaining about e-mail, 
one observer said, “Like bad 
advice, self-importance, and 
ugly carpeting, there’s just 
too much of it in the office.”
“Be careful what you write. My wonderful, charming, 
brilliant boss reads everyone’s e-mail.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
gather background 
information; organize it 
into an outline; compose 
your message; and revise 
for clarity, correctness, 
and feedback

108 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
• Organize your information. Make a brief outline of the points you want to cover 
in your message. For short messages jot down notes on the document you are 
answering or make a scratch list at your computer.
• Compose your first draft. At your computer compose the message from your 
outline. As you compose, avoid amassing huge blocks of text. No one wants to 
read endless lines of type.
revising, Proofreading, and Evaluating
Phase 3, revising, involves putting the final touches on your message. Careful and 
caring writers will ask a number of questions as they do the following:
• Revise for clarity and conciseness. Viewed from the receiver’s perspective, are 
the ideas clear? Do they need more explanation? If the message is passed on to 
others, will they need further explanation? Consider having a colleague critique 
your message if it is an important one.
• Revise for readability. Did you group related information into paragraphs, 
preferably short ones? Paragraphs separated by white space look inviting. Does 
each paragraph begin with the main point, and is that point backed up by 
details? Can you add paragraph headings to improve readability? Can you form 
bullet points or lists to make the message easy to skim and comprehend?
• Proofread for correctness. Are the sentences complete and punctuated prop-
erly? Did you overlook any typos or misspelled words? Remember to use 
your spell checker and grammar checker to proofread your message before 
sending it. 
• Plan for feedback. How will you know whether this message is successful? You 
can improve feedback by asking questions (such as Are you comfortable with 
these suggestions? or What do you think?). Remember to make it easy for the 
receiver to respond by providing your e-mail address or phone number.
Best Practices for using E-Mail 
Smartly, Safely, and Professionally
E-mail is the preferred communication channel in most businesses today. Because its 
use grew so quickly, many people need help in using it smartly, safely, and profes-
sionally. Early users ignored stylistic and grammatical considerations. They thought 
that “words on the fly” required little editing or proofing. Correspondents used 
emoticons (such as sideways happy faces) to express their feelings. 
Today, however, e-mail has grown up. It is a mainstream communication chan-
nel, with over 84 billion messages being sent each day worldwide.1 E-mail is twice as 
likely as the telephone to be used to communicate at work. When asked what com-
munication channel they preferred, 65 percent of senior executives chose e-mail.2
We have become so dependent on e-mail that 53 percent of people using it at work 
say that their productivity drops when they are away from it.3
Wise e-mail business communicators are aware of the importance as well 
as the dangers of e-mail as a communication channel. They know that their 
messages can travel, intentionally or unintentionally, long distances. A quickly 
drafted note may end up in the boss’s mailbox or be forwarded to an enemy’s 
box. Making matters worse, computers—like elephants and spurned lovers—
never forget. Even erased messages can remain on multiple servers that are 
backed up by companies or Internet service providers. Increasingly, e-mail has 
turned into the “smoking gun” uncovered by prosecutors to prove indelicate or 
even illegal intentions.
In addition, many users complain of poorly written messages and e-mail “ping-
pong.” Inboxes overflow with unnecessary back-and-forth exchanges seeking to 
clarify previous messages.4
Despite its popularity, 
e-mail may be dangerous 
because messages travel 
long distances, are difﬁ cult 
to erase, and may become 
evidence in court.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
109
Best Practices—getting Started
Despite its dangers and limitations, e-mail is the No. 1 channel of communication. 
To make your messages effective and to avoid e-mail ping-pong, take the time to 
organize your thoughts, compose carefully, and consider the receiver. The following 
best practices will help you get off to a good start in using e-mail smartly, safely, 
and professionally.
• Consider composing offline. Especially for important messages, think about 
using your word processing program to write offline. Then upload your mes-
sage to the e-mail network. This avoids “self-destructing” (losing all your writing 
through some glitch or pressing the wrong key) when working online.
• Get the address right. E-mail addresses are sometimes complex, often illogical, 
and always unforgiving. Omit one character or misread the letter l for the num-
ber 1, and your message bounces. Solution: Use your electronic address book 
for people you write to frequently. Double-check every address that you key in 
manually. Also be sure that you don’t reply to a group of receivers when you 
intend to answer only one.
• Avoid misleading subject lines. As discussed earlier, make sure your subject 
line is relevant and helpful. Generic tags such as Hi! and Important! may cause 
your message to be deleted before it is opened. 
• Apply the top-of-screen test. When readers open your message and look at the 
first screen, will they see what is most significant? Your subject line and first 
paragraph should convey your purpose.
Content, Tone, and Correctness
Although e-mail seems as casual as a telephone call, it definitely is not. Because it pro-
duces a permanent record, think carefully about what you say and how you say it.
Because e-mail is now a 
mainstream communication 
channel, messages 
should be well organized, 
carefully composed, and 
grammatically correct.
WOrKPLACE iN FOCuS
When engineers at Motorola teamed up to design 
the fashionable ultra-thin Razr, confidentiality 
was a primary concern. To keep their cell phone 
project top-secret, group members prohibited 
the circulation of prototypes, digital photos, and 
drawings of the sleek device. In addition, team 
members kept their effort hidden from other Motorola 
colleagues and banned the use of e-mail during 
the Razr’s development phase. Why might e-mail 
be an inappropriate channel of communication 
for certain types of messages and documents?
© IMAGE COURTESY OF THE ADVERTISING ARCHIVES

110 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
• Be concise. Don’t burden readers with unnecessary information. Remember that 
monitors are small and typefaces are often difficult to read. Organize your ideas 
tightly. If you must send a long message, prepare an attachment and use the e-
mail as a cover message.
• Don’t send anything you wouldn’t want published. Because e-mail seems like a 
telephone call or a person-to-person conversation, writers sometimes send sensi-
tive, confidential, inflammatory, or potentially embarrassing messages. Beware! 
E-mail creates a permanent record that does not go away even when deleted. 
Every message is a corporate communication that can be used against you or 
your employer. Don’t write anything that you wouldn’t want your boss, your 
family, or a judge to read.
• Don’t use e-mail to avoid contact. E-mail is inappropriate for breaking bad 
news or for resolving arguments. For example, it is improper to fire a person by 
e-mail. It is also not a good channel for dealing with conflict with supervisors, 
subordinates, or others. If there is any possibility of hurt feelings, pick up the 
telephone or pay the person a visit.
• Care about correctness. People are still judged by their writing, whether elec-
tronic or paper-based. Sloppy e-mail messages (with missing apostrophes, hap-
hazard spelling, and stream-of-consciousness writing) make readers work too 
hard. They resent not only the information but also the writer.
• Care about tone. Your words and writing style affect the reader. Avoid sounding 
curt, negative, or domineering.
• Resist humor and tongue-in-cheek comments. Without the nonverbal cues 
conveyed by your face and your voice, humor can easily be misunderstood.
Netiquette
Although e-mail is a relatively new communication channel, a number of rules of 
polite online interaction are emerging.
• Limit any tendency to send blanket copies. Send copies only to people who 
really need to see a message. It is unnecessary to document every business deci-
sion and action with an electronic paper trail.
• Consider using identifying labels. When appropriate, add one of the following 
labels to the subject line: Action (action required, please respond); FYI (for your 
information, no response needed); Re (this is a reply to another message); Urgent 
(please respond immediately); REQ (required).
• Use capital letters only for emphasis or for titles. Avoid writing entire messages 
in all caps, which is like SHOUTING.
• Don’t forward without permission and beware of long threads. Obtain 
approval before forwarding a message. Also beware of forwarding e-mail con-
sisting of a long thread (string) of messages. Some content in bottom screens 
may be inappropriate for the third receiver. Aside from the issue of clutter, 
leaving sensitive information in the thread can lead to serious trouble.
reading and replying to E-Mail
The following tips can save you time and frustration when reading and answering 
messages:
• Scan all messages in your inbox before replying to each individually. Because 
subsequent messages often affect the way you respond, scan all messages first 
(especially all those from the same individual).
• Print only when necessary. Generally, read and answer most messages online 
without saving or printing. Use folders to archive messages on special topics. 
Print only those messages that are complex, controversial, or involve significant 
decisions and follow-up.
• Acknowledge receipt. If you can’t reply immediately, tell when you can (Will 
respond Friday).
Avoid sending sensitive, 
conﬁ dential, inﬂ ammatory, 
or potentially embarrassing 
messages because e-mail 
is not private.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“E-mail is today’s version of a 
business letter or interoffice 
memo. Think accordingly. 
Make it look professional.”
Scan all messages before 
responding, paste in relevant 
sections, revise the subject 
if the topic changes, provide 
a clear ﬁ rst sentence, and 
never respond when angry.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
111
• Don’t automatically return the sender’s message. When replying, cut and paste 
the relevant parts. Avoid irritating your recipients by returning the entire thread 
(sequence of messages) on a topic.
• Revise the subject line if the topic changes. When replying or continuing an 
e-mail exchange, revise the subject line as the topic changes.
• Provide a clear, complete first sentence. Avoid fuzzy replies such as That’s fine 
with me or Sounds good! Busy respondents forget what was said in earlier mes-
sages, so be sure to fill in the context and your perspective when responding.
• Never respond when you are angry. Always allow some time to cool off before 
shooting off a response to an upsetting message. You often come up with differ-
ent and better alternatives after thinking about what was said. If possible, iron 
out differences in person.
Personal use
Remember that office computers are meant for work-related communication.
• Don’t use company computers for personal matters. Unless your company spe-
cifically allows it, never use your employer’s computers for personal messages, per-
sonal shopping, or entertainment.
• Assume that all e-mail is monitored. Employers legally have the right to moni-
tor e-mail, and many do.
Other Smart E-Mail Practices
Depending on your messages and audience, the following tips promote effective 
electronic communication.
• Improve the readability of longer messages with graphic highlighting. When a 
message requires several screens, help the reader with headings, bulleted listings, 
side headings, and perhaps an introductory summary that describes what will fol-
low. Although these techniques lengthen a message, they shorten reading time.
• Consider cultural differences. Be especially clear and precise in your language 
in e-mail messages that travel across borders. Remember that figurative clichés 
(pull up stakes, playing second fiddle,) sports references (hit a home run, play 
by the rules), and slang (cool, stoked) cause confusion, especially for nonnative 
speakers.
• Double-check before hitting the Send button. Have you included everything? 
Did you attach the file you said you would? Avoid the necessity of sending a 
 second message, which makes you look careless. Use spell-check and reread for 
fluency before sending. Checking your incoming messages before sending is also 
a good idea, especially if several people are involved in a rapid-fire exchange. 
This helps avoid “passing”—sending out a message that might be altered depend-
ing on an incoming note.
Design your messages to 
enhance readability, and 
double-check before sending.
CATHY © CATHY GUISEWITE. REPRINTED WITH PRMISSION 
OF UNIVERSAL PRESS SYNDICATE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

112 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
using instant Messaging Professionally
Instant messaging (IM) enables you to use the Internet to communicate in real time 
in a private chat room with one or more individuals. It is like live e-mail or a text 
telephone call. More and more workers are using it as a speedy communication 
channel to exchange short messages.
How instant Messaging Works
To send an instant message, you might use a client such as AOL’s Instant Messenger, 
Yahoo! Messenger, Google Talk, Jabber, or Microsoft’s Windows Live Messenger. 
These are public IM services. Once the client is installed, you would enter your name 
and password to log on. The software checks to see if any of the users in your contact 
list are currently logged in. If the server finds any of your contacts, it sends a message 
back to your computer. If the person you wish to contact is online, you can click 
that person’s name and a window opens that you can enter text into. You enter a 
message, such as that shown in Figure 5.4, and click Send. Because your client has 
the Internet address and port number for the computer of the person you addressed, 
your message is sent directly to the client on that person’s computer. All communica-
tion is directly between the two computers without the need of a server.
Unlike e-mail, IM provides no elaborate page layout options. The text box is 
short, and pressing the Enter key sends the message. Obviously, it is designed for 
brief but fast text interaction.
Weighing the Pros and Cons of instant Messaging
Once primarily a consumer tool, instant messaging is increasingly being used by 
knowledge workers for many reasons. People like instant messaging because of its 
immediacy. Unlike e-mail, messages do not wait to be downloaded from a mail 
server. In addition, a user knows right away whether a message was delivered. 
Proponents of instant messaging say that it avoids phone tag and eliminates the 
Businesspeople use instant 
messaging to exchange 
ideas in real time in a 
private chat room.
FigurE 5.4 Instant Message for Brief, Fast Communication

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
113
downtime associated with personal telephone conversations. Because it replaces 
expensive long-distance telephone and fax calls, instant messaging saves money. 
Another benefit of instant messaging includes “presence functionality.” Coworkers 
can locate each other online, thus avoiding wild goose chases hunting someone who 
is out of the office. Many people consider instant messaging a productivity booster 
because it enables them to get answers quickly and helps them multitask.
Despite its popularity among workers, some organizations forbid employees to 
use instant messaging for a number of reasons. Employers consider instant mes-
saging yet another distraction in addition to the interruptions caused by the tele-
phone, e-mail, and the Web. Organizations also fear that privileged information 
and company records will be revealed through public instant messaging systems, 
which hackers can easily penetrate. Organizations worry about “phishing” schemes, 
viruses, malware, and spim (IM spam). Like e-mail, instant messages are subject 
to discovery (disclosure); that is, they can become evidence in lawsuits. Finally, 
companies fear instant messaging because it forces them to face the daunting task 
of tracking and storing messaging conversations to comply with legal requirements. 
The pros and cons of instant messaging are summarized in Figure 5.5.
For some organizations IM is not an essential business tool and not worth the risks 
involved. They simply block its use. Other companies, however, see instant messaging 
as a beneficial communication tool. They are investing in enterprise-class IM systems.
Such systems enable workers to exchange instant messages within a closed-loop struc-
ture. These systems provide an audit trail and greater security. Organizations can selec-
tively retain, archive, and destroy IM conversations to meet compliance laws.
Organizations may 
ban instant messaging 
because of productivity, 
security, litigation, and 
compliance fears.
© GRANTLAND ENTERPRISES; WWW.GRANTLAND.NET
FigurE 5.5 Pros and Cons of Instant Messaging
Pros
Cons
Speed: Connects people immediately.
Security: Imperils privileged information.
Cost savings: Reduces telephone bills.
Litigation: Endangers companies with 
possibility of disclosure in lawsuits.
Presence functionality: Locates people 
online.
Control: Requires companies to establish 
and enforce usage rules.
Convenience: Provides quick answers to 
short questions.
Compliance: Forces organizations to monitor 
and track conversations to meet legal 
requirements.
Productivity booster: Speeds project 
completion; enables multitasking.
Productivity thief: Distracts workers; 
encourages frivolous time wasting.

Best Practices for instant Messaging
Instant messaging can definitely save time and simplify communications with 
coworkers and customers. Before using it on the job, however, be sure you have 
permission. Do not use public systems without checking with your supervisor. If 
your organization does allow instant messaging, you can use it efficiently and pro-
fessionally by following a number of best practices.
• Learn about your organization’s IM policies. Are you allowed to use instant mes-
saging? With whom may you exchange messages?
• Make yourself unavailable when you need to complete a project or meet a deadline.
• Organize your contact lists to separate business contacts from family and friends.
• Keep your messages simple and to the point. Avoid unnecessary chitchat, and 
know when to say goodbye.
• Don’t use IM to send confidential or sensitive information.
• Be aware that instant messages can be saved. Like e-mail, don’t say anything that 
would damage your reputation or that of your organization.
• If personal messaging is allowed, keep it to a minimum. Your organization may 
prefer that personal chats be done during breaks or the lunch hour.
• Show patience by not blasting multiple messages to coworkers if a response is not 
immediate.
• Keep your presence status up-to-date so that people trying to reach you don’t 
waste their time.
• Beware of jargon, slang, and abbreviations, which, although they may reduce 
keystrokes, may be confusing and appear unprofessional.
• Respect your receivers by employing proper grammar, spelling, and proofreading.
Writing information and Procedure 
E-Mail Messages and Memos
Although you may exchange very short instant messages, most of your writing tasks on 
the job will probably involve preparing e-mail messages and interoffice memos. Some of 
the most frequent messages that you can expect to be writing as a business communica-
tor are (a) information and procedure messages and (b) request and reply messages.
In this book we give you a number of writing plans appropriate for various mes-
sages. These plans provide a skeleton; they are the bones of a message. You will provide 
the flesh. Simply plugging in phrases or someone else’s words won’t work. Good writers 
provide details and link their ideas with transitions to create fluent and meaningful mes-
sages. However, a writing plan helps you get started and gives you ideas about what to 
include. At first, you will probably rely on these plans considerably. As you progress, 
these plans will become less important. Later in the book, no plans are provided.
Writing Plan for information and Procedure 
E-Mail Messages and Memos
• Subject line: Summarize the content of the message.
• Opening: Expand the subject line by stating the main idea concisely in a full 
sentence.
• Body: Provide background data and explain the main idea. Consider using 
lists, bullets, or headings to improve readability. In describing a procedure 
or giving instructions, use command language (do this, don’t do that).
• Closing: Request a specific action, summarize the message, or present a 
closing thought. If appropriate, include a deadline and a reason.
Information and procedure messages distribute routine information, describe pro-
cedures, and deliver instructions. They typically flow downward from management to 
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“[B]ear in mind that 
messaging sessions can 
be stored, then copied and 
pasted elsewhere. . . . 
The term ‘confidential’ is 
somewhat rubbery these 
days, so . . . think before you 
hit that Enter key.”
114 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
Writing plans help beginners 
get started by providing an 
outline of what to include.

employees and relate to the daily operation of an organization. In writing these mes-
sages, you have one primary function: conveying your idea so clearly that no further 
explanation (return message, telephone call, or personal visit) is necessary.
You have already seen the development of a routine information message in 
Figure 5.1 on page 103. It follows the writing plan with an informative subject line, 
an opening that states the purpose directly, and a body that organizes the informa-
tion for maximum readability. The closing in an information message depends on 
what was discussed. If the message involves an action request, it should appear in 
the closing—not in the opening or in the body. If no action is required, the closing 
can summarize the message or offer a closing thought.
Procedure messages must be especially clear and readable. Figure 5.6 shows the 
first draft of an interoffice memo written by Troy Bell. His memo was meant to 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
115
information and procedure 
messages generally 
ﬂ ow downward from 
management to employees.
FigurE 5.6 Procedure Memo

116 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
announce a new procedure for employees to follow in advertising open positions. 
However, the tone was negative, the explanation of the problem rambled, and the 
new procedure was unclear. Notice, too, that Troy’s first draft told readers what 
they shouldn’t do (Do not submit advertisements for new employees directly to an 
Internet job bank or a news paper). It is more helpful to tell readers what they should
do. Finally, Troy’s first memo closed with a threat instead of showing readers how 
this new procedure will help them.
In the revision Troy improved the tone considerably. The subject line contains 
a please, which is always pleasant to see even if one is giving an order. The subject 
line also includes a verb and specifies the purpose of the memo. Instead of express-
ing his ideas with negative words and threats, Troy revised his message to explain 
objectively and concisely what went wrong.
Troy realized that his original explanation of the new procedure was vague. 
Messages explaining procedures are most readable when the instructions are 
broken down into numbered steps listed chronologically. Each step should begin 
with an action verb in the command mode. Notice in Troy’s revision in Figure 
5.6 that numbered items begin with Write, Bring, Let, and Pick up. It is some-
times difficult to force all the steps in a procedure into this kind of command 
language. Troy struggled, but by trying different wording, he finally found verbs 
that worked.
Why should you go to so much trouble to make lists and achieve parallelism? 
Because readers can comprehend what you have said much more quickly, parallel 
language also makes you look professional and efficient.
In writing information and procedure messages, be careful of tone. Today’s 
managers and team leaders seek employee participation and cooperation. These 
goals can’t be achieved, though, if the writer sounds like a dictator or an auto-
crat. Avoid making accusations and fixing blame. Rather, explain changes, 
give reasons, and suggest benefits to the reader. Assume that employees want 
to contribute to the success of the organization and to their own achievement. 
Notice in the Figure 5.6 revision that Troy tells readers that they will save 
time and have their open positions filled more quickly if they follow the new 
procedures.
The writing of instructions and procedures is so important that we have devel-
oped a special bonus online supplement called How to Write Instruc tions. It provides 
more examples and information. This online supplement at www.meguffey.com
extends your textbook with in-depth material including links to real businesses to 
show you examples of well-written procedures and instructions.
Writing request and reply 
E-Mail Messages and Memos
Business organizations require information as their fuel. To make operations run 
smoothly, managers and employees request information from each other and then 
respond to those requests. Knowing how to write those requests and responses effi-
ciently and effectively can save you time and make you look good.
Writing Plan for request E-Mails and Memos
• Subject line: Summarize the request and note the action desired.
• Opening: Begin with the request or a brief statement introducing it.
• Body: Provide background, justification, and details. If asking questions, 
list them in parallel form.
• Closing: Request action by a specific date. If possible, provide a reason. 
Express appreciation, if appropriate.
Procedures and instructions 
are often written in 
numbered steps using 
command language (Do 
this, don’t do that ).
Visit www.meguffey.com 
for more information on 
How to Write Instructions.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
117
Making Direct E-Mail and Memo requests
If you are requesting routine information or action within an organization, the 
direct approach works best. Generally, this means asking for information or 
making the request without first providing elaborate explanations and justifica-
tions. Remember that readers are usually thinking, “Why me? Why am I receiv-
ing this?” They can understand the explanation better once they know what you 
are requesting.
If you are seeking answers to questions, you have three options for opening the 
message: (a) ask the most important question first, followed by an explanation and 
then the other questions, (b) use a polite command (Please answer the following ques-
tions regarding), or (c) introduce the questions with a brief statement (Your answers 
to the following questions will help us . . .).
In the body of the memo, explain and justify your request. When you must ask 
many questions, list them, being careful to phrase them similarly. Be courteous and 
friendly. In the closing include an end date (with a reason, if possible) to promote 
a quick response. 
The e-mail message shown in Figure 5.7 requests information. The functional 
subject line uses a verb in noting the action desired (Need Your Reactions to Our 
Casual-Dress Policy). The reader knows immediately what is being requested. The 
message opens with a polite command followed by a brief explanation. Notice that 
the questions are highlighted with bullets to provide the high “skim value” that is 
important in business messages. The reader can quickly see what is being asked. 
The message concludes with an end date and a reason. Providing an end date helps 
the reader know how to plan a response so that action is completed by the date 
given. Expressions such as do it whenever you can or complete it as soon as possible
use the direct approach 
in routine requests for 
information or action, 
opening with the most 
important question, a 
polite command, or a brief 
introductory statement.
FigurE 5.7 Request E-Mail Message

118 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
make little impression on procrastinators or very busy people. It is always wise to 
provide a specific date for completion. Dates can be entered on calendars to serve 
as reminders.
replying to E-Mail and Memo requests
Much business correspondence reacts or responds to previous messages. When 
replying to an e-mail, memo, or other document, be sure to follow the three-phase 
writing process. Analyze your purpose and audience, collect whatever information 
is necessary, and organize your thoughts. Make a brief outline of the points you 
plan to cover following this writing plan:
Writing Plan for E-Mail and Memo replies
• Subject line: Summarize the main information from your reply.
• Opening: Start directly by responding to the request with a summary 
statement.
• Body: Provide additional information and details in a readable format.
• Closing: Add a concluding remark, summary, or offer of further 
 assistance.
Writers sometimes fall into bad habits in replying to messages. Here are some 
trite and long-winded openers that are best avoided:
In response to your message of the 15th . . . (States the obvious.)
Thank you for your memo of the 15th in which you . . . (Suggests the writer can 
think of nothing more original.)
I have before me your memo of the 15th in which you . . . (Unnecessarily identifies 
the location of the previous message.)
Pursuant to your request of the 15th . . . (Sounds old-fashioned.)
This is to inform you that . . . (Delays getting to the point.)
Instead of falling into the trap of using one of the preceding shopworn openings, 
start directly by responding to the writer’s request. If you agree to the request, show 
your cheerful compliance immediately. Consider these good-news openers:
Yes, we will be glad to . . . (Sends message of approval by opening with “Yes.”)
Here are answers to the questions you asked about . . . (Sounds straightforward, 
businesslike, and professional.)
You are right in seeking advice about . . . (Opens with words that every reader 
enjoys seeing and hearing.)
We are happy to assist you in . . . (Shows writer’s helpful nature and goodwill.)
As you requested, I am submitting . . . (Gets right to the point.) 
After a direct and empathic opener, provide the information requested in a logi-
cal and coherent order. If you are answering a number of questions, arrange your 
answers in the order of the questions. In providing additional data, use familiar 
words, short sentences, short paragraphs, and active-voice verbs. Figure 5.3 on page 
106 illustrates an interoffice memo that replies to a request. Notice that the writer 
organized her suggestions into separate paragraphs with the introductory words, 
First, Second, and Third. The writer also designed the document with columns, 
white space, and bullets to further improve readability. The message concludes with 
what is to happen next.
In responding to requests, your primary goal is to answer the request clearly and 
completely so that additional messages are unnecessary.
Overused and long-winded 
openers bore readers 
and waste their time.
Direct opening statements 
can also be cheerful 
and empathic.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
119
 6. Name six forms of electronic communication and briefly describe each.
 7. Are e-mail messages and interoffice memorandums interchangeable as communication channels? 
Explain.
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
Organizations exchange messages externally and internally. 
Paper-based messages include business letters and inter-
office memos. Electronic messages include e-mail, instant 
messaging, text messaging, podcasts, blogs, and wikis. 
Internal messages in today’s workplace usually take the form 
of e-mail, interoffice memorandums, and, to a lesser extent, 
instant messaging. E-mails and memos use a standardized 
format to request and deliver information.
Because messages are increasingly being exchanged 
electronically, this chapter presented many techniques 
for sending and receiving safe and effective e-mail and 
instant messages. However, businesspeople are still 
using interoffice memos to convey confidential informa-
tion, emphasize ideas, deliver lengthy documents, or lend 
importance to a message. In this chapter you learned to 
apply the direct strategy in writing internal messages that 
inform, describe procedures, request, and respond. In the 
next chapter you will extend the direct strategy to writing 
positive messages.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. “E-mail is no longer a cutting edge tool,” says The New York 
Times. “But it is clear that some people still do not know 
how to use it effectively.”5 What have you heard are the 
major complaints about the use of business e-mail?
 2. What do you think this statement means? Instant messag-
ing could be the dial tone of the future. Do you agree or 
disagree?
 3. Why are lawyers and technology experts warning compa-
nies to store, organize, and manage computer data, includ-
ing e-mail and instant messages, with sharper diligence?
 4. Discuss the ramifications of the following statement: Once 
a memo or any other document leaves your hands, you have 
essentially published it.
 5. Ethical Issue: Should managers have the right to monitor 
the e-mail messages and instant messages of employees? 
Why or why not? What if employees are warned that e-mail 
could be monitored? If a company establishes an e-mail 
policy, should only in-house transmissions be monitored? 
Only outside transmissions? See the Communication 
Workshop for this chapter for more on this topic.
C
Chapter review
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S

120 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
 8. How are the structure and formatting of e-mail messages and memos similar and different?
 9. What are four questions you should ask yourself before writing an e-mail or memo?
 10. Suggest at least ten pointers that you could give to a business e-mail user.
 11. Name at least five rules of e-mail etiquette that show respect for others.
 12. What do you think are the five most important practices for those sending instant messages at 
work?
 13. What is the writing plan for an information or procedure message?
 
 Subject line: 
 
 Opening: 
 
 Body: 
 
 
 Closing: 
 14. What is the writing plan for a request message?
 
 Subject line: 
 
 Opening: 
 
 Body: 
 
 Closing: 
 

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
121
 15. What is the writing plan for a reply message?
 
 Subject line: 
 
 Opening: 
 
 Body: 
 
 Closing: 
W
Writing improvement Exercises
Message Openers
Compare the following sets of message openers. Circle the letter of the opener that illustrates a direct 
opening. Be prepared to discuss the weaknesses and strengths of each.
 16. An e-mail message inquiring about Web hosting:
 
 a.  We are considering launching our own Web site because we feel it is the only way to keep up with 
our competition and make our product more visible in a crowded market. We have a lot of questions 
and need information about Web hosting.
 
 b.  Please answer the following questions about hosting our new Web site, which we hope to launch 
to increase our product visibility in a crowded market.
 17. An e-mail message announcing an in-service program:
 
 a.  Employees interested in improving their writing and communication skills are invited to an in-service 
training program beginning October 4.
 
 b.  For the past year we have been investigating the possibility of developing an in-service training 
program for some of our employees.
 18. An e-mail message announcing a study:
 
 a.  We have noticed recently a gradual but steady decline in the number of customer checking 
accounts. We are disturbed by this trend, and for this reason I am asking our Customer Relations 
Department to conduct a study and make recommendations regarding this important problem.
 
 b.  Our Customer Relations Department will conduct a study and make recommendations regarding 
the gradual but steady decline of customer checking accounts.
 19. A memo announcing a new procedure:
 
 a.  It has come to our attention that increasing numbers of staff members are using instant messaging 
in sending business messages. We realize that IM often saves time and gets you fast responses, 
and we are prepared to continue to allow its use, but we have developed some specific procedures 
that we want you to use to make sure it is safe as well as efficient.
 
 b.  The following new procedures for using instant messaging will enable staff members to continue 
to use it safely and efficiently.
Opening Paragraphs
The following opening paragraphs to memos are wordy and indirect. After reading each paragraph, iden-
tify the main idea. Then, write an opening sentence that illustrates a more direct opening.
 20. Several staff members came to me and announced their interest in learning more about severance 
policies and separation benefits. As most of you know, these areas of concern are increasingly important 
for most Human Resources professionals. A seminar entitled “Severance & Separation Benefits” is 
being conducted February 11. I am allowing the following employees to attend the seminar: Terence 
Curran, Cindy Thompson, and Darlene McClure.
 21. Your Intel Employees Association has secured for you discounts on auto repair, carpet purchases, 
travel arrangements, and many other services. These services are available to you if you have a 
Buying Power Card. All Intel employees are eligible for their own private Buying Power Cards.

122 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
Bulleted and Numbered Lists
 22. Revise the following wordy paragraph into an introduction with a list. Should you use bullets or 
numbers?
 
 Producing excellent digital prints that equal what you see on your computer monitor is the most 
frustrating aspect of digital photography. You don’t have to be frustrated, however. If you follow three 
steps, you can improve your prints immensely. I recommend that you first calibrate your screen. You 
should use the Pantone Spyder to do that. Next you should edit your photo so that your image looks 
natural and balanced. The final step involves configuring your printer. At the same time you should, 
of course, select the correct type of paper.
 23. Use the following wordy instructions to compose a concise bulleted vertical list with an introductory 
statement:
 
 To write information for a Web site, there are three important tips to follow. For one thing, you should 
make the formatting as simple as possible. Another thing you must do is ensure the use of strong 
visual prompts. Last but not least, you should limit directions that are not needed.
 24. The following information will appear in a business newsletter. Revise this wordy paragraph to include 
an introductory statement followed by a list. Should the list be bulleted or numbered?
 
 The National Crime Prevention Council made a statement about crime in the workplace. It also 
provided some tips for improving workplace safety and preventing crime at work. It says that crime 
prevention and safety measures are just as important at work as they are at home. Some of the ways 
you can improve safety and prevent crime include changing locks before you move into a new office. 
When doors, windows, and locks are broken or not working, someone should report this immediately. 
Lighting is another important factor. Many organizations leave some interior lights on even when the 
business may be closed. Dark places around a building should have lights, and shrubs can be a 
problem.6
W
Writing improvement Cases
5.1 Request E-Mail: Dealing With Excessive E-Mail
The following e-mail from Stella Soto requests feedback from her managerial staff; however, her first draft suffers from many 
writing faults.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com if you want to revise it online.
To: 
Amsoft Manager List 
From: 
Stella Soto <stella.soto@amsoft.com>
Subject: E-Mail Problems
Cc: 
Bcc: 
Dear Managers,
As Amsoft vice president, I am troubled by a big problem. I am writing this note to ask for your help and advice to address 
an urgent problem—the problem of excessive e-mail. If you will do me the favor of answering the questions below, I’m sure 

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
123
your ideas will assist us in the development of a plan that should benefit your staff, yourself, and our organization will be 
improved. Your responses in writing to these questions (preferably by May 5) will help me prepare for our supervisory com-
mittee meeting on May 10.
Everyone had the expectation that e-mail would be a great big productivity tool. I’m afraid that its use is becoming extremely 
excessive. For our organization it is actually cutting into work time. Did you know that one study found that the average office 
worker is spending 2 hours a day on e-mail? In our organization we may be spending even more then this. Its exceedingly 
difficult to get any work done because of writing and answering an extra ordinary number of e-mails coming in each and every 
day. Excessive e-mail is sapping the organization’s strength and productivity. I would like to have your answers to some 
questions before the above referenced dates to help us focus on the problem.
Can you give a ballpark figure for how many e-mail messages you receive and answer on a personal basis each day? Think 
about how many hours the staff members in your department spend on e-mail each day. Approximately how many hours 
would you estimate? Do you have any ideas about how we can make a reduction in the volume of e-mail messages being 
sent and received within our own organization? Do you think that e-mail is being used by our employees in an excessive 
manner?
I’m wondering what you think about an e-mail-free day once a week. How about Fridays? I appreciate your suggestions and 
advice in developing a solution to the problem of controlling e-mail and making an improvement in productivity.
Stella
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this message.
 2. Outline a writing plan for this message.
  Subject line: 
  Opening: 
  Body: 
  Closing: 
 
5.2 Information Memo: Facts About Corporate Instant Messaging
The following interoffice memo reports information from a symposium, but it is poorly written.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com if you want to revise it online.
Date: 
March 4, 200x
To: 
Trevor Kurtz, CEO
From: 
Emily Lopez-Rush
Subject: Instant Messaging
Thanks for asking me to attend the Instant Messaging Symposium. It was sponsored by Pixel Link and took place March 2. 
Do you think you will want me to expand on what I learned at the next management council meeting? I believe that meeting 
is March 25.
Anyway, here’s my report. Jason Howard, the symposium leader told us that over 80 million workers are already using 
instant messaging and that it was definitely here to stay. But do the risks outweigh the advantages? He talked about ben-
efits, providers, costs involved, and risks. The top advantages of IM are speed, documentation, and it saves costs. The 
major problems are spam, security, control, and disruptive. He said that the principal IM providers for consumers were AOL 
Instant Messenger, Windows Live Messenger, and Yahoo Messenger. Misuse of IM can result in reductions in productivity. 
However, positive results can be achieved with appropriate use. Although some employees are using consumer IM services, 
for maximum security many organizations are investing in enterprise-level IM systems, and they are adopting guidelines for 
employees. These enterprise-level IM systems range in cost from $30 to $100 per user license. The cost depends on the 
amount of functionality.
This is just a summary of what I learned. If you want to hear more, please do not hesitate to call.

124 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this e-mail message.
 2. Outline a writing plan for this message.
  Subject line: 
  Opening: 
  Body: 
 
  Closing: 
5.3 Request E-Mail: Planning a Charity Golf Event
The following e-mail from Seth Jackson requests information about planning a charity golf tournament. His first draft must 
be revised.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com if you want to revise it online. Could this 
message benefit from category headings?
Date: 
February 1, 200x
To: 
Kaitlin Merek <kmerek@monarch.net>
From: 
Seth Jackson <seth.jackson@cox.net>
Subject: Need Help!
The Children’s Resource Center badly needs funds. We have tried other things, but now we want to try a charity golf event. 
In view of the fact that you have expertise in this area and since you volunteered to offer your assistance, I am writing this 
e-mail to pick your brain, so to speak, in regard to questions that have to do with five basic fundamentals in the process of 
preparation. I’m going to need your answers these areas before February 15. Is that possible? Maybe you would rather talk 
to me. Should I contact you?
In regard to the budget, I have no idea how to estimate costs. For example, what about administrative costs. How about 
marketing? And there are salaries, cell-phone rentals, copiers, and a lot of other things.
I also need help in choosing a golf course. Should it be a public course? Or a private course? Resort? One big area that I 
worry about is sponsors. Should I go after one big sponsor? But let’s say I get Pepsi to be a sponsor. Then do I have to ban 
Coke totally from the scene?
Another big headache is scoring. I will bet you can make some suggestions for tabulating the golf results. And posting them. 
By the way, did you see that Tiger Woods is back in the winner’s circle?
I have noticed that other golf tournaments have extra events, such as a pairing party to introduce partners. Many also have 
an awards dinner to award prizes. Should I be planning extra events?
Seth Jackson
Philanthropy and Gifts Coordinator
Children’s Resource Center
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this request e-mail.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
125
 2. Outline a writing plan for this message. 
  Subject line: 
  Opening: 
  Body: 
  Closing: 
5.4 Procedure E-Mail: New Process for Reporting Equipment Repairs
The following is a manager’s first draft of an e-mail describing a new process for reporting equipment repairs. The message 
is addressed to one employee, but it will also be sent to others.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com if you want to revise it online.
To: 
Faith Benoit <Faith.Benoit@stcc.edu>
From: 
Mia Murillo <Mia.Murillo@stcc.edu>
Subject: Repairs
Cc:
Bcc:
We have recently instituted a new procedure for all equipment repairs. Effective immediately, we are no longer using the 
“Equipment Repair Form” that we formerly used. We want to move everyone to an online database system. These new 
procedures will help us repair your equipment faster and keep track of it better. You will find the new procedure at http://
www.BigWebDesk.net. That’s where you log in. You should indicate the kind of repair you need. It may be for AudioVisual, 
Mac, PC, or Printer. Then you should begin the process of data entry for your specific problem by selecting Create New 
Ticket. The new ticket should be printed and attached securely to the equipment. Should you have questions or trouble, 
just call Sylvia at Extension 255. You can also write to her at Sylvia.Freeman@stcc.edu. The warehouse truck driver will pick 
up and deliver your equipment as we have always done in the past.
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this e-mail message.
 2. Outline a writing plan for this message.
  Subject line: 
  Opening: 
  Body: 
 
  Closing: 
A
Activities and Cases
E-MAiL
5.5 Request Memo: Redesigning the Company Web Site
You are part of the newly formed Committee on Web Site Redesign. Its function is to look into the possible redesign of your 
company Web site. Some managers think that the site is looking a bit dated. The committee delegates you to ask Cole 
Prewarski, Web master and manager, some questions. The committee wonders whether he has done any usability tests on 
the current site. The committee wants to know how much a total Web redesign might cost.
It also would like to know about the cost of a partial redesign. Someone wanted to know whether animation, sound, or 
video could be added and wondered if Cole would recommend doing so. Someone else thought that the timing of a redesign 
might be important. The committee asks you to add other questions to your memo. Invite Cole to a meeting April 6. Assume 
that he knows about the committee.
Your Task. Write an e-mail or an interoffice memo to Cole Prewarski requesting answers to several questions and inviting 
him to a meeting.
E-MAiL
5.6 Request E-Mail: Choosing a Holiday Plan
In the past your company offered all employees 11 holidays, starting with New Year’s Day in January and proceeding through 
Christmas Day the following December. Other companies offer similar holiday schedules. In addition, your company has 

126 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
given all employees one floating holiday. That day was determined by a company-wide vote. As a result, all employees had 
the same day off. Now, however, management is considering a new plan that involves a floating holiday that each employee 
may choose. Selections, however, would be subject to staffing needs within individual departments. If two people wanted 
the same day, the employee with the most seniority would have the day off.
Your Task. As a member of the Human Resources staff, write an e-mail to employees asking them to choose between con-
tinuing the current company-wide uniform floating holiday or instituting a new plan for an individual floating holiday. Be sure 
to establish an end date.
E-MAiL
5.7 Request E-Mail or Memo: Smokers vs. Nonsmokers
The city of Milwaukee has mandated that employers “shall adopt, implement, and maintain a written smoking policy which 
shall contain a prohibition against smoking in restrooms and infirmaries.” Employers must also “maintain a nonsmoking area 
of not less than two thirds of the seating capacity in cafeterias, lunchrooms, and employee lounges, and make efforts to work 
out disputes between smokers and nonsmokers.”
Your Task. As Lindsay English, director of Human Resources, write an e-mail or interoffice memo to all department manag-
ers of Imperial Foods, a large food products company. Announce the new restriction, and tell the managers that you want 
them to set up departmental committees to mediate any smoking conflicts before complaints surface. Explain why this is a 
good policy.
E-MAiL
5.8 Response E-Mail or Memo: Enforcing Smoking Ban
As manager of Accounting Services for Imperial Foods, you must respond to Ms. English’s memo in the preceding activity. 
You could have called Ms. English, but you prefer to have a permanent record of this message. You are having difficulty 
enforcing the smoking ban in restrooms. Only one men’s room serves your floor, and 9 of your 27 male employees are 
smokers. You have already received complaints, and you see no way to enforce the ban in the restrooms. You have also 
noticed that smokers are taking longer breaks than other employees. Smokers complain that they need more time because 
they must walk to an outside area. Smokers are especially unhappy when the weather is cold, rainy, or snowy. Moreover, 
smokers huddle near the building entrances, creating a negative impression for customers and visitors. Your committee 
members can find no solutions; in fact, they have become polarized in their meetings to date. You need help from a higher 
authority.
Your Task. Write an e-mail or memo to Ms. English appealing for solutions. Perhaps she should visit your department.
E-MAiL
TEAM
WEB
5.9 Response E-Mail or Memo: Office Romance Off Limits?
Where can you find the hottest singles scene today? Some would say in your workplace. Because people are working long 
hours and have little time for outside contacts, relationships often develop at work. Estimates suggest that one third to one 
half of all romances start at work. Your boss is concerned about possible problems resulting from relationships at work. What 
happens if a relationship between a superior and subordinate results in perceived favoritism? What happens if a relationship 
ends in a nasty breakup? Your boss would like to simply ban all relationships between employees. However, that’s not likely 
to work. He asks you, his assistant, to learn what guidelines could be established regarding office romances.
Your Task. Using professional databases or the Web, look for articles about workplace romance. From various articles, 
select four or five suggestions that you could make to your boss in regard to protecting an employer. Why is it necessary 
for a company to protect itself? Discuss your findings and reactions with your team. Individually or as a group, submit your 
findings and reactions in a well-organized, easy-to-read e-mail or memo to your boss (your instructor). You may list main 
points from the articles you research, but use your own words to write the message.
E-MAiL
5.10 Response E-Mail or Memo: Rescheduling Interviews to Accommodate a Traveling Boss
Your boss, Michael Kaufman, has scheduled three appointments to interview applicants for the position of project manager. 
All of these appointments are for Thursday, May 5. However, he now must travel to Atlanta that week. He asks you to resched-
ule all the appointments for one week later. He also wants a brief background summary for each candidate.
Although frustrated, you call each person and are lucky to arrange these times. Saul Salazar, who has been a project 
manager for nine years with Summit Enterprises, agrees to come at 10:30 A.M. Kaitlyn Grindell, who is a systems ana-
lyst and a consultant to many companies, will come at 11:30. Mary Montgomery, who has an MA degree and six years 
of experience as senior project coordinator at High Point Industries, will come at 9:30 A.M. You are wondering whether 
Mr. Kaufman forgot to include Bertha Ho, operations personnel officer, in these interviews. Ms. Ho usually is part of the 
selection process. 
Your Task. Write an e-mail or memo to Mr. Kaufman including all the information he needs. 

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
127
E-MAiL
TEAM
WEB
5.11 Response E-Mail or Memo: Proper Dress for Businesspeople in Saudi Arabia
The U.S. Air Force’s highest ranking female fighter pilot, Lt. Col. Martha McSally, was unhappy about being required to wear 
neck-to-toe robes in Saudi Arabia when she was off base. She filed a federal lawsuit seeking to overturn the policy that 
requires female servicewomen to wear such conservative clothing when they are off base.
After seeing an article about this in the newspaper, your boss began to worry about sending female engineers to Saudi 
Arabia. Your company has been asked to submit a proposal to develop telecommunications within that country, and some 
of the company’s best staff members are female. If your company wins the contract, it will undoubtedly need women to be 
in Saudi Arabia to complete the project. Because your boss knows little about the country, he asks you, his assistant, to do 
some research to find out what is appropriate business dress.
Your Task. Visit two or three Web sites and learn about dress expectations in Saudi Arabia. Is Western-style clothing 
acceptable for men? For women? Are there any clothing taboos? Should guest workers be expected to dress like natives? 
In teams discuss your findings. Individually or collectively, prepare a memo or e-mail addressed to LaDane Williams, your 
boss. Summarize your most significant findings.
E-MAiL
TEAM
5.12 Response E-Mail: Reaching Consensus Regarding Casual-Dress Policy
Casual dress in professional offices has been coming under attack. Your boss, Taylor Manning, received the e-mail shown 
in Figure 5.7 on page 117. He thinks it would be a good assignment for his group of management trainees to help him 
respond to that message. He asks your team to research answers to the first five questions in CEO William Lugo’s message. 
He doesn’t expect you to answer the final question, but any information you can supply to the first questions would help him 
shape a response.
Lugo & Associates is a public CPA firm with a staff of 120 CPAs, bookkeepers, managers, and support personnel. 
Located in downtown Pittsburgh, the plush offices in One Oxford Center overlook the Allegheny River and the North Shore. 
The firm performs general accounting and audit services as well as tax planning and preparation. Accountants visit clients 
in the field and also entertain them in the downtown office.
Your Task. Decide whether the entire team will research each question in Figure 5.7 or whether team members will be 
assigned certain questions. Collect information, discuss it, and reach consensus on what you will report to Mr. Manning. Write 
a concise, one-page response from your team addressed to <tmanning@lugo.com>. Your goal is to inform, not persuade. 
Remember that you represent management, not students or employees.
5.13 Procedure Memo: Standardizing Purchase Requests
The Purchasing Department handles purchases for a growing family company. Some purchase orders arrive on the proper 
forms, but others are memos or handwritten notes that are barely legible. The owner wants to establish a standard procedure 
for submitting purchase requests. The purchase requests must now be downloaded from the company intranet. To provide 
the fastest service, employees should fill out the purchase request. Employees must include the relevant information: date, 
quantities, catalog numbers, complete descriptions, complete vendor mailing address and contact information, delivery 
requirements, and shipping methods. The Purchasing Department should receive the original, and the sender should keep 
a copy. An important step in the new procedure is approval by the budget manager on the request form.
Your Task. As assistant manager in the Purchasing Department, write an interoffice memo to all employees informing them 
of the new procedure.
E-MAiL
TEAM
WEB
5.14 Procedure E-Mail or Memo: Rules for Cell Phone Use in Sales Reps’ Cars
As one of the managers of Futura, a hair care and skin products company, you are alarmed at a newspaper article you just 
saw. A stockbroker for Smith Barney was making cold calls on his personal cell phone while driving. His car hit and killed a 
motorcyclist. The brokerage firm was sued and accused of contributing to an accident by encouraging employees to use cell 
phones while driving. To avoid the risk of paying huge damages awarded by an emotional jury, the brokerage firm offered 
the victim’s family a $500,000 settlement.
You begin to worry, knowing that your company has provided its 75 sales representatives with mobile phones to help 
them keep in touch with the home base while they are in the field. At the next management meeting, other members agreed 
that you should draft a message detailing some mobile phone safety rules for your sales reps. On the Web you learned 
that anyone with a cell phone should get to know its features, including speed dial, automatic memory, and redial. Another 
suggestion involved using a hands-free device. Management members decided to purchase these for every sales rep and 
have the devices available within one month. When positioning cell phones in their cars, reps should make sure they are 
within easy reach. Cell phones should be where reps can grab them without removing their eyes from the road. If they get 
an incoming call at an inconvenient time, they should let their voice mail pick up the call. They should never talk, of course, 
during hazardous driving conditions, such as rain, sleet, snow, and ice.
Taking notes or looking up phone numbers is dangerous when driving. You want to warn sales reps not to get into danger-
ous situations by reading (such as an address book) or writing (such as taking notes) while driving.

128 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
The more you think about it, the more you think that sales reps should not use their cell phones in moving cars. They really 
should pull over. But you know that would be hard to enforce.
Your Task. Individually or in teams write a memo or e-mail to Futura sales reps outlining company suggestions (or should 
they be rules?) for safe wireless phone use in cars. You may wish to check the Web for additional safety ideas. Try to suggest 
reader benefits in this message. How is safety beneficial to the sales reps? The message is from you acting as operations 
manager.
E-MAiL
WEB
5.15 Procedure E-Mail or Memo: Revising a Rambling Security Memo 
After a recent frightening experience, your boss, Olivia Solano-Hughes, realized that she must draft a memo about office 
security. Here is why she is concerned. A senior associate, Lucy Bonner, was working overtime cleaning up overdue reports. 
At about 9 p.m. she heard the office door open, but the intruder quickly left when he found that someone was in the office. 
Your boss hurriedly put together the following memo to be distributed to office managers in five branch offices. But she was 
on her way out of town, and she asked you to revise her draft and have it ready for her approval when she returns. One other 
thing—she wondered whether you would do online research to find other helpful suggestions. Your boss trusts you to totally 
revise, if necessary.
Your Task. Conduct a database or Web search to look for reasonable office security suggestions. Study the following memo. 
Then improve its organization, clarity, conciseness, correctness, and readability. Don’t be afraid to do a total overhaul. 
Bulleted points are a must, and check the correctness, too. Your boss is no Ms. Grammar! Be sure to add an appropriate 
closing.
Date: 
Current
To: 
Branch Managers
From: 
Olivia Solano-Hughes, Vice President
Subject: Staying Safe in the Office
Office security is a topic we have not talked enough about. I was terrified recently when a senior associate, who was working 
late, told me she heard the front door of the branch office open and she thought she heard a person enter. When she called 
out, the person apparently left. This frightening experience reminded me there are several things that each branch can do 
to improve it’s office security. The following are a few simple things, but we will talk more about this at our next quarterly 
meeting (June 8?). Please come with additional ideas.
If an office worker is here early or late, then it is your responsibility to talk with them about before and after hours security. When 
someone comes in early it is not smart to open the doors until most of the rest of the staff arrive. Needless to say, employees 
working overtime should make sure the door is locked and they should not open there office doors after hours to people they 
don’t know, especially if you are in the office alone. Dark offices are especially attractive to thieves with valuable equipment.
Many branches are turning off lights at points of entry and parking areas to conserve energy. Consider changing this policy 
or installing lights connected to motion detectors, which is an inexpensive (and easy!) way to discourage burglars and intrud-
ers. I also think that “cash-free” decals are a good idea because they make thieves realize that not much is in this office to 
take. These signs may discourage breaking and entering. On the topic of lighting, we want to be sure that doors and windows 
that are secluded and not visible to neighbors or passersby is illuminated.
We should also beware of displaying any valuable equipment or other things. When people walk by, they should not be able 
to look in and see expensive equipment. Notebook computers and small portable equipment is particularly vulnerable at 
night. It should be locked up. In spite of the fact that most of our branches are guarded by FirstAlert, I’m not sure all branches 
are displaying the decals prominently—especially on windows and doors. We want people to know that our premises are 
electronically protected.
5.16 How to Write Clear Procedures and Instructions 
At www.meguffey.com, you will find a supplement devoted to writing instructions. It includes colorful examples and links to 
Web sites with relevant examples of real sets of instructions from business Web sites.
Your Task. Locate “How to Write Instructions” and study all of its sections. Then choose one of the following application 
activities: A-5, “Revising the Instructions for an Imported Fax Machine,” or A-6, “Evaluation: Instructions for Dealing With Car 
Emergencies.” Complete the assignment and submit it to your instructor.
WEB
5.17 Procedure E-Mail or Memo: Instant Messaging in Your Office
A few members of your team are using instant messaging, but others are clueless. As assistant team director, you have 
been asked by your team leader, Jamila Tucker, to prepare a list of procedures for team members to follow in setting up 
an instant messaging service for their computers and mobile devices. She wants all team members to be able to exchange 
messages quickly.

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
129
Your Task. Prepare a set of procedures for signing up, installing, and using an instant messaging program. This procedure 
e-mail will go to team members. Use the Web to find information. You may choose any IM service. Outline the system require-
ments and the steps necessary to send an instant message so that even the slowest team members will understand what to 
do. Address the e-mail to Team Members@lexcraft.com. Be sure to end with an action request, a deadline, and a reason.
V
Video resources
This important chapter offers two learning videos.
Video Library 1: Smart E-Mail Messages and Memos 
Advance Your Career. Watch this chapter-specific video for 
a demonstration of how to use e-mail skillfully and safely. You 
will better understand the writing process in relation to com-
posing messages. You will also see tips for writing messages 
that advance your career instead of sinking it.
Video Library 2: Innovation, Learning, and Communica-
tion: A Study of Yahoo. This video familiarizes you with man-
agers and inside operating strategies at the Internet company 
Yahoo. After watching the film, assume the role of assistant 
to John Briggs, senior producer, who appeared in the video. 
John has just received a letter asking for permission from 
another film company to use Yahoo offices and personnel in 
an educational video, similar to the one you just saw.
John wants you to draft a message for him to send to the 
operations manager, Ceci Lang, asking for permission for VX 
Studios to film. VX says it needs about 15 hours of filming 
time and would like to interview four or five managers as well 
as founders David Filo and Jerry Yang. VX would need to set 
up its mobile studio van in the parking lot and would need 
permission to use advertising film clips. Although VX hopes to 
film in May, it is flexible about the date. John Briggs reminds 
you that Yahoo has participated in a number of films in the 
past two years, and some managers are complaining that they 
can’t get their work done.
Your Task. After watching the video, write a memo or e mail 
request message to Ceci Lang, operations manager, asking 
her to allow VX Studios to film at Yahoo. Your message should 
probably emphasize the value of these projects in enhancing 
Yahoo’s image among future users. Supply any details you 
think are necessary to create a convincing request memo 
that will win authorization from Ceci Lang to schedule this 
filming.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 5
Prepositions and Conjunctions
Review Sections 1.18 and 1.19 in the Grammar Review section of the Grammar/Mechanics 
Handbook. Then study each of the following statements. Write a or b to indicate the sentence 
in which the idea is expressed more effectively. Also record the number of the G/M principle 
illustrated. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. If your answers dif-
fer, study carefully the principles shown in parentheses.
Example a. When do you expect to graduate college?
 
 b. When do you expect to graduate from college?
 1. a. No one knows where the meeting is.
  b. No one knows where the meeting is at.
 2. a. I hate when we have to work overtime.
  b. I hate it when we have to work overtime.
 3. a. Intel enjoyed greater profits this year then expected.
  b. Intel enjoyed greater profits this year than expected.
 4. a.  Gross profit is where you compute the difference between total sales and the cost of 
goods sold.
  b.  Gross profit is computed by finding the difference between total sales and the cost of 
goods sold.
 5. a.  We advertise to increase sales, introduce complementary products, and enhance our 
corporate image.
  b.  We advertise to have our products used more often, when we have complementary 
products to introduce, and we are interested in making our corporation look better to the 
public.
 6. a. What type computer monitor do you prefer?
  b. What type of computer monitor do you prefer?
b 
(1.18a)

130 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
 7. a. Your iPod was more expensive than mine.
 
 b. Your iPod was more expensive then mine.
 8. a.  Did you send an application to the headquarters in Cincinnati or to the branch in St. 
Louis?
 
 b. Did you apply to the Cincinnati headquarters or the St. Louis branch?
 9. a. The most dangerous situation occurs when employees ignore the safety rules.
 
 b. The most dangerous situation is when employees ignore the safety rules.
 10. a. She had a great interest, as well as a profound respect for, historical homes.
 
 b. She had a great interest in, as well as a profound respect for, historical homes.
 11. a.  Volunteers should wear long pants, bring gloves, and sunscreen should be applied.
 
 b. Volunteers should wear long pants, bring gloves, and apply sunscreen.
 12. a. His PowerPoint presentation was short like we hoped it would be.
 
 b. His PowerPoint presentation was short as we hoped it would be. 
 13. a. An ethics code is where a set of rules spells out appropriate behavior standards.
 
 b. An ethics code is a set of rules spelling out appropriate behavior standards.
 14. a. Please keep the paper near the printer.
 
 b. Please keep the paper near to the printer.
 15. a. A behavioral interview question is when the recruiter says, “Tell me about a time . . . .”
 
 b.  A behavioral interview question is one in which the recruiter says, “Tell me about a 
time . . . .”

Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums 
131
The following memo has errors involving grammar, punctuation, wording, lead-ins, paral-
lelism, language, listing techniques, and other problems. You may either (a) use standard 
proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or (b) download the docu-
ment from your companion Web site and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in 
the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 5
MEMORANDUM
DATE:     April 20, 200x
TO:          Department Heads, Managers, and Supervisors
FROM:    Donna Cooper-Grey, Director, Human Resources
SUBJECT:  Submitting Appraisals of Performance by June 1
This is to inform you that performance appraisals for all you 
employees must be submitted by June 1. These appraisal are 
especially important and essential this year because of job 
changes, new technologys and because of ofﬁce reorganization.
To complete your performance appraisals in the most effective way, 
you should follow the procedures described in our employee 
handbook, let me brieﬂy make a review of those procedures;
1. 
Be sure each and every employee has a performance plan 
 
with three or 4 main objective.
2. 
For each objective make an assessment of the employee on 
 
a scale of 5 (consistently exceeds requirements) to 0 (does 
 
not meet requirements.
3. 
You should identify three strengths that he brings to the job.
4. 
Name 3 skills that he can improve. These should pertain to 
 
skills such as Time Management rather then to behaviors 
 
such as habitual lateness.
5. 
You should meet with the employee to discuss his appraisal.
6. 
Then, be sure to obtain the employees signature on the form.
We look upon appraisals as a tool for helping each worker assess 
his performance. And enhance his output. Please submit and send 
each employees performance appraisal to my ofﬁce by June 1. If
you would like to discuss this farther, please do not hesitate to call 
me.

132 
Chapter 5: Electronic Messages and Memorandums
Should Employers Restrict E-Mail, Instant Messaging, 
and Internet Use?
Most employees today work with computers and have Internet access. Should they be able 
to use their work computers for online shopping, personal messages, and personal work, 
as well as to listen to music and play games?
But It’s Harmless. Office workers have discovered that it is far easier to shop online than 
to race to malls and wait in line. To justify her Web shopping at work, one employee, a 
recent graduate, said, “Instead of standing at the water cooler gossiping, I shop online.” 
She went on to say, “I’m not sapping company resources by doing this.”7
Those who use instant messaging say that what they are doing is similar to making 
personal phone calls. So long as they don’t abuse the practice, they see no harm. One 
marketing director justified his occasional game playing and online shopping by explain-
ing that his employer benefits because he is more productive when he takes minibreaks. 
“When I need a break, I pull up a Web page and just browse,” he says. “Ten minutes later, 
I’m all refreshed, and I can go back to business-plan writing.”8
Companies Cracking Down. Employers, however, see it differently. A recent survey 
reported that more than one fourth of employers have fired workers for misusing e-mail, 
and nearly one third have fired employees for misusing the Internet.9 UPS discovered an 
employee running a personal business from his office computer. Lockheed Martin fired 
an employee who disabled its entire company network for six hours because of an e-mail 
message heralding a holiday event that the worker sent to 60,000 employees. Companies 
not only worry about lost productivity, but they fear litigation, security breaches, and other 
electronic disasters from accidental or intentional misuse of computer systems.
What’s Reasonable? Some companies try to enforce a “zero tolerance” policy, prohibit-
ing any personal use of company equipment. Ameritech Corporation specifically tells 
employees that computers and other company equipment are to be used only to provide 
service to customers and for other business purposes. Companies such as Boeing, how-
ever, allow employees to use faxes, e-mail, and the Internet for personal reasons. But 
Boeing sets guidelines. Use has to be of reasonable duration and frequency and can’t 
cause embarrassment to the company. Strictly prohibited are chain letters, obscenity, and 
political and religious solicitation.
Career Application. As an administrative assistant at Texas Technologies in Fort Worth, 
you have just received an e-mail from your boss asking for your opinion. It seems that 
many employees have been shopping online and more are using instant messaging. One 
person actually received four personal packages from UPS in one morning. Although 
reluctant to do so, management is considering installing monitoring software that not only 
tracks Internet use but also blocks messaging, porn, hate, and game sites.
Your Task
In teams or as a class, discuss the problem of workplace abuse of e-mail, instant mes-
saging, and the Internet. Should full personal use be allowed?
Are computers and their links to the Internet similar to other equipment such as 
telephones?
Should employees be allowed to access the Internet for personal use if they use their 
own private e-mail accounts?
Should management be allowed to monitor all Internet use?
Should employees be warned if e-mail is to be monitored?
What reasons can you give to support an Internet crackdown by management?
What reasons can you give to oppose a crackdown?
Decide whether you support or oppose the crackdown. Explain your views in an e-mail or 
a memo to your boss, Arthur W. Rose, awrose@txtech.com.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Ethics

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
133
© MOnKeY BuSIneSS IMAGeS / SHutteRStOCK
oBJecTiVes
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Explain why business letters are important in delivering positive messages 
outside an organization.
• Write letters that make direct requests for information or action.
• Write letters that make direct claims.
• Write letters that reply to requests.
• Write adjustment letters to customers.
• Write goodwill messages that express thanks, recognition, and sympathy.
sending positive written Messages 
outside Your organization
Most of the workplace messages you write will probably be positive. That is, they 
will deal with routine matters that require straightforward answers using the direct 
method. As communication channels continue to evolve, you will be using both 
electronic and paper-based channels to send positive, routine messages. Chapter 5 
discussed electronic messages and memos dealing primarily with internal commu-
nication. This chapter focuses on positive external messages. The principal channel 
for external messages is business letters.
understanding the power of Business letters
Letters are a primary channel of communication for delivering messages outside
an organization. Positive, straightforward letters help organizations conduct 
everyday business and convey goodwill to outsiders. Such letters go to suppli-
ers, government agencies, other businesses, and, most important, customers. The 
letters to customers receive a high priority because these messages encourage 
product feedback, project a favorable image of the organization, and promote 
future business.
Even with the new media available today, a letter remains one of the most pow-
erful and effective ways to get your message across. Although e-mail is incredibly 
successful for both internal and external communication, many important messages 
Positive 
Messages
6
c H a p T e r  6
The principal channel 
for delivering messages 
outside an organization 
is business letters.

134 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
still call for letters. Business letters are necessary when (a) a permanent record is 
required; (b) confidentiality is paramount; (c) formality and sensitivity are essential; 
and (d) a persuasive, well-considered presentation is important.
Business letters produce a permanent record. Many business 
transactions require a permanent record. Business letters fulfill this function. For 
example, when a company enters into an agreement with another company, busi-
ness letters introduce the agreement and record decisions and points of understand-
ing. Although telephone conversations and e-mail messages may be exchanged, 
important details are generally recorded in business letters that are kept in company 
files. Business letters deliver contracts, explain terms, exchange ideas, negotiate 
agreements, answer vendor questions, and maintain customer relations. Business 
letters are important for any business transaction that requires a permanent written 
record.
Business letters can Be confidential. Carefree use of e-mail was 
once a sign of sophistication. Today, however, communicators know how danger-
ous it is to entrust confidential and sensitive information to digital channels. A 
writer in The New York Times recognized the unique value of letters when he said, 
“Despite the sneering term snail mail, plain old letters are the form of long-distance 
communication least likely to be intercepted, misdirected, forwarded, retrieved, or 
otherwise inspected by someone you didn’t have in mind.”1
Business letters convey Formality and sensitivity. Business 
letters presented on company stationery carry a sense of formality and importance 
not possible with e-mail. They look important. They carry a nonverbal message 
saying the writer considered the message to be so significant and the receiver so 
prestigious that the writer cared enough to write a real message. Business letters 
deliver more information than e-mail because they are written on stationery that 
usually is printed with company information such as logos, addresses, titles, and 
contact details.
Business letters Deliver persuasive, well-considered 
Messages. When a business communicator must be persuasive and can’t do it in 
person, a business letter is more effective than other communication channels. Letters 
© SCOtt J. FeRReLL / COnGReSSIOnAL QuARteRLY / GettY IMAGeS
workplace in Focus
When the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) sends 
letters emblazoned with the agency’s official 
insignia and addressed “dear taxpayer,” people 
get nervous. One IRS notice issued to millions 
of Americans, however, delivered positive news: 
“We are pleased to inform you that the united 
States Congress passed the economic Stimulus 
Act of 2008, which provides for economic stimulus 
payments to be made to over 130 million American 
households.” the body of the letter instructed 
qualifying taxpayers to file an annual tax return 
to receive the one-time cash payout. Why does 
the IRS use letters in today’s digital age?
Business letters are 
important for messages that 
require a permanent record, 
conﬁ dentiality, formality, 
sensitivity, and a well-
considered presentation.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Correspondence on 
business letterhead is 
decreasing, but there 
are times when only 
professionally typed 
correspondence on 
business letterhead 
can convey the desired 
message and tone.”

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
135
can persuade people to change their actions, adopt new beliefs, make donations, 
contribute their time, and try new products. Direct-mail letters remain a powerful 
tool to promote services and products, boost online and retail traffic, and solicit 
contributions. Business letters represent deliberate communication. They give you a 
chance to think through what you want to say, organize your thoughts, and write a 
well-considered argument. You will learn more about writing persuasive and market-
ing messages in Chapter 8.
Direct requests for information or action
The majority of your business letters will involve routine messages organized 
directly. Before you write any letter, though, consider its costs in terms of your time 
and workload. Whenever possible, don’t write! Instead of asking for information, 
could you find it yourself? Would a telephone call, e-mail message, instant message, 
or brief visit to a coworker solve the problem quickly? If not, use the direct pattern 
to present your request efficiently. 
Many business messages are written to request information or action. Although 
the specific subjects of inquiries may differ, the similarity of purpose in routine 
requests enables writers to use the following writing plan:
writing plan for an information or action request
• Opening: Ask the most important question first or express a polite 
 command.
• Body: Explain the request logically and courteously. Ask other questions if 
necessary.
• Closing: Request a specific action with an end date, if appropriate, and 
show appreciation.
open Your request Directly
The most emphatic positions in a letter are the opening and closing. Readers tend 
to look at them first. The writer, then, should capitalize on this tendency by putting 
the most significant statement first. The first sentence of an information request is 
usually a question or a polite command. It should not be an explanation or justifica-
tion, unless resistance to the request is expected. When the information requested 
is likely to be forthcoming, immediately tell the reader what you want. This saves 
the reader’s time and may ensure that the message is read. A busy executive who 
skims the mail, quickly reading subject lines and first sentences only, may grasp 
your request rapidly and act on it. A request that follows a lengthy explanation, on 
the other hand, may never be found.
A letter inquiring about hotel accommodations, shown in Figure 6.1, begins 
immediately with the most important idea: Can the hotel provide meeting rooms 
and accommodations for 250 people? Instead of opening with an explanation of 
who the writer is or how the writer happens to be writing this letter, the letter begins 
more directly. 
If several questions must be asked, you have two choices. You can ask the most 
important question first, as shown in Figure 6.1. An alternate opening begins with 
a summary statement, such as Will you please answer the following questions about 
providing meeting rooms and accommodations for 250 people from March 20 
through March 24. Notice that the summarizing statement sounds like a question 
but has no question mark. That is because it is really a command disguised as a ques-
tion. Rather than bluntly demanding information (Answer the following questions),
we often prefer to soften commands by posing them as questions. Such statements, 
readers ﬁ nd the openings 
and closings of letters 
most interesting and 
often read them ﬁ rst.
Begin an information 
request letter with the most 
important question or a 
summarizing statement.
Because business letters are 
costly, avoid writing them 
unless absolutely necessary.

136 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
called rhetorical questions, should not be punctuated as questions because they do 
not require answers.
put Details in the Body
The body of a letter that requests information should provide necessary details. 
Remember that the quality of the information obtained from a request letter depends 
on the clarity of the inquiry. If you analyze your needs, organize your ideas, and 
frame your request logically, you are likely to receive a meaningful answer that 
doesn’t require a follow-up message. Whenever possible, itemize the information to 
improve readability. Notice that the questions in Figure 6.1 are bulleted, and they 
are parallel. That is, they use the same balanced construction.
Figure 6.1 Letter That Requests Information
The body of a request letter 
may contain an explanation 
or a list of questions.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
137
close with an action request
Use the final paragraph to ask for specific action, to set an end date if appropriate, 
and to express appreciation. As you learned in working with e-mail messages and 
memos, a request for action is most effective when an end date and reason for that 
date are supplied, as shown in Figure 6.1.
Ending a request letter with appreciation for the action taken is always appro-
priate. However, don’t fall into a cliché trap, such as Thanking you in advance, I 
remain . . . or the familiar Thank you for your cooperation. Your appreciation will 
sound most sincere if you avoid mechanical, tired expressions.
Direct claims
In business many things can go wrong—promised shipments are late, warranted 
goods fail, or service is disappointing. When you as a customer must write to iden-
tify or correct a wrong, the letter is called a claim. Straightforward claims are those 
to which you expect the receiver to agree readily. Even these claims, however, often 
require a letter. While your first action may be a telephone call or an e-mail mes-
sage submitting your claim, you may not get the results you seek. Written claims 
are often taken more seriously, and they also establish a record of what happened. 
Claims that require persuasion are presented in Chapter 8. In this chapter you will 
learn to apply the following writing plan for a straightforward claim that uses a 
direct approach.
writing plan for a Direct claim
• Opening: Describe clearly the desired action.
• Body: Explain the nature of the claim, tell why the claim is justified, and 
provide details regarding the action requested.
• Closing: End pleasantly with a goodwill statement and include an end date 
and action request, if appropriate.
open Your claim with a clear 
statement of what You want
If you have a legitimate claim, you can expect a positive response from a company. 
Smart businesses today want to hear from their customers. They know that retain-
ing a customer is far less costly than recruiting a new customer. That is why you 
should open a claim letter with a clear statement of the problem or with the action 
you want the receiver to take. You might expect a replacement, a refund, a new 
order, credit to your account, correction of a billing error, free repairs, free inspec-
tion, or cancellation of an order.
When the remedy is obvious, state it immediately (Please send us 24 Sanyo digi-
tal travel alarm clocks to replace the Sanyo analog travel alarm clocks sent in error 
with our order shipped January 8). When the remedy is less obvious, you might ask 
for a change in policy or procedure or simply for an explanation (Because three 
of our employees with confirmed reservations were refused rooms September 16 
in your hotel, would you please clarify your policy regarding reservations and late 
arrivals).
explain and Justify Your claim in the Body
In the body of a claim letter, explain the problem and justify your request. Provide 
the necessary details so that the difficulty can be corrected without further corre-
spondence. Avoid becoming angry or trying to fix blame. Bear in mind that the 
person reading your letter is seldom responsible for the problem. Instead, state the 
facts logically, objectively, and unemotionally; let the reader decide on the causes. 
The ending of a request 
letter should tell the 
reader what you want 
done and when.
claim letters register 
complaints and usually seek 
correction of a wrong.
The direct strategy is best 
for simple claims that 
require no persuasion.
providing details without 
getting angry improves 
the effectiveness of 
a claim letter.

138 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Include copies of all pertinent documents such as invoices, sales slips, catalog 
descriptions, and repair records. (By the way, be sure to send copies and not your 
originals, which could be lost.) When service is involved, cite names of individuals 
spoken to and dates of calls. Assume that a company honestly wants to satisfy its 
customers—because most do. When an alternative remedy exists, spell it out (If you 
are unable to send 24 Sanyo digital travel alarm clocks immediately, please credit 
our account now and notify us when they become available). 
close Your claim with a specific action request
End a claim letter with a courteous statement that promotes goodwill and sum-
marizes your action request. If appropriate, include an end date. (We realize that 
mistakes in ordering and shipping sometimes occur. Because we have enjoyed your 
prompt service in the past, we hope that you will be able to send us the Sanyo 
digital travel alarm clocks by January 15.) Finally, in making claims, act promptly. 
Delaying claims makes them appear less important. Delayed claims are also more 
difficult to verify. By taking the time to put your claim in writing, you indicate your 
seriousness. A written claim starts a record of the problem, should later action be 
necessary. Be sure to keep a copy of your letter. 
put it all Together and revise
After completing your first draft, you are ready to revise as the last step in your writ-
ing plan. Figure 6.2 shows a first draft of a hostile claim that vents the writer’s anger 
but accomplishes little else. Its tone is belligerent, and it assumes that the company 
intentionally mischarged the customer. Furthermore, it fails to tell the reader how 
to remedy the problem. The revision follows the three-step writing plan with a clear 
opening, body, and closing. Notice that the revision tempers the tone, describes the 
problem objectively, and provides facts and figures. Most important, it specifies 
exactly what the customer wants done. The letter in Figure 6.2 illustrates personal 
business style with the return address typed above the date. This style may be used 
when typing on paper without a printed letterhead.
Direct replies
Often your messages will reply directly and favorably to requests for information or 
action. A customer wants information about a product. A supplier asks to arrange a 
meeting. Another business inquires about one of your procedures or about a former 
employee. In complying with such requests, you will want to apply the same direct 
pattern you used in making requests. 
writing plan for Direct replies
• Subject line: Identify previous correspondence or refer to the main idea.
• Opening: Deliver the most important information first.
• Body: Arrange information logically, explain and clarify it, provide addi-
tional information if appropriate, and build goodwill.
• Closing: End pleasantly.
A customer reply letter that starts with a subject line, as shown in Figure 6.3 on 
page 140, helps the reader recognize the topic immediately. Usually appearing one 
blank line below the salutation, the subject line refers in abbreviated form to previ-
ous correspondence and/or summarizes a message (Subject: Your December 1 Letter 
Inquiring About Our Investigator 360 Program). It often omits articles (a, an, the),
is not a complete sentence, and does not end with a period. Knowledgeable business 
communicators use a subject line to refer to earlier correspondence so that in the first 
sentence, the most emphatic spot in a letter, they are free to emphasize the main idea. 
written claims submitted 
promptly are taken more 
seriously than delayed ones.
Before responding to 
requests, gather facts, 
check ﬁ gures, and seek 
approval if necessary.
letters responding to 
requests may open with 
a subject line to identify 
the topic immediately.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
139 
Figure 6.2 Direct Claim Letter

140 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
open Directly with information the reader wants
In the first sentence of a direct reply letter, deliver the information the reader wants. 
Avoid wordy, drawn-out openings (I have before me your letter of December 1, in 
which you request information about . . . ). More forceful and more efficient is an 
opener that answers the inquiry (Here is the information you wanted about . . .). 
When agreeing to a request for action, announce the good news promptly (Yes, I 
will be happy to speak to your business communication class about . . . ). 
arrange Your information logically 
and Make it readable
In the body of your reply, supply explanations and additional information. Because 
a letter written on company stationery is considered a legally binding  contract, be 
Figure 6.3 Direct Reply Letter
announce the good 
news promptly.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
141
sure to check facts and figures carefully. If a policy or procedure needs authoriza-
tion, seek approval from a supervisor or executive before writing the letter. 
When answering a group of questions or providing considerable data, arrange 
the information logically and make it readable by using lists, tables, headings, 
boldface, italics, or other graphic devices. When customers or prospective cus-
tomers inquire about products or services, your response should do more than 
merely supply answers. Try to promote your organization and products. Often, 
companies have particular products and services they want to spotlight. Thus, 
when a customer writes about one product, provide helpful information that 
satisfies the inquiry, but consider using the opportunity to introduce another 
product as well. Be sure to present the promotional material with attention 
to the “you” view and to reader benefits (You can use our standardized tests 
to free you from time-consuming employment screening). You will learn more 
about special techniques for developing marketing and persuasive messages in 
Chapter 8. 
In concluding, make sure you are cordial and personal. Refer to the information 
provided or to its use. (The enclosed list summarizes our recommendations. We wish 
you all the best in redesigning your Web site.) If further action is required, describe 
the procedure and help the reader with specifics (The Small Business Administration 
publishes a number of helpful booklets. Its Web address is . . .).
close pleasantly and personally
To avoid abruptness, include a pleasant closing remark that shows your willing-
ness to help the reader. Provide extra information if appropriate. Tailor your 
remarks to fit this letter and this reader. Because everyone appreciates being rec-
ognized as an individual, avoid form-letter closings such as If we may be of further 
assistance, . . . .
adjustment letters
Even the best-run and best-loved businesses occasionally receive claims or com-
plaints from consumers. When a company receives a claim and decides to respond 
favorably, the letter is called an adjustment letter. In these messages, you have three 
goals:
• To rectify the wrong, if one exists
• To regain the confidence of the customer
• To promote future business and goodwill
A positive adjustment letter represents good news to the reader. Therefore, use the 
direct strategy described in the following writing plan:
writing plan for adjustment letters
• Subject line: (optional) Identify the previous correspondence 
and refer to the main topic.
• Opening: Grant the request or announce the adjustment 
immediately.
• Body: Provide details about how you are complying with the 
request. Try to regain the customer’s confidence. Apologize if 
appropriate, but don’t admit negligence.
• Closing: End positively with a forward-looking thought; 
express confidence in future business relations. Include sales 
promotion, if appropriate. Avoid referring to  unpleasantness.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“People unable to express 
themselves clearly in writing 
limit their opportunities 
for professional, salaried 
employment.”
© ted GOFF WWW.tedGOFF.COM

142 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
reveal the good news in the opening
Instead of beginning with a review of what went wrong, present the good news imme-
diately. When Kimberly Patel responded to the claim of customer Yonkers Digital & 
Wireless about a missing shipment, her first draft, shown at the top of Figure 6.4, 
was angry. No wonder. Yonkers Digital apparently had provided the wrong shipping 
address, and the goods were returned. But once Kimberly and her company decided 
to send a second shipment and comply with the customer’s claim, she had to give 
up the anger and strive to retain the goodwill and the business of this customer. The 
improved version of her letter announces that a new shipment will arrive shortly.
If you decide to comply with a customer’s claim, let the receiver know immedi-
ately. Don’t begin your letter with a negative statement (We are very sorry to hear 
that you are having trouble with your dishwasher). This approach reminds the reader 
of the problem and may rekindle the heated emotions or unhappy feelings experi-
enced when the claim was written. Instead, focus on the good news. The following 
openings for various letters illustrate how to begin a message with good news.
You’re right! We agree that the warranty on your American Standard Model 
UC600 dishwasher should be extended for six months.
You will be receiving shortly a new slim Nokia cell phone to replace the one that 
shattered when dropped recently.
Please take your portable Admiral microwave oven to A-1 Appliance Service, 
200 Orange Street, Pasadena, where it will be repaired at no cost to you.
The enclosed check for $325 demonstrates our desire to satisfy our customers 
and earn their confidence.
In announcing that you will make an adjustment, try to do so without a grudg-
ing tone—even if you have reservations about whether the claim is legitimate. Once 
you decide to comply with the customer’s request, do so happily. Avoid halfhearted 
or reluctant responses (Although the American Standard dishwasher works well 
when used properly, we have decided to allow you to take yours to A-1 Appliance 
Service for repair at our expense).
explain How You are complying in the Body
In responding to claims, most organizations sincerely want to correct a wrong. They 
want to do more than just make the customer happy. They want to stand behind 
their products and services; they want to do what’s right.
CARLOS BARRIA / ReuteRS / LAndOv
workplace in Focus
Airline troubles continue to mount as weary air travelers 
complain of lost luggage, long delays, canceled flights, 
and soaring ticket prices. In one customer-service 
debacle, major u.S. carriers shut down 3,700 flights in 
a single month after failing to meet safety inspections 
mandated by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
the grounded flights affected hundreds of thousands 
of passengers, underscoring the airline industry’s 
last-place finish in a Consumer Satisfaction Index 
survey conducted by the university of Michigan. 
What guidelines should airline companies follow when 
writing adjustment letters to disgruntled customers?
readers want to learn the 
good news immediately.
Be enthusiastic, 
not grudging, when 
granting a claim.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
143 
Figure 6.4 Customer Adjustment Letter

144 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
In the body of the letter, explain how you are complying with the claim. In all 
but the most routine claims, you should also seek to regain the confidence of the 
customer. You might reasonably expect that a customer who has experienced dif-
ficulty with a product, with delivery, with billing, or with service has lost faith in 
your organization. Rebuilding that faith is important for future business.
How to rebuild lost confidence depends on the situation and the claim. If 
procedures need to be revised, explain what changes will be made. If a product 
has defective parts, tell how the product is being improved. If service is faulty, 
describe genuine efforts to improve it. Notice in Figure 6.4 on page 143 that the 
writer promises to investigate shipping procedures to see whether improvements 
might prevent future mishaps.
Sometimes the problem is not with the product but with the way it is being 
used. In other instances customers misunderstand warranties or inadvertently cause 
delivery and billing mix-ups by supplying incorrect information. Remember that 
rational and sincere explanations will do much to regain the confidence of unhappy 
customers.
In your explanation avoid emphasizing negative words such as trouble, regret, 
misunderstanding, fault, defective, error, inconvenience, and unfortunately. Keep 
your message positive and upbeat.
Decide whether to apologize
Whether to apologize is a debatable issue. Some writing experts argue that apolo-
gies remind customers of their complaints and are therefore negative. These writers 
avoid apologies; instead they concentrate on how they are satisfying the customer. 
Real letters that respond to customers’ claims, however, often include apologies.2 If 
you feel that your company is at fault and that an apology is an appropriate good-
will gesture, by all means include it. Be careful, though, not to admit negligence.
show confidence and Helpfulness in the closing
End positively by expressing confidence that the problem has been resolved and 
that continued business relations will result. You might mention the product in a 
favorable light, suggest a new product, express your appreciation for the customer’s 
business, or anticipate future business. It is often appropriate to refer to the desire to 
be of service and to satisfy customers. Notice how the following closings illustrate 
a positive, confident tone.
You were most helpful in informing us of this situation and permitting us to 
correct it. We appreciate your thoughtfulness in writing to us.
Thanks for writing. Your satisfaction is important to us. We hope that this 
refund check convinces you that service to our customers is our No. 1 priority. 
Our goals are to earn your confidence and continue to merit that confidence 
with quality products and excellent service.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Even if the problem is 
not the company’s fault, 
something like ‘I’m sorry 
to hear that you’re not 
satisfied with our service’ is 
at least conciliatory, without 
involving the company [in] 
accepting any liability.”
CAtHY © CAtHY GuISeWIte. RePRInted WItH PeRMISSIOn OF unIveRSAL PReSS 
SYndICAte. ALL RIGHtS ReSeRved.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
145
Your Inspiron 1420 HD widescreen laptop will come in handy whether you 
are working at home or on the road. What’s more, if you desire an even bigger 
screen, you can upgrade to a 17-inch widescreen notebook for only $150. Take 
a look at the enclosed booklet detailing the big savings for essential technology 
on a budget. We value your business and look forward to your future orders.
Although the direct pattern works for many requests and replies, it obviously 
won’t work for every situation. With more practice and experience, you will be able 
to alter the pattern and adapt your skills to other communication problems.
goodwill Messages
Goodwill messages, which include thanks, recognition, and sympathy, seem to intim-
idate many communicators. Finding the right words to express feelings is sometimes 
more difficult than writing ordinary business documents. Writers tend to procrasti-
nate when it comes to goodwill messages, or else they send a ready-made card or pick 
up the telephone. Remember, though, that the personal sentiments of the sender are 
always more expressive and more meaningful to readers than are printed cards or 
oral messages. Taking the time to write gives more importance to our well-wishing. 
Personal notes also provide a record that can be reread, savored, and treasured. 
In expressing thanks, recognition, or sympathy, you should always do so promptly. 
These messages are easier to write when the situation is fresh in your mind, and they 
mean more to the recipient. Don’t forget that a prompt thank-you note carries the 
hidden message that you care and that you consider the event to be important. You 
will learn to write various goodwill messages that deliver thanks, congratulations, 
praise, and sympathy. Instead of learning writing plans for each of them, we recom-
mend that you concentrate on the five Ss. Goodwill messages should be:
• Selfless. Be sure to focus the message solely on the receiver not the sender. Don’t 
talk about yourself; avoid such comments as I remember when I . . . . 
• Specific. Personalize the message by mentioning specific incidents or character-
istics of the receiver. Telling a colleague Great speech is much less effective than 
Great story about McDonald’s marketing in Moscow. Take care to verify names 
and other facts. 
• Sincere. Let your words show genuine feelings. Rehearse in your mind how you 
would express the message to the receiver orally. Then transform that conversa-
tional language to your written message. Avoid pretentious, formal, or flowery 
language (It gives me great pleasure to extend felicitations on the occasion of 
your firm’s twentieth anniversary).
• Spontaneous. Keep the message fresh and enthusiastic. Avoid canned phrases 
(Congratulations on your promotion, Good luck in the future). Strive for direct-
ness and naturalness, not creative brilliance. 
• Short. Although goodwill messages can be as long as needed, try to accomplish 
your purpose in only a few sentences. What is most important is remembering an 
individual. Such caring does not require documentation or wordiness. Individuals 
and business organizations often use special note cards or stationery for brief 
messages. 
expressing Thanks
When someone has done you a favor or when an action merits praise, you need to 
extend thanks or show appreciation. Letters of appreciation may be written to customers 
for their orders, to hosts and hostesses for their hospitality, to individuals for kindnesses 
performed, and especially to customers who complain. After all, complainers are actu-
ally providing you with “free consulting reports from the field.” Complainers who feel 
that they were listened to often become the greatest promoters of an organization.
Because the receiver will be pleased to hear from you, you can open directly 
with the purpose of your message. The letter in Figure 6.5 thanks a speaker who 
Messages that express 
thanks, recognition, 
and sympathy should 
be written promptly.
goodwill messages are most 
effective when they are 
selﬂ ess, speciﬁ c, sincere, 
spontaneous, and short.
send letters of thanks to 
customers, hosts, and 
individuals who have 
performed kind acts.

146 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Figure 6.5 Thank-You Letter for a Favor
1Prewriting
2Writing
3Revising
Analyze: The purpose of this letter is
to express appreciation to a business
executive for presenting a talk before
professionals.
Anticipate: The reader will be more
interested in personalized comments
than in general statements showing
gratitude.
Adapt: Because the reader will be
pleased, use the direct pattern.
Research: Consult notes taken during
the talk.
Organize: Open directly by giving the
reason for writing. Express enthusiastic
and sincere thanks. In the body provide
speciﬁcs. Refer to facts and highlights
in the talk. Supply suﬃcient detail to
support your sincere compliments.
Conclude with appreciation. Be warm
and friendly.
Compose: Write the ﬁrst draft.
Revise: Revise for tone and warmth.
Use the reader’s name. Include concrete
detail but do it concisely. Avoid sounding
gushy or phony.
Proofread: Check the spelling of the
receiver’s name; verify facts. Check the
spelling of persistence, patience, and 
advice.
Evaluate: Does this letter convey
sincere thanks?

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
147
addressed a group of marketing professionals. Although such thank-you notes 
can be quite short, this one is a little longer because the writer wants to lend 
importance to the receiver’s efforts. Notice that every sentence relates to the 
receiver and offers enthusiastic praise. By using the receiver’s name along with 
contractions and positive words, the writer makes the letter sound warm and 
conversational.
Written notes that show appreciation and express thanks are significant to their 
receivers. In expressing thanks, you generally write a short note on special note-
paper or heavy card stock. The following messages provide models for expressing 
thanks for a gift, for a favor, and for hospitality. 
To Express Thanks for a Gift
Thanks, Laura, to you and the other members of the department for honoring 
me with the elegant Waterford crystal vase at the party celebrating my twentieth 
anniversary with the company.
The height and shape of the vase are perfect to hold roses and other bouquets 
from my garden. Each time I fill it, I will remember your thoughtfulness in 
choosing this lovely gift for me.
To Send Thanks for a Favor
I sincerely appreciate your filling in for me last week when I was too ill to attend 
the planning committee meeting for the spring exhibition.
Without your participation much of my preparatory work would have been lost. 
It’s comforting to know that competent and generous individuals like you are 
part of our team, Mark. Moreover, it’s my very good fortune to be able to count 
you as a friend. I’m grateful to you.
To Extend Thanks for Hospitality
Matt and I want you to know how much we enjoyed the dinner party for our 
department that you hosted Saturday evening. Your charming home and warm 
hospitality, along with the lovely dinner and sinfully delicious chocolate dessert, 
combined to create a truly memorable evening. 
Most of all, though, we appreciate your kindness in cultivating togetherness in 
our department. Thanks, Lisa, for being such a special person. 
responding to goodwill Messages
Should you respond when you receive a congratulatory note or a written pat on the 
back? By all means! These messages are attempts to connect personally; they are 
efforts to reach out, to form professional and/or personal bonds. Failing to respond 
to notes of congratulations and most other goodwill messages is like failing to say 
“You’re welcome” when someone says “Thank you.” Responding to such messages 
is simply the right thing to do. Do avoid, though, minimizing your achievements 
with comments that suggest you don’t really deserve the praise or that the sender is 
exaggerating your good qualities. 
To Answer a Congratulatory Note
Thanks for your kind words regarding my award, and thanks, too, for sending 
me the newspaper clipping. I truly appreciate your thoughtfulness and warm 
wishes.
To Respond to a Pat on the Back
Your note about my work made me feel good. I’m grateful for your thoughtfulness.
conveying sympathy
Most of us can bear misfortune and grief more easily when we know that others care. 
Notes expressing sympathy, though, are probably more difficult to write than any 
other kind of message. Commercial “In sympathy” cards make the task easier—but 
they are far less meaningful. Grieving friends want to know what you think—not what 
identify the gift, tell why 
you appreciate it, and 
explain how you will use it.
Tell what the favor 
means using sincere, 
simple statements.
compliment the ﬁ ne food, 
charming surroundings, 
warm hospitality, excellent 
host and hostess, and 
good company.
Take the time to respond 
to any goodwill message 
you may receive.
sympathy notes should refer 
to the misfortune sensitively 
and offer assistance.

148 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Hallmark’s card writers think. To help you get started, you can always glance through 
cards expressing sympathy. They will supply ideas about the kinds of thoughts you 
might wish to convey in your own words. In writing a sympathy note, (a) refer to 
the death or misfortune sensitively, using words that show you understand what a 
crushing blow it is; (b) in the case of a death, praise the deceased in a personal way; 
(c) offer assistance without going into excessive detail; and (d) end on a reassuring, 
forward-looking note. 
To Express Condolences
We are deeply saddened, Gayle, to learn of the death of your husband. Warren’s kind 
nature and friendly spirit endeared him to all who knew him. He will be missed.
Although words seem empty in expressing our grief, we want you to know that 
your friends at QuadCom extend their profound sympathy to you. If we may 
help you or lighten your load in any way, you have but to call.
We know that the treasured memories of your many happy years together, along 
with the support of your family and many friends, will provide strength and 
comfort in the months ahead.
is e-Mail appropriate for goodwill Messages?
In expressing thanks or responding to goodwill messages, handwritten notes are 
most impressive. However, if you frequently communicate with the receiver by 
e-mail and if you are sure your note will not get lost, then sending an e-mail goodwill 
message is acceptable, according to the Emily Post Institute.3 To express sympathy 
immediately after learning of a death or accident, you might precede a phone call or 
a written condolence message with an e-mail. E-mail is a fast and nonintrusive way 
to show your feelings. But, advises the Emily Post Institute, immediately follow with 
a handwritten note. Remember that e-mail messages are quickly gone and forgotten. 
Handwritten or printed messages remain and can be savored. Your thoughtfulness 
is more lasting if you take the time to prepare a handwritten or printed message on 
notepaper or personal stationery.
in condolence notes 
mention the loss tactfully 
and recognize the good 
qualities of the deceased.
conclude on a positive, 
reassuring note.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
summing up and looking Forward
Although e-mail is becoming an important communication 
channel for brief messages, business letters are still impor-
tant. they are necessary for messages that must produce 
a permanent record, are confidential, convey formality and 
sensitivity, and deliver persuasive ideas. In this chapter you 
learned to write direct letters that request information or 
action. You also learned to write direct claims, direct replies, 
adjustment letters, and a variety of goodwill messages. All of 
these routine letters use the direct strategy. they open imme-
diately with the main idea followed by details and explana-
tions. But not all letters will carry good news. Occasionally, 
you must deny requests and deliver bad news. In the next 
chapter you will learn to use the indirect strategy in convey-
ing negative news.
C
critical Thinking
 1. An article in a professional magazine carried this headline: 
“Is Letter Writing dead?”4 How would you respond to such 
a question?
 2. In promoting the value of letter writing, a well-known colum-
nist recently wrote, “to trust confidential information to e-mail 
is to be a rube.”5 What did he mean? do you agree?

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
149
 6. under what circumstances is it better for a businessperson to send a letter than to use another 
communication channel?
 7. When should you not write a business letter?
 8. What determines whether you write a letter directly or indirectly?
 9. What are the two most important positions in a letter?
 10. List two ways that you could begin an inquiry letter that asks many questions.
 11. What three elements are appropriate in the closing of a request for information?
 12. What is a claim letter? Give an original example of a situation that might require a claim letter.
 13. What is an adjustment letter, and what three goals does it have?
 14. the best goodwill messages include what five characteristics?
 15. When is it appropriate to use e-mail to deliver goodwill messages?
 3. Which is more effective in claim letters—anger or objec-
tivity? Why?
 4. Why is it important to regain the confidence of a customer 
when you respond to a claim letter?
 5. Ethical Issue: Should companies automatically grant 
adjustments? For example, some customers buy a video 
camera or a dress for a special event and return the prod-
uct afterward. What safeguards could be implemented?
C
chapter review

150 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Letter Openers
Your Task. Indicate which of the following entries represents an effective direct opening.
 16. a.  Please allow me to introduce myself. I am Marquis Jones, and I am assistant to the director of 
employee Relations at united Anesthesia Associates. We place nurse anesthetists in hospitals. 
each year we try to recognize outstanding staff members during Customer Service Week. I 
understand you provide an Idea Guide and that you sell special recognition gifts. I have a number 
of questions about them.
 
 b.  Please answer the following questions about ideas and gifts to recognize outstanding staff 
members during our Customer Service Week.
 17. a. We have on hand an ample supply of HOn 500 Series lateral file cabinets.
 
 b.  thank you for your e-mail of June 13 in which you inquired about the availability of HOn 500 Series 
lateral file cabinets.
 18. a. Yes, we do offer “Get Away today” discount vacations at disneyland Resorts.
 
 b.  this will acknowledge receipt of your May 15 inquiry in which you ask about our disneyland 
Resort “Get Away today” package with discount vacations.
 19. a.  Your letter of August 2 requesting a refund has been referred to me because Mr. Solano is away 
from the office. I am happy to respond to your inquiry requesting a refund of $175.
 
 b. Your refund check for $175 is enclosed.
 20. a.  We sincerely appreciate your recent order for Alpine touring skis. Here at uS Gear Shop, you will 
always find a wide range of skis, snowboards, and surfing equipment.
 
 b.  the Alpine touring skis you ordered were shipped today by Mountain express and should reach 
you by October 12.
Direct Openings
Your Task. Revise the following openings so that they are more direct. Add information if necessary.
 21. Hello! My name is Leeanne Gosbee, and I just saw the terrific Web site for your organization, Green 
Living Spaces, which I understand is one of the world’s leading health and wellness companies. I 
have a number of questions about selling your products and earning commissions. At your Web site 
I learned about the possibility of gaining affiliate status, which I am definitely interested in, but I still 
have many questions not answered at your site.
 22. Pursuant to your letter of november 19, I am writing in regard to your inquiry about whether we offer 
our Mediterranean-style patio umbrella in colors. this unique umbrella is a very popular item and 
receives a number of inquiries. Its 10-foot canopy protects you when the sun is directly overhead, 
but it also swivels and tilts to virtually any angle for continuous sun protection all day long. It comes 
in two colors: off-white and forest green.
 23. thank you for your letter inquiring about the possibility of my acting as a speaker at the final semester 
meeting of your business administration club on May 6. the topic of digital résumés and portfolios 
interests me and is one on which I think I could impart helpful information to your members. therefore, 
I am responding in the affirmative to your kind invitation. 
W
writing improvement exercises

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
151
 24. We have just received your letter of January 29 regarding the unfortunate troubles you are having 
with your Pilgrim dvd player. In your letter you ask whether you may send the flawed dvd player to 
us for inspection. Although we normally handle all service requests through our local dealers, in your 
circumstance we are willing to take a look at your unit here at our Atlanta plant. therefore, please 
send it to us so that we may determine what’s wrong. 
 25. Your message of June 18 has been given to me to answer. We regret that you were inconvenienced by 
receiving an incorrect invoice. We have used netPost to transmit visa invoices for eight years, and this 
is the first time that invoices were sent to the wrong recipients. We take what happened very seriously, 
and we are changing our procedures to avoid similar errors in the future. We can assure you that the 
revised invoice you will receive in two days is now correct. You may use your account again.
Closing Paragraph
Your Task. the following concluding paragraph to a claim letter response suffers from faults in strategy, 
tone, and emphasis. Revise and improve.
 26. Although we do not feel that we are to blame for the delay in delivery of the hardwood floors about 
which you complained, we are willing to give you a 10 percent discount on the total cost of this 
shipment. this should offset your pain caused by the delay of 10 weeks due to the container cargo 
disruption of all imported goods from China. Your hardwood floors won’t arrive for one more week, 
and once again, we apologize for the delay. thank you for your business.
6.1 Information Request: Workplace Security
the following letter requests information; however, the first draft suffers from many writing faults.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Mr. Kyle Gregory, Sales Manager
Micro Supplies and Software
830 north Meridian Street
Indianapolis, In 46205
dear Sir:
Our insurance rates will be increased in the near future due to the fact that we don’t have security devices on our computer 
equipment. Local suppliers were considered, but at this point in time none had exactly what we wanted. that’s why I am 
writing to see whether or not you can provide information and recommendations regarding equipment to prevent the pos-
sible theft of office computers and printers. In view of the fact that our insurance carrier has set a deadline of April 1, we 
need fast action.
Our office now has 18 computer workstations along with twelve printers. We need a device that can be used to secure 
separate computer components to desks or counters. Would you please recommend a device that can secure a workstation 
consisting of a computer, monitor, and keyboard. We wonder if professionals are needed to install your security devices and 
to remove them. We are a small company, and we don’t have a staff of maintenance people.
W
writing improvement cases

152 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
One problem is whether the devices can be easily removed when we need to move equipment around. We are, of course, 
very interested in the price of each device. What about quantity discounts, if you offer them.
until such time as we hear from you, thank you in advance for your attention to this matter.
Sincerely,
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this letter.
 2. Outline a writing plan for a direct request.
  Opening: 
  Body: 
  Closing: 
6.2 Claim Request: Rental Car Gas Complaint
the following letter conveys a complaint and makes a claim. However, its poor tone and expression may prevent the receiver 
from getting what he wants.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Mr. Orion Murillo, Manager
Customer Response Center
Western Car Rentals
2259 Weatherford Boulevard
dallas, tX 74091
dear Manager Orion Murillo:
With the exorbitant cost of gasoline today, I am totally frustrated at my experience with Western Car Rentals! I’m ticked off 
because you can’t seem to decide what to do about fill-ups. either you provide customers with cars with full gas tanks or you 
don’t. And if you don’t, you shouldn’t charge them when they return with empty tanks!
In view of the fact that I picked up a car at the dallas-Ft. Worth International Airport on June 23 with an empty tank, I had to 
fill it immediately. then I drove it until June 26. When I returned the car to Houston, as previously planned, I naturally let the 
tank go nearly empty, since that is the way I received the car in dallas-Ft. Worth.
But your attendant in Houston charged me to fill the tank—$69.43 (premium gasoline at premium prices)! Although I explained 
to her that I had received it with an empty tank, she kept telling me that company policy required that she charge for a fill-up. 
My total bill came to $446.50, which, you must agree, is a lot of money for a rental period of only three days. I have the 
signed rental agreement and a receipt showing that I paid the full amount and that it included $69.43 for a gas fill-up when 
I returned the car. those are the true facts! Any correspondence should be directed to the undersigned at Impact Group, 
402 north Griffin Street, dallas, tX 74105.
Inasmuch as my company is a new customer and inasmuch as we had hoped to use your agency for our future car rentals 
because of your competitive rates, I trust that you will give this matter your prompt attention.
Your unhappy customer,
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this letter.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
153
 2. Outline a writing plan for a claim request.
  Opening: 
  Body: 
 
  Closing: 
 
6.3 Adjustment Letter: Sagging Canvas Needs Restretching
When a company received an expensive office painting with sags in the canvas, it complained. the seller, Manhattan 
Galleries, responded with the following adjustment letter. How can it be improved?
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Ms. Sharon nickels
2459 drew Street
Clearwater, FL 33765
dear Ms. nickels:
Your letter has been referred to me for reply. You claim that the painting recently sent by Manhattan Galleries arrived with 
sags in the canvas and that you are unwilling to hang it in your company’s executive offices.
I have examined your complaint carefully, and, frankly, I find it difficult to believe because we are so careful about shipping, 
but if what you say is true, I suspect that the shipper may be the source of your problem. We give explicit instructions to our 
shippers that large paintings must be shipped standing up, not lying down. We also wrap every painting in two layers of 
convoluted foam and one layer of Perf-Pack foam, which we think should be sufficient to withstand any bumps and scrapes 
that negligent shipping may cause. We will certainly look into this.
Although it is against our policy, we will in this instance allow you to take this painting to a local framing shop for restretching. 
We are proud that we can offer fine works of original art at incredibly low prices, and you can be sure that we do not send 
out sagging canvases.
Sincerely,
 1. List at least five weaknesses of this adjustment letter.
A
activities and cases
6.4 Information Request: Raising Puppies to Become Guide Dogs
As an assistant in the Community Involvement Program of your corporation, you have been given an unusual task. Your boss 
wants to expand the company’s philanthropic and community relations mission and especially employee volunteerism. She 
heard about the Seeing eye, a program in which volunteers raise puppies for 14 to 18 months for guide dog training. She 
thinks this would be an excellent outreach program for the company’s employees. they could give back to the community 
in their role as puppy raisers. to pursue the idea, she asks you to request information about the program and ask questions 
about whether a company could sponsor a program encouraging employees to act as volunteers. She hasn’t thought it 
through very carefully and relies on you to raise logical questions, especially about costs for volunteers.
Your Task. Write an information request to Susanna Odell, the Seeing eye, 9002 east Chaparral Road, Scottsdale, AZ 85250. 
Include an end date and a reason.
6.5 Information Request: Brewing Coffee Shop Beverages in the Office
Workers in your office are big coffee drinkers. Some leave work to go to a nearby Starbucks, and others use instant coffee 
to brew their own. As manager, you realize that productivity and morale could be improved if your office supplied “coffee 

154 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
shop quality” in freshly brewed coffee. You saw a Maxima beverage system at another company, and you decide to look into 
purchasing such a system for your office. You have a number of questions about such a system.
the biggest problem is plumbing. If it requires plumbing, you can’t use it. You do have cold water available, but not 
plumbing. You wonder whether a Maxima Brewing System offers drinks other than coffee, such as hot chocolate and tea. 
Because you are a cappuccino fan, you want to know whether it makes authentic milk foam. naturally, you are concerned 
about cleaning, maintenance, supplies, and repairs. You also worry about how employees will pay for each cup of coffee or 
other beverage. Perhaps coin operation is available. A no. 1 concern, of course, is how much the system would cost and 
what kind of warranty is offered.
Your Task. Write a well-organized information request to Ms. Ann Pagnotta, Sales Manager, Maxima Brewing Systems, 1849 
Alum Creek drive, Columbus, OH 43207. Inquire about a Maxima Brewing System for your 25-person office staff. You need 
the information within two weeks for the next management council meeting.
6.6 Information Request: Meeting at Caesars Palace, Las Vegas
Your company, Software.com, wants to hold its next company-wide meeting in a resort location. the CeO has asked you, as 
marketing manager, to find a conference location for your 85 engineers, product managers, and marketing staff. He wants 
the company to host a four-day combination sales conference/vacation/retreat at some spectacular spot. He suggests that 
you start by inquiring at the amazing Caesars Palace Las vegas. You check its Web site and discover interesting information. 
However, you decide to write a letter so that you can have a permanent, formal record of all the resorts you investigate.
You estimate that your company will require about 80 rooms. You will also need three conference rooms (to accommodate 
25 or more) for one and a half days. You want to know room rates, conference facilities, and entertainment options for families. 
You have two periods that would be possible: April 20–24 or July 10–14. You know that one of these is at an off-peak time, and 
you wonder whether you can get a good room rate. You are interested in entertainment at Caesars during these times. One 
evening the CeO will want to host a banquet for about 125 people. the CeO wants a report from you by december 3.
Your Task. Write a well-organized information request to Ms. Isabella Cervantes, Manager, Convention Services, Caesars 
Palace, 257 Palace drive, Las vegas, nv 87551. You might like to take a look at the Caesars Web site at http://www.caesars
.com/palace.
6.7 Direct Claim: “No Surprise” Policy
As marketing manager of Rochester Preferred travel, you are upset with Premier Promos. Premier is a catalog company 
that provides imprinted promotional products for companies. Your travel company was looking for something special to offer 
in promoting its cruise ship travel packages. Premier offered free samples of its promotional merchandise under its “no 
Surprise” policy.
You figured, what could you lose? So on January 11 you placed a telephone order for a number of samples. these 
included three kinds of jumbo tote bags and a square-ended barrel bag with fanny pack, as well as a deluxe canvas attaché 
case and two colors of garment-dyed sweatshirts. All items were supposed to be free. You did think it odd that you were 
asked for your company’s Master Card number, but Premier promised to bill you only if you kept the samples. 
When the items arrived, you weren’t pleased, and you returned them all on January 21 (you have a postal receipt show-
ing the return). But your February credit statement showed a charge of $239.58 for the sample items. You called Premier in 
February and spoke to diane, who assured you that a credit would be made on your next statement. However, your March 
statement showed no credit. You called again and received a similar promise. It is now April and no credit has been made. 
You decide to write and demand action.
Your Task. Write a claim letter that documents the problem and states the action you want taken. Add any information you 
feel is necessary. Address your letter to Mr. Kevin Chitwood, Customer Services, Premier Promos, 2445 Bermiss Road, 
valdosta, GA 31602.
6.8 Direct Claim: Short Door for Tall Player
As the owner of Contempo Interiors, you recently worked on the custom Indiana home of an nBA basketball player. He 
requested an oversized 12-foot mahogany entry door. You ordered by telephone the solid mahogany door (“Provence”) from 
American Custom Wood on May 17. When it arrived on June 28, your carpenter gave you the bad news. Magnificent as it 
was, the huge door was cut too small. Instead of measuring a total of 12 feet 2 inches, the door measured 11 feet 10 inches. 
In your carpenter’s words, “no way can I stretch that door to fit this opening!” You waited four weeks for this hand-crafted 
custom door, and your client wanted it installed immediately. Your carpenter said, “I can rebuild this opening for you, but I’m 
going to have to charge you for my time.” His extra charge came to $940.50. 
You feel that the people at American Custom Wood should reimburse you for this amount since it was their error. In fact, 
you actually saved them a bundle of money by not returning the door. You decide to write to American Custom Wood and 
enclose a copy of your carpenter’s bill. You wonder whether you should also include a copy of the invoice, even though it 
does not show the exact door measurements. You are a good customer of American Custom Wood, having used its quality 
doors and windows on many other jobs. You are confident that it will grant this claim.
Your Task. Write a claim letter to Michael Medina, Operations Manager, American Custom Wood, 140 ne 136 Avenue, 
vancouver, WA 98654.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
155
6.9 Direct Claim: The Real Thing
Have you ever bought a product that didn’t work as promised? Have you been disappointed in service at a bank, video store, 
restaurant, department store, or discount house? Have you had ideas about how a company or organization could improve 
its image, service, or product? Remember that smart companies want to know what their customers think, especially if a 
product could be improved.
Your Task. Select a product or service that has disappointed you. Write a claim letter requesting a refund, replacement, 
explanation, or whatever seems reasonable. For claims about food products, be sure to include bar-code identification from 
the package, if possible. Your instructor may ask you to actually mail this letter. When you receive a response, share it with 
your class. 
6.10 Direct Claim: Can’t Attend Management Seminar
Ace executive training Institute offered a seminar titled “enterprise Project Management Protocol” that sounded terrific. It 
promised to teach project managers how to estimate work, report status, write work packages, and cope with project con-
flicts. Because your company often is engaged in large cross-functional projects, it decided to send four key managers to the 
seminar to be held June 1–2 at the Ace headquarters in Pittsburgh. the fee was $2,200 each, and it was paid in advance. 
About six weeks before the seminar, you learned that three of the managers would be tied up in projects that would not be 
completed in time for them to attend.
Your Task. On your company letterhead, write a claim letter to Addison O’neill, Registrar, Ace executive training Institute, 
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15244. Ask that the seminar fees for three employees be returned because they cannot 
attend. Give yourself a title and supply any details necessary.
6.11 Direct Claim: Neglected Landscape
As project manager at Liberty Property Management, you are in charge of landscaping maintenance for many clients includ-
ing Sycamore Business Park. Recently two tenants called to complain that their lawns had not been cut for two weeks and 
that weeds were growing in the parking lot. You drove out to see for yourself, and sure enough, Sycamore was looking a bit 
bedraggled. You also noticed that fallen tree branches from a recent windstorm were lying on the ground. Back in the office, 
you checked the files and saw that Stephen’s Landscaping Service had been hired to mow lawns and service the grounds at 
Sycamore. You checked further and saw that the original contract called for a fee of $350 per month. However, the latest bill 
paid was $410. You can’t understand why the price was increased without your knowledge. After leaving several telephone 
messages at Stephen’s Landscaping and receiving no response, you know you must write a letter.
Your Task. decide what you want to do in this situation. Send an appropriate letter explaining your claim or complaint to 
Stephen Hawasaki, Stephen’s Landscaping Service, Box 11A, elkhart, In 46515. Add any necessary details.
weB
6.12 Direct Reply: Going River Rafting
As the program chair for the SIu Ski Club, you have been asked by president Brian Krauss to investigate river rafting. the 
SIu Ski Club is an active organization, and its members want to schedule a summer activity. A majority favor rafting. use 
a browser such as Google to search the Web for relevant information. Select five of the most promising Web sites offering 
rafting. If possible, print a copy of your findings.
Your Task. Summarize your findings in a response letter to SIu Ski Club president. the next meeting is May 8, but you think 
it would be a good idea if you could discuss your findings with Brian before the meeting. Address your letter to Brian Krauss, 
President, SIu Ski Club, 303 Founders Hall, Carbondale, IL 62901.
TeaM
6.13 Direct Reply: Telling Job Applicants How to Make a Résumé Scannable
As part of a team of interns at the catalog store Patagonia, you have been asked to write a form letter to send to job appli-
cants who inquire about your résumé-scanning techniques. the following poorly written response to an inquiry was pulled 
from the file.
dear Ms. Moscatelli:
Your letter of April 11 has been referred to me for a response. We are pleased to learn that you are considering employment 
here at Patagonia, and we look forward to receiving your résumé, should you decide to send same to us.
You ask if we scan incoming résumés. Yes, we certainly do. Actually, we use Smarttrack, an automated résumé-tracking 
system. We sometimes receive as many as 300 résumés a day, and Smarttrack helps us sort, screen, filter, and separate the 
résumés. It also processes them, helps us organize them, and keeps a record of all of these résumés. Some of the résumés, 
however, cannot be scanned, so we have to return those—if we have time. 
the reasons that résumés won’t scan may surprise you. Some applicants send photocopies or faxed copies, and these can 
cause misreading, so don’t do it. the best plan is to send an original copy. Some people use colored paper. Big mistake! 

156 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
White paper (8½    11-inch) printed on one side is the best bet. Another big problem is unusual type fonts, such as script or 
fancy gothic or antique fonts. they don’t seem to realize that scanners do best with plain, readable fonts such as Helvetica 
or Arial in a 10- to 14-point size.
Other problems occur when applicants use graphics, shading, italics, underlining, horizontal and vertical lines, parentheses, 
and brackets. Scanners like plain, unadorned résumés. Oh yes, staples can cause misreading. And folding of a résumé can 
also cause the scanners to foul up. to be safe, don’t staple or fold, and be sure to use wide margins and a quality printer.
When a hiring manager within Patagonia decides to look for an appropriate candidate, he is told to submit keywords to 
describe the candidate he has in mind for his opening. We tell him (or sometimes her) to zero in on nouns and phrases 
that best describe what they want. thus, my advice to you is to try to include those words that highlight your technical and 
professional areas of expertise.
If you do decide to submit your résumé to us, be sure you don’t make any of the mistakes described herein that would cause 
the scanner to misread it. 
Sincerely,
Your Task. As a team, discuss how this letter could be improved. decide what information is necessary to send to potential 
job applicants. Search for additional information that might be helpful. then, submit an improved version to your instruc-
tor. Although the form letter should be written so that it can be sent to anyone who inquires, address this one to Carmela 
Moscatelli, 327 Avalon Way, Las vegas, nv 89154.
6.14 Direct Reply: Describing Your Major
A friend in a distant city is considering moving to your area for more education and training in your field. Your friend has 
asked you for information about your program of study.
Your Task. Write a letter describing a program in your field (or any field you wish to describe). What courses must be taken? 
toward what degree, certificate, or employment position does this program lead? Why did you choose it? Would you recom-
mend this program to your friend? How long does it take? Add any information you feel would be helpful.
6.15 Adjustment: Responding to Door Claim
As Michael Medina, operations manager, American Custom Wood, you have a problem. Your firm manufactures quality pre-
cut and custom-built doors and frames. You have received a letter from erica Adams (described in Activity 6.8), an interior 
designer. Her letter explained that the custom mahogany door (“Provence”) she received was cut to the wrong dimensions. 
She ordered an oversized door measuring 12 feet 2 inches. the door that arrived was 11 feet 10 inches.
Ms. Adams kept the door because her client, an nBA basketball player, insisted that the front of the house be closed up. 
therefore, she had her carpenter resize the opening. He charged $940.50 for this corrective work. She claims that you should 
reimburse her for this amount, since your company was responsible for the error. You check her May 17 order and find that 
the order was filled correctly. In a telephone order, Ms. Adams requested the Provence double-entry door measuring 11 feet 
10 inches, and that is what you sent. now she says that the door should have been 12 feet 2 inches.
Your policy forbids refunds or returns on custom orders. Yet, you remember that around May 15 you had two new people 
working the phones taking orders. It is possible that they did not hear or record the measurements correctly. You don’t know 
whether to grant this claim or refuse it. But you do know that you must look into the training of telephone order takers and be 
sure that they verify all custom order measurements. It might also be a good idea to have your craftspeople call a second 
time to confirm custom measurements.
Ms. Adams is a successful interior designer who has provided American Custom Wood with a number of orders. You 
value her business but aren’t sure how to respond. You would like to remind her that American Custom Wood has earned a 
reputation as a premier manufacturer of wood doors and frames. Your doors feature prime woods, meticulous craftsmanship, 
and award-winning designs. What’s more, the engineering is ingenious. You also have a wide range of classic designs.
Your Task. decide how to treat this claim and then respond to erica Adams, Contempo Interiors, 2304 River Ridge Road, 
Indianapolis, In 46031. You might mention that you have a new line of greenhouse windows that are available in three sizes. 
Include a brochure describing these windows.
6.16 Adjustment: Winning Back a Dissatisfied Customer
As the marketing manager at Carolina Furniture Galleries, you handle customer claims, and today you must respond to Jill 
Hudson Owens. She is returning a north American white oak executive desk. this handsome desk, embellished with hand-
inlaid walnut cross-banding, is made with full-suspension, silent ball-bearing drawer slides. She was disappointed in the 
wood grain, and she said that many of the drawers would not pull out easily. You find this hard to believe since the desk was 
in perfect condition when it was shipped. not only does she want a full refund, as your catalog promises, but she wants you 
to pay the freight charges.
You are bothered that she is returning this executive desk (Invoice 2091), but your policy is to comply with customer 
wishes. If she doesn’t want to keep the desk, you will certainly return the purchase price plus shipping charges. desks are 
occasionally damaged in shipping, and this may explain the marred finish and sticking drawers.

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
157
You will try to persuade Ms. Owens to give Carolina Furniture Galleries another chance. After all, your office furniture and 
other wood products are made from the finest hand-selected woods by master artisans. Because she is apparently furnish-
ing her office, send her another catalog and invite her to look at the traditional conference desk on page 9. this is available 
with a matching credenza, file cabinets, and accessories. She might be interested in your furniture-leasing plan, which can 
produce substantial savings.
Your Task. Write to Ms. Jill Hudson Owens, President, estate Management Services, 3920 east napier Avenue, Benton Harbor, 
MI 49021. In granting her claim, promise that you will personally examine any furniture she may order in the future. Supply any 
necessary details.
6.17 Claim Response: Pigeon Poisoning Must Stop
You didn’t want to do it. But guests were complaining about the pigeons that roost on the Scottsdale Hilton’s upper floors 
and tower. Pigeon droppings splattered sidewalks, furniture, and people. As manager, you had to take action. You called an 
exterminator who recommended Avitrol. this drug, he promised, would disorient the birds, preventing them from finding their 
way back to the Hilton. the drugging, however, produced a result you didn’t expect: pigeons began dying.
After a story hit the local newspapers, you began to receive complaints. the most vocal came from the Avian Affairs 
Coalition, a local bird-advocacy group. It said that the pigeons are really Mediterranean rock doves, the original “dove of 
Peace” in european history and the same species the Bible said noah originally released from his ark during the great flood. 
Activists claimed that Avitrol is a lethal drug causing birds, animals, and even people who ingest as little as 1/600th of a 
teaspoon to convulse and die lingering deaths of up to two hours.
Repulsed at the pigeon deaths and the bad publicity, you stopped the use of Avitrol immediately. You are now consider-
ing installing wires that offer a mild, nonlethal electrical shock. these wires, installed at the Maricopa County Jail in downtown 
Phoenix for $50,000, keep thousands of pigeons from alighting and could save $1 million in extermination and cleanup costs 
over the life of the building. You are also considering installing netting that forms a transparent barrier, sealing areas against 
entry by birds.
Your Task. Respond to Mrs. Meredith van Huss, 17168 Blackhawk Boulevard, Friendswood, tX 77546, a recent Scottsdale 
Hilton guest. She sent a letter condemning the pigeon poisoning and threatening to never return to the hotel unless it 
changed its policy. try to regain the confidence of Mrs. van Huss and promote further business.
6.18 Thanks for a Favor: Got the Job!
Congratulations! You completed your degree and got a terrific job in your field. One of your instructors was especially help-
ful to you when you were a student. this instructor also wrote an effective letter of recommendation that was instrumental in 
helping you obtain your job.
Your Task. Write a letter thanking your instructor. Remember to make your thanks specific so that your words are 
meaningful.
TeaM
6.19 Thanks for a Favor: The Century’s Biggest Change in Job Finding
Your business communication class was fortunate to have author Joyce Lain Kennedy speak to you. She has written many 
books including Electronic Job Search Revolution; Hook Up, Get Hired; and Electronic Résumé Revolution. Ms. Kennedy talked 
about writing a scannable résumé, using keywords to help employers hire you, keeping yourself visible in databases on the 
Internet, and finding online classified ads. the class especially liked hearing the many examples of real people who had 
found jobs on the Internet. Ms. Kennedy shared many suggestions from human resources people, and she described how 
large and small employers are using computers to read résumés and track employees. You know that she did not come to 
plug her books, but when she left, most class members wanted to head straight for a bookstore to get some of them. Her 
talk was a big hit.
Your Task. Individually or in groups, draft a thank-you letter to Joyce Lain Kennedy, P.O. Box 3502, Carlsbad, CA 92009.
6.20 Thanks for the Hospitality: Holiday Entertaining
You and other members of your staff or organization were entertained at an elegant dinner during the winter holiday season.
Your Task. Write a thank-you letter to your boss (supervisor, manager, vice president, president, or chief executive offi-
cer) or to the head of an organization to which you belong. Include specific details that will make your letter personal and 
sincere.
6.21 Responding to Good Wishes: Saying Thank You
Your Task. Write a short note thanking a friend who sent you good wishes when you recently completed your degree.
6.22 Extending Sympathy: To a Spouse
Your Task. Imagine that a coworker was killed in an automobile accident. Write a letter of sympathy to his or her spouse.

158 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Commas 1
Review the Grammar Review section of the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook Sections 2.01–
2.04. then study each of the following statements and insert necessary commas. In the space 
provided write the number of commas that you add; write 0 if no commas are needed. Also 
record the number of the G/M principle illustrated. When you finish, compare your responses 
with those shown at the end of the book. If your answers differ, study carefully the principles 
shown in parentheses.
Example In this class students learn to write clear and concise business letters e-mail mes-
sages memos and reports.
 1. We do not as a rule allow employees to take time off for dental appointments.
 2. You may be sure Mr. Sanchez that your car will be ready by 4 p.m.
 3. Anyone who is reliable conscientious and honest should be very successful.
 4. A conference on sales motivation is scheduled for May 5 at the Anaheim Marriott Hotel 
beginning at 2 p.m.
 5. As a matter of fact I just called your office this morning.
 6. We are relocating our distribution center from Memphis tennessee to des Moines Iowa.
 7. In the meantime please continue to send your orders to the regional office.
 8. the last meeting recorded in the minutes was on February 4 2008 in Chicago.
 9. Mr. Loh Mrs. Adams and Ms. Horne are our new representatives.
 10. the package mailed to Ms. Leslie Holmes 3430 Larkspur Lane San diego CA 92110 
arrived three weeks after it was mailed.
 11. the manager feels needless to say that the support of all employees is critical.
 12. eric was assigned three jobs: checking supplies replacing inventories and distributing 
delivered goods.
 13. We will work diligently to retain your business Mr. Bell.
 14. the vice president feels however that all sales representatives need training.
 15. the name selected for a product should be right for that product and should emphasize 
its major attributes.
V
Video resources
Video Library 2: Social Responsibility and Communica-
tion at Ben & Jerry’s. In an exciting inside look, you will 
see managers discussing six factors that determine Ben & 
Jerry’s continuing success. toward the end of the video, 
you will hear a discussion of a new packaging material 
made with unbleached paper. the new packaging paper 
was chosen because chlorine is not used in its manufac-
ture. What’s wrong with chlorine? Although it makes paper 
white, chlorine contains dioxin, which is known to cause 
cancer, genetic and reproductive defects, and learning dis-
abilities. In producing paper, pulp mills using chlorine are 
also adding to dioxin contamination of waterways. Finding 
a chlorine-free, unbleached paperboard for its packages 
delighted Ben & Jerry’s. However, the new process resulted 
in packages whose inner surfaces are brown, rather than 
white.
You have been hired at Ben & Jerry’s to help answer 
inquiries. Although you are fairly new, your boss gives you 
a letter from an unhappy customer. this customer opened 
a pint container of Ben & Jerry’s “World’s Best vanilla” and 
then threw it out. He saw the brown inner lid and inner sides 
of the package, and he decided that his pint container must 
have been used for chocolate before it was used for vanilla. 
Or, he said, “the entire pint has gone bad and somehow 
turned the insides brown.” Whatever the reason, he wasn’t 
taking any chances. Although he is a longtime customer, he 
now wants his money back. the last comment in his letter 
was, “I like your stand on environmental and social issues, 
but I don’t like getting my ice cream in used containers.”
Your Task. Write an adjustment letter that explains the brown 
interior of the carton, justifies the use of the new packaging 
material, and retains the customer’s business. How could you 
promote future business with this customer? Address your 
letter to Mr. Adam W. Johnson, 4030 West Griswold Road, 
Phoenix, AZ 85051.
G
grammar/Mechanics checkup 6
3 
(2.01)
^,
^,
^,

Chapter 6: Positive Messages 
159
Document for Revision
the following memo has errors in grammar, punctuation, spelling, proofreading, and 
other problems. You may either (a) use standard proofreading marks (see Appendix B) 
to correct the errors here or (b) download the document from your companion Web site 
and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
to sharpen your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics challenge 6
Dear Mr. Lee:
Subject: Your May 20 Inquiry About WorkZone Software
Yes we do offer personel record-keeping software specially 
designed for small businesses like your’s. Here’s answers to your
three questions about this software;
1. 
Our Work Zone software provide standard employee forms so 
 
you are all ways in compliance with current goverment 
 
regulations. 
2. 
You receive an interviewer’s guide for structured employee 
 
interviews and you also receive a scripted format for checking 
 
references by telephone.
3. 
Yes you can up date your employees records easy with out 
 
the need for additional software, hardware or training.
Our WorkZone software was specially designed to provide you with 
expert forms for interviewing, verifying references, recording 
attendance, evaluating performance and tracking the status of your 
employees. We even provide you with step by step instructions, 
and suggested procedures. You can treat your employees as if you 
had a Professional Human Resources Specialist on your staff. 
On page 6 of the enclosed pamphlet you can read about our 
WorkZone software. to receive a preview copy, or to ask questions 
about it’s use just call 1-800-354-5500. Our specialists are eager 
to help you week days from 8 to 5 PST.  If you prefer visit our Web 
site at www.workzone.com for more information, or to place an order.
Sincerely,
Jacob Scott
Senior Marketing Representative 
Enclosure
May 25, 200x
Ms. Breanna Lee, Manager
White-Rather Enterprises
1349 Century Boulevard
Wichita Falls, TX 76308

160 
Chapter 6: Positive Messages
Dr. Guffey’s Guide to Business Etiquette and 
Workplace Manners
etiquette, civility, and goodwill efforts may seem out of place in today’s fast-paced, high-
tech offices. However, etiquette and courtesy are more important than ever if diverse 
employees want to work cooperatively and maximize productivity and workflow. Many 
organizations recognize that good manners are good for business. Some colleges and uni-
versities offer management programs that include a short course in manners. Companies 
are also conducting manners seminars for trainee and veteran managers. Why is polite-
ness regaining legitimacy as a leadership tool? Primarily because courtesy works.
Good manners convey a positive image of an organization. We like to do business with 
people who show respect and treat others civilly. People also like to work in an environ-
ment that is pleasant. Considering how much time is spent at work, doesn’t it make sense 
to prefer an agreeable environment to one in which people are rude and uncivil?
You can brush up your workplace etiquette skills online at “dr. Guffey’s Guide to 
Business etiquette and Workplace Manners” (www.meguffey.com). Of interest to both 
workplace newcomers and veterans, this guide covers the following topics:
Professional Image 
Business Cards
Introductions and Greetings 
dealing With Angry Customers
networking Manners 
telephone Manners
General Workplace Manners 
Cell Phone etiquette
Coping With Cubicles 
e-Mail etiquette
Interacting With Superiors 
Gender-Free etiquette
Managers’ Manners 
Business dining
Business Meetings 
Avoiding Social Blunders When Abroad
Business Gifts 
to gauge your current level of knowledge of business etiquette, take the preview quiz 
at www.meguffey.com. then, study all 17 business etiquette topics. these easy-to-read 
topics are arranged in bulleted lists of dos and don’ts. After you complete this etiquette 
module, your instructor may test your comprehension by giving a series of posttests.
Career Application. As manager at Officetemps, a company specializing in employment 
placement and human resources information, you received a request from a reporter. She 
is preparing an article for a national news organization about how workplace etiquette is 
changing in today’s high-tech environment. the reporter asks for any other information 
you can share with her regarding her topic, “Information Age etiquette.” Her letter lists the 
following questions:
Are etiquette and workplace manners still important in today’s fast-paced Information 
Age work environment? Why or why not?
do workers need help in developing good business manners? Why or why not?
Are the rules of office conduct changing? If so, how?
What advice can you give about gender-free etiquette?
What special manners do people working in shared workspaces need to observe?
Your Task
In teams or individually, prepare an information response letter addressed to Ms. Lindsey 
Ann evans, national Press Association, 443 Riverside drive, new York, nY 10024. use the 
data you learned in this workshop. Conduct additional Web research if you wish. Remember 
that you will be quoted in her newspaper article, so make it interesting!
•
•
•
•
•
communication workshop: career skills

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
161
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / ZSOLT NYULASZI
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Describe the strategies and goals of business communicators in delivering bad 
news, including knowing when to use the direct and indirect patterns.
• Explain the writing process and how to avoid legal problems related to bad-news 
messages.
• Discuss and illustrate techniques for delivering bad news sensitively.
• Outline a plan for refusing direct requests and claims.
• Describe techniques for delivering bad news to customers.
• Describe techniques for announcing bad news within organizations.
• Distinguish between ethical and unethical use of the indirect strategy.
Strategies for Delivering Bad News
In all businesses, things sometimes go wrong. Goods are not delivered, products fail 
to perform as expected, service is poor, billing gets fouled up, or customers are mis-
understood. You may have to write messages ending business relationships, declining 
proposals, announcing price increases, refusing requests for donations, terminating 
employees, turning down invitations, or responding to unhappy customers. You might 
have to apologize for mistakes in orders, errors in pricing, the rudeness of employees, 
overlooked appointments, substandard service, pricing errors, faulty accounting, defec-
tive products, or jumbled instructions.
Everyone occasionally must deliver bad news. Because bad news disappoints, 
irritates, and sometimes angers the receiver, such messages must be written care-
fully. The bad feelings associated with disappointing news can generally be reduced 
if the receiver (a) knows the reasons for the rejection, (b) feels that the news was 
revealed sensitively, (c) thinks the matter was treated seriously, and (d) believes that 
the decision was fair. You have probably heard people say, It wasn’t so much the 
bad news that I resented. It was the way I was told!
In this chapter you will learn when to use the direct pattern and when to use 
the indirect pattern to deliver bad news. You will study the goals of business com-
municators in working with bad news, and you will examine three causes for legal 
concerns. The major focus of this chapter, however, is on developing the indirect 
Negative 
Messages
7
C H A P T e r  7
The sting of bad news 
can be reduced by 
giving reasons and 
communicating sensitively.
’s’s
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“Delivering difficult messages 
is part of day-to-day life in all 
social groups, whether the 
organization is a family, a 
nation, or a business.”

162 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
strategy and applying it to situations in which you must 
refuse typical requests, reject claims, and deliver negative 
news to employees and customers.
Primary and Secondary goals 
in Communicating Bad News
Delivering bad news is not the happiest writing task you 
may have, but it can be gratifying if you do it effectively. 
As a business communicator working with bad news, you 
will have many goals, the most important of which are 
these:
Primary Goals
• Make the receiver understand the bad news
• Help the receiver accept the bad news
• Maintain a positive image of you and your orga-
nization
Secondary Goals
• Reduce bad feelings
• Convey fairness
• Eliminate future correspondence
• Avoid creating legal liability or responsibility for 
you or your organization
These are ambitious goals, and we are not always 
successful in achieving them all. This chapter, however, 
provides the beginning communicator with strategies and 
tactics that many writers have found helpful in conveying 
disappointing news sensitively and safely. With experience, 
you will be able to vary these patterns and adapt them to 
your organization’s specific writing tasks. 
using the indirect Pattern to Prepare the reader
Whereas good news can be revealed quickly, bad news is generally easier to accept 
when broken gradually. Revealing bad news slowly and indirectly shows sensitiv-
ity to your reader. By preparing the reader, you tend to soften the impact. A blunt 
announcement of disappointing news might cause the receiver to stop reading 
and toss the message aside. The indirect strategy enables you to keep the reader’s 
attention until you have been able to explain the reasons for the bad news. In 
fact, the most important part of a bad-news message is the explanation, which 
you will learn about shortly. The indirect plan consists of four parts, as shown in 
Figure 7.1: 
The indirect pattern 
softens the impact of bad 
news by giving reasons 
and explanations ﬁ rst.
Figure 7.1 Four-Part Indirect Pattern for Bad News 
Open with a neutral
but meaningful
statement that does
not mention the bad
news.
Explain the causes
of the bad news
before disclosing it.
Reveal the bad news
without emphasizing
it. Provide an alterna-
tive or compromise,
if possible.
End with a personalized,
forward-looking,
pleasant statement.
Avoid referring to the 
bad news.
Closing
Bad News
Reasons
Buﬀer
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
Société Générale, situated here among the skyscrapers of 
Paris, suffered the worst loss in banking history when a junior 
employee liquidated more than $7 billion in a fraudulent 
trading scheme. In a letter to the bank’s customers, CEO 
Daniel Bouton opened immediately with the bad news: 
“It is my duty to inform you that Société Générale has 
been a victim of a serious internal fraud committed by 
an imprudent employee in the Corporate and Investment 
Banking Division.” Bouton went on to reveal a disaster-
response plan and assured customers that lost funds would 
be replaced with emergency funding from the international 
banking community. Should the bank have buffered this 
bad news by revealing it more gradually in the letter?
© JUDITH WHITE / BLOOMBERG NEWS / LANDOV

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
163
• Buffer. Introduce the message with a neutral statement that makes the reader 
continue reading.
• Reasons. Explain why the bad news was necessary and that the matter was 
taken seriously.
• Bad news. Provide a clear but understated announcement of the bad news that 
might include an alternative or a compromise.
• Closing. End with a warm, forward-looking statement that might mention good 
wishes, gifts, or sales promotion.
When to use the Direct Pattern
Many bad-news letters are best organized indirectly, beginning with a buffer and 
reasons. The direct pattern, with the bad news first, may be more effective, though, 
in situations such as the following: 
• When the receiver may overlook the bad news. Rate increases, changes in ser-
vice, new policy requirements—these critical messages may require directness to 
ensure attention. 
• When organization policy suggests directness. Some companies expect all 
internal messages and announcements—even bad news—to be straightforward 
and presented without frills.
• When the receiver prefers directness. Busy managers may prefer directness. If 
you know that the reader prefers that the facts be presented straightaway, use the 
direct pattern.
• When firmness is necessary. Messages that must demonstrate determination and 
strength should not use delaying techniques. For example, the last in a series of col-
lection letters that seek payment of overdue accounts may require a direct opener.
• When the bad news is not damaging. If the bad news is insignificant (such as a 
small increase in cost) and doesn’t personally affect the receiver, then the direct 
strategy certainly makes sense.
Applying the Writing Process
Thinking through the entire writing process is especially important in bad-news let-
ters. Not only do you want the receiver to understand and accept the message, but 
also you want to be careful that your words say only what you intend. Therefore, 
you will want to apply the familiar 3-x-3 writing process to bad-news letters. 
Analysis, Anticipation, and Adaptation. In Phase 1 (prewriting) you 
need to analyze the bad news so that you can anticipate its effect on the receiver. If the 
disappointment will be mild, announce it directly. If the bad news is serious or personal, 
consider techniques to reduce the pain. Adapt your words to protect the receiver’s ego. 
Instead of You neglected to change the oil, causing severe damage to the engine, switch 
to the passive voice: The oil wasn’t changed, causing severe damage to the engine.
Choose words that show you respect the reader as a responsible, valuable person. 
research, Organization, and Composition. In Phase 2 (writing) you 
can gather information and brainstorm for ideas. Jot down all the reasons you have 
that explain the bad news. If four or five reasons prompted your negative decision, 
concentrate on the strongest and safest ones. Avoid presenting any weak reasons; 
readers may seize on them to reject the entire message. After selecting your best 
reasons, outline the four parts of the bad-news pattern: buffer, reasons, bad news, 
and closing. Flesh out each section as you compose your first draft. 
revision, Proofreading, and evaluation. In Phase 3 (revising) you are 
ready to switch positions and put yourself into the receiver’s shoes. Have you looked 
at the problem from the receiver’s perspective? Is your message too blunt? Too 
subtle? Does the message make the refusal, denial, or bad-news announcement clear? 
Prepare the final version, and proofread for format, punctuation, and correctness. 
The direct pattern is 
appropriate when the 
receiver might overlook the 
bad news, when directness 
is preferred, when ﬁ rmness 
is necessary, and when the 
bad news is not damaging.
Following a writing process 
is especially important 
in crafting bad-news 
messages because of the 
potential consequences of 
poorly written messages.

164 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
Avoiding Three Causes of Legal Problems
Before we examine the components of a bad-news message, we must look more 
closely at how you can avoid exposing yourself and your employer to legal liability 
in writing negative messages. Although we can’t always anticipate the consequences 
of our words, we should be alert to three causes of legal difficulties: (a) abusive 
language, (b) careless language, and (c) the “good-guy syndrome.”
Abusive Language. Calling people names (such as deadbeat, crook, or 
quack) can get you into trouble. Defamation is the legal term for any false state-
ment that harms an individual’s reputation. When the abusive language is written, 
it is called libel; when spoken, it is slander.
To be actionable (likely to result in a lawsuit), abusive language must be (a) 
false, (b) damaging to one’s good name, and (c) “published”—that is, written or 
spoken within the presence of others. If you were alone with Jane Doe and you 
accused her of accepting bribes and selling company secrets to competitors, she 
could not sue because the defamation was not published. Her reputation was not 
damaged. However, if anyone heard the words or if they were written, you might 
be legally liable. 
In a new wrinkle, you may now be prosecuted if you transmit a harassing or 
libelous message by e-mail or post it at a Web site. Such electronic transmissions 
are considered to be “published.” Moreover, a company may incur liability for 
messages sent through its computer system by employees. That is one reason many 
companies are increasing their monitoring of both outgoing and internal messages. 
“Off-the-cuff, casual e-mail conversations among employees are exactly the type 
of messages that tend to trigger lawsuits and arm litigators with damaging evi-
dence,” says e-mail guru Nancy Flynn.1 Instant messaging adds another danger for 
companies. Whether their messages are in print or sent electronically, competent 
communicators avoid making unproven charges and letting their emotions prompt 
abusive language.
Careless Language. As the marketplace becomes increasingly litigious, we 
must be certain that our words communicate only what we intend. Take the case of 
a factory worker injured on the job. His attorney subpoenaed company documents 
and discovered a seemingly harmless letter sent to a group regarding a plant tour. 
These words appeared in the letter: “Although we are honored at your interest in 
our company, we cannot give your group a tour of the plant operations as it would 
be too noisy and dangerous.” The court found in favor of the worker, inferring 
from the letter that working conditions were indeed hazardous.2 The letter writer 
did not intend to convey the impression of dangerous working conditions, but the 
court accepted that interpretation. 
The good-guy Syndrome. Most of us hate to have to reveal bad news—
that is, to be the bad guy. To make ourselves look better, to make the receiver feel 
better, and to maintain good relations, we are tempted to make statements that are 
legally dangerous. Consider the case of a law firm interviewing job candidates. One 
of the firm’s partners was asked to inform a candidate that she was not selected. 
The partner’s letter said, “Although you were by far the most qualified candidate we 
interviewed, unfortunately, we have decided we do not have a position for a person 
of your talents at this time.” To show that he personally had no reservations about 
this candidate and to bolster the candidate, the partner offered his own  opinion. 
However, he differed from the majority of the recruiting committee. When the 
rejected interviewee learned later that the law firm had hired two male attorneys, 
she sued, charging sexual discrimination. The court found in favor of the rejected 
candidate. It agreed that a reasonable inference could be made from the partner’s 
letter that she was the “most qualified candidate.”3
Two important lessons emerge. First, business communicators act as agents of 
their organizations. Their words, decisions, and opinions are assumed to represent 
Abusive language becomes 
legally actionable when it is 
false, harmful to the person’s 
good name, and “published.”
Careless language includes 
statements that could be 
damaging or misinterpreted.
Avoid statements that make 
you feel good but may be 
misleading or inaccurate.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
165
those of the organization. If you want to communicate your personal feelings or 
opinions, use your home computer or write on plain paper (rather than company 
letterhead) and sign your name without title or affiliation. Second, volunteering 
extra information can lead to trouble. Thus, avoid supplying data that could be 
misused, and avoid making promises that can’t be fulfilled. Don’t admit or imply 
responsibility for conditions that caused damage or injury. Even careless apologies 
(We are sorry that a faulty bottle cap caused damage to your carpet) may suggest 
liability. 
Techniques for Delivering Bad News Sensitively
Legal matters aside, let us now study specific techniques for using the indirect pat-
tern in sending bad-news messages. In this pattern the bad news is delayed until 
after explanations have been given. The four components of the indirect pattern, 
shown in Figure 7.2, include buffer, reasons, bad news, and closing. 
Buffering the Opening
A buffer is a device to reduce shock or pain. To buffer the pain of bad news, begin 
with a neutral but meaningful statement that makes the reader continue reading. 
The buffer should be relevant and concise and provide a natural transition to the 
explanation that follows. The individual situation, of course, will help determine 
what you should put in the buffer. Here are some possibilities for opening bad-news 
messages. 
Best News. Start with the part of the message that represents the best news. 
For example, a message to workers announced new health plan rules limiting pre-
scriptions to a 34-day supply and increasing co-payments. With home delivery, 
however, employees could save up to $24 on each prescription. To emphasize 
the good news, you might write, You can now achieve significant savings and 
avoid trips to the drugstore by having your prescription drugs delivered to your 
home.4
Compliment. Praise the receiver’s accomplishments, organization, or efforts, 
but do so with honesty and sincerity. For instance, in a letter declining an invitation 
to speak, you could write, The Thalians have my sincere admiration for their fund-
raising projects on behalf of hungry children. I am honored that you asked me to 
speak Friday, November 5. 
use organizational 
stationery for ofﬁ cial 
business only, and beware 
of making promises 
that can’t be fulﬁ lled.
Figure 7.2 Ideas for Delivering Bad News Sensitively
• Best news
• Compliment
• Appreciation
• Agreement
• Facts
• Understanding
• Apology
• Cautious explanation
• Reader or other
beneﬁts
• Company policy
explanation
• Positive words
• Evidence that matter
was considered
fairly and seriously
• Embedded
placement
• Passive voice
• Implied refusal
• Compromise
• Alternative
• Forward look
• Information about
alternative
• Good wishes
• Freebies
• Resale
• Sales promotion
Closing
Bad News
Reasons
Buﬀer
To reduce negative 
feelings, use a buffer 
opening for sensitive 
bad-news messages.
Openers can buffer the bad 
news with compliments, 
appreciation, agreement, 
relevant facts, and 
understanding.

166 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
Appreciation. Convey thanks to the reader for doing business, for sending 
something, for conveying confidence in your organization, for expressing feelings, 
or simply for providing feedback. Suppose you had to draft a letter that refuses 
employment. You could say, I appreciated learning about the hospitality manage-
ment program at Cornell and about your qualifications in our interview last Friday.
Avoid thanking the reader, however, for something you are about to refuse. 
Agreement. Make a relevant statement with which both reader and receiver 
can agree. A letter that rejects a loan application might read, We both realize how 
much the export business has been affected by the relative weakness of the dollar 
in the past two years. 
Facts. Provide objective information that introduces the bad news. For example, 
in a memo announcing cutbacks in the hours of the employees’ cafeteria, you might 
say, During the past five years the number of employees eating breakfast in our 
cafeteria has dropped from 32 percent to 12 percent.
understanding. Show that you care about the reader. Notice how in this letter 
to customers announcing a product defect, the writer expresses concern: We know that 
you expect superior performance from all the products you purchase from OfficeCity. 
That’s why we are writing personally about the Exell printer cartridges you recently 
ordered.
Apologizing
You learned about making apologies in adjustment letters discussed in Chapter 6. 
We expand that discussion here because apologies are often part of bad-news 
messages. The truth is that sincere apologies work. Peter Post, great grandson of 
famed etiquette expert Emily Post and director of the Emily Post Institute, said that 
Americans love apologies. They will forgive almost anything if presented with a 
sincere apology.5 An apology is defined as an “admission of blameworthiness and 
regret for an undesirable event.”6 Here are some tips on how to apologize effectively 
in business messages:
• Apologize to customers if you or your company erred. Apologies cost nothing, 
and they go a long way in soothing hard feelings. Use good judgment, of course. 
Don’t admit blame if it might prompt a lawsuit.
• Apologize sincerely. People dislike apologies that sound hollow (We regret that 
you were inconvenienced or We regret that you are disturbed). Focusing on your 
regret does not convey sincerity. Explaining what you will do to prevent recur-
rence of the problem projects sincerity in an apology.
• Accept responsibility. One CEO was criticized for the following weak apology: “I 
want our customers to know how much I personally regret any difficulties you may 
experience as a result of the unauthorized intrusion into our computer systems.” 
Experts faulted this apology because it did not acknowledge responsibility.7
Consider these poor and improved apologies:
Poor apology: We regret that you are unhappy with the price of ice cream pur-
chased at one of our scoop shops.
Improved apology: We are genuinely sorry that you were disappointed in the 
price of ice cream recently purchased at one of our scoop shops. Your opinion is 
important to us, and we appreciate your giving us the opportunity to look into 
the problem you describe.
Poor apology: We apologize if anyone was affected.
Improved apology: I apologize for the frustration our delay caused you. As soon 
as I received your message, I began looking into the cause of the delay and real-
ized that our delivery tracking system must be improved.
An apology is an admission 
of blameworthiness 
and regret for an 
undesirable event.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
167
Poor apology: We are sorry that mistakes were made in filling your order.
Improved apology: You are right to be concerned. We sincerely apologize for 
the mistakes we made in filling your order. To prevent recurrence of this prob-
lem, we are . . . .
Conveying empathy
One of the hardest things to do in apologies is to convey sympathy and empathy. 
Empathy is the ability to understand and enter into the feelings of another. When ice 
storms trapped JetBlue Airways passengers on hot planes for hours, CEO Neeleman 
wrote a letter of apology that sounded as if it came from his heart. He said, “Dear 
JetBlue Customers: We are sorry and embarrassed. But most of all, we are deeply 
sorry.” Later in his letter he said, “Words cannot express how truly sorry we are 
for the anxiety, frustration, and inconvenience that you, your family, friends, and 
colleagues experienced.”8 Neeleman put himself into the shoes of his customers and 
tried to experience their pain. 
Here are other examples of ways to express empathy in written messages:
• In writing to an unhappy customer: We did not intentionally delay the shipment, and 
we sincerely regret the disappointment and frustration you must have suffered.
• In laying off employees: It is with great regret that we must take this step. Rest 
assured that I will be more than happy to write letters of recommendation for 
anyone who asks.
• In responding to a complaint: I am deeply saddened that our service failure dis-
rupted your sale, and we will do everything in our power to . . . .
• In showing genuine feelings: You have every right to be disappointed. I am truly 
sorry that . . . .
Presenting the reasons
The most important part of a bad-news letter is the section that explains why a 
negative decision is necessary. Without sound reasons for denying a request or 
refusing a claim, a letter will fail, no matter how cleverly it is organized or written. 
As part of your planning before writing, you analyzed the problem and decided to 
refuse a request for specific reasons. Before disclosing the bad news, try to explain 
those reasons. Providing an explanation reduces feelings of ill will and improves the 
chances that readers will accept the bad news.
explaining Clearly. If the reasons are not confidential and if they will not 
create legal liability, you can be specific: Growers supplied us with a limited number 
of patio roses, and our demand this year was twice that of last year. In responding 
to a billing error, explain what happened: After you informed us of an error on 
your January bill, we investigated the matter and admit the mistake was ours. Until 
our new automated system is fully online, we are still subject to human error. Rest 
assured that your account has been credited as you will see on your next bill. In 
refusing a speaking engagement, tell why the date is impossible: On January 17 we 
have a board of directors meeting that I must attend. Don’t, however, make unreal-
istic or dangerous statements in an effort to be the “good guy.”
Citing reader or Other Benefits if Plausible. Readers are more 
open to bad news if in some way, even indirectly, it may help them. In refusing a 
customer’s request for free hemming of skirts and slacks, Lands’ End wrote: “We 
tested our ability to hem skirts a few months ago. This process proved to be very 
time-consuming. We have decided not to offer this service because the additional 
cost would have increased the selling price of our skirts substantially, and we did 
not want to impose that cost on all our customers.”9 Readers also accept bad news 
more readily if they recognize that someone or something else benefits, such as other 
workers or the environment: Although we would like to consider your application, 
we prefer to fill managerial positions from within. Avoid trying to show reader 
empathy involves 
understanding and 
entering into the feelings 
of someone else.
Bad-news messages should 
explain reasons before 
stating the negative news.
readers accept bad news 
more readily if they see 
that someone beneﬁ ts.

168 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
benefits, though, if they appear insincere: To improve our service to you, we are 
increasing our brokerage fees.
explaining Company Policy. Readers resent blanket policy statements prohib-
iting something: Company policy prevents us from making cash refunds or Contract bids 
may be accepted from local companies only or Company policy requires us to promote 
from within. Instead of hiding behind company policy, gently explain why the policy 
makes sense: We prefer to promote from within because it rewards the loyalty of our 
employees. In addition, we have found that people familiar with our 
organization make the quickest contribution to our team effort. By 
offering explanations, you demonstrate that you care about readers 
and are treating them as important individuals. 
Choosing Positive Words. Because the words you use 
can affect a reader’s response, choose carefully. Remember that the 
objective of the indirect pattern is holding the reader’s attention 
until you have had a chance to explain the reasons justifying the 
bad news. To keep the reader in a receptive mood, avoid expres-
sions with punitive, demoralizing, or otherwise negative connota-
tions. Stay away from such words as cannot, claim, denied, error, 
failure, fault, impossible, mistaken, misunderstand, never, regret, 
rejected, unable, unwilling, unfortunately, and violate. 
Showing That the Matter Was Treated Seriously and Fairly. 
In explaining reasons, demonstrate to the reader that you take the matter seriously, 
have investigated carefully, and are making an unbiased decision. Receivers are 
more accepting of disappointing news when they feel that their requests have been 
heard and that they have been treated fairly. In canceling funding for a program, 
board members provided this explanation: As you know, the publication of Urban 
Artist was funded by a renewable annual grant from the National Endowment for 
the Arts. Recent cutbacks in federally sponsored city arts programs have left us 
with few funds. Because our grant has been discontinued, we have no alternative 
but to cease publication of Urban Artist. You have my assurance that the board has 
searched long and hard for some other viable funding, but every avenue of recourse 
has been closed before us. Accordingly, June’s issue will be our last.
“Dear Valued Customer: We’re sorry, but company 
policy forbids apologies. Sincerely yours...”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
© GREGG SEGAL
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
The ChicoBag Company knows that it is not what 
you say but how you say it that matters. While some 
environmental activists make strident calls to ban 
plastic bags that “hurt the earth,” the California-
based bag business takes a humorous approach to 
the issue. To illustrate the drawbacks of single-use 
plastic bags, ChicoBag dispatches Bag Monsters to 
roam the streets in high-visibility locations, such as 
on the streets at Mardi Gras or in front of the White 
House. The gimmicky-but-good-natured promotional 
effort helps the company sell its reusable nylon 
bags while muting the sometimes-negative tone 
taken by other eco-minded organizations. Why is it 
important to accentuate the positive side of things?

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
169
Cushioning the Bad News
Although you can’t prevent the disappointment that bad news brings, you can reduce 
the pain somewhat by breaking the news sensitively. Be especially considerate when 
the reader will suffer personally from the bad news. A number of thoughtful tech-
niques can cushion the blow. 
Positioning the Bad News Strategically. Instead of spotlighting it, 
sandwich the bad news between other sentences, perhaps among your reasons. Don’t 
let the refusal begin or end a paragraph—the reader’s eye will linger on these high-
visibility spots. Another technique that reduces shock is putting a painful idea in a 
subordinate clause: Although another candidate was hired, we appreciate your inter-
est in our organization and wish you every success in your job search. Subordinate 
clauses often begin with words such as although, as, because, if, and since. 
using the Passive Voice. Passive-voice verbs enable you to depersonalize 
an action. Whereas the active voice focuses attention on a person (We don’t give 
cash refunds), the passive voice highlights the action (Cash refunds are not given 
because . . .). Use the passive voice for the bad news. In some instances you can 
combine passive-voice verbs and a subordinate clause: Although franchise scoop 
shop owners cannot be required to lower their ice cream prices, we are happy to 
pass along your comments for their consideration.
Accentuating the Positive. As you learned earlier, messages are far more 
effective when you describe what you can do instead of what you can’t do. Rather 
than We will no longer allow credit card purchases, try a more positive appeal: We 
are now selling gasoline at discount cash prices. 
implying the refusal. It is sometimes possible to avoid a direct statement of 
refusal. Often, your reasons and explanations leave no doubt that a request has been 
denied. Explicit refusals may be unnecessary and at times cruel. In this refusal to contrib-
ute to a charity, for example, the writer never actually says no: Because we will soon be 
moving into new offices in Glendale, all our funds are earmarked for relocation costs. 
We hope that next year we will be able to support your worthwhile charity. The danger 
of an implied refusal, of course, is that it is so subtle that the reader misses it. Be certain 
that you make the bad news clear, thus preventing the need for further correspondence. 
Suggesting a Compromise or an Alternative. A refusal is not so 
 depressing—for the sender or the receiver—if a suitable compromise, substitute, or 
alternative is available. In denying permission to a group of students to visit a his-
torical private residence, for instance, this writer softens the bad news by proposing 
an alternative: Although private tours of the grounds are not given, we do open the 
house and its gardens for one charitable event in the fall. You can further reduce the 
impact of the bad news by refusing to dwell on it. Present it briefly (or imply it), and 
move on to your closing. 
Closing Pleasantly
After explaining the bad news sensitively, close the mes-
sage with a pleasant statement that promotes goodwill. The 
closing should be personalized and may include a forward 
look, an alternative, good wishes, freebies, resale informa-
tion, or an off-the-subject remark. 
Forward Look. Anticipate future relations or busi-
ness. A letter that refuses a contract proposal might read: 
Thanks for your bid. We look forward to working with 
your talented staff when future projects demand your spe-
cial expertise.
Techniques for cushioning 
bad news include positioning 
it strategically, using the 
passive voice, implying the 
refusal, and suggesting 
alternatives or compromises.
“Send him our toughest refusal letter, threaten him with legal 
action, and don’t pull the punches. But put XOXOXO under 
my signature to show that we still love him as a customer.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

170 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
Alternative Follow-up. If an alternative exists, end your letter with follow-
through advice. For example, in a letter rejecting a customer’s demand for replacement 
of landscaping plants, you might say: I will be happy to give you a free inspection 
and consultation. Please call 746-8112 to arrange a date for my visit. In a message 
to a prospective home buyer: Although the lot you saw last week is now sold, we do 
have two lots with excellent views available at a slightly higher price. In reacting to 
an Internet misprint: Please note that our Web site contained an unfortunate misprint 
offering $850-per-night Bora Bora bungalows at $85. Although we cannot honor that 
rate, we are offering a special half-price rate of $425 to those who responded.
good Wishes. A letter rejecting a job candidate might read: We appreciate 
your interest in our company, and we extend to you our best wishes in your search 
to find the perfect match between your skills and job requirements.
Freebies. When customers complain—primarily about food products or small 
consumer items—companies often send coupons, samples, or gifts to restore confi-
dence and to promote future business. In response to a customer’s complaint about 
a frozen dinner, you could write: Your loyalty and your concern about our frozen 
entrees are genuinely appreciated. Because we want you to continue enjoying our 
healthful and convenient dinners, we are enclosing a coupon that you can take to 
your local market to select your next Green Valley entree.
resale or Sales Promotion. When the bad news is not devastating or 
personal, references to resale information or promotion may be appropriate: The 
computer workstations you ordered are unusually popular because of their stain-, 
heat-, and scratch-resistant finishes. To help you locate hard-to-find accessories for 
these workstations, we invite you to visit our Web site where our online catalog pro-
vides a huge selection of surge suppressors, multiple outlet strips, security devices, 
and PC tool kits.
Avoid endings that sound canned, insincere, inappropriate, or self-serving. Don’t 
invite further correspondence (If you have any questions, do not hesitate . . .), and 
don’t refer to the bad news. To review these suggestions for delivering bad news 
sensitively, take another look at Figure 7.2. 
refusing Direct requests and Claims
Every business communicator will occasionally have to say no to a request. Depend-
ing on how you think the receiver will react to your refusal, you can use the direct or 
the indirect pattern. If you have any doubt, use the indirect pattern and the following 
writing plan:
Writing Plan for refusing routine requests and Claims
• Buffer: Start with a neutral statement on which both reader and writer 
can agree, such as a compliment, appreciation, a quick review of the facts, 
or an apology. Try to include a key idea or word that acts as a transition 
to the reasons.
• Reasons: Present valid reasons for the refusal, avoiding words that create 
a negative tone. Include resale or sales promotion material if appropriate.
• Bad news: Soften the blow by de-emphasizing the bad news, using the 
passive voice, accentuating the positive, or implying a refusal. Suggest a 
compromise, alternative, or substitute if possible. The alternative may be 
part of the bad-news section or part of the closing.
• Closing: Renew good feelings with a positive statement. Avoid referring to 
the bad news. Look forward to continued business.
Closings to bad-news 
messages might include a 
forward look, an alternative, 
good wishes, freebies, 
resale information, or 
sales promotion.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
171
rejecting Typical requests
Most of us prefer to be let down gently when we are being refused something we 
want. That’s why the reasons-before-refusal pattern works well when you must turn 
down requests for favors, money, information, action, and so forth. 
Saying No to requests From Outsiders. Requests for contributions 
to charity are common. Many big and small companies receive requests for con-
tributions of money, time, equipment, and support. Although the causes may be 
worthy, resources are usually limited. In a letter from Huron Architectural Services, 
shown in Figure 7.3, the company must refuse a request for a donation to a charity. 
Following the indirect strategy, the letter begins with a buffer acknowledging the 
request. It also praises the good works of the charity and uses those words as a tran-
sition to the second paragraph. In the second paragraph the writer explains why the 
company cannot donate. Notice that the writer reveals the refusal without actually 
Figure 7.3 Refusing Donation Request
The reasons-before-
refusal pattern works 
well when turning down 
requests for favors, money, 
information, or action.

172 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
stating it (Because of sales declines and organizational downsizing, we are forced to 
take a much harder look at funding requests that we receive this year). This gentle 
refusal makes it unnecessary to be more blunt in stating the denial.
In some donation refusal letters, the reasons may not be fully explained: Although 
we can’t provide financial support at this time, we all unanimously agree that the 
symphony orchestra contributes much to the community. The emphasis is on the 
symphony’s attributes rather than on an explanation for the refusal. In the letter 
shown in Figure 7.3, the writer felt a connection to the charity. Thus, he wanted to 
give a fuller explanation.
refusing internal requests. Just as managers must refuse requests from 
outsiders, they must also occasionally refuse requests from employees. In Figure 
7.4 you see the first draft and revision of a message responding to a request from 
a key specialist, Zachary Stapleton. He wants permission to attend a conference. 
However, he can’t attend the conference because the timing is bad; he must be pres-
ent at budget planning meetings scheduled for the same two weeks. Normally, this 
matter would be discussed in person. But Zach has been traveling among branch 
offices, and he hasn’t been in the office recently. 
The vice president’s first inclination was to send a quickie memo, as shown in 
Figure 7.4, and “tell it like it is.” In revising, the vice president realized that this 
message was going to hurt and that it had possible danger areas. Moreover, the 
memo misses a chance to give Zach positive feedback. An improved version of the 
memo starts with a buffer that delivers honest praise (pleased with your excep-
tional leadership and your genuine professional commitment). By the way, don’t be 
stingy with compliments; they cost you nothing. As a philosopher once observed, 
“We don’t live by bread alone. We need buttering up once in a while.” The buffer 
also includes the date of the meeting, used strategically to connect the reasons that 
follow. You will recall from Chapter 3 that repetition of a key idea is an effective 
transitional device to provide smooth flow between components of a message.
The middle paragraph provides reasons for the refusal. Notice that these reasons 
focus on positive elements: Zach is the specialist; the company relies on his expertise; 
and everyone will benefit if he passes up the conference. In this section it becomes 
obvious that the request will be refused. The writer is not forced to say, No, you 
may not attend. Although the refusal is implied, the reader gets the message. 
The closing suggests a qualified alternative (if our workloads permit, we will try 
to send you then). It also ends positively with gratitude for Zach’s contributions 
to the organization and with another compliment (you are our most valuable team 
player). Notice that the improved version focuses on explanations and praise rather 
than on refusals and apologies. 
The success of this message depends on attention to the entire writing process, 
not just on using a buffer or scattering a few compliments throughout. 
Delivering Bad News to Customers
Businesses must occasionally respond to disappointed customers. In Chapter 6 you 
learned to use the direct strategy in granting claims and making adjustments because 
these are essentially good-news messages. In some situations, however, you have little 
good news to share. Sometimes your company is at fault, in which case an apology is 
generally in order. Other times the problem is with orders you can’t fill, claims you 
must refuse, or credit you must deny. Messages with bad news for customers generally 
follow the same pattern as other negative messages. Customer letters, though, differ in 
one major way: they usually include resale or sales promotion information. 
Damage Control: Dealing With Disappointed Customers
All companies occasionally disappoint their customers. Merchandise is not deliv-
ered on time, a product fails to perform as expected, service is deficient, charges 
internal request refusals 
focus on explanations 
and praise, maintaining 
a positive tone, and 
offering alternatives.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
173
are erroneous, or customers are misunderstood. All businesses offering products or 
services must sometimes deal with troublesome situations that cause unhappiness to 
customers. Whenever possible, these problems should be dealt with immediately and 
personally. Many business professionals strive to control the damage and resolve 
such problems in the following manner:10
• Call the individual involved.
• Describe the problem and apologize.
Figure 7.4 Refusing an Internal Request
When a customer problem 
arises and the company is at 
fault, many businesspeople 
call and apologize, explain 
what happened, and follow 
up with a goodwill letter.

174 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
• Explain why the problem occurred, what you are doing to resolve it, and how 
you will prevent it from happening again.
• Follow up with a letter that documents the phone call and promotes goodwill.
Dealing with problems immediately is very important in resolving conflict and 
retaining goodwill. Written correspondence is generally too slow for problems that 
demand immediate attention. But written messages are important (a) when personal 
contact is impossible, (b) to establish a record of the incident, (c) to formally con-
firm follow-up procedures, and (d) to promote good relations.
A bad-news follow-up letter is shown in Figure 7.5. Consultant Catherine Martinez 
found herself in the embarrassing position of explaining why she had given out the 
name of her client to a salesperson. The client, Alliance Resources International, had 
Figure 7.5 Bad-News Follow-Up Message

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
175
hired her firm, Paragon Consulting Associates, to help find an appropriate service 
for outsourcing its payroll functions. Without realizing it, Catherine had mentioned 
to a potential vendor (Payroll Services, Inc.) that her client was considering hiring an 
outside service to handle its payroll. An overeager salesperson from Payroll Services 
immediately called on Alliance, thus angering the client. The client had hired the 
consultant to avoid this very kind of intrusion. Alliance did not want to be hounded 
by vendors selling their payroll services.
When she learned of the problem, the first thing consultant Catherine 
Martinez did was call her client to explain and apologize. She was careful to 
control her voice and rate of speaking. A low-pitched, deliberate pace gives the 
impression that you are thinking clearly, logically, and reasonably—not emo-
tionally and certainly not irrationally. However, she also followed up with the 
letter shown in Figure 7.5. The letter not only confirms the telephone conversa-
tion but also adds the right touch of formality. It sends the nonverbal message 
that the writer takes the matter seriously and that it is important enough to 
warrant a written letter.
Denying Claims
Customers occasionally want something they are not entitled to or something you 
can’t grant. They may misunderstand warranties or make unreasonable demands. 
Because these customers are often unhappy with a product or service, they are emo-
tionally involved. Letters that say no to emotionally involved receivers will prob-
ably be your most challenging communication task. As publisher Malcolm Forbes 
observed, “To be agreeable while disagreeing—that’s an art.”11
Fortunately, the reasons-before-refusal plan helps you be empathic and artful in 
breaking bad news. Obviously, in denial letters you will need to adopt the proper 
tone. Don’t blame customers, even if they are at fault. Avoid you statements that 
sound preachy (You would have known that cash refunds are impossible if you 
had read your contract). Use neutral, objective language to explain why the claim 
must be refused. Consider offering resale information to rebuild the customer’s 
confidence in your products or organization. In Figure 7.6 on page 176 the writer 
denies a customer’s claim for the difference between the price the customer paid for 
speakers and the price he saw advertised locally (which would have resulted in a 
cash refund of $200). Although the catalog service does match any advertised lower 
price, the price-matching policy applies only to identical models. This claim must 
be rejected because the advertisement the customer submitted showed a different, 
older speaker model.
The letter to Cedrick Mandela opens with a buffer that agrees with a statement 
in the customer’s letter. It repeats the key idea of product confidence as a transition 
to the second paragraph. Next comes an explanation of the price-matching policy. 
The writer does not assume that the customer is trying to pull a fast one. Nor does 
he suggest that the customer is a dummy who didn’t read or understand the price-
matching policy. The safest path is a neutral explanation of the policy along with 
precise distinctions between the customer’s speakers and the older ones. The writer 
also gets a chance to resell the customer’s speakers and demonstrate what a quality 
product they are. By the end of the third paragraph, it is evident to the reader that 
his claim is unjustified. 
refusing Credit
As much as companies want business, they can extend credit only when payment is 
likely to follow. Credit applications, from individuals or from businesses, are gener-
ally approved or disapproved on the basis of the applicant’s credit history. This record 
is supplied by a credit-reporting agency, such as Experian, Equifax, or TransUnion. 
After reviewing the applicant’s record, a credit manager applies the organization’s 
guidelines and approves or disapproves the application. 
If you must deny credit to prospective customers, you have four goals in convey-
ing the refusal: 
in denying claims, writers use 
the reasons-before-refusal 
pattern to set an empathic 
tone and buffer the bad news.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“As soon as you realize 
there is a problem, let your 
client know by phone or, if 
possible, in person. It’s better 
to let them hear bad news 
from you than to discover 
it on their own because it 
establishes your candor.”

176 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
• Avoid language that causes hard feelings.
• Retain customers on a cash basis.
• Prepare for possible future credit without raising false expectations.
• Avoid disclosures that could cause a lawsuit.
Because credit applicants are likely to continue to do business with an organi zation 
even if they are denied credit, you will want to do everything possible to encourage 
that patronage. Thus, keep the refusal respectful, sensitive, and upbeat. A letter to a 
customer denying her credit application might begin as follows: We genuinely appre-
ciate your application of January 12 for a Mod Style credit account. To avoid possible 
litigation, many companies offer no explanation of the reasons for a credit refusal. 
Instead, they provide the name of the credit-reporting agency and suggest that inqui-
ries be directed to it. In the following example notice the use of passive voice (credit 
cannot be extended) and a long sentence to de-emphasize the bad news: 
Figure 7.6 Denying a Claim
goals when refusing credit 
include maintaining customer 
goodwill and avoiding 
actionable language.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
177
After we received a report of your current credit record from Experian, it is 
apparent that credit cannot be extended at this time. To learn more about your 
record, you may call an Experian credit counselor at (212) 356-0922.
A cordial closing looks forward to the possibility of a future reapplication:
Thanks, Ms. Love, for the confidence you have shown in Mod Style. We invite 
you to continue shopping at our stores, and we look forward to your reapplica-
tion in the future.
Some businesses do provide reasons explaining credit denials (Credit cannot 
be granted because your firm’s current and long-term credit obligations are nearly 
twice as great as your firm’s total assets). They may also provide alternatives, such 
as deferred billing or cash discounts. When the letter denies a credit application that 
accompanies an order, the message may contain resale information. The writer tries 
to convert the order from credit to cash. For example, if a big order cannot be filled 
on a credit basis, perhaps part of the order could be filled on a cash basis. Whatever 
form the bad-news letter takes, it is a good idea to have the message reviewed by 
legal counsel because of the litigation land mines awaiting unwary communicators 
in this area. 
Delivering Bad News Within Organizations
A tactful tone and a reasons-first approach help preserve friendly relations with cus-
tomers. These same techniques are useful when delivering bad news within organi-
zations. Interpersonal bad news might involve telling the boss that something went 
wrong or confronting an employee about poor performance. Organizational bad 
news might involve declining profits, lost contracts, harmful lawsuits, public rela-
tions controversies, and changes in policy. Whether you use a direct or an indirect 
pattern in delivering that news depends primarily on the anticipated reaction of the 
audience. Generally, bad news is better received when reasons are given first. Within 
organizations, you may find yourself giving bad news in person or in writing.
giving Bad News Personally
Whether you are an employee or a supervisor, you may have the unhappy respon-
sibility of delivering bad news. First, decide whether the negative information is 
newsworthy. For example, trivial, noncriminal mistakes or one-time bad behaviors 
are best left alone. However, fraudulent travel claims, consistent hostile behavior, 
or failing projects must be reported.12 For example, you might have to tell the boss 
that the team’s computer crashed with all its important files. As a team leader or 
supervisor, you might be required to confront an underperforming employee. If you 
know that the news will upset the receiver, the reasons-first strategy is most effec-
tive. When the bad news involves one person or a small group nearby, you should 
generally deliver that news in person. Here are pointers on how to do so tactfully, 
professionally, and safely:13
• Gather all the information. Cool down and have all the facts before marching in 
on the boss or confronting someone. Remember that every story has two sides.
• Prepare and rehearse. Outline what you plan to say so that you are confident, 
coherent, and dispassionate.
• Explain: past, present, future. If you are telling the boss about a problem such 
as the computer crash, explain what caused the crash, the current situation, and 
how and when you plan to fix it.
• Consider taking a partner. If you fear a “shoot the messenger” reaction, espe-
cially from your boss, bring a colleague with you. Each person should have a 
consistent and credible part in the presentation. If possible, take advantage of 
your organization’s internal resources. To lend credibility to your view, call on 
auditors, inspectors, or human resources experts.
Bad news, whether delivered 
in person or in writing, is 
usually better received when 
reasons are given ﬁ rst.
When you must deliver bad 
news in person, be sure to 
gather all the information, 
prepare, and rehearse.

178 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
• Think about timing. Don’t deliver bad news when someone is already stressed or 
grumpy. Experts also advise against giving bad news on Friday afternoon when 
people have the weekend to dwell on it.
• Be patient with the reaction. Give the receiver time to vent, think, recover, and 
act wisely.
Delivering Workplace Bad News
Many of the same techniques used to deliver bad news personally are useful when 
organizations face a crisis or must deliver bad news in the workplace. Smart orga-
nizations involved in a crisis prefer to communicate the news openly to employees, 
customers, and stockholders. A crisis might involve serious performance problems, 
a major relocation, massive layoffs, a management shake-up, or public controversy. 
Instead of letting rumors distort the truth, they explain the organization’s side of the 
story honestly and early. Morale can be destroyed when employees learn of major 
events affecting their jobs through the grapevine or from news accounts—rather 
than from management.
When bad news must be delivered to employees, management may want to 
deliver the news personally. With large groups, however, this is generally impos-
sible. Instead, organizations may deliver bad news through interoffice memos. 
Organizations are experimenting with other delivery channels such as e-mail, videos, 
webcasts, and voice mail. Still, hard-copy interoffice memos seem to function most 
effectively because they are more formal and make a permanent record. The follow-
ing writing plan outlines the content for such a message:
Writing Plan for Announcing Bad News to employees
• Buffer: Open with a neutral or positive statement that transitions to the 
reasons for the bad news. Consider mentioning the best news, a compli-
ment, appreciation, agreement, or solid facts. Show understanding.
• Reasons: Explain the logic behind the bad news. Provide a rational expla-
nation using positive words and displaying empathy. If possible, mention 
reader benefits.
• Bad News: Position the bad news so that it does not stand out. Be positive 
but don’t sugarcoat the bad news. Use objective language.
• Closing: Provide information about an alternative, if one exists. If appro-
priate, describe what will happen next. Look forward positively.
The draft of the memo shown in Figure 7.7 announces a substantial increase 
in the cost of employee health care benefits. However, the memo suffers from 
many problems. It announces jolting news bluntly in the first sentence. Worse, 
it offers little or no explanation for the steep increase in costs. It also sounds 
insincere (We did everything possible . . .) and arbitrary. In a final miscue, the 
writer fails to give credit to the company for absorbing previous health cost 
increases.
In the revision of this bad-news memo, the writer uses the indirect pattern and 
improves the tone considerably. Notice that it opens with a relevant, upbeat buffer 
regarding health care—but says nothing about increasing costs. For a smooth transi-
tion, the second paragraph begins with a key idea from the opening (comprehensive 
package). The reasons section discusses rising costs with explanations and figures. 
The bad news (you will be paying $119 a month) is clearly presented but embedded 
within the paragraph. Throughout, the writer strives to show the fairness of the 
company’s position. The ending, which does not refer to the bad news, emphasizes 
how much the company is paying and what a wise investment it is. Notice that the 
entire memo demonstrates a kinder, gentler approach than that shown in the first 
draft. Of prime importance in breaking bad news to employees is providing clear, 
convincing reasons that explain the decision. 
Organizations can sustain 
employee morale by 
communicating bad news 
openly and honestly.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
179
ethics and the indirect Strategy
You may worry that the indirect organizational strategy is unethical or manipula-
tive because the writer deliberately delays the main idea. But consider the alterna-
tive. Breaking bad news bluntly can cause pain and hard feelings. By delaying bad 
news, you soften the blow somewhat, as well as ensure that your reasoning will be 
read while the receiver is still receptive. One expert communicator recognized the 
significance of the indirect strategy when she said, “People must believe the reasons 
why before they will listen to the details of what and when.”14 In using the indirect 
Figure 7.7 Announcing Bad News to Employees

180 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
strategy, your motives are not to deceive the reader or to hide the news. Rather, 
your goal is to be a compassionate, yet effective communicator.
The key to ethical communication lies in the motives of the sender. Unethical 
communicators intend to deceive. For example, Victoria’s Secret, the clothing and 
lingerie chain, once offered free $10 gift certificates. However, when customers tried 
to cash the certificates, they found that they were required to make a minimum pur-
chase of $50 worth of merchandise.15 For this misleading, deceptive, and unethical 
offer, the chain paid a $100,000 fine. Although the indirect strategy provides a set-
ting in which to announce bad news, it should not be used to avoid or misrepresent 
the truth.
The indirect strategy 
is unethical only if 
the writer intends to 
deceive the reader.
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
When faced with delivering bad news, you have a choice. 
You can announce it immediately, or you can delay it by 
presenting a buffer and reasons first. Many business com-
municators prefer the indirect strategy because it tends to 
preserve goodwill. In some instances, however, the direct 
strategy is effective in delivering bad news. In this chapter 
you learned the goals in communicating bad news and how 
to avoid creating legal problems. You studied many tech-
niques for delivering bad news sensitively. Then, you learned 
to apply those techniques in refusing requests from outsiders 
(routine requests for favors, money, information, and action) 
as well as refusing internal requests. You studied techniques 
for breaking bad news to customers, denying claims, refus-
ing credit, and delivering bad news to employees. Finally, 
you were taught to distinguish unethical applications of the 
indirect strategy.
Thus far you have studied electronic messages, memo-
randums, positive messages, and negative messages. In the 
next chapter you will learn to be persuasive, a powerful skill 
for any business communicator.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. Does bad news travel faster and farther than good news? 
Why? What implications would this have for companies 
responding to unhappy customers?
 2. Some people feel that all employee news, good or bad, 
should be announced directly. Do you agree or disagree? 
Why?
 3. Consider times when you have been aware that others 
have used the indirect pattern in writing or speaking to 
you. How did you react?
 4. When Boeing Aircraft reported that a laptop containing the 
names, salary information, and social security numbers of 
382,000 employees had been stolen from an employee’s 
car, CEO Jim McNerney wrote this e-mail to employees: 
“I’ve received many e-mails over the past 24 hours from 
employees expressing disappointment, frustration, and 
downright anger about yesterday’s announcement of 
 personal information belonging to thousands of employ-
ees and retirees being on a stolen computer. I’m just as 
disappointed as you are about it. I know that many of us 
feel that this data loss amounts to a betrayal of the trust 
we place in the company to safeguard our personal infor-
mation. I certainly do.” Critics have faulted this apology. 
With what did they find fault? Do you agree?
 5. Ethical Issue: You work for a large corporation with head-
quarters in a small town. Recently you received shoddy 
repair work and a huge bill from a local garage. Your car’s 
transmission has the same problems that it did before you 
took it in for repair. You know that a complaint letter writ-
ten on your corporation’s stationery would be much more 
authoritative than one written on plain stationery. Should 
you use corporation stationery?
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
181
 6. What are the writer’s primary and secondary goals in communicating bad news?
 7. Describe the four parts of the indirect message pattern.
 8. Name five situations in which the direct pattern should be used for bad news.
 9. What is the difference between libel and slander?
 10. What is a buffer? Name five or more techniques to buffer the opening of a bad-news message.
 11. What is an apology? When should an apology be offered to customers?
 12. Name four or more techniques that cushion the delivery of bad news.
 13. Why is it a good idea to rehearse and also to take a partner when delivering bad news in person to 
a superior?
C
Chapter review

182 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
 14. Identify a process used by a majority of business professionals in resolving problems with disappointed 
customers.
 15. What are some channels that large organizations may use when delivering bad news to 
employees?
W
Writing improvement exercises
Passive-Voice Verbs
Passive-voice verbs may be preferable in breaking bad news because they enable you to emphasize 
actions rather than personalities. Compare these two refusals:
Example Active voice: I cannot authorize you to take three weeks of vacation in July.
Example Passive voice: Three weeks of vacation in July cannot be authorized.
Revise the following refusals so that they use passive-voice instead of active-voice verbs.
 16. We will no longer be accepting credit cards for purchases under $5.
 17. Our hospital policy forbids us from examining patients until we have verified their insurance 
coverage.
 18. We cannot offer health and dental benefits until employees have been on the job for 12 months.
 19. The manager and I have made arrangements for the investors to have lunch after the tour.
 20. Your car rental insurance does not cover large SUVs.
 21. Because management now requires more stringent security, we are postponing indefinitely requests 
for company tours.
Subordinate Clauses
You can further soften the effect of bad news by placing it in an introductory subordinate clause that 
begins with although, since, or because. The emphasis in a sentence is on the independent clause. Instead 
of saying We cannot serve you on a credit basis, try Although we cannot serve you on a credit basis, we invite 
you to take advantage of our cash discounts and sale prices. Revise the following so that the bad news is 
de-emphasized in a dependent clause that precedes an independent clause.
 22. We are sorry to report that we are unable to ship your complete order at this point in time. However, 
we are able to send two corner workstations now; you should receive them within five days.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
183
 23. Unfortunately, we no longer print a complete catalog. However, we now offer all of our catalog 
choices at our Web site, which is always current.
 24. We appreciate your interest in our organization, but we are unable to extend an employment offer to 
you at this time.
 25. State law does not allow smoking within 5 feet of a state building. But the college has set aside 16 
outdoor smoking areas.
Implying Bad News
Bad news can be de-emphasized by implying a refusal instead of stating it directly. Compare these refusals:
Example Direct refusal: We cannot send you a price list, nor can we sell our lawn mowers directly to 
customers. We sell only through dealers, and your dealer is HomeCo.
Example Implied refusal: Our lawn mowers are sold only through dealers, and your dealer is HomeCo.
Revise the following refusals so that the bad news is implied. If possible, use passive-voice verbs and 
subordinate clauses to further de-emphasize the bad news.
 26. We cannot ship our fresh fruit baskets c.o.d. Your order was not accompanied by payment, so we 
are not shipping it. We have it ready, though, and will rush it to its destination as soon as you call us 
with your credit card number.
 27. Unfortunately, we find it impossible to contribute to the fund-raising campaign this year. At present 
all the funds of my organization are needed to lease new equipment and offices for our latest branch 
in Richmond. We hope to be able to support this endeavor in the future.
 28. Your team cannot schedule a retreat for the week of May 15. Too many staffers will be working on 
the Osgood Project, which will not be completed until June 1.
W
Writing improvement Cases
7.1 Request Refusal: Shooting Down Request for Salary Stars
The following poorly written letter refuses a request from a reporter seeking salary information about top sales performers 
for an article.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Ms. Emily Decker
2415 Jefferson Road
Rochester, NY 14623
Dear Ms. Decker:
We cannot release salary information because such disclosure would violate our employees’ privacy and lead to lawsuits. 
However, the article you are researching for Business Management Weekly sounds fascinating and will be most interesting to 

184 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
its readers. As a matter of fact, we are flattered that you wish to include LaserScope. You may be interested to know that we 
have many outstanding young salespeople—some are male and some are female—who command top salaries.
I cannot reveal private employee information because each of our salespeople operate under an individual salary contract. 
This is a result of salary negotiations several years ago. During those negotiations an agreement was reached that both sales 
staff members and management were in agreement to keep the terms of these individual contracts confidential. For obvious 
reasons, we cannot release specific salaries and commission rates. It has been suggested, however, that we can provide 
you with a list that is a ranking of our top salespeople for a period of the past five years. As a matter of fact, three of the top 
salespeople are currently under the age of thirty-five.
We are sorry that we cannot help you more with your fascinating research. Enclosed is a fact sheet in regard to our top 
salespeople, and we wish you every success with your article. It would be terrific to see LaserScope represented in it. Do 
not hesitate to call me if you have any questions.
Cordially,
 1. List at least five weaknesses in this letter.
 2. Outline a writing plan for a request refusal:
  Buffer:  
  Reasons: 
 
  Bad news: 
 
  Closing: 
 
7.2 Request Refusal: Diving Gear Warranty Rejection
The following letter refuses a consumer request for warranty service of a scuba diving computer used to monitor diving and 
decompression time.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Ms. Monica Soto
430 Bayou Vista Boulevard
Galveston, TX 77551
Dear Ms. Soto:
It is impossible for us to calibrate your Scuba Max XL diving computer, as requested in your letter which I have before me.
You acknowledge that you have used the product successfully off the Barrier Reefs in Australia and that you like its compact 
size and easy-to-read digits telling you exactly how much air time remains. Unfortunately, your letter does not include an 
important piece of information. We do not know whether you purchased this product from one of our authorized dealers. You 
can call 1-800-439-4509 to find out.
Our most popular products are the Scuba Max, Aqua Lung, and Atomic Aquatics. They come with 24-month warranties. 
However, we have a policy that states very clearly that these products must be sold through authorized dealers. This is the 
only way we can be sure that customers receive proper presale and postsale assistance. If our products are sold through 
authorized dealers, we can restrict their use to trained and certified divers.
We regret that we cannot approve your request to calibrate this product.
Sincerely,

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
185
 1. List at least five weaknesses in this refusal letter.
 2. Outline a plan for writing a refusal to a request.
  Buffer: 
 
  Reasons: 
 
  Bad news: 
 
  Closing: 
 
7.3 Claim Denial: Saying No to Free Repair
Following is a letter to a customer who demanded that a burned-out clothes dryer motor be replaced at no charge.
Your Task. Analyze the message. List its weaknesses and then outline an appropriate writing plan. If your instructor directs, 
revise the message. A copy of this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
Ms. Kadence Larios
3591 Allen Avenue
Baton Rouge, LA 70809
Dear Ms. Larios:
This letter is being sent to you to inform you that warranty repairs are not available for damage caused by operator error. The 
motor on your clothes dryer burned out because the lint filter was full, thus clogging and overheating the motor.
After you called in your complaint, we had our service technician, Bryce Grindell, make an inspection. That’s when he made 
the discovery that your lint filter was not being taken care of properly. Mr. Grindell said he had never seen such a clogged 
lint filter, and that without a doubt it caused the motor circuitry to overheat and then burn out. You are lucky it did not cause 
a house fire.
NewDay Harmony dryers get rave reviews from users. They talk about its large capacity, fast drying times, and antibacterial 
cycle. However, the warranty on your NewDay Harmony clothes dryer covers only these things: manufacturing defects or 
improper installation by us. As far as we can tell, the dryer had no defects and we know it was installed properly. We can’t 
replace the motor at no charge. But we could install a reconditioned motor, at a cost of $99. Or we could bring you a new 
motor at $189. If you decide to go this route, we would only charge you as a continuing service call at $65 instead of the 
full rate of $130.
Let us know what you want to do.
Sincerely,
 1. List at least five weaknesses in this letter.

186 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
 2. Outline a plan for writing a refusal to a request.
  Buffer: 
 
  Reasons: 
 
  Bad news: 
 
  Closing: 
 
A
Activities and Cases
e-MAiL
7.4 Request Refusal: You Want Me to Do What?
As the manager of the Reprographics Department, you have been asked by two staff engineers for a copy of the latest ver-
sion of Adobe Photoshop. This is an expensive licensed software program that your employees use. The engineers want it for 
home use. You know it is against the law to do this, and you understand why. Software companies would go out of business 
if they sold a program and it was copied by many others. Your Adobe software contract allowed you to install the updated 
version of Photoshop on one server and use it with up to five employees in this networked office. You would be breaking 
the contract and the law to let the program be copied. You wouldn’t mind showing people how your department uses it, but 
you can’t let the program be copied.
Your Task. Send an e-mail message to robert.barnes@ecc.com and jose.lopez@ecc.com refusing their requests and explain-
ing why you cannot allow them to copy your updated version of Adobe Photoshop.
7.5 Request Refusal: Jamba Asks for Juicy Favor
In an aggressive expansion effort, Jamba Juice became a good customer of your software company. You have enjoyed 
the business it brought, and you are also quite fond of its products—especially Banana Berry and Mega Mango smoothies. 
Jamba Inc. is in the midst of expanding its menu with the goal of becoming the Starbucks of the smoothie. “Just as Starbucks 
defined the category of coffee, Jamba has the opportunity to define the category of the healthy snack,” said analyst Brian 
Moore.16 One goal of Jamba is to boost the frequency of customer visits by offering some products that are more filling. Then 
it could attract hungry customers as well as thirsty ones. It was experimenting with adding grains such as oatmeal or nuts 
such as almonds so that a smoothie packs more substance and could substitute for a meal.
You receive a letter from Joe Wong, your business friend and contact at Jamba Juice. He asks you to do him and Jamba 
Juice a favor. He wants to set up a juice tasting bar in your company cafeteria to test his new experimental drinks. All the 
drinks would be free, of course, but employees would have to fill out forms to evaluate each recipe. The details could be 
worked out later.
You definitely support healthy snacks, but you think this idea is terrible. First of all, your company doesn’t even have a 
cafeteria. It has a small lunch room, and employees bring their own food. Secondly, you would be embarrassed to ask your 
boss to do this favor for Jamba Juice, despite the business it has brought your company. 
Your Task. Write a letter that retains good customer relations with Jamba Juice but refuses this request. What reasons can 
you give, and what alternatives are available? Address your message to Joe Wong, Vice President, Product Development, 
Jamba Inc., 450 Golden Gate Avenue, San Francisco, 94102.
7.6 Request Refusal: Carnival Rejects Under-21 Crowd
The world’s largest cruise line finds itself in a difficult position. Carnival climbed to the No. 1 spot by promoting fun at sea 
and pitching its appeal to younger customers who were drawn to on-board discos, swim-up bars, and hassle-free partying. 
But apparently the partying of high school and college students went too far. Roving bands of teens had virtually taken over 
some cruises in recent years. Travel agents complained of “drunken, loud behavior,” as reported by Mike Driscall, editor of 
Cruise Week.
To crack down, Carnival raised the drinking age from 18 to 21 and required more chaperoning of school groups. Young 
individual travelers, however, were still unruly and disruptive. Thus, Carnival instituted a new policy, effective immediately. 
No one under 21 may travel unless accompanied by an adult over 25. Says Vicki Freed, Carnival’s vice president for market-
ing, “We will turn them back at the docks, and they will not get refunds.” As Eric Rivera, a Carnival marketing manager, you 
must respond to the inquiry of Sheryl Kiklas of All-World Travel, a New York travel agency that features special spring- and 
summer-break packages for college and high school students. 
All-World Travel has been one of Carnival’s best customers. However, Carnival no longer wants to encourage unaccom-
panied young people. You must refuse the request of Ms. Kiklas to help set up student tour packages. Carnival discourages 
even chaperoned tours. Its real market is now family packages. You must write to All-World Travel and break the bad news. 
Try to promote fun-filled, carefree cruises destined for sunny, exotic ports of call that remove guests from the stresses of 

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
187
everyday life. By the way, Carnival attracts more passengers than any other cruise line—over a million people a year from all 
over the world. Over 98 percent of Carnival’s guests say that they were well satisfied. Tell her you will call during the week 
of January 5 to help her plan special family tour packages.17 
Your Task. Write your letter to Sheryl Kiklas, All-World Travel Agency, 440 East Broadway, New York, NY 10014. Send her 
a schedule for spring and summer Caribbean cruises.
WeB
7.7 Request Refusal: Evict Loud Music Fan?
As the owner of Peachtree Business Plaza, you must respond to the request of Michael Vazquez, one of the tenants in your 
three-story office building. Mr. Vazquez, a CPA, demands that you immediately evict a neighboring tenant who plays loud 
music throughout the day, interfering with Mr. Vazquez’s conversations with clients and with his concentration. The noisy 
tenant, Anthony Chomko, seems to operate an entertainment booking agency and spends long hours in his office. You know 
you can’t evict Mr. Chomko because, as a legal commercial tenant, he is entitled to conduct his business. However, you 
might consider adding soundproofing, an expense that you would prefer to share with Mr. Chomko and Mr. Vazquez. You 
might also discuss limiting the time of day that Mr. Chomko could make noise.
Before responding to Mr. Vazquez, you decide to find out more about commercial tenancy. Use databases and the Web 
to search the keywords commercial eviction. Then develop a course of action.
Your Task. In writing to Mr. Vazquez, deny his request but retain his goodwill. Tell him how you plan to resolve the problem. 
Write to Michael Vazquez, CPA, Suite 230, Peachtree Business Plaza, 116 Krog Street, Atlanta, GA 30307. Your instructor 
may also ask you to write an appropriate message to Mr. Anthony Chomko, Suite 225.
7.8 Claim Denial: Airline Loses Passenger’s Glasses
American Southern Airline (ASA) had an unhappy customer. Leticia Tomlinson flew from Atlanta to Seattle. The flight stopped 
briefly at Chicago O’Hare, where she got off the plane for half an hour. When she returned to her seat, her $400 prescription 
reading glasses were gone. She asked the flight attendant where the glasses were, and the attendant said they probably 
were thrown away since the cleaning crew had come in with big bags and tossed everything in them. Ms. Tomlinson tried 
to locate the glasses through the airline’s lost-and-found service, but she failed. Then she wrote a strong letter to the airline 
demanding reimbursement for the loss. She felt that it was obvious that she was returning to her seat. The airline, however, 
knows that an overwhelming number of passengers arriving at hubs switch planes for their connecting flights. The airline 
does not know who is returning. What’s more, flight attendants usually announce that the plane is continuing to another city 
and that passengers who are returning should take their belongings. Cabin-cleaning crews speed through planes removing 
newspapers, magazines, leftover foods, and trash. Airlines feel no responsibility for personal items left in cabins. The airline 
never refunds cash, but it might consider travel vouchers for the value of the glasses.18
Your Task. As a staff member of the customer relations department of American Southern Airline, deny the customer’s claim 
but retain her goodwill using techniques learned in this chapter. Remember that apologies cost nothing. Write a claim denial 
to Mrs. Leticia Tomlinson, 1952 Kanako Lane, Mount Vernon, WA 98273.
7.9 Customer Bad News: J. Crew Goofs on Cashmere Turtleneck
Who wouldn’t want a cashmere zip turtleneck sweater for $18? At the J. Crew Web site, many delighted shoppers scrambled 
to order the bargain cashmere. Unfortunately, the price should have been $218! Before J. Crew officials could correct the 
mistake, several hundred e-shoppers had bagged the bargain sweater for their digital shopping carts.
When the mistake was discovered, J. Crew immediately sent an e-mail message to the soon-to-be disappointed shop-
pers. The subject line shouted “Big Mistake!” The first line began with this statement: “I wish we could sell such an amazing 
sweater for only $18. Our price mistake on your new cashmere zip turtleneck probably went right by you, but rather than 
charge you such a large difference, I’m writing to alert you that this item has been removed from your recent order.”
As an assistant in the communication department at J. Crew, you saw the e-mail message that was sent to customers 
and you tactfully suggested that the bad news might have been broken differently. Your boss says, “OK, hot stuff. Give it 
your best shot.”
Your Task. Although you have only a portion of the message, analyze the customer bad-news message sent by J. Crew. 
Using the principles suggested in this chapter, write an improved e-mail message. In the end, J. Crew decided to allow 
customers who ordered the sweater at $18 to reorder it for $118.80 to $130.80, depending on the size. Customers were 
given a special Web site to reorder (make up an address). Remember that J. Crew customers are youthful and hip. Keep 
your message upbeat.19
WeB
7.10 Customer Bad News Follow-Up: Worms in Her PowerBars!
In a recent trip to her local grocery store, Kelly Keeler decided for the first time to stock up on PowerBars. These are low-fat, 
high-carbohydrate energy bars that are touted as a highly nutritious snack food specially formulated to deliver long- lasting 
energy. Since 1986, PowerBar (http://www.powerbar.com) has been dedicated to helping athletes and active people 

188 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
achieve peak performance. It claims to be “the fuel of choice” for top athletes around the world. Kelly is a serious runner and 
participates in many track meets every year.
On her way to a recent meet, Kelly grabbed a PowerBar and unwrapped it while driving. As she started to take her first 
bite, she noticed something white and shiny in the corner of the wrapping. An unexpected protein source wriggled out of 
her energy bar—a worm! Kelly’s first inclination was to toss it out the window and never buy another PowerBar. On sec-
ond thought, though, she decided to tell the company. When she called the toll-free number on the wrapper, Sophie, who 
answered the phone, was incredibly nice, extremely apologetic, and very informative about what happened. “I’m very sorry 
you experienced an infested product,” said Sophie.
She explained that the infamous Indian meal moth is a pantry pest that causes millions of dollars in damage worldwide. It feeds 
on grains or grain-based products, such as cereal, flour, dry pasta, crackers, dried fruits, nuts, spices, and pet food. The tiny moth 
eggs lie dormant for some time or hatch quickly into tiny larvae (worms) that penetrate food wrappers and enter products.
At its manufacturing facilities, PowerBar takes stringent measures to protect against infestation. It inspects incoming 
grains, supplies proper ventilation, and shields all grain-storage areas with screens to prevent insects from entering. It also 
uses light traps and electrocuters; these devices eradicate moths with the least environmental impact. PowerBar President 
Brian Maxwell makes sure every complaint is followed up immediately with a personal letter. His letters generally tell custom-
ers that it is rare for infestations like this to occur. Entomologists say that the worms are not toxic and will not harm humans. 
Nevertheless, as President Maxwell says, “it is extremely disgusting to find these worms in food.”
Your Task. For the signature of Brian Maxwell, PowerBar president, write a bad-news follow-up letter to Kelly Keeler, 932 
Opperman Drive, Eagan, MN 55123. Keep the letter informal and personal. Explain how pests get into grain-based products 
and what you are doing to prevent infestation. You can learn more about the Indian meal moth by searching the Web. In your 
letter include a brochure titled “Notes About the Indian Meal Moth,” along with a kit for Kelly to mail the culprit PowerBar to 
the company for analysis in Boise, Idaho. Also send a check reimbursing Kelly $36.85 for her purchase.20
7.11 Customer Bad News: Costly SUV Upgrade to a Ford Excursion
Steven Chan, a consultant from Oakland, California, was surprised when he picked up his rental car from Budget in Seattle 
over Easter weekend. He had reserved a full-size car, but the rental agent told him he could upgrade to a Ford Excursion for 
an additional $25 a day. “She told me it was easy to drive,” Mr. Chan reported. “But when I saw it, I realized it was huge—like 
a tank. You could fit a full-size bed inside.”
On his trip Mr. Chan managed to scratch the paint and damage the rear-door step. He didn’t worry, though. He thought 
the damage would be covered because he had charged the rental on his American Express card. He knew that the company 
offered back-up car rental insurance coverage. To his dismay, he discovered that its car rental coverage excluded large 
SUVs. “I just assumed they’d cover it,” he confessed. He wrote to Budget to complain about not being warned that certain 
credit cards may not cover damage to large SUVs or luxury cars.
Budget agents always encourage renters to sign up for Budget’s own “risk product.” They don’t feel that it is their respon-
sibility to study the policies of customers’ insurance carriers and explain what may or may not be covered. Moreover, they 
try to move customers into their rental cars as quickly as possible and avoid lengthy discussions of insurance coverage. 
Customers who do not purchase insurance are at risk. Mr. Chan does not make any claim against Budget, but he is upset 
about being “pitched” to upgrade to the larger SUV, which he didn’t really want.21
Your Task. As a member of the communication staff at Budget, respond to Mr. Chan’s complaint. Budget obviously is not 
going to pay for the SUV repairs, but it does want to salvage his goodwill and future business. Offer him a coupon worth two 
days’ free rental of any full-size sedan. Write to Steven Chan, 5300 Park Ridge, Apt. 4A, Oakland, CA 93578
TeAM
7.12 Damage Control for Disappointed Customers: Late Delivery of Printing Order
Kevin Kearns, a printing company sales manager, must tell one of his clients that the payroll checks his company ordered 
are not going to be ready by the date Kearns had promised. The printing company’s job scheduler overlooked the job and 
didn’t get the checks into production in time to meet the deadline. As a result, Kearns’ client, a major insurance company, 
is going to miss its pay run.
Kearns meets with internal department heads. They decide on the following plan to remedy the situation: (a) move the 
check order to the front of the production line; (b) make up for the late production date by shipping some of the checks—
enough to meet their client’s immediate payroll needs—by air freight; (c) deliver the remaining checks by truck.
Your Task. Form groups of three or four students. Discuss the following issues about how to present the bad news to Andrew 
Tyra, Kearns’ contact person at the insurance company.
a. Should Kearns call Tyra directly or delegate the task to his assistant? 
b. When should Tyra be informed of the problem?
c. What is the best procedure for delivering the bad news?
d. What follow-up would you recommend to Kearns?
Be prepared to share your group’s responses during a class discussion. Your instructor may ask two students to role-play 
the presentation of the bad news.

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
189
7.13 Credit Refusal: Cash Only at Gold’s Gym and Fitness Center
As manager of Gold’s Gym and Fitness Center, you must refuse the application of Monique Cooper for an Extended 
Membership. This is strictly a business decision. You liked Monique very much when she applied, and she seems genuinely 
interested in fitness and a healthful lifestyle. However, your Extended Membership plan qualifies the member for all your 
testing, exercise, recreation, yoga, and aerobics programs. This multiservice program is expensive for the club to maintain 
because of the huge staff required. Applicants must have a solid credit rating to join. To your disappointment, you learned 
that Monique’s credit rating is decidedly negative. Her credit report indicates that she is delinquent in payments to four busi-
nesses, including Pros Athletic Club, your principal competitor.
You do have other programs, including your Drop In and Work Out plan, which offers the use of available facilities on a 
cash basis. This plan enables a member to reserve space on the racquetball and handball courts. The member can also 
sign up for yoga and exercise classes, space permitting. Because Monique is far in debt, you would feel guilty allowing her 
to plunge in any more deeply.
Your Task. Refuse Monique Cooper’s credit application, but encourage her cash business. Suggest that she make an 
inquiry to the credit-reporting company Experian to learn about her credit report. She is eligible to receive a free credit report 
if she mentions this application. Write to Monique Cooper, 303 New Stine Road, Bakersfield, CA 93305.
e-MAiL
WeB
7.14 Employee Bad News: Refusing the Use of Instant Messaging on the Job
As the vice president of the Green Group, an environmental firm, you had a request from team leader Emily Tsonga. She 
wants to know whether her team can use instant messaging on the job. Emily is working on the plans for an environmentally 
friendly shopping center, Westbury Mall. Her team project is moving ahead on schedule, and you have had excellent feed-
back from the shopping center developers.
Emily’s team is probably already using instant messaging through public systems, and this worries you. You are con-
cerned about security, viruses, and wasted time. However, the company has been considering a secured “enterprise-level” 
instant messaging system. The principal drawbacks are that such a system is expensive, requires administration, and limits 
use to organizational contacts only. You are not sure your company will ever adopt such a system.
You will have to refuse Emily’s request, but you want her to know how much you value her excellent work on developing 
sustainability and green building techniques for the Westbury Mall project. You know you cannot get by with a quick refusal. 
You must give her solid reasons for rejecting her request.
Your Task. Send an e-mail to Emily Tsonga (etsonga@greengroup.com) refusing her request. See Chapter 5 for more information 
on the pros and cons of instant messaging. Also do research on the Web to understand better the risks of instant messaging.
7.15 Employee Bad News: No Go for Tuition Reimbursement
Ashley Arnett, a hardworking bank teller, has sent a request asking that the company create a program to reimburse the tuition 
and book expenses for employees taking college courses. Although some companies have such a program, First Federal has 
not felt that it could indulge in such an expensive employee perk. Moreover, CEO Richard Houston is not convinced that com-
panies see any direct benefit from such programs. Employees improve their educational credentials and skills, but what is to 
keep them from moving that education and skill set to another employer? First Federal has over 200 employees. If even a frac-
tion of them started classes, the company could see a huge bill for the cost of tuition and books. Because the bank is facing 
stiff competition and its profits are sinking, the expense of such a program is out of the question. In addition, it would involve 
administration—applications, monitoring, and record keeping. It is just too much of a hassle. When employees were hard to 
hire and retain, companies had to offer employment perks. But with a soft economy, such inducements are unnecessary.
Your Task. As director of Human Resources, send an individual response to Ashley Arnett. The answer is a definite no, but 
you want to soften the blow and retain the loyalty of this conscientious employee.
V
Video resource
Video Library 2: Bad News: BuyCostumes. This video fea-
tures BuyCostumes, the world’s largest online costume and 
accessories retailer. After watching the video, play the part 
of a customer service representative.
BuyCostumes is proud of its extensive stock of costumes, 
its liberal return policy, and its many satisfied customers. But 
one day a letter arrived with a request that went beyond the 
company’s ability to deliver. The customer said that he had 
ordered the Gorilla Blinky Eye with Chest costume. This popu-
lar gorilla costume comes with a unique gorilla mask, attractive 
suit with rubber chest, foot covers, and hands. The customer 
complained that the gorilla costume did not arrive until two 
days after his Halloween party. He planned an elaborate party 
with a gorilla theme, and he was extremely unhappy that he 
did not have his costume. He asks BuyCostumes to reimburse 
$300 that he spent on theme-related decorations, which he 
says were useless when he failed to receive his costume.
As a customer service representative, you checked his 
order and found that it was not received until five days before 
Halloween, the busiest time of the year for your company. The 
order was filled the next day, but standard shipping requires 
three to six business days for delivery. The customer did not 

190 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
Commas 2
Review the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook Sections 2.05–2.09. Then study each of the following 
statements and insert necessary commas. In the space provided write the number of commas 
that you add; write 0 if no commas are needed. Also record the number of the G/M principle(s) 
illustrated. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided at the end of the book. 
If your answers differ, study carefully the principles shown in parentheses.
Example When U.S. organizations engage in overseas business they must train their staffs 
accordingly.
 1. If managers don’t prepare for international business trips by learning about the culture 
they will be at a disadvantage when negotiating deals abroad.
 2. One international support person works with time zones around the world and she keeps 
several clocks set to different zones.
 3. Dealing with the unfamiliar is less challenging if you are patient and if you are able to avoid 
becoming irritated at misunderstandings.
 4. The board of directors of Danube, Inc., appointed Elena Tolstaya who had served as the 
company’s chief financial officer since 2007 to the position of president and CEO.
 5. The imaginative promising software company opened its offices May 2 in Berlin.
 6. Any sales associate who earns at least 1,000 recognition points this year will be honored 
with a bonus vacation trip to Tahiti.
 7. James Manning the marketing manager for Chevron’s Global Power Generation frequently 
engages in videoconferences that span time zones.
 8. During the fourth quarter of the last fiscal year Rotor Company’s earnings exceeded 
analysts’ expectations.
 9. When you are working with foreign clients for whom English is a second langauge you may 
have to speak slowly and repeat yourself.
 10. To be most successful you must read between the lines and learn to pick up on various 
cultural vibes.
Review of Commas 1 and 2
 11. Diamond Blade Company’s new machine-tool facility showcases the latest advances in 
automation laser cutting and robotic bending in direct partnership with customers.
 12. After she was hired she was told to report for work on Monday June 2 in Paris.
 13. In the fall we expect to open a new branch in Sunnyvale which is an area of considerable 
growth.
 14. As we discussed on the telephone the ceremony is scheduled for Thursday March 4 at 
3 p.m.
 15. The interviewer expected a firm handshake from the candidate but was greeted by a limp-
fish clasp and she was uncomfortable touching the clammy hand.
order express or premium delivery; his shipping option was 
marked “Standard.”
You showed the letter to the owner, Mr. Getz, who said 
that this request was ludicrous. However, he wanted to retain 
the customer’s goodwill. Obviously, BuyCostumes was not 
going to shell out $300 for late delivery of a costume. But Mr. 
Getz suggested that the company would allow the customer 
to return the costume (in its original packaging) with a credit 
for the $134.99 charge. In addition, BuyCostumes would 
send a coupon for $20 off on the next costume purchase.
Your Task. Mr. Getz asks you to write a letter that retains the 
goodwill of this customer. Address your bad-news letter to 
Mr. Christopher King, 3579 Elm Street, Buffalo, NY 14202. 
Check http://www.buycostumes.com for more company 
information.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 7
1 
(2.06a)
^,

Chapter 7: Negative Messages 
191
The following letter has errors in spelling, proofreading, commas, parallelism, and other 
writing techniques studied in previous chapters. You may either (a) use standard proof-
reading marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or (b) download the docu-
ment from www.meguffey.com and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in the 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 7
Dear Mr. Bumﬁeld:
Did you know about the direct link between the health of your employes, and the health of your 
proﬁts? Because we in the midst of tough economic times you are in all probability looking for 
beneﬁts to offer your employees that help both you and them.
The beneﬁts of healthyer employees includes lower health care costs, fewer medical claims, 
improved productivity, better morale and absenteeism is reduced. Here is how you can help 
your employees to have sound bodies, and also improve your companys proﬁts:
• Provide them with Galaxy Fitness health club discounts.
• Bring our aerobics, massage, weight loss and educational programs on-site.
• You should have us manage your on-site ﬁtness center.
Business Fortune magazine recently reported the following: “After a prevention and early 
intervention health program was implemented at L. L. Bean loss claims dropped by 
approximately 40 percent.”
Please call (713) 839-2300 and speak to Jan Novak who is our corporate ﬁtness expert to learn 
how you can add to the health of each and every employee and also to you are bottom line.
Sincerely,
GALAXY FITNESS
Missy Mischke
Senior Marketing Manager
Current date
Mr. John Brumﬁeld
Human Resources Development
Gulfport Energy Enterprises
1400 Longhorn Blvd.
Houston, TX 76400

192 
Chapter 7: Negative Messages
Presenting Bad News in Other Cultures
To minimize disappointment, Americans generally prefer to present negative messages 
indirectly. Other cultures may treat bad news differently, as illustrated in the following:
In Germany business communicators occasionally use buffers but tend to present bad 
news directly.
British writers tend to be straightforward with bad news, seeing no reason to soften its 
announcement.
In Latin countries the question is not how to organize negative messages but whether 
to present them at all. It is considered disrespectful and impolite to report bad news 
to superiors. Therefore, reluctant employees may fail to report accurately any negative 
situations to their bosses. 
In Thailand the negativism represented by a refusal is completely alien; the word no
does not exist. In many cultures negative news is offered with such subtleness or in 
such a positive light that it may be overlooked or misunderstood by literal-minded 
Americans.
In many Asian and some Latin cultures, one must look beyond an individual’s actual 
words to understand what is really being communicated. One must consider the com-
munication style, the culture, and especially the context. Consider the following phrases 
and their possible meanings:
Phrase 
Possible Meaning
I agree. 
I agree with 15 percent of what you say.
We might be able to . . . 
Not a chance!
We will consider . . . 
We will consider, but the real decision maker will not.
That is a little too much . . . 
That is outrageous!
Yes.  
 Yes, I’m listening. OR: Yes, you have a good point. 
OR: Yes, I understand, but I don’t necessarily 
agree.
Career Application. Interview fellow students or work colleagues who are from other cul-
tures. Collect information regarding the following questions:
How is negative news handled in their cultures?
How would typical business communicators refuse a request for a business favor (such 
as a contribution to a charity)?
How would typical business communicators refuse a customer’s claim?
How would an individual be turned down for a job?
Your Task
Report the findings of your interviews in class discussion or in a memo report. In addition, 
collect samples of foreign business letters. You might ask foreign students, your campus 
admissions office, or local export/import companies whether they would be willing to share 
business letters from other countries. Compare letter styles, formats, tone, and writing 
strategies. How do these elements differ from those in typical North American business 
letters?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: intercultural issues

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
193
© iSTOCkpHOTO.COm / DmiTriY SHirONOSOV
oBJecTiVes
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Outline the opening, body, and closing of persuasive requests.
• Request favors and action convincingly.
• Write effective persuasive messages within organizations.
• Make reasonable claims and request adjustments credibly.
• Outline sales letters and their AIDA pattern: gaining attention, building interest, 
developing desire, and motivating action.
• Adapt the persuasive approach to online sales messages.
Making persuasive requests
Much of your success in business and in life depends on how skilled you are at 
persuading people to believe, accept, and act on what you are saying. Famous inves-
tor Warren Buffett, considered the richest person on earth by Forbes, was named 
by Time magazine as one of the world’s 100 most influential people. Called “the 
Oracle of Omaha,” Buffett commands respect when he speaks about stocks and the 
economy. He also had the public’s ear when he announced plans to give away most 
of his fortune to charity.
Buffett’s annual letters to shareholders feature more than facts and figures. The 
president and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway understands that he needs to connect to 
his audience’s desires and needs. In addition to analyzing impressive numbers, Buffett 
sprinkles his prose with quotations and humor. Applying such persuasive techniques 
and many others can help you become a persuasive communicator. Because their ideas 
generally prevail, persuasive individuals become decision makers—managers, execu-
tives, and entrepreneurs. This chapter will examine techniques for presenting ideas 
persuasively, whether in your career or in your personal life.
Persuasion is necessary when you anticipate resistance or when you must pre-
pare before you can present your ideas effectively. For example, let’s say you bought 
a new car and the transmission repeatedly required servicing. When you finally 
got tired of taking it in for repair, you decided to write to the car manufacturer’s 
district office asking that the company install a new transmission in your car. You 
knew that your request would be resisted. You had to convince the manufacturer 
that replacement, not repair, was needed. Direct claim letters, such as those you 
Persuasive 
Messages
8
c H a p T e r  8
The ability to persuade is a 
primary factor in personal 
and business success.

194 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
wrote in Chapter 6, are straightforward and direct. Persuasive requests, on the other 
hand, are generally more effective when they are indirect. Reasons and explanations 
should precede the main idea. To overcome possible resistance, the writer lays a 
logical foundation before delivering the request. A writing plan for a persuasive 
request requires deliberate development.
writing plan for a persuasive request
• Opening: Capture the reader’s attention and interest. Describe a problem, 
state something unexpected, suggest reader benefits, offer praise or compli-
ments, or ask a stimulating question.
• Body: Build interest. Explain logically and concisely the purpose of the 
request. Prove its merit. Use facts, statistics, expert opinion, examples, spe-
cific details, and direct and indirect benefits. Reduce resistance. Anticipate 
objections, offer counterarguments, establish credibility, demonstrate com-
petence, and show the value of your proposal.
• Closing: Motivate action. Ask for a particular action. Make the action easy 
to take. Show courtesy, respect, and gratitude.
In this chapter you will learn to apply the preceding writing plan to messages 
that (a) request favors and action, (b) persuade subordinates and your superiors, 
and (c) make claims and request adjustments that may meet with opposition. 
requesting favors and action
Persuading someone to do something that largely benefits you is not easy. Fortunately, 
many individuals and companies are willing to grant requests for time, money, 
information, special privileges, and cooperation. They grant these favors for a vari-
ety of reasons. They may just happen to be interested in your project, or they may 
see goodwill potential for themselves. Often, though, they comply because they see 
that others will benefit from the request. Professionals sometimes feel obligated to 
contribute their time or expertise to “give back to the community.”
You may find that you have few direct benefits to offer in your persuasion. 
Instead, you will be focusing on indirect benefits, as the writer does in Figure 8.1. 
In asking an individual to speak before a restaurant industry meeting, the writer has 
little to offer as a direct benefit other than a $300 honorarium. However, indirectly, 
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Persuasion is your golden 
ticket to promotion. Master 
communicators feel in 
control of challenging 
situations because they 
understand the art of 
persuasion and they know 
how to recognize and use 
persuasive strategies.”
workplace in focus
The ability to persuade is critical in personal and 
business success, yet persuasion is hard work. 
Sometimes resistance arises simply because attitudes 
change slowly. Nien-Ling Wacker, CEO of Compulink, 
is trying to convince businesses to go paperless. Her 
company provides software that enables users to 
scan and index documents that remain searchable. 
Wacker says that prompting businesses to let go 
of paper was “like trying to get a plant to grow on a 
rock.” She says that people resist changing their work 
routines and have trouble parting with paper and 
filing cabinets. How might Wacker go about changing 
entrenched attitudes that are slow to change?
© BaNaNaSTOCk / JupiTErimagES
people are more likely 
to grant requests if they 
see direct or indirect 
beneﬁ ts to themselves.

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
195 
figure 8.1 Persuasive Favor Request

196 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
the writer offers enticements such as an enthusiastic audience and a chance to help 
other restaurant owners prevent food service problems. 
The hurriedly written first version of the request suffers from many faults. It fails 
to pique the interest of the reader in the opening. It also provides an easy excuse 
for Ms. Cunningham to refuse (hate to ask such a busy person). The body fails to 
give her any incentive to accept the invitation. The letter also does not anticipate 
objections and fails to suggest counterarguments. Finally, the closing doesn’t supply 
a telephone number or e-mail address for an easy response.
In the revised version, the writer gains attention with praise for a presentation 
Ms. Cunningham made. The letter builds interest with a number of appeals. The 
primary appeal is to the reader’s desire to serve the restaurant industry, although a 
receptive audience and an opportunity to serve as an expert have a certain ego appeal 
as well. Together, these appeals—professional, self-serving, and monetary—make a 
persuasive argument rich and effective. The writer also anticipates objections and 
counters them by telling Ms. Cunningham that the talk is informal. The writer pro-
vides a list of questions so that the speaker can organize her talk more easily. The 
closing motivates action and makes acceptance as simple as a telephone call.
persuading within organizations
When it comes to persuasion, the power relationships at work determine how we 
write—whether we choose a direct or indirect approach, for example. We may con-
sider what type and amount of support we include, depending on whether we wish 
to persuade subordinates or superiors. The authority of our audience may also help 
us decide whether to adopt a formal or informal tone. 
persuading subordinates. Instructions or directives moving downward 
from superiors to subordinates usually require little persuasion. Employees expect to 
be directed in how to perform their jobs. These messages (such as information about 
procedures, equipment, or customer service) follow the direct pattern, with the purpose 
immediately stated. However, employees are sometimes asked to perform in a capacity 
outside their work roles or to accept changes that are not in their best interests (such 
as pay cuts, job transfers, or reduced benefits). Occasionally, superiors need to address 
sensitive workplace issues such as smoking-cessation or exercise programs. Similarly, 
supervisors may want to create buy-in when introducing a healthier cafeteria menu. In 
these instances, a persuasive memo using the indirect pattern may be most effective. 
The goal is not to manipulate employees or to seduce them with trickery. Rather, the 
goal is to present a strong but honest argument, emphasizing points that are important 
to the receiver or the organization. In business, honesty is not just the best policy—it is 
the only policy. People see right through puffery and misrepresentation. For this reason, 
the indirect pattern is effective only when supported by accurate, honest evidence. 
persuading the Boss. Another form of persuasion within organizations centers 
on suggestions made by subordinates. Convincing management to adopt a procedure 
or invest in a product or new equipment generally requires skillful communication. 
Managers are just as resistant to change as others are. Providing evidence is critical 
when subordinates submit recommendations to their bosses. “The key to making a 
request of a superior,” advises communication consultant Patricia Buhler, “is to know 
your needs and have documentation [facts, figures, evidence].” Another important fac-
tor is moderation. “Going in and asking for the world [right] off the cuff is most likely 
going to elicit a negative response,” she added.1 Equally important is focusing on the 
receiver’s needs. How can you make your suggestion appealing to the receiver?
Obviously, when you set out to persuade someone at work who has more clout 
than you, do so carefully. Use words like suggest and recommend, and craft sen-
tences to begin with these words: It might be a good idea if . . . . That lets you offer 
suggestions without threatening the person’s authority.
In Figure 8.2 you see a persuasive memo written by Marketing Manager Monique 
Hartung, who wants her boss to authorize the purchase of a multifunction color 
internal persuasive messages 
present honest arguments 
detailing speciﬁ c reader 
or company beneﬁ ts.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“When you create the 
impression that you are 
a person of honesty and 
integrity, you will have a 
considerable advantage 
over someone who is 
perceived otherwise.”

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
197 
figure 8.2 E-Mail Cover Note With Attached Persuasive Memo

198 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
laser copier. She has researched the prices, features, and maintenance costs of the 
machines. They often serve as copiers, faxes, scanners, and printers and can cost 
several thousand dollars. Monique has found an outstanding deal offered by a local 
office supplier. Because Monique knows that her boss, Samuel Neesen, favors “cold, 
hard facts,” she lists current monthly costs for copying at Copy Quick to increase 
her chances of gaining approval. Finally, she calculates the amortization of the pur-
chase price and monthly costs of running the new color copier.
Notice that Monique’s memo isn’t short. A successful persuasive message will 
typically take more space than a direct message because proving a case requires 
evidence. In the end, Monique chose to send her memo as an e-mail attachment 
accompanied by a polite short e-mail message because she wanted to keep the docu-
ment format in MS Word intact. She also felt that the message was too long to 
paste into her e-mail program. Monique’s persuasive memo and her e-mail include a 
subject line that announces the purpose of the message without disclosing the actual 
request. By delaying the request until she has had a chance to describe the problem 
and discuss a solution, Monique prevents the reader’s premature rejection.
The strength of this persuasive document, though, is in the clear presentation of 
comparison figures showing how much money the company can save by purchas-
ing a remanufactured copier. Buying a copier that uses low-cost solid ink instead 
of expensive laser cartridges is another argument in this machine’s favor. Although 
the organization pattern is not obvious, the memo begins with an attention-getter 
(a frank description of the problem), builds interest (with easy-to-read facts and 
figures), provides benefits, and reduces resistance. Notice that the conclusion tells 
what action is to be taken, makes it easy to respond, and repeats the main benefit 
to motivate action. 
composing claim and complaint Messages
Persuasive claim and complaint letters generally focus on damaged products, mis-
taken billing, inaccurate shipments, warranty problems, return policies, insurance 
snafus, faulty merchandise, and so on. The direct pattern is usually best for request-
ing straightforward adjustments (see Chapter 6). When you believe your request is 
justified and will be granted, the direct strategy is most efficient. However, if a past 
request has been refused or ignored or if you anticipate reluctance, then the indirect 
pattern is appropriate. 
In a sense, a claim is a complaint letter. Someone is complaining about something 
that went wrong. Some complaint letters just vent anger; the writers are mad, and 
they want to tell someone about it. Conversely, if the goal is to change something 
(and why bother to write except to motivate change?), then persuasion is necessary. 
Effective claim letters make a reasonable claim, present a logical case with clear 
facts, and adopt a moderate tone. Anger and emotion are not effective persuaders. 
logical Development. Strive for logical development in a claim letter. You 
might open with sincere praise, an objective statement of the problem, a point 
of agreement, or a quick review of what you have done to resolve the problem. 
Then you can explain precisely what happened or why your claim is legitimate. 
Don’t provide a blow-by-blow chronology of details; just hit the highlights. Be sure 
to enclose copies of relevant invoices, shipping orders, warranties, and payments. 
Close with a clear statement of what you want done: refund, replacement, credit to 
your account, or other action. Be sure to think through the possibilities and make 
your request reasonable. 
Moderate Tone. The tone of your message is important. Don’t suggest that 
the receiver intentionally deceived you or intentionally created the problem. Rather, 
appeal to the receiver’s sense of responsibility and pride in the company’s good 
name. Calmly express your disappointment in view of your high expectations of 
the product and of the company. Communicating your feelings, without rancor, is 
often your strongest appeal. 
effective claim and 
complaint letters make 
reasonable requests 
backed by solid evidence.
when selling an idea to 
management, writers often 
are successful if they 
make a strong case for 
saving or earning money.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
“Complaining—when done 
well—can be a positive 
experience that benefits 
the company and person 
receiving the complaint, and 
which resolves a problem 
encountered by the person 
who is complaining.”

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
199 
If at all possible, address your complaint letter or e-mail to a specific person. 
If you truly want a problem solved quickly, take the time to call the organization, 
search its Web site, or send an e-mail. Who should be informed about your issue? 
Who has the authority to act? Addressing a specific person is more likely to gener-
ate action than addressing a generic customer service department. Whether you 
approach an individual or a department, the tone of your message should, of course, 
be moderate.
Marilyn Easter’s letter, shown in Figure 8.3, follows the persuasive pattern. 
She wants to return two voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) telephone systems. 
Notice her positive opening, her well-documented claims, and her request for spe-
cific action. 
figure 8.3 Claim Request (Complaint Letter)

200 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
writing sales and Marketing Messages
Sales messages use persuasion to promote specific products and services. In our 
coverage we will be most concerned with sales messages delivered by mail. Many of 
the concepts you will learn about sales persuasion, however, can be applied to radio 
and TV advertising, as well as print, online, and wireless media. Smart companies 
strive to develop a balanced approach to their overall marketing strategy, including 
both online e-marketing and direct mail when appropriate.
Toward the end of this chapter, you will learn about preparing online sales mes-
sages. However, we will give most emphasis to traditional direct-mail campaigns 
featuring letters. Sellers feel that “even with all the new media we have available 
today, a letter remains one of the most powerful ways to make sales, generate leads, 
boost retail traffic, and solicit donations.” Moreover, experts know that most recip-
ients do look at their direct mail; in fact, about 80 percent of such promotional mail 
pieces are read.2 Hard-copy sales letters are still recognized as the most “personal, 
one-to-one form of advertising there is.”3
Sales letters are generally part of a package that may contain a brochure, price 
list, illustrations, testimonials, and other persuasive appeals. Professionals who spe-
cialize in traditional direct-mail services have made a science of analyzing a market, 
developing an effective mailing list, studying the product, preparing a sophisticated 
campaign aimed at a target audience, and motivating the reader to act. You have 
probably received many direct-mail packages, often called “junk mail.”
We are most concerned here with the sales letter: its strategy, organization, and 
evidence. Because sales letters are usually written by specialists, you may never 
write one on the job. Why, then, learn how to write a sales letter? In many ways, 
every letter we create is a form of sales letter. We sell our ideas, our organizations, 
and ourselves. When you apply for a job, you are both the seller and the product. 
Learning the techniques of sales writing will help you be more successful in any 
communication that requires persuasion and promotion. Furthermore, you will 
recognize sales strategies, thus enabling you to become a more perceptive consumer 
of ideas, products, and services. 
Your primary goal in writing a sales message is to get someone to devote a few 
moments of attention to it.4 You may be promoting a product, a service, an idea, or 
yourself. In each case the most effective messages will follow a writing plan. This is 
the same recipe we studied earlier, but the ingredients are different. 
writing plan for a sales Message: aiDa
Professional marketers and salespeople follow the AIDA pattern (attention, 
interest, desire, and action) when persuading consumers. In addition to telemar-
keting and personal selling, this pattern works very well for written messages.
• Opening: Gain attention. Offer something valuable; promise a benefit to 
the reader; ask a question; or provide a quotation, fact, product feature, 
testimonial, startling statement, or personalized action setting.
• Body: Build interest. Describe central selling points and make rational and 
emotional appeals. Elicit desire in the reader and reduce resistance. Use 
 testimonials, money-back guarantees, free samples, performance tests, or 
other techniques.
• Closing: Motivate action. Offer a gift, promise an incentive, limit the offer, 
set a deadline, or guarantee satisfaction.
attention. One of the most critical elements of a sales letter is its opening para-
graph, the attention-getter. This opener should be short (one to five lines), honest, 
relevant, and stimulating. Marketing pros have found that eye-catching typographical 
Traditional direct-mail 
marketing uses snail mail; 
electronic marketing 
uses e-mail, web 
documents, and fax.
learning to write sales 
letters helps you sell 
yourself and your ideas 
as well as become a 
smarter consumer.
The aiDa pattern (attention, 
interest, desire, and action) 
is used in selling because 
it is highly effective.

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
201
arrangements or provocative messages, such as the following, can hook a reader’s 
attention: 
• Offer: A free trip to Hawaii is just the beginning!
• Benefit: Now you can raise your sales income by 50 percent or even more with 
the proven techniques found in . . . . 
• Open-ended suggestive question: Do you want your family to be safe? 
• Quotation or proverb: Necessity is the mother of invention.
• Compliment: Life is full of milestones. You have reached one. You deserve . . . .
• Fact: The Greenland Eskimos ate more fat than anyone in the world, yet . . . they 
had virtually no heart disease.
• Product feature: Electronic stability control, ABS, and other active and passive 
safety features explain why the ultra-compact new Smart Fortwo has achieved a 
four-star crash rating in California.
• Testimonial: The most recent J.D. Power survey of “initial quality” shows that 
BMW ranks at the top of brands with the fewest defects and malfunctions, ahead 
of Chrysler, Hyundai, Lexus, Porsche, and Toyota. 
• Startling statement: Let the poor and hungry feed themselves! For just $100 
they can. 
• Personalized action setting: It’s 6:30 p.m. and you are working overtime to 
meet a pressing deadline. Suddenly your copier breaks down. The production 
of your color-laser brochures screeches to a halt. How you are wishing you had 
purchased the Worry-Free-Anytime service contract from Canon. 
Other openings calculated to capture attention might include a solution to a 
problem, an anecdote, a personalized statement using the receiver’s name, or a rel-
evant current event. 
interest. In this phase of your sales message, you should describe clearly the 
product or service. Think of this part as a promise that the product or service will 
deliver to satisfy the audience’s needs. In simple language emphasize the central sell-
ing points that you identified during your prewriting analysis. Those selling points 
can be developed using rational or emotional appeals. 
Rational appeals are associated with reason and intellect. They translate selling 
points into references to making or saving money, increasing efficiency, or mak-
ing the best use of resources. In general, rational appeals are appropriate when a 
product is expensive; long-lasting; or important to health, security, and financial 
success. Emotional appeals relate to status, ego, and sensual feelings. Appealing to 
workplace in focus
Trying to sell a micro car to americans is a huge 
gamble by Daimler ag, manufacturer of the luxuri-
ous mercedes-Benz brand but also maker of the 
diminutive Smart Fortwo. prompted by skyrocketing 
gasoline prices, European and asian drivers have 
long embraced small automobiles. But SuV-loving 
americans? although the Smart is well engineered 
and sells briskly in 36 countries, its promoters will 
have to work hard to win over americans. What 
will American car buyers worry about the most 
when they see an automobile such as the Smart? 
What strategies might reduce their resistance?
© COurTESY OF DaNa LOEWY
Build interest by describing 
the beneﬁ ts a product or 
service offers and by making 
rational or emotional appeals.

202 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
the emotions is sometimes effective when a product is inexpensive, short-lived, or 
nonessential. Many clever sales messages, however, combine emotional and rational 
strategies for a dual appeal. Consider these examples: 
Rational Appeal
You can buy the things you need and want, pay household bills, pay off higher-
cost loans and credit cards—as soon as you are approved and your Credit-Line 
account is opened. 
Emotional Appeal
Leave the urban bustle behind and escape to sun-soaked Bermuda! To recharge 
your batteries with an injection of sun and surf, all you need is your bathing suit, 
a little suntan lotion, and your Credit-Line card. 
Dual Appeal
New Credit-Line cardholders are immediately eligible for a $100 travel certificate 
and additional discounts at fun-filled resorts. Save up to 40 percent while lying on 
a beach in picturesque, sun-soaked Bermuda, the year-round resort island. 
A physical description of your product is not enough, however. Zig Ziglar, 
thought by some to be America’s greatest salesperson, pointed out that no matter 
how well you know your product, no one is persuaded by cold, hard facts alone. 
In the end, he contended, “People buy because of the product benefits.”5 Your job 
is to translate those cold facts into warm feelings and reader benefits. Let’s say a 
sales letter promotes a hand cream made with aloe and cocoa butter extracts, along 
with Vitamin A. Those facts become, Nature’s hand helpers—including soothing 
aloe and cocoa extracts, along with firming Vitamin A—form invisible gloves that 
protect your sensitive skin against the hardships of work, harsh detergents, and 
constant environmental assaults.
Desire. The goal at this stage in the sales message is to elicit desire in the reader 
and to overcome resistance. To make the audience want the product or service 
and to anticipate objections, focus strongly on reader benefits. Here the promises 
of the attention and interest sections are covered in great detail. Marketing pros 
use a number of techniques to elicit desire in their audience and to overcome 
resistance. 
• Testimonials: Thanks to your online selling workshop, I was able to increase the 
number of my sales leads from three per month to twelve per week!—Carlton 
Strong, Phoenix, Arizona
• Names of satisfied users (with permission, of 
course): Enclosed is a partial list of private pilots 
who enthusiastically subscribe to our service.
• Money-back guarantee or warranty: We offer the 
longest warranties in the business—all parts and 
service on-site for two years! 
• Free trial or sample: We are so confident that 
you will like our new accounting program that we 
want you to try it absolutely free. 
• Performance tests, polls, or awards: Our Audi 
R8 supercar won World Design Car of the Year 
and World Performance Car of the Year awards—
the first time a single car has received trophies in 
more than one category.
In addition, you need to anticipate objections 
and questions the receiver may have. When possible, 
translate these objections into selling points (If you 
are worried about training your staff members on 
emotional appeals 
focus on status, ego, 
and sensual feelings.
“a really great salesman convinced us we 
needed protection from stray asteroids.”
© TED gOFF WWW.TEDgOFF.COm
rational appeals focus on 
making or saving money, 
increasing efﬁ ciency, or mak-
ing good use of resources.

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
203
the new software, remember that our offer includes $1,000 of on-site, one-on-one 
instruction). Be sure, of course, that your claims are accurate and do not stretch 
the truth.
When price is an obstacle, consider these suggestions: 
• Delay mentioning price until after you have created a desire for the product. 
• Show the price in small units, such as the price per issue of a magazine. 
• Demonstrate how the reader saves money by, for instance, subscribing for two 
or three years. 
• Compare your prices with those of a competitor. 
• If applicable, offer advantageous financing terms.
action. All the effort put into a sales message is wasted if the reader fails to act. 
To make it easy for readers to act, you can provide a reply card, a stamped and 
preaddressed envelope, a toll-free telephone number, a convenient Web address, or 
a promise of a follow-up call. Because readers often need an extra push, consider 
including additional motivators, such as the following: 
• Offer a gift: You will receive a free iPod nano with the pur-
chase of any new car. 
• Promise an incentive: With every new, paid subscription, we 
will plant a tree in one of America’s Heritage Forests. 
• Limit the offer: Only the first 100 customers receive free 
checks. 
• Set a deadline: You must act before June 1 to get these low 
prices. 
• Guarantee satisfaction: We will return your full payment if 
you are not entirely satisfied—no questions asked.
The final paragraph of the sales letter carries the punch line. This 
is where you tell readers what you want done and give them rea-
sons for doing it. Most sales letters also include postscripts because 
they make irresistible reading. Even readers who might skim over or 
bypass paragraphs are drawn to a P.S. Therefore, use a postscript to 
reveal your strongest motivator, to add a special inducement for a 
quick response, or to reemphasize a central selling point. 
putting it all Together
Sales letters are a preferred marketing medium because they can be personalized, 
directed to target audiences, and filled with a more complete message than other 
advertising media. However, direct mail is expensive. That is why the total sales 
message is crafted so painstakingly. 
Figure 8.4 shows a sales letter addressed to a target group of small-business 
owners. To sell the new magazine Small Business Monthly, the letter incorporates 
all four components of an effective persuasive message. Notice that the personal-
ized action-setting opener places the reader in a familiar situation (getting into an 
elevator) and draws an analogy between failing to reach the top floor and failing to 
achieve a business goal. 
The writer develops a rational central selling point (a magazine that provides 
valuable information for a growing small business) and repeats this selling point in 
all the components of the letter. Notice, too, how a testimonial from a small-business 
executive lends support to the sales message, and how the closing pushes for action. 
Because the price of the magazine is not a selling feature, it is mentioned only on the 
reply card. This sales letter saves its strongest motivator—a free booklet—for the 
high-impact P.S. line. 
In developing effective sales messages, some writers may be tempted to cross 
the line that separates legal from illegal sales tactics. Be sure to check out the 
Techniques for motivating 
action include offering a 
gift or incentive, limiting 
an offer, and guaranteeing 
satisfaction.
“i find it hard to believe that we’ve 
actually won 20 million dollars when 
they send the letter bulk mail.”
© FrOm THE WALL STREET JOURNAL–pErmiSSiON, CarTOON FEaTurES SYNDiCaTE.

204 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
Communication Workshop for this chapter to see specific examples of what is legal 
and what is not.
writing successful online 
sales and Marketing Messages
To make the best use of limited advertising dollars while reaching a great number 
of potential customers, many businesses are turning to the Internet and to e-mail 
marketing campaigns in particular. Much like traditional direct mail, e-mail mar-
keting can attract new customers, keep existing ones, encourage future sales, cross-
sell, and cut costs. As consumers feel more comfortable and secure with online 
purchases, they will receive more e-mail sales messages.
figure 8.4 Sales Letter

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
205
selling by e-Mail
If your organization requires an online sales message, try using the following tech-
niques gleaned from the best-performing e-mails.
Communicate only with those who have given permission! By sending mes-
sages only to “opt-in” folks, you greatly increase your “open rate”—those e-mail 
messages that will be opened. E-mail users detest spam. However, receivers are 
surprisingly receptive to offers tailored specifically for them. Remember that today’s 
customer is somebody—not anybody.
Today’s promotional e-mail often comes with colorful and eye-catching graphics 
and a minimum of text. To allow for embedded images, sound, and even video, the 
e-mail is coded in HTML and can be viewed in an e-mail program or an Internet 
browser. Software programs make it easy to create e-newsletters for e-mail distribu-
tion. Figure 8.5 shows such a promotional message in HTML format by live music 
search engine Live Nation. It was sent by e-mail to customers who had bought 
tickets from Live Nation. They had to create an account and sign up to receive such 
periodic promotions or e-newsletters. Note that the marketers make it easy for the 
recipient to unsubscribe.
The principles you have learned to apply to traditional sales messages also work 
with electronic promotional tools. However, some fundamental differences are obvi-
ous when you study Figure 8.5. Online sales messages are much shorter than direct 
mail, feature colorful graphics, and occasionally even have sound or video clips. They 
offer a richer experience to readers who can click hyperlinks at will to access content 
that interests them. When such messages are sent out as ads or periodic e-newsletters, 
they may not have salutations or closings. Rather, they may resemble Web pages.
Here are a few guidelines that will help you create effective online sales messages:
• Craft a catchy subject line. Offer discounts or premiums: Spring Sale: Buy now 
and save 20 percent! Promise solutions to everyday work-related problems. 
Highlight hot new industry topics. Invite readers to scan a top-ten list of items 
such as issues, trends, or people.
• Keep the main information “above the fold.” E-mail messages should be top 
heavy. Primary points should appear early in the message so that they capture 
the reader’s attention.
• Make the message short, conversational, and focused. Because on-screen text 
is taxing to read, be brief. Focus on one or two central selling points only.
• Convey urgency. Top-performing e-mail messages state an offer deadline or 
demonstrate why the state of the industry demands action on the reader’s part. 
Good messages also tie the product to relevant current events.
• Sprinkle testimonials throughout the copy. Consumers’ own words are the 
best sales copy. These comments can serve as callouts or be integrated into the 
copy.
• Provide a means for opting out. It is polite and a good business tactic to include 
a statement that tells receivers how to be removed from the sender’s mailing 
database.
using Blogs, wikis, and other new Media to 
convey company and product information
Businesses increasingly look to blogs, wikis, and RSS feeds to convey their persua-
sive and promotional messages to partner firms and customers. These new tools can 
also be useful internally when communicating with employees.
Blogs. In the right hands blogs can be powerful marketing tools. Information 
technology giant Hewlett-Packard invites guest bloggers onto its site as advisors to 
small businesses, for example. Executives, HP employees, and outside experts dis-
cuss a wide range of technology- and company-related topics. Although not overtly 
pushing a marketing message, ultimately HP wants to generate goodwill; hence, the 
blogs serve as a public relations tool.6 Nearly half of the CEOs questioned in one 
send only targeted, not 
“blanket,” mailings. 
include something special 
for a select group.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Internet advertising is 
expected to become the 
largest ad segment in 2011, 
surpassing newspapers. 
Revenues for blogging, 
podcasting, and RSS are 
expected to hit $1.1 billion in 
2011, up from an estimated 
$196 million in 2007.

206 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
survey said they believe blogs are useful for external public relations, and 59 percent 
said they find blogs valuable for internal communication.7 Many companies now 
use blogs to subtly market their products and develop a brand image.
wikis. Wikis generally facilitate collaboration inside organizations, but they also 
do so between companies, thus generating goodwill. A wiki contains digital informa-
tion available on a Web portal or on a company’s protected intranet where visitors 
figure 8.5 E-Mail Sales Message to Opt-In Recipients 

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
207
can add or edit content. One big advantage of wikis is the ease of information and 
file sharing. Perhaps the best-known wiki is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia.
In business, wiki users can quickly document and publish a complex process to 
a group of recipients. Ziba Design of Portland, Oregon, launched what it calls “vir-
tual studios,” popular online meeting spots where the agency and its clients share 
files, exchange design ideas, and post news.8 Ziba Design is providing a valuable 
service to its customers and, in turn, is learning about their needs. You will find out 
more about wikis as collaboration tools in Chapter 10.
rss (really simple syndication). RSS (really simple syndication) is yet 
another tool for keeping customers and business partners up-to-date. Many com-
panies now offer RSS feeds, a format for distributing news or information about 
recent changes on their Web sites, in wikis, or in blogs. Recipients subscribe to 
content they want using RSS reader software. Alternatively, they receive news items 
or articles in their e-mail.9 The RSS feeds help users to keep up with their favorite 
Web magazines, Web sites, and blogs. As a promotional tool, this medium can cre-
ate interest in a company and its products. 
podcasting. Podcasting is emerging as an important Internet marketing tool. 
Business podcasts are content-rich audio or video files featuring company repre-
sentatives, business experts, or products and services. They can be distributed by 
RSS or downloaded from company Web sites and played back on a computer or 
an MP3 player.
Blogs, wikis, RSS, and podcasting are just a few new media available to com-
panies for communicating with and persuading the public. Strategic use of these 
media can enable companies to increase their competitive profiles as well as their 
awareness of the needs and concerns of their customers.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
summing up and looking forward
The ability to persuade is a powerful and versatile communication 
tool. in this chapter you learned to apply the indirect strategy in 
making favor and action requests, writing persuasive messages 
within organizations, making claims and requesting adjustments, 
and writing sales letters. You also learned techniques for devel-
oping successful online sales messages. in the Communication 
Workshop following this chapter, you can examine examples of 
what is legal and what is not in sales letters.
The techniques suggested in this chapter will be use-
ful in many other contexts beyond the writing of business 
documents. They will come in handy when you apply for a 
position. moreover, you will find that organizing your argu-
ments logically is also extremely helpful when expressing 
ideas orally or any time you must overcome resistance to 
change.
in coming chapters you will learn how to modify and gen-
eralize the techniques of direct and indirect strategies in pre-
paring and writing informal and formal reports and propos-
als. Nearly all businesspeople today find that they must write 
an occasional report.
C
critical Thinking
 1. Why do many writers prefer the indirect pattern for per-
suasive requests?
 2. Describe the components of a persuasive request or a sales 
letter and explain what each part needs to accomplish.
 3. Because of the burden that “junk mail” places on society 
(depleted landfills, declining timber supplies, an overbur-
dened postal system), how can it be justified?

208 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
 6. What is the difference between direct and indirect benefits to individuals we may want to 
persuade?
 7. How can a subordinate be effective in persuading a superior to adopt a new procedure or purchase 
new equipment?
 8. Explain how you would decide whether to use the direct pattern or the indirect pattern.
 9. List eight tips for making claims and complaints.
 10. List at least ten ways to gain a reader’s attention in the opening of a sales letter.
 11. Recline in your first-class seat and sip a freshly stirred drink while listening to 12 channels of superb audio, 
or snooze is an example of what type of persuasive appeal? How does it compare to the following: 
Take one of four daily direct flights to Europe on our modern Airbus aircraft, and enjoy the most legroom 
of any airline. If we are ever late, you will receive coupons for free trips.
 4. Why is it not a wise idea to “stretch the truth” when 
persuading?
 5. Some individuals will never write an actual sales letter. 
Why is it nevertheless important for them to learn the 
techniques for doing so?
C
chapter review

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
209
 12. Name six writing techniques that reduce resistance in a sales message.
 13. Name five techniques for motivating action in the closing of a sales message.
 14. Describe the main purposes of using business podcasts, blogs, and wikis.
 15. What techniques do writers of successful online sales messages use?
W
writing improvement exercises
Strategies
For each of the following situations, check the appropriate writing strategy.
 16. an invitation to a nationally known information technology expert to discuss the latest 
technology trends with the campus community
 17. an announcement that must convince employees to stop smoking, start exercising, and 
opt for a healthy diet to lower health care expenses and reduce absenteeism
 18. a request to another company for verification of employment regarding a job applicant
 19. a letter to a cleaning service demanding a refund for sealing a dirty tiled floor and 
damaging a fresh paint job
 20. a request for information about a wireless office network
 21. a letter to a grocery store requesting permission to display posters advertising a school 
fund-raising car wash
 22. a request for a refund of the cost of a computer program that does not perform the 
functions it was expected to perform
 23. a request for correction of a routine billing error on your company credit card
 24. an invitation to your boss or a business partner to join you for dinner
 25. a memo to employees describing the schedule and menu selections of a new mobile 
catering service
 Direct 
indirect 
 Strategy 
Strategy

210 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
8.1 Persuasive Letter: Favor Request
Your Task. analyze the following message and list its weaknesses. if your instructor directs, revise the message. a copy of 
this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
ms. Lisa gurchiek
590 Loudon road
Loudonville, NY 12211
Dear Lisa:
Because we heard that you frequently travel to our fair city of Tampa, we thought it would not be too much trouble for you 
to be the keynote speaker at our uT management Society banquet april 2. Your newspaper columns and many books on 
careers have been reliable sources of information and inspiration to readers across the country and especially to us business 
students here at the university of Tampa.
One of our professors said that you were the dean of career columnists. maybe that is why you have been named the person 
that our students would most like to have as the keynote speaker at our uT management Society banquet april 2. all of us 
will be seeking business careers when we graduate, so this is why we are interested in tips about résumés, cover letters 
and interviews. We were surprised, though, when our professor told us that you have written a number of “Dummies” books 
including Résumés for Dummies, Cover Letters for Dummies, and so on. We are not dummies, but we are especially interested 
in learning about internet job searching, the topic of one of your recent columns.
We can’t offer an honorarium; therefore, we have to rely on local speakers. But we can promise you a fine dinner at the uT 
Faculty Club.
We also know that you often stay in Crystal Beach, which is not too far from our campus, so we hoped you could work us 
into your schedule. Our banquet evening as a general rule begins at 6:30 with a social hour, followed by dinner at 7:30 P.M.
and the speaker from 8:30 until 9 or 9:15 P.M. You won’t have to worry about transportation; we can arrange a limousine for 
you and your husband if you need it.
We realize that you have a busy schedule, but we hope you will carve out a space for us. please let our advisor, professor 
michael Eastman, have the favor of an early reply.
Cordially,
List at least five weaknesses of this letter.
8.2 Persuasive E-Mail: Importing T-Shirts From China
Your Task. analyze the following message and list its weaknesses. if your instructor directs, revise the message. a copy of 
this message is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
From: 
Donna Happich [dhappich@superfit.com]
To: 
Harry Lambrusco [hlambrusco@superfit.com]
Cc: 
Subject: T-Shirts From China
Trade shows are a great way for us to meet customers and sell our Super Fit strength machines. But instead of expand-
ing our visits to these trade shows, we continue to cut back the number that we attend. Lately we have been sending 
W
writing improvement cases

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
211
fewer staff members. i know that you have been asking us to find ways to reduce costs, but perhaps we are not going 
about it right.
With increased air fares and hotel charges, my staff has tried to find ways to live within our very tight budget. However, we 
are being asked to find additional ways to reduce our costs. i’m currently thinking ahead to the big Las Vegas trade show 
coming up in September.
One area where we could make a change is in the gift that we give away. in the past we have presented booth visitors with a 
nine-color T-shirt that is silk screened and gorgeous. But it comes at a cost of $15 for each and every one of these beauties 
from a top-name designer. To save money, i suggest that we try a $5 T-shirt made in China, which is reasonably present-
able. it has got our name on it, and, after all, folks just use these shirts for workouts. Who cares if it is a fancy silk-screened 
T-shirt or a functional Chinese one that has “Super Fit” plastered on the chest? Since we give away 2,000 T-shirts at our 
largest show, we could save big bucks by dumping the designer shirt. But we have to act quickly. i put a cheap one in your 
mailbox, so you can take a look at it.
Let me know what you think.
List at least five weaknesses of this message.
8.3 Claim Request: Copier Ripoff!
The following letter makes a claim, but the message is not as effective as it could be.
Your Task. analyze the message and list its weaknesses. if your instructor directs, revise the message. a copy of this message 
is provided at www.meguffey.com for revision online.
Current date
mr. Carl Brownston
Leder Business Supplies
8933 Cribbins road
Jeddo, mi 48032
Dear Sir:
Three months ago we purchased four of your imager 500E photocopiers, and we have had nothing but trouble ever since. 
Your salesperson, Judy Selles, assured us that the imager 500E could easily handle our volume of 5,000 copies a day. This 
seemed strange since the sales brochure said that the imager 500E was meant for 1,000 copies a day. But we believed ms. 
Selles. Big mistake! Our four imager 500E copiers are down constantly; we can’t go on like this. Because they are still under 
warranty, they eventually get repaired. But we are losing considerable business in downtime. 
Your ms. Selles has been less than helpful, so i telephoned the district manager, rick Jimenez. i suggested that we trade in our 
imager 500E copiers (which we got for $2,500 each) on two imager 1000E models (at $13,500 each). However, mr. Jimenez 
said he would have to charge 50 percent depreciation on our imager 500E copiers. What a ripoff! i think that 20 percent depre-
ciation is more reasonable since we have had the machines only three months. mr. Jimenez said he would get back to me, and 
i haven’t heard from him since. 
i’m writing to your headquarters because i have no faith in either ms. Selles or mr. Jimenez, and i need action on these 
machines. if you understood anything about business, you would see what a sweet deal i’m offering you. i’m willing to stick 
with your company and purchase your most expensive model—but i can’t take such a steep loss on the imager 500E copi-
ers. The imager 500E copiers are relatively new; you should be able to sell them with no trouble. and think of all the money 
you will save by not having your repair technicians making constant trips to service our 500E copiers! please let me hear 
from you immediately. 
Sincerely yours,

212 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
List at least five weaknesses of this letter.
8.4 Sales Letter Analysis
Your Task. Select a one- or two-page sales letter received by you or a friend. (if you are unable to find a sales letter, your 
instructor may have a collection.) Study the letter and then answer these questions:
a. What techniques capture the reader’s attention?
b. is the opening effective? Explain. 
c. What are the central selling points?
d. Does the letter use rational, emotional, or a combination of appeals? Explain. 
e. What reader benefits are suggested?
f. How does the letter build interest in the product or service?
g. How is price handled?
h. How does the letter anticipate reader resistance and offer counterarguments?
i.  What action is the reader to take? How is the action made easy?
j.  What motivators spur the reader to act quickly?
A
activities and cases
weB
8.5 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Financial Advice for the Young, Fabulous, and Broke
Despite spending countless hours in the classroom and writing stacks of meticulous research papers, many graduates who 
are about to enter the real world are clueless when it comes to basic personal finance, according to the experts. as program 
chair for the associated Student Organization at the university of Nevada, Las Vegas, you suggest that the group invite 
financial celebrity Suze Orman to be its keynote speaker at a special graduation convocation. The aSO agreed and set aside 
$1,000 as an honorarium. This is not very much to entice the author of The Money Book for the Young, Fabulous & Broke, but 
ms. Orman has been heavily promoting her book in cross-country tours to college campuses. The aSO group thinks it stands 
a fair chance of luring this financial celebrity to campus.10
Your Task. Write a convincing favor/action request to Suze Orman, p.O. Box 4502, New York, NY 10014. Learn more about 
her expertise and books by using the Web and electronic databases. invite her to speak may 26. provide direct and indirect 
benefits. include an end date and make it easy to respond. Do not use the same wording as the model documents in this 
chapter.
TeaM
8.6 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Celebrity Auction
Your professional or school organization (such as the associated Students Organization) must find ways to raise money. The 
president of your group appoints a team and asks it to brainstorm for ways to meet your group’s pledge to aid the united 
Way’s battle against adult illiteracy in your community. The campaign against adult illiteracy has targeted an estimated 
10,000 people in your community who cannot read or write. after considering and discarding a number of silly ideas, your 
team comes up with the brilliant idea of a celebrity auction. at a fall function, items or services from local and other celebri-
ties would be auctioned. Your organization approves your idea and asks your team to persuade an important person in your 
professional organization (or your college president) to donate one hour of tutoring in a subject he or she chooses. if you 
have higher aspirations, write to a movie star or athlete of your choice—perhaps one who is part of your organization or who 
attended your school.
Your Task. as a team, discuss the situation and decide what action to take. Then write a persuasive letter to secure an item 
for the auction. You might wish to ask a star to donate a prop from a recent movie.

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
213
TeaM
weB
8.7 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: PDAs Lighten Realtors’ Load in Orlando, Florida
Orlando, Florida, boasts warm weather year round. its lack of income tax makes it a popular destination for retirees and oth-
ers who want to stretch their dollar farther and soak up some sun. Orlando offers a lower cost of living and steadier home 
values than the rest of Florida and the nation. Orlando has been nicknamed “Hollywood East” for a growing movie industry 
and is an attractive destination for its theme parks and convention centers. The engineering and electronic gaming fields 
are booming and seem immune even to economic downturns.11 all this is good news for the realtors in Orlando. However, 
agents have to grapple with telephone directory–size books of multiple listings—or run back and forth to their offices as they 
show home buyers what is on the market.
as a staffer at one of Orlando’s top realty agencies, you recently attended a association of realtors meeting and talked 
with fellow agent greg Sawicki. He showed you his new BlackBerry, a personal digital assistant (pDa), and said, “Watch 
this.” He accessed listing after listing of homes for sale by his company and others. You couldn’t believe your eyes. You saw 
island properties, historic homes, lakefront condos—all with pictures and complete listing information. in this little device, 
which could easily fit into a pocket (or purse), you could carry six months’ worth of active, pending, and closed listings, along 
with contact details for agents and other valuable information.
You thought about the size of your multiple listing books and how often you had to trudge back to the office when a 
home buyer wanted to see a market listing. “Looks terrific,” you said to greg. “But what about new listings? and how much 
does this thing cost? i bet it has a steep learning curve.” Eager to show off his new toy, greg demonstrated its user-friendly 
interface that follows intuitive prompts such as price, area, and number of bedrooms. He explained that his agency bought 
the software for $129. For a monthly fee of $19, he downloads updates as often as he likes. in regard to ease of use, greg 
said that even his fellow agent annette, notoriously computer challenged, loved it. None of the staff found it confusing or 
difficult to operate.
You decide that the agency where you work should provide this service to all 18 full-time staff agents. assume that multi-
ple listing software is available for the greater Orlando area.
Your Task. With other staff members (your classmates), decide how to approach the agency owner, who is “old school” and 
shuns most technology. Decide what you want to request. Do you merely want the owner to talk with you about the service? 
Should you come right out and ask for pDas and the service for all 18 staff members? Should you expect staff members 
to provide the hardware (a basic pDa at about $200) and the agency to purchase the service and individual updates for 
each full-time agent? Or should you ask for the service plus a top-of-the-line smartphone that provides pDa/phone, global 
positioning system (gpS), navigation, and other capabilities? Learn more about smartphones and pDas such as BlackBerry, 
Treo, and iphone on the Web. Explore this information with your team. Once you decide on a course of action, what appeals 
would be most persuasive? Discuss how to handle price in your persuasive argument. individually or as a group, prepare 
a persuasive message to michael J. Sawyer, president, Sawyer Orlando realty. Decide whether you should deliver your 
persuasive message as a printed memo or an e-mail, possibly one with an attachment in mS Word.
TeaM
8.8 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Servers Want Recourse From Stingy Customers
Centered in the heart of a 650-acre Florida paradise, the Crescent Beach & golf resort offers gracious hospitality and beauti-
ful accommodations. its casually elegant restaurant, The Lido Beach Club, is the perfect stop after a day at the beach with 
infinite views of the gulf of mexico. as a server at the Lido, you enjoy working in this resort setting—except for one thing. 
You have occasionally been “stiffed” by a patron who left no tip. You know your service is excellent, but some customers 
just don’t get it. They seem to think that tips are optional, a sign of appreciation. For servers, however, tips are 80 percent 
of their income.
in a recent New York Times article, you learned that some restaurants—like the famous Coach House restaurant in New 
York—automatically add a 15 percent tip to the bill. in Santa monica the Lula restaurant prints “gratuity guidelines” on 
checks, showing customers what a 15 or 20 percent tip would be. You also know that american Express recently developed 
a gratuity calculation feature on its terminals. This means that diners don’t even have to do the math!
Your Task. Because they know you are studying business communication, your fellow servers have asked you to write a 
serious letter to andrew garcia, general manager, Crescent Beach & golf resort, 9891 gulf Shore Drive, Naples, FL 34108. 
persuade him to adopt mandatory tipping guidelines in the restaurant. Talk with fellow servers (your classmates) to develop 
logical persuasive arguments.
8.9 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Dictionary Definition of McJobs Angers McDonald’s
The folks at mcDonald’s fumed when they heard about the latest edition of a highly regarded dictionary, Merriam-Webster’s 
Collegiate Dictionary, defined the word McJob as “a low-paying job that requires little skill and provides little opportunity for 
advancement.” Naturally, mcDonald’s was outraged. One executive said, “it’s a slap in the face to the 12 million men and 
women who work hard every day in america’s 900,000 restaurants.”
The term McJob was coined by Canadian novelist Douglas Coupland in his 1991 novel Generation X. in this novel the 
term described a low-prestige, low-dignity, low-benefit, no-future job in the service sector. mcDonald’s strongly objects 

214 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
to this corruption of its name. For one thing, the company rejects the notion that its jobs are dead ends. Significant mem-
bers of top management—including the president, chief operating officer, and CEO—began their mcDonald’s careers 
behind the counter. moreover, when it comes to training, mcDonald’s trains more young people than the u.S. armed 
forces.
What is more, mcDonald’s is especially proud of its “mCJOBS” program for mentally and physically challenged people. 
Some officers even wonder whether the dictionary term McJob comes dangerously close to the trademarked name for its 
special program. another point that rankles mcDonald’s is that, according to its records, over 1,000 people who now own 
mcDonald’s restaurants received their training while serving customers. Who says that its jobs have no future?
The CEO is burned up about merriam-Webster’s dictionary definition, and he wants to send a complaint letter. However, 
he is busy and asks you, a member of the communication staff, to draft a first version. He is so steamed that he is thinking 
of sending a copy of the letter to news agencies.
Your Task. Before writing this letter, decide what action, if any, to request. Think about an appropriate tone and also about 
the two possible audiences. Then write a persuasive letter for the signature of the CEO. include the “a slap in the face” 
statement, which he insists on inserting. address your letter to Frederick C. mish, editor in chief, merriam-Webster. Look for 
a street address on the Web.
weB
8.10 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Appealing to Your Congressional Representative to Listen 
and Act
assume you are upset about an issue, and you want your representative or senator to know your position. Choose a national 
issue about which you feel strongly: student loans, social security depletion, human rights in other countries, federal safety 
regulations for employees, environmental protection, affirmative action, gun control, taxation of married couples, finding a 
cure for obesity, the federal deficit, or some other area regulated by Congress. 
How does one write to a congressional representative? For best results, consider these tips:
a. use the proper form of address (The Honorable John Smith, Dear Senator Smith or The Honorable Joan Doe, Dear 
representative Doe).
b. identify yourself as a member of his or her state or district. 
c. immediately state your position (I urge you to support/oppose . . . because . . .). 
d. present facts and illustrations and explain how they affect you personally. if legislation were enacted, how would you or 
your organization be better off or worse off? avoid generalities.
e. Offer to provide further information. 
f. keep the message polite, constructive, and brief (one page tops).
Your Task. use your favorite Web search engine such as google to obtain your congressional representative’s address. Try 
the search term contacting Congress. You should be able to find e-mail and land addresses, along with fax and telephone 
numbers. remember that although e-mail and fax messages are fast, they don’t carry as much influence as personal letters. 
moreover, congressional representatives are having trouble responding to the overload of e-mail messages they receive. 
Decide whether it would be better to send an e-mail message or a letter. 
TeaM
8.11 Persuasive Favor/Action Request: Vending Machines Are Cash Cows to Schools
”if i start to get huge, then, yeah, i’ll cut out the chips and Coke,” says seventeen-year-old Nicole O’Neill, as she munches 
sour-cream-and-onion potato chips and downs a cold can of soda fresh from the snack machine. most days her lunch comes 
from a vending machine. The trim high school junior, however, isn’t too concerned about how junk food affects her weight or 
overall health. although she admits she would prefer a granola bar or fruit, few healthful selections are available from school 
vending machines.
Vending machines loaded with soft drinks and snacks are increasingly under attack in schools and lunchrooms. Some 
school boards, however, see them as cash cows. in gresham, Oregon, the school district is considering a lucrative soft drink 
contract. if it signs an exclusive 12-year agreement with Coca-Cola to allow vending machines at gresham High School, the 
school district will receive $75,000 up front. Then it will receive an additional $75,000 three years later. Commission sales on 
the 75-cent drinks will bring in an additional $322,000 over the 12-year contract, provided the school sells 67,000 cans and 
bottles every year. in the past the vending machine payments supported student body activities such as sending students 
to choir concerts and paying athletic participation fees. Vending machine funds also paid for an electronic reader board in 
front of the school and a sound system for the gym. The latest contract would bring in $150,000, which is already earmarked 
for new artificial turf on the school athletic field.
Coca-Cola’s vending machines would dispense soft drinks, Fruitopia, minute maid juices, powerade, and Dasani water. 
The hands-down student favorite, of course, is calorie-laden Coke. Because increasing childhood and adolescent obesity 
across the nation is a major health concern, the gresham parent–Teacher association (pTa) decided to oppose the  contract. 

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
215
The pTa realizes that the school board is heavily influenced by the income generated from the Coca-Cola contract. it won-
ders what other school districts are doing about their vending machine contracts.
Your Task. as part of a pTa committee, you have been given the task of researching and composing a persuasive but 
concise (no more than one page) letter addressed to the school board. use the Web to locate articles that might help 
you develop arguments, alternatives, and counterarguments. meet with your team to discuss your findings. Then, indi-
vidually or as a group, write a letter to the Board of Directors, gresham-Barlow School District, p.O. Box 310, gresham, 
Or 97033.
8.12 Personal Persuasive Memo or E-Mail: Dear Boss
in your own work or organization experience, identify a problem for which you have a solution. Should a procedure be altered 
to improve performance? Would a new or different piece of equipment help you perform your work better? Could some tasks 
be scheduled more efficiently? are employees being used most effectively? Could customers be better served by changing 
something? Do you want to work other hours or perform other tasks?
Your Task. Once you have identified a situation requiring persuasion, decide whether to write an e-mail message or an 
 interoffice memo (sent as an attachment to a short cover e-mail) to your boss or organization head. use actual names and 
facts. Employ the concepts and techniques in this chapter to help you convince your boss that your idea should prevail. 
include concrete examples, anticipate objections, emphasize reader benefits, and end with a specific action to be taken.
e-Mail
8.13 Persuasive E-Mail: Scheduling Meetings More Strategically
The following message, with names changed, was actually sent.
Your Task. Based on what you have learned in this chapter, improve this e-mail. Expect the staff to be somewhat resistant 
because they have never before had meeting restrictions. 
From: 
Dina Waterman [dwaterman@promosell.com]
To: 
all managers
Cc: 
Subject: Scheduling meetings
please be reminded that travel in the greater Los angeles area is time consuming. in the future we are asking that you set 
up meetings that 
 1. are of critical importance
 2. Consider travel time for the participants
 3. Consider phone conferences (or video or e-mail) in lieu of face-to-face meetings 
 4. meetings should be at the location where most of the participants work and at the most opportune travel times
 5. Traveling together is another way to save time and resources.
We all have our traffic horror stories. a recent one is that a certain manager was asked to attend a one-hour meeting in 
Burbank. This required one hour of travel in advance of the meeting, one hour for the meeting, and two and a half hours of 
travel through Los angeles afterward. This meeting was scheduled for 4 P.M. Total time consumed by the manager for the 
one-hour meeting was four and a half hours. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
e-Mail
weB
8.14 Persuasive Internal E-Mail Request: Convincing Your Boss to Blog
You have just read Steve rubel’s Micro Persuasion blog, in which he cites an interesting study of chief executives and blog-
ging.12 it turns out that a majority of CEOs believe blogs to be useful for internal (59 percent) and external communication 
(47 percent). However, only 7 percent of the CEOs interviewed actually blog, although 18 percent expect to host a company 
blog within two years.
Your boss, Simon Dawkins, is a technophobe who is slow in adopting the latest information technology. You know that it 
will be a difficult sell, but you believe that corporate blogging is an opportunity not to be missed.
Your Task. Write a persuasive e-mail message to Simon Dawkins attempting to convince him that blogging is a useful public-
relations and internal communication tool and that he or someone he officially designates should start a company weblog. 
anticipate Dawkins’ fears. Naturally, a blogger has to be prepared even for unflattering comments. if your instructor directs, 
visit the blogs of companies such as google (http://googleblog.blogspot.com/), microsoft (http://blogs.msdn.com/), or 
Chrysler (http://www.chryslerweblog.com/). You can search for company blogs in google. Select the More tab on top of 
the screen and click Blogs.

216 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
e-Mail
weB
8.15 Persuasive Internal Request: Can We Create Our Own Business Podcasts?
You are working for the small accounting firm, Cpa plus, and your boss, Bradford Trask, wonders whether your company 
could produce podcasts for its clients without professional help. He doesn’t know how podcasting really works, nor what 
resources or costs would be required. However, he has read about the benefits of providing advice or sending promotional 
messages to customers who can download them from the company Web site or subscribe to them in a podcast directory.
Conduct some Web research to understand better how podcasting works and what hardware and software are needed. 
Visit podcast directories such as Podcast Alley (http://www.podcastalley.com) or Podcast.net (http://www.podcast.net) 
for some ideas, or search iTunes for business and investment podcasts. The Small Business administration (http://www.sba
.gov/tools/resourcelibrary/Podcasts/) also offers Web pages devoted to the topic.
Your Task. Consider your accounting firm’s needs and its audience. Then write an e-mail or a memo addressed to Bradford 
Trask that you would send along with a brief e-mail cover message. in your memo argue for or against creating podcasts in 
house. For professional podcasts listen to The Wall Street Journal’s The Journal Report or any number of business podcasts 
on iTunes.
8.16 Persuasive Claim: Legal Costs for Sharing a Slice of Heaven
Originally a shipbuilding village, the town of mystic, Connecticut, captures the spirit of the nineteenth-century seafaring era. 
However, it is best known for mystic pizza, a bustling local pizzeria featured in a movie that launched the film career of Julia 
roberts. Today, customers line the sidewalk waiting to taste its pizza, called by some “a slice of Heaven.”
assume that you are the business manager for mystic pizza’s owners. They were approached by an independent vendor 
who wants to use the mystic pizza name and secret recipes to distribute frozen pizza through grocery and convenience 
stores. as business manager, you worked with a law firm, Santoro, michaels, and associates. This firm was to draw up con-
tracts regarding the use of mystic pizza’s name and quality standards for the product. When you received the bill from Tom 
Santoro, you were flabbergasted. it itemized 38 hours of attorney preparation, at $400 per hour, and 55 hours of paralegal 
assistance, at $100 per hour. The bill also showed $415 for telephone calls, which might be accurate because mr. Santoro 
had to talk with the owners, who were vacationing in italy at the time. You seriously doubt, however, that an experienced 
attorney would require 38 hours to draw up the contracts in question. When you began checking, you discovered that excel-
lent legal advice could be obtained for $200 an hour.
Your Task. Decide what you want to request, and then write a persuasive request to Thomas E. Santoro, attorney at Law, 
Santoro, michaels, and associates, 448 asylum Street, Hartford, CT 06105. include an end date and a reason for it.
8.17 Persuasive Claim: Champagne Breakfast Appears Only on Credit Card
as regional manager for an electronics parts manufacturer, you and two other employees attended a conference in Chicago. 
You stayed at the Hilton Chicago Lakeview because your company recommends that employees use this hotel chain. 
generally, your employees have liked their accommodations, and the rates have been within your company’s budget. The 
hotel’s service has been excellent.
Now, however, you are unhappy with the charges you see on your company’s credit statement from Hilton Chicago 
Lakeview. When your department’s administrative assistant made the reservations, she was assured that you would 
receive the weekend rates and that a hot breakfast—in the hotel restaurant, The pavilion—would be included in the rate. 
You hate those cold sweet-rolls-and-instant-coffee “continental” breakfasts, especially when you have to leave early and 
won’t get another meal until afternoon. So you and the other two employees went to the restaurant and ordered a hot meal 
from the menu.
When you received the credit statement, though, you saw a charge for $81 for three champagne buffet breakfasts in the 
atrium. You hit the ceiling! For one thing, you didn’t have a buffet breakfast and certainly no champagne. The three of you 
got there so early that no buffet had been set up. You ordered pancakes and sausage, and for this you were billed $25 each. 
You are outraged! What is worse, your company may charge you personally for exceeding the expected rates.
in looking back at this event, you remembered that other guests on your floor were having a “continental” breakfast in a 
lounge on your floor. perhaps that is where the hotel expected all guests on the weekend rate to eat. However, your admin-
istrative assistant had specifically asked about this matter when she made the reservations, and she was told that you could 
order breakfast from the menu at the hotel’s restaurant.
Your Task. You want to straighten out this matter, and you can’t do it by telephone because you suspect that you will need 
a written record of this entire mess. Write a claim request to Customer Service, Hilton Chicago Lakeview, 800 North michigan 
avenue, Chicago, iL 60604. Should you include a copy of the credit statement showing the charge?
8.18 E-Mail or Direct Mail Sales Message: Promoting Your Product or Service
identify a situation in your current job or a previous one in which a sales letter is or was needed. using suggestions from 
this chapter, write an appropriate sales message that promotes a product or service. use actual names, information, 
and examples. if you have no work experience, imagine a business you would like to start: word processing, pet groom-
ing, car detailing, tutoring, specialty knitting, balloon decorating, delivery service, child care, gardening, lawn care, or 
something else. 

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
217
Commas 3
review the grammar/mechanics Handbook Sections 2.10–2.15. Then study each of the following 
statements and insert necessary commas. in the space provided write the number of commas 
that you add; write 0 if no commas are needed. also record the number of the g/m principle(s) 
illustrated. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided at the end of the book. 
if your answers differ, study carefully the principles shown in parentheses.
Example management selected meredith Jones not ronald Lee to be the next manager.
 1. “There are no gains” said Benjamin Franklin “without pains.”
 2. The featured speakers are keiko krahnke phD and reggie kostiz mBa.
 3. You inspected their Web site didn’t you?
 4. research shows that talking on a cell phone distracts drivers and quadruples their chances 
of getting into accidents such as rear-ending a car ahead of them.
 5. The bigger the monitor the clearer the picture.
Review Commas 1, 2, 3
 6. as you may know information chips are already encoded in the visas of people who need 
them for work travel or study in this country.
 7. We think however that the new passports will be issued only to diplomats and other 
government employees beginning in august.
 8. To fill the vacant position we hope to hire Wilma robinson who is currently working in 
Virginia Beach.
 9. all things considered our conference will attract more participants if it is held in a resort 
setting such as Las Vegas Scottsdale or Orlando.
V
Video resources
This chapter has one video with a writing assignment.
Video Library 2: Persuasive Request: Hard Rock Café. 
This video takes you inside the Hard rock Cafe where you 
learn about changes it has undergone in surviving over 
30 years in the rough-and-tumble world of hospitality. One 
problem involves difficulty in maintaining its well-known logo 
around the world. While watching the video, look for refer-
ences to the changes taking place and the discussion of 
brand control.
Your Task. as an assistant in the Hard rock Corporate 
identity Division, you have been asked to draft a persuasive 
message to be sent to the Edinburgh international Comedy 
Festival. in doing research, you learned that this festival is 
one of the three largest comedy festivals in the world, along-
side melbourne madness Festival and montreal’s Just for 
Laughs Festival. an annual event, the Edinburgh international 
Comedy Festival takes over this Scotland city each autumn 
with stand-up comedy, cabaret, theater, street performance, 
film, television, radio, and visual arts programs. Some of the 
programs raise funds for charity. 
The problem is that the festival is staging some of its events 
at the Hard rock Cafe, and the festival is using outdated Hard 
rock logos at their Web site and in print announcements. 
Your task is to persuade the Edinburgh international Comedy 
Festival organizers to stop using the old logos. Explain why it 
is necessary to use the official Hard rock logo. make it easy 
for them to obtain the official logo at http://www.hardrock.net
.official.logo. Organizers must also sign the logo usage agree-
ment. Organizers may be resistant because they have invested 
in announcements and Web designs with the old logo. if they 
don’t comply by June 1, Hard rock attorneys may begin legal 
actions. However, you need to present this date without mak-
ing it sound like a threat. Your boss wants this message to 
develop goodwill, not motivate antagonism. Write a persuasive 
e-mail message to Edinburgh international Comedy Festival 
organizer Barry Cook at bcook@edinburghfestival.com. add any 
reasonable details.
G
grammar/Mechanics checkup 8
Your Task. Write a sales letter or an online e-mail message selling your product or service to be distributed to your prospec-
tive customers. Be sure to tell them how to respond.
You don’t need to know HTmL to craft a concise and eye-catching online sales message. Try designing it in mS Word 
and saving it as a Web page (in Word 2003, go to File, click Save as, and select Web Page in the Save as type pull-down 
window; in Word 2007 you reach the same window by clicking the mS logo, then Save as). Consider adding graphics or 
photos—either your own or samples borrowed from the internet. as long as you use them for this assignment and don’t 
publish them online, you are not violating copyright laws.
2 
(2.12)
^,
^,

218 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
 10. if you examine the log closely you will see that we shipped 15 orders on Thursday; on 
Friday only 4. 
 11. in the past ten years we have promoted over 30 well-qualified individuals many of whom 
started in accounting.
 12. Nancy rubey who spoke to our class last week is the author of a book titled The Digital 
Workplace.
 13. a recent study of productivity that was conducted by authoritative researchers revealed 
that workers in the united States are more productive than workers in Europe or Japan.
 14. america’s secret productivity weapons according to the report were not bigger companies 
more robots or even brainier managers. 
 15. as a matter of fact the report said that america’s productivity resulted from a capitalistic 
system of unprotected hands-off competition. 

Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages 
219
The following letter has errors in grammar, punctuation, spelling, proofreading, and other 
problems. You may either (a) use standard proofreading marks (see appendix B) to cor-
rect the errors here or (b) download the document from www.meguffey.com and revise 
at your computer. Study the guidelines in the grammar/mechanics Handbook to sharpen 
your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics challenge 8
Current date
Mrs. E. R. Churchill
224 Oak Grove Avenue
Chapel Hill, NC 27514
Dear Mrs. Churchell:
This message is to inform you that we appreciate receiving your 
recent letter requesting that a curve in Highway 35 be rebuilt. The 
Department of Transportation shares your concern about the safety 
of the stretch between Mount Vernon and Pittsboro which is near 
your home. 
Highway 35 as you mentioned has many hills curves and blind 
spots. However it's accident rate which is 4.05 per million vehicle 
miles is far from the worse in the state. In fact at least 49 other state 
highways have worse safety records.
At this point in time I want you to know that we do have studies 
under way that will result in the relocation of sections of highway 35 
to terrain that will provide safer driving conditions. As you are aware 
such changes take time. We must coordinate our plans with town 
county state and federal authorities. Money is assigned to these 
projects by priority and Highway 35 does not have top priority. In 
addition accidents along Highway 35 are not concentrated at any 
one curve, they are spread out over the entire highway. 
For all of the above reasons we do not anticipate immediately 
rebuilding any curves on Highway 35. In the near future we plan to 
install guardrails and we will be certain to place a guardrail at the 
curve that concerns you. 
We appreciate your concern for safety Mrs. Churchill. Please write 
to us again if you have other ideas for reducing accidents.
Sincerely,
Mitchell M. Overton
Ofﬁce of Safety and Speed Management
Mitchell M. Overton

220 
Chapter 8: Persuasive Messages
What Is Legal and What Is Not in Sales Letters
in promoting products and writing sales letters, be careful about the words you choose 
and the claims you make. How far can you go in praising and selling your product?
Puffery. in a sales letter, you can write, Hey, we’ve got something fantastic! It’s the very best 
product on the market! Called “puffery,” such promotional claims are not taken literally by 
reasonable consumers. 
Proving your claims. if you write that a gadget or additive you sell will help consum-
ers save gasoline, you had better have competent and reliable scientific evidence to 
support the claim. Such a claim goes beyond puffery and requires proof. The Federal 
Trade Commission warned companies about making misleading claims regarding the 
benefits of gas-saving and other energy-related devices without scientifically proving 
their assertions.13 in a litigious society, marketers who exaggerate are often taken to 
court.
Celebrities. The unauthorized use of a celebrity’s name, likeness, or nickname is not 
permitted in sales messages. For example, actor, writer, and director Woody allen suc-
cessfully sued a video store chain that used a model who looked enough like allen to 
cause confusion in consumers; they may have been led to believe that allen endorsed 
the business. Similarly, film star Dustin Hoffman won millions of dollars for the unauthor-
ized use of a digitally altered photo showing him in an evening gown and ralph Lauren 
heels. Even a commercial showing the image of a celebrity such as Tiger Woods on a 
camera phone is risky without permission.
Misleading statements. You cannot tell people that they are winners or finalists in a 
sweepstake unless they actually are. american Family publishers was found guilty of 
sending letters tricking people into buying magazine subscription in the belief that they 
had won $1.1 million. Similarly, it is deceptive to invite unsuspecting consumers to cash 
a check that will then hook them into entering a legal contract or a subscription. Finally, 
companies may not misrepresent the nature, characteristics, qualities, or geographic 
origin of goods or services they are promoting.
Unwanted merchandise. if you enclose unsolicited merchandise with a letter, don’t 
require the receiver to pay for it or return it. Express publishing, for example, sent a 
copy of its Food & Wine Magazine’s Cookbook with a letter inviting recipients to preview 
the book. “if you don’t want to preview the book, simply return the advance notice card 
within 14 days.” Courts, however, have ruled that recipients are allowed to retain, use, 
or discard any unsolicited merchandise without paying for it or returning it.
Career Application. Bring to class at least three sales letters or advertisements that 
may represent issues described here. What examples of puffery can you identify? are 
claims substantiated by reliable evidence? What proof is offered? Do any of your exam-
ples include names, images, or nicknames of celebrities? How likely is it that the celebrity 
authorized this use? Have you ever received unwanted merchandise as part of a sales 
campaign? What were you expected to do with it?
•
•
•
•
•
communication workshop: ethics

Chapter 9
Informal Reports
Chapter 10
Proposals and Formal Reports
Reporting Workplace Data
4
u N I T  4
© comma ImaGe / JUPITeRImaGes

222 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
© IsTocKPHoTo.com / cHRIs scHmIdT
OBJeCTIVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Describe business report basics, including functions, organizational patterns, 
formats, and delivery methods.
• Develop informal reports, including determining the problem and purpose, and 
gathering data.
• Select an appropriate writing style, be objective, and compose effective headings.
• Describe six kinds of informal reports.
• Write information and progress reports.
• Write justification/recommendation reports.
• Write feasibility reports.
• Write minutes of meetings and summaries of longer publications.
understanding Report Basics
Why do you need to learn how to write reports? As a business and professional 
communicator, you will probably have your share of reports to write. Reports are a 
fact of life in business today. With increasing emphasis on performance and profits, 
businesspeople analyze the pros and cons of problems, studying alternatives and 
assessing facts, figures, and details. This analysis results in reports.
Management decisions in many organizations are based on information submit-
ted in the form of reports. Reports may be submitted in writing, orally, or digitally. 
Increasingly, workplace information is presented in a PowerPoint talk accompanied 
by a written report or a series of digital slides called a deck. You will learn about 
making oral presentations in Chapter 12.
In this chapter we will concentrate on informal reports, the most common type of 
report in the workplace. These reports tend to be short (usually eight or fewer pages), use 
memo or letter format, and are personal in tone. You will learn about the functions, pat-
terns, formats, and writing styles of typical business reports. You will also learn to write 
good reports by examining basic techniques and by analyzing appropriate models.
Because of their abundance and diversity, business reports are difficult to define. 
They may range from informal half-page trip reports to formal 200-page financial 
forecasts. Reports may be presented orally in front of a group or electronically by 
e-mail or a Web site. Some reports appear as words on paper in the form of memos 
Informal 
Reports
9
C H A P T e R  9
The ultimate goal of a 
written report is to get your 
ideas across to your readers.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
223 
and letters. Others are primarily numerical data, such as tax reports or profit-and-
loss statements. Some reports provide information only; others analyze and make 
recommendations. Although reports vary greatly in length, content, form, and for-
mality level, they all have one common purpose: to answer questions and solve 
problems.
Functions of Reports
In terms of what they do, most reports fit into two broad cat-
egories: informative reports and analytical reports. 
Informative Reports. Reports that present data with-
out analysis or recommendations are primarily informative. 
Although writers collect and organize facts, they are not 
expected to analyze the facts for readers. A trip report describ-
ing an employee’s visit to a conference, for example, simply 
presents information. Other reports that present information 
without analysis involve routine operations, compliance with 
regulations, and company policies and procedures. 
Analytical Reports. Reports that provide data, analyses, and conclusions 
are analytical. If requested, writers also supply recommendations. Analytical reports 
may intend to persuade readers to act or to change their beliefs. Assume you are 
writing a feasibility report that compares several potential locations for a skate-
board arena. After analyzing and discussing alternatives, you might recommend one 
site, thus attempting to persuade readers to accept this choice. 
Organizational Patterns for Reports
Like letters and memos, reports may be organized directly or indirectly. The reader’s 
expectations and the content of a report determine its pattern of development, as 
illustrated in Figure 9.1.
“Your report was a bit unfocused, so I trimmed it 
down from 300 pages to one strong paragraph.”
© RandY GlasbeRGen. www.GlasbeRGen.com
FIguRe 9.1 Audience Analysis and Report Organization
Information Report 
Introduction/Background
Facts/Findings
Summary 
Analytical Report
Introduction/Problem
Facts/Findings
Discussion/Analysis 
CONCLUSIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS
Analytical Report
Introduction/Problem
Facts/Findings
Discussion/Analysis 
CONCLUSIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS
If readers 
may be 
disappointed
or hostile
If readers
need to be
persuaded
If readers
need to be
educated
If readers
are eager
to have 
results first
If readers
are
supportive
Indirect
Pattern
If readers
are
informed
Direct
Pattern

224 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
Direct Pattern. When the purpose for writing is presented close to the begin-
ning, the organizational pattern is direct. Information reports, such as the letter report 
shown in Figure 9.2, are usually arranged directly. They open with an introduction, 
FIguRe 9.2 Information Report—Letter Format With E-Mail Transmittal

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
225
followed by the facts and a summary. In Figure 9.2 the writer explains a legal services 
plan. The letter report begins with an introduction. Then it presents the facts, which 
are divided into three subtopics identified by descriptive headings. The letter ends with 
a summary and a complimentary close. Note that the report was sent as an attach-
ment by e-mail.
Analytical reports may also be organized directly, especially when readers are 
supportive or are familiar with the topic. Many busy executives prefer this pattern 
because it gives them the results of the report immediately. They don’t have to 
spend time wading through the facts, findings, discussion, and analyses to get to the 
two items they are most interested in—the conclusions and recommendations. You 
The direct pattern 
places conclusions and 
recommendations near 
the beginning of a report.
FIguRe 9.2 Continued

226 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
should be aware, though, that unless readers are familiar with the topic, they may 
find the direct pattern confusing. Some readers prefer the indirect pattern because it 
seems logical and mirrors the way we solve problems. 
Indirect Pattern. When the conclusions and recommendations, if requested, 
appear at the end of the report, the organizational pattern is indirect. Such 
reports usually begin with an introduction or description of the problem, fol-
lowed by facts and interpretation from the writer. They end with conclusions and 
recom mendations. This pattern is helpful when readers are unfamiliar with the 
problem. It is also useful when readers must be persuaded or when they may be 
disappointed in or hostile toward the report’s findings. The writer is more likely 
to retain the reader’s interest by first explaining, justifying, and analyzing the 
facts and then making recommendations. This pattern also seems most rational 
to readers because it follows the normal thought process: problem, alternatives 
(facts), solution. 
Report Formats
The format of a report is governed by its length, topic, audience, and purpose. After 
considering these elements, you will probably choose from among the following five 
formats. 
Letter Format. Use letter format for short (usually eight or fewer pages) 
informal reports addressed outside an organization. Prepared on a company’s 
letterhead stationery, a letter report contains a date, inside address, salutation, 
and complimentary close, as shown in Figure 9.2. Although they may carry 
information similar to that found in correspondence, letter reports usually are 
longer and show more careful organization than most letters. They also include 
headings. 
Memo Format. For short informal reports that stay within organizations, 
memo format is appropriate. Memo reports begin with essential background infor-
mation, using standard headings: Date, To, From, and Subject. Like letter reports, 
memo reports differ from regular memos in length, use of headings, and deliber-
ate organization. The trip report in Figure 9.3 illustrates the format of an internal 
memo report. Note that the writer attaches the report to an e-mail message, which 
introduces the attachment. 
Manuscript Format. For longer, more formal reports, use manuscript for-
mat. These reports are usually printed on plain paper instead of letterhead statio-
nery or memo forms. They begin with a title followed by systematically displayed 
headings and subheadings. You will see examples of proposals and formal reports 
using manuscript formats in Chapter 10.
Printed Forms. Prepared forms are often used for repetitive data, such as 
monthly sales reports, performance appraisals, merchandise inventories, expense 
claims, and personnel and financial reports. Standardized headings on these forms 
save time for the writer. Preprinted forms also make similar information easy to 
locate and ensure that all necessary information is provided. 
Digital Format. Some reports are not primarily meant to be printed but will 
be projected or viewed and edited digitally. Increasingly, businesses encourage 
employees to upload reports to the company intranet. Firms provide software 
enabling workers to update information about their activities, progress on a project, 
and other information about their on-the-job performance. 
The indirect pattern is 
appropriate for analytical 
reports that seek to persuade 
or that convey bad news.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
A nonprofit organization 
polled 120 businesses to find 
out what type of writing they 
required of their employees. 
More than half of the business 
leaders responded that 
they “frequently” or “almost 
always” produce technical 
reports (59 percent), formal 
reports (62 percent), and 
memos and correspondence 
(70 percent).
How you format a report 
depends on its length, topic, 
audience, and purpose.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
227 
FIguRe 9.3 Information Memo Report—Trip Report With E-Mail Transmittal

228 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
Report Delivery
Once reports are written, you must decide what channel to use to deliver them to 
your readers. Written business reports can be delivered in the following ways:
In Person. If you are located close to the reader, deliver your report in person. 
This delivery method works especially well when you would like to comment on 
the report or clarify its purpose. Delivering a report in person also makes the report 
seem more important or urgent.
By Mail. Many reports are delivered by mail. You can send your reports by 
interoffice mail, U.S. Postal Service delivery, or commercial delivery service such as 
UPS or FedEx.
By Fax. You can fax your report to your reader, but be sure to seek the recipi-
ent’s permission. Very long reports can overwhelm most fax machines. Be sure to 
include a cover page that identifies the sender and introduces the report.
By e-Mail. Reports in any format can be attached to an e-mail message. When 
using this channel, you will introduce the report and refer clearly to the attachment 
in the body of your e-mail message. Figure 9.2 on page 224 shows an example of 
an e-mail transmittal or cover that announces the enclosed letter report and goes to 
a recipient outside the organization. In Figure 9.3 the writer is sending an internal 
memo report by e-mail as an attachment within the organization.
Online. You might choose to make your report available online. Many report 
writers today are making their reports available to their readers on the Web. One 
common method for doing this involves saving the report in Portable Document 
Format (PDF) and then uploading it to the company’s Web site or its intranet. This 
is an inexpensive method of delivery and allows an unlimited number of readers 
access to the report. If the report contains sensitive or confidential information, 
access to the document can be password protected.
Defining the Purpose and gathering Data
Your natural tendency in preparing a report is to sit down and begin writing imme-
diately. If you follow this urge, however, you will very likely have to backtrack and 
start again. Reports take planning, beginning with defining the project and gather-
ing data. The following guidelines will help you plan your project.
Determining the Problem and Purpose of Your Report
The first step in writing a report is understanding the problem or assignment clearly. 
This includes coming up with a statement of purpose. Ask yourself: Am I writing this 
report to inform, to analyze, to solve a problem, or to persuade? The answer to this 
question should be a clear, accurate statement identifying your purpose. In informal 
reports the statement of purpose may be only one sentence; that sentence usually 
becomes part of the introduction. Notice how the following introductory statement 
describes the purpose of the report:
This report analyzes the feasibility and costs of operating an on-site recreation 
center for use by employees.
After writing a statement of purpose, analyze who will read your report. If your 
report is intended for your immediate supervisors and they are supportive of your 
project, you need not include extensive details, historical development, definition 
of terms, or persuasion. Other readers, however, may require background data and 
persuasive strategies.
Written reports can be 
delivered in person, by 
mail, or electronically.
Begin the report-writing 
process by determining 
your purpose for writing 
the report.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
229
The expected audience for your report influences your writing style, research 
methods, vocabulary, areas of emphasis, and communication strategy. Remember, 
too, that your audience may consist of more than one set of readers. Reports are 
often distributed to secondary readers who may need more details than the primary 
readers.
gathering Data
One of the most important steps in the process of writing a report is that of research-
ing and gathering data. A good report is based on solid, accurate, verifiable facts. 
Typical sources of factual information for informal reports include (a) company 
records; (b) observation; (c) surveys, questionnaires, and inventories; (d) interviews; 
(e) printed material; and (f) electronic resources.
Company Records. Many business reports begin with an analysis of com-
pany records and files. From these records you can observe past performance and 
methods used to solve previous problems. You can collect pertinent facts that will 
help determine a course of action.
Observation. Another logical source of data for many problems lies in per-
sonal observation and experience. For example, if you were writing a report on 
the need for a comprehensive policy on the use of digital media, you might observe 
how employees are using e-mail and the Web for personal errands or whether they 
spread potentially damaging company information in their blogs.
Surveys, Questionnaires, and Inventories. Data from groups of 
people can be collected most efficiently and economically by using surveys, ques-
tionnaires, and inventories. For example, if you were part of a committee investi-
gating the success of an employee carpooling program, you might begin by using a 
questionnaire.
Interviews. Talking with individuals directly concerned with the problem pro-
duces excellent firsthand information. For example, if you are researching whether 
your company should install wireless technology, you could interview an expert in 
wireless technology about the pros and cons. Interviews also allow for one-on-one 
communication, thus giving you an opportunity to explain your questions and ideas 
to elicit the most accurate information.
WORKPLACe IN FOCuS
Though new to the international tourism scene, 
the Ritz-carlton, moscow, has quickly become a 
hotel hot spot for five-star travelers. located within 
walking distance of Red square and the Kremlin, 
the 11-story luxury hotel features marble bathrooms, 
regal amenities, a dedicated concierge staff, and a 
panoramic view of one of the world’s most historic 
cities. The traditional-styled guest rooms and suites, 
along with the hotel’s ultra-mod rooftop lounge, offer 
unparalleled comfort with a touch of contemporary 
ambiance. What data sources might an architectural 
firm use when developing plans for an upscale hotel?
© aleXandeR naTRUsKIn / ReUTeRs / landoV
The facts for reports are 
often obtained from company 
records, observation, surveys, 
interviews, printed material, 
and electronic resources.
Interviews provide 
rich, accurate ﬁ rsthand 
information because 
questions can be explained.

230 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
Printed Material. Although we are seeing a steady movement away from 
print to electronic data, print sources are still the most visible part of most libraries. 
Much information is available only in print. Print sources include books, newspa-
pers, and periodicals, such as magazines and journals.
electronic Resources. An extensive source of current and historical infor-
mation is available electronically by using a computer to connect to the Web, elec-
tronic databases, and other online resources. From a personal or office computer 
you can access storehouses of information provided by the government, newspapers, 
magazines, nonprofit organizations, and businesses. Business researchers are also 
using such electronic tools as mailing lists, discussion boards, and blogs to conduct 
research. For short, informal reports you will probably find the most usable data 
in online resources. Chapter 10 gives you more detailed suggestions about online 
research and electronic research tools.
Choosing a Report Writing 
Style and Creating Headings
In previous chapters you have learned that the tone and style we adopt in business doc-
uments matter as much as the message we convey. Not surprisingly, reports require an 
appropriate writing style. They also benefit from objectivity and effective headings.
Adopting an Appropriate Writing Style
Like other business messages, reports can range from informal to formal, depending 
on their purpose, audience, and setting. Research reports from consultants to their 
clients tend to be rather formal. Such reports must project an impression of objectiv-
ity, authority, and impartiality.
In this chapter we are most concerned with an informal writing style. Your short 
reports will probably be written for familiar audiences and involve noncontroversial 
topics. You may use first-person pronouns (I, we, me, my, us, our) and contractions 
(I’m, it’s, let’s, can’t, didn’t). You will emphasize active-voice verbs and strive for 
shorter sentences using familiar words. Figure 9.4 will help you distinguish between 
formal and informal report writing styles.
Whether you choose a formal or informal writing style, remember to apply the 
writing techniques you have learned in earlier chapters. The same techniques you 
have been using to compose effective memos, letters, and e-mail messages apply to 
developing outstanding reports. Like all business documents, business reports must 
be clear and concise. They should be written using topic sentences, support sen-
tences, and transitional expressions to build coherence. Avoid wordiness, outdated 
expressions, slang, jargon, and clichés in your reports. Finally, proofread all busi-
ness reports carefully to make sure that they contain no errors in spelling, grammar, 
punctuation, names and numbers, or format.
Being Objective
Reports are convincing only when the facts are believable and the writer is credible. 
You can build credibility in a number of ways:
• Present both sides of an issue. Even if you favor one possibility, discuss both 
sides and show through logical reasoning why your position is superior. Remain 
impartial, letting the facts prove your point.
• Separate fact from opinion. Suppose a supervisor wrote, Our department 
works harder and gets less credit than any other department in the company.
This opinion is difficult to prove, and it damages the credibility of the writer. A 
more convincing statement might be, Our productivity has increased 6 percent 
over the past year, and I’m proud of the extra effort my employees are making.
After you have made a claim or presented an important statement in a report, 
An informal writing style 
includes ﬁ rst-person 
pronouns, contractions, 
active-voice verbs, 
short sentences, and 
familiar words.
Reports are more believable 
if the author is impartial, 
separates fact from opinion, 
uses moderate language, 
and cites sources.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
231
ask yourself, Is this a verifiable fact? If the answer is no, rephrase your statement 
to make it sound more reasonable.
• Be sensitive and moderate in your choice of language. Don’t exaggerate. 
Instead of saying most people think . . ., it might be more accurate to say 
Some people think . . . . Better yet, use specific figures such as Sixty percent 
of employees agree . . . . Also avoid using labels and 
slanted expressions. Calling someone a loser, a con-
trol freak, or an elitist demonstrates bias. If readers 
suspect that a writer is prejudiced, they may discount 
the entire argument.
• Cite sources. Tell your readers where the informa-
tion came from. For example, In a telephone inter-
view with Blake Spence, director of transportation, 
October 15, he said . . . OR: The Wall Street Journal 
(August 10, p. 40) reports that . . . . By referring to 
respected sources, you lend authority and credibil-
ity to your statements. Your words become more 
believable and your argument, more convincing. In 
Chapter 10 you will learn how to document your 
sources properly.
using effective Report Headings
Good headings are helpful to both the report reader and the writer. For the reader 
they serve as an outline of the text, highlighting major ideas and categories. They 
also act as guides for locating facts and pointing the way through the text. Moreover, 
headings provide resting points for the mind and for the eye, breaking up large 
chunks of text into manageable and inviting segments. For the writer headings 
require that the report author organize the data into meaningful blocks. To learn 
more about designing readable headings, as well as to pick up other tips on design-
ing documents, see Figure 9.5.
FIguRe 9.4 Report Writing Styles
Informal Writing Style
Formal Writing Style
Use
short, routine reports
Reports for familiar audiences
noncontroversial reports
most reports to company insiders
Theses
Research studies
controversial or complex reports (especially to 
outsiders)
Effect
Feeling or warmth, personal involvement, closeness
Impression of objectivity, accuracy, professionalism, 
fairness
distance created between writer and reader
Characteristics
Use of first-person pronouns (I, we, me, my, us, our )
Use of contractions (can’t, don’t )
emphasis on active-voice verbs (I conducted the 
study )
shorter sentences; familiar words
occasional use of humor, metaphors
occasional use of colorful speech
acceptance of author’s opinions and ideas
absence of first-person pronouns; use of third 
person (the researcher, the writer ); increasingly, 
however, the informal style is acceptable
absence of contractions (cannot, do not )
Use of passive-voice verbs (the study was conducted )
complex sentences; long words
absence of humor and figures of speech
Reduced use of colorful adjectives and verbs
elimination of “editorializing” (author’s opinions, 
perceptions)
Formal Writing Style
Theses
Research studies
controversial or complex reports (especially to
outsiders)
Impression of objectivity, accuracy, professionalism,
fairness
distance created between writer and reader
absence of first-person pronouns; use of third
person (the researcher, the writer ); increasingly,
however, the informal style is acceptable
absence of contractions (cannot, do not )
Use of passive-voice verbs (the study was conducted )
complex sentences; long words
absence of humor and figures of speech
Reduced use of colorful adjectives and verbs
elimination of “editorializing” (author’s opinions,
perceptions)
“He says our report is objective. However, quoting 
winston churchill, he writes that the report, by its very 
length, defends itself against the risk of being read.”
© RandY GlasbeRGen. www.GlasbeRGen.com

232 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
You may choose functional or talking headings. Functional headings (such as 
Back ground, Findings, Staffing, and Projected Costs) describe functions or general 
topics. They show the outline of a report but provide little insight for readers. 
Functional headings are useful for routine reports. They are also appropriate for 
sensitive or controversial topics that might provoke emotional reactions. Functional 
headings are used in the progress report shown in Figure 9.6 on page 235.
Talking headings (such as Employees Struggle With Lack of Day-Care Options) 
describe content and provide more information to the reader. Many of the examples 
in this chapter use talking headings, including the information reports in Figures 9.2 
and 9.3. To provide even greater clarity, you can make headings both functional and 
descriptive, such as Recommendations: Saving Costs With Off-Site Care. Whether 
your headings are talking or functional, keep them brief and clear. To create the 
most effective headings, follow a few basic guidelines:
• Use appropriate heading levels. The position and format of a heading indicate 
its level of importance and relationship to other points.
• Strive for parallel construction within levels. All headings at a given level should 
be grammatically similar. Use balanced expressions such as Current Quarterly 
Budget and Next Quarterly Budget rather than Current Quarterly Budget and 
Budget Projected in the Next Quarter.
FIguRe 9.5 Ten Tips for Designing Better Documents
Desktop publishing packages, high-level word processing programs, and advanced printers now make it possible for you to turn out 
professional-looking documents. The temptation, though, is to overdo it by incorporating too many features in one document. Here 
are ten tips for applying good sense and sound design principles in “publishing” your documents:
 1. Analyze your audience. Avoid overly flashy type, colors, 
and borders for conservative business documents. Also 
consider whether your readers will be reading painstakingly 
or merely browsing. Lists and headings help readers who 
are in a hurry.
 2. Choose an appropriate type size. For most business 
memos, letters, and reports, the body text should be 10 to 
12 points tall (a point is 1/72 of an inch). Larger type looks 
amateurish, and smaller type is hard to read.
 3. Use a consistent typeface. Although your software may 
provide a variety of fonts, stay with a single family of type 
within one document. In Word 2003, Times New Roman 
and Arial were the default typefaces and, therefore, became 
the most popular choices. Word 2007 offers many poten-
tial style variations, but the default typefaces are Cambria 
and Calibri. For emphasis and contrast, you may vary the 
font size and weight with bold, italic, bold italic, and other 
selections.
 4. Generally, don’t justify right margins. Textbooks, novels, 
newspapers, magazines, and other long works are usually 
set with justified (even) right margins. However, for shorter 
works ragged-right margins are recommended because 
such margins add white space and help readers locate the 
beginnings of new lines. Slower readers find ragged-right 
copy more legible.
 5. Separate paragraphs and sentences appropriately. The 
first line of a paragraph should be indented or preceded by 
a blank line. To separate sentences, typists have tradition-
ally left two spaces. This spacing is still acceptable, but 
most writers now follow printers’ standards and leave only 
one space.
 6. Design readable headlines. Presenting headlines and 
headings in all caps is generally discouraged because 
solid blocks of capital letters interfere with the recognition 
of word patterns. To further improve readability, select a 
sans serif typeface (one without cross strokes or embellish-
ment), such as Arial.
 7. Strive for an attractive page layout. In designing title 
pages or graphics, provide for a balance between print and 
white space. Also consider placing the focal point (some-
thing that draws the reader’s eye) at the optical center of a 
page—about three lines above the actual center. Moreover, 
remember that the average reader scans a page from left 
to right and top to bottom in a Z pattern. Plan your visuals 
accordingly.
 8. Use graphics and clip art with restraint. Charts, original 
drawings, and photographs can be scanned into documents. 
Ready-made clip art and graphics can also be inserted into 
documents. Use such images, however, only when they are 
well drawn, relevant, purposeful, and appropriately sized.
 9. Avoid amateurish results. Many beginning writers, eager 
to display every graphic device a program offers, produce 
busy, cluttered documents. Too many typefaces, ruled 
lines, images, and oversized headlines will overwhelm 
readers. Strive for simple, clean, and forceful effects.
 10. Develop expertise. Learn to use the desktop publish-
ing features of your current word processing software, 
or investigate one of the special programs, such as 
Quark’s QuarkXPress; Adobe’s PageMaker, InDesign, and 
FrameMaker; and Corel’s Ventura. Although the learning 
curve for these popular programs is steep, such effort is 
well spent if you will be producing newsletters, brochures, 
announcements, visual aids, and promotional literature.
Functional headings 
show the outline of a 
report; talking headings 
describe the content.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
233
• For short reports use first- and second-level headings. Many business reports 
contain only one or two levels of headings. For such reports use first-level head-
ings (centered, bolded) and/or second-level headings (flush left, bolded).
• Capitalize and underline carefully. Most writers use all capital letters (without 
underlines) for main titles, such as the report, chapter, and unit titles. For first- 
and second-level headings, they capitalize only the first letter of main words. 
For additional emphasis, they use a bold font. Don’t enclose headings in quota-
tion marks. 
• Keep headings short but clear. Try to make your headings brief (no more than 
eight words) but understandable. Experiment with headings that concisely tell 
who, what, when, where, and why.
• Don’t use headings as antecedents for pronouns. Don’t follow headings with 
pronouns, such as this, that, these, and those. For example, when the heading 
reads Mobile Devices, don’t begin the next sentence with These are increasingly 
multifunctional and capable.
• Include at least one heading per report page. Headings increase the readability 
and attractiveness of report pages. If used correctly, headings help the reader 
grasp the report structure quickly. Use at least one per page to break up blocks 
of text.
Preparing Typical Informal Reports
Informal business reports generally fall into one of six categories. In many instances 
the boundaries of the categories overlap; distinctions are not always clear-cut. 
Individual situations, goals, and needs may make one report take on some char-
acteristics of a report in another category. Still, these general categories, presented 
here in a brief overview, are helpful to beginning writers. Later you will learn how 
to fully develop each of these reports.
• Information reports. Reports that collect and organize information are informa-
tive or investigative. They may record routine activities such as daily, weekly, 
and monthly reports of sales or profits. They may investigate options, perfor-
mance, or equipment. Although they provide information, they do not analyze 
that information.
  
One distinct type of information report is the trip report. In it business trav-
elers identify the event they attended or the company they visited, objectively 
summarize three to five main points and, if requested, itemize their expenses on 
a separate sheet. Trip reports inform management about new procedures, equip-
ment, trends, and laws or regulations. They may supply information affecting 
products, operations, and service.
• Progress reports. Progress reports monitor the headway of unusual or nonrou-
tine activities. For example, progress reports would keep management informed 
about a committee’s preparations for a trade show 14 months from now. Such 
reports usually answer three questions: (a) Is the project on schedule? (b) Are 
corrective measures needed? and (c) What activities are next?
• Justification/recommendation reports. Justification and recommendation 
reports are similar to information reports in that they present information. 
However, they offer analysis in addition to data. They attempt to solve problems 
by evaluating options and offering recommendations. These reports are often 
solicited; that is, the writer has been asked to investigate and report.
• Feasibility reports. When a company must decide whether to proceed with a 
plan of action, it may require a feasibility report. For example, should a company 
invest thousands of dollars to expand its Web site? A feasibility report would 
examine the practicality of implementing the proposal.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Two-thirds of salaried 
employees in large American 
companies have some 
writing responsibility. “All 
employees must have writing 
ability. . . . Manufacturing 
documentation, operating 
procedures, reporting 
problems, lab safety, waste-
disposal operations—all have 
to be crystal clear,” said one 
human resource director.
Justiﬁ cation/recommendation 
and feasibility reports 
attempt to solve problems 
by presenting data, drawing 
conclusions, and making 
recommendations.

234 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
• Minutes of meetings. A record of the proceedings of a meeting is called “the 
minutes.” This record is generally kept by a secretary or recorder. Minutes may 
be kept for groups that convene regularly, such as clubs, committees, and boards 
of directors.
• Summaries. A summary condenses the primary ideas, conclusions, and recom-
mendations of a longer report or publication. Employees may be asked to write 
summaries of technical reports. Students may be asked to write summaries of 
periodical articles or books to sharpen their writing skills. Executive summaries 
condense long reports such as business plans and proposals.
Information Reports
Writers of information reports provide information without drawing conclusions or 
making recommendations. Some information reports are highly standardized, such 
as police reports, hospital admittance reports, monthly sales reports, or government 
regulatory reports. Other information reports are more personalized, as illustrated 
in the letter report shown in Figure 9.2 on pages 224–225 and the memo report in 
9.3 on page 227. Information reports generally contain three parts: introduction, 
body (findings), and conclusion. The body may have many subsections. Consider 
these suggestions for writing information reports:
• Explain why you are writing in the introduction.
• Describe what methods and sources were used to gather information and why 
they are credible.
• Provide any special background information that may be necessary. Preview 
what is to follow.
• Organize the facts/findings in a logical sequence.
• Consider grouping the facts/findings in one of these patterns: (a) chronological, 
(b) alphabetical, (c) topical, (d) geographical, (e) journalism style (who, what, 
when, where, why, and how), (f) simple-to-complex, or (g) most to least impor-
tant. Organizational strategies will be explained in detail in Chapter 10.
• Summarize your findings, synthesize your reactions, suggest action to be taken, 
or express appreciation in the conclusion.
In the two-page information report shown in Figure 9.2 on pages 224–225, 
Richard Ramos responds to an inquiry about prepaid legal services. In the intro-
duction he explains the purpose of the report and previews the organization of the 
report. In the findings/facts section, he arranges the information topically. He uses 
the summary to emphasize the three main topics previously discussed.
As the trip report in Figure 9.3 demonstrates, internal memo reports can be 
informal and still be professional, informational, and effective. In this report the 
writer Grant Snow organizes his general impressions from the CeBIT trade show 
by focusing on contacts he established and the main trends that emerged during the 
annual gathering. You will find that communication in the information technology 
sector tends to be informal.
Progress Reports
Continuing projects often require progress reports to describe their status. These 
reports may be external (telling customers how their projects are advancing) or 
internal (informing management of the status of activities). Progress reports typi-
cally follow this pattern of development:
• Specify in the opening the purpose and nature of the project.
• Provide background information if the audience requires filling in.
• Describe the work completed.
• Explain the work currently in progress, including personnel, activities, methods, 
and locations.
• Anticipate problems and possible remedies.
• Discuss future activities and provide the expected completion date.
Minutes of meetings and 
summaries organize and 
condense information for 
quick reading and reference.
Organize information 
chronologically, alphabetically, 
topically, geographically, 
journalistically, from simple 
to complex, or from most 
to least important.
Progress reports tell 
management whether 
projects are on schedule.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
235 
As a location manager in the film industry, Robin Ellsworth frequently writes 
progress reports, such as the one shown in Figure 9.6. Producers want to be informed 
of what she is doing, and a phone call does not provide a permanent record. Notice 
that her progress report identifies the project and provides brief background infor-
mation. She then explains what has been completed, what is yet to be completed, 
and what problems she expects.
Justification/Recommendation Reports
Both managers and employees must occasionally write reports that justify or rec-
ommend something, such as buying equipment, changing a procedure, hiring an 
FIguRe 9.6 Progress Report—Memo Format

236 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
employee, consolidating departments, or investing funds. Large organizations 
sometimes prescribe how these reports should be organized; they use forms with 
conventional headings. When you are free to select an organizational plan yourself, 
however, let your audience and topic determine your choice of direct or indirect 
structure.
Direct Pattern. For nonsensitive topics and recommendations that will be agree-
able to readers, you can organize directly according to the following sequence:
• In the introduction identify the problem or need briefly.
• Announce the recommendation, solution, or action concisely and with action 
verbs.
• Explain more fully the benefits of the recommendation or steps to be taken to 
solve the problem.
• Discuss pros, cons, and costs.
• Conclude with a summary specifying the recommendation and necessary action.
Troy Barnwell applied the preceding process in writing the recommendation 
report shown in Figure 9.7. Troy is operations manager in charge of a fleet of trucks 
for a large parcel delivery company in Charleston, South Carolina. When he heard 
about a new Goodyear smart tire with an electronic chip, Troy thought his company 
should give the new tire a try. His recommendation report begins with a short intro-
duction to the problem followed by his two recommendations. Then he explains the 
product and how it would benefit his company. He concludes by highlighting his 
recommendation and specifying the action to be taken.
Indirect Pattern. When a reader may oppose a recommendation or when 
circumstances suggest caution, don’t be in a hurry to reveal your recommen-
dation. Consider using the following sequence for an indirect approach to your 
recommendations:
• Make a general reference to the problem, not to your recommendation, in the 
subject line.
• Describe the problem or need your recommendation addresses. Use specific 
examples, supporting statistics, and authoritative quotes to lend credibility to 
the seriousness of the problem.
• Discuss alternative solutions, beginning with the least likely to succeed.
• Present the most promising alternative (your recommendation) last.
• Show how the advantages of your recommendation outweigh its disadvantages.
• Summarize your recommendation. If appropriate, specify the action it requires.
• Ask for authorization to proceed if necessary.
Feasibility Reports
Feasibility reports examine the practicality and advisability of following a course 
of action. They answer this question: Will this plan or proposal work? Feasibility 
reports typically are internal reports written to advise on matters such as consoli-
dating departments, offering a wellness program to employees, or hiring an outside 
firm to handle a company’s accounting or computing operations. These reports may 
also be written by consultants called in to investigate a problem. The focus in these 
reports is on the decision of whether to stop or proceed with the proposal. Since your 
role is not to persuade the reader to accept the decision, you will want to present the 
decision immediately. In writing feasibility reports, consider these suggestions:
• Announce your decision immediately.
• Describe the background and problem necessitating the proposal.
• Discuss the benefits of the proposal.
• Describe any problems that may result.
• Calculate the costs associated with the proposal, if appropriate.
• Show the time frame necessary for implementing the proposal.
Feasibility reports analyze 
whether a proposal or plan 
will work.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
237 
Ashley Denton-Tait, human resources manager for a large public accounting firm 
in San Antonio, Texas, wrote the feasibility report shown in Figure 9.8. Because 
she discovered that the company was losing time and money as a result of personal 
e-mail and Internet use by employees, she talked with the vice president about the 
problem. The vice president didn’t want Ashley to take time away from her job 
to investigate what other companies were doing to prevent this type of problem. 
Instead, she suggested that they hire a consultant to investigate what other companies 
FIguRe 9.7 Justification/Recommendation Report—Memo Format

238 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
were doing to prevent or limit personal e-mail and Internet use. The vice president 
then wanted to know whether the consultant’s plan was feasible. Although Ashley’s 
report is only one page long, it provides all the necessary information: background, 
benefits, problems, costs, and time frame.
Minutes of Meetings 
Minutes summarize the proceedings of meetings. Formal, traditional minutes, illustrated 
in Figure 9.9, are written for large groups and legislative bodies. If you are the secretary 
or recorder of a meeting, you will want to write minutes that do the following:
• Provide the name of the group, as well as the date, time, and place of the meeting.
• Identify the names of attendees and absentees, if appropriate.
• State whether the previous minutes were approved or revised.
• Record old business, new business, announcements, and reports.
FIguRe 9.8 Feasibility Report—Memo Format
Meeting minutes record 
summaries of old 
business, new business, 
announcements, and reports 
as well as the precise 
wording of motions.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
239 
• Include the precise wording of motions; record the vote and action taken.
• Conclude with your name and signature.
Notice in Figure 9.9 that Secretary Goddard tries to 
summarize discussions rather than capture every com-
ment. However, when a motion is made, he records it 
verbatim. He also shows in parentheses the name of 
the individual making the motion and the person who 
seconded it. By using all capital letters for MOTION 
and PASSED, he makes these important items stand 
out for easy reference.
Informal minutes are usually shorter and easier 
to read than formal minutes. They may be formatted 
with three categories: summaries of topics discussed, 
FIguRe 9.9 Minutes of Meeting—Report Format
“Here are the minutes of our last meeting. some events 
have been fictionalized for dramatic purposes.”
© RandY GlasbeRGen. www.GlasbeRGen.com

240 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
decisions reached, and action items (showing the action item, the person respon-
sible, and the due date).
Although the format of informal minutes and lists of action items varies, 
spreadsheets or tables work well for readability, as Figure 9.10 indicates. The 
executives of a property management company worried about the cost, effec-
tiveness, and environ mental impact of pest control measures for a large num-
ber of condominiums and apartment buildings. Fairway Property Management 
held a meeting, and several attendees assumed research tasks as outlined in 
Figure 9.10.
Summaries
A summary compresses the main points from a book, report, article, Web site, 
meeting, or convention. A summary saves time because it can reduce a report or 
article 85 to 95 percent. Employees are sometimes asked to write summaries that 
condense technical reports, periodical articles, or books so that their staffs or supe-
riors may grasp the main ideas quickly. Students may be asked to write summaries 
of articles, chapters, or books to sharpen their writing skills and to confirm their 
knowledge of reading assignments. In writing a summary, you will follow these 
general guidelines:
• Present the goal or purpose of the document being summarized. Why was it 
written?
Organizations may include a list of action items as part of their minutes so that individuals know what task has been assigned to 
whom. This list can later be used to track task completion. Fairway Property Management is investigating pest control methods for 
a large group of apartments and condominiums. The table below was generated in MS Excel to allow easy sorting by due date or 
other variables.
FAIRWAY PROPeRTY MANAgeMeNT
TERMITE ABATEMENT ACTION ITEMS/OPEN ISSUES
Sorted by due date 
last Update 6/14/09 6:00 p.m. Hassan
No.
Item
Date
Who
Status 
Date 
completed
1
Review tradi tional methods 
of termite abatement, their 
pros/cons
6/15/09
erin to 
summarize 
findings
done
will be distributed at 
meeting on 6/20
6/4/09
2
Investigate alternative pest 
control methods and their 
efficacy in large apartment 
complexes
6/15/09
bob
done
will report on 6/20
6/14/09
3
contact at least two 
independent research 
chemists about Vikane 
residue
6/15/09
erin
waiting for callback
4
Research consumer 
information and resources
6/15/09
Hassan
5
search for government 
sources and information
6/15/09
chris
closed: none found
6/10/09
6
call at least five termite 
control companies for 
bids; request large-volume 
discounts, long term
7/2/09
chris
FIguRe 9.10 Action Item List for Meeting Minutes
Indicates dates 
when tasks were 
assigned
Identifies dates 
when tasks were 
completed
Shows 
numbered action 
items with 
descriptions
Lists names 
of members 
responsible 
for tasks
A summary condenses the 
primary ideas, conclusions, 
and recommendations of 
a longer publication.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
241 
• Highlight the research methods (if appropriate), findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations.
• Omit illustrations, examples, and references.
• Organize for readability by including headings and bulleted or enumerated 
lists.
• Include your reactions or an overall evaluation of the document if asked to 
do so.
An executive summary summarizes a long report, proposal, or business plan. 
It concentrates on what management needs to know from a longer report. The 
executive summary shown in Figure 9.11 summarizes main points from a business 
plan prepared by Bluewater Koi fish farm. This company wants to expand, and it 
needs $72,000 to acquire additional land for three fish ponds. To secure financial 
backing, Bluewater wrote a business plan explaining its operation, service, product, 
marketing, and finances. Part of that business plan is an executive summary, which 
you see in Figure 9.11.
FIguRe 9.11 Executive Summary (excerpt from business plan)

242 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
This chapter presented six common types of informal business 
reports: information reports, progress reports, justification/
recommendation reports, feasibility reports, minutes of meet-
ings, and summaries. Information reports generally provide 
data only. Justification/recommendation and feasibility re ports 
are more analytical in that they also evaluate the information, 
draw conclusions, and make recommendations. This chapter 
also discussed five formats for reports. letter format is used 
for reports sent outside an organization; memo format is used 
for internal reports. more formal reports are formatted on plain 
paper with a manuscript design, whereas routine reports may 
be formatted on prepared forms. some companies enable 
workers to file reports online. The chapter presented numer-
ous model documents illustrating the many kinds of reports 
and their formats.
all of the examples in this chapter are considered rela-
tively informal. longer, more formal reports are necessary for 
major investigations and research. These reports and pro-
posals, along with suggestions for research methods, are 
presented in chapter 10.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. what are the main differences between formal and infor-
mal reports?
 2. How do business reports differ from business letters?
 3. How are informative reports different from analytical reports? 
Give an original example of each.
 4. of the reports presented in this chapter, discuss those 
that require indirect development versus those that require 
direct development.
 5. How are the reports that you write for your courses similar 
to those presented here? How are they different?
© IsTocKPHoTo.com / elena elIsseeVa
WORKPLACe IN FOCuS
breeding beautifully colored koi for collectors is 
a profitable but hazardous and costly business. 
commercial growers need acreage to build breeding 
and growing ponds, expensive equipment to monitor 
water quality and prevent diseases, and caring 
personnel to oversee the intricate breeding program. 
To secure financial backing, businesses such as 
bluewater Koi submit proposals that often include 
executive summaries, such as that shown in Figure 
9.11. How do business communicators decide what 
information to include in summaries of long reports?

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
243
 6. why do you need to know how to write reports?
 7. list six kinds of informal reports. be prepared to describe each.
 8. list five formats suitable for reports. be prepared to discuss each.
 9. From the lists you made in Questions 7 and 8, select a report category and appropriate format for 
each of the following situations.
 
 a.  Your supervisor asks you to review the apple iPhone to determine if the gadget would work with 
your corporate e-mail system.
 
 b.  You want to tell management about an idea you have for consolidating two departments in order 
to eliminate redundancy and lower expenses.
 
 c.  You are in charge of developing a new procedure for processing payroll. Your boss wants to know 
what you have done thus far.
 
 d.  You were selected to record the meeting of a project team where new tasks were assigned to 
each member.
 
 e.  as accounting department manager, you have been asked to describe for all employees your 
procedure for processing expense claims.
 
 f. as a security officer, you are writing a report of an office break-in.
 
 g.  at a web-based retail company, your supervisor asks you to investigate ways to reduce the 
number of steps that customers must go through to place an online order. she wants your report 
to examine the problem and offer solutions.
C
Chapter Review

244 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
 10. If you were about to write the following reports, where would you gather information? be prepared to 
discuss the specifics of each choice.
 
 a.  You are a peer promoter of a free sony camera that the company gave you to use and talk about 
to fellow students to create buzz and increase sales. Your instructor wants you to write a report 
about your experiences and sketch the digital camera market.
 
 b.  as department manager, you must write job descriptions for several new positions you wish to 
establish in your department.
 
 c. You are proposing a new company Internet-use policy to management.
 
 d.  You must produce a document that will survey the past fiscal year and recommend steps to turn 
around your employer, a struggling clothing retailer.
 11. list and explain four ways you can build credibility in a business report.
 12. what one factor distinguishes reports developed directly from those developed indirectly?
 13. what is the difference between a functional heading and a talking heading? Give an example of each 
for a report about employee reactions to a proposed reduction in health benefits.
 14. what should the minutes of a meeting include?
 15. what should a summary of a long article or report contain?
W
Writing Improvement exercises
Evaluating Headings and Titles
Identify the following report headings and titles as talking or functional/descriptive. discuss the usefulness 
and effectiveness of each.
 16. overview
 17. suggestions for energy savings and Recycling

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
245
 18. annual budget
 19. How Instant messaging can Improve corporate communication
 20. solution: Promoting an employee carpool Program
 21. solving our networking Problems with an extranet
 22. comparing copier Volume, ease of Use, and speed
 23. summary
A
Activities and Cases
9.1 Information Report: Describing Your Job
Your instructor wants to learn about your employment. select a position you now hold or one that you have held in the past. 
If you have not been employed, choose a campus, professional, or community organization to which you belong. You may 
also select an internship or volunteer activity.
Your Task. write an information report describing your employment or involvement. In the introduction describe the com-
pany and its products or services, its ownership, and its location. In the main part of the report, describe your position, 
including its tasks and the skills required to perform these tasks. summarize by describing the experience you gained. Your 
memo report should be single-spaced and 1½   to 2 pages long and should be addressed to your instructor.
WeB
9.2 Information Report: Searching for Career Information
Gather information about a career or position in which you might be interested. learn about the nature of the job. discover 
whether certification, a license, or experience is required. one of the best places to search is the latest Occupational Outlook 
Handbook. Use a search engine such as Google to locate the handbook, sponsored by the U.s. bureau of labor statistics. 
click the OOH Search/A-Z Index link; then search for a specific job title or search the alphabetic list for an occupation.
Your Task. write an information report to your instructor that describes your target career area. discuss the nature of the work, 
working conditions, necessary qualifications, and the future job outlook for the occupation. Include information about typical 
salary ranges and career paths. If your instructor wants an extended report, collect information about two companies where 
you might apply. Investigate each company’s history, products and/or services, size, earnings, reputation, and number of 
employees. describe the functions of an employee working in the position you have investigated. To do this, interview one or 
more individuals who are working in that position. devote several sections of your report to the specific tasks, functions, duties, 
and opinions of these individuals. You can make this into a recommendation report by drawing conclusions and making recom-
mendations. one conclusion that you could draw relates to success in this career area. who might be successful in this field?
WeB
9.3 Information Report: Exploring a Possible Place to Work
You are thinking about taking a job with a Fortune 500 company, and you want to learn as much as possible about the com-
pany. select a Fortune 500 company (or any other company that interests you), and collect information about it on the web. Visit 
http://www.hoovers.com for basic facts. Then take a look at the company’s web site; check its background, news releases, 
and annual report. learn about its major product, service, or emphasis. Find its Fortune 500 ranking (if applicable), its current 
stock price (if listed), and its high and low range for the year. look up its profit-to-earnings ratio. Track its latest marketing plan, 
promotion, or product. Identify its home office, major officers, and number of employees. study the company’s future plans.
Your Task. In a memo report to your instructor, summarize your research findings. explain why this company would be a 
good or bad employment choice.

246 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
WeB
9.4 Information Report: Briefing Your Boss
Your boss wants to know more about intercultural and international business etiquette. Today most managers recognize 
that they need to be polished and professional if they wish to earn the respect of diverse audiences. assume that your boss 
will assign various countries to several interns and recent hires. choose a country that interests you and conduct a web 
search. For example, in Google, search with terms such as business etiquette, business etiquette abroad, or intercultural com-
munication. You could visit web sites such as the popular, informative etiquette and business guides for specific countries 
by Kwintessential ltd. (http://www.kwintessential.co.uk).
Your Task. as an intern or a new-hire, write a short memo report about one country that is a lot different from the United 
states and that offers new business opportunities. address your report to clifford danielson, ceo. summarize your research 
into what U.s. managers need to know about business etiquette in that culture. You should investigate social customs such 
as greetings, attire, gift giving, formality, business meals, attitudes toward time, communication styles, and so forth, to help 
your ceo avoid etiquette blunders.
9.5 Progress Report: Making Headway Toward Your Degree
You made an agreement with your parents (or spouse, partner, relative, or friend) that you would submit a progress report at 
this time describing the progress you have made toward your educational goal (employment, certificate, or degree).
Your Task. In memo format write a progress report that fulfills your promise to describe your progress toward your educa-
tional goal. address your progress report to your parents, spouse, partner, relative, or friend. In your memo (a) describe 
your goal; (b) summarize the work you have completed thus far; (c) discuss thoroughly the work currently in progress, 
including your successes and anticipated obstacles; and (d) forecast your future activities in relation to your scheduled 
completion date.
9.6 Progress Report: Keeping Your Supervisor Updated
as office manager for the animal Rescue Foundation (http://www.arf.net), a nonprofit organization that rescues and finds 
homes for abandoned and abused animals, you have been asked to come up with ways to increase community awareness 
of your organization. For the past month you have been meeting with business and community leaders, conducting web 
research, and visiting with representatives from other nonprofit organizations. Your supervisor has just asked you to prepare 
a written report to outline what you have accomplished so far.
Your Task. In memo format write a progress report to your supervisor. In your memo (a) state whether the project is on 
schedule; (b) summarize the activities you have completed thus far; (c) discuss thoroughly the work currently in progress; 
and (d) describe your future activities. also let your supervisor know of any obstacles you have encountered and whether 
the project is on schedule.
e-MAIL
9.7 Progress Report: Connecting With E-Mail
If you are working on a long report for either this chapter or chapter 10, keep your instructor informed of your progress.
Your Task. send your instructor a report by e-mail detailing the progress you are making on your long report assignment. 
discuss (a) the purpose of the report, (b) the work already completed, (c) the work currently in progress, and (d) your sched-
ule for completing the report.
9.8 Justification/Recommendation Report: Expanding the Company Library 
despite the interest in online publications, managers and employees at your company still like to browse through magazines 
in the company library. andy Kivel, the company librarian, wants to add business periodicals to the library subscription list 
and has requested help from various company divisions.
Your Task. You have been asked to recommend four periodicals in your particular specialty (accounting, marketing, etc.). 
Visit your library and use appropriate indexes and guides to select four periodicals to recommend. write a memo report to 
mr. Kivel describing the particular readership, usual contents, and scope of each periodical. To judge each adequately, you 
should examine several issues. explain why you think each periodical should be ordered and who would read it. convince 
the librarian that your choices would be beneficial to your department.
TeAM
9.9 Justification/Recommendation Report: Solving a Campus Problem
In any organization, room for improvement always exists. Your college campus is no different. You are the member of a 
student task force that has been asked to identify problems and suggest solutions.
In groups of two to five, investigate a problem on your campus, such as inadequate parking, slow registration, poor class 
schedules, an inefficient bookstore, a weak job-placement program, unrealistic degree requirements, or a lack of internship 

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
247
programs. within your group develop a solution to the problem. If possible, consult the officials involved to ask for their input 
in arriving at a feasible solution. do not attack existing programs; instead, strive for constructive discussion and harmonious 
improvements. 
Your Task. after reviewing persuasive techniques discussed in chapter 8, write a justification/recommendation report in 
memo or letter format. address your report to the college president.
TeAM
WeB
9.10 Justification/Recommendation Report: Developing a Company E-Mail and Web-Use Policy
as a manager in a midsized financial services firm, you are aware that members of your department frequently use e-mail 
and the Internet for private messages, shopping, games, and other personal activities. In addition to the strain on your 
company’s computer network, you worry about declining productivity, security problems, and liability issues. when you 
walked by one worker’s computer and saw what looked like pornography on the screen, you knew you had to do something. 
although workplace privacy is a controversial issue for unions and employee-rights groups, employers have legitimate rea-
sons for wanting to know what is happening on their computers. a high percentage of lawsuits involve the use and abuse of 
e-mail. You think that the executive council should establish some kind of e-mail and web-use policy. The council is generally 
receptive to sound suggestions, especially if they are inexpensive. You decide to talk with other managers about the problem 
and write a justification/recommendation report.
In teams of two to five, discuss the need for an e-mail and web-use policy. Using the web, find sample policies used by 
other firms. look for examples of companies struggling with lawsuits over e-mail abuse. Find information about employers’ 
rights to monitor employees’ e-mail and web use. Use this research to determine what your company’s e-mail and web-use 
policy should cover. each member of the team should present and support his or her ideas regarding what should be included 
in the policy and how to best present your ideas to the executive council.
Your Task. write a convincing justification/recommendation report in memo or letter format to the executive council based 
on the conclusions you draw from your research and discussion. decide whether you should be direct or indirect.
TeAM
9.11 Justification/Recommendation Report: Diversity Training—Does It Work?
employers recognize the importance of diversity awareness and intercultural sensitivity in the workplace because both 
are directly related to productivity. It is assumed that greater harmony also minimizes the threat of lawsuits. an interest in 
employee diversity training has spawned numerous corporate trainers and consultants, but after many years of such train-
ing, some recent studies seem to suggest that they may be ineffective or indicate mixed results at best. an article in Time
magazine concluded that diversity training does not necessarily change biases in executives or increase the number of 
minorities in the workplace.1
search the web or electronic databases for information about diversity training. examine articles favorable to diversity 
training and those that exhibit a more pessimistic view of such efforts.
Your Task. as a group of two to five members, write a memo report to your boss (address it to your instructor) and define 
diversity training. explain which measures companies take to make their managers and workers culturally aware and respect-
ful of differences. If you have personally encountered such a training, draw on your experience in addition to your research. 
Your report should answer the question, does diversity training work? If yes, recommend steps your company should take to 
become more sensitive to minorities. If not, suggest how current practices could be improved to be more effective.
9.12 Feasibility Report: Professional Business Organization
To fulfill a student project in your department, you have been asked to submit a letter report to the dean evaluating the fea-
sibility of starting a Phi beta lambda (http://www.fbla-pbl.org/) chapter on campus. Find out how many business students 
are on your campus, the benefits Phi beta lambda would provide for students, how one goes about starting a chapter, and 
whether a faculty sponsor is needed. assume that you conducted an informal survey of business students. of the 39 who 
filled out the survey, 31 said they would be interested in joining.
Your Task. write a report in memo or letter format to the dean outlining the practicality and advisability of starting a Phi beta 
lambda chapter on your college campus.
9.13 Feasibility Report: Improving Employee Fitness
Your company is considering ways to promote employee fitness and morale. select a possible fitness program that seems 
reasonable for your company. consider a softball league, bowling teams, a basketball league, lunchtime walks, lunchtime 
fitness speakers and demos, company-sponsored health club memberships, a workout room, a fitness center, nutrition 
programs, and so on.
Your Task. assume that your supervisor has tentatively agreed to one of the programs and has asked you to write a memo 
report investigating its feasibility.

248 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
9.14 Minutes: Recording the Proceedings of a Meeting
attend an open meeting of an organization at your school, in your community, or elsewhere. assume that you are asked to 
record the proceedings.
Your Task. Record the meeting proceedings in formal or informal minutes. Review the chapter to be sure you include all the 
data necessary for minutes. Focus on motions, votes, decisions reached, and action taken.
TeAM
9.15 Minutes and Action Items: Assigning Report Writing Tasks
when writing a formal report or proposal with a team, take notes at a team meeting about your research, especially one 
you may schedule with your instructor. divide research, writing, editing, and formatting responsibilities among the group 
members.
Your Task. write minutes recording the meeting. Include a list or table of action items that clearly show how tasks were 
divided along with names and deadlines. see Figure 9.10 on page 240 for a sample action item list.
WeB
9.16 Summary: Using Blogs for Research
Your supervisor has just learned about the popularity of using blogs (or weblogs) as research tools. This is the first he has 
heard of this new communication tool, and he wants to learn more. He asks you to conduct Internet research to see what 
has been written on the subject.
Your Task. Using an electronic database or the web, find an article that discusses the use of blogs in the workplace for 
research purposes. In a memo report addressed to your boss, david wong, summarize the primary ideas, conclusions, and 
recommendations presented in the article. be sure to identify the author, article name, journal, and date of publication in 
your summary.
WeB
9.17 Executive Summary: Keeping the Boss Informed
like many executives, your boss is too rushed to read long journal articles. but she is eager to keep up with developments 
in her field. assume she has asked you to help her stay abreast of research in her field. she asks you to submit to her one 
executive summary every month on an article of interest.
Your Task. In your field of study, select a professional journal, such as the Journal of Management. Using an electronic 
database search or a web search, look for articles in your target journal. select an article that is at least five pages long 
and is interesting to you. write an executive summary in memo format. Include an introduction that might begin with As you 
requested, I am submitting this executive summary of . . . . Identify the author, article name, journal, and date of publication. 
explain what the author intended to do in the study or article. summarize three or four of the most important findings of the 
study or article. Use descriptive rather than functional headings. summarize any recommendations you make. Your boss 
would also like a concluding statement indicating your reaction to the article. address your memo to susan wright.
9.18 Report Topics
a list of over 90 report topics is available at www.meguffey.com. The topics are divided into the following categories: 
accounting, finance, human resources, marketing, information systems, management, and general business/education/
campus issues. You can collect information for many of these reports by using electronic databases and the web. Your 
instructor may assign them as individual or team projects. all involve critical thinking in collecting and organizing information 
into logical reports.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports 
249
Semicolons and Colons
Review sections 2.16–2.19 in the Grammar/mechanics Handbook. Then study each of the fol-
lowing statements. Insert any necessary punctuation. Use the delete sign to omit unnecessary 
punctuation. In the space provided indicate the number of changes you made and record 
the number of the G/m principle(s) illustrated. (when you replace one punctuation mark with 
another, count it as one change.) If you make no changes, write 0. This exercise concentrates 
on semicolon and colon use, but you will also be responsible for correct comma use. when 
you finish, compare your responses with those shown at the end of the book. If your responses 
differ, study carefully the specific principles shown in parentheses.
Example nino Rota’s job is to make sure that his company has enough cash to meet its obli-
gations moreover he is responsible for finding ways to reduce operating expenses.
 1. Informal reports tend to be short and informational formal reports on the other hand are 
mostly delivered in manuscript format and are usually analytical.
 2. our supplier has experienced labor shortages causing delays however we will do our best 
to deliver your order as soon as we can.
 3. business slows down to a crawl in europe because of extensive vacations during the 
following months June July and august.
 4. large american corporations that offer a variety of financial services are: bank of america 
and citibank.
 5. as long as you observe the ethics guidelines in your company’s employee handbook you 
have nothing to fear from your next employee performance appraisal.
 6. a supermarket probably requires no short-term credit a seasonal company such as a ski 
resort however typically would need considerable short-term credit.
 7. we offer three basic types of short-term lines of credit commercial paper and single-payer 
credit.
 8. speakers at the conference on credit include the following businesspeople lynne Krause 
financial manager american International Investments Patrick coughlin comptroller 
nationsbank and shannon daly legal counsel Fidelity national Financial.
 9. Users must first establish an account on the company’s e-commerce site and then they 
can order from the online catalog.
 10. many methods are used to calculate finance charges for example average daily balance 
adjusted balance two-cycle average daily balance and previous balance.
 11. Hot Topic, which is a small clothing retailer with a solid credit rating recently applied for 
a loan however Union bank refused the loan application because the bank was short on 
cash.
 12. when Hot Topic was refused by Union bank its financial managers submitted applications 
to: chemical bank, washington mutual, and wells Fargo.
 13. The cost of financing capital investments at the present time is very high therefore Hot 
Topic’s managers elected to postpone certain expansion projects.
 14. If interest rates reach as high as 18 percent the cost of borrowing becomes prohibitive and 
many businesses are forced to reconsider or abandon projects that require financing.
 15. many small stockholders invested in stocks when the markets were riding high then they 
lost a lot of money after the markets declined.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 9
2 
(2.16a)
^,
^;

250 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
The following progress report has faults in grammar, punctuation, spelling, number form, 
wordiness, and word use. Use standard proofreading marks (see appendix b) to correct 
the errors. when you finish, your instructor can show you the revised version of this report.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 9
%BUF 
November 9, 200x
5P 
Eric Sternlicht, President
'SPN 
Durene Washington, Development Ofﬁcer
4VCKFDU Progress Report on Construction of Seattle Branch Ofﬁce
Construction of Apex Realtys Portland Branch Ofﬁce has entered 
Phase three. Although we are 1 week behind the contractors original 
schedule the building should be already for occupancie on March 10.
1BTU1SPHSFTT
Phaze one involved development of the architects plans, this 
process was completed onJune 5. Phaze two involved submission 
of the plan’s for county building department approval. Each of the 
plans were then given to the following 2 contractors for the purpose 
of eliciting estimates, Steven Duffy Construction, and Titan Builders.
The lowest bidder was Steven Duffy Construction, consequently 
this ﬁrm began construction on July 15.
1SFTFOU4UBUVT
Phase three includes initial construction processes. We have 
completed the following steps as of November 9:
• 
Demolition of existing building at 11485 North 27 Avenue
• 
Excavation of foundation footings for the building and for the 
 
surrounding wall
• 
Steel reinforcing rods installed in building pad and wall
• 
Pouring of concrete foundation
Steven Duffy Construction indicated that he was 1 week behind 
schedule for these reasons. The building inspectors required more 
steel reinforcement then was showed on the architects blueprints. 
In addition excavation of the footings required more time then the 
contractor anticipated because the 18 inch footings were all 
below grade.
'VUVSF4DIFEVMF
In spite of the fact that we lost time in Phase 3 we are substantially 
on target for the completion of this ofﬁce building by March 1. 
Phase 4 include the following activities, framing drywalling and 
installation of plumbing.

Chapter 9: Informal Reports  
251
Laying the Groundwork for Team Writing Projects
The chances are that you can look forward to some kind of team writing in your future 
career. You may collaborate voluntarily (seeking advice and differing perspectives) or 
involuntarily (through necessity or by assignment). working with other people can be 
frustrating, particularly when some team members don’t carry their weight or when conflict 
breaks out. Team projects, though, can be harmonious, productive, and rewarding when 
members establish ground rules at the outset and adhere to guidelines such as those 
presented here.
collaboration tools, such as wikis, allow team members to contribute to and edit a text 
online. many businesses today turn to wikis to facilitate teamwork. Your instructor may 
have access to wiki software or to the wiki function in blackboard.
Preparing to Work Together. before you discuss the project, talk about how your group 
will function.
limit the size of your team, if possible, to two to five members. larger groups have 
more difficulties. an odd number is usually preferable to avoid ties in voting.
name a team leader (to plan and conduct meetings), a recorder (to keep a record of 
group decisions), and an evaluator (to determine whether the group is on target and 
meeting its goals).
decide whether your team will be governed by consensus (everyone must agree) or 
by majority rule.
compare schedules of team members, and set up the best meeting times. Plan to meet 
often. avoid other responsibilities during meetings. Team meetings can take place 
face-to-face or virtually.
discuss the value of conflict. by bringing conflict into the open and encouraging confron-
tation, your team can prevent personal resentment and group dysfunction. conflict can 
actually create better final documents by promoting new ideas and avoiding groupthink.
discuss how you will deal with members who are not pulling their share of the load.
Planning the Document. once you have established ground rules, you are ready to dis-
cuss the project and resulting document. be sure to keep a record of the decisions your 
team makes.
establish the document’s specific purpose and identify the main issues involved.
decide on the final form of the document. what parts will it have?
discuss the audience(s) for the document and what appeal would help it achieve its 
purpose.
develop a work plan. assign jobs. set deadlines.
decide how the final document will be written: individuals working separately on 
assigned portions, one person writing the first draft, the entire group writing the com-
plete document together, or some other method.
Collecting Information. The following suggestions help teams gather accurate information:
brainstorm for ideas as a group.
decide who will be responsible for gathering what information.
establish deadlines for collecting information.
discuss ways to ensure the accuracy and currency of the information collected.
Organizing, Writing, and Revising. as the project progresses, your team may wish to 
modify some of its earlier decisions.
Review the proposed organization of your final document, and adjust it if necessary.
write the first draft. If separate team members are writing segments, they should use 
the same word processing program to facilitate combining files.
meet to discuss and revise the draft(s).
If individuals are working on separate parts, appoint one person (probably the best 
writer) to coordinate all the parts, striving for consistent style and format.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Collaboration

252 
Chapter 9: Informal Reports
Editing and Evaluating. before the document is submitted, complete these steps:
Give one person responsibility for finding and correcting grammatical and mechanical 
errors.
meet as a group to evaluate the final document. does it fulfill its purpose and meet the 
needs of the audience?
Option: Using a Wiki to Collaborate. Hosting companies such as Pbwiki (http://pbwiki
.com/education.wiki) offer easy-to-use, free wiki accounts to educators to run in their 
classes without the need of involving the IT department. blackboard supports a wiki option 
as long as a college or university selects it with its subscription. a wiki within blackboard 
is a page, or multiple pages, that students enrolled in the class can edit and change. They 
may add other content such as images and hyperlinks. a log allows instructors to track 
changes and the students’ contributions. ask you instructor about these options.
Career Application. select a report topic from this chapter or chapter 10. assume that 
you must prepare the report as a team project. If you are working on a long report, your 
instructor may ask you to prepare individual progress reports as you develop your topic.
Your Task
Form teams of two to five members.
Prepare to work together by using the suggestions provided here.
Plan your report by establishing its purpose, analyzing the audience, identifying the 
main issues, developing a work plan, and assigning tasks.
collect information, organize the data, and write the first draft.
decide how the document will be revised, edited, and evaluated.
Tip: For revising and editing, consider using the tools in ms word introduced in chapter 4 
to track changes and make comments.
Your instructor may assign grades not only on the final report but also on your team 
effectiveness and your individual contribution, as determined by fellow team members 
and, potentially, by tracking your activities if you are using a wiki.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
253
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / LISE GAGNE
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Identify and explain the parts of informal and formal proposals.
• Describe the preparatory steps for writing a formal report.
• Learn to collect data from secondary sources including print and electronic sources.
• Understand how to use Web browsers, search tools, blogs, and other online 
communication tools to locate reliable data.
• Discuss how to generate primary data from surveys, interviews, observation, and 
experimentation.
• Understand the need for the accurate documentation of data.
• Describe how to organize report data, create an outline, and make effective 
headings.
• Illustrate data using tables, charts, and graphs.
• Describe and sequence the parts of a formal report.
understanding Business Proposals
You may wonder what proposals are and why you are learning to write them. For 
example, a business plan, a type of proposal, is necessary to obtain financing if you 
wish to start your own business. Similarly, if you apply for a grant or a graduate 
fellowship, you will need to provide a written plan or sketch a worthy project. The 
goal when writing business proposals and formal reports is to make them accessible 
and useful to your readers. In this chapter you will learn how to achieve this goal. 
Our discussion will start with proposals.
Proposals are written offers to solve problems, provide services, or sell equipment. 
Some proposals are internal, often taking the form of justification and recommenda-
tion reports. You learned about these reports in Chapter 9. Most proposals, however, 
are external and are a critical means of selling equipment and services that generate 
income for many companies.
External proposals may be divided into two categories: solicited and unsolicited. 
Enterprising companies looking for work might submit unsolicited proposals, but 
most proposals are solicited. When a firm knows exactly what it wants, it prepares 
Proposals and 
Formal Reports
10
10
C H A P T e r  1 0
Proposals are persuasive 
offers to solve problems, 
provide services, or 
sell equipment.

254 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
a request for proposal (RFP) specifying its requirements. Government agencies as 
well as private businesses use RFPs to solicit competitive bids from vendors.
For example, let’s say that apparel merchandiser Abercrombie & Fitch wants 
to upgrade the computers and software in its home office in New Albany, Ohio. 
If the company knows exactly what it wants, it would prepare a request for pro-
posals (RFP) specifying its requirements. It then publicizes this RFP, and com-
panies interested in bidding on the job submit proposals. Both large and small 
companies are increasingly likely to use RFPs to 
solicit competitive bids on their projects. This 
enables them to compare “apples to apples.” 
That is, they can compare prices from different 
companies on their projects. They also want the 
legal protection offered by proposals, which are 
legal contracts.
Many companies earn a sizable portion of their 
income from sales resulting from pro posals. That 
is why creating effective proposals is especially 
important today. In writing proposals, the most 
important thing to remember is that proposals are 
sales presentations. They must be persuasive, not 
merely mechanical descriptions of what you can 
do. You may recall from Chapter 8 that effective 
persuasive sales messages (a) emphasize benefits for the reader, (b) “toot your horn” 
by detailing your expertise and accomplishments, and (c) make it easy for the reader 
to understand and respond.
informal Proposals 
Proposals may be informal or formal; they differ primarily in length and format. 
Informal proposals are often presented in short (two- to four-page) letters. Sometimes 
called letter proposals, they contain six principal parts: introduction, background, 
proposal, staffing, budget, and authorization request. The informal letter proposal 
shown in Figure 10.1 on page 256 illustrates all six parts of a letter proposal. This 
proposal is addressed to a Cambridge, Massachusetts dentist who wants to improve 
patient satisfaction.
introduction
Most proposals begin by explaining briefly the reasons for the proposal and by 
highlighting the writer’s qualifications. To make your introduction more persuasive, 
you need to provide a “hook” to capture the reader’s interest. One proposal expert 
suggests these possibilities:1
• Hint at extraordinary results, with details to be revealed shortly.
• Promise low costs or speedy results.
• Mention a remarkable resource (well-known authority, new computer program, 
well-trained staff) available exclusively to you.
• Identify a serious problem (worry item) and promise a solution, to be explained 
later.
• Specify a key issue or benefit that you feel is the heart of the proposal.
For example, in the introduction of the proposal shown in Figure 10.1, 
Allen Ward focused on what the customer was looking for. He analyzed the 
request of the Cambridge dentist, Dr. Diane Corbett, and decided that she 
was most interested in specific recommendations for improving service to her 
patients. But Ward did not hit on this hook until he had written a first draft 
and had come back to it later. Indeed, it is often a good idea to put off writing 
Both large and small 
companies today often 
use requests for proposals 
(rFPs) to solicit competitive 
bids on projects.
informal proposals may 
contain an introduction, 
background information, 
the proposal, stafﬁ ng 
requirements, a budget, and 
an authorization request.
“I have no objection to creative problem solving as long 
as it’s not too creative and it’s not a real problem.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
effective proposal 
openers “hook” readers by 
promising extraordinary 
results or resources or by 
identifying key beneﬁ ts, 
issues, or outcomes.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
255
the introduction to a proposal until after you have completed other parts. For 
longer proposals the introduction also outlines the organization of the material 
to come.
Although writers may know what goes into the proposal introduction, many 
face writer’s block before they get started. It doesn’t help that most proposals 
and reports must be completed under the pressure of tight deadlines. To get the 
creative juices flowing, former Raytheon proposal specialist Dr. Mark Grinyer 
suggests studying the RFP closely to understand what the client really wants. 
Based on that analysis, he would look for persuasive themes until a proposal 
outline emerged.2 Addressing the client’s needs may be the ticket to getting off 
to a good start.
Background, Problem, Purpose 
The background section identifies the problem and discusses the goals or purposes 
of the project. In an unsolicited proposal your goal is to convince the reader that a 
problem exists. As a result, you must present the problem in detail, discussing such 
factors as monetary losses, failure to comply with government regulations, and loss 
of customers. In a solicited proposal your aim is to persuade the reader that you 
understand the problem completely. Therefore, if you are responding to an RFP, 
this means repeating its language. For example, if the RFP asks for the design of a 
company Web site that can handle multiuser access with differential permissions to 
view data,3 you would use the same language in explaining the purpose of your pro-
posal. This section might include segments titled Basic Requirements, Most Critical 
Tasks, and Most Important Secondary Problems.
Proposal, Plan, Schedule
In the proposal section itself, you should discuss your plan for solving the problem. 
In some proposals this is tricky because you want to disclose enough of your plan 
to secure the contract without giving away so much information that your services 
aren’t needed. Without specifics, though, your proposal has little chance, so you 
must decide how much to reveal. Tell what you propose to do and how it will 
benefit the reader. Remember, too, that a proposal is a sales presentation. Sell your 
methods, product, and “deliverables”—items that will be left with the client. In this 
section some writers specify how the project will be managed and how its progress 
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
In a move reminiscent of suburban bomb shelters 
of the Cold War era, urban planners are preparing 
“lilypad cities” to house survivors if climate-
disaster fears ever materialize. Should the planet 
become inundated by rising sea levels, these 
zero-emission ships could literally bob around 
the globe as self-sustaining habitats, complete 
with energy supplied from solar panels and wind 
turbines. Designed by award-winning Belgian 
architect Vincent Callebaut, and inspired by the 
shape of lilypads, the giant floating metropolises 
are both stylish and loaded with the comforts of 
modern living. What organizations might submit 
proposals in the development of lily-pad cities?
© COURTESY OF VINCENT CALLEBAUT ARCHITECTURES. WWW.VINCENT.CALLEBAUT.ORG
OFFICE I N S I D E R
To conquer writer’s block, 
begin with a bulleted list of 
what the customer is looking 
for. This list is like a road 
map; it gets you started and 
keeps you headed in the right 
direction.
The proposal section must 
give enough information 
to secure the contract but 
not so much detail that the 
services aren’t needed.

256 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
will be audited. Most writers also include a schedule of activities or timetable show-
ing when events will take place.
Staffing 
The staffing section of a proposal describes the credentials and expertise of the 
project leaders. It may also identify the size and qualifications of the support 
staff, along with other resources such as computer facilities and special programs 
for analyzing statistics. The staffing section is a good place to endorse and pro-
mote your staff. In longer proposals some firms follow industry standards and 
include staff qualifications and generic résumés of key people in an appendix. 
Using generic rather than actual résumés ensures privacy for individuals and also 
protects the company in case the staff changes after a proposal has been submit-
ted to a client.
Figure 10.1 Informal Proposal
The stafﬁ ng section 
promotes the credentials 
and expertise of the project 
leaders and support staff.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
257
Budget 
A central item in most proposals is the budget, a list of project costs. You need 
to prepare this section carefully because it represents a contract; you can’t raise 
the price later—even if your costs increase. You can—and should—protect your-
self with a deadline for acceptance. In the budget section some writers itemize 
hours and costs; others present a total sum only. A proposal to design and 
build a complex e-commerce Web site might, for example, contain a detailed 
line-by-line budget. In the proposal shown in Figure 10.1, Allen Ward felt that 
he needed to justify the budget for his firm’s patient satisfaction survey, so he 
itemized the costs. But the budget included for a proposal to conduct a one-day 
diversity awareness seminar for employees might be presented as a lump sum 
only. Your analysis of the project will help you decide what kind of budget to 
prepare.
Figure 10.1 Continued
Because a proposal is a legal 
contract, the budget must 
be carefully researched.

258 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Authorization request 
Informal proposals often close with a request for 
approval or authorization. In addition, the closing 
should remind the reader of key benefits and motivate 
action. It might also include a deadline date beyond 
which the offer is invalid. At some companies, such 
as Hewlett-Packard, authorization to proceed isn’t 
part of the proposal. Instead, it is usually discussed 
after the customer has received the proposal. In this 
way the customer and the sales account manager are 
able to negotiate terms before a formal agreement is 
drawn.
Formal Proposals 
Formal proposals differ from informal proposals not in style but in tone, structure, 
format, and length. Formal proposals respond to big projects and may range from 5 
to 200 or more pages. To facilitate comprehension and reference, they are organized 
into many parts. In addition to the six basic parts just described, formal proposals 
contain some or all of the following additional parts: copy of the RFP, letter or 
memo of transmittal, abstract and/or executive summary, title page, table of con-
tents, list of figures, and appendix. In addition, the tone used in formal proposals is 
often more formal than the tone used in informal proposals.
Well-written proposals win contracts and business for companies and individu-
als. In fact, many companies depend entirely on proposals to generate their income. 
Companies such as Microsoft, KPMG, and Boeing employ staffs of people who do 
nothing but prepare proposals to compete for new business. For more information 
about industry standards and resources, visit the Web site of the Association of 
Proposal Management Professionals at http://www.apmp.org.
Preparing to Write Formal reports
Formal reports are similar to formal proposals in length, organization, and serious 
tone. Instead of making an offer, however, formal reports represent the product of 
thorough investigation and analysis. They present organized information to decision 
makers in business, industry, government, and education. Although formal reports 
in business are seen infrequently, they serve an important function. They provide 
management with vital data for decision making. In this section we will consider the 
entire process of writing a formal report: preparing to write, researching secondary 
data, generating primary data, documenting data, organizing and outlining data, 
illustrating data, and presenting the final report.
Like proposals and informal reports, formal reports begin with a definition of 
the project. Probably the most difficult part of this definition is limiting the scope of 
the report. Every project has limitations. If you are writing a formal report, decide 
at the outset what constraints influence the range of your project and how you will 
achieve your purpose. How much time do you have for completing your report? 
How much space will you be allowed for reporting on your topic? How accessible 
are the data you need? How thorough should your research be?
If you are writing about low morale among swing-shift employees, for example, 
how many of your 475 employees should you interview? Should you limit your 
research to company-related morale factors, or should you consider external factors 
over which the company has no control? In investigating the relationship between 
work and students’ graduation rate, should you focus on a particular groups, such 
Formal proposals respond 
to big projects and may 
contain 200 or more pages.
Formal reports discuss 
the results of a process 
of thorough investigation 
and analysis.
“I haven’t read your proposal yet, Bob, but I already 
have some great ideas on how to improve it.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
259
as seniors and transfer students, or should you consider all students, including 
graduate students? The first step in writing a report, then, is determining the precise 
boundaries of the topic.
Once you have defined the project and limited its scope, write a statement of 
purpose. Preparing a written statement of purpose is a good idea because it defines 
the focus of the report and provides a standard that keeps the project on target. 
The statement of purpose should describe the goal, significance, and limitations of 
the report. In writing useful statements of purpose, choose action verbs telling what 
you intend to do: analyze, choose, investigate, compare, justify, evaluate, explain, 
establish, determine, and so on. Notice how the following statement pinpoints the 
research and report and uses action verbs:
The purpose of this report is to explore employment possibilities for entry-level 
paralegal workers in the city of Phoenix. It will consider typical salaries, skills 
required, opportunities, and working conditions. This research is significant 
because of the increasing number of job openings in the paralegal field. This 
report won’t consider legal secretarial employment, which represents a different 
employment focus.
researching Secondary Data 
One of the most important steps in the process of writing a report is that of gath-
ering information (research). Because a report is only as good as its data, you will 
want to spend considerable time collecting data before you begin writing.
Data fall into two broad categories, primary and secondary. Primary data result 
from firsthand experience and observation. Secondary data come from reading what 
others have experienced and observed. Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola, for example, pro-
duce primary data when they stage taste tests and record the reactions of consumers. 
These same sets of data become secondary after they have been published and, let’s 
say, a newspaper reporter uses them in an article about soft drinks. Secondary data 
are easier and cheaper to develop than primary data, which might involve interview-
ing large groups or sending out questionnaires. 
You are going to learn first about secondary data because that is where nearly 
every research project should begin. Often, something has already been written 
about your topic. Reviewing secondary sources can save time and effort and prevent 
you from “reinventing the wheel.” Most secondary material is available either in 
print or electronically.
Print resources 
Although we are seeing a steady movement away from print to electronic data, 
print sources are still the most visible parts of most libraries. Because some infor-
mation is available only in print, you may want to use some of the following print 
resources.
If you are an infrequent library user, begin your research by talking with a 
reference librarian about your project. These librarians won’t do your research 
for you, but they will steer you in the right direction. What is more, they are very 
accommodating. Several years ago a Wall Street Journal poll revealed that librarians 
are thought to be among the friendliest, most approachable people in the working 
world. Many libraries help you understand their computer, cataloging, and retrieval 
systems by providing brochures, handouts, and workshops. 
Books. Although quickly outdated, books provide excellent historical, in-depth 
data on a large variety of subjects. Books can be located through print catalogs 
or online catalogs. Most automated systems today enable you to learn not only 
whether a book is in the library but also whether it is currently available.
The planning of every report 
begins with a statement 
of purpose explaining the 
goal, signiﬁ cance, and 
limitations of the report.
Primary data come from 
ﬁ rsthand experience and 
observation; secondary 
data, from reading.
Books provide historical, 
in-depth data; periodicals 
provide limited but 
current coverage.

260 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Periodicals. Magazines, pamphlets, and journals are called periodicals because 
of their recurrent, or periodic, publication. Journals are compilations of scholarly 
articles. Articles in journals and other periodicals will be extremely useful to you 
because they are concise, limited in scope, and current, and can supplement infor-
mation in books. 
Bibliographic indexes. The Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature is a 
valuable index of general-interest magazine article titles. It includes such magazines 
as Time, Newsweek, The New Yorker, and U.S. News & World Report. More use-
ful to business writers, though, will be the titles of articles appearing in business 
and industrial magazines and newspapers (such as Forbes, Fortune, The Economist, 
BusinessWeek, Barron’s, and The Wall Street Journal). For an index of these publi-
cations, consult the Business Periodicals Index. Most indexes today are available in 
print, CD-ROM, and Web versions for easy searching.
electronic Databases 
As a writer of business reports today, you will probably begin your secondary 
research with electronic resources. Although some databases are still presented on 
CD-ROM, information is increasingly available in online databases. These online 
databases have become a staple of secondary research. Most writers turn to them 
first because they are fast and easy to use. College and public libraries and some 
employers offer free access to several commercial databases, sparing you the high 
cost of individual subscriptions. With an Internet connection, you can conduct 
detailed searches without ever leaving your office, home, or dorm room.
A database is a collection of information stored electronically so that it is 
accessible by computer and digitally searchable. Databases provide both biblio-
graphic (titles of documents and brief abstracts) as well as full-text documents. 
Most researchers prefer full-text documents. Various databases contain a rich 
array of magazine, newspaper, and journal articles, as well as newsletters, busi-
ness reports, company profiles, government data, reviews, and directories. Well-
known databases are EBSCO Business Source Premier, Factiva, ABI/Inform, and 
LexisNexis.
The Web 
The best-known area of the Internet is the World Wide Web. Growing at a dizzy-
ing pace, the Web includes an enormous collection of Web sites around the world. 
With trillions of pages of information available on the Web, chances are that if you 
have a question, an answer exists online. Web offerings include online databases, 
magazines, newspapers, library resources, sound and video files, and many other 
information resources. You can expect to find such items as product and service 
facts, public relations material, mission statements, staff directories, press releases, 
current company news, government information, selected article reprints, collabora-
tive scientific project reports, stock research, financial information, and employment 
information. The Web is indeed a vast network of resources at your fingertips.
The Web is unquestionably one of the greatest sources of information now avail-
able to anyone needing simple facts quickly and inexpensively. But finding relevant, 
credible information can be frustrating and time consuming. The constantly chang-
ing contents of the Web and its lack of organization irritate budding researchers. 
Moreover, content isn’t always reliable. Anyone posting a Web site is a publisher 
without any quality control or guarantee. Check out the Communication Workshop 
at the end of this chapter to learn more about what questions to ask in assessing the 
quality of a Web document. The problem of gathering information is complicated 
by the fact that the total number of Web sites recently surpassed 100 million, grow-
ing at a rate of about 4 million new addresses each month.4 Therefore, to succeed 
in your search for information and answers, you need to understand how to browse 
the Web and use search tools. You also need to understand how to evaluate the 
information you find.
Most researchers today 
begin by looking in 
electronic databases.
The World Wide Web is a 
collection of hypertext pages 
that offer information and 
links on trillions of pages.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
261
Web Browsers and urLs. Searching the Web requires a Web browser, 
such as Microsoft Internet Explorer, Safari, or Firefox. Browsers are software pro-
grams that enable you to view the graphics and text of, as well as access links to, 
Web pages. To locate the Web page of a specific organization, you need its Web 
site address, or URL (Uniform Resource Locator). URLs are case and space sensi-
tive, so be sure to type the address exactly as it is printed. For most companies, the 
URL is http://www.xyzcompany.com. Your goal is to locate the top-level Web page 
(called home page and, in certain cases, portal) of an organization’s site. On this 
page you will generally find an overview of the site contents or a link to a site map. 
If you can’t guess a company’s URL, you can usually find it quickly using Google 
(http://www.google.com).
Web access has gone mobile in the last few years, as increasingly sophisticated 
smartphones and PDAs (personal digital assistants) now offer nearly the same 
functions as desktop and laptop computers do. Mobile browsers, also called mini-
browsers, are small versions of their bigger cousins, Internet Explorer or Firefox. 
Businesspeople can surf Web pages and write e-mail on the go with devices such as 
the popular BlackBerry and iPhone, which fit into their pockets. Similarly, users can 
listen to podcasts, digital recordings of radio programs, and other audio and video 
files on demand. Podcasts are distributed for downloading to a computer or an MP3 
audio player such as the iPod and can be enjoyed anywhere you choose.
Search Tools. The Web is packed with amazing information. Instead of visit-
ing libraries or searching reference books when you need to find something, you can 
now turn to the Web for all kinds of facts. However, you will need a good search 
tool, such as Google, Yahoo, or MSN. A search tool is a service that indexes, orga-
nizes, and often rates and reviews Web pages. Some search tools rely on people to 
maintain a catalog of Web sites or pages. Others use software to identify key infor-
mation. They all begin a search based on the keywords you enter. The most-used 
search tool at this writing is Google. It has developed a cultlike following with its 
“uncanny ability to sort through millions of Web pages and put the sites you really 
want at the top of its results pages.”5
Web Search Tips and Techniques. To conduct a thorough Web search 
for the information you need, use these tips and techniques:
• Use two or three search tools. Different Internet search engines turn up differ-
ent results. However, at this writing, Google consistently turns up more reliable 
“hits” than other search tools.
• Know your search tool. When connecting to a search service for the first time, 
always read the description of its service, including its FAQs (Frequently Asked 
Questions), Help, and How to Search sections.
• Understand case sensitivity. Generally use lowercase for your searches, unless 
you are searching for a term that is typically written in upper- and lowercase, 
such as a person’s name.
• Use nouns as search words and as many as eight words in a query. The right 
key words—and more of them—can narrow your search considerably.
• Use quotation marks. When searching for a phrase, such as cost-benefit analysis,
most search tools will retrieve documents having all or some of the terms. This 
AND/OR strategy is the default of most search tools. To locate occurrences of a 
specific phrase, enclose it in quotation marks.
• Omit articles and prepositions. Known as “stop words,” articles and prepositions 
don’t add value to a search. Instead of request for proposal, use proposal request.
• Proofread your search words. Make sure you are searching for the right thing by 
proofreading your search words carefully. For example, searching for sock market
will come up with substantially different results than searching for stock market.
• Save the best. To keep better track of your favorite Web sites, save them as 
bookmarks or favorites.
Web browsers are software 
programs that access 
Web pages and their links. 
increasingly users access 
the Web on the go with 
smartphones and PDAs. 
A search tool is a service 
that indexes, organizes, 
and often rates and 
reviews Web pages.
You must know how to 
use search tools to make 
them most effective.

262 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
• Keep trying. If a search produces no results, check your spelling. Try synonyms 
and variations on words. Try to be less specific in your search term. If your search 
produces too many hits, try to be more specific. Think of words that uniquely 
identify what you are looking for, and use as many relevant keywords as pos-
sible. Use a variety of search tools, and repeat your search a few days later.
Blogs (Weblogs), Wikis, and Social Networks 
The Web continues to grow and expand, offering a great variety of virtual com-
munities and collaboration tools. Mentioned most frequently are blogs, wikis, and 
social networking sites. Far from being mere entertainment for “wired” teens, these 
resources are affecting the way we do business today.
One of the newest ways to locate secondary information on the Web is through 
the use of weblogs, more commonly referred to as blogs. A Google search yields 
dozens of definitions. A Cornell University glossary defines the term as a “jour-
nal on the web, which may be public or private, individual or collaborative.”6 An 
individual’s opinions or news are posted regularly in reverse chronological order, 
allowing visitors to comment.
Blogs are used by business researchers, students, politicians, the media, and many 
others to share and gather information. Marketing firms and their clients are look-
ing closely at blogs because blogs can produce unbiased consumer feedback faster 
and more cheaply than such staples of consumer research as focus groups and sur-
veys.7 Employees and executives at companies such as Google, Sun Microsystems, 
IBM, and Hewlett-Packard maintain blogs. They use blogs to communicate inter-
nally with employees and externally with clients.8
A blog is basically an online diary or journal that allows visitors to leave public 
comments. At this time, writers have posted 70 million blogs, up nearly 30 percent 
in one year.9 However, only about half of these blogs are active, meaning that posts 
were published within three months. A recent Forrester Research study suggests that 
25 percent of the U.S. population read a blog once a month.10Although blogs may 
have been overrated in their importance, they do represent an amazing new infor-
mation stream if used wisely. Be sure to evaluate all blog content using the checklist 
provided in the Communication Workshop at the end of this chapter.
At least as important to business as blogs are new communication tools such as 
wikis and social networking sites. A wiki is collaborative software, typically a col-
lection of Web pages, that can be edited by a group of users tapping into the same 
technology that runs the well-known online encyclopedia Wikipedia. Large compa-
nies, such as British Telecom (BT), encourage their employees to team up to author 
software, launch branding campaigns, and map cell phone stations. Most projects 
are facilitated with the help of wikis, a tool that is especially valuable across vast 
geographic distances and multiple time zones.11
Far from being only entertaining leisure sites, social networks such as Facebook 
and Twitter are used by businesses to enable teams to form spontaneously and natu-
rally and then to assign targeted projects to them. Idea generators are easy to spot. 
A BT executive considers these contributors invaluable, adding that “a new class of 
supercommunicators has emerged.”12 However, these exciting new online tools require 
sound judgment when researchers wish to use them. The Communication Workshop 
at the end of this chapter will help you establish reliable evaluation criteria.
generating Primary Data 
Although you will begin a business report by probing for secondary data, you will 
probably need primary data to give a complete picture. Business reports that solve 
specific current problems typically rely on primary, firsthand data. If, for example, 
management wants to discover the cause of increased employee turnover in its Las 
Vegas office, it must investigate conditions in Las Vegas by collecting recent informa-
tion. Providing answers to business problems often means generating primary data 
Blogs, wikis, and informal 
online networks can be 
used to generate primary 
or secondary data.
Business reports often 
rely on primary data from 
ﬁ rsthand experience.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
263
through surveys, interviews, observation, or experimentation. In addition to generat-
ing secondary data, blogs can also be used to generate primary data. Similarly, wikis 
can be harnessed by teams to discuss a project and solicit feedback that may produce 
primary data.
Surveys
Surveys collect data from groups of people. When companies develop new prod-
ucts, for example, they often survey consumers to learn their needs. The advantages 
of surveys are that they gather data economically and efficiently. Surveys can be 
mailed to participants, or they can be administered online. Both mailed and online 
surveys reach big groups nearby or at great distances. Moreover, people responding 
to mailed and online surveys have time to consider their answers, thus improving 
the accuracy of the data.
Mailed surveys, of course, have disadvantages. Most of us rank them with junk 
mail, so response rates may be no higher than 2 percent. Online surveys also have 
disadvantages, although response rates tend to be higher. Furthermore, those who 
do respond to either mailed or online surveys may not represent an accurate sample 
of the overall population, thus invalidating generalizations from the group. Let’s 
say, for example, that an e-commerce site sends out a survey questionnaire asking 
about online shopping preferences. If only young Internet users respond, the survey 
data can’t be used to generalize what people in other age groups might think. A 
final problem with surveys has to do with truthfulness. Some respondents exag-
gerate their incomes or distort other facts, thus causing the results to be unreliable. 
Nevertheless, surveys may be the best way to generate data for business and student 
reports.
interviews
Some of the best report information, particularly on topics about which little has 
been written, comes from individuals. These individuals are usually experts or 
veterans in their fields. Consider both in-house and outside experts for business 
reports. Tapping these sources will call for in-person, telephone, or online inter-
views. To elicit the most useful data, try these techniques: 
• Locate an expert. Ask managers and individuals working in an area whom they 
consider to be most knowledgeable. Check membership lists of professional orga-
nizations, and consult articles about the topic or related topics. Search business-
related blogs to find out who the experts are in your area of interest. You could 
also post an inquiry to an Internet newsgroup. An easy way to search newsgroups 
in a topic area is through the browse groups now indexed by the popular search 
tool Google (http://groups.google.com). Most people enjoy being experts or at 
least recommending them.
• Prepare for the interview. Learn about the individual you are interviewing, and 
make sure you can pronounce the interviewee’s name correctly. Research the 
background and terminology of the topic. Let’s say you are interviewing a corpo-
rate communication expert about producing an in-house newsletter. You ought 
to be familiar with terms such as font and software such as QuarkXpress and 
Adobe InDesign. In addition, be prepared by making a list of questions that pin-
point your focus on the topic. Ask the interviewee if you may record the talk. 
• Maintain a professional attitude. Call before the interview to confirm the arrange-
ments, and then arrive on time. Bring what you need to take notes, and dress pro-
fessionally. Use your body language to convey respect. 
• Make your questions objective and friendly. Adopt a courteous and respectful 
attitude. Don’t get into a debating match with the interviewee. Remember that 
you are there to listen, not to talk! Use open-ended questions (What are your pre-
dictions for the future of the telecommunications industry?), rather than yes-or-no 
questions (Do you think we will see more video e-mail in the future?) to draw 
experts out. 
Surveys yield efﬁ cient 
and economical primary 
data for reports.
interviews with experts 
produce useful report data, 
especially when little has 
been written about a topic.

264 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
• Watch the time. Tell interviewees in advance how much time you expect to need 
for the interview. Don’t overstay your appointment. 
• End graciously. Conclude the interview with a general question, such as Is there 
anything you would like to add? Express your appreciation, and ask permission 
to telephone later if you need to verify points. Send a thank-you note within a 
day or two after the interview.
Observation and experimentation 
Some kinds of primary data can be obtained only through firsthand observation and 
experimentation. If you determine that the questions you have require observational 
data, then you need to plan the observations carefully. One of the most important 
questions to ask is what or whom you are observing and how often those observa-
tions are necessary to provide reliable data. For example, if you want to learn more 
about an organization’s customer-service phone service, you probably need to use 
observation techniques, along with interviews and perhaps even surveys. You will 
want to answer questions such as, How long does a typical caller wait before a 
customer-service rep answers the call? and Is the service consistent?
Observation produces rich data, but that information is especially prone to 
charges of subjectivity. One can interpret an observation in many ways. Thus, to 
make observations more objective, try to quantify them. For example, record cus-
tomer telephone wait-time for 60-minute periods at different times throughout a 
week. This will give you a better picture than just observing for an hour on a Friday 
before a holiday.
Experimentation produces data suggesting causes and effects. Informal experi-
mentation might be as simple as a pretest and posttest in a college course. Did stu-
dents expand their knowledge as a result of the course? More formal experimenta-
tion is undertaken by scientists and professional researchers who control variables 
to test their effects. Assume, for example, that the Hershey Company wants to test 
the hypothesis (which is a tentative assumption) that chocolate lifts people out of the 
doldrums. An experiment testing the hypothesis would separate depressed individu-
als into two groups: those who ate chocolate (the experimental group) and those 
who did not (the control group). What effect did chocolate have? Such experiments 
aren’t done haphazardly, however. Valid experiments require sophisticated research 
designs and careful attention to matching the experimental and control groups. 
Documenting Data 
Whether you collect data from primary or secondary sources, the data must be 
documented; that is, you must indicate where the data originated. Using the ideas 
of someone else without giving credit is called plagiarism and is unethical. Even if 
you paraphrase (put the information in your own words), the ideas must be docu-
mented. You will learn more about paraphrasing in this section.
Purposes of Documentation
As a careful writer, you should properly document your data for the following 
reasons:
• To strengthen your argument. Including good data from reputable sources will 
convince readers of your credibility and the logic of your reasoning.
• To instruct the reader. Citing references enables readers to pursue a topic further 
and make use of the information themselves.
• To protect yourself against charges of plagiarism. Acknowledging your sources 
keeps you honest. Plagiarism, which is illegal and unethical, is the act of using 
others’ ideas without proper documentation or paraphrasing poorly.
Plagiarism of words or ideas is a serious charge and can lead to loss of a job. 
The career-ending missteps of journalists such as Jayson Blair of The New York 
Some of the best 
report data come from 
ﬁ rsthand observation 
and experimentation.
report writers document 
their sources to strengthen 
an argument, protect 
themselves from charges 
of plagiarism, and help 
readers locate data.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
265
Times and, more recently, of Baltimore Sun columnist Michael Olesker, illustrate 
that plagiarism is serious business.13 You can avoid charges of plagiarism as well as 
add clarity to your work by knowing what to document and by developing good 
research habits.
Learning What to Document 
When you write business or academic reports, you are continually dealing with 
other people’s ideas. You are expected to conduct research, synthesize ideas, and 
build on the work of others. But you are also expected to give proper credit for 
borrowed material. To avoid plagiarism, you must give credit whenever you use 
the following:14
• Another person’s ideas, opinions, examples, or theory
• Any facts, statistics, graphs, and drawings that aren’t common knowledge
• Quotations of another person’s actual spoken or written words
• Paraphrases of another person’s spoken or written words
Information that is common knowledge requires no documentation. For exam-
ple, the following statement needs no documentation: The Wall Street Journal is a 
popular business newspaper. Statements that aren’t common knowledge, however, 
must be documented. For example, Eight of the nation’s top ten fastest-growing large 
cities (100,000 or more population) since Census 2000 lie in the Western states of 
Arizona, Nevada, and California would require a citation because most people don’t 
know this fact. Cite sources for proprietary information such as statistics organized 
and reported by a newspaper or magazine. You probably know to use citations to 
document direct quotations, but you must also cite ideas that you summarize in your 
own words. 
Developing good research Habits 
Report writers who are gathering information should record documentation data 
immediately after locating the information. This information can then be used in 
footnotes, endnotes, or in-text citations; and it can be listed in a bibliography or 
works-cited list at the end of the report. Here are some tips for gathering the docu-
mentation data you need from some of the most popular types of resources:
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
Hailed as the largest science experiment in history, 
the Large Hadron Collider is a multibillion-dollar 
atom-smasher out to uncover the origins of the 
universe. Buried 330 feet below Meyrin, Switzerland, 
the massive particle accelerator uses barrel-shaped 
solenoids and supercooled magnets to recreate 
conditions believed to have existed during the 
Big Bang. Physicists at CERN built the collider 
to investigate the existence of extra dimensions 
and “dark matter”—an invisible mass that may 
comprise much of the universe. Despite public 
fears that the atomic project could unleash an 
Earth-swallowing black hole, scientists backing 
the collider have issued formal reports affirming 
its safety. Why is it important for CERN to provide 
accurate documentation in its safety reports?
© DENIS BALIBOUSE / REUTERS / LANDOV
give credit when you use 
another’s ideas, when you 
borrow facts that aren’t 
common knowledge, 
and when you quote or 
paraphrase another’s words.

266 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
• For a book, record the title, author(s), publisher, place of publication, year of 
publication, and pages cited.
• For newspaper, magazine, and journal articles, record the publication title, article 
title, author(s), issue/volume number, date, and pages cited.
• For online newspaper and magazine articles, record the author(s), article title, 
publication title, date the article was written, the exact URL, and the date you 
retrieved the article.
• For an entire Web site, record the name of the company or organization sponsor-
ing the site, the URL, and the date you retrieved the page.
Report writers who are gathering information have two methods available for 
recording the information they find. The time-honored manual method of note taking 
works well because information is recorded on separate cards, which can then be 
arranged in the order needed to develop a thesis or argument. Today, though, writ-
ers rely heavily on electronic researching. Instead of recording facts on note cards, 
savvy researchers manage their data by saving sources to memory sticks and disks, 
e-mailing documents, bookmarking favorites, and copying and pasting information 
from the Web into word processing software for easy storage and retrieval. Be care-
ful, though, not to cut-and-paste your way into plagiarism.
You can learn more about what types of documentation information to record 
during your research by studying the formal report in Figure 10.17 and by consult-
ing Appendix C.
Practicing the Fine Art of Paraphrasing 
In writing business or academic reports and using the ideas of others, you will prob-
ably rely heavily on paraphrasing, which means restating an original passage in your 
own words and in your own style. To do a good job of paraphrasing, follow these 
steps:
• Read the original material carefully to comprehend its full meaning.
• Write your own version without looking at the original.
• Don’t repeat the grammatical structure of the original, and don’t merely replace 
words with synonyms.
• Reread the original to be sure you covered the main points but did not borrow 
specific language. 
To better understand the difference between plagiarizing and paraphrasing, 
study the following passages. Notice that the writer of the plagiarized version uses 
the same grammatical construction as the source and often merely replaces words 
with synonyms. Even the acceptable version, however, requires a reference to the 
source author.
Source
While the BlackBerry has become standard armor for executives, a few maverick 
leaders are taking action to reduce e-mail use. . . . The concern, say academics 
and management thinkers, is misinterpreted messages, as well as the degree to 
which e-mail has become a substitute for the nuanced conversations that are 
critical in the workplace.15
Plagiarized version
Although smartphones are standard among business executives, some pioneer-
ing bosses are acting to lower e-mail usage. Business professors and management 
experts are concerned that messages are misinterpreted and e-mail substitutes for 
nuances in conversations that are crucial on the job (Brady, 2006).
Acceptable paraphrase
E-mail on the go may be the rage in business. However, some executives are 
rethinking its use, as communication experts warn that e-mail triggers misunder-
standings. These specialists believe that e-mail should not replace the more subtle 
face-to-face interaction needed on the job (Brady, 2006).
Paraphrasing involves 
putting an original passage 
into your own words.
The acceptable paraphrase 
changes sentence structure 
and perspective.
The plagiarized version copies 
sentence structure and 
merely replaces some words.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
267
Knowing When and How to Quote 
On occasion you will want to use the exact words of a source. Anytime you use 
the exact words from a source, you must enclose the words in quotation marks. Be 
careful when doing this that you don’t change the wording of the quoted material 
in any way.
Also beware of overusing quotations. Documents that contain pages of spliced-
together quotations suggest that writers have few ideas of their own. Wise writers 
and speakers use direct quotations for three purposes only: 
• To provide objective background data and establish the severity of a problem as 
seen by experts
• To repeat identical phrasing because of its precision, clarity, or aptness
• To duplicate exact wording before criticizing
When you must use an exact quotation, try to summarize and introduce it in 
your own words. Readers want to know the gist of a quotation before they tackle 
it. For example, to introduce a quotation discussing the shrinking staffs of large 
companies, you could precede it with your words: In predicting employment trends, 
Charles Waller believes the corporation of the future will depend on a small core 
of full-time employees. To introduce quotations or paraphrases, use wording such 
as the following:
According to Waller, . . . .
Waller argues that . . . .
In his recent study, Waller reported . . . .
Use quotation marks to enclose exact quotations, as shown in the following: 
“The current image,” says Charles Waller, “of a big glass-and-steel corporate head-
quarters on landscaped grounds directing a worldwide army of tens of thousands of 
employees may soon be a thing of the past.”
using Citation Formats 
You can direct readers to your sources with parenthetical notes inserted into 
the text and with bibliographies or works-cited lists. The most common cita-
tion formats are those presented by the Modern Language Association (MLA) 
and the American Psychological Association (APA). Learn more about how to 
use these formats in Appendix C. Guidelines for the most up-do-date citation 
formats for electronic references are at www.guffey.com. You will find model 
citation formats for online magazine, newspaper, and journal articles, as well as 
for Web references.
Organizing and Outlining Data 
Once you have collected the data for a report and recorded that information on 
notes or printouts, you are ready to organize it into a coherent plan of presentation. 
First, you should decide on an organizational strategy, and then, following your 
plan, you will want to outline the report. Poorly organized reports lead to frustra-
tion; therefore, it is important to organize your report carefully so that readers will 
understand, remember, or be persuaded.
Organizational Strategies 
The readability and effectiveness of a report are greatly enhanced by skillful orga-
nization of the information presented. As you begin the process of organization, 
ask yourself two important questions: (a) Where should I place the conclusions/
recommendations? and (b) How should I organize the findings?
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Changing the words of an 
original source is not sufficient 
to prevent plagiarism. If you 
have retained the essential 
idea of an original source, 
and have not cited it, then no 
matter how drastically you 
may have altered its context 
or presentation, you have still 
plagiarized.
use quotations only to 
provide background data, 
to cite experts, to repeat 
precise phrasing, or to 
duplicate exact wording 
before criticizing.

268 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Where to Place the Conclusions and recommendations. As 
you recall from earlier instruction, the direct strategy requires that we present main 
ideas first. In formal reports that would mean beginning with your conclusions and 
recommendations. For example, if you were studying five possible locations for a 
proposed shopping center, you would begin with the recommendation of the best 
site. Use this strategy when the reader is supportive and knowledgeable. However, 
if the reader isn’t supportive or needs to be informed, the indirect strategy may 
be better. This strategy involves presenting facts and discussion first, followed by 
conclusions and recommendations. Since formal reports often seek to educate the 
reader, this order of presentation is often most effective. Following this sequence, a 
study of possible locations for a shopping center would begin with data regarding 
all proposed sites followed by an analysis of the information and conclusions drawn 
from that analysis.
How to Organize the Findings. After collecting your facts, you need a 
coherent plan for presenting them. We describe here three principal organizational 
patterns: chronological, geographical, and topical. You will find these and other 
patterns summarized in Figure 10.2. The pattern you choose depends on the mate-
rial collected and the purpose of your report.
• Chronological order. Information sequenced along a time frame is arranged 
chronologically. This plan is effective for presenting historical data or for 
in the direct strategy, 
conclusions and 
recommendations come 
ﬁ rst; in the indirect 
strategy, they are last.
Figure 10.2 Organizational Patterns for Report Findings
Pattern
Development 
use
Chronology
Arrange information in a time sequence to show 
history or development of topic.
Useful in showing time relationships, such as 
five-year profit figures or a series or events 
leading to a problem
Geography/Space
Organize information by regions or areas.
Appropriate for topics that are easily divided into 
locations, such as East Coast and West Coast, etc.
Topic/Function
Arrange by topics or functions.
Works well for topics with established categories, 
such as a report about categories of company 
expenses
Compare/Contrast
Present problem and show alternative solutions. 
Use consistent criteria. Show how the solutions are 
similar and different.
Best used for “before and after” scenarios or for 
problems with clear alternatives
Journalism Pattern
Arrange information in paragraphs devoted to who, 
what, when, where, why, and how. May conclude 
with recommendations.
Useful with audiences that need to be educated 
or persuaded
Value/Size
Start with the most valuable, biggest, or most 
important item. Discuss other items in descending 
order.
Useful for classifying information in, for example, 
a realtor’s report on home values
Importance
Arrange from most important to least importance or 
build from least to most important.
Appropriate when persuading the audience to 
take a specific action or change a belief
Simple/Complex
Begin with simple concept; proceed to more 
complex idea.
Useful for technical or abstract topics
Best Case/Worst Case
Describe the best and possibly the worst possible 
outcomes.
Useful when dramatic effect is needed to achieve 
results; helpful when audience is uninterested or 
uninformed
Convention
Organize the report using a prescribed plan that all 
readers understand.
Useful for many operational and recurring reports 
such as weekly sales reports
Organize report ﬁ ndings 
chronologically, geographi-
cally, topically, or by one 
of the other methods 
shown in Figure 10.2.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
269
describing a procedure. Agendas, minutes of meetings, progress reports, and 
procedures are usually organized by time. A description of the development 
of a multinational company, for example, would be chronological. A report 
explaining how to obtain federal funding for a project might be organized 
chronologically. Often topics are arranged in a past-to-present or present-to-
past sequence.
• Geographical or spatial arrangement. Information arranged geographically or 
spatially is organized by physical location. For instance, a report analyzing a 
company’s national sales might be divided into sections representing geographi-
cal areas such as the East, South, Midwest, West, and Northwest.
• Topical or functional arrangement. Some subjects lend themselves to arrange-
ment by topic or function. A report analyzing changes in the management hierar-
chy of an organization might be arranged in this manner. First, the report would 
consider the duties of the CEO followed by the functions of the general manager, 
business manager, marketing manager, and so forth.
Outlines and Headings 
Most writers agree that the clearest way to show the organization of a report topic 
is by recording its divisions in an outline. Although the outline isn’t part of the final 
report, it is a valuable tool of the writer. It reveals at a glance the overall organiza-
tion of the report. As you learned in Chapter 3, outlining involves dividing a topic 
into major sections and supporting those with details. Figure 10.3 shows an abbre-
viated outline of a report about forms of business ownership. Rarely is a real outline 
so perfectly balanced; some sections are usually longer than others. Remember, 
though, not to put a single topic under a major component. If you have only one 
subpoint, integrate it with the main item above it or reorganize. Use details, illustra-
tions, and evidence to support subpoints.
The main points used to outline a report often become the main headings of 
the written report. In Chapter 9 you studied tips for writing talking and functional 
headings. Formatting those headings depends on what level they represent. Major 
headings, as you can see in Figure 10.4, are centered and typed in bold font. Second-
level headings start at the left margin, and third-level headings are indented and 
become part of a paragraph.
Figure 10.3 Outline Format
 
  A. Advantages of sole proprietorship (first subdivision of Topic I )
  
 1. Minimal capital requirements (first subdivision of Topic A)
  
 2. Control by owner (second subdivision of Topic A)
  B. Disadvantages of sole proprietorship (second subdivision of Topic I )
  
 1. Unlimited liability (first subdivision of Topic B)
  
 2. Limited management talent (second subdivision of Topic B)
 
  A. Advantages of partnership (first subdivision of Topic II )
  
 1. Access to capital (first subdivision of Topic A)
  
 2. Management talent (second subdivision of Topic A)
  
 3. Ease of formation (third subdivision of Topic A)
  B. Disadvantages of partnership (second subdivision of Topic II )
  
 1. Unlimited liability (first subdivision of Topic B)
  
 2. Personality conflicts (second subdivision of Topic B)
Outlines show the 
organization and 
divisions of a report.

270 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
illustrating Data 
After collecting information and interpreting it, you need to consider how best to 
present it to your audience. If your report contains complex data and numbers, you 
may want to consider using graphics such as tables and charts. Appropriate graphics 
clarify data, create visual interest, and make numerical data meaningful. By simpli-
fying complex ideas and emphasizing key data, well-constructed graphics make key 
information more understandable and easier to remember. In contrast, readers tend 
to be bored and confused by text paragraphs packed with complex data and num-
bers. The same information summarized in a table or chart becomes clear.
Because data can be shown in many forms (for example, in a chart, table, or graph), 
you need to recognize how to match the appropriate graphic with your objective. In 
addition, you need to know how to incorporate graphics into your reports.
effective graphics clarify 
numerical data and 
simplify complex ideas.
Figure 10.4 Levels of Headings in Reports

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
271
Matching graphics and Objectives 
In developing the best graphics, you should first decide what data you want to high-
light. Chances are you will have many points you would like to show in a table or chart. 
But which graphics are most appropriate for your objectives? Tables? Bar charts? Pie 
charts? Line charts? Surface charts? Flowcharts? Organization charts? Pictures?
Figure 10.5 summarizes appropriate uses for each type of graphic. Notice that tables 
are appropriate when you must report exact figures and values. However, if you want to 
compare one item with others or demonstrate changes in quantitative data over time, bar 
and line charts are better. To show the parts of a whole and the proportions of all the 
parts, you might draw a pie chart. If you must show a process such as how a product is 
made, a flowchart works well. An organization chart defines elements in a hierarchy such 
as the line of command in business management. Photographs, maps, and illustrations are 
most useful to create authenticity, to spotlight a location, and to show an item in use.
Let’s look at each kind of graphic in greater detail so that you can use it 
effectively.
Tables 
Probably the most frequently used visual aid in reports is the table. Because a table pre-
sents quantitative or verbal information in systematic columns and rows, it can clarify 
large quantities of data in small spaces. The disadvantage is that tables don’t readily dis-
play trends. In making tables, you will be constructing rows and columns. A row is a list 
of items presented straight across a table. Each row must have a row heading. In Figure 
10.6, the row headings are years. Columns are lists of items presented vertically.
Figure 10.5 Matching Graphics to Objectives
Graphic
Table
Bar Chart
Line Chart
Pie Chart
Flowchart
Organization
Chart
Photograph, Map,
Illustration
Objective
To show exact figures and values
To compare one item with others
To demonstrate changes in
quantitative data over time
To visualize a whole unit and the
proportions of its components
To display a process or procedure
To define a hierarchy of elements
To create authenticity, to spotlight
a location, and to show an item in 
use
Disagree
_____
_____
_____
_____
Undecided
_____
_____
_____
_____
Agree
_____
_____
_____
_____
3.3
4.75
6.58
2.44
  5.48
  6.2
22.4
  3.4
2.2
3.7
4.8
1.25
Tables permit the 
systematic presentation 
of large amounts of data, 
whereas charts enhance 
visual comparisons.
Selecting an appropriate 
graphic form depends on 
the purpose that it serves.

272 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Here are specific tips for designing good tables:
• Provide a descriptive title at the top of the table.
• Arrange items in a logical order (alphabetical, chronological, geographical, highest 
to lowest), depending on what you want to emphasize.
• Provide clear headings for the rows and columns.
• Identify the units in which figures are given (percentages, dollars, units per worker 
hour, and so forth) in the table title, in the column or row head, with the first 
item in a column, or in a note at the bottom.
• Use N/A (not available) for missing data.
• Make long tables easier to read by shading alternate lines or by leaving a blank 
line after groups of five.
• Place tables as close as possible to the place where they are mentioned in the text.
Bar Charts 
Although they lack the precision of tables, bar charts enable you to make emphatic 
visual comparisons by using horizontal or vertical bars of varying lengths. Bar charts 
can be used to compare related items, illustrate changes in data over time, and show 
segments as part of a whole. Figures 10.7 through 10.10 show vertical (also called 
column charts), horizontal, grouped, and segmented bar charts that highlight some 
of the data shown in the MPM Entertainment Company table (Figure 10.6). Note 
how the varied bar charts present information in different ways.
Bar charts enable readers 
to compare related items, 
see changes over time, 
and understand how 
parts relate to a whole.
Figure 10.7 Vertical Bar Chart
40
30
20
10
0
Millions?of?Dollars
DVDs
&?Videos
Motion
Pictures
Theme
Parks
$32.2
22.0
24.3
Figure 1
2009 MPM INCOME BY DIVISION
Source: Industry Profiles (New York: DataPro, 2009), 225.
Figure 10.8 Horizontal Bar Chart
20
Figure 2
TOTAL MPM INCOME, 2006 TO 2010
Source: Industry Profiles.
0
40
60
80
100
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010*
$66.3
50.9
67.6
78.5
82.2
*Projected
Millions of Dollars
Figure 1
MPM Entertainment Company
Income by Division (in millions of dollars)
Theme Parks
Motion Pictures
DVDs and Videos
Total
2006
$15.8
$39.3
$11.2
$66.3
2007
 18.1
 17.5
 15.3
 50.9
2008
 23.8
 21.1
 22.7
 67.6
2009
 32.2
 22.0
 24.3
 78.5
2010 (projected)
 35.1
 21.0
 26.1
 82.2
Source: Industry Profiles (New York: DataPro, 2009), 225.
Figure 10.6 Table Summarizing Precise Data

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
273
Many suggestions for tables also hold true for bar charts. Here are a few addi-
tional tips:
• Keep the length and width of each bar and segment proportional.
• Include a total figure in the middle of a bar or at its end if the figure helps the 
reader and doesn’t clutter the chart.
• Start dollar or percentage amounts at zero.
• Avoid showing too much information, which produces clutter and confusion.
• Place each bar chart as close as possible to the place where it is mentioned in the 
text.
Line Charts 
The major advantage of line charts is that they show changes over time, thus indi-
cating trends. The vertical axis is typically the dependent variable (such as dol-
lars), and the horizontal axis is the independent one (such as years). Figures 10.11 
through 10.13 show line charts that reflect income trends for the three divisions of 
MPM. Notice that line charts don’t provide precise data, such as the 2009 MPM 
DVD and video income. Instead, they give an overview or impression of the data. 
Experienced report writers use tables to list exact data; they use line charts or bar 
charts to spotlight important points or trends.
Figure 10.9 Grouped Bar Chart
Figure 10.10 Segmented 100% Bar Chart
100
75
50
25
0
2010*
2008
2006
Figure 4
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL INCOME BY DIVISION
2006, 2008, AND 2010
Source: Industry Profiles.
*Projected
17%
59%
24%
31%
43%
35%
34%
25%
32%
Theme Parks
Motion Pictures
DVDs & Videos
50
10
0
DVDs
& Videos
Motion
Pictures
Theme
Parks
23.8
Figure 3
MPM INCOME BY DIVISION
2006, 2008, AND 2010
Source: Industry Profiles.
20
30
40
35.1
$15.8
21.1
21.0
39.3
22.7
26.1
11.2
Millions of Dollars
2006
2008
2010
2006
2008
2010
2006
2008
2010
2006
2008
2010
Line charts illustrate 
trends and changes 
in data over time.
Figure 10.11 Simple Line Chart
Figure 10.12 Multiple Line Chart
Figure 6
COMPARISON OF DIVISION REVENUES
2005 TO 2010
50
Millions of Dollars
2006
Source: Industry Profiles.
40
30
20
10
2007
2008
2009
2010*
2005
*Projected
Theme Parks
DVDs & Videos
Motion Pictures
50
Millions of Dollars
2006
Figure 5
MOTION PICTURE REVENUES
2005 TO 2010
40
30
20
10
2007
2008
2009
2010*
2005
Source: Industry Profiles.
*Projected

274 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Simple line charts (Figure 10.11) show just one variable. Multiple line charts 
compare items, such as two or more data sets, using the same variable (Figure 
10.12). Segmented line charts (Figure 10.13), also called surface charts, illustrate 
how the components of a whole change over time.
Here are tips for preparing line charts:
• Begin with a grid divided into squares.
• Arrange the time component (usually years) horizontally across the bottom; 
arrange values for the other variable vertically.
• Draw small dots at the intersections to indicate each value at a given year.
• Connect the dots and add color if desired.
• To prepare a segmented (surface) chart, plot the first value (say, DVD and video 
income) across the bottom; add the next item (say, motion picture income) to the 
first figures for every increment; for the third item (say, theme park income) add 
its value to the total of the first two items. The top line indicates the total of the 
three values.
• Place each line chart as close as possible to the place where it is mentioned in the 
text.
Pie Charts 
Pie, or circle, charts enable readers to see a whole and the proportion of its compo-
nents, or wedges. Although less flexible than bar or line charts, pie charts are use-
ful in showing percentages, as Figure 10.14 illustrates. Notice that a wedge can be 
“exploded,” or popped out, for special emphasis, as seen in Figure 10.14. For the 
most effective pie charts, follow these suggestions:
• Begin at the 12 o’clock position, drawing the largest wedge first. (Computer soft-
ware programs don’t always observe this advice, but if you are drawing your own 
charts, you can.)
• Include, if possible, the actual percentage or absolute value for each wedge.
• Use four to eight segments for best results; if necessary, group small portions into 
one wedge called “Other.”
• Distinguish wedges with color, shading, or cross-hatching.
• Keep all labels horizontal.
• Place each pie chart as close as possible to the place where it is mentioned in the 
text.
Pie charts are most useful 
in showing the proportion 
of parts to a whole.
Figure 10.13 Segmented Line (Surface) Chart
Source: Industry Profiles.
100
Millions of Dollars
2006
Figure 7
COMPARISON OF DIVISION REVENUES
2005 TO 2010
80
60
40
20
2007
2008
2009
2010*
2005
*Projected
Theme Parks
Motion Pictures
DVDs & Videos
Year
Figure 10.14 Pie Chart
Figure 8
2009 MPM INCOME BY DIVISION
Motion
Pictures
28%
DVDs & Videos
31%
Theme Parks
Motion Pictures
DVDs 
& Videos
Theme
Parks
41%
Source: Industry Profiles.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
275
Flowcharts 
Procedures are simplified and clarified by diagramming them in a flowchart, as 
shown in Figure 10.15. Whether you need to describe the procedure for handling 
a customer’s purchase order or outline steps in solving a problem, flowcharts 
help the reader visualize the process. Traditional flowcharts use the following 
symbols:
• Ovals: to designate the beginning and end of a process
• Diamonds: to denote decision points
• Rectangles: to represent major activities or steps
Software programs such as SmartDraw!, EasyDraw, and ConceptDraw can be 
used to create professional-quality flowcharts.
Organization Charts 
Many large organizations are so complex that they need charts to show the chain of 
command, from the boss down to the line managers and employees. Organization 
charts like the one in Figure 10.16 provide such information as who reports to whom, 
how many subordinates work for each manager (the span of control), and what chan-
nels of official communication exist. These charts may illustrate a company’s struc-
ture, for example, by function, customer, or product. They may also be organized by 
the work being performed in each job or by the hierarchy of decision making.
Photographs, Maps, and illustrations 
Some business reports include photographs, maps, illustrations, and other 
graphics to serve specific purposes. Photos, for example, add authenticity and 
provide a visual record. An environmental engineer may use photos to docu-
ment hazardous waste sites. Maps enable report writers to depict activities 
or concentrations geographically, such as dots indicating sales reps in states 
across the country. Illustrations and diagrams are useful in indicating how an 
object looks or operates. A drawing showing the parts of a printer with labels 
describing their functions, for example, is more instructive than a photograph 
or verbal description. With today’s computer technology, photographs, maps, 
Flowcharts use standard 
symbols to illustrate a 
process or procedure.
Figure 10.15 Flowchart
Goods
restocked
Customer
Shipping
sends order
Customer
Service checks
inventory
Accounting
prepares
invoice
Goods
available ?
Credit
granted ?
Credit
Department
evaluates
Company
receives
order
Legend 
Operation
Decision
End
?
Prepaid ?
Sales
Manager
responds
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
FLOW OF CUSTOMER ORDER THROUGH 
XYZ COMPANY

276 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
illustrations, and other graphics can be scanned and inserted directly into busi-
ness reports.
incorporating graphics in reports 
Used appropriately, graphics make reports more interesting and easier to under-
stand. In putting graphics into your reports, follow these suggestions for best 
effects:
• Evaluate the audience. Consider the reader, the content, your schedule, and your 
budget.
• Use restraint. Don’t overuse color or decorations. Too much color can be dis-
tracting and confusing.
• Be accurate and ethical. Double-check all graphics for accuracy of figures 
and calculations. Be certain that your visuals aren’t misleading—either acci-
dentally or intentionally. Also be sure to cite sources when you use someone 
else’s facts.
• Introduce a graph meaningfully. Refer to every graphic in the text, and place the 
graphic close to the point where it is mentioned. Most important, though, help 
the reader understand the significance of the graphic.
• Choose an appropriate caption or heading style. Like reports, graphics may 
use functional or talking heads. These headings were discussed in Chapter 9.
using Your Computer to Produce Charts 
Designing effective, accurate bar charts, pie charts, figures, and other graphics is 
easy with today’s software. Spreadsheet programs such as Excel, as well as presen-
tation graphics programs such as PowerPoint, allow even nontech ni cal people to 
design high-quality graphics. These graphics can be printed directly on paper for 
written reports or used for transparency masters and slides for oral presentations. 
The benefits of preparing visual aids on a computer are near- professional quality, 
shorter preparation time, and substantial cost  savings.
Figure 10.16 Organization Chart
Chief Executive
Officer
Vice President
Manufacturing
Plant
Manager
Vice President
Human Resources
Vice President
Marketing
Vice President
Finance
Sales
Manager
Personnel
Manager
Accounting
Manager
Domestic Sales
Manager
International
Sales Manager
Senior
Accountant
Training
Supervisor
Maintenance
Supervisor
Production
Supervisor
Staff
Accountant
Cost
Accountant
Computer software 
programs enable you to 
produce top-quality graphics 
quickly and cheaply.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
277
Presenting the Final report 
Long reports are generally organized into three major divisions: (a) prefatory parts, 
(b) body, and (c) supplementary parts. Following is a description of the order and 
content of each part. Refer to the model formal report in Figure 10.17 for illustra-
tions of most of these parts.
Prefatory Parts (Preceding the Body of report) 
Title Page. A report title page, as illustrated in Figure 10.17, begins with 
the name of the report typed in uppercase letters (no underscore and no quota-
tion marks). Next comes Prepared for (or Submitted to) and the name, title, 
and organization of the individual receiving the report. Lower on the page is 
Prepared by (or Submitted by) and the author’s name plus any necessary identi-
fication. The last item on the title page is the date of submission. All items after 
the title appear in a combination of upper- and lowercase letters. The informa-
tion on the title page should be evenly spaced and balanced on the page for a 
professional look.
Letter or Memo of Transmittal. Generally written on organization 
letterhead stationery, a letter or memo of transmittal introduces a formal report. 
You will recall that letters are sent to outsiders and memos to insiders. A trans-
mittal letter or memo follows the direct pattern and is usually less formal than 
the report itself. For example, the letter or memo may use contractions and 
first-person pronouns such as I and we. The transmittal letter or memo typi-
cally (a) announces the topic of the report and tells how it was authorized; (b) 
briefly describes the project; (c) highlights the report’s findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations, if the reader is expected to be supportive; and (d) closes with 
appreciation for the assignment, instructions for the reader’s follow-up actions, 
acknowledgment of help from  others, or offers of assistance in answering ques-
tions. If a report is going to different readers, a special transmittal letter or memo 
should be prepared for each, anticipating what each reader needs to know in 
using the report.
Table of Contents. The table of contents shows the headings in a report 
and their page numbers. It gives an overview of the report topics and helps 
readers locate them. You should wait to prepare the table of contents until 
after you have completed the report. For short reports include all headings. 
For longer reports you might want to list only first- and second-level headings. 
Leaders (spaced or  unspaced dots) help guide the eye from the heading to the 
page number. Items may be indented in outline form or typed flush with the 
left margin.
List of Figures. For reports with several figures or illustrations, you may wish 
to include a list of figures to help readers locate them. This list may appear on the 
same page as the table of contents, space permitting. For each figure or illustration, 
include a title and page number.
executive Summary. As you learned in Chapter 9, the purpose of an execu-
tive summary is to present an overview of a longer report to people who may not 
have time to read the entire document. This timesaving device summarizes the pur-
pose, key points, findings, and conclusions. An executive summary is usually no 
longer than 10 percent of the original document. Therefore, a 20-page report might 
require a 2-page executive summary. Chapter 9 discussed how to write an executive 
summary and included an example in Figure 9.11. You can see another executive 
summary in Figure 10.17.
A letter or memo of 
transmittal presents an 
overview of the report, 
suggests how to read it, 
describes limitations, 
acknowledges assistance, 
and expresses appreciation.

278 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Figure 10.17 Model Formal Report
The title page is usually arranged in four evenly balanced areas. If the report is to be bound on the left, move 
the left margin and center point ¼ inch to the right. Notice that no page number appears on the title page, 
although it is counted as page i. In designing the title page, be careful to avoid anything unprofessional—such 
as too many type fonts, italics, oversized print, and inappropriate graphics. Keep the title page simple and 
professional. This model report uses MLA documentation style. However, it doesn’t illustrate double-spacing, 
the recommended format for research papers using MLA style. Instead, this model uses single-spacing, which 
saves space and is more appropriate for business reports.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
279 
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Letter of Transmittal
A letter or memo of transmittal announces the report topic and explains who authorized it. It briefly describes 
the project and previews the conclusions, if the reader is supportive. Such messages generally close by 
expressing appreciation for the assignment, suggesting follow-up actions, acknowledging the help of others,  
or offering to answer questions. The margins for the transmittal should be the same as for the report, about  
1 to 1¼ inches for side margins. The dateline is placed 2 inches from the top, and the margins should be 
left-justified. A page number is optional.

280 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Table of Contents and List of Figures
Because the table of contents and the list of figures for this report are small, they are combined on one page. 
Notice that the titles of major report parts are in all caps, whereas other headings are a combination of upper- 
and lowercase letters. This duplicates the style within the report. Advanced word processing capabilities enable 
you to generate a contents page automatically, including leaders and accurate page numbering—no matter how 
many times you revise. Notice that the page numbers are right-justified.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
281 
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Executive Summary
For readers who want a quick overview of the report, the executive summary presents its most important 
elements. Executive summaries focus on the information the reader requires for making a decision related to 
the issues discussed in the report. The summary may include some or all of the following elements: purpose, 
scope, research methods, findings, conclusions, and recommendations. Its length depends on the report 
it summarizes. A 100-page report might require a 10-page summary. Shorter reports may contain 1-page 
summaries, as shown here. Unlike letters of transmittal (which may contain personal pronouns and references 
to the writer), the executive summary of a long report is formal and impersonal. It uses the same margins as the 
body of the report. See Chapter 9 for additional discussion of executive summaries.

282 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Page 1
The first page of a formal report generally contains the title printed 2 inches from the top edge. Titles for major 
parts of a report are centered in all caps. In this model document we show functional heads, such as PROBLEM, 
BACKGROUND, FINDINGS, and CONCLUSIONS. However, most business reports would use talking heads or 
a combination such as FINDINGS REVEAL REVENUE AND EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.  First-level headings (such 
as Revenues on page 2) are printed with bold upper- and lowercase letters. Second-level headings (such as 
Distribution on page 3) begin at the side, are bolded, and are written in upper- and lowercase letters. See Figure 
10.4 for an illustration of heading formats. This business report is shown with single-spacing, although some 
research reports might be double-spaced. Always check with your organization to learn its preferred style.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
283 
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Page 2
Notice that this formal report is single-spaced. Many businesses prefer this space-saving format. However, 
some organizations prefer double-spacing, especially for preliminary drafts. If you single-space, don’t indent 
paragraphs. If you double-space, do indent the paragraphs. Page numbers may be centered 1 inch from the 
bottom of the page or placed 1 inch from the upper right corner at the margin. Your word processor can insert 
page numbers automatically. Strive to leave a minimum of 1 inch for top, bottom, and side margins. References 
follow the parenthetical citation style (or in-text citation style) of the Modern Language Association (MLA). 
Notice that the author’s name and a page reference are shown in parentheses. The complete bibliographic entry 
for any in-text citation appears at the end of report in the works-cited section.

284 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Page 3
Only the most important research findings are interpreted and discussed for readers. The depth of discussion 
depends on the intended length of the report, the goal of the writer, and the expectations of the reader. Because 
the writer wants this report to be formal in tone, she avoids I and we in all discussions.
As you type a report, avoid widows and orphans (ending a page with the first line of a paragraph or carrying a 
single line of a paragraph to a new page). Strive to start and end pages with at least two lines of a paragraph, 
even if a slightly larger bottom margin results.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
285 
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Page 4
If you use figures or tables, be sure to introduce them in the text (for example, as shown in Figure 3). Although 
it isn’t always possible, try to place them close to the spot where they are first mentioned. To save space, you 
can print the title of a figure at its side. Because this report contains few tables and figures, the writer named 
them all “Figures” and numbered them consecutively.

286 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Page 5
After discussing and interpreting the research findings, the writer articulates what she considers the most 
important conclusions and recommendations. Longer, more complex reports may have separate sections for 
conclusions and resulting recommendations. In this report they are combined. Notice that it is unnecessary to 
start a new page for the conclusions.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
287
Body of report 
The main section of a report is the body. It generally begins with an introduction, 
includes a discussion of findings, and concludes with a summary and possibly 
recommendations.
introduction. The body of a formal report starts with an introduction that sets 
the scene and announces the subject. Because they contain many parts serving differ-
ent purposes, formal reports have a degree of repetition. The same information may 
be included in the letter or memo of transmittal, executive summary, and introduc-
tion. To avoid sounding repetitious, try to present the information slightly differently 
in each section.
A good report introduction typically covers the following elements, although not 
necessarily in this order:
• Background. Describe the events leading up to the problem or need.
• Problem or purpose. Explain the report topic and specify the problem or need 
that motivated the report.
• Significance. Tell why the topic is important. You may wish to quote experts or 
cite secondary sources to establish the importance of the topic.
Figure 10.17 (Continued) Works Cited
On this page the writer lists all references cited in the text as well as others that she examined during her 
research. The writer lists these citations following the MLA referencing style. Notice that all entries are arranged 
alphabetically. Book and periodical titles are italicized, but they could be underlined. When referring to online 
items, she shows the full name of the citation and then identifies the URL as well as the date on which she 
accessed the electronic reference. This works-cited page is shown with single-spacing, which is preferable 
for business reports. However, MLA style recommends double-spacing for research reports, including the 
works-cited page.
The body of a report 
includes an introduction; 
discussion of ﬁ ndings; and 
summary, conclusions, 
or recommendations.

288 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
• Scope. Clarify the boundaries of the report, defining what will be included or 
excluded.
• Sources and methods. Describe your secondary sources. Also explain how you 
collected primary data.
• Summary. Include a summary of findings, if the report is written directly.
• Organization. Preview the major sections of the report to follow, thus providing 
coherence and transition for the reader.
Discussion of Findings. This is the main section of the report and contains 
numerous headings and subheadings. This section discusses, analyzes, interprets, 
and evaluates the research findings or solution to the initial problem. This is where 
you show the evidence that justifies your conclusions. It is unnecessary to use the 
title Discussion of Findings; many business report writers prefer to begin imme-
diately with the major headings into which the body of the report is divided. As 
summarized in Figure 10.2, you may organize the findings chronologically, geo-
graphically, topically, or by some other method. Regardless of the organizational 
pattern, present your findings logically and objectively. In most cases you will want 
to avoid the use of first-person pronouns (I, we), unless you are certain that your 
audience prefers informal language. Include tables, charts, and graphs if necessary 
to illustrate findings. Analytic and scientific reports may include another section 
titled Implications of Findings, in which the findings are analyzed and related to the 
problem. Less formal reports contain the author’s analysis of the research findings 
within the Discussion section.
Summary, Conclusions, recommendations. The conclusion to 
a report tells what the findings mean, particularly in terms of solving the origi-
nal problem. If the report has been largely informational, it ends with a sum-
mary of the data presented. If the report analyzes research findings, then it ends 
with conclusions drawn from the analyses. An analytic report frequently poses 
research questions. The conclusion to such a report reviews the major findings 
and answers the research questions. If a report seeks to determine a course of 
action, it may end with conclusions and recommendations. Recommendations 
regarding a course of action may be placed in a separate section or incorporated 
with the conclusions.
Supplementary Parts of report 
Works Cited, references, or Bibliography. Readers look in the bib-
liography section to locate the sources of ideas mentioned in a report. Your method 
of report documentation determines how this section is developed. If you use the 
Modern Language Association (MLA) referencing format, all citations would be 
listed alphabetically in the “Works Cited.” If you use the American Psychological 
Association (APA) format, your list would be called “References.” Regardless of 
the format, you must include the author, title, publication, date of publication, page 
number, and other significant data for all sources used in your report. For electronic 
references include the URL and the date you accessed the information online. To see 
electronic and other citations, examine the list of references at the end of Figure 10.17, 
which follows the MLA documentation style. See Appendix C for more information 
on documentation formats.
Appendix. The appendix contains any supplementary or supporting informa-
tion needed to clarify the report. This information is relevant to some readers but 
not to all. Extra information that might be included in an appendix are such items 
as survey forms, a survey cover letter, correspondence relating to the report, maps, 
other reports, and optional tables. Items in the appendix are labeled Appendix A, 
Appendix B, and so forth; and these items should be referenced in the body of the 
report.
endnotes, a bibliography, 
and appendixes may appear 
after the body of the report.

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
289
 6. Why are many large companies encouraging their employees to participate in social networking sites 
such as Facebook and LinkedIn or to create their own formal or informal networks?
 7. What is the difference between a solicited and an unsolicited proposal. Give an example of when each 
would be written.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
Proposals are written offers to solve problems, provide ser-
vices, or sell equipment. Both large and small businesses 
today write proposals to generate income. Informal propos-
als may be as short as 2 pages; formal proposals may run 
200 pages or more. Regardless of the size, proposals con-
tain standard parts that must be developed persuasively. 
Formal reports present well-organized information system-
atically. The information may be collected from primary or 
 secondary sources. All ideas borrowed from others must be 
documented. Good reports contain appropriate headings to 
help guide readers through the report. In addition, formal reports 
often contain tables, charts, and graphs to illustrate data.
Written reports are vital to decision makers. But oral 
reports can be equally important. In Chapter 12 you will learn 
how to organize and make professional oral presentations. 
Before learning about oral reports, however, in Chapter 11 
you will learn how to become an ethical, polished business 
professional. In addition to business ethics and etiquette, 
you will also study how to communicate effectively in person, 
by telephone, in teams, and in meetings.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. Consider personal and business uses of proposals. How 
might you benefit if you know how to write proposals?
 2. Who is hurt by plagiarism? Discuss.
 3. Are charts and graphs objective, unbiased presentations 
of data? Explain. 
 4. Is information obtained on the Web as reliable as informa-
tion obtained from journals, newspapers, and magazines? 
Explain.
 5. Should all reports be written so that they follow the sequence 
of investigation—that is, description of the initial problem, 
analysis of issues, data collection, data analysis, and con-
clusions? Why or why not?
C
Chapter review

290 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
 8. What are the six principal parts of an informal proposal? Be prepared to explain each.
 9. How are formal proposals different from informal proposals?
 10. How can business writers overcome writer’s block when setting out to write a proposal or report?
 11. Explain when documentation is required and when it is not required.
 12. List four sources of secondary information, and be prepared to discuss how valuable each might be 
in writing a formal report about outsourcing your company’s payroll function.
 13. Name at least four commercial electronic databases useful to business writers and researchers.
 14. What are blogs and how can they be used for research?
 15. Pie charts are most helpful in showing what? Line charts are most effective in showing what?

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
291
TeAM
10.1 Researching Secondary and Primary Data
In teams, discuss how you would collect information for each of the following report topics. Would your research be primary, 
secondary, or a combination of methods? What resources would be most useful—books, articles, the Web, interviewing, 
surveys?
a. Comparing the health care systems in France and the United Kingdom
b. Which public relations firm will best improve the image of a company so that its stock price increases
c. Investigating high turnover and apparent employee dissatisfaction at a large retailer
d. The latest Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) rulings that might affect your small business
e. The traffic count at a possible location for a new coffee shop
f. Planning to introduce healthier food in the company cafeteria and investigating how workers would feel about the new 
choices
g. The costs and features of a new network system for your company
h. How users are reacting to a new digital imaging software that was recently released
i.  How to meet international quality standards (ISO certification) so that you can sell your products in Europe
WeB
10.2 Gathering and Documenting Data: Biotechnology Alters Foods
California is home to the nation’s most diverse and valuable agricultural industry. Many of its crops are sold in Japanese and 
European markets where customers are extremely wary of genetically modified foods. Despite that fact, sources in the state 
capital are reporting that the biotech industry is actively seeking sponsors for a bill in the state legislature that would preempt 
the right of counties to ban genetically engineered crops. As an intern working for the Organic Consumers Association, the 
nation’s largest public interest group dedicated to a healthy and sustainable food system, you have been asked to gather 
data about the dangers of genetically engineered crops. The organization plans to write a report to the state government 
about this issue.
Your Task. Conduct a keyword search using three different search tools on the Web. Select three articles you think would be 
most pertinent to the organization’s argument. Save them using the strategies for managing data, and create a bibliography. 
Conduct the same keyword search in an electronic database. Save the three most pertinent articles, and add these items 
to your bibliography. In a short memo to your instructor, summarize what you have found and describe its value. Attach the 
bibliography.
A
Activities and Cases

292 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
WeB
10.3 Writing a Survey: Studying Employee Use of Instant Messaging
Instant messaging (IM) is a popular way to exchange messages in real time. It offers the convenience of telephone con-
versations and e-mail. Best of all, it allows employees to contact anyone in the world while retaining a written copy of the 
conversation—without a whopping telephone bill! But instant messaging is risky for companies. They may lose trade secrets 
or confidential information over insecure lines. They also may be liable if inappropriate material is exchanged. Moreover, IM 
opens the door to viruses that can infect a company’s entire computer system.
Your boss just read an article stating that 40 percent of companies now use IM for business, and up to 90 percent 
of employees use IM without their managers’ knowledge or authorization. He asks you to prepare a survey of your 
48-member staff to learn how many are using IM. He wants to know what type of IM software they have downloaded, 
how many hours a day they spend on IM, what are the advantages of IM, and so forth. The goal isn’t to identify those 
using or abusing IM. Instead, the goal is to learn when, how, and why it is being used so that appropriate policies 
can be designed.
Your Task. Use an electronic database or the Web to learn more about instant messaging. Then prepare a short employee 
survey. Include an appropriate introduction that explains the survey and encourages a response. Should you ask for 
names on the survey? How can you encourage employees to return the forms? Your instructor may wish to expand this 
survey into a report by having you produce fictitious survey results, analyze the findings, draw conclusions, and make 
recommendations.
10.4 Outlining: Explaining Blogs
Your boss has been hearing a lot about blogs (weblogs) lately and wonders if this is something your company should start 
using for research and communication. He has asked you to write a short report on how blogs can be used in a business 
environment. He also wonders whether a blogging policy would be needed. Here are some ideas you gathered from your 
Internet research:
Although some companies worry that blogs could be used to expose company secrets or violate securities laws, many 
companies are encouraging their employees to take part in blogging. The corporate world has found that blogging is an 
effective way to communicate with customers and clients, to encourage internal interaction, and to make them look more 
approachable and “human” to the outside world. Blogs can also be used by employees for research, for data collection, and 
for keeping up with what competitors are doing. Some companies have both external and internal blogs, and some even 
allow employees to set up personal blogs.
Companies that use blogs should probably have policies or guidelines governing their use. Companies might adopt 
guidelines that require employees to use first-person pronouns and to be honest. Microsoft tells employees to avoid writing 
blog entries when they are upset or emotional. Other companies provide lists of topics that should be avoided in blogs, such 
as anything that should remain confidential, private, or secret or anything that is embarrassing, libelous, or illegal. Above all, 
any policy should state that employees are responsible for their own posts.
Various tools can be used to set up blogs. Some of the most popular include Google’s Blogger.com, Microsoft’s MSN 
Spaces, and Yahoo’s 360° service. These tools make setting up blogs easy to do. They help users publish text entries, add 
photos, publish links to other blogs and Web pages, and establish privacy if desired. They also provide themes and various 
editing tools that can help corporate blogs look professional.
Your Task. Select the most important information and organize it into an outline such as that shown in Figure 10.3. You 
should have three main topics with three subdivisions under each. Assume that you will gather more information later. Add 
a title.
TeAM
10.5 Selecting Graphics
In teams identify the best graphic (table, bar chart, line chart, pie chart, flowchart, organization chart, illustration, map) to 
illustrate the following data:
a. Figure showing the process of making paper
b. Figures showing what proportion of every state tax dollar is spent on education, social services, transportation, debt, and 
other expenses
c. Data showing the newly formed divisions of a major multinational company after several mergers and leveraged buyouts
d. Figures showing the operating revenue of a company for the past five years

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
293
e. Figures comparing the sales of PDAs (personal digital assistants), cell phones, and laptop computers over the past five 
years
f. Percentages showing the causes of forest fires (lightning, 73 percent; arson, 5 percent; campfires, 9 percent; and so on) 
in the Rocky Mountains
g. Figure comparing the costs of cable, DSL, and satellite Internet service in ten major metropolitan areas of the United 
States for the past ten years (the boss wants to see exact figures)
h. Figure showing the locations of a popular family-owned fast-food franchise operating in California and the Southwest.
10.6 Evaluating Graphics in Publications
From U.S. News & World Report, USA Today, BusinessWeek, a textbook, or some other publication, locate one example each 
of a table, a pie chart, a line chart, a bar chart, and an organization chart. Bring copies of these visual aids to class. How 
effectively could the data have been expressed in words, without the graphics? Is the appropriate graphic form used? How 
is the graphic introduced in the text? Do you think the graphic is misleading or unethical in any way? Your instructor may ask 
you to submit a memo discussing visual aids.
10.7 Studying Graphics in Annual Reports
In a memo to your instructor, evaluate the effectiveness of graphics in three to five corporation annual reports. Critique their 
readability, clarity, and success in visualizing data. How were they introduced in the text? What suggestions would you make 
to improve them? Do you feel the graphics presented the data accurately and ethically?
10.8 Developing Bibliography Skills
Select a business topic that interests you. Prepare a bibliography of at least five current magazine or newspaper articles, 
three books, and five online references that contain relevant information regarding the topic. Your instructor may ask you to 
divide your bibliography into sections: Books, Periodicals, Online Resources. You may also be asked to annotate your bibliog-
raphy, that is, to compose a brief description of each reference, such as this:
McManus, Reed. “Hybrid Helpers.” Sierra, Mar/Apr 2007, 16.
McManus writes that U.S. cities are promoting new gas-electric hybrids with large rechargeable batteries to combat 
air pollution, over half of which comes from motor vehicles. The new vehicles will travel up to 60 miles without need-
ing their gasoline engines. Many electric utilities have expressed interest in this cause. Toyota, Ford, and GM have 
agreed to manufacture hybrid cars although they are skeptical of electric vehicles and worry about the cost of large 
batteries.
10.9 Creating an Annotated Works-Cited List
Being a quick learner and smart researcher will serve you well in college and in the workplace. Savvy businesspeople are 
lifelong learners who often must become knowledgeable fast in a subject they initially know very little about. To become a 
well-informed citizen and businessperson, you will need to be able to make sense of controversies and public discussions. 
Here are a few topic suggestions:
a. Should the government and airlines allow in-flight cell phone calls? 
b. Should something be done about high gas prices (affordable housing, tax reform, health care, and so forth), and what 
are some of the proposals being discussed?
c. What are the security risks of e-commerce? How do fraud, identify theft, and invasions of privacy affect online business?
d. Should the government grant more H-1B visas to foreign nationals in specialty occupations such as computer technology, 
as Microsoft and other tech companies demand?
Your instructor may suggest other topics or ask you to find a current business controversy on your own.
Your Task. Consider one current hot-button business topic and gather several—up to ten—highly relevant and informative 
sources, preferably articles reflecting a wide spectrum of opinions. List them in the MLA works-cited format and provide each 
with a brief (60 words maximum) summary, as shown in Activity 10.8.

294 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
WeB
TeAM
10.10 Setting Up a Wiki to Complete a Group Project
Younger workers who grew up with digital technology are spearheading a new trend in business. They are bringing their tech 
savvy to the table, and as a result, wikis, blogs, and other new communication channels are being used in the workplace to 
manage projects and exchange information. When writing a team paper, for example, you could share graphics and other 
data along with report drafts or the articles you found.
If you would like to try collaborating online, you can set up a free wiki virtually in seconds. Two very popular free sites are 
PBwiki.com (http://pbwiki.com) and Wetpaint (http://www.wetpaint.com). At PBwiki.com be sure to select Education as 
your purpose or you will be charged about $10 per month for premium membership.
As you register, you can select a variety of features—for example, to make your wiki accessible to anyone or only to invitees 
whom you choose. Templates and intuitive menus make creating a wiki simple and easy.
Your Task. Whether you create a wiki to share common interests online with friends or whether you use it to collaborate on a 
team project, becoming an experienced user of wikis will prepare you for the workplace. Visit either PBwiki.com or Wetpaint 
and set up a wiki for yourself and your team. Be sure to invite your instructor as well, so that he or she can observe your 
online collaboration.
WeB
10.11 Proposals: Comparing Real Proposals 
Many new companies with services or products to offer would like to land corporate or government contracts. But they are 
intimidated by the proposal (RFP process). You have been asked for help by your friend Chloe, who has started her own 
designer uniform company. Her goal is to offer her colorful yet functional uniforms to hospitals and clinics. Before writing a 
proposal, however, she wants to see examples and learn more about the process.
Your Task. Use the Web to find at least two examples of business proposals. Don’t waste time on sites that want to sell 
templates or books. Find actual examples. Then prepare a memo to Chloe in which you do the following:
a. Identify two sites with sample business proposals.
b. Outline the parts of each proposal.
c. Compare the strengths and weaknesses of each proposal.
d. Draw conclusions. What can Chloe learn from these examples?
10.12 Proposal: Solving a Workplace Problem in an Unsolicited Informal Proposal
The ability to spot problems before they turn into serious risks is prized by most managers. Draw on your internship and work 
experience. Can you identify a problem that could be solved with a small to moderate financial investment? Look for issues 
such as missing lunch or break rooms for staff; badly needed health initiatives such as gyms or sports club memberships; 
switching to high-gas-mileage, low-emission company vehicles; or encouraging recycling efforts.
Your Task. Discuss with your instructor the workplace problem that you have identified. Make sure you choose a rela-
tively weighty problem that can nevertheless be lessened or eliminated with a minor expenditure. Be sure to include a 
cost-benefit analysis. Address your unsolicited letter or memo proposal to your current or former boss and copy your 
instructor.
10.13 Unsolicited Proposal: Working From Home
You have been working as an administrative/virtual assistant for your company since its inception in 2001. Every day you 
commute from your home, almost two hours round trip. Most of your work is done at a computer terminal with little or no 
human contact. You would prefer to eliminate the commute time, which could be better spent working on your programming. 
You believe your job would be perfect for telecommuting. With a small investment in the proper equipment, you could do all 
of your work at home, perhaps reporting to the office once a week for meetings and other activities. 
Your Task. Research the costs and logistics of telecommuting, and present your proposal to your supervisor, Sidney 
Greene. Because this is an unsolicited proposal, you will need to be even more persuasive. Convince your supervisor that 
the company will benefit from this telecommuting arrangement.
TeAM
10.14 Unsolicited Proposal: Thwarting Dorm Room Thievery
As an enterprising college student, you recognized a problem as soon as you arrived on campus. Dorm rooms filled 
with pricey digital doodads were very attractive to thieves. Some students move in with more than $3,000 in gear, 
including laptop computers, flat-screen TVs, digital cameras, MP3 players, video game consoles, PDAs, and DVD 
players. You solved the problem by buying an extra-large steel footlocker to lock away your valuables. However, ship-
ping the footlocker was expensive (nearly $100), and you had to wait for it to arrive from a catalog company. Your 
bright idea is to propose to the Associated Student Organization that it allow you to offer these steel footlockers to 
students at a reduced price and with campus delivery. Your footlocker, which you found by searching the Web, is 

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
295
extremely durable and works great as a coffee table, nightstand, or card table. It comes with a smooth interior liner 
and two compartments.
Your Task. Working individually or with a team, imagine that you have made arrangements with a manufacturer to act as a 
middleman selling footlockers on your campus at a reduced price. Consult the Web for manufacturers and make up your 
own figures. However, how can you get the ASO’s permission to proceed? Give that organization a cut? Use your imagination 
in deciding how this plan might work on a college campus. Then prepare an unsolicited proposal to your ASO. Outline the 
problem and your goals of protecting students’ valuables and providing convenience. Check the Web for statistics regarding 
on-campus burglaries. Such figures should help you develop one or more persuasive “hooks.” Then explain your proposal, 
project possible sales, discuss a timetable, and describe your staffing. Submit your proposal to Billie White, president, 
Associated Student Organization.
TeAM
10.15 Proposal: Starting Your Own Business
You and your buddies have a terrific idea for a new business in your town. For example, you might want to propose to 
Starbucks the concept of converting some of its coffee shops into Internet cafes. Or you might propose to the city or another 
organization a better Web site, which you and your team would design and maintain. You might want to start a word process-
ing business that offers production, editing, and printing services. Often businesses, medical centers, attorneys, and other 
professionals have overload transcribing or word processing to farm out to a service.
Your Task. Working in teams, explore entrepreneurial ventures based on your experience and expertise. Write a proposal 
to secure approval and funding. Your report should include a transmittal letter, as well as a description of your proposed 
company, its product or service, a market analysis, an operations and management plan, and a financial plan.
TeAM
10.16 Formal Report: Intercultural Communication
U.S. businesses are expanding into foreign markets with manufacturing plants, sales offices, and branch offices abroad. 
Unfortunately, most Americans have little knowledge of or experience with people from other cultures. To prepare for par-
ticipation in the global marketplace, you are to collect information for a report focused on an Asian, Latin American, African, 
or European country where English isn’t regularly spoken. Before selecting the country, though, consider consulting your 
campus international student program for volunteers who are willing to be interviewed. Your instructor may make advance 
arrangements seeking international student volunteers.
Your Task.  In teams of two to four, collect information about your target country from the library, the Web, and other sources. 
If possible, invite an international student representing your target country to be interviewed by your group. As you conduct 
primary and secondary research, investigate the topics listed in Figure 10.18.16 Confirm what you learn in your secondary 
research by talking with your interviewee. When you complete your research, write a report for the CEO of your company 
(make up a name and company). Assume that your company plans to expand its operations abroad. Your report should 
advise the company’s executives of social customs, family life, attitudes, appropriate business attire, religions, economic 
institutions, and values in the target country. Remember that your company’s interests are business oriented; don’t dwell on 
tourist information. Write your report individually or in teams.
10.17 Formal Report: Is Vinyl Back?
Although you and fellow students were probably born long after the introduction of the CD in the early 1980s and 
download MP3 tracks from iTunes to an iPod, something strange is afoot. Lately, sales of turntables and vinyl long-
playing records (LPs) have been picking up. “Classic” bands such as the Beatles and Pink Floyd are not the only ones 
on vinyl. Contemporary artists such as R.E.M., the White Stripes, the Foo Fighters, and Metallica, have released their 
music on vinyl to enthusiastic audiences. Listeners even claim that music sounds better on vinyl than it does on a CD.17
Perhaps most surprising, many vinyl fans are not nostalgic baby boomer parents but their teenage or twenty-something 
children.
Major music retailers caught on to the trend. Although Amazon.com has been selling vinyl records since its founding in 
1994, it has recently begun to offer a vinyl-only section on its site. Now, your employer, Best Buy Company, is eager to test 
vinyl sales at some of its stores. Your manager, José Martinez, was asked by headquarters to explore the feasibility of offer-
ing a vinyl selection in his store, and he left this research job to you.
Your Task. This assignment calls for establishing primary data using a survey. Devise a questionnaire and poll young music 
consumers in your area to find out whether they enjoy and, more important, purchase vinyl records. Examine attitudes toward 
LPs in the populations and age groups most likely to find them intriguing. After collecting your data, determine whether your 
Best Buy store could establish a profitable vinyl business. Support your recommendation with conclusions you draw from 
your survey but also from secondary research detailing the new trend. To illustrate your findings, use pie charts for percent-
ages (e.g., how many LPs are sold in comparison to CDs and other media), line graphs to indicate trends over time (e.g., 
sales figures in various consumer segments), and other graphics. Prepare a formal report for José Martinez, who will share 
your report with upper management.

296 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
10.18 Formal Report: Fast-Food Checkup 
The national franchising headquarters for a fast-food chain has received complaints about the service, quality, and cleanli-
ness of one of its restaurants in your area. You have been sent to inspect and to report on what you see.
Your Task. Select a nearby fast-food restaurant. Visit on two or more occasions. Make notes about how many 
customers were served, how quickly they received their food, and how courteously they were treated. Observe the 
number of employees and supervisors working. Note the cleanliness of observable parts of the restaurant. Inspect 
the restroom as well as the exterior and surrounding grounds. Sample the food. Your boss is a stickler for details; 
she has no use for general statements such as The restroom was not clean. Be specific. Draw conclusions. Are the 
complaints justified? If improvements are necessary, make recommendations. Address your report to Sandra M. 
Ross, President.
Figure 10.18 Intercultural Interview Topics and Questions
Social Customs
 1. How do people react to strangers? Are they friendly? 
Hostile? Reserved?
 2. How do people greet each other?
 3. What are the appropriate manners when you enter a 
room? Bow? Nod? Shake hands with everyone?
 4. How are names used for introductions? Is it appropriate to 
inquire about one’s occupation or family?
 5. What are the attitudes toward touching?
 6. How does one express appreciation for an invitation to 
another’s home? Bring a gift? Send flowers? Write a 
thank-you note? Are any gifts taboo?
 7. Are there any customs related to how or where one sits?
 8. Are any facial expressions or gestures considered rude?
 9. How close do people stand when talking?
 10. What is the attitude toward punctuality in social situations? 
In business situations?
 11. What are acceptable eye contact patterns?
 12. What gestures indicate agreement? Disagreement?
Family Life
 1. What is the basic unit of social organization? Basic family? 
Extended family?
 2. Do women work outside of the home? In what 
 occupations?
Housing, Clothing, and Food
 1. Are there differences in the kind of housing used by differ-
ent social groups? Differences in location? Differences in 
furnishings?
 2. What occasions require special clothing?
 3. Are some types of clothing considered taboo?
 4. What is appropriate business attire for men? For women?
 5. How many times a day do people eat?
 6. What types of places, food, and drink are appropriate for 
business entertainment? Where is the seat of honor at a 
table?
Class Structure
 1. Into what classes is society organized?
 2. Do racial, religious, or economic factors determine social 
status?
 3. Are there any minority groups? What is their social 
 standing?
Political Patterns
 1. Are there any immediate threats to the political survival 
of the country?
 2. How is political power manifested?
 3. What channels are used for expression of popular 
 opinion?
 4. What information media are important?
 5. Is it appropriate to talk politics in social situations?
Religion and Folk Beliefs
 1. To which religious groups do people belong? Is one 
 predominant?
 2. Do religious beliefs influence daily activities?
 3. Which places have sacred value? Which objects? 
Which events?
 4. How do religious holidays affect business activities?
Economic Institutions
 1. What are the country’s principal products?
 2. Are workers organized in unions?
 3. How are businesses owned? By family units? By large 
public corporations? By the government?
 4. What is the standard work schedule?
 5. Is it appropriate to do business by telephone?
 6. How has technology affected business procedures?
 7. Is participatory management used?
 8. Are there any customs related to exchanging business 
cards?
 9. How is status shown in an organization? Private office? 
Secretary? Furniture?
 10. Are businesspeople expected to socialize before 
conducting business?
Value Systems
 1. Is competitiveness or cooperation more prized?
 2. Is thrift or enjoyment of the moment more valued?
 3. Is politeness more important than factual honesty?
 4. What are the attitudes toward education?
 5. Do women own or manage businesses? If so, how are 
they treated?
 6. What are your people’s perceptions of Americans? Do 
Americans offend you? What has been hardest for you 
to adjust to in America? How could Americans make this 
adjustment easier for you?

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
297
WeB
10.19 Formal Report: Consumer Product Investigation
Study a consumer product that you might consider buying. Are you, or is your family or your business, interested in 
purchasing a flat-screen TV, DVD player, computer, digital camera, espresso machine, car, SUV, hot tub, or some other 
product?
Your Task. Use at least five primary and five secondary sources in researching your topic. Your primary research 
will be in the form of interviews with individuals (owners, users, salespeople, technicians) in a position to comment 
on attributes of your product. Secondary research will be in the form of print or electronic sources, such as magazine 
articles, owner manuals, and Web sites. Be sure to use electronic databases and the Web to find appropriate articles. 
Your report should analyze and discuss at least three comparable models or versions of the target product. Decide 
what criteria you will use to compare the models, such as price, features, warranty, service, and so forth. The report 
should include these components: letter of transmittal, table of contents, executive summary, introduction (including 
background, purpose, scope of the study, and research methods), findings (organized by comparison criteria), sum-
mary of findings, conclusions, recommendations, and bibliography. Address the report to your instructor. You may work 
individually, in pairs, or in teams.
WeB
10.20 Formal Report: Communication Skills on the Job 
Collect information regarding communication skills used by individuals in a particular career field (accounting, management, 
marketing, office administration, paralegal, and so forth). Interview three or more individuals in a specific occupation in that 
field. Determine how much and what kind of writing they do. Do they make oral presentations? How much time do they spend 
in telephone communication? Do they use e-mail? If so, how much and for what? What other technology do they use for 
communication? What recommendations do they have for training for this position?
Your Task. Write a report that discusses the findings from your interviews. What conclusions can you draw regarding com-
munication skills in this field? What recommendations would you make for individuals entering this field? Your instructor may 
ask you to research the perception of businesspeople over the past ten years regarding the communication skills of employ-
ees. To gather such data, conduct library or online research.
WeB
TeAM
10.21 Formal Report: All About Wikis
As discussed in this chapter on p. 262, wikis are becoming increasingly important to businesses that rely on teamwork 
across time zones and national borders. Some educators also use wikis for collaboration in their college-level classes. 
You are part of a group of interns from your college working at a large financial institution, Home Bank. Your intern 
team has collaborated on your finance-related research using a wiki. Your informal wiki has also been helpful when 
you worked together on a team project for college credit. Your internship supervisor is impressed and would like you 
to collect more hard data so he can pilot wikis for wider application in collaborative settings at the bank. Your prelimi-
nary research suggests that quite a few companies are using wikis, such as Best Buy’s Geek Squad, Xerox, and IBM. 
In fact, IBM conducted a massive online brainstorming session that took two 72-hour sessions and involved 100,000 
employees, customers, and business partners in over 160 countries.18 Your boss is interested in reading about such 
cases to decide whether to pilot a wiki, and if so, what kind would work for Home Bank. Your team of three to five will 
investigate. 
Your Task. Keep in mind that your boss, Irving E. Pound, will share your report with other managers who may be  computer-
literate users but no tech heads. Start with the brief definition of wikis earlier in this chapter. Expand the definition by searching 
the Web and electronic database articles. First explain what wikis are and how they work, which resources (cost, software, 
hardware) are needed, how much training is required, and so forth. Examine the use of wikis in business today. How are 
large and small companies benefiting from collaboration facilitated by wikis? If your instructor directs, the report (or a section 
thereof) could discuss wikis in education and how instructors harness this new tool. After collecting a sufficient amount of 
information and data, outline and then write a formal report with a recommendation at the end suggesting whether and how 
Home Bank would benefit from investing in wiki software. 
10.22 More Proposal and Report Topics
A list with over 90 report topics is available at www.guffey.com. The topics are divided into the following categories: account-
ing, finance, human resources, marketing, information systems, management, and general business/education/campus 
issues. You can collect information for many of these reports by using electronic databases and the Web. Your instructor may 
assign them as individual or team projects. All involve critical thinking in organizing information, drawing conclusions, and 
making recommendations. The topics include assignments appropriate for proposals, business plans, and formal reports.

298 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Apostrophes
Review Sections 2.20–2.22 in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. Then study each of the 
following statements. Underscore any inappropriate form. Write a correction in the space pro-
vided and record the number of the G/M principle(s) illustrated. If a sentence is correct, write 
C. When you finish, compare your responses with those at the back of the book. If your answers 
differ, study carefully the principles shown in parentheses.
Example In just two years time, Marti earned her MBA degree. 
 1. Mark Hanleys PDA was found in the conference room.
 2. The severance package includes two weeks salary for each year worked.
 3. In only one years time, her school loans totaled $5,000.
 4. The board of directors strongly believed that John Petersons tenure as CEO was excep-
tionally successful.
 5. Several employees records were accidentally removed from the files.
 6. The last witness testimony was the most convincing to the jury members.
 7. Outstanding performance, efficiency, and superior communication skills led to Robins 
promotion.
 8. I always get my moneys worth at my favorite restaurant.
 9. Three local companies went out of business last month.
 10. In one months time we hope to have our new Web site up and running.
 11. I need my boss signature on this expense claim.
 12. Only one legal secretaries document was error-free. 
 13. In certain aerospace departments new applicants must apply for security clearance. 
 14. My companys stock price rose dramatically last month.
 15. In three months several businesses opening hours will change.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 10
years’ 
(2.20b)

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports 
299
The following executive summary has faults in grammar, punctuation, spelling, wordi-
ness, parallelism, and possessives. You may either (a) use standard proofreading 
marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or (b) download the document from 
www.guffey.com and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in the Grammar/
Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
Bottled water has become a $4 billion-a-year business in the United states. Millions of 
consumer’s use bottled water as there primary source of drinking water. Although 
most bottled water is of good quality some bottled water contains bacterial 
contaminants. Reassurances from the water industrys executives that bottled water is 
totally safe is false.

4VNNBSZPG'JOEJOHT
Commissioned by the National Resource’s Defense Commission, this report analyzes 
tests of bottled water. The tests showed that most bottled water is not contaminated, 
however, after testing more then 1,000 bottles, we found that about one fourth were 
contaminated at levels violating many states limits. Bottled water contaminated with 
microbes may raise public health issues, and todays consumers are rightfully concerned. 
There are government bottled water regulations and programs that have serious deﬁciencys.
Under the FDAs control, the regulation of most bottled water is left to ill-equipped and 
understaffed state governments. In spite of the fact that voluntary bottled water industry 
controls are commendable. They are an inadequate substitute for strong government rules. 
FDA ofﬁcials has stated that bottled water regulation carries a low priority. In addition the 
marketing of bottled water can be misleading. However, the long term solution to drinking 
water problems are to ﬁx tap water rather than switching to bottled water.

3FDPNNFOEBUJPOT
Based on our tests and analysis we submit the following reccomendations:
 
1. Fix tap water quality so that consumers’ will not resort to bottled water.
 
2. Establish the publics right to know about the contents of bottled water.
 
3. Require FDA inspections of all bottling facilities and thier water sources.
 
4. Institute a penny per bottle fee to ensure bottled water safety.
 
5. Bottled water certiﬁcation should be established.
)08163&*4#055-&%8"5&3 
&9&$65*7&46.."3:
1SPCMFN
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 10

300 
Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports
Trash or Treasure: Assessing the Quality of 
Web Documents
Many users think that documents found by a World Wide Web search tool have somehow 
been previously validated by a trustworthy authority. Others think that, because the Web 
is the most current and most accessible source of information, its documents must be the 
most reliable available. Wrong on both counts! Almost anyone with a computer and an 
Internet connection can publish almost anything on the Web. In every Web domain, reliable 
sites and unreliable ones compete for your attention.
Unlike the contents of the journals, magazines, and newspapers found in research-
oriented libraries, the contents of most Web sites haven’t been carefully scrutinized by 
experienced editors and peer writers. To put it another way, print journals, magazines, and 
newspapers have traditionally featured reasonably unbiased, trustworthy articles; all too 
many Web sites, however, have another goal in mind. They are above all else interested 
in promoting a cause or in selling a product.
To use the Web meaningfully, you must learn to scrutinize carefully what you find in 
the documents it offers. The following checklist will help you distinguish Web trash from 
Web treasure.
Checklist for Assessing the Quality of a Web Page
Authority
Who publishes or sponsors this Web page?
Is the author or sponsor clearly identified?
What makes the author or sponsor of the page an authority?
Is information about the author or creator available?
If the author is an individual, is he or she affiliated with a reputable organization?
Is contact information, such as an e-mail address, available?
To what domain (.com, .org, .edu, .gov, .net, .biz, .tv) does the site containing it 
belong?
Is the site based in the United States or abroad (usually indicated by .uk, .ca, ru, or 
other designation in the URL)?
Is the site “personal” (often indicated by “~” or “%” in the site’s URL)?
Currency
What is the date of the Web page?
When was the last time the Web page was updated?
Is some of the information obviously out of date?
Content
Is the purpose of the page to entertain, inform, convince, or sell?
How would you classify this page (e.g., news, personal, advocacy, reference)?
Is the objective or purpose of the Web page clear?
Who is the intended audience of the page, based on its content, tone, and style?
Can you judge the overall value of the content as compared with other resources on 
this topic?
Does the content seem to be comprehensive (does it cover everything about the 
topic)?
Is the site easy to navigate?
What other sites does the Web page link to? These may give you a clue to the credibility 
of the target page.
Does the page contain distracting graphics or fill your screen with unwanted pop-ups?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Technology

Chapter 10: Proposals and Formal Reports  
301
Accuracy
Do the facts that are presented seem reliable to you?
Do you find spelling, grammar, or usage errors?
Does the page have broken links or graphics that don’t load?
Do you see any evidence of bias?
Are footnotes or other documentation necessary? If so, have they been provided?
If the site contains statistics or other data, are the source, date, and other pertinent 
information disclosed?
Are advertisements clearly distinguished from content?
Career Application. As interns at a news-gathering service, you have been asked to 
assess the quality of the following Web sites. Which of these could you recommend as 
sources of valid information?
Beef Nutrition (http://www.beefnutrition.org)
Edmunds—Where Smart Car Buyers Start (http://www.edmunds.com)
I Hate Windows (http://www.ihatewindowsxp.com)
EarthSave International (http://www.earthsave.org)
The Vegetarian Resource Group (http://www.vrg.org/nutshell/nutshell.htm)
The White House (http://www.whitehouse.org)
The White House (http://www.whitehouse.gov)
The White House (http://www.whitehouse.com)
The Anaheim White House (http://www.anaheimwhitehouse.com)
National Anti-Vivisection Society (http://www.navs.org)
Dow Chemical Company (http://www.dow.com)
Dow: A Chemical Company on the Global Playground (http://www.dowethics.com)
Smithsonian Institution (http://www.si.edu)
Drudge Report (http://www.drudgereport.com)
American Cancer Society (http://www.cancer.org)
CraigsList (http://www.craigslist.com)
Your Task
If you are working with a team, divide the preceding list among team members. If you are 
working individually, select four of the sites. Answer the questions in the preceding check-
list as you evaluate each site. Summarize your evaluation of each site in a memo report to 
your instructor or in team or class discussion.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 11
Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
Chapter 12
Business Presentations
Professionalism, Teamwork, Meetings, 
and Speaking Skills
5
u N i T  5
© POLKA DOT IMAGES / JUPITERIMAGES

304 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
recognizing the importance of Professionalism, 
Business etiquette, and ethical Behavior
You have probably been told that being professional is important. When you search 
for definitions, however, you will find a wide range of meanings. Related terms 
and synonyms, such as business etiquette or protocol, soft skills, social intelligence, 
polish, and civility, may add to the confusion. However, they all have one thing in 
common: They describe desirable workplace behavior. Businesses have an interest 
in a workforce that gets along and delivers positive results that enhance profits and 
boost a company’s image. As a budding business professional, you have a stake in 
acquiring skills that will make you a strong job applicant and a valuable, successful 
employee.
In this section you will learn which professional characteristics most business-
people value in workplace relationships and will expect of you. Next you will be 
asked to consider the link between professional and ethical behavior on the job. 
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Show that you understand the importance of professional behavior, business 
etiquette, and ethics and know what employers want.
• Discuss improving face-to-face workplace communication including using your 
voice as a communication tool.
• Specify procedures for promoting positive workplace relations through 
conversation.
• Review techniques for responding professionally to workplace criticism and for 
offering constructive criticism on the job.
• Explain ways to polish your professional telephone skills and practice proper cell 
phone and voice mail etiquette.
• Describe the role of conventional and virtual teams, explain positive and 
negative team behavior, and identify the characteristics of successful teams.
• Outline procedures for planning, leading, and participating in productive 
business meetings, including using professional etiquette techniques, resolving 
conflict, and handling dysfunctional group members.
Professionalism 
at Work: 
Business 
Etiquette, 
Ethics, 
Teamwork, and 
Meetings
11
11
C H A P T e r  1 1
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / JACOB WACKERHAUSEN
Whether we call it 
professionalism, business 
etiquette, ethical conduct, 
social intelligence, or soft 
skills, we are referring to 
a whole range of desirable 
workplace behaviors. 

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
305
Finally, by knowing what recruiters want, you will have the power to shape yourself 
into the kind of professional they are looking to hire.
Defining Professional Behavior
Smooth relations in the workplace and when interacting with business partners or 
the public are crucial for the bottom line. Therefore, many businesses have estab-
lished protocol procedures or policies to encourage civility. They are responding 
to increasing incidents of “desk rage” in American workplaces. Here are a few 
synonyms that attempt to define professional behavior to foster positive workplace 
relations:
Civility. Management consultant Patricia M. Buhler defines rising incivility at 
work “as behavior that is considered disrespectful and inconsiderate of others.”1
For an example of a policy encouraging civility, view Wikipedia’s guidelines to its 
editors (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:CIV), which offer principles to pre-
vent rudeness and hateful responses on the Internet. The largest wiki ever created, 
the free encyclopedia must ensure that its more than 75,000 active collaborators 
get along and respect each other. Interestingly, Wikipedia admits that it is easier to 
define civility by its opposite: “[I]ncivility . . . consists of personally-targeted, bellig-
erent behavior and persistent rudeness that result in an atmosphere of conflict and 
stress.”2 Surely such actions would not be acceptable in most businesses.
Polish. You may hear businesspeople refer to someone as being polished or dis-
playing polish when dealing with others. In her book with the telling title Buff and 
Polish: A Practical Guide to Enhance Your Professional Image and Communication 
Style, Kathryn J. Volin focuses on nonverbal techniques and etiquette guidelines that 
are linked to career success. For example, she addresses making first impressions, 
shaking hands, improving one’s voice quality, listening, and presentation skills. You 
will find many of these valuable traits of a polished business professional in this 
textbook and on the Web (see www.meguffey.com).
Business and Dining etiquette. Proper business attire, dining eti-
quette, and other aspects of your professional presentation can make or break 
your interview, as you will see in Chapter 14. Even a seemingly harmless act such 
as sharing a business meal can have a huge impact on your career. In the words of 
a Fortune 500 executive, “Eating is not an executive skill . . . but it is especially 
hard to imagine why anyone negotiating a rise to the top would consider it pos-
sible to skip mastering the very simple requirements . . . what else did they skip 
learning?”3 This means that you will be judged on more than your college-bred 
expertise. You will need to hone your etiquette skills as a well-rounded future 
business professional.
Social intelligence. Occasionally you may encounter the expression social
intelligence. In the words of one of its modern proponents, it is “The ability to get 
along well with others and to get them to cooperate with you.”4 Social intelligence 
points to a deep understanding of culture and life that helps us negotiate inter personal 
and social situations. This type of intelligence can be much harder to acquire than 
simple etiquette. Social intelligence requires us to interact well, be perceptive, show 
sensitivity toward others, and grasp a situation quickly and accurately.
Soft Skills. Perhaps the most common term for important interpersonal habits 
is soft skills, as opposed to hard skills, a term for the technical knowledge in your 
field. Soft skills are a whole cluster of personal qualities, habits, attitudes (for exam-
ple, optimism and friendliness), communication skills, and social graces. Employers 
want managers and employees who are comfortable with diverse coworkers, who 
can listen actively to customers and colleagues, who can make eye contact, who 
display good workplace manners, and who possess a host of other interpersonal 
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Civility on the job creates an 
atmosphere of respect and 
appreciation that ultimately 
translates to a better 
reputation and, hence, to 
better business.

306 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
skills. Dress for Success guru John T. Molloy says that 99 out of 100 executives 
view social skills as prerequisites to success, whether over cocktails, during dinner, 
or in the boardroom. These skills are immensely important not only to be hired 
but also to be promoted.
Simply put, all attempts to explain proper behavior at work aim at identifying 
traits that make someone a good employee and a compatible coworker. You will 
want to achieve a positive image on the job and to maintain a solid reputation. For 
the sake of simplicity, in the discussion that follows, the terms professionalism, busi-
ness etiquette, and soft skills will be used largely synonymously.
understanding the relationship Between 
ethics and Professional Behavior
The wide definition of professionalism also encompasses another crucial quality in 
a businessperson: ethics or integrity. Perhaps you subscribe to a negative view of 
business after learning about companies such as Enron, WorldCom, and Global 
Crossing. The collapse of these businesses along with fraud charges against their 
executives has reinforced the cynical perception of business as unethical and greedy. 
However, for every company that captures the limelight for misconduct, hundreds 
or even thousands of others operate honestly and serve their customers and the 
public well. The overwhelming majority of businesses wish to recruit ethical and 
polished graduates.
The difference between ethics and etiquette is minimal in the workplace. Ethics 
professor Douglas Chismar—and Harvard professor Stephen L. Carter before him—
suggest that no sharp distinction between ethics and etiquette exists. How we 
approach the seemingly trivial events of work life reflects our character and atti-
tudes when we handle larger issues. Our conduct should be consistently ethical and 
professional. Professor Chismar believes that “[w]e each have a moral obligation 
to treat each other with respect and sensitivity every day.”5 He calls on all of us 
to make a difference in the quality of life, morale, and even productivity at work. 
When employed appropriately in business, he says, professionalism brings greater 
good to society and makes for a better workplace.
Figure 11.1 summarizes the many components of professional workplace behav-
ior6 and identifies six main dimensions that will ease your entry into the world of 
work. Follow these guidelines to ensure your success on the job and increase the 
likelihood of promotion.
Business etiquette is 
closely related to everyday 
ethical behavior.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Unprofessional conduct 
around the office will 
eventually overflow into 
official duties. Few of us 
have mastered the rare art 
of maintaining multiple 
personalities.
© MARC ROMANELLI / WORKBOOK STOCK / JUPITERIMAGES
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
From meetings and interviews to company parties 
and golf outings, nearly all workplace-related 
activities involve etiquette. Take Your Dog to 
Work Day, the ever-popular morale booster that 
keeps workers chained to their pets instead 
of the desk, has a unique set of guidelines to 
help maximize fun. For employees at the nearly 
one in five U.S. businesses that allow dogs at 
work, etiquette gurus say pets must be well 
behaved, housebroken, and free of fleas to 
participate in the four-legged festivity. Why is it 
important to follow proper business etiquette?

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
307
Anticipating What employers Want
Professional polish is increasingly valuable in our knowledge-based economy and 
will set you apart in competition with others. Hiring managers expect you to have 
technical expertise in your field. A good résumé and interview may get you in the 
door. However, soft skills and professional polish will ensure your long-term success. 
Advancement and promotions will depend on your grasp of workplace etiquette and 
Figure 11.1 The Six Dimensions of Professional Behavior
Professional Dimension
What Professionalism Means on the Job
Courtesy and respect
Be punctual.
Speak and write clearly and in language others can understand.
Apologize for errors or misunderstandings.
Notify the other person promptly when running late.
Accept constructive criticism.
Provide fair and gentle feedback.
Practice active listening.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Appearance and appeal
Present yourself pleasantly with good hygiene and grooming.
Choose attractive, yet not distracting business attire.
Understand that appropriate dress and behavior are the first indication of professionalism and 
create lasting impressions.
Display proper business and dining etiquette.
•
•
•
•
Tolerance and tact
Demonstrate self-control.
Stay away from public arguments and disagreements, including in written documents and e-mail.
Eliminate biases and prejudices in all business dealings.
Keep personal opinions of people private.
Avoid snap judgments especially when collaborating with others.
•
•
•
•
•
Honesty and ethics
Avoid even the smallest lies at all cost.
Steer clear of conflicts of interest.
Pay for services and products promptly.
Keep confidential information confidential.
Pass up opportunities to badmouth competitors—emphasize your company’s benefits, not your 
competitors’ flaws.
Take positive, appropriate actions; avoid resorting to vengeful behavior when you feel wronged.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Reliability and responsibility
Be dependable.
Follow through on commitments.
Keep promises and deadlines.
Perform work consistently and deliver effective results.
Make realistic promises about the quantity and quality of work output in a projected time frame.
•
•
•
•
•
Diligence and collegiality
Deliver only work you can be proud of.
Strive for excellence at all times.
Give to customers more than they expect.
Be prepared before meetings and when presenting reports.
Do what needs to be done; do not leave work for others to do.
Show a willingness to share expertise.
Volunteer services to a worthy community or charity group.
Join networking groups and help their members.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
in the workplace we 
are judged to a great 
extent on our soft skills 
and professionalism.

308 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
the ability to communicate with your boss, coworkers, and customers. You will also 
earn recognition on the job if you prove yourself as an effective and contributing 
team member—and as a well-rounded professional overall. 
Even in technical fields such as accounting and finance, employers are looking 
for professionalism and soft skills. Based on a survey of international accounting 
executives, CA Magazine concluded that “the future is bright for the next genera-
tion of accounting and finance professionals provided they are armed with such soft 
skills as the ability to communicate, deal with change, and work in a team setting.”7
A survey of chief financial officers revealed that a majority believed that communi-
cation skills carry a greater importance today than in the past.8 Increasingly, finance 
professionals must be able to interact with the entire organization and explain terms 
without using financial jargon.
Employers want team players who can work together productively. If you look 
at current online or newspaper want ads, chances are you will find requirements 
such as the following examples:
• Proven team skills to help deliver on-time, on-budget results
• Strong verbal and written communication skills as well as excellent presentation 
skills
• Excellent interpersonal, organizational, and teamwork skills
• Interpersonal and team skills plus well-developed communication skills
• Good people skills and superior teamwork abilities
In addition, most hiring managers are looking for new-hires who show enthusi-
asm, are eager to learn, volunteer to tackle even difficult tasks, and exhibit a positive 
attitude. You will not be hired to warm a seat.
This chapter focuses on developing interpersonal skills, telephone and voice 
mail etiquette, teamwork proficiency, and meeting management skills. These 
are some of the soft skills that employers seek in today’s increasingly intercon-
nected and competitive environments. You will learn many tips and techniques 
for becoming a professional communicator, valuable team player, and polished 
meeting participant. 
Becoming a Professional Communicator 
in Face-to-Face Settings
Because today’s technologies provide many alternate communication channels, 
you may think that face-to-face communication is no longer essential or even 
important in business and professional transactions. You have already learned 
that e-mail is now the preferred communication channel because it is faster, 
cheaper, and easier than telephone, mail, or fax. However, despite their popular-
ity and acceptance, alternate communication technologies can’t replace the rich-
ness or effectiveness of face-to-face communication.9 Imagine that you want to 
tell your boss how you solved a problem. Would you settle for a one-dimensional 
phone call, a fax, or an e-mail when you could step into her office and explain 
in person?
Face-to-face conversation has many advantages. It allows you to be persuasive 
and expressive because you can use your voice and body language to make a point. 
You are less likely to be misunderstood because you can read feedback and make 
needed adjustments. In conflict resolution, you can reach a solution more efficiently 
and cooperate to create greater levels of mutual benefit when communicating face-
to-face.10 Moreover, people want to see each other to satisfy a deep human need for 
social interaction. For numerous reasons communicating in person remains the most 
effective of all communication channels. In this chapter you will explore helpful 
business and professional interpersonal speaking techniques, starting with viewing 
your voice as a communication tool.
One-dimensional 
communication technologies 
cannot replace the richness 
or effectiveness of face-to-
face communication.
employment advertisements 
frequently mention team, 
communication, and people 
skills.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
309
using Your Voice as a Communication Tool
It has been said that language provides the words, but your voice is the music that 
makes words meaningful.11 You may believe that a beautiful or powerful voice is 
unattainable. After all, this is the voice you were born with and it can’t be changed. 
Actually, the voice is a flexible instrument. Actors hire coaches to help them elimi-
nate or acquire accents or proper inflection for challenging roles. For example, 
Nicole Kidman, who speaks with an Australian accent, often takes on other accents, 
including American Southern and South African, for film roles. Celebrities, busi-
ness executives, and everyday people consult voice and speech therapists to help 
them shake bad habits or just help them speak so that they can be understood and 
not sound less intelligent than they are. Rather than consult a high-paid specialist, 
you can pick up useful tips for using your voice most effectively by learning how 
to control such elements as pronunciation, voice quality, pitch, volume, rate, and 
emphasis.
Pronunciation. Proper pronunciation involves saying words correctly and 
clearly with the accepted sounds and accented syllables. You will have a distinct 
advantage in your job if, through training and practice, you learn to pronounce 
words correctly. How can you improve your pronunciation skills? The best ways 
are to listen carefully to educated people, to look words up in the dictionary, and 
to practice. Online dictionaries frequently allow you to play back the pronunciation 
when you have found your desired word.
Voice Quality. The quality of your voice sends a nonverbal message to  listeners. 
It identifies your personality and your mood. Some voices sound enthusiastic and 
friendly, conveying the impression of an upbeat person who is happy to be with the 
listener. But voices can also sound controlling, patronizing, slow-witted, angry, bored, 
or childish. This doesn’t mean that the speaker necessarily has that attribute. It may 
mean that the speaker is merely carrying on a family tradition or pattern learned in 
childhood. To check your voice quality, record your voice and listen to it critically. Is 
it projecting a positive quality about you? Do you sound professional?
Pitch. Effective speakers use a relaxed, controlled, well-pitched voice to attract lis-
teners to their message. Pitch refers to sound vibration frequency; that is, the highness 
or lowness of a sound. Voices are most engaging when they rise and fall in conversa-
tional tones. Flat, monotone voices are considered boring and ineffectual.
Volume and rate. The volume of your voice is the degree of loudness or the 
intensity of sound. Just as you adjust the volume on your radio or television set, 
you should adjust the volume of your speaking to the occasion and your listeners. 
Rate refers to the pace of your speech. If you speak too slowly, listeners are bored 
and their attention wanders. If you speak too quickly, listeners may not be able to 
understand you. Most people normally talk at about 125 words a minute. Monitor 
the nonverbal signs of your listeners and adjust your volume and rate as needed.
emphasis. By emphasizing or stressing certain words, you can change the 
meaning you are expressing. To make your message interesting and natural, use 
emphasis appropriately.
Some speakers today are prone to uptalk. This is a habit of using a rising inflec-
tion at the end of a sentence resulting in a singsong pattern that makes statements 
sound like questions. Once used exclusively by teenagers, uptalk is increasingly 
found in the workplace with negative results. When statements sound like questions, 
speakers seem weak and tentative. Their messages lack conviction and authority. On 
the job, managers afflicted by uptalk may have difficulty convincing staff members 
to follow directions because their voice inflection implies that other valid options 
are available. If you want to sound confident and competent, avoid uptalk.
Speaking in a moderately 
low-pitched voice at 
about 125 words a minute 
makes you sound pleasing 
and professional.
“uptalk,” in which sentences 
sound like questions, 
makes speakers seem 
weak and tentative.
Like an actor, you can 
change your voice to 
make it a more powerful 
communication tool.
Proper pronunciation 
means saying words 
correctly and clearly with 
the accepted sounds and 
accented syllables.

310 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
Promoting Positive Workplace 
relations Through Conversation
In the workplace, conversations may involve giving and taking instructions, provid-
ing feedback, exchanging ideas on products and services, participating in perfor-
mance appraisals, or engaging in small talk about such things as families and sports. 
Face-to-face conversation helps people work together harmoniously and feel that 
they are part of the larger organization. Our goal here is to provide you with several 
business etiquette guidelines that promote positive workplace conversations, both in 
the office and at work-related social functions.
use Correct Names and Titles. Although the world seems increasingly 
informal, it is still wise to use titles and last names when addressing professional 
adults (Ms. O’Malley, Mr. Santiago). In some organizations senior staff members 
speak to junior employees on a first-name basis, but the reverse may not be encour-
aged. Probably the safest plan is to ask your superiors how they want to be addressed. 
Customers and others outside the organization should always be addressed initially 
by title and last name. Wait for an invitation to use first names.
When you meet strangers, do you have trouble remembering their names? You 
can improve your memory considerably if you associate the person with an object, 
place, color, animal, job, adjective, or some other memory hook. For example, tech-
nology pro Gina, L.A. Matt, silver-haired Mr. Elliott, baseball fan John, programmer 
Tanya, traveler Ms. Choi. The person’s name will also be more deeply imbedded in 
your memory if you use it immediately after being introduced, in subsequent conver-
sation, and when you part.
Choose Appropriate Topics. In some workplace activities, such as social 
gatherings or interviews, you will be expected to engage in small talk. Be sure to stay 
away from controversial topics with someone you don’t know very well. Avoid poli-
tics, religion, or controversial current event items that can start heated arguments. To 
initiate appropriate conversations, read newspapers and listen to radio and TV shows 
discussing current events. Subscribe to e-newsletters that deliver relevant news to you 
via e-mail, or visit news portals such as Google News or Yahoo on the Web. Make a 
mental note of items that you can use in conversation, taking care to remember where 
you saw or heard the news items so that you can report accurately and authoritatively. 
Try not to be defensive or annoyed if others present information that upsets you.
Avoid Negative remarks. Workplace conversations are not the place to 
complain about your colleagues, your friends, the organization, or your job. No one 
enjoys listening to whiners. What’s more, your criticism of others may come back 
to haunt you. A snipe at your boss or a complaint about a fellow worker may reach 
him or her, sometimes embellished or distorted with meanings you did not intend. 
Be circumspect in all negative judgments. Remember, some people love to repeat 
statements that will stir up trouble or set off internal workplace wars. Don’t give 
them the ammunition!
Listen to Learn. In conversations with managers, colleagues, subordinates, and 
customers, train yourself to expect to learn something from what you are hearing. 
Being attentive is not only instructive but also courteous. Beyond displaying good man-
ners, you will probably find that your conversation partner has information that you 
don’t have. Being receptive and listening with an open mind means not interrupting or 
prejudging. Let’s say you want very much to be able to work at home for part of your 
workweek. You try to explain your ideas to your boss, but he cuts you off shortly after 
you start. He says, It is out of the question; we need you here every day. Suppose instead 
he had said, I have strong reservations about your telecommuting, but maybe you will 
change my mind; and he settles in to listen to your presentation. Even if your boss 
decides against your request, you will feel that your ideas were heard and respected.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
“In today’s fiercely competitive 
business arenas, etiquette 
and protocol intelligence 
will distinguish you from the 
crowd. While this unique 
intelligence alone may not get 
you anywhere, it will give you 
an edge that will make the 
difference between you and 
another person who is just 
as smart.”
You will be most effective in 
workplace conversations if 
you use correct names and 
titles, choose appropriate 
topics, avoid negative and 
judgmental remarks, and give 
sincere and speciﬁ c praise.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
311
give Sincere and Specific Praise. The Greek philosopher Xenophon 
once said, “The sweetest of all sounds is praise.” Probably nothing promotes posi-
tive workplace relationships better than sincere and specific praise. Whether the 
compliments and appreciation are traveling upward to management, downward 
to workers, or horizontally to colleagues, everyone responds well to recognition. 
Organizations run more smoothly and morale is higher when people feel appreci-
ated. In your workplace conversations, look for ways to recognize good work and 
good people. Try to be specific. Instead of saying, You did a good job in leading 
that meeting, say something more specific, such as, Your excellent leadership skills 
certainly kept that meeting short, focused, and productive.
Act Professionally in Social Situations. You will likely attend many 
work-related social functions during your career, including dinners, picnics, holiday 
parties, and other events. It is important to remember that your actions at these 
events can help or harm your career. Dress appropriately, and avoid or limit alco-
hol consumption. Choose appropriate conversation topics, and make sure that your 
voice and mannerisms communicate that you are glad to be there.
responding Professionally to Workplace Criticism
Most of us hate giving criticism, but we dislike receiving it even more. However, it 
is normal to both give and receive criticism on the job. The criticism may be given 
informally, for example, during a casual conversation with a supervisor or coworker. 
Or the criticism may be given formally, for example, during a performance evalua-
tion. The important thing is that you are able to accept and respond professionally 
when receiving criticism.
When being criticized, you may feel that you are being attacked. You can’t just 
sit back and relax. Your heart beats faster, your temperature shoots up, your face 
reddens, and you respond with the classic fight-or-flight response. You want to 
instantly retaliate or escape from the attacker. But focusing on your feelings dis-
tracts you from hearing the content of what is being said, and it prevents you from 
responding professionally. Some or all of the following suggestions will guide you 
in reacting positively to criticism so that you can benefit from it:
• Listen without interrupting. Even though you might want to protest, make your-
self hear the speaker out.
• Determine the speaker’s intent. Unskilled communicators may throw “verbal 
bricks” with unintended negative-sounding expressions. If you think the intent is 
positive, focus on what is being said rather than reacting to poorly chosen words.
• Acknowledge what you are hearing. Respond with a pause, a nod, or a neutral 
statement such as, I understand you have a concern. This buys you time. Do not 
disagree, counterattack, or blame, which may escalate the situation and harden 
the speaker’s position.
• Paraphrase what was said. In your own words restate objectively what you are 
hearing.
• Ask for more information, if necessary. Clarify what is being said. Stay focused 
on the main idea rather than interjecting side issues.
• Agree—if the comments are accurate. If an apology is in order, give it. Explain 
what you plan to do differently. If the criticism is on target, the sooner you agree, 
the more likely you will be to engender respect from the other person.
• Disagree respectfully and constructively—if you feel the comments are unfair. 
After hearing the criticism, you might say, May I tell you my perspective? Or you 
could try to solve the problem by saying, How can we improve this situation in 
a way you believe we can both accept? If the other person continues to criticize, 
say, I want to find a way to resolve your concern. When do you want to talk 
about it next?
• Look for a middle position. Search for a middle position or a compromise. Be 
genial even if you don’t like the person or the situation.
When being criticized, you 
should listen, paraphrase, 
and clarify what is said; 
if you agree, apologize 
or explain what you 
will do differently.
if you feel you are 
being criticized unfairly, 
disagree respectfully 
and constructively; look 
for a middle position.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
“I discovered that as much 
as businesspeople needed 
training in thinking on their 
feet, they needed far more 
training in the fine art of 
getting along and dealing 
with people in everyday 
business and social contacts.”

312 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
• Learn from criticism. Most work-related criticism is given with the best of inten-
tions. You should welcome the opportunity to correct your mistakes and to learn 
from them. Responding positively and professionally to workplace criticism can 
help improve your job performance. As Winston Churchill said, “All men make 
mistakes, but only wise men learn from their mistakes.”12
Offering Constructive Criticism on the Job
No one likes to receive criticism, and most of us don’t like to give it either. But in 
the workplace cooperative endeavors demand feedback and evaluation. How are 
we doing on a project? What went well? What failed? How can we improve our 
efforts? Today’s workplace often involves team projects. As a team member, you 
will be called on to judge the work of others. In addition to working on teams, 
you can also expect to become a supervisor or manager one day. As such, you will 
need to evaluate subordinates. Good employees seek good feedback from their 
supervisors. They want and need timely, detailed observations about their work to 
reinforce what they do well and help them overcome weak spots. But making that 
feedback palatable and constructive is not always easy. Depending on your situa-
tion, you may find some or all of the following suggestions helpful when you must 
deliver constructive criticism:
• Mentally outline your conversation. Think carefully about what you want to 
accomplish and what you will say. Find the right words and deliver them at the 
right time and in the right setting.
• Generally, use face-to-face communication. Most constructive criticism is better 
delivered in person rather than in e-mail messages or memos. Personal feedback 
offers an opportunity for the listener to ask questions and give explanations. 
Occasionally, however, complex situations may require a different strategy. You 
might prefer to write out your opinions and deliver them by telephone or in writ-
ing. A written document enables you to organize your thoughts, include all the 
details, and be sure of keeping your cool. Remember, though, that written docu-
ments create permanent records—for better or worse.
• Focus on improvement. Instead of attacking, use language that offers alternative 
behavior. Use phrases such as Next time, you could . . . . 
• Offer to help. Criticism is accepted more readily if you volunteer to help in elimi-
nating or solving the problem.
• Be specific. Instead of a vague assertion such as, Your work is often late, be more 
specific: The specs on the Riverside job were due Thursday at 5 p.m., and you 
didn’t hand them in until Friday. Explain how the person’s performance jeopar-
dized the entire project.
• Avoid broad generalizations. Don’t use words such as should, never, always, 
and other encompassing expressions as they may cause the listener to shut down 
and become defensive. 
• Discuss the behavior, not the person. Instead of saying, You seem to think you 
can come to work any time you want, focus on the behavior: Coming to work 
late means that we have to fill in with someone else until you arrive.
• Use the word we rather than you. Saying, We need to meet project deadlines, is 
better than saying, You need to meet project deadlines. Emphasize organizational 
expectations rather than personal ones. Avoid sounding accusatory.
• Encourage two-way communication. Even if well planned, criticism is still hard 
to deliver. It may surprise or hurt the feelings of the employee. Consider ending 
your message with, It can be hard to hear this type of feedback. If you would like 
to share your thoughts, I’m listening.
• Avoid anger, sarcasm, and a raised voice. Criticism is rarely constructive when 
tempers flare. Plan in advance what you will say and deliver it in low, controlled, 
and sincere tones.
• Keep it private. Offer praise in public; offer criticism in private. “Setting an 
example” through public criticism is never a wise management policy.
Learn what you can from 
workplace criticism to 
improve your performance 
on the job.
Offering constructive 
criticism is easier if you plan 
what you will say, focus on 
improvement, offer to help, 
are speciﬁ c, discuss the 
behavior and not the person, 
speak privately face-to-face, 
and avoid anger.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
313
Practicing Professional Telephone, 
Cell Phone, and Voice Mail etiquette
Despite the heavy reliance on e-mail, the telephone is still an extremely important 
piece of equipment in offices. With the addition of today’s wireless technology, it 
doesn’t matter whether you are in or out of the office. You can always be reached 
by phone. As a business communicator, you can be more productive, efficient, and 
professional by following some simple suggestions. In this chapter we will focus on 
traditional telephone etiquette as well as cell phone use and voice mail techniques.
Making Telephone Calls Professionally
Before making a telephone call, decide whether the intended call is really necessary. 
Could you find the information yourself? If you wait a while, would the problem 
resolve itself? Perhaps your message could be delivered more efficiently by some 
other means. Some companies have found that telephone calls are often less impor-
tant than the work they interrupt. Alternatives to telephone calls include instant 
messaging, e-mail, memos, or calls to voice mail systems. If you must make a tele-
phone call, consider using the following suggestions to make it fully productive:
• Plan a mini-agenda. Have you ever been embarrassed when you had to make 
a second telephone call because you forgot an important item the first time? 
Before placing a call, jot down notes regarding all the topics you need to discuss. 
Following an agenda guarantees not only a complete call but also a quick one. 
You will be less likely to wander from the business at hand while rummaging 
through your mind trying to remember everything. 
• Use a three-point introduction. When placing a call, immediately (a) name the 
person you are calling, (b) identify yourself and your affiliation, and (c) give a 
brief explanation of your reason for calling. For example: May I speak to Jeremy 
Johnson? This is Paula Soltani of Coughlin and Associates, and I’m seeking infor-
mation about a software program called ZoneAlarm Internet Security. This kind 
of introduction enables the receiving individual to respond immediately without 
asking further questions. 
• Be brisk if you are rushed. For business calls when your time is limited, avoid 
questions such as How are you? Instead, say, Lauren, I knew you’d be the only 
one who could answer these two questions for me. Another efficient strategy is 
to set a “contract” with the caller: Look, Lauren, I have only ten minutes, but I 
really wanted to get back to you.
• Be cheerful and accurate. Let your voice show the same kind of animation that 
you radiate when you greet people in person. In your mind try to envision the 
individual answering the telephone. A smile can certainly affect the tone of your 
voice; therefore, even though the individual can’t see you, smile at that person. 
Speak with a tone that is enthusiastic, respectful, and attentive. Moreover, be 
accurate about what you say. Hang on a second; I’ll be right back rarely is true. 
It is better to say, It may take me two or three minutes to get that information. 
Would you prefer to hold or have me call you back?
• Be professional and courteous. Remember that you are representing yourself 
and your company when you make phone calls. Use professional vocabulary and 
courteous language. Say thank you and please during your conversations. Don’t 
eat, drink, or chew gum while talking on the phone, which can often be heard on 
the other end. Articulate your words clearly so that the receiver can understand 
you. Avoid doing other work during the phone call so that you can focus entirely 
on the conversation.
• Bring it to a close. The responsibility for ending a call lies with the caller. This is 
sometimes difficult to do if the other person rambles on. You may need to use sug-
gestive closing language, such as the following: (a) I have certainly enjoyed talking 
with you, (b) I have learned what I needed to know, and now I can proceed with 
You can make productive 
telephone calls by planning 
an agenda, identifying the 
purpose, being cheerful 
and accurate, being 
professional and courteous, 
and avoiding rambling.
For most businesses, 
telephones—both traditional 
and wireless—are a 
primary contact with 
the outside world.

314 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
my work, (c) Thanks for your help, (d) I must go now, but may I call you again 
in the future if I need . . . ? or (e) Should we talk again in a few weeks?
• Avoid telephone tag. If you call someone who is not in, ask when it would be 
best for you to call again. State that you will call at a specific time—and do it. If 
you ask a person to call you, give a time when you can be reached—and then be 
sure you are in at that time. 
• Leave complete voice mail messages. Remember that there is no rush when 
you leave a voice mail message. Always enunciate clearly. And be sure to provide 
a complete message, including your name, telephone number, and the time and 
date of your call. Explain your purpose so that the receiver can be ready with the 
required information when returning your call. 
receiving Telephone Calls Professionally
With a little forethought you can project a professional image and make your tele-
phone a productive, efficient work tool. Developing good telephone manners also 
reflects well on you and on your organization. You will be most successful on the 
job if you practice the following etiquette guidelines: 
• Answer promptly and courteously. Try to answer the phone on the first or sec-
ond ring if possible. Smile as you pick up the phone.
• Identify yourself immediately. In answering your telephone or someone else’s, 
provide your name, title or affiliation, and a greeting. For example, Juan Salinas, 
Digital Imaging Corporation. How may I help you? Force yourself to speak clearly 
and slowly. Remember that the caller may be unfamiliar with what you are saying 
and fail to recognize slurred syllables.
• Be responsive and helpful. If you are in a support role, be sympathetic to callers’ 
needs and show that you understand their situations. Instead of I don’t know, try 
That is a good question; let me investigate. Instead of We can’t do that, try That 
is a tough one; let’s see what we can do. Avoid No at the beginning of a sentence. 
It sounds especially abrasive and displeasing because it suggests total rejection.
• Be cautious when answering calls for others. Be courteous and helpful, but don’t 
give out confidential information. It is better to say, She is away from her desk or 
He is out of the office than to report a colleague’s exact whereabouts. Also be tight 
lipped about sharing company information with strangers. Security experts insist that 
employees answering telephones must become guardians of company information.13
• Take messages carefully. Few things are as frustrating as receiving a potentially 
important phone message that is illegible. Repeat the spelling of names and verify 
telephone numbers. Write messages legibly and record their time and date. Promise 
to give the messages to intended recipients, but don’t guarantee return calls.
• Leave the line respectfully. If you must put a call on hold, let the caller know 
and give an estimate of how long you expect the call to be on hold. Give the caller 
the option of holding. Say Would you prefer to hold, or would you like me to 
call you back? If the caller is on hold for a long time, check back periodically so 
that the caller doesn’t think that he or she has been forgotten or that the call has 
been disconnected.
• Explain what you are doing when transferring calls. Give a reason for transfer-
ring, and identify the extension to which you are directing the call in case the 
caller is disconnected. 
using Cell Phones for Business
Cell phones enable you to conduct business from virtually anywhere at any time. More 
than a plaything or a mere convenience, the cell phone has become an essential part of 
communication in today’s workplace. A few years ago, for the first time, the number of 
U.S. cell phone users surpassed the number of landline telephone users, and the num-
ber of cell phone users has continued to grow.14 More than 80 percent of Americans 
own a cell phone,15 and a third of wireless customers rarely use a landline.16 Today’s 
highly capable smartphones are used for much more than making and receiving calls. 
You can improve your 
telephone reception skills 
by identifying yourself, being 
responsive and helpful, and 
taking accurate messages.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
315
High-end cell phones and personal digital assistants (PDAs) can be used to store con-
tact information, make to-do lists, keep track of appointments and important dates, 
send and receive e-mail, send and receive text and multimedia messages, search the 
Web, get news and stock quotes from the Internet, take pictures and videos, synchro-
nize with Outlook and other software applications, and many other functions.
With so many people depending on their cell phones, it is important to understand 
proper use and etiquette. How are they best used? When is it acceptable to take calls? 
Where should calls be made? Most of us have experienced thoughtless and rude 
cell phone behavior. To avoid offending, smart business communicators practice cell 
phone etiquette, as outlined in Figure 11.2. In projecting a professional image, they 
are careful about location, time, and volume in relation to their cell phone calls.
Location. Use good judgment in placing or accepting cell phone calls. Some 
places are dangerous or inappropriate for cell phone use. Turn off your cell phone 
when entering a conference room, interview venue, theater, place of worship, or any 
other place where it could be distracting or disruptive to others. Taking a call in a 
crowded room or bar makes it difficult to hear and reflects poorly on you as a pro-
fessional. Taking a call while driving can be dangerous, leading some states to ban 
cell phone use while driving. A bad connection also makes a bad impression. Static 
or dropped signals create frustration and miscommunication. Don’t sacrifice profes-
sionalism for the sake of a quick phone call. It is smarter to turn off your phone in 
an area where the signal is weak and when you are likely to have interference. Use 
voice mail and return the call when conditions are better. Also, be careful about 
using your cell phone to discuss private or confidential company information.
Time. Often what you are doing is more important than whatever may come 
over the air waves to you on your phone. For example, when you are having an 
important discussion with a business partner, customer, or superior, it is rude to 
allow yourself to be interrupted by an incoming call. It is also poor manners to 
practice multitasking while on the phone. What’s more, it is dangerous. Although 
you might be able to read and print out e-mail messages, deal with a customer at the 
counter, and talk on your cell phone simultaneously, it is impolite and risky. Lack 
of attention results in errors. If a phone call is important enough to accept, then it is 
important enough to stop what you are doing and attend to the conversation.
Cell phones are essential 
workplace communication 
tools, but they must be used 
without offending others.
Figure 11.2 Practicing Courteous and Responsible Cell Phone Use
Business communicators find cell phones to be enormously convenient and real time-savers. But rude users have generated a 
backlash against inconsiderate callers. Here are specific suggestions for using cell phones safely and responsibly:
Be courteous to those around you. Don’t force those near you to hear your business. Don’t step up to a service counter, such 
as at a restaurant, bank, or post office, while talking on your cell phone. Don’t carry on a cell phone conversation while someone 
is waiting on you. Think first of those in close proximity instead of those on the other end of the phone. Apologize and make 
amends gracefully for occasional cell phone blunders.
Observe wireless-free quiet areas. Don’t allow your cell phone to ring in theaters, restaurants, museums, classrooms, important 
meetings, and similar places. Use the cell phone’s silent/vibrating ring option. A majority of travelers prefer that cell phone conver-
sations not be held on most forms of public transportation.
Speak in low, conversational tones. Microphones on cell phones are quite sensitive, thus making it unnecessary to talk loudly. 
Avoid “cell yell.”
Take only urgent calls. Make full use of your cell phone’s caller ID feature to screen incoming calls. Let voice mail take those 
calls that are not pressing.
Drive now, talk later. Pull over if you must make a call. Talking while driving increases the chance of accidents fourfold, about 
the same as driving while intoxicated. Some companies are implementing cell phone policies that prohibit employees from using 
cell phones while driving for company business.
Choose a professional ringtone. These days you can download a variety of ringtones, from classical to rap to the Star Wars 
theme. Choose a ringtone that will sound professional.
•
•
•
•
•
•

316 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
Volume. Many people raise their voices when using their cell phones because the 
small devices offer little aural feedback. “Cell yell” results, much to the annoyance 
of anyone nearby. Raising your voice is unnecessary since most phones have excel-
lent microphones that can pick up even a whisper. If the connection is bad, louder 
volume will not improve the sound quality. As in face-to-face conversations, a low, 
modulated voice sounds professional and projects the proper image.
Making the Best use of Voice Mail
Because telephone calls can be disruptive, most businesspeople are making extensive 
use of voice mail to intercept and screen incoming calls. Voice mail links a telephone 
system to a computer that digitizes and stores incoming messages. Some systems 
also provide functions such as automated attendant menus, allowing callers to reach 
any associated extension by pushing specific buttons on a touch-tone telephone.
Voice mail is quite efficient for message storage. Because as many as half of all 
business calls require no discussion or feedback, the messaging capabilities of voice 
mail can mean huge savings for businesses. Incoming information is delivered with-
out interrupting potential receivers and without all the niceties that most two-way 
conversations require. Stripped of superfluous chitchat, voice mail messages allow 
communicators to focus on essentials. Voice mail also eliminates telephone tag, 
inaccurate message taking, and time-zone barriers. 
However, voice mail should not be overused. Individuals who screen all incoming 
calls cause irritation, resentment, and needless telephone tag. Both receivers and  callers 
can use etiquette guidelines to make voice mail work most effectively for them.
On the receiver’s end. Your voice mail should project professionalism and 
should provide an efficient mechanism for your callers to leave messages for you. 
Here are some voice mail etiquette tips to follow:
• Don’t overuse voice mail. Don’t use voice mail 
as a means to avoid taking phone calls. It is bet-
ter to answer calls yourself than to let voice mail 
messages build up.
• Set the number of rings appropriately. Set 
your voice mail to ring as few times as possible 
before picking up. This shows respect for your 
callers’ time.
• Prepare a professional, concise, friendly 
greeting. Make your mechanical greeting sound 
warm and inviting, both in tone and content. 
Your greeting should be in your own voice, not 
a computer-generated voice. Identify yourself 
and your organization so that callers know they 
have reached the right number. Thank the caller 
and briefly explain that you are unavailable. 
Invite the caller to leave a message or, if appro-
riate, call back. Here’s a typical voice mail greeting: Hi! This is Larry Lopez of 
Proteus Software, and I appreciate your call. You have reached my voice mail-
box because I’m either working with customers or talking on another line at the 
moment. Please leave your name, number, and reason for calling so that I can be 
prepared when I return your call. Give callers an idea of when you will be avail-
able, such as I’ll be back at 2:30 or I’ll be out of my office until Wednesday, May 
20. If you screen your calls as a time-management technique, try this message: I’m 
not near my phone right now, but I should be able to return calls after 3:30.
• Test your message. Call your number and assess your message. Does it sound 
inviting? Sincere? Professional? Understandable? Are you pleased with your 
tone? If not, record your message again until it conveys the professional image 
you want.
Voice mail eliminates 
telephone tag, inaccurate 
message taking, and 
time-zone barriers; it also 
allows communicators 
to focus on essentials.
“Thank you for calling. Please leave a message. In case I forget 
to check my messages, please send your message as an audio 
file to my e-mail, then send me a fax to remind me to check 
my e-mail, then call back to remind me to check my fax.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
317
• Change your message. Update your message regularly, especially if you travel 
for your job.
• Respond to messages promptly. Check your messages regularly, and try to 
return all voice mail messages within one business day.
• Plan for vacations and other extended absences. If you will not be picking up 
voice mail messages for an extended period, let callers know how they can reach 
someone else if needed.
On the Caller’s end. When leaving a voice mail message, you should follow 
these tips:
• Be prepared to leave a message. Before calling someone, be prepared for voice 
mail. Decide what you are going to say and what information you are going to 
include in your message. If necessary, write your message down before calling.
• Leave a concise, thorough message. When leaving a message, always identify 
yourself using your complete name and affiliation. Mention the date and time 
you called and a brief explanation of your reason for calling. Always leave a 
complete phone number, including the area code, even if you think the receiver 
already has it. Tell the receiver the best time to return your call. Don’t ramble.
• Use a professional and courteous tone. When leaving a message, make sure 
that your tone is professional, enthusiastic, and respectful. Smile when leaving a 
message to add warmth to your voice.
• Speak slowly and articulate. You want to make sure that your receiver will be 
able to understand your message. Speak slowly and pronounce your words care-
fully, especially when providing your phone number. The receiver should be able 
to write information down without having to replay your message.
• Be careful with confidential information. Don’t leave confidential or private 
information in a voice mail message. Remember that anyone could gain access to 
this information.
• Don’t make assumptions. If you don’t receive a call back within a day or two 
after leaving a message, don’t get angry or frustrated. Assume that the message 
wasn’t delivered or that it couldn’t be understood. Call back and leave another 
message, or send the person an e-mail message.
Becoming a Team Player in 
Professional groups and Teams
As we discussed in Chapter 1, the workplace and economy are changing. Responding 
to fierce global competition, businesses are being forced to operate ever more effi-
ciently. One significant recent change is the emphasis on teamwork. You might find 
yourself a part of a work team, project team, customer support team, supplier team, 
design team, planning team, functional team, cross-functional team, or some other 
group. All of these teams are being formed to accomplish specific goals, and your 
career success will depend on your ability to function well in a team-driven profes-
sional environment.
Teams can be effective in solving problems and in developing new products. 
Take, for example, the creation of Red Baron’s “Stuffed Pizza Slices.” Featuring a 
one-of-a-kind triangular, vented design, the product delivers taste, convenience, and 
style. But coming up with an innovative new hit required a cross-functional team 
with representatives from product development, packaging, purchasing, and opera-
tions. The entire team worked to shape an idea into a hit product using existing 
machinery.17
German auto manufacturer BMW likes to “throw together” designers, engineers, 
and marketing experts to work intensively on a team project. Ten team members, for 
example, working in an old bank building in London, collaborated on the redesign of 

318 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
the Rolls-Royce Phantom. The result was a best-selling superluxury automobile that 
remained true to the Rolls heritage. The new model had twenty-first-century lines 
with BMW’s technological muscle under the hood.18 Perhaps you can now imagine 
why forming teams is important.
The importance of Conventional and 
Virtual Teams in the Workplace
Businesses are constantly looking for ways to do jobs better at less cost. They are 
forming teams for the following reasons:
• Better decisions. Decisions are generally more accurate and effective because 
group and team members contribute different expertise and perspectives.
• Faster response. When action is necessary to respond to competition or to solve 
a problem, small groups and teams can act rapidly.
• Increased productivity. Because they are often closer to the action and to the 
customer, team members can see opportunities for improving efficiency.
• Greater buy-in. Decisions arrived at jointly are usually better received because 
members are committed to the solution and are more willing to support it.
• Less resistance to change. People who have input into decisions are less hostile, 
aggressive, and resistant to change.
• Improved employee morale. Personal satisfaction and job morale increase when 
teams are successful.
• Reduced risks. Responsibility for a decision is diffused, thus carrying less risk 
for any individual.
To connect with distant team members across borders and time zones, many 
organizations are creating virtual teams. These are groups of people who work inter-
dependently with a shared purpose across space, time, and organization boundaries 
using technology.19 The author of this textbook, for example, works in her office 
in Santa Barbara, California. Her developmental editor is located in Kentucky, the 
production editor is in Minnesota, and the publisher is in Ohio. Important parts of 
the marketing team are in Singapore and Canada. Although they work in different 
time zones and rarely see each other, team members use e-mail and teleconferencing 
to exchange ideas, make decisions, and stay connected.
Virtual teams may be local or global. At Best Buy’s corporate headquarters in 
Richfield, Minnesota, certain employees are allowed to work anywhere and any-
time—as long as they successfully complete their assignments on time. They can 
decide how, when, and where they work.20 Although few other organizations are 
engaging in such a radical restructuring of work, many workers today complete 
their tasks from remote locations, thus creating local virtual teams. Hyundai Motors 
exemplifies virtual teaming at the global level. For its vehicles, Hyundai completes 
engineering in Korea, research in Tokyo and Germany, styling in California, engine 
calibration and testing in Michigan, and heat testing in the California desert.21
Members of its virtual teams coordinate their work and complete their tasks across 
time and geographic zones. Work is increasingly viewed as what you do rather than 
a place you go.
In some organizations, remote coworkers may be permanent employees of the 
same company or may be specialists called together for temporary projects. Regardless 
of the assignment, virtual teams can benefit from shared views and skills.
Positive and Negative Team Behavior
Team members who are committed to achieving the group’s purpose contribute by 
displaying positive behavior. How can you be a professional team member? The 
most effective groups have members who are willing to establish rules and abide 
by those rules. Effective team members are able to analyze tasks and define prob-
lems so that they can work toward solutions. They offer information and try out 
their ideas on the group to stimulate discussion. They show interest in  others’ ideas 
by listening actively. Helpful team members also seek to involve silent members. 
Organizations are forming 
teams for better decisions, 
faster response, increased 
productivity, greater 
buy-in, less resistance to 
change, improved morale, 
and reduced risks.
Virtual teams are 
groups of people who 
work interdependently 
with a shared purpose 
across space, time, and 
organization boundaries 
using technology.
Professional team members 
follow team rules, analyze 
tasks, deﬁ ne problems, 
share information, listen 
actively to others, and try 
to involve quiet members.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
319
They help to resolve differences, and they encourage a warm, supportive climate 
by  praising and agreeing with others. When they sense that agreement is near, they 
review significant points and move the group toward its goal by synthesizing points 
of understanding.
Not all groups, however, have members who contribute positively. Negative 
behavior is shown by those who constantly put down the ideas and suggestions 
of others. They insult, criticize, and aggress against others. They waste the group’s 
time with unnecessary recounting of personal achievements or irrelevant topics. 
The team joker distracts the group with excessive joke telling, inappropriate com-
ments, and disruptive antics. Also disturbing are team members who withdraw 
and refuse to be drawn out. They have nothing 
to say, either for or against ideas being consid-
ered. To be a productive and welcome member 
of a group, be prepared to perform the positive 
tasks described in Figure 11.3. Avoid the negative 
behaviors.
Characteristics of Successful 
Professional Teams
The use of teams has been called the solution to 
many ills in the current workplace.22 Someone 
even observed that as an acronym TEAM means 
“Together, Everyone Achieves More.”23 Yet, 
many teams do not work well together. In fact, 
some teams can actually increase frustration, 
lower productivity, and create employee dissatis-
faction. Experts who have studied team workings 
and decisions have discovered that effective teams 
share some or all of the following characteristics.
Small Size, Diverse Makeup. Teams may range from 2 to 25 members, 
although 4 or 5 is optimum for many projects. Larger groups have trouble interact-
ing constructively, much less agreeing on actions.24 For the most creative decisions, 
teams generally have male and female members who differ in age, ethnicity, social 
background, training, and experience. Members should bring complementary skills 
to a team. Fred Adair, a partner at executive search firm Heidrick & Struggles, had 
this to say about diverse teams when asked about his recent study of nearly 700 
top business leaders: “Yes, diverse teams are generally better. There is a more bal-
anced consideration of different perspectives, and I’m using the word ‘diversity’ in 
the broadest sense—diversity of personality, of opinion, of decision-making style.”25 
The key business advantage of diversity is the ability to view a project and its con-
text from multiple perspectives. Many of us tend to think that everyone in the world 
Negative team behavior 
includes insulting, criticizing, 
aggressing against 
others, wasting time, and 
refusing to participate.
Figure 11.3 Positive and Negative Team Behaviors
Positive Team Behaviors
Negative Team Behaviors
Setting rules and abiding by them
Blocking the ideas and suggestions of others
Analyzing tasks and defining problems
Insulting and criticizing others
Contributing information and ideas
Wasting the group’s time
Showing interest by listening actively
Making inappropriate jokes and comments
Encouraging members to participate
Failing to stay on task
Synthesizing points of agreement 
Withdrawing, failing to participate
“Isn’t this what teamwork is all about? 
You doing all my work for me?”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
Small, diverse teams 
often produce more 
creative solutions with 
broader applications than 
homogeneous teams do.

320 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
is like us because we know only our own experience.26 Teams with members from 
a variety of ethnicities and cultures can look at projects beyond the limited view of 
one culture. Many organizations are finding that diverse teams can produce innova-
tive solutions with broader applications than homogeneous teams can.
Agreement on Purpose. An effective team begins with a purpose. For exam-
ple, when Magic Johnson Theatres was developing its first theater, it hired a team 
whose sole purpose was to help the company move rapidly through the arduous state 
permit application process. Even the task of obtaining a license for the site’s popcorn 
machine was surprisingly difficult.27 Xerox scientists who invented personal comput-
ing developed their team purpose after the chairman of Xerox called for an “architec-
ture of information.” A team at Sealed Air Corporation developed its purpose when 
management instructed it to cut waste and reduce downtime.28 Working from a gen-
eral purpose to specific goals typically requires a huge investment of time and effort. 
Meaningful discussions, however, motivate team members to “buy into” the project.
Agreement on Procedures. The best teams develop procedures to guide 
them. They set up intermediate goals with deadlines. They assign roles and tasks, 
requiring all members to contribute equivalent amounts of real work. They decide how 
they will reach decisions using one of the strategies discussed earlier. Procedures are 
continually evaluated to ensure movement toward the attainment of the team’s goals.
Ability to Confront Conflict. Poorly functioning teams avoid conflict, pre-
ferring sulking, gossiping, or backstabbing. A better plan is to acknowledge conflict 
and address the root of the problem openly. Although it may feel emotionally risky, 
direct confrontation saves time and enhances team commitment in the long run. To 
be constructive, however, confrontation must be task oriented, not person oriented. 
An open airing of differences, in which all team members have a chance to speak 
their minds, should center on the strengths and weaknesses of the different posi-
tions and ideas—not on personalities. After hearing all sides, team members must 
negotiate a fair settlement, no matter how long it takes. Good decisions are based 
on consensus: most members must agree.
use of good Communication Techniques. The best teams exchange 
information and contribute ideas freely in an informal environment. Team members 
speak clearly and concisely, avoiding generalities. They encourage feedback. Listeners 
become actively involved, read body language, and ask clarifying questions before 
responding. Tactful, constructive disagreement is encouraged. Although a team’s task 
is taken seriously, successful teams are able to inject humor into their interactions.
Ability to Collaborate rather Than Compete. Effective team mem-
bers are genuinely interested in achieving team goals instead of receiving individual 
recognition. They contribute ideas and feedback unselfishly. They monitor team 
progress, including what is going right, what is going wrong, and what to do about 
it. They celebrate individual and team accomplishments.
Shared Leadership. Effective teams often have no formal leader. Instead, 
leadership rotates to those with the appropriate expertise as the team evolves and 
moves from one phase to another. Many teams operate under a democratic approach. 
This approach can achieve buy-in to team decisions, boost morale, and create fewer 
hurt feelings and less resentment. But in times of crisis, a strong team member may 
need to step up as leader.
Acceptance of ethical responsibilities. Teams as a whole have ethi-
cal responsibilities to their members, to their larger organizations, and to society. 
Members have a number of specific responsibilities to each other, as shown in Figure 
11.4. As a whole, teams have a responsibility to represent the organization’s view 
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
Teamwork is the ability 
to work together toward 
a common vision. The 
ability to direct individual 
accomplishments toward 
organizational objectives. 
It is the fuel that allows 
common people to attain 
uncommon results.
effective teams 
exchange information 
freely and collaborate 
rather than compete.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
321
and respect its privileged information. They should not discuss with outsiders any 
sensitive issues without permission. In addition, teams have a broader obligation to 
avoid advocating actions that would endanger members of society at large.
The skills that make you a valuable and ethical team player will serve you well 
when you run or participate in professional meetings.
Conducting Productive Business 
and Professional Meetings
As businesses become more team oriented and management becomes more partici-
patory, people are attending more meetings than ever. Despite heavy reliance on 
e-mail and the growing use of wireless devices to stay connected, meetings are still 
the most comfortable way to exchange information. However, many meetings are a 
waste of time. One survey showed that a quarter of U.S. workers would rather go 
to the dentist than attend a boring meeting.29 Regardless, meetings are here to stay. 
Our task, then, is to make them efficient, satisfying, and productive. 
Meetings consist of three or more individuals who gather to pool informa-
tion, solicit feedback, clarify policy, seek consensus, and solve problems. For you, 
however, meetings have another important purpose. They represent opportuni-
ties. Because they are a prime tool for developing staff, they are career-critical. 
The inability to run an effective meeting can sink a career, warns The Wall Street 
Journal.30 The head of a leadership training firm echoed this warning when he said, 
“If you can’t orchestrate a meeting, you are of little use to the corporation.”31 At 
meetings, judgments are formed and careers are made. Therefore, instead of treating 
meetings as thieves of your valuable time, try to see them as golden opportunities 
When people form a group or a team to achieve a purpose, 
they agree to give up some of their individual sovereignty 
for the good of the group. They become interdependent and 
assume responsibilities to one another and to the group. Here 
are important ethical responsibilities for members to follow:
Determine to do your best. When you commit to the group 
process, you are obligated to offer your skills freely. Don’t hold 
back, perhaps fearing that you will be repeatedly targeted 
because you have skills to offer. If the group project is worth 
doing, it is worth your best effort.
Decide to behave with the group’s good in mind. You 
may find it necessary to set aside your personal goals in 
favor of the group’s goals. Decide to keep an open mind and 
to listen to evidence and arguments objectively. Strive to 
evaluate information carefully, even though it may contradict 
your own views or thwart your personal agendas.
Make a commitment to fair play. Group problem solving is 
a cooperative, not a competitive, event. Decide that you can-
not grind your private ax at the expense of the group project.
Expect to give and receive a fair hearing. When you 
speak, others should give you a fair hearing. You have a right 
to expect them to listen carefully, provide you with candid 
feedback, strive to understand what you say, and treat your 
ideas seriously. Listeners do not have to agree with you, of 
course. However, all speakers have a right to a fair hearing.
•
•
•
•
Be willing to take on a participant/analyst role. As a 
group member, it is your responsibility to pay attention, 
evaluate what is happening, analyze what you learn, and 
help make decisions.
As a leader, be ready to model appropriate team behav-
ior. It is a leader’s responsibility to coach team members 
in skills and teamwork, to acknowledge achievement and 
effort, to share knowledge, and to periodically remind mem-
bers of the team’s missions and goals.
•
•
Figure 11.4 Ethical Responsibilities of Group Members and Leaders
Because you can expect 
to attend many workplace 
meetings, learn to make 
them efﬁ cient, satisfying, 
and productive.
© DMITRIY SHIRONOSOV / SHUTTERSTOCK

322 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
to demonstrate your leadership, communication, and problem-solving skills. So that 
you can make the most of these opportunities, here are techniques for planning and 
conducting successful meetings. You will also learn how to be a valuable meeting 
participant.
Before the Meeting
Benjamin Franklin once said, “By failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail.”32 If 
you are in charge of a meeting, give yourself plenty of preparation time to guarantee 
the meeting’s success. Before the meeting, determine your purpose, decide how and 
where to meet, organize an agenda, decide who to invite, and prepare the meeting 
location and materials.
Determining Your Purpose. Before you do anything else, you must 
decide the purpose of your meeting and whether a meeting is even necessary. No 
meeting should be called unless the topic is important, can’t wait, and requires an 
exchange of ideas. If the flow of information is strictly one way and no immedi-
ate feedback will result, then don’t schedule a meeting. For example, if people 
are merely being advised or informed, send an e-mail, memo, or letter. Leave a 
telephone or voice mail message, but don’t call a costly meeting. Remember, the 
real expense of a meeting is the lost productivity of all the people attending. To 
decide whether the purpose of the meeting is valid, it is a good idea to consult the 
key people who will be attending. Ask them what outcomes are desired and how 
to achieve them. This consultation also sets a collaborative tone and encourages 
full participation.
Deciding How and Where to Meet. Once you have determined that 
a meeting is necessary, you must decide whether to meet face-to-face or virtually. 
If you decide to meet face-to-face, reserve a meeting room. If you decide to meet 
virtually, make any necessary advance arrangements for your voice conference, 
video conference, or Web conference. These electronic tools were discussed in 
Chapter 1.
Organizing an Agenda. Prepare an agenda of topics to be discussed during 
the meeting. Also include any reports or materials that participants should read in 
advance. For continuing groups, you might also include a copy of the minutes of the 
previous meeting. To keep meetings productive, limit the number of agenda items. 
Remember, the narrower the focus, the greater the chances for success. Consider 
putting items that will be completed quickly near the beginning of the agenda to give 
the group a sense of accomplishment. Save emotional topics for the end. You should 
distribute the agenda at least two days in advance of the meeting. A good agenda, 
as illustrated in Figure 11.5, covers the following information:
• Date and place of meeting
• Start time and end time
• Brief description of each topic, in order of priority, including names of individuals 
who are responsible for performing some action
• Proposed allotment of time for each topic
• Any premeeting preparation expected of participants
inviting Participants. The number of meeting participants is determined 
by the purpose of the meeting, as shown in Figure 11.6. If the meeting purpose is 
motivational, such as an awards ceremony for sales reps of Mary Kay Cosmetics, 
then the number of participants is unlimited. But to make decisions, according to 
studies at 3M Corporation, the best number is five or fewer participants.33 Ideally, 
those attending should be people who will make the decision and people with infor-
mation necessary to make the decision. Also attending should be people who will 
be responsible for implementing the decision and representatives of groups who will 
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Effective meetings don’t 
happen by accident; they 
happen by design.
Call meetings only when 
necessary, and invite 
only key people.
Before a meeting, pass out 
a meeting agenda showing 
topics to be discussed 
and other information.
Problem-solving meetings 
should involve ﬁ ve 
or fewer people.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
323 
benefit from the decision. Let’s say, for example, that the CEO of rugged sportswear 
manufacturer Timberland is strongly committed to community service. He wants 
his company to participate more fully in community service. So he might meet 
with managers, employee representatives, and community leaders to decide how 
his employees could volunteer to refurbish a school, build affordable housing, or 
volunteer at a clinic.34
Preparing the Meeting Location and Materials. If you are 
meeting face-to-face, decide the layout of the room. To maximize collabora-
tion and participation, try to arrange tables and chairs in a circle or a square so 
that all participants can see one another. Moreover, where you sit at the table 
or stand in the room signals whether you wish to be in charge or are willing  
to share leadership.35 Set up any presentation equipment that will be needed. 
Make copies of documents that will be handed out during the meeting. Arrange 
for refreshments.
Figure 11.5 Typical Meeting Agenda
Figure 11.6 Meeting Purpose and Number of Participants
Purpose
ideal Size
Intensive problem solving
5 or fewer
Problem identification
10 or fewer
Information reviews and presentations
30 or fewer
Motivational
Unlimited

324 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
During the Meeting
Meetings can be less boring, more efficient, and more productive if leaders and par-
ticipants recognize how to get the meeting started, move it along, handle conflict, 
and deal with dysfunctional participants. Whether you are the meeting leader or 
a participant, it is important to act professionally during the meeting. Figure 11.7 
outlines etiquette tips for both meeting leaders and participants. Following are addi-
tional guidelines to adhere to during the meeting to guarantee its success.
getting the Meeting Started. To avoid wasting time and irritating 
attendees, always start meetings on time—even if some participants are missing. 
Waiting for latecomers causes resentment and sets a bad precedent. For the same 
reasons, don’t give a quick recap to anyone who arrives late. At the appointed time, 
open the meeting by having all participants introduce themselves if necessary. Then 
continue with a three- to five-minute introduction that includes the following:
• Goal and length of the meeting
• Background of topics or problems
• Possible solutions and constraints
• Tentative agenda
• Ground rules to be followed
A typical set of ground rules might include arriving on time, communicating 
openly, being supportive, listening carefully, participating fully, confronting conflict 
frankly, turning off cell phones and pagers, and following the agenda. Participants 
should also determine how decisions will be made. More formal groups follow par-
liamentary procedures based on Robert’s Rules of Order. After establishing basic 
ground rules, the leader should ask whether participants agree thus far. The next 
step is to assign one attendee to take minutes and one to act as a recorder. The 
recorder stands at a flipchart or whiteboard and lists the main ideas being discussed 
and agreements reached.
Start meetings on 
time and open with a 
brief introduction.
Meeting leaders and 
participants should follow 
professional meeting 
etiquette at all times.
Meeting Leader
Start and end the meeting on time.
Introduce yourself and urge participants to introduce 
themselves.
Make everyone feel welcome and valued.
Maintain control of the group members and discussion.
Make sure that everyone participates.
Stick to the agenda.
Encourage everyone to follow the ground rules.
Schedule breaks for longer meetings.
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Meeting Participants
Arrive on time and stay until the meeting ends, unless you 
have made prior arrangements to arrive late or leave early.
Leave the meeting only for breaks and emergencies.
Come to the meeting prepared.
Turn off cell phones and pagers.
Follow the ground rules.
If you are on the agenda as a presenter, do not go over 
your allotted time.
Do not exhibit nonverbal behavior that suggests you are 
bored, frustrated, angry, or negative in any way.
Do not interrupt others or cut anyone off.
Make sure your comments, especially negative comments, 
are about ideas, not people.
Listen carefully to what other meeting participants are 
saying.
Participate fully.
Do not go off on tangents; be sure that you stick to the topic 
being discussed.
Do not engage in side conversations.
Clean up after yourself when leaving the meeting.
Complete in a timely manner any follow-up work that you 
are assigned.
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Figure 11.7 Etiquette Checklist for Meeting Leaders and Participants
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / ARTHUR KWIATKOWSKI

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
325
Moving the Meeting Along. After the preliminaries, the leader should 
say as little as possible. Like a talk show host, an effective leader makes “sure that 
each panel member gets some air time while no one member steals the show.”36
Remember that the purpose of a meeting is to exchange views, not to hear one per-
son, even the leader, do all the talking. If the group has one member who monopo-
lizes, the leader might say, Thanks, Gary, for that perspective, but please hold your 
next point while we hear how Rachel would respond to that. This technique also 
encourages quieter participants to speak up.
To avoid allowing digressions to sidetrack the group, 
try generating a “Parking Lot” list. This is a list of 
important but divergent issues that should be discussed 
at a later time. Another way to handle digressions is to 
say, Look, folks, we’re veering off track here. Let’s get 
back to the central issue of . . . . It is important to adhere 
to the agenda and the time schedule. Equally important, 
when the group seems to have reached a consensus, 
is to summarize the group’s position and check to see 
whether everyone agrees.
Dealing With Conflict. Conflict is a normal 
part of every workplace. Although conflict may cause 
you to feel awkward and uneasy, conflict is not always 
negative. In fact, conflict in the workplace can even be 
desirable. When managed properly, conflict can improve 
decision making, clarify values, increase group cohesive-
ness, stimulate creativity, decrease tensions, and reduce 
dissatisfaction. Unresolved conflict, however, can destroy productivity and seriously 
reduce morale.
In meetings, conflict typically develops when people feel unheard or mis-
understood. If two people are in conflict, the best approach is to encourage 
each to make a complete case while group members give their full attention. Let 
each one question the other. Then, the leader should summarize what was said, 
and the group should offer comments. The group may modify a recommenda-
tion or suggest alternatives before reaching consensus on a direction to follow. 
You will find more suggestions for dealing with conflict in the Communication 
Workshop, “Five Rules for Resolving Workplace Conflicts,” at the end of this 
chapter.
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
While most people know to turn off cell phones at 
company meetings, some employees show little 
hesitation in sending text messages during group 
presentations. Whether one is tapping away sneakily 
under the table or ripping off full e-mails in plain 
view, texting during meetings is an inappropriate 
practice that distracts others and sends a message 
that the gathering is unimportant. The behavior has 
reached epidemic proportions, especially among 
young college graduates. What can team leaders 
do to prevent unwanted texting at meetings?
© B2M/MACHET (RF) / PIXLAND / JUPITERIMAGES
Keep the meeting moving 
by avoiding issues that 
sidetrack the group.
“Wow! This meeting lasted longer than I thought. 
It appears the year is now 2053.”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
When a conﬂ ict develops 
between two members, allow 
each to make a complete 
case before the group.

326 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
Handling Difficult group Members. When individuals are performing 
in a dysfunctional role (such as blocking discussion, monopolizing the conversation, 
attacking other speakers, joking excessively, not paying attention, or withdrawing), 
they should be handled with care and tact. The following specific techniques can 
help a meeting leader control some group members and draw others out.37
• Lay down the rules in an opening statement. Give a specific overall summary 
of topics, time allotment, and expected behavior. Warn that speakers who digress 
will be interrupted.
• Seat potentially dysfunctional members strategically. Experts suggest seating 
a difficult group member immediately next to the leader. It is easier to control 
a person in this position. Make sure the person with dysfunctional behavior is 
not seated in a power point, such as at the end of the table or across from the 
leader.
• Avoid direct eye contact. In American society direct eye contact is a nonverbal 
signal that encourages talking. Thus, when asking a question of the group, look 
only at those whom you wish to answer. 
• Assign dysfunctional members specific tasks. Ask a potentially disruptive 
person, for example, to be the group recorder.
• Ask members to speak in a specific order. Ordering comments creates an arti-
ficial, rigid climate and should be done only when absolutely necessary. But such 
a regimen ensures that everyone gets a chance to participate.
• Interrupt monopolizers. If a difficult member dominates a discussion, wait for a 
pause and then break in. Summarize briefly the previous comments or ask some-
one else for an opinion.
• Encourage nontalkers. Give only positive feedback to the comments of reticent 
members. Ask them direct questions about which you know they have informa-
tion or opinions.
• Give praise and encouragement to those who seem to need it, including the 
distracters, the monopolizers, the blockers, and the withdrawn.
ending the Meeting and Following up
How do you know when to stop a meeting? Many factors determine when a meeting 
should be adjourned, including (a) when the original objectives have been accom-
plished, (b) when the group has reached an impasse, or (c) when the agreed-upon 
ending time arrives. To show respect for participants, the leader should be sure 
the meeting stops at the promised time. It may be necessary to table (postpone for 
another meeting) some unfinished agenda items. Concluding a meeting effectively 
helps participants recognize what was accomplished so that they feel that the meet-
ing was worthwhile. Effective leaders perform a number of activities in ending a 
meeting and following up.
Concluding the Meeting. When the agreed-upon stopping time arrives 
or when the objectives have been met, discussion should stop. The leader should 
summarize what has been decided and who is going to do what. Deadlines for 
action items should also be established. It may be necessary to ask people to vol-
unteer to take responsibility for completing action items agreed to in the meeting. 
No one should leave the meeting without a full understanding of what was accom-
plished. One effective technique that encourages full participation is “once around 
the table.” Everyone is asked to summarize briefly his or her interpretation of what 
was decided and what happens next. Of course, this closure technique works best 
with smaller groups.
An effective leader concludes by asking the group to set a time for the next meet-
ing. The leader should also assure the group that a report will follow and thank 
participants for attending. Participants should vacate the meeting room once the 
meeting is over, especially if another group is waiting to enter. The room should be 
returned to a neat and orderly appearance.
To control dysfunctional 
behavior, team leaders 
should establish rules 
and seat problem 
people strategically.
end the meeting with a 
summary of accomplishments 
and a review of action items; 
follow up by distributing 
meeting minutes and 
reminding participants of 
their assigned tasks.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
327
Distributing Minutes. If minutes were taken during the meeting, they should 
be keyed in an appropriate format. You will find guidelines for preparing meeting 
minutes in Chapter 9. Minutes should be distributed within a couple of days after 
the meeting. Send the minutes to all meeting participants and to anyone else who 
needs to know what was accomplished and discussed during the meeting.
Completing Assigned Tasks. It is the leader’s responsibility to see that 
what was decided at the meeting is accomplished. The leader may need to call 
people to remind them of their assignments and also to volunteer to help them if 
necessary. Meeting participants should complete any assigned tasks by the agreed-
upon deadline.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
In this chapter you studied how to practice professional 
behavior in individual face-to-face settings, on the phone, 
as well as in teams and meetings. You learned how to use 
your voice as a communication tool, how to promote positive 
workplace relations through conversation, and how to give 
and take constructive criticism on the job. You were given 
tips on professional telephone, cell phone, and voice mail 
 etiquette, including making and receiving productive tele-
phone calls. You learned about a variety of tools enabling 
you to participate constructively in professional teams. 
Finally, the chapter presented techniques for planning and 
participating in productive business and professional meet-
ings, both face-to-face and virtual.
The next chapter covers an additional facet of oral com-
munication, that of making business presentations. Learning 
to speak before groups is important to your career success 
because you will probably be expected to do so occasion-
ally. You will learn helpful techniques and get practice apply-
ing them so that you can control stage fright in making pol-
ished presentations.
C
Critical Thinking
C
Chapter review
 1. Why does ethics professor Douglas Chismar argue that 
no difference between everyday ethics and etiquette 
exists in the workplace?
 2. Why are professionalism, business etiquette, or soft skills 
so important in the workplace?
 3. Is face-to-face communication always preferable to one-
dimensional channels of communication such as e-mail 
and fax? Why or why not?
 4. In what ways can conflict be a positive force in meetings 
and how should it be addressed?
 5. How can business meetings help you advance your 
career?
 6. Define soft skills and the qualities the term describes.

328 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
 7. Name as many synonyms for professionalism on the job as you can recall after reading this 
chapter:
 8. Name five elements that you control in using your voice as a communication tool.
 9. If you are criticized at work, what are nine ways you can respond and benefit professionally?
 10. How can business professionals create and maintain positive workplace relations in face-to-face 
contact?
 11. Name six ways callers can practice courteous and responsible cell phone use.
 12. Name several reasons companies are using teams.

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
329
 13. What are some characteristics of effective teams?
 14. List ten etiquette guidelines for meeting participants that you feel are most important.
 15. List eight tactics that a meeting leader can use in dealing with difficult participants.
A
Activities and Cases
TeAM
11.1 Researching Definitions and Compiling an Annotated Works-Cited List
The ability to scan articles quickly, summarize them efficiently, and list sources in the correct MLA format will be very useful 
to you. In your classes and as you continue learning throughout your life, you will need to be a quick study who demonstrates 
attention to detail. Moreover, frequently you will need to grasp a new subject area or field in a relatively short amount of time. 
Naturally, research typically starts with definitions of key terms. You have seen that many definitions for professionalism exist. 
Recently, an opportunity to practice your research skills has arisen when your boss was invited to make a presentation to a 
group of human relations officers. He asked you and a small group of fellow interns to help him find articles about profes-
sionalism, soft skills, and other interpersonal qualities.
Your Task. Review activities 10.8 and 10.9 in Chapter 10 and as a team divide your research in such a way that each intern 
is responsible for one or two search terms, depending on the size of your group. Look for articles with definitions of profes-
sionalism, business etiquette, civility, business ethics, social skills, soft skills, and social intelligence. Find at least three useful 
articles for each search term. If you get bogged down in your research, consult with a business librarian on campus or report 
to your instructor. After compiling your findings, as a team present your annotated works cited list in an informational memo 
report to your boss, Henry Franks.

330 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
WeB
11.2 Soft Skills: Checking Job Ads
What soft skills do employers request when they list job openings in your field?
Your Task. Check job listings in your field at an online job board. Visit a job board such as Monster, College Recruiter, 
Career Builder, or Yahoo Top Jobs. Follow the instructions to search job categories and locations. Study many job listings in 
your field. Then prepare a list of the most frequently requested soft skills in your field. Next to each item on the list, indicate 
the degree to which you have the skill or trait mentioned. Your instructor may ask you to submit your findings or report to the 
class. If you are not satisfied with the job selection at any job site, choose another job board.
TeAM
11.3 Voice Quality 
Recording your voice gives you a chance to learn how your voice sounds to others and provides an opportunity to improve 
its effectiveness. Don’t be surprised if you fail to recognize your own voice.
Your Task. Record yourself reading a newspaper or magazine article.
a. If you think your voice sounds a bit high, practice speaking slightly lower.
b. If your voice is low or expressionless, practice speaking slightly louder and with more inflection.
c. Ask a colleague, teacher, or friend to provide feedback on your pronunciation, pitch, volume, rate, and professional 
tone.
e-MAiL
TeAM
11.4 Surviving a Social Business Function 
The idea of attending a social business function provokes anxiety in many businesspeople. What should you talk about? What 
should you wear? How can you make sure you maintain your professionalism?
Your Task. In groups of two to four, discuss appropriate behavior in four social situations. Decide appropriate attire, suitable 
topics of conversation, and other etiquette guidelines that you should follow. Present your decisions regarding the following 
social functions to your instructor in a memo or e-mail message:
a. Company picnic
b. Holiday party
c. Formal dinner
d. Business luncheon
11.5 Delivering and Responding to Criticism
Develop your skills in handling criticism by joining with a partner to role-play critical messages you might deliver and receive 
on the job.
Your Task. Designate one person “A” and the other “B.” A describes the kinds of critical messages she or he is likely to 
receive on the job and identifies who might deliver them. In Scenario 1, B takes the role of the critic and delivers the criti-
cism in an unskilled manner. A responds using techniques described in this chapter. In Scenario 2, B again is the critic but 
delivers the criticism using techniques described in this chapter. A responds again. Then A and B reverse roles and repeat 
Scenarios 1 and 2.
TeAM
11.6 Discussing Workplace Criticism
In the workplace, criticism is often delivered thoughtlessly.
Your Task. In teams of two or three, describe a time when you were criticized by an untrained superior or colleague. 
What made the criticism painful? What goal do you think the critic had in mind? How did you feel? How did you respond? 
Considering techniques discussed in this chapter, how could the critic have improved his or her delivery? How does the 
delivery technique affect the way a receiver responds to criticism? Your instructor may ask you to submit a memo or e-mail 
analyzing an experience in which you were criticized.
11.7 Going It Alone or Making It a Team Effort at Timberland
He introduces himself as a New Hampshire bootmaker, but Timberland CEO Jeffrey B. Swartz is much more. Although he 
heads a fast-rising company that produces boots and sportswear, he is strongly committed to civic responsibility and employee 
involvement. Fortune magazine consistently ranks Timberland as one of the 100 best companies to work for in America. With 
the zeal of a missionary, the enthusiastic, fast-talking Swartz travels extensively, preaching the power of volunteerism among 
the 200 Timberland stores and factories.38

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
331
Your Task. Let’s say that you work for Timberland, and Swartz asks you to organize an extensive volunteer program using 
Timberland employees. The program involves much planning and cooperation to be successful. You are flattered that he 
respects you and thinks that you are capable of completing the task. But you think that a team could do a better job than an 
individual. What arguments would you use to convince him that a team could work better than a single person?
11.8 Analyzing a Meeting
You have learned a number of techniques in this chapter for planning and participating in meetings. Here’s your chance to 
put your knowledge to work.
Your Task. Attend a structured meeting of a college, social, business, community, or other organization. Compare the man-
ner in which the meeting is conducted with the suggestions presented in this chapter. Why did the meeting succeed or fail? 
Prepare a memo for your instructor or be ready to discuss your findings in class.
11.9 Planning a Meeting
Assume that the next meeting of your Associated Students Organization (ASO) will discuss preparations for a job fair in 
the spring. The group will hear reports from committees working on speakers, business recruiters, publicity, reservations of 
campus space, setup of booths, and any other matters you can think of.
Your Task. As president of your ASO, prepare an agenda for the meeting. Compose your introductory remarks to open the 
meeting. Your instructor may ask you to submit these two documents or use them in staging an actual meeting in class.
11.10 Leading a Meeting
Your boss is unhappy at the way some employees lead meetings. Because he knows that you have studied this topic, he 
asks you to send him a memo or e-mail listing specific points that he can use in an in-house training session in which he 
plans to present ideas on how to conduct business meetings.
Your Task. Using an electronic database, locate articles providing tips on leading meetings. Three particularly good articles 
are listed below. Prepare a memo to your boss, Mark Shields, outlining eight or more points on how to lead a meeting. Include 
at least five tips that are not found in this chapter.
Krattemnaker, T. (2007, December). Make every meeting matter. Harvard Management Update, pp. 3–5. Retrieved June 18, 2008, 
from EBCO database.
Motley, A. (2005, January). Minding your meeting manners. Association Management, pp. 39–40. Retrieved June 18, 2008, 
from ProQuest database.
Olsztynski, J. (2004, October 1). Productive meetings vs. bull sessions. Roofing Contractor, p. 14. Retrieved June 18, 2008, from 
http://www.roofingcontractor.com/CDA/Archives/3437189ac3c58010VgnVCM100000f932a8c0
11.11 Improving Telephone Skills by Role-Playing
Acting out the roles of telephone caller and receiver is an effective technique for improving skills. To give you such practice, 
your instructor will divide the class into pairs. 
Your Task. For each scenario take a moment to read and rehearse your role silently. Then play the role with your partner. If 
time permits, repeat the scenarios, changing roles. 
Partner 1 
Partner 2
A. You are the receptionist for Digitron Corporation. The 
caller asks for Susan Campbell, who is home sick today. 
You don’t know when she will be able to return. Answer 
the call appropriately. 
B. You are now Ms. Campbell, office manager. Describe Lisa 
Chung, an imaginary employee. Think of someone with 
whom you have worked. Include many details, such as 
her ability to work with others, her appearance, her skills 
at computing, her schooling, her ambition, and so forth. 
C. You are now an administrative assistant for attorney Maria 
Solomon-Williams. Call Cyrus Artemis to verify a meeting 
date Ms. Solomon-Williams has with Mr. Artemis. Use your 
own name in identifying yourself. 
D. You are now the receptionist for attorney Maria Solomon-
Williams. Ms. Solomon-Williams is skiing in Aspen and will 
return in two days, but she doesn’t want her clients to 
know where she is. Take a message. 
E. Reverse roles and take a message again. 
A. You are the personnel manager of Wireless World, Inc. Call 
Susan Campbell, office manager at Digitron Corporation. 
Inquire about a job applicant, Lisa Chung, who listed Ms. 
Campbell as a reference. 
B. Call Ms. Campbell again the following day to inquire 
about the same job applicant, Lisa Chung. Ms. Campbell 
answers today, but she talks on and on, describing the 
applicant in great detail. Tactfully close the conversation.
 
C. You are now the receptionist for Cyrus Artemis, of Artemis 
Imports. Answer a call for Mr. Artemis, who is working in 
another office, at Ext. 2219, where he will accept calls. 
D. You are now Cyrus Artemis, owner of Artemis Imports. 
Call your attorney, Maria Solomon-Williams, about a 
legal problem. Leave a brief, incomplete message. 
E. Call Ms. Solomon-Williams again. Leave a message that 
will prevent telephone tag. 

332 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
11.12 Leaving a Professional Voice Mail Message
Voice mail messages can be very effective communication tools as long as they are professional and easy to respond to.
Your Task. If your instructor allows, call his or her office number after hours or within a specified time frame. Plan what 
you will say; if needed, jot down a few notes. Leave a professional voice mail message as described in this chapter. Start 
by introducing yourself by name, then give your telephone number, and finally leave a brief message about something you 
discussed in class, read in the chapter, or want the instructor know about yourself. Speak slowly, loudly enough, and clearly, 
so that your instructor won’t need to replay your message.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 11
Other Punctuation
Although this checkup concentrates on Sections 2.23–2.29 in the Grammar/Mechanics Hand-
book, you may also refer to other punctuation principles. Insert any necessary punctuation. In 
the space provided, indicate the number of changes you make and record the number of the 
G/M principle(s) illustrated. Count each mark separately; for example, a set of parentheses 
counts as 2. If you make no changes, write O. When you finish, compare your responses with 
those provided at the end of the book. If your responses differ, study carefully the specific 
principles shown in parentheses.
Example (De-emphasize.) Several cities chosen by CNN/Money as the best places to live in 
the United States Alexandria, Chesapeake, Chantilly, and Reston are in Virginia. 
 1. (Emphasize.) Employers will typically want to know about four key areas education, 
experience, hard skills, and soft skills before making you an offer.
 2. Will you please Eddie put the report on my desk by five o’clock
 3. (De-emphasize.) Sales of durable goods in the first quarter of the year see Figure 5.1 are 
down sharply. 
 4. To determine whether to spell Web site as one word or two consult our company style 
book.
 5. Cargill, Koch Industries, and Mars these enterprises are the top three largest private US 
companies. 
 6. Warren Buffet said, “Why not invest your assets in companies you really like
 7. Have you read The Wall Street Journal article titled Oracle’s Ellison Gives $115 Million to 
Harvard Study
 8. (Emphasize.) The biggest wine-producing states California, Washington, and Oregon are 
all located on the Pacific Coast.
 9. Have you received reservations and membership dues from Ms Alice Theodor, Mr Ron P 
Gill, and Dr Wei Li Chin
 10. I enjoyed the chapter titled The Almost Perfect Meeting that appeared in Emily Post’s book 
called The Etiquette Advantage in Business.
 11. Donald Trump said, “Generally I like other people to fire, because it is always a lousy task” 
however he has fired many people himself.
 12. Devon described the filthy factory floor as gross.
 13. Is the vice president coming in today at 9 a m 
 14. Wow You have picked up some awesome sales techniques haven’t you
 15. In business the word speculator may be defined as one who attempts to profit by 
anticipating price changes.
2 
(2.27)
^
(
^
)

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
333
The following report of meeting minutes has faults in grammar, punctuation, spell-
ing, number form, wordiness, and word use. Use standard proofreading marks (see 
Appendix B) to correct the errors. When you finish, your instructor can show you the 
revised version of this summary.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 11
Old Business
Reports
New Business
Next Meeting
Honolulu-Pacific Federal Interagency Board
Policy Board Committee
Room 25, 310 Ala Moana Boulevard, Honolulu
February 4, 200x
Present:
Debra Chinnapongse, Tweet Jackson, Irene Kishita, Barry Knaggs, Kevin
Poepoe, and Ralph Mason
Absent:
Alex Watanabe
The meeting was call to order by Chair Kevin Poepo at 9:02 a.m. in the morning.
Minutes from the January 6th meeting was read and approve.
Debra Chinnapongse discussed the cost of the annual awards luncheon. That honors
outstanding employees. The ticket price ticket does not cover all the expenses incured.
Major expenses include: awards, leis, and complementary lunches for the judges, VIP
guests and volunteers. Honolulu-Pacific Federal Interagency Board can not continue to
make up the difference between income from tickets and costs for the luncheon.
Ms. Chinnapongse reported that it had come to her attention that other interagency 
boards relied on members contributions for their awards’ programs.
MOTION: To send a Letter to board members asking for there contributions to support
the annual awards luncheon. (Chinapongse/Kishita). PASSED 6-0.
Barry Knaggs reported that the homeland defense committee sponsored a get acquainted
meeting in November. More than eighty people from various agencys attended.
The Outreach Committee reports that they have been asked to assist the Partnership
for Public Service, a non profit main land organization in establishing a speakers
bureau of Hawaiian Federal employees. It would be available to speak at schools and
colleges about Federal jobs and employment.
The chair announced a Planning Meeting to be held in March regarding revising the
emergency dismissal plan. In other New Business Ralph Mason reported that the staff
had purchased fifty tickets for members, and our committees to attend the Zig Ziglar
seminar in the month of March.
The next meeting of the Policy Boare Committee will be held in early Aprl at the Fleet
and Industrial Supply Center, Pearl harbor. At that time the meeting will include a tour
of the Red Hill under ground fuel storage facility.
The meeting adjourned at 10:25 am by Keven Poepoe.
Respectfully submitted,

334 
Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings
Five Rules for Resolving Workplace Conflicts
”Conflict is inevitable in a team . . . in fact, to achieve synergistic solutions, a variety of 
ideas and approaches is needed. These are the ingredients for conflict,” says consul-
tant Susan Gerke.39 Although all workplaces experience conflict from time to time, some 
people think that workplace conflict is escalating.
Several factors may be tied to increasing problems at work. One factor is our increas-
ingly diverse workforce. Sharing ideas that stem from a variety of backgrounds, experi-
ences, and personalities may lead to better problem solving, but it can also lead to conflict. 
Another factor related to increased conflict is the trend toward participatory management. 
In the past only bosses had to resolve problems, but now more employees are making 
decisions and facing conflict. This is particularly true of teams. Working together harmoni-
ously involves a great deal of give and take, and conflict may result if some people feel 
that they are being taken advantage of.
Not all conflict is negative or dysfunctional. In fact, conflict can serve a number of 
healthy functions. In groups, conflict can increase involvement and cohesiveness. When 
people clash over differing views, they can become more committed to their purpose 
and to each other. Handled properly, conflict can provide an outlet for hostility and can 
increase group productivity.40 The famous piano manufacturer Theodore E. Steinway used 
the following metaphor to illustrate the benefit of conflict: “In one of our concert grand 
pianos, 243 taut strings exert a pull of 40,000 pounds on an iron frame. It is proof that out 
of great tension may come great harmony.”41
When problems arise in the workplace, it is important for everyone to recognize that 
conflict is a normal occurrence42 and that it should be confronted and resolved. Effective 
conflict resolution requires good listening skills, flexibility, and a willingness to change. 
Individuals must be willing to truly listen and seek to understand rather than immediately 
challenge the adversary. In many workplace conflicts, involving a third party to act as 
a mediator is necessary. Although problems vary greatly, the following five rules offer a 
good basic process for resolving conflicts.43
Five Rules for Resolving Conflict
 1. Set the scene. Make sure that good relationships are the first priority. Treat the parties 
involved calmly and try to build mutual respect. Be courteous and remain constructive. 
Use active listening skills—restate, paraphrase, and summarize—to ensure that you 
hear and understand other’s positions and perceptions.
 2. Keep people and problems separate. Agree on the problem. Recognize that often 
the other person is not just “being difficult.” Real and valid differences may lurk behind 
conflicts. Separate the problem from the person to debate real issues without damag-
ing working relationships. Often people perceive problems very differently. You will 
need to agree on the problem that you are trying to solve before you can find a mutually 
acceptable solution.
 3. Pay attention to the interests that are being presented. Try to get to the underlying 
interests, needs, and concerns. Explore hidden motivations and goals. Is work perfor-
mance affected? Listen with empathy, use “I” statements, and clarify feelings.
 4. Listen first, talk second. If you listen carefully, you will most likely understand why 
the person is adopting his or her position. To solve a problem effectively, you have to 
understand the other person’s position before defending your own.
 5. Explore options together. Brainstorm and negotiate solutions. Be open to the idea 
that a third position may exist, and that you can get to this idea jointly. To feel satisfied 
with the resolution, everyone needs to have fair input in generating solutions.
At this stage, you may better understand the position of the other and a mutually satis-
factory solution may be clear to all. However, sometimes you may uncover real and valid 
differences among the positions. This is where the win–win technique of negotiation can 
be helpful.
Communication Workshop: Career Skills

Chapter 11: Professionalism at Work: Business Etiquette, Ethics, Teamwork, and Meetings 
335
Career Application. As leader of your work team, you were recently confronted by an 
angry fellow team member. Linda, a story editor on your film production team, is upset 
because, for the third time in as many weeks, she was forced to give up part of her 
weekend for work. This time it was for a black-tie affair that everyone in the office tried to 
duck. Linda is particularly angry with Robert, who should have represented the team at 
this awards dinner. But he uttered the magic word: family. “Robert says he has plans with 
his family, and it is like a get-out-of-jail-free card,” Linda complains to you. “I don’t resent 
him or his devotion to his family. But I do resent it when my team constantly expects me to 
give up my personal time because I don’t have kids. That is my choice, and I don’t think 
I should be punished for it.”44
Your Task
Using the principles outlined here, work out a conflict resolution plan for Linda and Robert. 
Your instructor may wish to divide your class into three-person teams to role-play Linda, 
Robert, and the team leader. Add any details to make a realistic scenario.
What are the first steps in resolving this conflict?
What arguments might each side present?
What alternatives might be offered?
What do you think is the best solution?
How could the solution be implemented with the least friction?
•
•
•
•
•

336 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Organizations today are increasingly interested in hiring people with good presen­
tation skills. Why? The business world is changing. As you have seen in Chapter 
11, technical skills aren’t enough to guarantee success. You also need to be able to 
communicate ideas effectively in presentations to customers, vendors, members of 
your team, and management. Your presentations will probably be made to inform, 
influence, or motivate action.
Speaking skills are useful at every career stage. An AT&T and Stanford University 
study found that the No. 1 predictor of success and upward mobility is how much 
you enjoy public speaking and how effective you are at it.1 You might, for example, 
have to make a sales pitch before customers or speak to a professional gathering. 
You might need to describe your company’s expansion plans to your banker, or you 
might need to persuade management to support your proposed marketing strategy. 
Speaking skills rank very high on recruiters’ wish lists. As reported in an employer 
study, 70 percent of executives considered oral communication skills very important 
for high school graduates entering the job market; 82 percent for two­year college 
graduates, and a whopping 95 percent for four­year college graduates.2
This chapter prepares you to use speaking skills in making effective and profes­
sional oral presentations. You will learn what to do before, during, and after your 
presentation; and how to design effective visual aids and multimedia presentations.
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Discuss two important first steps in preparing effective oral presentations.
• Explain the major elements in organizing the content of a presentation, including 
the introduction, body, and conclusion.
• Identify techniques for gaining audience rapport, including (a) using effective 
imagery, (b) providing verbal signposts, and (c) sending appropriate nonverbal 
messages.
• Discuss types of visual aids, including multimedia slides, handouts, overhead 
transparencies, and speaker’s notes.
• Explain how to design an impressive multimedia presentation, including adapting 
text and color schemes; organizing, composing, and editing your slideshow; 
rehearsing your talk; and keeping audiences engaged.
• Specify delivery techniques for use before, during, and after a presentation.
Business 
Presentations
12
12
C H A P T e r  1 2
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / LAJOS RÉPÁSI

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
337
getting ready for an Oral Presentation
In getting ready for an oral presentation, you probably feel a great deal of anxiety. 
For many people the dread of speaking before a group is irrational and paralyzing. 
Executive coach Aileen Pincus writes that “fear of public speaking ranks No. 1 on 
the list of people’s worst fears, far ahead of even fear of death!”3
The good news is that for any presentation, you can reduce your fears and lay 
the foundation for a professional performance by focusing on five areas: prepara­
tion, organization, audience rapport, visual aids, and delivery.
Knowing Your Purpose
The most important part of your preparation is deciding your purpose. What do 
you want to accomplish? Do you want to sell a health care program to a prospec­
tive client? Do you want to persuade management to increase the marketing budget? 
Do you want to inform customer service reps of three important ways to prevent 
miscommunication? Do you want to give advice to graduating high school seniors? 
Whether your goal is to persuade, to inform, or to entertain, you must have a clear 
idea of where you are going. At the end of your presentation, what do you want 
your listeners to believe, remember, or do?
Mark Miller, a loan officer at First Fidelity Trust, faced such questions as he 
planned a talk for a class in small business management. (You can see the outline for 
his talk in Figure 12.3.) Mark’s former business professor had asked him to return 
to campus and give the class advice about borrowing money from banks in order 
to start new businesses. Because Mark knew so much about this topic, he found 
it difficult to extract a specific purpose statement for his presentation. After much 
thought he narrowed his purpose to this: To inform potential entrepreneurs about 
three important factors that loan officers consider before granting start-up loans to 
launch small businesses. His entire presentation focused on ensuring that the class 
members understood and remembered three principal ideas.
understanding Your Audience
A second key element in preparation is analyzing your audience, anticipating its reac­
tions, and making appropriate adaptations. Audiences may fall into four categories, 
as summarized in Figure 12.1. By anticipating your audience, you have a better idea 
of how to organize your presentation. A friendly audience, for example, will respond 
to humor and personal experiences. A neutral audience requires an even, controlled 
delivery style. The talk would probably be filled with facts, statistics, and expert opin­
ions. An uninterested audience that is forced to attend requires a brief presentation. 
Such an audience might respond best to humor, cartoons, colorful visuals, and startling 
statistics. A hostile audience demands a calm, controlled delivery style with objective 
data and expert opinion. Whatever type of audience you will have, remember that the 
most important thing to do is to plan your presentation so that it focuses on audience 
benefits. The members of your audience will want to know what’s in it for them.
Other elements, such as age, gender, education, experience, professional back­
ground, and audience size will affect your style and message content. Analyze the 
following questions to help you determine your organizational pattern, delivery 
style, and supporting material.
• How will this topic appeal to this audience?
• How can I relate this information to my listeners’ needs?
• How can I gain credibility and earn respect so that they accept my message?
• What would be most effective in making my point? Facts? Statistics? Personal 
experiences? Expert opinion? Humor? Cartoons? Graphic illustrations? Demon-
strations? Case histories? Analogies?
• What measures must I take to ensure that this audience remembers my main 
points?
Preparing for an oral pre-
sentation means identifying 
your purpose and under-
standing the audience.
Audience analysis issues 
include size, age, gender, 
experience, attitude, 
and expectations.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Presentation skills are a 
primary differentiator among 
you and your peers. Master 
your presentation skills, and 
become the master of your 
career options.

338 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Organizing Content for a Powerful impact
Once you have determined your purpose and analyzed the audience, you are ready 
to collect information and organize it logically. Good organization and conscious 
repetition are the two most powerful keys to audience comprehension and retention. 
In fact, many speech experts recommend the following admittedly repetitious, but 
effective, plan:
Step 1: Tell them what you are going to say.
Step 2: Say it.
Step 3: Tell them what you have just said.
In other words, repeat your main points in the introduction, body, and conclu­
sion of your presentation. Although it sounds deadly, this strategy works surpris­
ingly well. You will want to keep this strategy in mind as you construct the three 
parts of a presentation: introduction, body, and conclusion.
Capturing Attention in the introduction
How many times have you heard a speaker begin with, It is a pleasure to be 
here, I’m honored to be asked to speak, or I’m going to do my presentation 
on . . . . Boring openings such as these get speakers off to a dull start. Avoid 
such banalities by striving to accomplish three goals in the introduction to your 
presentation:
• Capture listeners’ attention and get them involved.
• Identify yourself and establish your credibility.
• Preview your main points.
Figure 12.1 Succeeding With Four Audience Types
Audience Members
Organizational Pattern
Delivery Style
Supporting Material
Friendly
They like you and your 
topic.
Use any pattern. Try something 
new. Involve the audience.
Be warm, pleasant, and open. 
Use lots of eye contact and 
smiles.
Include humor, personal 
examples, and experiences.
Neutral
They are calm, rational; 
their minds are made 
up, but they think they 
are objective.
Present both sides of the issue. 
Use pro/con or problem/solution 
patterns. Save time for audience 
questions.
Be controlled. Do nothing 
showy. Use confident, small 
gestures.
Use facts, statistics, expert 
opinion, and comparison and 
contrast. Avoid humor, personal 
stories, and flashy visuals.
Uninterested
They have short attention 
spans; they may be 
there against their will.
Be brief—no more than three 
points. Avoid topical and pro/con 
patterns that seem lengthy to the 
audience. 
Be dynamic and entertaining. 
Move around. Use large 
gestures.
Use humor, cartoons, colorful 
visuals, powerful quotations, 
and startling statistics.
Avoid darkening the room, standing motionless, passing out handouts, using boring visuals, 
or expecting the audience to participate.
Hostile
They want to take 
charge or to ridicule the 
speaker; they may be 
defensive, emotional.
Organize using a noncontrover-
sial pattern, such as a topical, 
chronological, or geographical 
strategy.
Be calm and controlled. 
Speak evenly and slowly.
Include objective data 
and expert opinion. Avoid 
anecdotes and humor.
Avoid a question-and-answer period, if possible; otherwise, use a moderator or accept only 
written questions.
good organization and 
intentional repetition help 
your audience understand 
and retain what you say.
Attention-grabbing openers 
include questions, startling 
facts, jokes, anecdotes, 
and quotations.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
339
If you are able to appeal to listeners and involve them in your presentation right 
from the start, you are more likely to hold their attention until the finish. Consider 
some of the same techniques that you used to open sales 
letters: a question, a startling fact, a joke, a story, or a quo­
tation. Some speakers achieve involvement by opening with 
a question or command that requires audience members to 
raise their hands or stand up. Ten techniques for effectively 
capturing and maintaining your audience’s attention are 
described in Figure 12.2.
To establish your credibility, you need to describe your 
position, knowledge, education, or experience—whatever 
qualifies you to speak. Try also to connect with your audi­
ence. Listeners are particularly drawn to speakers who 
reveal something of themselves and identify with them. A 
consultant addressing office workers might explain how he 
started as a temporary worker; a CEO might tell a funny 
story in which the joke is on herself. Use humor if you 
can pull it off (not everyone can); self­effacing humor may 
work best for you.
The opening scene of Al Gore’s film about global warming, An Inconvenient 
Truth, shows the former presidential candidate on stage, slide remote in hand, a 
giant screen behind him. Thousands of college students in the audience cheer and 
then wait in silence for the presentation to begin. Al Gore then introduces himself: 
“Hello, my name is Al Gore, and I used to be the next president of the United 
States.” The audience responds with roaring laughter and applause. The speaker has 
instantly won his viewers over. He has become likeable and funny by poking fun at 
himself for ultimately losing the presidency in 2000.4
After capturing attention, introducing yourself, and establishing your cred­
ibility, you will want to preview the main points of your topic, perhaps with a 
visual aid. You may wish to put off actually writing your introduction, however, 
until after you have organized the rest of the presentation and crystallized your 
principal ideas.
Take a look at Mark Miller’s introduction, shown in Figure 12.3, to see how he 
integrated all the elements necessary for a good opening.
“Always start your presentation with a joke, but 
be careful not to offend anyone! Don’t mention 
religion, politics, race, age, money, technology, 
men, women, children, plants, animals, food....”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Stories and punch lines pack 
power. Humor anchors key 
points. Humor makes your 
message memorable.
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
When the Detroit Symphony Orchestra (DSO) 
wanted to tout its acclaimed music program for 
disadvantaged youth, organizers hosted a concert 
by renowned cellist Yo-Yo Ma and opened the 
event with a surprise. As the lights dimmed and 
the audience grew silent, a 4-foot-tall robot named 
ASIMO took to the stage. The Honda-built humanoid 
promptly strutted to the conductor’s rostrum and led 
the orchestra in a beautiful rendition of “Impossible 
Dream,” thrilling the crowd while drawing attention 
to Honda’s support of the program. What attention-
grabbing techniques can professional speakers use 
to captivate audiences and gain their involvement?
© COURTESY OF AMERICAN HONDA MOTOR COMPANY, INC.

340 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Organizing the Body
The biggest problem with most oral presentations is a failure to focus on a few prin­
cipal ideas. Therefore, the body of your short presentation (20 or fewer minutes) 
should include a limited number of main points, say, two to four. Develop each 
main point with adequate, but not excessive, explanation and details. Too many 
details can obscure the main message, so keep your presentation simple and logical. 
Remember, listeners have no pages to review should they become confused. 
When Mark Miller began planning his presentation, he realized immediately 
that he could talk for hours on his topic. He also knew that listeners are not good 
at separating major and minor points. Therefore, instead of drowning his listeners 
in a sea of information, he sorted out a few main ideas. In the banking industry, 
loan officers generally ask the following three questions of each applicant for a 
small business loan: (a) Are you ready to “hit the ground running” in starting your 
business? (b) Have you done your homework? and (c) Have you made realistic 
projections of potential sales, cash flow, and equity investment? These questions 
would become his main points, but Mark wanted to streamline them further so that 
his audience would be sure to remember them. He capsulized the questions in three 
words: experience, preparation, and projection. As you can see in Figure 12.3, Mark 
prepared a sentence outline showing these three main ideas. Each is supported by 
examples and explanations.
The best oral presentations 
focus on a few key ideas.
Figure 12.2 Winning Techniques for Gaining and Keeping 
Audience Attention
Experienced speakers know how to capture the attention of an audience and how to maintain 
that attention during a presentation. You can give your presentations a boost by trying these 
proven techniques.
A promise. Begin with a promise that keeps the audience expectant (for example, By the 
end of this presentation, you will know how you can increase your sales by 50 percent! ).
Drama. Open by telling an emotionally moving story or by describing a serious problem 
that involves the audience. Throughout your talk include other dramatic elements, such as 
a long pause after a key statement. Change your vocal tone or pitch. Professionals use 
high-intensity emotions such as anger, joy, sadness, and excitement.
Eye contact. As you begin, command attention by surveying the entire audience to take 
in all listeners. Give yourself two to five seconds to linger on individuals to avoid fleeting, 
unconvincing eye contact. Don’t just sweep the room and the crowd.
Movement. Leave the lectern area whenever possible. Walk around the conference table 
or down the aisles of your audience. Try to move toward your audience, especially at the 
beginning and end of your talk.
Questions. Keep listeners active and involved with rhetorical questions. Ask for a show 
of hands to get each listener thinking. The response will also give you a quick gauge of 
audience attention.
Demonstrations. Include a member of the audience in a demonstration (for example, I’m 
going to show you exactly how to implement our four-step customer courtesy process, 
but I need a volunteer from the audience to help me ).
Samples/props. If you are promoting a product, consider using items to toss out to the 
audience or to award as prizes to volunteer participants. You can also pass around product 
samples or promotional literature. Be careful, though, to maintain control.
Visuals. Give your audience something to look at besides yourself. Use a variety of visual 
aids in a single session. Also consider writing the concerns expressed by your audience 
on a flipchart or on the board as you go along.
Dress. Enhance your credibility with your audience by dressing professionally for your 
presentation. Professional attire will help you look more competent and qualified, which will 
make your audience more likely to listen to you and take you seriously.
Self-interest. Review your entire presentation to ensure that it meets the critical 
What’s-in-it-for-me audience test. Remember that people are most interested in things 
that benefit them.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
341
How to organize and sequence main ideas may not be immediately obvious 
when you begin working on a presentation. The following patterns, which review 
and amplify the patterns discussed in Chapter 10 (Figure 10.2), provide many pos­
sible strategies and examples to help you organize a presentation:
• Chronology. Example: A presentation describing the history of a problem, orga­
nized from the first sign of trouble to the present.
• Geography/space. Example: A presentation about the changing diversity of the 
workforce, organized by regions in the country (East Coast, West Coast, and so 
forth).
• Topic/function/conventional grouping. Example: A report discussing mishan­
dled airline baggage, organized by names of airlines.
• Comparison/contrast (pro/con). Example: A presentation comparing organic 
farming methods with those of modern industrial farming.
Figure 12.3 Oral Presentation Outline
Organize your report by 
time, geography, function, 
importance, or some 
other method that is 
logical to the receiver.

342 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
• Journalism pattern (the six Ws). Example: A presentation describing how iden­
tity thieves can steal your money and ruin your good name. Organized by who, 
what, when, where, why, and how.
• Value/size. Example: A presentation describing fluctuations in housing costs, 
organized by prices of homes.
• Importance. Example: A report describing five reasons that a company should 
move its headquarters to a specific city, organized from the most important rea­
son to the least important.
• Problem/solution. Example: A company faces a problem such as declining sales. 
A solution such as reducing staff is offered.
• Simple/complex. Example: A report explaining genetic modification of plants such 
as corn, organized from simple seed production to complex gene introduction.
• Best case/worst case. Example: A report analyzing whether two companies 
should merge, organized by the best­case results (improved market share, profit­
ability, employee morale) opposed to the worst­case results (devalued stock, lost 
market share, employee malaise).
In the presentation shown in Figure 12.3, Mark arranged the main points by 
importance, placing the most important point last where it had maximum effect. 
When organizing any presentation, prepare a little more material than you think 
you will actually need. Savvy speakers always have something useful in reserve such 
as an extra handout, transparency, or idea—just in case they finish early. At the 
same time, most speakers go about 25 percent over the allotted time as opposed to 
their practice runs at home in front of the mirror. If your speaking time is limited, 
as it usually is in your classes, aim for less than the limit when rehearsing, so that 
you don’t take time away from the next presenters. 
Summarizing in the Conclusion
Nervous speakers often rush to wrap up their presentations because they can’t wait 
to flee the stage. But listeners will remember the conclusion more than any part of 
a speech. That is why you should spend some time to make it most effective. Strive 
to achieve three goals:
• Summarize the main themes of the presentation.
• Leave the audience with a specific and memorable “take­away.”
• Include a statement that allows you to leave the podium gracefully.
When it is time to end your presentation, be careful not to introduce any new 
material. Anything important should have been included in the body of your pre­
sentation. The conclusion is the time to summarize that information, not to bring 
up new details.
Some speakers end blandly with comments such as I guess that is about all I 
have to say or That’s it. Such lame statements show little enthusiasm and are not 
the culmination of the talk that listeners expect. Skilled speakers alert the audience 
that they are finishing. They use phrases such as, In conclusion, As I end this pre-
sentation, or, It is time for me to sum up. Then they proceed immediately to the 
conclusion. Audiences become justly irritated with a speaker who announces the 
conclusion but then talks on for ten more minutes.
A straightforward summary should review major points and focus on what 
you want the listeners to do, think, or remember. You might say, In bringing my 
presentation to a close, I will restate my major purpose . . . , or, In summary, my 
major purpose has been to . . . . In support of my purpose, I have presented three 
major points. They are (a) . . . , (b) . . . , and (c) . . . . Notice how Mark Miller, in the 
conclusion shown in Figure 12.3, summarized his three main points and provided 
a final focus to listeners.
If you are promoting a recommendation, you might end as follows: In order 
to increase our sales by at least 25 percent, I recommend that we retain Matrixx 
Marketing to conduct a telemarketing campaign beginning September 1 at a cost 
effective conclusions 
summarize main points 
and allow the speaker 
to exit gracefully.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
343
of X dollars. To complete this recommendation, I suggest that we (a) finance this 
campaign from our operations budget, (b) develop a persuasive message describ-
ing our new product, and (c) name Lisa Beck to oversee the project. Avoid using 
phrases such as I think, I believe, or I feel, which state the obvious and will weaken 
your presentation.
A conclusion is like a punch line and must be memorable. Think of it as the 
high point of your presentation, a valuable nugget of information to take away. 
The valuable nugget of information, or take­away, should tie in with the opening 
and present a forward­looking idea. Avoid merely rehashing, in the same words, 
what you said before. Instead, ensure that the audience will take away very specific 
information or benefits and a positive impression of you and your company. The 
so­called take­away is the value of the presentation to the audience and the benefit 
it believes to have received. The tension that you built in the early parts of the talk 
now culminates in the close.
In your conclusion you might want to use an anecdote, an inspiring quotation, 
or a statement that ties in the opener and offers a new insight. Whatever you choose, 
be sure to include a closing thought that indicates you are finished. For example, 
This concludes my presentation. After investigating many marketing firms, we are 
convinced that Matrixx is the best for our purposes. Your authorization of my rec-
ommendations will mark the beginning of a very successful campaign for our new 
product. Thank you.
Building rapport Like a Pro
Good speakers are adept at building audience rapport. They form a bond with 
the audience; they entertain as well as inform. They keep their audience involved 
throughout the presentation. How do they do it? From observations of successful 
and unsuccessful speakers, we learn that the good ones use a number of verbal and 
nonverbal techniques to connect with the audience. Some of their helpful techniques 
include providing effective imagery, supplying verbal signposts, and using body 
language strategically.
effective imagery
You will lose your audience quickly if your talk is filled with abstractions, generali­
ties, and dry facts. To enliven your presentation and enhance comprehension, try 
using some of the following techniques. However, beware of exaggeration or distor­
tion. Keep your imagery realistic and credible.
• Analogies. A comparison of similar traits between dissimilar things can be effective 
in explaining and drawing connections. For example, Product development is simi-
lar to the process of conceiving, carrying, and delivering a baby. Or, Downsizing 
or restructuring is similar to an overweight person undergoing a regimen of dieting, 
habit changing, and exercise.
• Metaphors. A comparison between otherwise dissimilar things without using the 
words like or as results in a metaphor. For example, Our competitor’s CEO is a 
snake when it comes to negotiating, or, My desk is a garbage dump.
• Similes. A comparison that includes the words like or as is a simile. For example, 
Our CEO was as angry as a bear with a sore foot when he read the government 
report. Or, The microwave in our lunch room sparked and smoked like Fourth 
of July fireworks.
• Personal anecdotes. Nothing connects you faster or better with your audience 
than a good personal story. In a talk about e­mail techniques, you could reveal 
your own blunders that became painful learning experiences. In a talk to poten­
tial investors, the founder of a new ethnic magazine might tell a story about 
growing up without positive ethnic role models.
use analogies, metaphors, 
similes, personal 
anecdotes, personalized 
statistics, and worst- 
and best-case scenarios 
instead of dry facts.

344 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
• Personalized statistics. Although often misused, statistics stay with people—
particularly when they relate directly to the audience. A speaker discussing job 
searching might say, Look around the room. Only three out of five graduates 
will find a job immediately after graduation. If possible, simplify and personalize 
facts. For example, The sales of Coca-Cola totaled 2 billion cases last year. That 
means that every man, woman, and child in the United States consumed six full 
cases of Coke.
• Worst- and best-case scenarios. Hearing the worst that could happen can be 
effective in driving home a point. For example, If we do nothing about our 
computer backup system now, it is just a matter of time before the entire system 
crashes and we lose all of our customer contact information. Can you imagine 
starting from scratch in building all of your customer files again? However, if we 
fix the system now, we can expand our customer files and actually increase sales 
at the same time.
Verbal Signposts
Speakers must remember that listeners, unlike readers of a report, cannot control 
the rate of presentation or flip back through pages to review main points. As a 
result, listeners get lost easily. Knowledgeable speakers help the audience recognize 
the organization and main points in an oral message with verbal signposts. They 
keep listeners on track by including helpful previews, summaries, and transitions, 
such as these:
• Previewing
The next segment of my talk presents three reasons for . . . .
Let’s now consider two causes of . . . .
• Summarizing
Let me review with you the major problems I have just discussed.
You see, then, that the most significant factors are . . . .
• Switching directions
Thus far we have talked solely about . . . ; now let’s move to . . . .
I have argued that . . . and . . . , but an alternate view holds that . . . .
You can further improve any oral presentation by including appropriate tran­
sitional expressions such as first, second, next, then, therefore, moreover, on the 
other hand, on the contrary, and in conclusion. These transitional expressions 
build coherence, lend emphasis, and tell listeners where you are headed. Notice in 
Mark Miller’s outline, in Figure 12.3 on page 341, the specific transitional elements 
designed to help listeners recognize each new principal point.
Nonverbal Messages
Although what you say is most important, the nonverbal messages you send can 
also have a powerful effect on how well your message is received. How you look, 
how you move, and how you speak can make or break your presentation. The fol­
lowing suggestions focus on nonverbal tips to ensure that your verbal message is 
well received.
• Look terrific! Like it or not, you will be judged by your appearance. For every­
thing but small in­house presentations, be sure to dress professionally. The rule 
of thumb is that you should dress at least as well as the best­dressed person in the 
audience. However, even if you know that your audience will be dressed casually, 
showing up in professional attire will help you build credibility. You will feel bet­
ter about yourself too!
• Animate your body. Be enthusiastic and let your body show it. Stand with good 
posture to show confidence. Emphasize ideas to enhance points about size, num­
ber, and direction. Use a variety of gestures, but don’t consciously plan them in 
advance.
Knowledgeable speakers 
provide verbal signposts 
to indicate when they are 
previewing, summarizing, 
or switching directions.
Your appearance, 
movement, and speech 
affect the success of 
your presentation.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
345
• Speak extemporaneously. Do not read from notes or a manuscript, but speak 
freely. Use your presentation slides to guide your talk. You will come across as 
more competent and enthusiastic if you are not glued to your notes or manu­
script. Use note cards or a paper outline only when presenting without an elec­
tronic slideshow.
• Punctuate your words. You can keep your audience interested by varying your 
tone, volume, pitch, and pace. Use pauses before and after important points. 
Allow the audience to take in your ideas.
• Use appropriate eye contact. Maintaining eye contact with your audience shows 
that you are confident and prepared. In addition, looking at audience members, 
rather than looking at your notes or your computer screen, helps them feel more 
involved.
• Get out from behind the podium. Avoid being planted behind the podium. 
Movement makes you look natural and comfortable and helps you connect more 
with your audience. You might pick a few places in the room to walk to. Even if 
you must stay close to your visual aids, make a point of leaving them occasionally 
so that the audience can see your whole body.
• Vary your facial expression. Begin with a smile, but change your expressions to 
correspond with the thoughts you are voicing. You can shake your head to show 
disagreement, roll your eyes to show disdain, look heavenward for guidance, 
or wrinkle your brow to show concern or dismay. To see how speakers convey 
meaning without words, mute the sound on your TV and watch the facial expres­
sions of a talk show personality, newscaster, or politician.
Whenever possible, beginning presenters should have an experienced speaker 
watch them and give them tips as they rehearse. Your instructor is an important 
coach who can provide invaluable feedback. In the absence of helpers, try to tape 
yourself and watch for your nonverbal behavior on camera.
Planning Visual Aids
Before you make a business presentation, consider this wise Chinese proverb: “Tell 
me, I forget. Show me, I remember. Involve me, I understand.” Your goals as a 
speaker are to make listeners understand, remember, and act on your ideas. To get 
them interested and involved, include effective visual aids. Some experts say that 
we acquire as much as 85 percent of all our knowledge visually. Therefore, an oral 
presentation that incorporates visual aids is far more likely to be understood and 
retained than one lacking visual enhancement.
Good visual aids have many purposes. They emphasize and clarify main points, 
thus improving comprehension and retention. They increase audience interest, and 
they make the presenter appear more professional, better prepared, and more per­
suasive. Furthermore, research shows that the use of visual aids may shorten meet­
ings.5 Visual aids are particularly helpful for inexperienced speakers because the 
audience concentrates on the aid rather than on the speaker. However, experienced 
speakers work hard at not being eclipsed or upstaged by their slideshows. Good 
visuals also serve to jog the memory of a speaker, thus improving self­confidence, 
poise, and delivery.
Types of Visual Aids
Fortunately for today’s speakers, many forms of visual media are available to 
enhance a presentation. When deciding what types of visual aids to include in your 
presentation, you should consider the cost, the ease of preparation, the degree of 
formality desired, and the potential effectiveness. Figure 12.4 describes the pros 
and cons of a number of visual aids and can guide you in selecting the best visual 
aid for any speaking occasion. Four popular visuals are multimedia slides, overhead 
transparencies, handouts, and speaker’s notes. 
Visual aids clarify points, 
improve comprehension, 
and aid retention.

346 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Multimedia Slides. With today’s excellent software programs—such as 
Microsoft PowerPoint, Apple Keynote, Lotus Freelance Graphics, Corel Presenta­
tions, and Adobe Presenter or Adobe Ovation—you can create dynamic, colorful 
presentations with your PC or Mac. The output from these programs is generally 
shown on a computer monitor, a TV monitor, an LCD (liquid crystal display) panel, 
or a screen. With a little expertise and advanced equipment, you can create a multi­
media presentation that includes stereo sound, videos, and hyperlinks, as described 
shortly in the discussion of multimedia presentations. Multimedia slides can also be 
uploaded to a Web site or broadcast live over the Internet.
Overhead Transparencies. Student and professional speakers alike still 
rely on the overhead projector for many reasons. Most meeting areas are equipped 
with projectors and screens. Moreover, acetate transparencies for the overhead are 
cheap, effortlessly prepared on a computer or copier, and simple to use. What’s 
more, because rooms need not be darkened, a speaker using transparencies can 
maintain eye contact with the audience. Many experienced speakers create overhead 
slides in addition to their electronic slideshows to have a backup plan in the case of 
malfunctioning presentation technology. A word of caution, though: stand to the 
side of the projector so that you don’t obstruct the audience’s view. Also make sure 
that the information on your transparencies can be seen by all audience members.
Figure 12.4 Pros and Cons of Visual Aid Options
Medium
Pros
Cons
Multimedia slides
 
Create professional appearance with 
many color, art, graphic, and font options. 
Easy to use and transport via removable 
storage media, Web download, or e-mail 
attachment. Inexpensive to update.
Present potential incompatibility issues. 
Require costly projection equipment and 
practice for smooth delivery. Tempt user 
to include razzle-dazzle features that 
may fail to add value.
Transparencies 
 
Give professional appearance with little 
practice. Easy to (a) prepare, (b) update 
and maintain, (c) locate reliable equipment, 
and (d) limit information shown at one time.
Appear to some as an outdated 
presentation method. Hold speaker 
captive to the machine. Provide poor 
reproduction of photos and some 
graphics.
Handouts or speaker’s notes
 
Encourage audience participation. Easy 
to maintain and update. Enhance recall 
because audience keeps reference 
material.
Increase risk of unauthorized duplication 
of speaker’s material. Can be difficult 
to transport. May cause speaker to lose 
audience’s attention.
Flipcharts or whiteboards
 
Provide inexpensive option available at 
most sites. Easy to (a) create, (b) modify 
or customize on the spot, (c) record 
comments from the audience, and (d) 
combine with more high-tech visuals in the 
same presentation.
Require graphics talent. Difficult for 
larger audiences to see. Prepared 
flipcharts are cumbersome to transport 
and easily worn with use.
Video
 
Gives an accurate representation of the 
content; strong indication of forethought 
and preparation.
Creates potential for compatibility issues 
related to computer video formats. 
Expensive to create and update.
Props
 
Offer a realistic reinforcement of message 
content. Increase audience participation 
with close observation.
Lead to extra work and expense in 
transporting and replacing worn objects. 
Limited use with larger audiences.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
347
Handouts. You can enhance and complement your presentations by distribut­
ing pictures, outlines, brochures, articles, charts, summaries, or other supplements. 
Speakers who use multimedia presentation software often prepare handouts that 
have images of their slides along with notes to distribute to viewers. Timing the dis­
tribution of any handout, though, is tricky. If given out during a presentation, your 
handouts tend to distract the audience, causing you to lose control. Therefore, you 
should discuss handouts during the presentation but delay distributing them until 
after you finish. If you plan to give your audience handouts at the end, tell them 
near the beginning of the presentation.
Speaker’s Notes. You have a variety of options for printing hard­copy ver­
sions of your presentation. You can, for example, make speaker’s notes that are a 
wonderful aid for practicing your talk. Beneath the miniature image of each slide 
is space for you to key in your supporting comments for the abbreviated material 
in your slides. You can also include up to nine miniature versions of your slides 
per printed page. These miniatures are handy if you want to preview your talk to a 
sponsoring organization or if you want to supply the audience with a summary of 
your presentation. However, resist the temptation to read from your notes during 
the slide presentation. It might turn off your audience and make you appear insecure 
and incompetent.
Designing an impressive Multimedia Presentation
Few businesspeople would want to live without the razzle­dazzle of colorful images 
to make their point. Electronic slideshows, PowerPoint in particular, have become a 
staple of business presentations. However, overuse or misuse may be the downside 
of the ever­present multimedia slideshow. Over the two decades of the software 
program’s existence, millions of poorly created and badly delivered PowerPoint 
presentations have tarnished PowerPoint’s reputation as an effective communica­
tion tool. Tools are helpful only when used properly.
Imagine those who sit through the more than 30 million PowerPoint presenta­
tions that Microsoft estimates are made each day.6 No doubt, many of them would 
say this “disease” has reached epidemic proportions. PowerPoint, say its detractors, 
dictates the way information is structured and presented. They say that the program 
is turning the nation’s businesspeople into a “mindless gaggle of bullet­pointed 
morons.”7 If you looked up death by PowerPoint in your favorite search engine, 
you would score about 120,000 hits. However, text­laden, amateurish slides that 
distract and bore audiences are the fault of their creator and not the software pro­
gram itself.
In the sections that follow, you will learn to create an impressive multimedia pre­
sentation using the most widely used presentation software program, PowerPoint. 
With any software program, of course, gaining expertise requires your investment 
To maintain control, 
distribute handouts after 
you ﬁ nish speaking.
Microsoft PowerPoint 
has become the business 
standard for presenting, 
defending, and selling ideas.
Critics say that PowerPoint 
is too rigid and produces 
“bullet-pointed morons.”
DILBERT: © SCOTT ADAMS / DIST. BY UNITED FEATURE SYNDICATE, INC.

348 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
of time and effort. You could take a course or you could teach yourself through an 
online tutorial such as that at http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/training/default
.aspx. Another way to master PowerPoint is to read a book such as Faithe Wempen’s 
PowerPoint 2007 Bible. If operated by a proficient slide preparer and a skillful pre­
senter, PowerPoint can add a distinct visual impact to any presentation.
Preparing a Visually Appealing PowerPoint Presentation
Some presenters prefer to create their slides first and then develop the narra­
tive around their slides. Others prepare their content first and then create the 
visual component. The risk associated with the first approach is that you may be 
tempted to spend too much time making your slides look good and not enough 
time preparing your content. Remember that great­looking slides never compen­
sate for thin content. In the following discussion, you will learn how to adjust the 
content and design of your slides to the situation or purpose and your audience. 
You will also receive detailed how­to instructions for composing a PowerPoint 
slideshow.
Analyzing the Situation and Purpose. Making the best content and 
design choices for your slides depends greatly on your analysis of the presentation 
situation and the purpose of your slideshow. Will your slides be used during a live 
presentation? Will they be part of a self­running presentation such as in a store kiosk? 
Will they be saved on a server so that those with Internet 
access can watch the presentation at their convenience? Will 
they be sent as a PowerPoint slideshow or a PDF document—
also sometimes called a deck—to a client instead of a hard­
copy report? Are you converting PowerPoint slideshows for 
viewing on video iPods or BlackBerry devices? 
If you are e­mailing the presentation or posting it online 
as a self­contained file, the slides will typically feature more 
text than if they were delivered orally. If, on the other hand, 
you are creating slides for a live presentation, your analysis 
will include answering questions such as these: Should I 
prepare speaker’s notes pages for my own use during the 
presentation? Should I distribute hard copies of my slides 
to my audience?
© STOCKBYTE / GETTY IMAGES
WOrKPLACe iN FOCuS
Although videoconferencing, Web seminars, 
and other virtual-meeting platforms can make 
business presentations more stimulating and 
cost-effective, failure to manage these tools may 
lead to embarrassing career blunders. In one 
instance, a business executive delivering a virtual 
presentation became flummoxed when the words 
“I love you teddy bear” appeared unexpectedly 
on the computer screen. The instant message, 
which a love interest had transmitted during the 
meeting, was visible to all attendees, earning 
the executive the nickname Teddy Bear. What 
precautions should communicators take to ensure 
the smooth delivery of multimedia presentations?
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Don’t blame PowerPoint for 
the millions of poor presenta-
tions that are delivered every 
day. The hundreds of millions 
of dollars wasted every year 
in boring meetings with 
mind-numbing presentations 
is the fault of professionals 
and organizations not 
wanting to put in the hard 
work it takes to craft a clear, 
compelling message.
“My presentation lacks power and it has no point. 
I assumed the software would take care of that!”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
349
Anticipating Your Audience. Think about how you can design your pre­
sentation to get the most positive response from your audience. Audiences respond, 
for example, to the colors you use. Slide backgrounds for business presentations 
should be in bold colors such as blue, green, and purple. Because the messages that 
colors convey can vary from culture to culture, colors must be chosen carefully. 
In the United States blue is the color of credibility, tranquility, conservatism, and 
trust. Therefore, it is the background color of choice for many business presenta­
tions. Green relates to interaction, growth, money, and stability. It can work well 
as a background or an accent color. Purple can be used as a background or accent 
color. It conveys spirituality, royalty, dreams, and humor.8 As for slide text, adjust 
the color so it provides high contrast and is readable. White or yellow, for example, 
usually works well on dark backgrounds.
Just as you anticipate audience members’ reactions to color, you can usually 
anticipate their reactions to special effects. Using animation and sound effects—
 flying objects, swirling text, clashing cymbals, and the like—only because they are 
available is not a good idea. Special effects distract your audience, drawing attention 
away from your main points. Add animation features only if doing so helps convey 
your message or adds interest to the content. When your audience members leave, 
they should be commenting on the ideas you conveyed—not the cool swivels and 
sound effects.
Adapting Text and Color Selections. Adapt the amount of text on 
your slide to how your audience will use the slides. As a general guideline, most 
graphic designers encourage the 6­x­6 rule: “Six bullets per screen, max; six words 
per bullet, max.”9 You may find, however, that breaking this rule is sometimes nec­
essary, particularly when your users will be viewing the presentation on their own 
with no speaker assistance.
Adjust the colors based on where the presentation will be given. Use light text 
on a dark background for presentations in darkened rooms. Use dark text on a 
light background for presentations in lighted rooms. Avoid using a dark font on a 
dark background, such as red text on a dark blue background. In the same way, 
avoid using a light font on a light background, such as white text on a pale blue 
background. Dark on dark or light on light results in low contrast, making the slides 
difficult to read.
Organizing Your Slides. When you prepare your slides, translate the major 
headings in your presentation outline into titles for slides. Then build bullet points 
using short phrases. In Chapter 4 you learned to improve readability by using graphic 
highlighting techniques, including bullets, numbers, and headings. In preparing a 
PowerPoint presentation, you will use those same techniques.
The slides you create to accompany your spoken ideas can be organized with 
visual elements that will help your audience understand and remember what you 
want to communicate. Let’s say, for example, that you have three points in your 
presentation. You can create a blueprint slide that captures the three points in a 
visually appealing way, and then you can use that slide several times throughout 
your presentation. Near the beginning, the blueprint slide provides an overview of 
your points. Later, it will provide transitions as you move from point to point. For 
transitions, you can direct your audience’s attention by highlighting the next point 
you will be talking about. Finally, the blueprint slide can be used near the end to 
provide a review of your key points.
Composing Your Slideshow. All presentation programs require you to 
(a) select or create a template that will serve as the background for your presen­
tation and (b) make each individual slide by selecting a layout that best conveys 
your message. You can use one of the templates provided with your presenta­
tion software program, download one from many Web sites, or create one from 
scratch.
Follow the 6-x-6 rule and 
select background and 
text colors based on the 
lightness of the room.

350 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Novice and even advanced users choose existing templates because they are 
designed by professionals who know how to combine harmonious colors, borders, 
bullet styles, and fonts for pleasing visual effects. If you prefer, you can alter exist­
ing templates so they better suit your needs. Adding a corporate logo, adjusting 
the color scheme to better match the colors used on your organization’s Web site, 
and selecting a different font are just some of the ways you can customize existing 
templates.
Be careful, though, of what one expert labels “visual clichés.”10 Overused tem­
plates and even clip art that ship with PowerPoint can weary viewers who have seen 
them repeatedly in presentations. Instead of using a standard template, search for 
PowerPoint template in your favorite search engine. You will see hundreds of template 
options available as free downloads. Unless your employer requires that presentations 
all have the same look, your audience will most likely appreciate fresh templates that 
complement the purpose of your presentation and provide visual variety.
Figure 12.5 illustrates some of the many layout and design options for creating 
your slides. You can alter layouts by repositioning, resizing, or changing the fonts 
for the placeholders in which your title, bulleted list, organization chart, video clip, 
photograph, or other elements appear. As Figure 12.5 shows, you can experiment 
with graphic elements that will enhance your presentation by making your slides 
visually more appealing and memorable. Try to avoid long, boring bulleted lists.
If you look more closely at Figure 12.5, you will notice that the bulleted items on 
the first slide are not parallel. The slide looks as if the author had been brainstorm­
ing or freewriting a first draft. The second and sixth bullet points express the same 
thought, that shopping online is convenient and easy for customers. Some bullet 
points are too long. As opposed to that, the bullets on the improved slide are very 
short, well within the 6­x­6 rule, although they are complete sentences. The photo­
graph in the revised slide adds interest and illustrates the point. You may use stock 
photos that you can download from the Web for personal or school use without 
penalty, or consider taking your own pictures if you own a digital camera.
Figure 12.6 shows how to add variety and pizzazz to your slides. Notice that the 
same information that appeared as bullet points in Figure 12.5 now appears as excit­
ing spokes radiating from the central idea: Why you should sell online. This spoke 
Overused templates and clip 
art produce “visual clichés” 
that bore audiences.
Figure 12.5 Revising and Enhancing Slides for Greater Impact
Before Revision
After Revision
Why You Should Sell Online
Why You Should Sell Online
■■Grow your business 
Grow your business 
globally.
globally.
■■Provide convenience
Provide convenience
for customers.
for customers.
■■Conduct business 24/7.
Conduct business 24/7.
■■Save on rent and hiring.
Save on rent and hiring.
■■Provide policies to 
Provide policies to 
reduce inquiries.
reduce inquiries.
Reasons for Selling Online
Reasons for Selling Online
■
■
■
■
■
■
■Your online business can grow globally.
Your online business can grow globally.
■Customer convenience.
Customer convenience.
■Conduct business 24/7.
Conduct business 24/7.
■No need for renting a retail store or 
No need for renting a retail store or 
hiring employees.
hiring employees.
■Reduce inquiries by providing policies 
Reduce inquiries by providing policies 
and a privacy statement.
and a privacy statement.
■Customers can buy quickly and easily.
Customers can buy quickly and easily.
The slide on the left contains bullet points that are not parallel and that overlap meaning. The second and sixth bullet points 
say the same thing. Moreover, some bullet points are too long. After revision, the slide on the right has a more convincing title 
illustrating the “you” view. The bullet points are shorter, and each begins with a verb for parallelism. The photo adds interest. 
Note that the revised slide features a more lively and readable color scheme, starting with the title.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
351
diagram is just one of six common diagram possibilities available in PowerPoint’s 
Diagram Gallery. You can also animate each item in the diagram. Occasionally, try 
to convert pure text and bullet points to diagrams, charts, and other images to add 
punch to your slideshow. You will keep your audiences interested and help them 
retain the information you are presenting.
Numeric information is more easily grasped in charts or graphs than in a listing 
of numbers. Moreover, in most programs, you can animate your graphs and charts. 
Say, for instance, you have four columns in your bar chart. You can control the entry 
of each column by determining in what order and how each column appears on the 
screen. The goal is to use animation strategically to introduce elements of the presen­
tation as they unfold in your spoken remarks. Figure 12.7 shows how a chart can be 
used to illustrate a concept discussed in the presentation about selling online.
During this composition stage many users fall into the trap of excessive format­
ting and programming. They fritter away precious time fine­tuning their slides and 
don’t spend enough time on what they are going to say and how they will say it. 
To avoid this trap, set a limit for how much time you will spend making your slides 
visually appealing. Your time limit will be based on how many “bells and whistles” 
(a) your audience expects and (b) your content requires to make it understandable. 
Remember that not every point nor every thought requires a visual. In fact, it is smart 
to switch off the slides occasionally and direct the focus to yourself. Darkening the 
screen while you discuss a point, tell a story, give an example, or involve the audience 
will add variety to your presentation.
Create a slide only if the slide accomplishes at least one of the following 
purposes:
• Generates interest in what you are saying and helps the audience follow your 
ideas
• Highlights points you want your audience to remember
• Introduces or reviews your key points
• Provides a transition from one major point to the next
• Illustrates and simplifies complex ideas
In a later section of this chapter you will find very specific steps to follow as you 
create your presentation.
Figure 12.6 Converting a Bulleted Slide into an Animated Diagram
Revised for Animation
Diagram Gallery
Provide
convenience
for
customers.
Provide
convenience
for
customers.
Save on 
rent and 
hiring.
Save on 
rent and 
hiring.
Provide
policies to 
reduce
inquiries.
Provide
policies to 
reduce
inquiries.
Conduct
business
24/7.
Conduct
business
24/7.
Grow your 
business
globally.
Grow your 
business
globally.
Why you 
should
sell online
Why you 
should
sell online
The same content that appears in the Figure 12.5 slides takes on a totally different look when arranged as spokes radiating 
from a central idea. When presenting this slide, you can animate each item and control its appearance, further enlivening your 
presentation. PowerPoint provides a Diagram Gallery with six choices for arranging information.
use animation to introduce 
elements of a presentation 
as they unfold in your 
spoken remarks.

352 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
revising, Proofreading, and evaluating Your Slideshow. Use 
PowerPoint’s Slide Sorter View to rearrange, insert, and delete slides during the 
revision process. This is the time when you will focus on making your presentation 
as clear and concise as possible. If you are listing items, be sure that all items use 
parallel grammatical form. Figure 12.8 shows how to revise a slide to improve it 
for conciseness, parallelism, and other features. Study the design tips described in 
Figure 12.7 Using a Bar Chart (Column Chart) to Illustrate a Concept
Growth in Online Sales
Growth in Online Sales
This slide was created using 
PowerPoint’s Insert, Chart 
function. The information 
presented here is more exciting 
and easier to comprehend than 
if it had been presented in a 
bulleted list.
Figure 12.8 Designing More Effective Slides
Before Revision
After Revision
1.
STRIVE TO HAVE NO MORE THAN SIX
  BULLETS PER SLIDE AND NO MORE THAN
  SIX WORDS PER BULLET.
2.
IF YOU USE UPPER- AND LOWERCASE TYPE,
  IT IS EASIER TO READ
3.
IT IS BETTER TO USE PHRASES RATHER
  THAN SENTENCES.
4.
USING A SIMPLE, HIGH-CONTRAST TYPE
  FACE IS EASIER TO READ AND DOES NOT
  DETRACT FROM YOUR PRESENTATION
5.
BE CONSISTENT IN YOUR SPACING,
  CAPITALIZATION, AND PUNCTUATION.
DESIGN TIPS FOR SLIDE TEXT
Limit: 6 bullets per slide
Limit: 6 words per bullet
Upper- and lowercase type
Concise phrases, not sentences
Simple type face
Consistent spacing, capitalization, and
punctuation
The slide on the left is difficult to read and understand because it violates many slide-making rules. How many violations can you 
detect? The slide on the right illustrates an improved version of the same information. Which slide do you think viewers would 
rather read?

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
353 
the first slide and determine which suggestions were not followed. Then compare it 
with the revised slide.
Notice that both slides in Figure 12.8 feature a blue background. This calming 
color is the color of choice for most business presentations. However, the back­
ground swirls on the first slide look distracting. In addition, the uppercase white 
font is hard to read and contributes to making the image look busy. Inserting a 
transparent overlay and choosing a dark font to mute the distracting waves create 
a cleaner­looking slide.
As you are revising, check carefully to find spelling, grammar, punctuation, 
and other errors. Use the PowerPoint spell check, but don’t rely on it without 
careful proofing, preferably from a printed copy of the slideshow. Nothing is as 
embarrassing as projecting errors on a huge screen in front of your audience. Also 
check for consistency in how you capitalize and punctuate points throughout the 
presentation.
Finally, critically evaluate your slideshow. Consider whether you have done all 
you can to use the tools PowerPoint provides to communicate your message in a 
visually appealing way. In addition, test your slides on the equipment and in the 
room you will be using during your presentation. Do the colors you selected work in 
this new setting? Are the font styles and sizes readable from the back of the room? 
Figure 12.9 shows examples of slides that incorporate what you have learned in 
this discussion.
Figure 12.9 PowerPoint Slides That Summarize and Illustrate Multimedia Presentations
 WRITING
Researching
Organizing
Composing
Create Your Presentation
Create Your Presentation
Following the
Following the
Writing Process
Writing Process
 PREWRITING
Analyzing
Anticipating
Adapting
 REVISING
Revising
Proofreading
Evaluating
Rearrange, insert,
and delete slides.
Correct errors before
they are magnified on
screen.
Evaluate content.
REVISING
Revising
Proofreading
Evaluating
Address your audience, not your slides.
Paraphrase, don’t read, your slides.
Keep room lights fairly bright.
Strike B to toggle image off.
Supplement with other visual
aids.
During Your
Multimedia Presentation
Illustrate content in
fresh ways.
Use blueprint slides
to help audience
follow your
presentation.
Follow six steps in
creating your
presentation.
WRITING
Researching
Organizing
Composing
AutoContent Wizard Guides
Content Development
Create visual interest.
Highlight memorable points.
Introduce or review key points.
Provide transition.
Illustrate idea.
Simplify complex thought.
Each Slide Must
Serve a Purpose
Before Delivering Your
Multimedia Presentation
Set up and test your
equipment.
Bring backups in
case of equipment
failure.
How will your
presentation be
used?
What colors work
best?
What animations?
How much text?
PREWRITING
Analyzing
Anticipating
Adapting
Start
with the
text.
Select
background
and fonts.
Add
special
effects.
Create
graphics.
Choose
images.
Include
interactive
elements.
Start
with the
text.
Select
background
and fonts.
Add
special
effects.
Create
graphics.
Choose
images.
Include
interactive
elements.
Create a
Multimedia
Presentation

354 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
The dark purple background and the green and blue hues in the slideshow shown 
in Figure 12.9 are standard choices for many business presentations. With an unob­
trusive dark background, white fonts are a good option for maximum contrast and, 
hence, readability. The creator of the presentation varied the slide design to break 
the monotony of bulleted or numbered lists. Images and animated diagrams add 
interest and zing to the slides.
using PowerPoint effectively With Your Audience
Many promising presentations have been sabotaged by technology glitches or by 
the presenter’s unfamiliarity with the equipment. Fabulous slides are of value only 
if you can manage the technology expertly. Apple CEO Steve Jobs is famous for his 
ability to wow his audiences during his keynote addresses. A BusinessWeek cover 
story described his approach: “Jobs unveils Apple’s latest products as if he were a 
particularly hip and plugged­in friend showing off inventions in your living room. 
Truth is, the sense of informality comes only after grueling hours of practice.”11 At 
one of his recent Macworld rehearsals, for example, he spent more than four hours 
on stage practicing and reviewing every technical and performance aspect of his 
product launch.
Practicing and Preparing
Allow plenty of time before your presentation to set up and test your equipment.12
Confirm that the places you plan to stand are not in the line of the projected image. 
Audience members don’t appreciate having part of the slide displayed on your body. 
Make sure that all video or Web links are working and that you know how to 
operate all features the first time you try. No matter how much time you put into 
preshow setup and testing, you still have no guarantee that all will go smoothly. 
Therefore, you should always bring backups of your presentation. Overhead trans­
parencies or handouts of your presentation provide good substitutes. Transferring 
your presentation to a CD or a USB flash drive that could run from any available 
notebook might prove useful as well.
Keeping Your Audience engaged
In addition to using the technology to enhance and enrich your message, here 
are additional tips for performing like a professional and keeping the audience 
engaged:
• Know your material, so you are free to look at your audience and to gaze at the 
screen, not your practice notes. Maintain genuine eye contact to connect with 
individuals in the room.
• As you show new elements on a slide, allow the audience time to absorb the 
information. Then paraphrase and elaborate on what the listeners have seen. 
Don’t insult your audience’s intelligence by reading verbatim from a slide.
• Leave the lights as bright as you can. Make sure the audience can see your face 
and eyes.
• Use a radio remote control (not infrared) so you can move freely rather than 
remain tethered to your computer. Radio remotes will allow you to be up to 50 
feet away from your laptop.
• Maintain a connection with the audience by using a laser pointer to highlight 
slide items to discuss. Be aware, however, that a dancing laser point in a shaky 
hand may make you appear nervous. Steady your hand.
• Don’t leave a slide on the screen when you are no longer discussing it. In Slide 
Show, View Show mode, strike B on the keyboard to turn on or off the screen 
image by blackening it. Pressing W will turn the screen white.
Some presenters allow their PowerPoint slides to steal their thunder. One expert 
urges speakers to “use their PowerPresence in preference to their PowerPoint.”13
Although multimedia presentations supply terrific sizzle, they cannot replace the 
steak. In developing a presentation, don’t expect your slides to carry the show. You 
A fabulous slideshow can be 
ruined if you are unfamiliar 
with the equipment.
To keep your audience 
interested, maintain eye 
contact, don’t read from 
your slides, use a radio 
remote and a laser pointer, 
and turn off an image when 
it has been discussed.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
355
can avoid being upstaged by not relying totally on your slides. Help the audience 
visualize your points by using other techniques. For example, drawing a diagram 
on a whiteboard or flipchart can be more engaging than showing slide after slide 
of static drawings. Demonstrating or displaying real objects or props is a welcome 
relief from slides. Remember that slides should be used only to help your audience 
understand the message and to add interest. You are still the main attraction!
eight Steps to Making a Powerful 
Multimedia Presentation
We have now discussed many suggestions for making effective PowerPoint presenta­
tions, but you may still be wondering how to put it all together. Here is a step­by­
step process for creating a powerful multimedia presentation:
 1. Start with the text. The text is the foundation of your presentation. Express 
your ideas using words that are clear, concise, and understandable. Once the 
entire content of your presentation is in place, you are ready to begin adding 
color and all the other elements that will make your slides visually appealing.
 2. Select background and fonts. Select a template that will provide consistent 
font styles, font sizes, and a background for your slides. You can create your 
own template or use one included with PowerPoint. You can also download 
free templates or pay for templates from many online sites. You can’t go wrong 
selecting a basic template design with an easy­to­read font, such as Times New 
Roman or Arial. As a general rule, use no more than two font styles in your 
presentation. The point size should be between 24 and 36. Title fonts should be 
larger than text font. The more you use PowerPoint and find out what works 
and doesn’t work, the more you can experiment with bolder, more innovative 
background and font options that effectively convey your message.
 3. Choose images that help communicate your message. Images, such as clip art, 
photographs, and maps, should complement the text. Never use an image that 
is not immediately relevant. Microsoft Office Online is accessed in PowerPoint 
and contains thousands of clip art images and photographs, most of which are 
in the public domain and require no copyright permissions. Before using images 
from other sources, determine whether permission from the copyright holder is 
required. Bear in mind that some people consider clip art amateurish, so photo­
graphs are usually preferable. In addition, clip art is available to any user, so it 
tends to become stale fast.
 4. Create graphics. PowerPoint includes a variety of tools to help you simplify 
complex information or to transform a boring bulleted list into a visually 
appealing graphic. You can use PowerPoint’s Draw and AutoShapes tools to 
create a time line or a flowchart. The Diagram Gallery will help you create 
an organization chart or a cycle, radial, pyramid, Venn, or target diagram as 
well as over a dozen chart types including line, pie, and bar charts. All of these 
tools require practice before you can create effective graphics. Remember that 
graphics should be easy to understand without overloading your audience with 
unnecessary details or too much text. In fact, consider putting such details in 
handouts rather than cluttering your slides with them.
 5. Add special effects. To keep your audience focused on what you are discuss­
ing, use PowerPoint’s Custom Animation feature to control when objects or text 
appear on the screen. Animate points in a bulleted list to appear one at a time, 
for example, or the boxes in a radial diagram to appear as each is discussed. Keep 
in mind that the first thing your audience sees on every slide should describe the 
slide’s content. With motion paths and other animation options, you can move 
objects to various positions on the slide; or to minimize clutter, you can dim or 
remove them once they have served their purpose.
In addition, as you move from slide to slide in a presentation, you can select 
transition effects, such as wipe down. The animation and transition options 
range from subtle to flashy—choose them with care so that the visual delivery of 
For a powerful presentation, 
ﬁ rst write the text, and 
then work on templates, 
font styles, and colors.
Learn to simplify complex 
information in visually 
appealing graphics.

356 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
your presentation doesn’t distract from the content of your message. An option 
at this step is to purchase a PowerPoint add­in product, such as Ovation, that 
can add professional­looking special effects to your presentation with very little 
effort.14
 6. Create hyperlinks to approximate the Web browsing experience. Make your 
presentation more interactive and intriguing by connecting your PowerPoint pre­
sentation, via hyperlinks, to other sources that provide content that will enhance 
your presentation. You can hyperlink to (a) other slides within the presentation 
or in other PowerPoint files; (b) other programs that will open a second window 
that displays items such as spreadsheets, documents or videos; and (c) if you have 
an Internet connection, Web sites.
Once you have finished discussing the hyperlinked source or watching the 
video that opened in a second window, close that window and your hyper­
linked PowerPoint slide is in view. In this way, you can break up the monotony 
of typical linear PowerPoint presentations. Instead, your hyperlinked show 
approximates the viewing experience of a Web user who enters a site through a 
main page or portal and then navigates at will to reach second­ and third­level 
pages.
 7. Engage your audience by asking for interaction. When audience response 
and feedback are needed, interactive tools are useful. Audience response sys­
tems may be familiar to you from game shows, but they are also used for 
surveys and opinion polls, group decision making, voting, quizzes and tests, 
and many other applications. To interact with your audience, present polling 
questions. Audience members submit their individual or team responses using 
handheld devices read by a PowerPoint add­in program. The audience imme­
diately sees a bar chart that displays the response results. If you would like 
to know more about audience response systems, visit one of the many Web 
sites devoted to them, for example, http://www.audienceresponse.com or 
http://www.turningtechnologies.com.
 8. Move your presentation to the Internet. You have a range of alternatives, from 
simple to complex, for moving your multimedia presentation to the Internet 
or your company’s intranet. The simplest option is posting your slides online 
for others to access. Even if you are giving a face­to­face presentation, attend­
ees appreciate these electronic handouts because they don’t have to lug them 
home. The most complex option for moving your multimedia presentation to 
the Internet involves a Web conference or broadcast.
Web presentations with slides, narration, and speaker control have emerged 
as a way for anyone who has access to the Internet to attend your presenta­
tion without leaving the office. For example, you could initiate a meeting via a 
conference call, narrate using a telephone, and have participants see your slides 
from the browsers on their computers. If you prefer, you could skip the nar­
ration and provide a prerecorded presentation. Web­based presentations have 
many applications, including providing access to updated training or sales data 
whenever needed.15
Some businesses convert their PowerPoint presentations to PDF documents 
or send PowerPoint shows (file extension *.PPS), which open directly in Slide 
Show View, ready to run. Both types of documents are highly suitable for 
e­mailing. For one thing, they start immediately, can’t be easily changed, and 
typically result in smaller, less memory­hogging files.
Polishing Your Delivery and Following up
Once you have organized your presentation and prepared visuals, you are ready to 
practice delivering it. You will feel more confident and appear more professional if 
you know more about various delivery methods and techniques to use before, dur­
ing, and after your presentation.
internet options for slide 
presentations range 
from posting slides 
online to conducting 
a live Web conference 
with slides, narration, 
and speaker control.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
357
Delivery Method
Inexperienced speakers often feel that they must memorize an entire presentation 
to be effective. Unless you are an experienced performer, however, you will sound 
wooden and unnatural. What’s more, forgetting your place can be disastrous! That 
is why we don’t recommend memorizing an entire oral presentation. However, 
memorizing significant parts—the introduction, the conclusion, and perhaps a 
meaningful quotation—can be dramatic and impressive.
If memorizing your business presentation won’t work, is reading from a manu­
script the best plan? Definitely not! Reading to an audience is boring and ineffec­
tive. Because reading suggests that you don’t know your topic well, the audience 
loses confidence in your expertise. Reading also prevents you from maintaining 
eye contact. You can’t see audience reactions; consequently, you can’t benefit from 
feedback.
Neither memorizing nor reading creates very convincing business presentations. 
The best plan, by far, is to present extemporaneously, especially when you are 
displaying an electronic slideshow such as PowerPoint. Extemporaneous delivery 
means speaking freely, generally without notes, after preparation and rehearsing. 
It means that in your talk you comment on the electronic slideshow you have pre­
pared and rehearsed several times. Remember, PowerPoint and other presentation 
software have replaced traditional outlines and notes. Reading notes or a manu­
script in addition to PowerPoint slides will damage 
your credibility.
If you give a talk without PowerPoint, however, 
you may use note cards or an outline containing key 
sentences and major ideas. In any case, beware of 
reading from a script. By preparing and then prac­
ticing with your notes, you can talk to your audi­
ence in a conversational manner. Your notes should 
be neither entire paragraphs nor single words. 
Instead, they should contain a complete sentence or 
two to introduce each major idea. Below the topic 
sentence(s), outline subpoints and illustrations. 
Note cards will keep you on track and prompt your 
memory, but only if you have rehearsed the presen­
tation thoroughly.
Combating Stage Fright
Nearly everyone experiences some degree of stage fright when speaking before a 
group. “If you hear someone say he or she isn’t nervous before a speech, you are 
talking either to a liar or a very boring speaker,” says corporate speech consultant 
Dianna Booher.16 Being afraid is quite natural and results from actual physiologi­
cal changes occurring in your body. Faced with a frightening situation, your body 
responds with the fight­or­flight response, discussed more fully in Figure 12.10. You 
can learn to control and reduce stage fright, as well as to incorporate techniques for 
effective speaking, by using the following strategies and techniques before, during, 
and after your presentation.
Before Your Presentation
Speaking in front of a group will become less daunting if you allow for adequate 
preparation, sufficient practice, and rehearsals. Interacting with the audience and 
limiting surprises such as malfunctioning equipment will also add to your peace of 
mind. Review the following tips for a smooth start:
• Prepare thoroughly. One of the most effective strategies for reducing stage fright 
is knowing your subject thoroughly. Research your topic diligently and prepare 
a careful sentence outline. Those who try to “wing it” usually suffer the worst 
butterflies—and make the worst presentations.
extemporaneous delivery 
results in more convincing 
presentations than those 
that are memorized or read.
Stage fright is both natural 
and controllable.
Thorough preparation, 
extensive rehearsal, and 
stress-reduction techniques 
can lessen stage fright.
“Fear of public speaking is quite common. If dressing up as 
Speaker Man makes you feel more confident, then so be it.”
© SRANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

358 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
• Rehearse repeatedly. When you rehearse, practice your entire presentation, not 
just the first half. In PowerPoint you may print out speaker’s notes, an outline, 
or a handout featuring miniature slides, which are excellent for practice. If you 
don’t use an electronic slideshow, place your outline sentences on separate note 
cards. You may also wish to include transitional sentences to help you move to 
the next topic as you practice. Rehearse alone or before friends and family. Also 
try an audio or video recording so that you can evaluate your effectiveness.
• Time yourself. Most audiences tend to get restless during longer talks. Therefore, 
try to complete your presentation in no more than 20 minutes. If you have a time 
limit, don’t go over it. Set a simple kitchen timer during your rehearsal to keep 
track of time. Better yet, PowerPoint offers a function, Rehearse Timings, that 
can measure the length of your talk as you practice.
• Dress professionally. Dressing professionally for a presentation will make you 
look more credible to your audience. You will also feel more confident.
• Request a lectern. Every beginning speaker needs the security of a high desk or lec­
tern from which to deliver a presentation. It serves as a note holder and a convenient 
place to rest wandering hands and arms. Don’t, however, lean on it. Eventually you 
will want to interact with the audience without any physical barriers.
• Check the room. If you are using a computer, a projector, or sound equipment, 
be certain they are operational. Before you start, check electrical outlets and the 
position of the viewing screen. Ensure that the seating arrangement is appropriate 
to your needs.
• Greet members of the audience. Try to make contact with a few members of the 
audience when you enter the room, while you are waiting to be introduced, or 
when you walk to the podium. Your body language should convey friendliness, 
confidence, and enjoyment.
• Practice stress reduction. If you feel tension and fear while you are waiting your 
turn to speak, use stress­reduction techniques, such as deep breathing. Additional 
techniques to help you conquer stage fright are presented in Figure 12.10.
Figure 12.10 Techniques for Conquering Stage Fright
Ever get nervous before giving a speech? Everyone does! And it is not all in your head, either. When you face something threaten-
ing or challenging, your body reacts in what psychologists call the fight-or-flight response. This physical reflex provides your body 
with increased energy to deal with threatening situations. It also creates those sensations—dry mouth, sweaty hands, increased 
heartbeat, and stomach butterflies—that we associate with stage fright. The fight-or-flight response arouses your body for action—in 
this case, making a presentation.
Because everyone feels some form of apprehension before speaking, it is impossible to eliminate the physiological symptoms 
altogether. However, you can reduce their effects with the following techniques:
Breathe deeply. Use deep breathing to ease your fight-or-
flight symptoms. Inhale to a count of ten, hold this breath 
to a count of ten, and exhale to a count of ten. Concentrate 
on your counting and your breathing; both activities reduce 
your stress.
Convert your fear. Don’t view your sweaty palms and dry 
mouth as evidence of fear. Interpret them as symptoms of 
exuberance, excitement, and enthusiasm to share your ideas.
Know your topic and come prepared. Feel confident 
about your topic. Select a topic that you know well and that 
is relevant to your audience. Test your equipment and arrive 
with time to spare.
Use positive self-talk. Remind yourself that you know  
your topic and are prepared. Tell yourself that the audience 
is on your side—because it is! Moreover, most speakers  
appear to be more confident than they feel. Make this 
apparent confidence work for you.
•
•
•
•
Take a sip of water. Drink some water to alleviate your  
dry mouth and constricted voice box, especially if you are 
talking for more than 15 minutes.
Shift the spotlight to your visuals. At least some of the 
time the audience will be focusing on your slides, transparen-
cies, handouts, or whatever you have prepared—and not 
totally on you.
Ignore any stumbles. Don’t apologize or confess your 
nervousness. If you keep going, the audience will forget any 
mistakes quickly.
Don’t admit you are nervous. Never tell your audience 
that you are nervous. They will probably never notice!
Feel proud when you finish. You will be surprised at 
how good you feel when you finish. Take pride in what you 
have accomplished, and your audience will reward you with 
applause and congratulations. Your body, of course, will call 
off the fight-or-flight response and return to normal!
•
•
•
•
•

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
359
During Your Presentation
Now that you have rehearsed and completed your preparation, you are ready to 
meet your audience. By following these suggestions during your presentation, you 
can apply techniques used by professionals to win over the audience, feel comfort­
able, and look polished:
• Begin with a pause. When you first approach the audience, take a moment to 
adjust your notes and make yourself comfortable. Establish your control of the 
situation.
• Present your first sentence from memory. By memorizing your opening, you 
can immediately establish rapport with the audience through eye contact. You 
will also sound confident and knowledgeable.
• Maintain eye contact. If the size of the audience overwhelms you, pick out two 
individuals on the right and two on the left. Talk directly to these people. Don’t 
ignore listeners in the back of the room. If you are presenting to a smaller audi­
ence, try to make eye contact with everyone in the room at least once during your 
presentation.
• Control your voice and vocabulary. This means speaking in moderated tones 
but loudly enough to be heard. Eliminate verbal static, such as ah, er, like, you 
know, and um. Silence is preferable to meaningless 
fillers when you are thinking of your next idea.
• Skip the apologies. Don’t begin with a weak open­
ing, such as I will not take much time. I know you 
are busy. Or: I know you have heard this before, 
but we need to review it anyway. Or: I had trou-
ble with my computer and the slides, so bear with 
me. Unless the issue is blatant, such as not being 
able to load the presentation or make the projec­
tor work, apologies are counterproductive. Focus 
on your presentation. Dynamic speakers never say 
they are sorry.
• Incorporate pauses when appropriate. Silence 
can be effective especially when you are transi­
tioning from one point to another. Pauses are also 
effective in giving the audience time to absorb an 
important point.
• Show enthusiasm. If you are not excited about your topic, how can you expect 
your audience to be? Show passion for your topic through your tone, facial 
expressions, and gestures. Adding variety to your voice also helps to keep your 
audience alert and interested.
• Put the brakes on. Many novice speakers talk too rapidly, displaying their ner­
vousness and making it difficult for audience members to understand their ideas. 
Slow down and listen to what you are saying.
• Move naturally. If you have a lectern, don’t remain glued to it. Move about casu­
ally and naturally. Avoid fidgeting with your clothing, your hair, or items in your 
pockets. Do not roll up your sleeves or put your hands in your pockets. Learn to 
use your body to express a point.
• Use visual aids effectively. Discuss and interpret each visual aid for the audi­
ence. Move aside as you describe it so that it can be seen fully. Use a laser pointer 
if necessary, but steady your hand if it is shaking.
• Avoid digressions. Stick to your outline and notes. Don’t suddenly include 
clever little anecdotes or digressions that occur to you on the spot. If it is not part 
of your rehearsed material, leave it out so that you can finish on time.
• Summarize your main points and arrive at the high point of your talk. Conclude 
your presentation by reiterating your main points or by emphasizing what you 
want the audience to think, do, or remember. Once you have announced your 
conclusion, proceed to it directly.
eye contact, a moderate 
tone of voice, and natural 
movements enhance 
a presentation.
“This is where you all went wrong, causing my plan to fail.”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Don’t be afraid to show 
enthusiasm for your subject. 
“I’m excited about being here 
today” says good things to an 
audience. It generally means 
that you are confident, you 
have something of value to 
say, and you are prepared 
to state your case clearly. 
Boredom is contagious.

360 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
After Your Presentation
As you are concluding you presentation, handle questions and answers competently 
and provide handouts if appropriate. Try the following techniques:
• Distribute handouts. If you prepared handouts with data the audience will not 
need during the presentation, pass them out when you finish.
• Encourage questions. If the situation permits a question­and­answer period, 
announce it at the beginning of your presentation. Then, when you finish, ask for 
questions. Set a time limit for questions and answers. If you don’t know the answer 
to a question, don’t make one up. Instead, offer to find the answer within a day or 
two. If you make such a promise to your audience, be sure to follow through.
• Repeat questions. Although the speaker may hear the question, audience mem­
bers often do not. Begin each answer with a repetition of the question. This also 
gives you thinking time. Then, direct your answer to the entire audience.
• Reinforce your main points. You can use your answers to restate your pri­
mary ideas (I’m glad you brought that up because it gives me a chance to 
elaborate on . . .). In answering questions, avoid becoming defensive or debat­
ing the questioner.
• Keep control. Don’t allow one individual to take over. Keep the entire audience 
involved.
• Avoid Yes, but answers. The word but immediately cancels any preceding mes­
sage. Try replacing it with and. For example, Yes, X has been tried. And Y works 
even better because . . . .
• End with a summary and appreciation. To signal the end of the session before 
you take the last question, say something like We have time for just one more 
question. As you answer the last question, try to work it into a summary of your 
main points. Then, express appreciation to the audience for the opportunity to 
talk with them.
The time to answer 
questions, distribute 
handouts, and reiterate 
main points is after 
a presentation.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
S
Summing up and Looking Forward
This chapter presented techniques for making effective oral 
presentations. Good presentations begin with analyses of 
your audience and your purpose. Organizing the content 
involves preparing an effective introduction, body, and clos-
ing. The introduction should capture the listener’s attention, 
identify the speaker, establish credibility, and preview the 
main points. The body should discuss two to four main points, 
with appropriate explanations, details, and verbal signposts 
to guide listeners. The conclusion should review the main 
points, provide a final focus, or take-away, and allow the 
speaker to leave the podium gracefully. You can improve 
audience rapport by using effective imagery including analo-
gies, metaphors, similes, personal anecdotes, statistics, and 
worst-/best-case scenarios. In illustrating a presentation, use 
simple, easily understood visual aids to emphasize and clar-
ify main points. If you employ PowerPoint, you can enhance 
the presentation by using templates, layout designs, bullet 
points, and multimedia elements. Don’t allow your PowerPoint 
slides, however, to steal your thunder.
Before delivering your presentation, rehearse repeatedly. 
Check your equipment before the talk. During the presenta-
tion consider beginning with a pause and presenting your 
first sentence from memory. Dress professionally, make eye 
contact, control your voice, show enthusiasm for your topic, 
speak and move naturally, and avoid digressions. After your 
talk distribute handouts and answer questions. End grace-
fully and express appreciation.
The final two chapters of this book focus on your ultimate 
goal—getting a job or advancing in your career. In Chapter 
13 you will learn how to write a persuasive résumé and other 
employment documents. In Chapter 14 you will discover how 
to ace an employment interview.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
361
 6. What are the two key elements you need to clarify before you can begin creating your 
presentation?
 7. Why is it important to analyze your audience when preparing your presentation?
 8. Name three goals to be achieved in the introduction of an oral presentation.
 9. Name at least five of the ten techniques for gaining and keeping audience attention.
 10. Focusing on effective imagery, list the specific techniques that have the power to enliven your 
presentation and help you connect with the audience.
 11. Name three ways for a speaker to use verbal signposts in a presentation. Illustrate each.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. What are some of the differences between conventional 
presentations and multimedia presentations with pre-
sentation software such as PowerPoint? How would you 
prepare for each?
 2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of your vari-
ous visual aid options—multimedia slides, transparencies, 
handouts, flipcharts or whiteboards, videos, and props.
 3. If PowerPoint is so effective, why are people speaking 
out against using it in presentations?
 4. How can speakers prevent electronic presentation soft-
ware from upstaging them?
 5. What techniques are most effective for reducing stage 
fright?
C
Chapter review

362 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
 12. What should you consider when deciding what types of visual aids to use during your presentation?
 13. How is the 6-x-6 rule applied in preparing bulleted points?
 14. List six techniques that you think would be most helpful to you in overcoming stage fright.
 15. Name at least five things savvy speakers do after their presentations.
A
Activities and Cases
12.1 Critiquing a Speech
Your Task. Visit your library and select a speech from Vital Speeches of Our Day. You can also listen to a variety of famous 
speeches online at http://www.historychannel.com/speeches/archive1.html. (Note: If this link doesn’t work, use a search 
tool such as Google to search for speech transcripts.) For tips on speech critiques and to learn how the pros review speeches, 
visit Andrew Dlugan’s blog at http://sixminutes.dlugan.com/2008/ or search Google for speech critiques. Write a memo report 
to your instructor critiquing the speech in terms of the following:
a. Effectiveness of the introduction, body, and conclusion 
e. Effectiveness of supporting facts (use of examples, 
statistics, quotations, and so forth)
f. Focus on audience benefits
g. Enthusiasm for the topic
b. Evidence of effective overall organization
c. Use of verbal signposts to create coherence
d. Emphasis of two to four main points
12.2 Knowing Your Audience
Your Task. Select a recent issue of Fortune, The Wall Street Journal, Fast Company, BusinessWeek, The Economist, or another 
business periodical approved by your instructor. Based on your analysis of your classmates, select an article that will 
appeal to them and that you can relate to their needs. Submit to your instructor a one-page summary that includes the 
following: (a) the author, article title, source, issue date, and page reference; (b) a one-paragraph article summary; (c) 
a description of why you believe the article will appeal to your classmates; and (d) a summary of how you can relate the 
article to their needs.
12.3 Preparing an Oral Presentation From an Article
Your Task. Select a business-related newspaper or magazine article and prepare an oral report based on it. Submit your 
outline, introduction, and conclusion to your instructor, or present the report to your class. You might use the same article 
you used for Activity 12.2. If you are required to present the report to your class, your instructor will set criteria such as length 
of time.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
363
12.4 Overcoming Stage Fright
What are you most afraid of about making a presentation before a class? Being tongue-tied? Having all eyes on you? 
Messing up? Forgetting your ideas and looking silly?
Your Task. Discuss the previous questions as a class. Then, in groups of three or four, talk about ways to overcome these 
fears. Your instructor may ask you to write a memo (individual or collective) summarizing your suggestions, or you may break 
out of your small groups and report your best ideas to the entire class.
12.5 Investigating Oral Communication in Your Field
One of the best sources of career information is someone in your field.
Your Task. Interview one or two individuals in your professional field. How is oral communication important in this profession? 
Does the need for oral skills change as one advances? What suggestions can these people make to newcomers to the field 
for developing proficient oral communication skills? Present your findings to your class. 
12.6 Outlining an Oral Presentation
One of the hardest parts of preparing an oral presentation is developing the outline. 
Your Task. Select an oral presentation topic from the list in Activity 12.11 or suggest an original topic. Prepare an outline for 
your presentation using the following format.
Title
Purpose
 
I. INTRODUCTION
State your name 
 A.
Gain attention and involve audience 
 B.
Establish credibility 
 C.
Preview main points 
 D.
Transition 
 
II. BODY
Main point 
 A.
Illustrate, clarify, contrast 
  
1.
 
  
2.
 
  
3.
Transition
Main point  
 B.
Illustrate, clarify, contrast 
  
1.
 
  
2.
 
  
3.
Transition
Main point 
 C.
Illustrate, clarify, contrast  
  
1.
 
  
2.
 
  
3.
Transition
 
III. CONCLUSION
Summarize main points  
 A.
Provide final focus or “take-away” 
 B.
Encourage questions  
 C.
12.7 Creating an Oral Presentation: Outline Your Job Duties
What if you had to create a presentation for your classmates and instructor, or perhaps a potential recruiter, that describes 
the multiple tasks you fulfill at work? Could you do it in a five-minute PowerPoint presentation?
Your instructors, for example, may wear many hats. Most academics (a) teach; (b) conduct research to publish; and (c) 
provide service to the department, college, university, and community. Can you see how those aspects of their profession 
lend themselves to an outline of primary slides (teaching, publishing, service) and second-level slides (instructing under-
graduate and graduate classes, presenting workshops, and giving lectures under the teaching label)?
Your Task. Now it is your turn to introduce the duties of a current position or a past job, volunteer activity, or internship, 
in a brief, simple, yet well-designed PowerPoint presentation. Your goal is to inform your audience of your job duties in a 
three- to five-minute talk. Use animation features and graphics where appropriate. Your instructor may show you a completed 
example of this project.

364 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
WeB
12.8 Discovering New Presentation Tips
Your Task. Using an electronic database or the Web, search for business presentations. Read at least three articles that 
provide suggestions for giving business presentations. If possible, print the most relevant findings. Select at least eight good 
tips or techniques that you did not learn from this chapter. Your instructor may ask you to bring them to class for discussion 
or to submit a short memo report outlining your tips.
WeB
12.9 Exploring the New World of Web Conferencing
Your boss at the Home Realty Company is interested in learning more about Web conferencing but doesn’t have time to do 
the research herself. She asks you to find out the following:
a. In terms of revenue, how big is the Web conferencing industry?
b. Who are the leading providers of Web conferencing tools?
c. What are the typical costs associated with holding a Web conference?
d. How are other realtors using Web conferencing?
Your Task. Using electronic databases and the Internet, locate articles and Web sites that provide the information your 
boss has requested. Be prepared to role-play an informal presentation to your boss in which you begin with an introduction, 
answer the four questions in the body, and present a conclusion.
WeB
12.10 Researching Fortune List Information
Your Task. Using electronic databases, perform a search to learn how Fortune magazine determines which companies make 
its annual lists. Research the following lists. Then organize and present a five- to ten-minute informative talk to your class.
a. Fortune 500
b. Global 500
c. 100 Best Companies to Work For
d. America’s Most Admired Companies
e. Global Most Admired Companies
12.11 Choosing a Topic for an Oral Presentation
Your Task. Select a topic from the following list or from the report topics at the end of Chapter 10. For an expanded list of 
report topics, go to www.meguffey.com. Prepare a five-to ten-minute oral presentation. Consider yourself an expert who has 
been called in to explain some aspect of the topic before a group of interested people. Because your time is limited, prepare 
a concise yet forceful presentation with effective visual aids.
a. How can students and other citizens contribute to conserving gasoline and other resources in order to save money and 
help slow global warming?
b. What is the career outlook in a field of your choice? Consider job growth, compensation, and benefits. What kind of 
academic or other experience is typically required in your field? 
c. How could students in the United States be motivated to learn languages and study abroad in greater numbers?
d. What simple network security tips can your company use to avoid problems?
e. What is telecommuting, and for what kinds of workers is it an appropriate work alternative?
f. What criteria should parents use in deciding whether their young child should attend public, private, parochial, or home 
school?
g. What travel location would you recommend for college students during the holidays or in the summer?
h. What is the economic outlook for a given product, such as hybrid cars, laptop computers, digital cameras, fitness 
equipment, or a product of your choice?
i.  How can your company or educational institution improve its image?
j.  What are the Webby Awards, and what criteria do the judges use to evaluate Web sites?
k. What brand and model of computer and printer represent the best buy for college students today?
l.  What franchise would offer the best investment opportunity for an entrepreneur in your area?
m. How should a job candidate dress for an interview?
n. What should a guide to proper cell phone use include?
o. Are internships worth the effort?
p. Why should a company have a written e-mail and Internet use policy?

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
365
q. Where should your organization hold its next convention?
r. What is your opinion of the statement “Advertising steals our time, defaces the landscape, and degrades the dignity of 
public institutions”?17
s. How can businesspeople reduce the amount of e-mail spam they receive?
t. What is the outlook for real estate (commercial or residential) investment in your area?
u. What are the pros and cons of videoconferencing for [name an organization]?
v. What do the personal assistants for celebrities do, and how does one become a personal assistant? (Investigate the 
Association of Celebrity Personal Assistants.)
w. What kinds of gifts are appropriate for businesses to give clients and customers during the holiday season?
x. What scams are on the Federal Trade Commission’s List of Top 10 Consumer Scams, and how can consumers avoid 
falling for them?
y. How are businesses and conservationists working together to protect the world’s dwindling tropical forests?
z. Should employees be able to use computers in a work environment for anything other than work-related business?
WeB
12.12 Will Maxing Out My Credit Cards Improve My Credit Rating?
The program chair for the campus business club has asked you to present a talk to the group about consumer credit. He 
saw a newspaper article saying that only 10 percent of Americans know their credit scores. Many consumers, including 
students, have dangerous misconceptions about their scores. Not knowing your score could result in denial of credit as well 
as difficulty obtaining needed services and even a job.
Your Task. Using electronic databases and the Web, learn more about credit scores and typical misconceptions. For exam-
ple, is a higher or lower credit score better? Can you improve your credit score by marrying well? If you earn more money, 
will you improve your score? If you have a low score, is it impossible to raise it? Can you raise your score by maxing out all 
your credit cards? (One survey reported that 28 percent of consumers believed the latter statement was true!) Prepare an 
oral presentation appropriate for a student audience. Conclude with appropriate recommendations.
12.13 Self-Contained Multimedia Activity: Creating a PowerPoint Presentation (No additional 
research required)
You are a consultant who has been hired to improve the effectiveness of corporate trainers. These trainers frequently 
make presentations to employees on topics such as conflict management, teamwork, time management, problem solv-
ing, performance appraisals, and employment interviewing. Your goal is to teach these trainers how to make better 
presentations.
Your Task. Create six visually appealing slides.  Base the slides on the following content, which will be spoken during the 
presentation titled “Effective Employee Training.” The comments shown here are only a portion of a longer presentation.
Trainers have two options when they make presentations. The first option is to use one-way communication where the 
trainer basically dumps the information on the employees and leaves. The second option is to use a two-way audience 
involvement approach. The two-way approach can accomplish many purposes, such as helping the trainer connect with 
the employees, helping the trainer reinforce key points, increasing the employees’ retention rates, and changing the pace 
and adding variety. The two-way approach also encourages employees to get to know each other better. Because today’s 
employees demand more than just a “talking head,” trainers must engage their audiences by involving them in a two-way 
dialogue.
When you include interactivity in your training sessions, choose approaches that suit your delivery style. Also, think about 
which options your employees would be likely to respond to most positively. Let’s consider some interactivity approaches 
now. Realize, though, that these ideas are presented to help you get your creative juices flowing. After I present the list, we 
will think about situations in which these options might be effective. We will also brainstorm to come up with creative ideas 
we can add to this list.
Ask employees to guess at statistics before revealing them.
Ask an employee to share examples or experiences.
Ask a volunteer to help you demonstrate something.
Ask the audience to complete a questionnaire or worksheet.
Ask the audience to brainstorm or list something as fast as possible.
Ask a variety of question types to achieve different purposes.
Invite the audience to work through a process or examine an object.
Survey the audience.
Pause to let the audience members read something to themselves.
Divide the audience into small groups to discuss an issue.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

366 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Figure 12.11 PowerPoint Slides Needing Revision
Voice Quality During Webcast
Voice Quality During Webcast
• The Three Ps are
critical
Pacing
Pausing
Passion
Webcasting Basics
Webcasting Basics
• Inexpensive way to hold conferences and
meetings.
• Presenter broadcasts via one of many
Webcast platforms available today.
• Participants access meeting from
anywhere via Internet connection and free
software.
• Capabilities include live Q&A sessions
and live polls of audience members.
• Those who missed the event can access
stored presentations when convenient.
Webcasting Pointers
Webcasting Pointers
• To engage audience early on, tell
personal stories.
• Standing while webcasting adds
energy to your voice.
• Remember, smiles are audible.
• Change slides frequently.
• Prepare a brief summary conclusion to
follow Q&A session.
V
Video resource
Video Library 1: Building Workplace Skills: Effective On-
the-Job Oral Presentations. Watch this video to see how 
businesspeople apply a writing process in developing a per-
suasive oral presentation.
12.14 Improving the Design and Content of PowerPoint Slides
Your Task. Identify ways to improve the design and content of the three slides presented in Figure 12.11. Classify your 
comments under the following categories: (a) color choices, (b) font choice including style and point size, (c) 6-x-6 rule, 
(d) listings in parallel grammatical form, (e) consistent capitalization and punctuation, and (f) graphics and images. Identify 
what needs to be improved and exactly how you would improve it. For example, if you identify category (d) as an area 
needing improvement, your answer would include a revision of the listing. When you finish, your instructor may show you a 
revised set of slides.

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
367
Capitalization
Review Sections 3.01–3.16 in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. Then study each of the fol-
lowing statements. Draw three underlines below any letter that should be capitalized. Draw a 
slash (/) through any capital letter that you wish to change to lowercase. Indicate in the space 
provided the number of changes you made in each sentence and record the number of the 
G/M principle(s) illustrated. If you made no changes, write 0. When you finish, compare your 
responses with those provided at the back of the book. If your responses differ, study carefully 
the principles in parentheses.
Example Once the Management Team and the Union members finally agreed, mayor Johnson 
signed the Agreement.
 1. The suzuki employees had to evacuate their Branch office in suite 500 after the yorba linda 
fire department units arrived.
 2. Travel to europe is down because of the weak Dollar; trips to the U.S. by french citizens, 
however, have increased, says Pierre Rostand, an Accounting Director at Hilton hotels.
 3. Annan, part-time Chauffeur to Hollywood stars, wants to start his own Limo Service after 
college.
 4. Patricia was disappointed when she read that the University of New England eliminated 
german from its curriculum; she now must take History, Geography, and Political Science 
classes to learn about Germany.
 5. Did you see the BusinessWeek article entitled “harry potter and the endless cash”?
 6. Although I recommend the dell inspiron 2200, you may purchase any Notebook Computer 
you choose.
 7. According to a Federal Government report, any regulation of State and County banking 
must receive local approval.
 8. The vice president of the united states said, “we continue to look for Foreign investment 
opportunities.”
 9. The Comptroller of Zarconi Industries reported to the President and the Board of Directors 
that the securities and exchange commission was beginning an investigation of their 
Company.
 10. My Father, who lives near death valley, says that the Moon and Stars are especially 
brilliant on a cold, clear night.
 11. Our Marketing Director met with Karin Bloedorn, Manager of the Advertising Sales 
Department, to plan an Ad Campaign for our newly redesigned Wireless Phone.
 12. During the Summer semester our Faculty Advisor explored new exchange and semester-
abroad opportunities in japan, korea, and china to find new Sponsors.
 13. To reach Belle Isle park, which is located on an Island in the Detroit river, tourists pass 
over the Douglas MacArthur bridge.
 14. On page 8 of the report, you will find a list of all employees in our accounting department 
with Master’s degrees.
 15. Please consult figure 3.2 in chapter 5 for U.S. census bureau figures regarding non-english-
speaking residents.
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 12
5 
(3.01, 3.06a)

368 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
The following executive summary of a report has faults in grammar, punctuation, spelling, 
number form, wordiness, and word use. Correct the errors with standard proofreading 
marks (see Appendix B) or revise the message online at www.meguffey.com. 
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 12
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose of Report
The purposes of this report is (1) To determine the Sun coast university campus 
communitys awareness of the campus recycling program and (2) To recommend ways to 
increase participation. Sun Coasts recycling program was intended to respond to the 
increasing problem of waste disposal, to fulfil it’s social responsibility as an educational 
institution, and to meet the demands of legislation that made it a requirement for 
individuals and organizations to recycle.
A Survey was conducted in an effort to learn about the campus communities recycling 
habits and to make an assessment of the participation in the recycling program that is 
current. 220 individuals responded to the Survey but twenty-seven Surveys could not be 
used. Since Sun coast universitys recycling program include only aluminum, glass, paper 
and plastic at this point in time these were the only materials considered in this Study.
Recycling at Sun coast
Most Survey respondants recognized the importance of recycling, they stated that they 
do recycle aluminum, glass, paper and plastic on a regular basis either at home or at 
work. However most respondants displayed a low-level of awareness, and use of the on 
campus program. Many of the respondants was unfamilar with the location of the bins 
around campus; and therefore had not participated in the Recycling Program. Other 
responses indicated that the bins were not located in convenent locations.
Reccommendations for increasing recycling participation
Recommendations for increasing participation in the Program include the following;
1.
relocating the recycling bins for greater visability
2.
development of incentive programs to gain the participation of on campus groups
3.
training student volunteers to give on campus presentations that give an explanation of 
the need for recycling, and the benefits of using the Recycling Program
4.
we should increase Advertising in regard to the Program

Chapter 12: Business Presentations 
369
Techniques for Taking Part in Effective and 
Professional Team Presentations
You may find that you are assigned to a team that must prepare and deliver an oral pre-
sentation. This can happen in the classroom and on the job. If you have been part of any 
team before, you also know that such projects can be very frustrating—particularly when 
some team members don’t carry their weight or when members cannot resolve conflict. 
On the other hand, team projects can be harmonious and productive when members 
establish ground rules and follow guidelines related to preparing, planning, collecting 
information for, organizing, rehearsing, and evaluating team projects. Here are steps to 
take to ensure that your team presentation is a success.
Prepare to work together. Before you begin working on the presentation, you should 
(a) compare schedules of team members in order to set up the best meetings times, 
(b) plan to meet often, and (c) discuss how you will deal with team members who are 
not contributing to the project.
Plan the presentation. You need to make a number of decisions in the beginning about 
the presentation. These include agreeing on (a) the specific purpose of the presenta-
tion; (b) who your audience is, (c) how long the presentation will be; (d) what types of 
visuals will be included, and (e) the basic structure and content of the presentation.
Make assignments. Once you have a clear understanding of what your presentation 
will cover, give each team member a written assignment that details his or her respon-
sibilities for researching content, producing visuals, developing handouts, building 
transitions between segments, and showing up for team meetings and rehearsals.
Collect information. To gather or generate information, teams can brainstorm together, 
conduct interviews, or search the Web for information. The team should decide on 
deadlines for collecting information and should discuss how to ensure the accuracy 
and currency of the information collected. Team members should exchange periodic 
progress reports on how their research is coming along.
Organize and develop the presentation. Once all the research has been gathered, 
it is time for the team to start working on the presentation. Decide on the organiza-
tion of the presentation, compose a draft of the presentation in writing, and prepare 
PowerPoint slides and other visual aids. The team should meet often to discuss and 
revise the presentation and to determine which team member will be responsible for 
delivering what parts of the presentation. Be sure each member builds a transition 
to the next presenter’s topic and launches it smoothly. Strive for logical connections 
between segments.
Edit, rehearse, and evaluate. Before you deliver the presentation, rehearse several 
times as a team. Make sure that transitions from speaker to speaker are smooth. For 
example, you might say, Now that I have discussed how to prepare for the meeting, Renee 
is going to discuss how to get the meeting started. Decide who will be responsible for 
advancing slides during the presentation. Practice fielding questions if you plan to have 
a question-and-answer session. Decide how you are going to dress so that you look 
professional and competent. Run a spell check and look over your PowerPoint slides 
to make sure that the design, format, and vocabulary are consistent.
Deliver the presentation. On the day of the presentation, show up on time and in 
appropriate attire. Deliver your part of the presentation with professionalism and enthu-
siasm. Remember that your audience is judging the team on its performance, not the 
individuals. Do what you can to make your team shine!
Career Application. You have just been named to a team that is to produce an organiza-
tional five-year plan for your company. You know this assignment will end with an oral pre-
sentation to management and stockholders. Your first reaction is dismay. You have been on 
teams before in the classroom, and you know how frustrating they can be. But you decide 
that if you must take on this task, you want to make sure you know what you are doing and 
that you will contribute positively to this team effort.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Collaboration

370 
Chapter 12: Business Presentations
Your Task
In small groups or with the entire class, discuss what traits and actions make effective and 
ineffective team members. How can one contribute positively to a team? How should teams 
deal with members who are not contributing or who have negative attitudes? What should 
team members do to ensure that the final presentation is professional, well coordinated, 
and effective?

Chapter 13
The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Chapter 14
Interviewing and Following Up
Employment Communication
6
U N i T  6
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / LAJOS RÉPÁSI

372 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
OBJeCTiVeS
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Prepare for employment by identifying your interests, evaluating your assets, 
recognizing the changing nature of jobs, and choosing a career path.
• Apply both electronic and traditional techniques in a successful job search.
• Compare and contrast chronological and functional résumés.
• Organize and format the parts of a résumé to produce a persuasive product.
• Identify techniques that prepare a résumé for today’s technologies, including 
preparing a scannable résumé, a plain-text résumé, and an e-portfolio.
• Write a persuasive cover letter to accompany your résumé.
The Internet has changed the way we look for jobs today. Workplace experts point 
out that the Internet has made job searching easier but also more challenging.1
Because hundreds and perhaps thousands of candidates may be applying for an 
advertised position, you must do everything possible to be noticed and to outshine 
the competition. You must also look beyond the Internet.
The better prepared you are, the more confident you will feel during your search. 
This chapter provides expert current advice in preparing for employment, searching the 
job market, writing a persuasive résumé, and developing an effective cover letter. What 
you learn here can lead to a successful job search and maybe even your dream job.
Preparing for employment
You may think that the first step in finding a job is writing a résumé. Wrong! The 
job-search process actually begins long before you are ready to prepare your résumé. 
Regardless of the kind of employment you seek, you must invest time and effort get-
ting ready. You can’t hope to find the position of your dreams without (a) knowing 
yourself, (b) knowing the job market, and (c) knowing the employment process.
One of the first things you should do is obtain career information and choose 
a specific job objective. At the same time, you should be studying the job market 
and becoming aware of substantial changes in the nature of work. You will want to 
understand how to use the latest Web resources in your job search. Finally, you will 
The Job Search, 
Résumés, and 
Cover Letters
13
13
C H A P T e r  1 3
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / DEAN SANDERSON
Finding a satisfying career 
requires learning about 
yourself, the job market, and 
the employment process.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
373
need to design a persuasive résumé and cover letter appropriate for small businesses 
as well as for larger organizations that may be using résumé-scanning programs. 
Following these steps, summarized in Figure 13.1 and described in this chapter, 
gives you a master plan for landing a job you really want.
identifying Your interests
The employment process begins with introspection. This means looking inside your-
self to analyze what you like and dislike so that you can make good employment 
choices. Off-campus career counselors charge large sums for helping individuals 
FigUre 13.1 The Employment Search
Identify your interests
and goals.
Know the
Process
Know
Yourself
Evaluate your
qualiﬁcations.
Choose a career path
and job objective.
Search the open
job market.
Search the hidden
job market.
Reevaluate your
progress.
Accept the
best oﬀer.
Interview companies.
Design a customized résumé
and cover letter.
or
START HERE
Know the
Job Market
WOrKPLACe iN FOCUS
Given the box-office success of comic book heroes such as Batman and Spider Man, 
it is not surprising that the hottest career hero of the new generation is also a 
fictional character— Johnny Bunko. In the Japanese magna book The Adventures 
of Johnny Bunko: The Last Career Guide You’ll Ever Need, anime character 
Johnny Bunko is a disillusioned office worker who longs to escape his dead-end 
job and find true occupational happiness. Aided by the spellbinding avatar Diana 
and a pair of magic chopsticks, Bunko embarks on an action-packed career 
journey that gives readers valuable insights into their own career paths. Why 
should job seekers consult career guides when preparing for employment?
© “THE ADVENTURES OF JOHNNY BUNKO: THE LAST CAREER GUIDE YOU’LL EVER NEED,” 
BY BUSINESS BOOK GURU DANIEL H. PINK AND ILLUSTRATOR ROB TEN PAS / NEWSCOM
Analyzing your likes and 
dislikes helps you make wise 
employment decisions.

374 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
learn about themselves. You can do the same kind of self-examination—without 
spending a dime. For guidance in choosing a field that eventually proves to be sat-
isfying, answer the following questions. If you have already chosen a field, think 
carefully about how your answers relate to that choice.
• Do you enjoy working with people, data, or things?
• Would you like to work for someone else or be your own boss?
• How important are salary, benefits, technology support, and job stability?
• How important are working environment, colleagues, and job stimulation?
• Would you rather work for a large or a small company?
• Must you work in a specific city, geographical area, or climate?
• Are you looking for security, travel opportunities, money, power, or prestige?
• How would you describe the perfect job, boss, and coworkers?
To aid you with appraising your abilities, many college career centers offer skills 
assessment and personality type testing. Be sure to explore resources available on cam-
pus, including one-on-one sessions with career counselors, job-search and etiquette 
workshops, local employer job postings, internships, and more.
evaluating Your Qualifications
In addition to your interests, assess your qualifications. Employers today want to 
know what assets you have to offer them. Your responses to the following questions 
will target your thinking as well as prepare a foundation for your résumé. Remember, 
though, that employers seek more than empty assurances; they will want proof of 
your qualifications.
• What technology skills can you offer? Employers are often interested in specific 
computer software programs and your level of expertise.
• What other skills have you acquired in school, on the job, or through activities? 
How can you demonstrate these skills?
• Do you work well with people? Do you enjoy teamwork? What proof can you 
offer? Consider extracurricular activities, clubs, class projects, and jobs.
• Are you a leader, self-starter, or manager? What evidence can you offer?
• Do you speak, write, or understand another language?
• Do you learn quickly? Are you creative? Do you take initiative? Are you flexible? 
How can you demonstrate these characteristics?
• Do you communicate well in speech and in writing? How can you verify these 
talents?
recognizing the Changing Nature of Jobs
As you learned in Chapter 1, the workplace is changing. One of the most significant 
changes involves the concept of the “job.” Following the downsizing of corporations 
and the outsourcing and offshoring of jobs in recent years, companies are employing 
fewer people in permanent positions.
Other forms of employment are replacing traditional jobs. 
In many companies teams complete special projects and then 
disband. Work may also be outsourced to a group that is not 
even part of an organization. Because new technologies can 
spring up overnight making today’s skills obsolete, employers 
are less willing to hire people into jobs with narrow descrip-
tions. Instead, they are hiring contingency employees who work 
temporarily and then leave. What’s more, big companies are no 
longer the main employers. People work for smaller companies, 
or they are starting their own businesses. By 2020 small, pri-
vately owned companies are expected to comprise 25 percent 
of U.S. businesses.2
What do these changes mean for you? For one thing, you 
should probably forget about a lifelong career with a single 
Answering speciﬁ c 
questions can help you 
choose a career.
Decide what qualiﬁ cations 
you possess and how 
you can prove them.
“We found someone overseas who can 
drink coffee and talk about sports all day 
for a fraction of what we’re paying you.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
People feel less job security 
after downsizing, outsourcing, 
and offshoring of jobs.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
375
 company. Don’t count on regular pay raises, promotions, and a comfortable retire-
ment income. You should also become keenly aware that a career that relies on 
yesterday’s skills is headed for trouble. You are going to need updated, market-
able skills that serve you well as you move from job to job. Upgrading your skills 
through constant retraining is the best career strategy for the twenty-first century. 
People who learn quickly and adapt to change will always be in demand even in a 
climate of surging change.3
Choosing a Career Path
The job picture today is extraordinarily dynamic and flexible. On average, workers 
between ages eighteen and thirty-eight in the United States will have ten different 
employers, and job tenure currently averages 6.6 years.4 Although you may be fre-
quently changing jobs in the future (especially before you reach forty), you still need 
to train for a specific career area now. In choosing an area, you will make the best 
decisions when you can match your interests and qualifications with the require-
ments and rewards in specific career fields. Where can you find the best career data? 
Here are some suggestions:
• Visit your campus career center. Most have literature, inventories, career-
related software programs, and employment or internship databases that allow 
you to search such fields as accounting, finance, office technology, information 
systems, hotel management, and so forth.
• Search the Web. Many job-search sites on the Web offer career-planning informa-
tion and resources. You will learn about some of the best sites in the next section.
• Use your library. Many print and online resources are especially helpful. Consult 
O*NET Occupational Information Network, Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 
Occupational Outlook Handbook, and The Jobs Rated Almanac for information 
about job duties, qualifications, salaries, and employment trends.
• Take a summer job, internship, or part-time position in your field. Nothing 
is better than trying out a career by actually working in it or in a related area. 
Many companies offer internships and temporary or part-time jobs to begin 
training college students and to develop relationships with them. Experts com-
monly believe that at least 60 percent of these relationships blossom into perma-
nent positions.
• Interview someone in your chosen field. People are usually flattered when 
asked to describe their careers. Inquire about needed skills, required courses, 
financial and other rewards, benefits, working conditions, future trends, and 
entry requirements.
• Volunteer with a nonprofit organization. Many colleges and universities encour-
age service learning opportunities. In volunteering their services, students gain 
valuable experience, and nonprofits appreciate the expertise and fresh ideas that 
students bring.
• Monitor the classified ads. Early in your college career, begin monitoring want 
ads and Web sites of companies in your career area. Check job availability, 
qualifications sought, duties, and salary range. Don’t wait until you are about to 
graduate to see how the job market looks.
• Join professional organizations in your field. Frequently, professional organiza-
tions offer student membership status and reduced rates. You will receive inside 
information on issues, career news, and possibly jobs. Campus business clubs and 
associations help with career tips and networking opportunities.
Searching for a Job electronically
Another significant change in the workplace involves the way we find jobs. Just ten 
years ago, a job seeker browsed the local classified ads, found a likely sounding job 
listing, prepared an elegant résumé on bond paper, and sent it out by U.S. mail. All 
that has changed with the advent of the Internet. Searching for a job electronically 
has become a common, but not always fruitful, approach. With all the publicity 
Jobs are becoming more 
ﬂ exible and less permanent.
Career information can be 
obtained at campus career 
centers and libraries, from 
the Web, in classiﬁ ed ads, 
and from professional 
organizations.
Summer jobs, part-time 
employment, and internships 
are good opportunities 
to learn about various 
careers and to establish 
a professional network.
employment Web sites list 
many jobs, but ﬁ nding a 
job electronically requires 
more work than simply 
clicking a mouse.

376 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
given to Internet job boards, you might think that electronic job searching has 
totally replaced traditional methods. Not so! Although Web sites such as Yahoo 
HotJobs.com and CareerBuilder.com, shown in Figure 13.2, list millions of jobs, 
actually landing a job is much harder than just clicking a mouse. In addition, these 
job boards are facing recent competition from social networking sites such as 
LinkedIn and Facebook.5
Both recruiters and job seekers complain about online job boards. Corporate 
recruiters say that the big job boards bring a flood of candidates, many of whom 
are not suited for the listed jobs. Workplace experts estimate that the average 
Fortune 500 company is inundated with 2,000 résumés a day.6 Job candidates 
grumble that listings are frequently out-of-date and fail to produce leads. Some 
career advisors call these sites black holes,7 into which résumés vanish without a 
trace. Applicants worry about the privacy of information posted at big boards. 
Most important, an independent study has shown that the percentage of hires 
resulting from job boards is astonishingly low—3.6 percent at Monster.com, 1.5 
percent at CareerBuilder.com, and 0.5 percent at HotJobs.com.8 Workplace expert 
Liz Ryan advises job seekers not to count on finding a job by devoting all their 
energy to searching online job boards.9
Using the Big Job Boards. Despite these gloomy prospects, many job 
 seekers use job boards to gather job-search information, such as résumé, interview-
ing, and salary tips. Job boards also serve as a jumping-off point in most searches. 
They can inform you about the kinds of jobs that are available and the skill sets 
required. With over 40,000 job boards and employment Web sites deluging the 
FigUre 13.2 Using the Web to Search for a Job
Commercial job boards list 
millions of job openings and 
also provide excellent tips 
for conducting job searches, 
writing résumés, organizing 
cover letters, and preparing 
for job interviews.
Source: College Recruiter image courtesy of Collegerecruiter.com. Yahoo image reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. © 2007.  
YAHOO! and the Yahoo! logo are trademarks of Yahoo Inc.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
377
Internet, it is hard to know where to start. We have listed a few of the best-known 
online job sites here:10
• CareerBuilder (http://www.careerbuilder.com) claims to be the nation’s larg-
est employment network. At this writing it lists 1.5 million jobs and has over 
250,000 client companies posting jobs. Users can search for these jobs by key-
word, geographic location, and job type.
• Monster (http://www.monster.com) offers access to information on more than 
1.1 million jobs worldwide with 275,000 client companies posting jobs. You 
may search for jobs by keyword, company name, geographic location, and job 
category. Many consider it to be the Web’s premier job site.
• College Recruiter (http://www.CollegeRecruiter.com) claims to be the “highest 
traffic entry-level job site” for students and graduates. It lists over 250,000 jobs 
from more than 12,500 client companies.
• CareerJournal (http://www.CareerJournal.com), sponsored by The Wall Street 
Journal, lists over 125,000 executive positions from over 4,000 companies.
• Yahoo HotJobs (http://hotjobs.yahoo.com) lists over 150,000 job openings.11 
It says that job seekers voted it the “Best General Purpose Job Board for Job 
Seekers.”
Beyond the Big Job Boards. Disillusioned job seekers increasingly turn 
their backs on the big online job boards but not on electronic job-searching tactics. 
Savvy candidates know how to use their computers to search for jobs at Web sites 
such as the following:
• Corporate Web sites. Probably the best way to find a job online is at a compa-
ny’s own Web site. One poll found that 70 percent of job seekers felt they were 
more likely to obtain an interview if they posted their résumés on corporate sites. 
In addition to finding a more direct route to decision makers, job seekers thought 
that they could keep their job searches more private at corporate Web sites than 
at big job board sites.12
• Association Web sites. Online job listings have proved to be the single-most 
popular feature of many professional organizations such as the International 
Association of Administrative Professionals, the American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants, the National Association of Sales Professionals, the National 
Association of Legal Assistants, and the Association of Information Technology 
Professionals. Although you pay a fee, the benefits of joining a professional 
associa tion in your career field are enormous. Networking starts on campus. If 
you join an accounting, finance, or marketing association, you will jumpstart 
your professional connections.
• JobCentral National Labor Exchange. JobCentral is a public service Web site 
provided by the DirectEmployers Association, a nonprofit consortium of Fortune 
500 and other leading U.S. corporations. Several hundred companies now use 
http://www.jobcentral.com as a gateway to job listing at their own Web sites, 
advertising an estimated five million jobs. Best of all, this service is free, bypass-
ing the big commercial job boards. You can enter a job description or job title, 
and a list of openings pops up. When you click one, you are taken straight to the 
company’s Web site, where you can apply.
• Local employment Web sites. Workplace expert Liz Ryan encourages candidates 
to focus on smaller, locals sites, such as a local Jobing.com site—for example, for 
Colorado (http://colorado.jobing.com/)—and JobStar (http:// jobstar.org).13
• Niche Web sites. If you want a job in a specialized field, look for a niche Web 
site, such as HealthCareerWeb.com, CareerWomen.com, SixFigureJobs.com, and 
so on. Already, niche sites control well over half of the job-search market.14
• Professional networking sites. Perhaps you use MySpace to chat with friends. 
However, users are increasingly tapping into social networking sites to prospect 
for jobs. Facebook and other sites have started professional offshoots. LinkedIn 
boasts more than 13 million active users, but smaller sites, such as invite-only 
Job prospects may be 
more promising at the 
Web sites of corporations, 
professional organizations, 
employers’ organizations, 
niche ﬁ elds, and, most 
recently, professional 
networking sites.

378 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Doostang, may have an edge in specialized fields.15 Finally, international net-
working sites—Chinese Wealink and German Xing—can help candidates who 
seek a global reach.
Thousands of job boards listing millions of jobs now flood the Internet. The 
harsh reality, however, is that landing a job still depends largely on personal con-
tacts. Stanford sociologist Mark Granovetter found that 70 percent of jobs are 
discovered through networking.16 One employment expert believes that overreliance 
on technology may have made job seekers lazy: “At the end of the day, the job hunt 
is largely about people and it is about networking—looking at who you know and 
where they work.”17 Job-search consultant Debra Feldman concurs: “More impor-
tant than what you know is who knows what you know. Make sure you are on the 
radar of people who have access to the kind of job leads you want.”18
Searching for a Job Using Traditional Techniques
Finding the perfect job requires an early start and a determined effort. A research 
study of college graduates revealed that those with proactive personalities were the 
most successful in securing interviews and jobs. Successful candidates were not pas-
sive; they were driven to “make things happen.”19
Whether you use traditional or online job-search techniques, you should be 
prepared to launch an aggressive campaign. What’s more, you can’t start too early. 
Some universities now require first- and second-year students to take an employ-
ment seminar called “Reality 101.” Students are told early on that a college degree 
alone doesn’t guarantee a job. They are cautioned that grade point averages make 
a difference to employers.20 They are also advised of the importance of experience, 
such as internships. Traditional job-search techniques, such as those described here, 
continue to be critical in landing jobs.
• Check classified ads in local and national newspapers. Be aware, though, that 
classified ads are only one small source of jobs.
• Check announcements in publications of professional organizations. If you do 
not have a student membership, ask your professors to share current copies of profes-
sional journals, newsletters, and so on. Your college library is another good source.
• Contact companies in which you are interested, even if you know of no cur-
rent opening. Write an unsolicited letter and include your résumé. Follow up 
with a telephone call. Check the company’s Web site for employment possibilities 
and procedures.
• Sign up for campus interviews with visiting company representatives. Campus 
recruiters may open your eyes to exciting jobs and locations. They may also help 
you prepare by offering mock interviews.
• Attend career fairs. Job fairs are invaluable in your quest to learn about specific 
companies and your future career options. Recruiters say that the more you 
know about the company and its representatives, the more comfortable you will 
be in an interview.21
• Ask for advice from your instructors. They often have contacts and ideas for 
expanding your job search.
• Develop your own network of contacts. Networking accounts for almost two 
thirds of the jobs found by candidates. Therefore, plan to spend a considerable por-
tion of your job-search time developing a personal network. The Communication 
Workshop at the end of this chapter gives you step-by-step instructions for tra-
ditional networking as well as some ideas for online networking.
Creating a Customized résumé
After using both traditional and online resources to learn about the employment 
market and to develop job leads, you will focus on writing a customized résumé. 
This means you will prepare a special résumé for every position you want. The 
Many jobs are listed on 
the Web, but most hiring 
is still done through 
personal contact.
OF F I C E  I N S IDER
Online recruiting is a little 
like computer dating. People 
may find dates that way, 
but they don’t get married 
that way.
The most successful 
job seekers are those 
who launch aggressive, 
proactive campaigns.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
379
competition is so stiff today that you cannot get by with a generic, all-purpose 
résumé. Although you can start with a basic résumé, you should customize it to fit 
each company and position if you want your résumé to stand out from the crowd. 
Include many keywords that describe the skills, traits, tasks, and job titles associated 
with your targeted job. You will learn more about keywords shortly.
The Internet has made it so easy to apply that recruiters are swamped with appli-
cations. As a job seeker, you have about five seconds to catch the recruiter’s eye—if 
your résumé is even read by a person. Many companies use computer scanning tech-
nologies to weed out unqualified candidates.22 Your goal is to make your résumé fit 
the targeted position and be noticed. Such a résumé does more than merely list your 
qualifications. It packages your assets into a convincing advertisement that sells you 
for a specific job.
In the scramble to get noticed, some job seekers—particularly in creative 
 professions—occasionally resort to unusual job-hunting tactics; for example, sending 
a recruiter a shoe “to get a foot in the door” or a bowling pin to suggest “I’ll bowl 
you over.”23 The survey of hiring managers revealed that more than half of market-
ing and a quarter of advertising executives view such unconventional approaches as 
unprofessional. Whereas in advertising gimmicky applications may be acceptable to 
almost half of the executives polled, in most business disciplines they would be a 
huge gamble. Perhaps you should think twice before drawing attention to yourself 
the way one applicant did by putting up posters of himself in the garage where the 
executives parked.
The purpose of a résumé is winning an interview. Even if you are not in the job 
market at this moment, preparing a résumé now has advantages. Having a current 
résumé makes you look well organized and professional should an unexpected employ-
ment opportunity arise. Moreover, preparing a résumé early can help you recognize 
weak areas and give you time to bolster them. Even after you have accepted a position, 
it is a good idea to keep your résumé up-to-date. You never know when an opportunity 
might come along!
Choosing a résumé Style
Résumés usually fall into two categories: chronological and functional. In this sec-
tion we present basic information as well as inside tips on how to choose an appro-
priate résumé style, how to determine its length, and how to arrange its parts. You 
will also learn about adding a summary of qualifications, which busy recruiters 
increasingly want to see. Models of the résumés in the following discussion are 
shown in our comprehensive résumé section beginning on page 386.
Chronological. The most popular résumé format is the chronological résumé, 
shown in Figures 13.6 through 13.9 in our résumé collection. It lists work history 
job by job, starting with the most recent position. Recruiters favor the chronologi-
cal format because such résumés quickly reveal a candidate’s education and experi-
ence record. Recruiters are familiar with the chronological résumé, and as many 
as 84 percent of employers prefer to see a candidate’s résumé in this format.24 The 
chronological style works well for candidates who have experience in their field of 
employment and for those who show steady career growth, but it is less appropriate 
for people who have changed jobs frequently or who have gaps in their employ-
ment records. For college students and others who lack extensive experience, the 
functional résumé format may be preferable.
Functional. The functional résumé, shown in Figure 13.10, focuses atten-
tion on a candidate’s skills rather than on past employment. Like a chronological 
résumé, the functional résumé begins with the candidate’s name, address, telephone 
number, job objective, and education. Instead of listing jobs, though, the functional 
résumé groups skills and accomplishments in special categories, such as Supervisory 
and Management Skills or Retailing and Marketing Experience. This résumé style 
highlights accomplishments and can de-emphasize a negative employment history. 
Winning an interview 
is the purpose of a 
customized résumé.
See our comprehensive 
collection of résumé styles 
beginning on page 386.
Chronological résumés focus 
on job history with the most 
recent positions listed ﬁ rst.
Because functional résumés 
focus on skills, they may be 
more advisable for graduates 
with little experience.

380 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
People who have changed jobs frequently, who have gaps in their employment 
records, or who are entering an entirely different field may prefer the functional 
résumé. Recent graduates with little or no related employment experience often 
find the functional résumé useful. Older job seekers who want to de-emphasize a 
long job history and job hunters who are afraid of appearing overqualified may also 
prefer the functional format. Be aware, though, that online job boards may insist 
on chronological format. In addition, some recruiters are suspicious of functional 
résumés, thinking the candidate is hiding something.
Deciding on Length
Experts simply do not agree on how long a résumé should be. Conventional wis-
dom has always held that recruiters prefer one-page résumés. A carefully controlled 
study of 570 recruiters, however, revealed that they claimed they preferred one-page 
résumés. The recruiters actually chose to interview the applicants with two-page 
résumés.25 Recruiters who are serious about candidates often prefer a full picture 
with the kind of details that can be provided in a two-page résumé. On the other 
hand, recruiters are said to be extremely busy and prefer concise résumés.
Perhaps the best advice is to make your résumé as long as needed to sell your 
skills to recruiters and hiring managers. Individuals with more experience will natu-
rally have longer résumés. Those with fewer than ten years of experience, those 
making a major career change, and those who have had only one or two employers 
will likely have a one-page résumé. Those with ten years or more of related experi-
ence may have a two-page résumé. Finally, some senior-level managers and execu-
tives with a lengthy history of major accomplishments might have a résumé that is 
three pages or longer.26 A recent survey by a global staffing firm found that 61 per-
cent of hiring managers now prefer to receive two-page résumés from experienced 
candidates for management jobs; 31 percent stated that they would accept three 
pages. Even applicants for low-level staff jobs may opt for two pages, 44 percent 
of recruiters said.27
Arranging the Parts
Although résumés have standard parts, their arrangement and content should be 
strategically planned. A customized résumé emphasizes skills and achievements 
aimed at a particular job or company. It shows a candidate’s most important quali-
fications first, and it de-emphasizes any weaknesses. In arranging your information 
and qualifications, try to create as few headings as possible; more than six gener-
ally looks cluttered. No two résumés are ever 
exactly alike, but most writers consider includ-
ing all or some of these items: main heading, 
career objective, summary of qualifications, 
education, experience, capabilities and skills, 
awards and activities, personal information, 
and references.
Main Heading. Your résumé, whether it 
is chronological or functional, should begin 
with your name; add your middle initial for an 
even more professional look. Following your 
name, list your contact information, including 
your complete address, area code and phone 
number, and e-mail address. If possible, 
include a telephone number where messages 
may be left for you. The outgoing message at 
this number should be in your voice, it should 
mention your full name, and it should be concise and professional. If you are expect-
ing an important recruiting call on your cell phone, pick up only when you are in 
a quiet environment and can concentrate. Keep the main heading as uncluttered 
recruiters may say they 
prefer one-page résumés, but 
many choose to interview 
those with longer résumés.
The parts of résumés should 
be arranged with the most 
important qualiﬁ cations ﬁ rst.
“That’s my resume, my autobiography, and six of my last projects.”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
381
and simple as possible. Format your name so that it stands out on the page. Don’t 
include the word résumé; it is like putting the word letter above correspondence.
For your e-mail address, be sure it sounds professional instead of something 
like 1foxylady@yahoo.com or hotdaddy@hotmail.com. Also be sure that you are 
using a personal e-mail address. Putting your work e-mail address on your résumé 
announces to prospective employers that you are using your current employer’s 
resources to look for another job.
Career Objective. Opinion is divided about the effect of including a career 
objective on a résumé. Recruiters think such statements indicate that a candidate 
has made a commitment to a career and is sure about what he or she wants to do. 
Career objectives, of course, make the recruiter’s life easier by quickly classifying 
the résumé. But such declarations can also disqualify a candidate if the stated 
objective doesn’t match a company’s job description.28 A well-written objective 
customized for the job opening can add value to a chronological or functional 
résumé.
A person applying for an auditor position might include the following objective: 
Seeking an auditor position in an internal corporate accounting department where 
my accounting skills, computer experience, knowledge of GAAP, and attention 
to detail will help the company run efficiently and ensure that its records are kept 
accurately.
Your objective should also focus on the employer’s needs. Therefore, it should 
be written from the employer’s perspective, not your own. Focus on how you 
can contribute to the organization, not on what the organization can do for you. 
A typical self-serving objective is To obtain a meaningful and rewarding posi-
tion that enables me to learn more about the graphic design field and allows for 
advancement. Instead, show how you will add value to the organization with an 
objective such as Position with advertising firm designing Web sites, publications, 
logos, and promotional displays for clients, where creativity, software knowledge, 
and proven communication skills can be used to build client base and expand 
operations.
Also be careful that your career objective doesn’t downplay your talents. For 
example, some consultants warn against using the words entry-level in your objective, 
as these words emphasize lack of experience or show poor self-confidence. Finally, 
your objective should be concise. Try to limit your objective to no more than two or 
three lines. Avoid using complete sentences and the pronoun I.
If you choose to omit the career objective, be sure to discuss your objectives and 
goals in your cover letter. Savvy job seekers are also incorporating their objectives 
into a summary of qualifications, which is discussed next.
Summary of Qualifications. “The biggest change in résumés over the last 
decade has been a switch from an objective to a summary at the top,” says career 
expert Wendy Enelow.29 Recruiters are busy, and smart job seekers add a summary 
of qualifications to their résumés to save the time of recruiters and hiring managers. 
Once a job is advertised, a hiring manager may get hundreds or even thousands 
of résumés in response. A summary at the top of your résumé makes it easier to 
read and ensures that your most impressive qualifications are not overlooked by a 
recruiter, who may be skimming résumés quickly. A well-written summary moti-
vates the recruiter to read further.
A summary of qualifications will include three to eight bulleted statements that 
prove you are the ideal candidate for the position. When formulating these state-
ments, consider your experience in the field, your education, your unique skills, 
awards you have won, certifications, and any other accomplishments that you 
want to highlight. Include numbers wherever possible. Target the most important 
qualifications an employer will be looking for in the person hired for this position. 
Examples of summaries of qualifications appear in Figures 13.6, 13.7, 13.9, and 
13.11 in the résumé models found in our collection.
Career objectives are 
most appropriate for 
speciﬁ c, targeted positions, 
but they may limit a 
broader job search.
A summary of qualiﬁ cations 
section lists your most 
impressive accomplishments 
and qualiﬁ cations in one 
concise bulleted list.

382 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
education. The next component in a chronological résumé is your education—
if it is more noteworthy than your work experience. In this section you should 
include the name and location of schools, dates of attendance, major fields of study, 
and degrees received. By the way, once you have attended college, you don’t need 
to list high school information on your résumé.
Your grade point average and/or class ranking may be important to prospective 
employers. Sixty-six percent of employers screen candidates by GPA, a recent survey 
found, and 58 percent of survey respondents stated that they would be less likely to 
hire candidates with GPAs below 3.0. One way to enhance your GPA is to calculate 
it in your major courses only (for example, 3.6/4.0 in major). It is not unethical to 
showcase your GPA in your major—as long as you clearly indicate what you are 
doing. Although some hiring managers may think that applicants are hiding some-
thing if they omit a poor record of grades, consultant Terese Corey Blanck suggests 
leaving out a poor GPA. Instead, she advises that students try to excel in intern-
ships, show extracurricular leadership, and target smaller, lesser-known companies 
to offset low grades.30
Under Education you might be tempted to list all the courses you took, but such 
a list makes for very dull reading. Refer to courses only if you can relate them to 
the position sought. When relevant, include certificates earned, seminars attended, 
workshops completed, and honors earned. If your education is incomplete, include 
such statements as B.S. degree expected 5/10 or 80 units completed in 120-unit pro-
gram. Title this section Education, Academic Preparation, or Professional Training. 
If you are preparing a functional résumé, you will probably put the education sec-
tion below your skills summaries, as Kevin Touhy has done in Figure 13.10.
Work experience or employment History. If your work experience 
is significant and relevant to the position sought, this information should appear 
before your education information. List your most recent employment first and 
work backward, including only those jobs that you think will help you win the 
targeted position. A job application form may demand a full employment history, 
but your résumé may be selective. Be aware, though, that time gaps in your employ-
ment history will probably be questioned in the interview. For each position show 
the following:
• Employer’s name, city, and state
• Dates of employment (month and year)
• Most important job title
• Significant duties, activities, accomplishments, and promotions
Describe your employment achievements concisely but concretely to make what 
resume consultants call “a strong value proposition.”31 Avoid generalities such as 
Worked with customers. Be more specific, with statements such as Served 40 or more 
retail customers a day; Successfully resolved problems about custom stationery orders; 
or Acted as intermediary among customers, printers, and suppliers. If possible, quan-
tify your accomplishments, such as Conducted study of equipment needs of 100 small 
businesses in Houston; Personally generated orders for sales of $90,000 annually; or 
Keyed all the production models for a 250-page employee procedures manual. One 
professional recruiter said, “I spend a half hour every day screening 50 résumés or 
more, and if I don’t spot some [quantifiable] results in the first 10 seconds, the résumé 
is history.”32
Your employment achievements and job duties will be easier to read if you 
place them in a bulleted list. When writing these bullet points, don’t try to list every 
single thing you have done on the job; instead, customize your information so that 
it relates to the target job. Make sure your list of job duties shows what you have 
to contribute and how you are qualified for the position you are applying for. Do 
not make your bullet points complete sentences, and avoid using personal pronouns 
(I, me, my) in them. If you have performed a lot of the same duties for multiple 
employers, you don’t have to repeat them.
The education section 
shows degrees and gPA but 
does not list all courses a 
job applicant has taken.
The work experience 
section of a résumé 
should list speciﬁ cs and 
quantify achievements.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
383
In addition to technical skills, employers seek individuals with communication, 
management, and interpersonal capabilities. This means you will want to select 
work experiences and achievements that illustrate your initiative, dependability, 
responsibility, resourcefulness, flexibility, and leadership. Employers also want 
people who can work together in teams. Therefore, include statements such as 
Collaborated with interdepartmental task force in developing ten-page handbook 
for temporary workers and Headed student government team that conducted most 
successful voter registration in campus history.
Statements describing your work experience can be made forceful and persuasive 
by using action verbs, such as those listed in Figure 13.3 and illustrated in Figure 
13.4. Starting each of your bullet points with an action verb will help ensure that 
your bulleted lists are parallel.
Capabilities and Skills. Recruiters want to know specifically what 
you can do for their companies. Therefore, list your special skills, such as 
Proficient in preparing federal, state, and local payroll tax returns as well as 
franchise and personal property tax returns. Include your ability to use the 
Internet, software programs, office equipment, and communication technology 
tools. If you speak a foreign language or use sign language, include it on your 
résumé. Describe proficiencies you have acquired through training and experi-
ence, such as Certified in computer  graphics and Web design through an inten-
sive 350-hour classroom program. Use expressions such as competent in, skilled 
in, proficient with, experienced in, and ability to; for example, Competent in 
FigUre 13.4 Use Action Verbs in Statements That Quantify Achievements
Identified weaknesses in internships and researched five alternate programs
Reduced delivery delays by an average of three days per order
Streamlined filing system, thus reducing 400-item backlog to zero
Organized holiday awards program for 1,200 attendees and 140 workers
Designed three pages in HTML for company Web site
Represented 2,500 students on committee involving university policies and procedures
Calculated shipping charges for overseas deliveries and recommended most economical rates
Managed 24-station computer network linking data in three departments
Distributed and explained voter registration forms to over 500 prospective voters
Praised by top management for enthusiastic teamwork and achievement
Secured national recognition from National Arbor Foundation for tree project
emphasize the skills 
and aptitudes that prove 
you are qualiﬁ ed for a 
speciﬁ c position.
FigUre 13.3 Strengthen Your Résumé With Action Verbs
accelerated
enabled
introduced
reviewed
achieved
encouraged
managed
revitalized
analyzed
engineered
organized
screened
collaborated
established
originated
served
conceptualized
expanded
overhauled
spearheaded
constructed
expedited
pioneered
spurred
converted
facilitated
reduced
strengthened
designed
improved
resolved
targeted
directed
increased
restructured
transformed

384 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
 writing, editing, and proofreading reports, tables, letters, memos, manuscripts, 
and business forms.
You will also want to highlight exceptional aptitudes, such as working well 
under stress, learning computer programs quickly, and interacting with customers. 
If possible, provide details and evidence that back up your assertions; for example, 
Mastered PhotoShop in 25 hours with little instruction. Search for examples of 
your writing, speaking, management, organizational, and interpersonal skills—
particularly those talents that are relevant to your targeted job. For recent gradu-
ates, this section can be used to give recruiters evidence of your potential. Instead of 
Capabilities, the section might be called Skills and Abilities.
Those job hunters preparing a functional résumé will place more focus on skills than 
on any other section. A well-written functional résumé groups skills into categories 
such as Accounting/Finance Skills, Management/Leadership Skills, Communication/
Teamwork Skills, and Computer/Technology Skills. Each skills category includes a 
bulleted list of achievements and experience that demonstrate the skill, including 
specific numbers whenever possible. These skills categories should be placed in the 
beginning of the résumé, where they will be highlighted, followed by education and 
work experience. The action verbs shown in Figures 13.3 and 13.4 can also be used 
when constructing a functional résumé.
Awards, Honors, and Activities. If you have three or more awards or 
honors, highlight them by listing them under a separate heading. If not, put them 
with activities or in the education or work experience section if appropriate. Include 
awards, scholarships (financial and other), fellowships, dean’s list, honors, recogni-
tion, commendations, and certificates. Be sure to identify items clearly. Your reader 
may be unfamiliar, for example, with Greek organizations, honors, and awards; 
tell what they mean. Instead of saying Recipient of Star award, give more details: 
Recipient of Star award given by Pepperdine University to outstanding graduates 
who combine academic excellence and extracurricular activities.
It is also appropriate to include school, community, volunteer, and professional 
activities. Employers are interested in evidence that you are a well-rounded person. 
This section provides an opportunity to demonstrate leadership and interpersonal 
skills. Strive to use action statements. For example, instead of saying Treasurer of 
business club, explain more fully: Collected dues, kept financial records, and paid 
bills while serving as treasurer of 35-member business management club.
Personal Data. Today’s résumés omit personal data, such as birth date, mari-
tal status, height, weight, national origin, health, and religious affiliation. Such 
information doesn’t relate to genuine occupational qualifications, and recruiters 
are legally barred from asking for such information. Some job seekers do, however, 
include hobbies or interests (such as skiing or photography) that might grab the 
recruiter’s attention or serve as conversation starters. For example, let’s say you 
learn that your hiring manager enjoys distance running. In that case you may want 
to mention that you have run a marathon if you share that interest. Many execu-
tives practice tennis or golf, two sports highly suitable for networking. Naturally, 
you shouldn’t mention time-consuming interests or dangerous pastimes (such as 
rock climbing, scuba diving, caving, bungee jumping, or motorcycle racing). You 
could also indicate your willingness to travel or to relocate since many companies 
will be interested.
references. Listing references directly on a résumé takes up valuable space. 
Moreover, references are not normally instrumental in securing an interview—few 
companies check them before the interview. Instead, recruiters prefer that you bring 
to the interview a list of individuals willing to discuss your qualifications. Therefore, 
you should prepare a separate list, such as that in Figure 13.5, when you begin your 
job search. Ask three to five instructors, your current employer or previous employ-
ers, colleagues or subordinates, and other professional contacts whether they would 
Awards, honors, and 
activities are appropriate 
for the résumé.
Omit personal data not 
related to job qualiﬁ cations.
references are unnecessary 
for the résumé, but they 
should be available for 
the interview.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
385
be willing to answer inquiries regarding your qualifications for employment. Be sure, 
however, to provide them with an opportunity to refuse. No reference is better than 
a negative one. Better yet, to avoid rejection and embarrassment, ask only those con-
tacts who will give you a glowing endorsement.
Do not include personal or character 
references, such as friends, family, or neigh-
bors, because recruiters rarely consult them. 
Companies are more interested in the opinions 
of objective individuals who know how you 
perform professionally and academically. One 
final note: most recruiters see little reason for 
including the statement References furnished 
upon request. It is unnecessary and takes up 
precious space.
In Figures 13.6 through 13.10, you will 
find a collection of models for chronological 
and functional résumés. Use these models to 
help you organize the content and format of 
your own persuasive résumé.
Optimizing Your résumé 
for Today’s Technologies
Thus far we have aimed our résumé advice at human readers. However, the 
first reader of your résumé may well be a computer. Hiring organizations today 
use a variety of methods to process incoming résumés. Some organizations still 
 welcome traditional print-based résumés that may include attractive formatting. 
FigUre 13.5 Sample Reference List
“I don’t have any references, but 4 out of 5 phone 
psychics say I’m destined for greatness.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

386 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Larger organizations, however, must deal with thousands of incoming résumés. 
Increasingly, they are placing those résumés directly into searchable databases. So 
that you can optimize your chances, you may need three versions of your résumé: 
(1) a traditional print-based résumé, (2) a scannable résumé, and (3) a plain-text 
résumé for  e-mailing or online posting. This does not mean that you have to write 
different résumés. You are merely preparing different versions of your traditional 
résumé. With all versions, you should also be aware of the significant role of 
résumé keywords. Finally, you may decide to create an e-portfolio to showcase 
your qualifications.
FigUre 13.6 Chronological Résumé: Current College Student With Limited Experience
To highlight her skills and capabilities, Casey placed them in the summary of qualifications at the top of her resume. She used the tables 
feature of her word processing program to create neat, invisible columns and to fit more information on one page, the length favored by 
most recruiters. 
Because résumés are 
increasingly becoming part 
of searchable databases, 
you may need three versions.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
387 
Designing a Print-Based résumé
Print-based résumés (also called presentation résumés) are attractively formatted 
to maximize readability. You can create a professional-looking résumé by using 
your word processing program to highlight your qualifications. The examples in 
this chapter provide ideas for simple layouts that are easily duplicated. You can 
also examine résumé templates for design and format ideas. Their inflexibility, 
however, leads to frustration as you try to force your skills and experience into a 
FigUre 13.7 Chronological Résumé: Recent College Graduate With Related Experience
Courtney Castro used a chronological resume to highlight her work experience, most of which was related directly to the position she 
seeks. Although she is a recent graduate, she has accumulated experience in two part-time jobs and one full-time job. She included a 
summary of qualifications to highlight her skills, experience, and interpersonal traits aimed at a specific position. Notice that Courtney 
designed her résumé in two columns with five major categories listed in the left column. In the right column she included bulleted items  
for each of the five categories. Conciseness and parallelism are important in writing an effective résumé. In the Experience category,  
she started each item with an active verb, which improved readability and parallel form.

388 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
predetermined template sequence. What’s more, recruiters who read hundreds of 
résumés can usually spot a template-based résumé. Instead, create your own origi-
nal résumé that fits your unique qualifications.
Your print-based résumé should use an outline format with headings and bullet  
points to present information in an orderly, uncluttered, easy-to-read format. An 
attractive print-based résumé is necessary (a) when you are competing for a job that 
does not require electronic submission, (b) to present in addition to an electronic 
submission, and (c) to bring with you to job interviews. Even if a résumé is submitted 
FigUre 13.8 Chronological Résumé: Current University Student With Limited Related Experience
Eric used MS Word to design a traditional chronological print-based résumé that he plans to give to recruiters at the campus job fair or 
during an interview. Although Eric has work experience not related to his future employment, his résumé looks impressive because he has 
transferable skills. His internship is related to his future career, and his language skills and study abroad experience will help him score 
points in competition with applicants. Eric’s volunteer experience is also attractive because it shows him as a well-rounded, compassionate 
individual. Because his experience in his future field is limited, he omitted a summary of qualifications.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
389 
FigUre 13.9 Chronological Résumé: University Graduate With Substantial Experience
Because Rachel has many years of experience and seeks executive-level employment, she highlighted her experience by placing it before 
her education. Her summary of qualifications highlighted her most impressive experience and skills. This chronological two-page résumé 
shows the steady progression of her career to executive positions, a movement that impresses and reassures recruiters. 

390 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
electronically, nearly every job candidate will want to have an attractive traditional 
résumé handy for human readers.
Preparing a Scannable résumé
A scannable résumé is one that is meant to be printed on plain white paper 
and read by a computer. To screen incoming résumés, many mid- and large-
sized companies use automated applicant-tracking software. These systems 
scan an incoming résumé with optical character recognition (OCR) looking 
FigUre 13.10 Functional Résumé: Recent College Graduate With Unrelated Part-Time Experience
Recent graduate Kevin Touhy chose this functional format to de-emphasize his meager work experience and emphasize his potential in 
sales and marketing. This version of his résumé is more generic than one targeted for a specific position. Nevertheless, it emphasizes his 
strong points with specific achievements and includes an employment section to satisfy recruiters. The functional format presents ability-
focused topics. It illustrates what the job seeker can do for the employer instead of narrating a history of previous jobs. Although recruiters 
prefer chronological résumés, the functional format is a good choice for new graduates, career changers, and those with employment gaps.
increasing use of scanners 
requires job candidates to 
prepare computer-friendly 
résumés. 

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
391
for  keywords. The most sophisticated programs enable recruiters and hiring 
managers to search for keywords, rank résumés based on the number of “hits,” 
and generate reports. Information from your résumé is stored, usually from six 
months to a year.
Before sending your résumé, find out whether the recipient uses scanning soft-
ware. If you can’t tell from the job announcement, call the company to ask whether 
it scans résumés electronically. If you don’t get a clear answer and you have even the 
slightest suspicion that your résumé might be read elec tronically, you will be smart 
to prepare a plain, scannable version as shown in Figure 13.11.
FigUre 13.11 Scannable Résumé
Letitia P. Lopez prepared this “plain Jane” résumé free of graphics and fancy formatting so that it would scan well if read by a computer. 
With the résumé, she included many job titles, skills, traits, and other descriptive keywords that scanners are programmed to recognize. 
To improve accurate scanning, she avoided bullets, italics, underlining, and columns. If she had more information to include, she could 
have gone to a second page because a résumé to be scanned need not be restricted to one page.
Applicant-tracking software 
scans incoming résumés 
searching for keywords.

392 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Tips for Maximizing Scannability. A scannable résumé must sacrifice 
many of the graphic enhancements you might have used to make your traditional 
print résumé attractive. To maximize scannability, follow these steps:
• Use 10- to 14-point type. Because touching letters or unusual fonts are likely to 
be misread, using a large, well-known font such as 12-point Times New Roman 
or Arial is safest. This may mean that your résumé will require two pages. After 
printing, inspect your résumé to see whether any letters touch—especially in your 
name.
• Avoid unusual typefaces, underlining, and italics. Moreover, don’t use bor-
ders, shading, or other graphics to highlight text. These features don’t scan well. 
Most applicant-tracking programs, however, can accurately read bold print, solid 
bullets, and asterisks.
• Be sure that your name is the first line on the page. Don’t use fancy layouts 
that may confuse a scanner. Reports generated by applicant-tracking software 
usually assume that the first line of a résumé contains the applicant’s name.
• List each phone number on its own line. Your landline and cell phone numbers 
should appear on separate lines to improve recognition.
• Provide white space. To ensure separation of words and categories, leave plenty 
of white space. For example, instead of using parentheses to enclose a telephone 
area code, insert blank spaces, such as 212 799-2415. Leave blank lines around 
headings.
• Avoid double columns. When listing job duties, skills, computer programs, and 
so forth, don’t tabulate items into two- or three-column lists. Scanners read 
across and may convert tables into nonsensical output.
• Use smooth white paper, black ink, and quality printing. Avoid colored or 
 textured paper, and use a high-quality laser or ink-jet printer.
• Don’t fold or staple your résumé. Send it in a large envelope so that you can 
avoid folds. Words that appear on folds may not be scanned correctly.
Tips for Maximizing “Hits.” In addition to paying attention to the 
physical appearance of your résumé, you must also be concerned with keywords 
that produce “hits” or recognition by the scanner. To maximize hits, do the 
following:
• Focus on specific keywords. Study carefully any advertisements and job 
descriptions for the position you want. Select keywords that describe skills, 
traits, tasks, and job titles. Because interpersonal traits are often requested 
by employers, consult Figure 13.12. It shows the most frequently requested 
interpersonal traits, as reported by Resumix, a pioneer in résumé-scanning 
software.
• Incorporate words from the advertisement or job description. Describe your 
experience, education, and qualifications in terms associated with the job adver-
tisement or job description for this position.
• Use typical headings. Include expected categories such as Objective, Summary 
of Qualifications, Education, Work Experience, Skills, and Accomplishments. 
Scanning software looks for such headings.
• Be careful of abbreviations. Minimize unfamiliar abbreviations, but maximize 
easily recognized abbreviations—especially those within your field, such as CAD, 
JPG, or JIT. When in doubt, though, spell out! Computers are less confused by 
whole words.
• Describe interpersonal traits and attitudes. Hiring managers look for keywords 
and phrases such as time management skills, dependability, high energy, leader-
ship, sense of responsibility, and team player.
• Use more than one page if necessary. Computers can easily handle more than 
one page so include as much as necessary to describe your qualifications and 
maximize hits.
Scanners produce “hits” 
when they recognize 
targeted keywords such 
as nouns describing skills, 
traits, tasks, and job titles.
Scannable résumés use 
plain formatting, large 
fonts, quality printing, 
and white space.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
393
Preparing a Plain-Text résumé for e-Mailing
A plain-text résumé (also called an ASCII résumé) is an electronic version 
suitable for e-mailing or pasting into online résumé bank submission forms. 
Employers prefer plain-text résumés because they avoid possible e-mail viruses 
and word processing incompatibilities. Usually embedded within an e-mail mes-
sage, a plain-text résumé, shown in Figure 13.13, is immediately searchable. You 
should prepare a plain-text résumé if you want the fastest and most reliable way 
to contact potential employers. Follow these suggestions to create a plain-text 
résumé:
• Observe all the tips for a scannable résumé. A plain-text résumé requires the 
same attention to content, formatting, and keywords as that recommended for a 
scannable résumé.
• Reformat with shorter lines. Many e-mail programs wrap lines longer than 60 
characters. To avoid having your résumé look as if a chain saw attacked it, use a 
short line length (such as 4 inches).
• Think about using keyboard characters to enhance format. In addition to 
using capital letters and asterisks, you might use spaced equals signs (= = =) and 
tildes (~ ~ ~) to create lines that separate résumé categories.
• Move all text to the left. Do not center items; start all text at the left margin. 
Remove tabs.
• Save your résumé in plain text (.txt) or rich text format (.rtf). Saving your résumé 
in one of these formats will ensure that it can be read when pasted in an e-mail 
message.
• Test your résumé before sending it to an employer. After preparing and saving 
your résumé, copy and paste a copy of it into an e-mail message and send it to 
yourself and check to see whether any non-ASCII characters appear. They may 
show up as question marks, square blocks, or other odd characters. Make any 
necessary changes.
When sending a plain-text résumé to an employer, be sure that your subject line 
clearly describes the purpose of your message. In addition, use the professional 
e-mail techniques you learned in Chapter 5.
FigUre 13.12 Interpersonal Keywords Most Requested by Employers Using Résumé-Scanning Software*
Ability to delegate
Creative
Leadership
Self-accountable
Ability to implement
Customer oriented
Multitasking
Self-managing
Ability to plan
Detail minded
Open communication
Setting priorities
Ability to train
Ethical
Open minded
Supportive
Accurate
Flexible
Oral communication
Takes initiative
Adaptable
Follow instructions
Organizational skills
Team building
Aggressive work
Follow through
Persuasive
Team player
Analytical ability
Follow up
Problem solving
Tenacious
Assertive
High energy
Public speaking
Willing to travel
Communication skills
Industrious
Results oriented
Competitive
Innovative
Safety conscious
*Reported by Resumix, a leading producer of résumé-scanning software.
Source: Joyce Lain Kennedy and Thomas J. Morrow, Electronic Résumé Revolution (New York: John Wiley & Sons), 70. Reprinted by permission of 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
employers prefer plain-text 
résumés because they are 
immediately searchable and 
they do not require employers 
to open attachments, which 
might carry viruses or create 
software incompatibilities.

394 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Showcasing Your Qualifications in an e-Portfolio
As the workplace becomes increasingly digital, you have yet another way to display 
your qualifications to prospective employers—the e-portfolio. Resourceful job can-
didates in certain fields—writers, models, artists, and 
graphic artists—have been creating print portfolios 
to illustrate their qualifications and achievements for 
some time. Now business and professional job candi-
dates in the technology industry in particular are using 
electronic portfolios to show off their talents.
An e-portfolio is a collection of digital files that 
can be navigated with the help of menus much like 
a personal Web site. It provides viewers with a snap-
shot of a candidate’s performance, talents, and accom-
plishments. A digital portfolio may include a copy of 
your résumé, reference letters, special achievements, 
awards, certificates, work samples, a complete list of 
your courses, thank-you letters, and anything else that 
FigUre 13.13 Plain-Text Résumé
To be sure her plain-text résumé would transmit well when within an e-mail message, Leticia prepared a special version with all lines starting 
at the left margin. She used a 4-inch line length to avoid awkward line breaks. To set off her major headings, she used the tilde character 
on her keyboard. She saved the document as a text file (.txt or .rtf) so that it could be read by different computers. At the end she included a 
statement saying that an attractive, fully formatted hard copy of her résumé was available on request. 
“I want my résumé to be the one you remember. It’s also 
available as a music video, interpretive dance, and a haiku.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
An e-portfolio offers links to 
examples of a job candidate’s 
performance, talents, and 
accomplishments in 
digital form.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
395
touts your accomplishments. An advanced portfolio might include links to electronic 
copies of your artwork, film projects, blueprints, and photographs of classwork that 
might otherwise be difficult to share with potential employers.
Digital portfolios are generally accessed on Web sites, where they are available 
around the clock to employers. Some colleges and universities not only make Web site 
space available for student e-portfolios, but also provide instruction and resources 
for scanning photos, digitizing images, and preparing graphics. E-portfolios may 
also be burned onto CDs and DVDs that you can mail to prospective employers.
E-portfolios have many advantages. On Web sites they can be viewed at employers’ 
convenience. Let’s say you are talking on the phone with an employer in another city 
who wants to see a copy of your résumé. You can simply refer the employer to the Web 
address where your résumé is posted. E-portfolios can also be seen by many individuals 
in an organization without circulating a paper copy. But the real reason for preparing 
an e-portfolio is that it shows off your talents and qualifications more thoroughly than 
a print résumé does.
Tech-savvy applicants even use videos to profile their skills. A professional-grade 
video résumé may open doors and secure an interview when other techniques have 
failed.33 However, some recruiters are skeptical about digital or video portfolios 
because they fear that such applications will take more time to view than paper-
based résumés do. Nontraditional applications may end up at the bottom of the 
pile or be ignored. Worse yet, lack of judgment can lead to embarrassment. Aleksey 
Vayner’s video résumé somehow ended up on YouTube in late 2006, causing him 
to be widely ridiculed. The Yale senior and budding investment banker concocted 
a six-minute video titled “Impossible Is Nothing,” showing him boisterously lifting 
weights, ballroom dancing, and playing tennis, all the while engaging in shameless 
puffery.34
Experts agree that the new medium will need to mature before smart use guide-
lines can be established. You can learn more about video résumés by searching 
the Web.
Applying the Final Touches to Your résumé
Because your résumé is probably the most important message you will ever write, 
you will revise it many times. With so much information in concentrated form and 
with so much riding on its outcome, your résumé demands careful polishing, proof-
reading, and critiquing.
As you revise, be certain to verify all the facts, particularly those involving your 
previous employment and education. Don’t be caught in a mistake, or worse, a dis-
tortion of previous jobs and dates of employment. These items likely will be checked, 
and the consequences of puffing up a résumé with deception or flat-out lies are sim-
ply not worth the risk.
Being Honest and ethical
A résumé is expected to showcase a candidate’s strengths and minimize weaknesses. 
For this reason, recruiters expect a certain degree of self-promotion. Some résumé 
writers, however, step over the line that separates honest self-marketing from decep-
tive half-truths and blatant lies. Distorting facts on a résumé is unethical; lying is 
illegal. Either practice can destroy a career.
Given the competitive job market, it might be tempting to puff up your résumé. 
What’s more, you wouldn’t be alone in telling fibs or outright whoppers. One study 
found that 44 percent of applicants lied about their work histories, 23 percent 
fabricated licenses or credentials, and 41 percent falsified their educational back-
grounds.35 Another recent study revealed an even higher number of résumé cheats; 
over 50 percent of applicants lie.36 Although recruiters can’t check all information, 
most will verify previous employment and education before hiring candidates. Over 
half will require official transcripts.
Job candidates generally 
offer e-portfolios at Web 
sites, but they may also burn 
them onto a CD or a DVD.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
I think the video résumé 
debate is going to be hot 
for the next few years. 
Typically, they are frowned 
upon because of [Equal 
Employment Opportunity 
Commission] regulation. 
Companies are scared to 
death of getting sued.

396 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
After hiring, the checking process may continue. If 
hiring officials find a discrepancy in GPA or prior experi-
ence and the error is an honest mistake, they meet with 
the new-hire to hear an explanation. If the discrepancy 
wasn’t a mistake, they will likely fire the person immedi-
ately. No job seeker wants to be in the unhappy position 
of explaining résumé errors or defending misrepresenta-
tion. Avoiding the following common problems can keep 
you off the hot seat:
• Inflated education, grades, or honors. Some job 
candidates claim degrees from colleges or universi-
ties when in fact they merely attended classes. Others 
increase their grade point averages or claim fictitious 
honors. Any such dishonest reporting is grounds for 
dismissal when discovered.
• Enhanced job titles. Wishing to elevate their status, 
some applicants misrepresent their titles. For exam-
ple, one technician called himself a programmer when 
he had actually programmed only one project for his 
boss. A mail clerk who assumed added responsibili-
ties conferred upon herself the title of supervisor. Even 
when the description seems accurate, it is unethical to 
list any title not officially granted.
• Puffed-up accomplishments. Some job seekers inflate 
their employment experience or achievements. One 
clerk, eager to make her photocopying duties sound 
more important, said that she assisted the vice presi-
dent in communicating and distributing employee 
directives. An Ivy League graduate who spent the bet-
ter part of six months watching rented movies on his 
DVD player described the activity as Independent Film 
Study. That statement may have helped win an inter-
view, but it lost him the job. In addition to avoiding 
puffery, guard against taking sole credit for achieve-
ments that required the efforts of many people. When 
recruiters suspect dubious claims on résumés, they nail 
applicants with specific—and often embarrassing—
questions during their interviews.
• Altered employment dates. Some candidates extend the dates of employment 
to hide unimpressive jobs or to cover up periods of unemployment and illness. 
Let’s say that several years ago Cindy was unemployed for 14 months between 
working for Company A and being hired by Company B. To make her employ-
ment history look better, she adds seven months to her tenure with Company A 
 
 and seven months to Company B. Now her employ-
ment history has no gaps, but her résumé is dishonest 
and represents a potential booby trap for her.
• Hidden keywords. One of the latest sneaky tricks 
involves inserting invisible keywords in electronic 
résumés. To fool scanning programs into ranking their 
résumés higher, some job hunters use white type on 
a white background or they use Web coding to pack 
their résumés with target keywords. However, newer 
recruiter search tools detect such mischief, and those 
résumés are tossed.37
If your honest qualifications aren’t good enough to get 
you the job you want, start working now to improve them.
WOrKPLACe iN FOCUS
Despite the temptation to fudge the facts a little when 
applying for a job, it doesn’t pay to pad one’s résumé. 
Celebrity chef Robert Irvine, who rose to fame by preparing 
meals on the Food Network’s Dinner: Impossible program, 
lost his spot when executives discovered the TV chef 
had cooked up far more than sumptuous soufflés and 
dynamite desserts. Numerous qualifications listed on 
Irvine’s résumé—such as the claim to have cooked 
for U.S. presidents and Britain’s royal family—proved 
greatly exaggerated or untrue. What common pitfalls 
should job seekers avoid when preparing résumés? 
© AP PHOTO / RICHARD DREW, FILE
“I typed up my résumé on the computer. The spell-checker 
accidentally changed ‘Mid-State Junior College’ to ‘Harvard.’ ”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
397
Polishing Your résumé
While you continue revising, look for other ways to improve your résumé. For 
example, consider consolidating headings. By condensing your information into as 
few headings as possible, you will produce a clean, professional-looking document. 
Study other résumés for valuable formatting ideas. Ask yourself what graphic high-
lighting techniques you can use to improve readability: capitalization, underlining, 
indenting, and bulleting. Experiment with headings and styles to achieve a pleasing, 
easy-to-read message. Moreover, look for ways to eliminate wordiness. For exam-
ple, instead of Supervised two employees who worked at the counter, try Supervised 
two counter employees. Review Chapter 4 for more tips on writing concisely.
In addition to making your résumé concise, make sure that you haven’t included 
any of the following information, which doesn’t belong on a résumé:
• Any basis for discrimination (age, 
marital status, gender, national origin, 
religion, race, marital status, number of 
children, disability)
• A photograph
• Reasons for leaving previous jobs
• The word résumé
• Social security number
• Salary history or requirements
• High school information
• References
• Full addresses of schools or 
employers (include city and 
state only)
Above all, make sure your print-based résumé look professional. Avoid anything 
humorous or “cute,” such as a help-wanted poster with your name or picture inside. 
Eliminate the personal pronoun I to ensure an objective style. Use high-quality paper 
in a professional color, such as white, off-white, or light gray. Print your résumé 
using a first-rate laser or ink-jet printer. Be prepared with a résumé for people to 
read as well as one for a computer to read.
Proofreading Your résumé
After revising, you must proofread, proofread, and proofread again for spelling, 
mechanics, content, and format. Then have a knowledgeable friend or relative 
proofread it yet again. This is one document that must be perfect. Because the job 
market is so competitive, one typo, misspelled word, or grammatical error could 
eliminate you from consideration.
By now you may be thinking that you’d like to hire someone to write your 
résumé. Don’t! First, you know yourself better than anyone else could know you. 
Second, you will end up with a generic or a one-time résumé. A generic résumé in 
today’s highly competitive job market will lose out to a customized résumé nine 
times out of ten. Equally useless is a one-time résumé aimed at a single job. What if 
you don’t get that job? Because you will need to revise your résumé many times as 
you seek a variety of jobs, be prepared to write (and rewrite) it yourself.
Submitting Your résumé
If you are responding to a job advertisement, be sure to read the job listing carefully 
to make sure you know how the employer wants you to submit your résumé. Not 
following the prospective employer’s instructions can eliminate you from consid-
eration before your résumé is even reviewed. Employers will probably ask you to 
submit your résumé in one of the following ways:
• Word document. Recruiters may still ask candidates to send their résumés and 
cover letters by snail mail. They may also allow applicants to attach their résumés 
as MS Word documents to e-mail messages, despite the fear of viruses.
• Plain-text, ASCII document. As discussed earlier, some employers expect appli-
cants to submit résumés and cover letters as plain-text documents. This format is 
widely used for posting to an online job board or for e-mail delivery. Plain-text 
résumés may be embedded within or attached to e-mail messages.
• PDF document. For the sake of safety, many hiring managers prefer PDF (por-
table document format) files. A PDF résumé will look exactly like the original 
Study résumé models 
for ideas on improving 
your format.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
It sounds basic, but make 
sure that your resume is 
free of typos and other 
errors. When applying by 
e-mail, there is more of a 
tendency to rush and make 
careless mistakes. For many 
employers, this shows a lack 
of attention to detail and 
is an easy way to eliminate 
someone from consideration.
in addition to being well 
written, a résumé must be 
carefully formatted and 
meticulously proofread.
Send your résumé 
in the format the 
employer requests.

398 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
and cannot be easily altered. Newer computers come with Adobe Acrobat Reader 
preinstalled for easy reading. Converting your MS Word and other documents to 
a PDF file requires Adobe software.
• Company database. Some organizations prefer that you complete an online 
form with your résumé information. This enables them to plug your data into 
their formats for rapid searching. You might be able to cut and paste your infor-
mation into the form.
• Fax. Although still a popular way of sending résumés, faxing presents problems 
in blurring and lost information. If you must fax your résumé, use at least a 
12-point font to improve readability. Thinner fonts—such as Times, Palatino, 
New Century Schoolbook, Arial, and Bookman—are clearer than thicker ones. 
Avoid underlines, which may look broken or choppy when faxed. Follow up with 
your polished, printed résumé.
Whether you are mailing your résumé the traditional way, submitting it by 
e-mail, or transmitting it by fax, don’t send it on its own. Regardless of the submis-
sion format, in most cases a résumé should be accompanied by a cover letter, which 
will be discussed in the next section.
Creating a Customized, Persuasive Cover Letter
Job candidates often labor over their résumés but treat the cover letter as an after-
thought. This critical mistake could destroy a job search. Even if an advertisement 
doesn’t request one, be sure to distinguish your application with a persuasive cover 
letter (also called a letter of application). It has three purposes: (a) introducing the 
résumé, (b) highlighting your strengths in terms of benefits to the reader, and (c) gain-
ing an interview. In many ways your cover letter is a sales letter; it sells your talent 
and tries to beat the competition. It will, accordingly, include many of the techniques 
you learned for sales letters in Chapter 8, especially if your letter is unsolicited.
Recruiting professionals disagree about how long to make a cover letter. Many 
prefer short letters with no more than three paragraphs. Others desire longer letters 
that supply more information, thus giving them a better opportunity to evaluate 
a candidate’s qualifications. These recruiters argue that hiring and training new 
employees is expensive and time consuming; therefore, they welcome extra data to 
guide them in making the best choice the first time. Follow your judgment in writing 
a brief or a longer cover letter. If you believe, for example, that you need space to 
explain in more detail what you can do for a prospective employer, do so.
Regardless of its length, a cover letter should have three primary parts: (a) an 
opening that introduces the message and identifies the position, (b) a body that sells 
the candidate and focuses on the employer’s needs, and (c) a closing that requests an 
interview and motivates action. When putting your cover letter together, remember 
that the biggest mistake job seekers make when writing cover letters is making them 
sound too generic. You should, therefore, write a personalized, targeted cover letter 
for every position you apply for.
gaining Attention in the Opening
Your cover letter will be more appealing, and will more likely be read, if it begins by 
addressing the reader by name. Rather than sending your letter to the Hiring Manager
or Human Resources Department, try to identify the name of the appropriate indi-
vidual. Call the organization for the name of the person in charge of hiring for the 
position, and always verify spelling. If that fails, says workplace expert Liz Ryan, look 
on the company Web site under About Us. “Either the VP/leader of the function you 
are interested in (e.g., marketing or engineering),” suggests Ryan, “or the VP/leader 
of HR is a great person to call or write to.”38 If you still cannot find the name of a 
person to address, you might use the simplified letter style and replace the salutation 
with a subject line such as “Application for Position of . . . .”
Cover letters introduce 
résumés, relate writer 
strengths to reader beneﬁ ts, 
and seek an interview.
The opening in a cover 
letter gains attention by 
addressing the receiver 
by name.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
399
How you open your cover letter depends largely on whether the application is 
solicited or unsolicited. If an employment position has been announced and appli-
cants are being solicited, you can use a direct approach. If you do not know whether 
a position is open and you are prospecting for a job, use an indirect approach. 
Whether direct or indirect, the opening should attract the attention of the reader. 
Strive for openings that are more imaginative than Please consider this letter an 
application for the position of . . . or I would like to apply for. . . .
Openings for Solicited Jobs. Here are some of the best techniques to 
open a cover letter for a job that has been announced:
• Refer to the name of an employee in the company. Remember that employers 
always hope to hire known quantities rather than complete strangers:
Mitchell Sims, a member of your Customer Service Department, told me 
that IntriPlex is seeking an experienced customer service representative. The 
enclosed summary of my qualifications demonstrates my preparation for this 
position.
At the suggestion of Ms. Jennifer Larson of your Human Resources Department, 
I submit my qualifications for the position of staffing coordinator.
• Refer to the source of your information precisely. If you are answering an 
advertisement, include the exact position advertised and the name and date of 
the publication. For large organizations it is also wise to mention the section of 
the newspaper where the ad appeared:
Your advertisement in Section C-3 of the June 1 Daily News for an account-
ing administrator greatly appeals to me. With my accounting training and 
computer experience, I believe I could serve Quad Graphics well.
From your company’s Web site, I learned about your need for a sales repre-
sentative for the Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois regions. I am very interested in 
this position and believe that my education and experience are appropriate 
for the opening.
Susan Butler, placement director at Sierra University, told me that DataTech has 
an opening for a technical writer with knowledge of Web design and graphics.
• Refer to the job title and describe how your qualifications fit the requirements. 
Human resources directors are looking for a match between an applicant’s cre-
dentials and the job needs:
Will an honors graduate with a degree in recreation and two years of part-
time experience organizing social activities for a convalescent hospital qualify 
for your position of activity director?
Because of my specialized training in computerized accounting at Boise State 
University, I am confident that I have the qualifications you described in your 
advertisement for a cost accountant trainee.
Openings for Unsolicited Jobs. If you are unsure whether a position 
actually exists, you may wish to use a more persuasive opening. Since your goal is 
to convince this person to read on, try one of the following techniques:
• Demonstrate interest in and knowledge of the reader’s business. Show the 
hiring officer that you have done your research and that this organization is more 
than a mere name to you:
Because Signa HealthNet, Inc., is organizing a new information management 
team for its recently established group insurance division, could you use the 
services of a well-trained information systems graduate who seeks to become 
a professional systems analyst?
Openers for solicited jobs 
refer to the source of 
the information, the job 
title, and qualiﬁ cations 
for the position.
Openers for unsolicited 
jobs show interest in 
and knowledge of the 
company, as well as 
spotlight reader beneﬁ ts.

400 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
• Show how your special talents and background will benefit the company. 
Human resource managers need to be convinced that you can do something for 
them:
Could your rapidly expanding publications division use the services of an 
 editorial assistant who offers exceptional language skills, an honors degree 
from the University of Maine, and two years’ experience in producing a cam-
pus literary publication?
In applying for an advertised job, Kendra Hawkins wrote the solicited cover 
letter shown in Figure 13.14. Notice that her opening identifies the position and 
the newspaper completely so that the reader knows exactly what advertisement 
Kendra means. Using features on her word processing program, Kendra designed 
her own letterhead that uses her name and looks like professionally printed letter-
head paper.
FigUre 13.14 Solicited Cover Letter

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
401
More challenging are unsolicited cover letters, such as Donald Vinton’s shown 
in Figure 13.15. Because he hopes to discover or create a job, his opening must grab 
the reader’s attention immediately. To do that, he capitalizes on company informa-
tion appearing in an online article. Donald purposely kept his cover letter short and 
to the point because he anticipated that a busy executive would be unwilling to 
read a long, detailed letter. Donald’s unsolicited letter “prospects” for a job. Some 
job candidates believe that such letters may be even more productive than efforts 
to secure advertised jobs, since “prospecting” candidates face less competition and 
show initiative. Notice that Donald’s letter uses a personal business letter format 
with his return address above the date.
Selling Your Strengths in the Body
Once you have captured the attention of the reader and identified your purpose in the 
letter opening, you should use the body of the letter to promote your qualifications for 
FigUre 13.15 Unsolicited Cover Letter
The body of the cover 
letter promotes the 
candidate’s qualiﬁ cations 
for the targeted job.

402 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
this position. If you are responding to an advertisement, you will want to explain how 
your preparation and experience fill the stated requirements. If you are prospecting 
for a job, you may not know the exact requirements. Your employment research and 
knowledge of your field, however, should give you a reasonably good idea of what is 
expected for this position.
It is also important to stress reader benefits. In other words, you should describe 
your strong points in relation to the needs of the employer. Hiring officers want you 
to tell them what you can do for their organizations. This is more important than 
telling what courses you took in college or what duties you performed in your pre-
vious jobs. Instead of I have completed courses in business communication, report 
writing, and technical writing, try this:
Courses in business communication, report writing, and technical writing have 
helped me develop the research and writing skills required of your technical 
writers.
Choose your strongest qualifications and show how they fit the targeted job. 
Remember that students with little experience are better off spotlighting their educa-
tion and its practical applications, as these candidates did:
Because you seek an architect’s apprentice with proven ability, I submit a drawing 
of mine that won second place in the Sinclair College drafting contest last year.
Composing e-mail messages, business letters, memos, and reports in my business 
communication and office technology courses helped me develop the writing, 
language, proofreading, and computer skills mentioned in your ad for an admin-
istrative assistant.
In the body of your letter, you may choose to discuss relevant personal traits. 
Employers are looking for candidates who, among other things, are team players, take 
responsibility, show initiative, and learn easily. Don’t just list several personal traits, 
though; instead, include documentation that proves you possess these traits. Notice how 
the following paragraph uses action verbs to paint a picture of a promising candidate:
In addition to developing technical and academic skills at Mid-State University, 
I have gained interpersonal, leadership, and organizational skills. As vice presi-
dent of the business students’ organization, Gamma Alpha, I helped organize 
and supervise two successful fund-raising events. These activities involved con-
ceptualizing the tasks, motivating others to help, scheduling work sessions, and 
coordinating the efforts of 35 diverse students in reaching our goal. I enjoyed 
my success with these activities and look forward to applying such experience in 
your management trainee program.
Finally, in this section or the next, you should refer the reader to your résumé. 
Do so directly or as part of another statement, as shown here:
As you will notice from my enclosed résumé, I will graduate in June with a 
bachelor’s degree in business administration.
Please refer to the attached résumé for additional information regarding my 
education, experience, and references.
Motivating Action in the Closing
After presenting your case, you should conclude by asking confidently for an inter-
view. Don’t ask for the job. To do so would be presumptuous and naive. In request-
ing an interview, you might suggest reader benefits or review your strongest points. 
Sound sincere and appreciative. Remember to make it easy for the reader to agree 
by supplying your telephone number and the best times to call you. In addition, 
keep in mind that some hiring officers prefer that you take the initiative to call them. 
Avoid expressions like I hope, which will weaken your closing. Here are possible 
endings:
employers seek employees 
who are team players, 
take responsibility, show 
initiative, and learn easily.
The closing of a cover 
letter conﬁ dently requests 
an interview and makes 
it easy to respond.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
403
This brief description of my qualifications and the additional information on my 
résumé demonstrate my genuine desire to put my skills in accounting to work for 
you. Please call me at (405) 488-2291 before 10 a.m. or after 3 p.m. to arrange 
an interview.
To add to your staff an industrious, well-trained administrative assistant with proven 
word processing and communication skills, call me at (350) 492-1433 to arrange an 
interview. I can meet with you at any time convenient to your schedule.
I look forward to the opportunity to discuss my qualifications more fully in an 
interview. You can reach me on my cell phone at (213) 458-4030.
Next week, after you have examined the enclosed résumé, I will call you to dis-
cuss the possibility of arranging an interview.
Sending Your Cover Letter by e-Mail or by Fax
More than 90 percent of résumés at Fortune 500 companies arrive by e-mail or 
are submitted through the corporate Web site.39 Many applicants using technology 
make the mistake of not including cover letters with their résumés submitted by 
e-mail or by fax. A résumé that arrives without a cover letter makes the receiver 
wonder what it is and why it was sent. Recruiters want you to introduce yourself, 
and they also are eager to see some evidence that you can write. Some candidates 
either skip the cover letter or think they can get by with one-line cover letters such 
as this: Please see attached résumé, and thanks for your consideration.
If you are serious about landing the job, take the time to prepare a professional 
cover letter. If you are sending your résumé by e-mail, you may use the same cover 
letter you would send by snail mail but shorten it a bit. As illustrated in Figure 
13.16, an inside address is unnecessary for an e-mail recipient. Also move your 
Serious job candidates 
send a professional cover 
letter even if the résumé 
is submitted online, by 
e-mail, or by fax.
FigUre 13.16 E-Mail Cover Letter

404 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
return address from the top of the letter to just below your name. Include your 
e-mail address and phone number. Remove tabs, bullets, underlining, and italics 
that might be problematic in e-mail messages. If you are submitting your résumé by 
fax, you can use the same cover letter you would send by the U.S. Postal Service, just 
indicate the delivery method by writing BY FAX above the recipient’s address.
Final Tips for Successful Cover Letters
As you revise your cover letter, notice how many sentences begin with I. Although 
it is impossible to talk about yourself without using I, you can reduce “I” domina-
tion with this writing technique. Make activities and outcomes, and not yourself, 
the subjects of sentences. For example, rather than I took classes in business com-
munication and computer applications, say Classes in business communication and 
computer applications prepared me to . . . . Instead of I enjoyed helping customers, 
say Helping customers was a real pleasure.
Because the beginning of a sentence is a prominent position, avoid starting sen-
tences with I whenever possible. Use the “you” view (You are looking for a hardwork-
ing team player . . . ), or try opening with phrases that de-emphasize you, the writer, 
for example, All through college, I worked full time at . . . . Above all, strive for a com-
fortable style. In your effort to avoid sounding self-centered, don’t write unnaturally.
Like the résumé, your cover letter must look professional and suggest qual-
ity. This means using a traditional letter style, such as block or modified block. 
Also, be sure to print it on the same quality paper as your résumé. As with your 
résumé, proofread it several times yourself; then have a friend read it for content 
and mechanics. Don’t rely on spell check to find all the errors. Just like your résumé, 
your cover letter must be perfect.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Unless you are applying for a 
position as a snake charmer, 
the following opening line 
from an actual cover letter will 
definitely nix your chances of 
winning an interview: “I have 
seven years of expertise as 
an international press editor, 
proven journalism skills, and 
excellent writhing skills.”
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
In today’s competitive job market, an employment search 
begins with identifying your interests, evaluating your quali-
fications, and choosing a career path. Finding the perfect 
job will mean a concentrated effort devoted to searching 
online job listings, checking classified advertisements, and 
networking. In applying for jobs, you will want to submit a 
customized, persuasive résumé that sells your skills and 
experience. Whether you choose a chronological or a func-
tional résumé style, you should tailor your assets to fit the 
position sought. If you think your résumé might be scanned, 
emphasize keywords and keep the format simple. A persua-
sive cover letter should introduce your résumé and describe 
how your skills and experiences match those required.
Now, if your résumé and cover letter have been success-
ful, you will proceed to the employment interview, one of life’s 
most nerve-wracking experiences. The last chapter in this 
book provides helpful suggestions for successful interview-
ing and follow-up communication.
S
Summing Up and Looking Forward
C
Critical Thinking
 1. How has the Internet changed job searching for individuals 
and recruiters? Has the change had a positive or a negative 
effect?
 2. How is a résumé different from a company employment 
application?
 3. Some job candidates think that applying for unsolicited 
jobs can be more fruitful than applying for advertised 
positions. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of 
letters that “prospect” for jobs.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
405
 6. How should the job-search process begin? By writing a résumé?
 7. Using the Web, where should job candidates look in addition to using the big job board sites?
 8. What is a chronological résumé, and what are its advantages and disadvantages?
 9. Describe a functional résumé and discuss its advantages and disadvantages.
 10. List five tips for writing an effective career objective on your résumé.
 11. Describe a summary of qualifications, and explain why it is increasingly popular on résumés.
 12. Has searching for a job online replaced traditional job-search methods?
 4. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of uncon-
ventional job applications that use “gimmicks” or a video 
résumé to get noticed.
 5. Ethical Issue: Job candidate Karen accepts a position 
with Company A. One week later she receives a better 
offer from Company B. She wants very much to accept 
it. What should she do?
C
Chapter review

406 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
 13. What changes must be made in a typical résumé to make it effective for computer scanning?
 14. When you send a cover letter within an e-mail message, what changes should you make to the format 
of the letter?
 15. What is an e-portfolio, and what are its advantages?
A
Activities and Cases
13.1 Revising Janet’s Résumé
One effective way to improve your writing skills is to critique and edit the résumé of someone else.
Your Task. Analyze the following poorly organized résumé. List its weaknesses. Your instructor may ask you to revise sec-
tions of this résumé before showing you an improved version.
Résumé
Janet P. Garza
530 N. Comanche St., Apt. B • San Marcos, TX 78666
Phone (512) 396-5182 • E-Mail: Hotchilibabe08@gmail.com
OBJECTIVE
I would love to find a first job in the “real world” with a big accounting company that will help me get ahead in the account-
ing field
SKILLS
Word processing, Internet browsers (Explorer and Google), Powerpoint, Excel, type 30 wpm, databases, spreadsheets; 
great composure in stressful situations; 3 years as leader and supervisor and 4 years in customer service
EDUCATION
Austin Community College Lamar Center. San Marcos, Texas. AA degree Fall 2007
Now I am pursuing a BA in Accounting at TSU-San Marcos, majoring in Accounting; my minor is Marketing. Expected degree 
date is June 2009; I recieved a Certificate of Completion in Entry Level Accounting in June 2007
I went to Scranton High School, Scranton, PA. I graduated in June 2004.
Highlights:
Named Line Manager of the Month at Home Depot, 09/2004 and 08/2003
Obtained a Certificate in Entry Level Accounting, June 2005
Chair of Accounting Society, Spring and fall 2007
Dean’s Honor List, Fall 2008
Financial advisor training completed through Primerica (May 2008)
Webmaster for M.E.Ch.A., Spring 2009
•
•
•
•
•
•

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
407
Part-Time Employment
Financial Consultant, 2008 to present
I worked only part-time (January 2008-present) for Primerica Financial Services, San Marcos, TX to assist clients in obtaining 
a mortgage or consolidating a current mortgage loan and also to advise clients in assessing their need for life insurance.
Home Depot, Kyle, TX. As line manager, from September 2004–March 2008, I supervised 50 cashiers and front-end associates. 
I helped to write schedules, disciplinary action notices, and performance appraisals. I also kept track of change drawer and 
money exchanges; occasionally was manager on duty for entire store.
Penn Foster Career School-Scranton, PA where I taught flower design, I supervised 15 florists, made floral arrangements, 
sent them to customers, and restocked flowers.
List at least six weaknesses in this résumé.
13.2 Revising Janet’s Cover Letter
The following cover letter accompanies Janet Garza’s résumé (Activity 13.1).
Your Task. Analyze each section of the following cover letter written by Janet and list its weaknesses. Your instructor may 
ask you to revise this letter before showing you an improved version.
To Whom It May Concern:
I saw your internship position yesterday and would like to apply right away. It would be so exciting to work for your esteemed 
firm! An internship would really give me much needed real-world experience and help my career.
I have all the qualifications you require in your ad and more. I am a junior at Texas State University-San Marcos and an 
Accounting major (with a minor in Finance). Accounting and Finance are my passion and I want to become a CPA and a 
financial advisor. I have taken Intermediate I and II and now work as a financial advisor with Primerica Financial Services 
in San Marcos. I should also tell you that I was at Home Depot for four years. I learned a lot, but my heart is in accounting 
and finance.
I am a team player, a born leader, motivated, reliable, and I show excellent composure in stressful situation, for example, 
when customers complain. I put myself through school and always carry at least 15 units while working part time.
You will probably agree that I am a good candidate for your internship position, which should start July 1. I feel that my 
motivation, passion, and strong people skills will serve your company well.
Best regards,
List at least six weaknesses in the cover letter.

408 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
e-MAiL
13.3 Identifying Your Employment Interests
Your Task. In a memo or e-mail addressed to your campus career counselor or to a professional job expert you would like 
to hire, answer the questions in the section “Identifying Your Interests” at the beginning of the chapter. Draw a conclusion 
from your answers. What kinds of career, company, position, and location seem to fit your self-analysis? Explore options on 
your campus in career placement and advising; find out if you have access to personality and aptitude testing to help you 
flesh out a likely career path.
13.4 Evaluating Your Qualifications
Your Task. Prepare four worksheets that inventory your qualifications in the areas of employment, education, capabilities 
and skills, and honors and activities. Use active verbs when appropriate.
a. Employment. Begin with your most recent job or internship. For each position list the following information: employer; 
job title; dates of employment (months and years); and three to five duties, activities, or accomplishments. Emphasize 
activities related to your job goal. Strive to quantify your achievements.
b. Education. List degrees, certificates, and training accomplishments. Include courses, seminars, or skills that are relevant 
to your job goal. Calculate your grade point average in your major.
c. Capabilities and skills. List all capabilities and skills that recommend you for the job you seek. Use words such as 
skilled, competent, trained, experienced, and ability to. Also list five or more qualities or interpersonal skills necessary for a 
successful individual in your chosen field. Write action statements demonstrating that you possess some of these qualities. 
Empty assurances aren’t good enough; try to show evidence (Developed teamwork skills by working with a committee of eight 
to produce a . . .).
d. Awards, honors, and activities. Explain any awards so that the reader will understand them. List campus, community, 
and professional activities that suggest you are a well-rounded individual or possess traits relevant to your target job.
WeB
13.5 Choosing a Career Path
Many people know surprisingly little about the work done in various occupations and the training requirements.
Your Task. Use the online Occupational Outlook Handbook at http://www.bls.gov/oco, prepared by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, to learn more about an occupation of your choice. Find the description of a position for which you could apply 
now or after you graduate. Learn about what workers do, the nature of the job, working conditions, training and education 
needed, earnings, and expected job outlook. Print the pages from the Occupational Outlook Handbook that describe employ-
ment in the area in which you are interested. If your instructor directs, attach these copies to the cover letter you will write 
in Activity 13.10.
WeB
13.6 Locating Salary Information
What salary can you expect in your chosen career?
Your Task. Visit America’s Career InfoNet at http://www.acinet.org or Salary.com at www.salary.com and select an occu-
pation based on the kind of employment you are seeking now or will be seeking after you graduate. What wages can you 
expect in this occupation? Use your current geographic area or the location where you would like to work after graduation. 
Click to learn more about this occupation. Take notes on three or four interesting bits of information you uncovered about this 
career. Bring a printout of the wage information to class and be prepared to discuss what you learned.
WeB
13.7 Searching the Job Market
Where are the jobs? Even though you may not be in the market at the moment, become familiar with the kinds of available 
positions because job awareness should become an important part of your education.
Your Task. Clip or print a job advertisement or announcement from (a) the classified section of a newspaper, (b) a job board 
on the Web, (c) a company Web site, or (d) a professional association listing. Select an advertisement or announcement 
describing the kind of employment you are seeking now or plan to seek when you graduate. Save this advertisement or 
announcement to attach to the résumé you will write in Activity 13.9.
WeB
13.8 Posting a Résumé on the Web
Learn about the procedure for posting résumés at job boards on the Web.
Your Task. Prepare a list of at least three online employment sites where you could post your résumé. Describe the proce-
dure involved and the advantages for each site.

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
409
13.9 Writing Your Résumé
Your Task. Using the data you developed in Activity 13.4, write your résumé. Aim it at a full-time job, part-time position, or 
internship. Attach a job listing for a specific position (from Activity 13.7). Also prepare a separate list of at least three profes-
sional references. Revise your résumé until it is perfect.
13.10 Preparing Your Cover Letter
Your Task. Write a cover letter introducing your résumé. Again, revise it until it is perfect.
13.11 Swapping Résumés
A terrific way to get ideas for improving your résumé is seeing how other students have developed their résumés.
Your Task. Bring your completed polished résumé to class. Attach a plain sheet with your name at the top. In small groups 
exchange your résumés for peer edits. Each reviewer should provide at least two supportive comments and one suggestion 
for improvement on the cover sheet. Reviewers should sign their names with their comments.
e-MAiL
13.12 Special Tips for Today’s Résumé Writers
Your Task. Using electronic databases, research the topic of employment résumés. Read at least three recent articles. In 
an e-mail or memo to your instructor list eight or more good tips that are not covered in this chapter. Pay special attention 
to advice concerning the preparation of online résumés. The subject line of your memo should be Special Tips for Today’s 
Résumé Writers.
13.13 Consumer: Being Wary of Career Advisory Firms With Big Promises and Big Prices 
Not long ago employment agencies charged applicants 5 percent of their annual salaries to find jobs. Most agencies have 
quit this unethical practice, but unscrupulous firms still prey on vulnerable job seekers. Some career advisory firms claim to 
be legitimate, but they make puffed-up promises and charge inflated fees—an up-front payment of $4,000 is typical, with a 
typical hourly honorarium of $90 to $125.
Your Task. Using databases and the Web, find examples of current employment scams or danger areas for job seekers. 
In a presentation to the class or in team discussions, describe three examples of disreputable practices candidates should 
recognize. Make recommendations to job seekers for avoiding employment scams and disappointment with career advisory 
services.
WeB
13.14 E-Portfolios: Job Hunting in the Twenty-First Century
In high-tech fields digital portfolios have been steadily gaining in popularity and now seem to be going mainstream as 
universities are providing space for student job seekers to profile their qualifications in e-portfolios online. Although it is 
unlikely that digital portfolios will become widely used very soon, you would do well to learn about them by viewing many 
samples—good and bad.
Your Task. Conduct a Google search using the search term student e-portfolios or student digital portfolios. You will see long 
lists of hits, some of which will be actual digital document samples on the Web or instructions for creating an e-portfolio. Your 
instructor may assign individual students or teams to visit specific digital portfolio sites and ask them to summarize their find-
ings in a memo or in a brief oral presentation. If this is your task, you could focus on the composition of the site, page layout, 
links provided, colors used, types of documents included, and so forth. A fine site to start from that offers many useful links is 
maintained by the Center for Excellence in Teaching (CET) at the University of Southern California. Visit http://www.usc.edu
and type student e-portfolios to search the USC Web pages. Click the link to the CET site.
Alternatively, single groups or the whole class could study sites that provide how-to instructions and combine the advice 
of the best among them to create practical tips for making a digital portfolio. This option would lend itself to team writing, for 
example, with the help of a wiki.
V
Video resource
Video Library 1: Building Workplace Skills: The Job 
Search. At Clifton-Harding Associates (CHA), owner Ella 
Clifton realizes that she needs another employee to help run 
the business. She places a “blind” advertisement, to which 
her current employee, Stephanie, responds. Ella interviews 
a promising candidate, Yolanda, but during the process Ella 
learns that Stephanie has lied on a résumé posted to a job 
site. In addition to the ethical dilemma, you will witness good 
and bad job-search and résumé techniques.

410 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Number Style
Review Sections 4.01–4.13 in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. Then study each of the 
following pairs. Assume that these expressions appear in the context of letters, reports, or 
memos. Write a or b in the space provided to indicate the preferred number style and record 
the number of the G/M principle illustrated. When you finish, compare your response with those 
at the end of the book. If your responses differ, study carefully the principles in parentheses.
Example (a) three cell phone (b) 3 cell phones
 1. (a) twenty menu items 
(b) 20 menu items
 2. (a) Third Street Promenade 
(b) 3rd Street Promenade
 3. (a) 24 newspapers 
(b) twenty-four newspapers
 4. (a) September 1st 
(b) September 1
 5. (a) the sum of fifty dollars 
(b) the sum of $50
 6. (a) on the 15th of July 
(b) on the fifteenth of July
 7. (a) at 4:00 p.m. 
(b) at 4 p.m.
 8. (a) 5 250-pound athletes 
(b) five 250-pound athletes
 9. (a) over fifty years ago 
(b) over 50 years ago
 10. (a) 2,000,000 people 
(b) 2 million people
 11. (a) fifteen cents 
(b) 15 cents
 12. (a) a twenty-year-old student 
(b) a 20-year-old student
 13. (a) 2/3 of the e-mails 
(b) two thirds of the e-mails
 14. (a) two printers for 15 employees 
(b) 2 printers for 15 employees
 15. (a) 40 of the 1,000 laid-off employees 
(b) forty of the 1,000 laid-off employees
G
grammar/Mechanics Checkup 13
a 
(4.01a)

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
411
The following résumé has errors in capitalization, number usage, punctuation, spelling, 
proofreading, and other problems. You may either (a) use standard proofreading 
marks (see Appendix B) to correct the errors here or (b) download the document from 
www.meguffey.com and revise at your computer. Study the guidelines in the Grammar/
Mechanics Handbook to sharpen your skills.
G
grammar/Mechanics Challenge 13
4VNNBSZPGRVBMJGJDBUJPOT
• 
Over two years experience in Ofﬁce Administration interacting 
 
with customers
• 
Ability to keyboard (ﬁfty-ﬁve wpm) and proﬁcient with 10-key 
 
calculator
• 
Proﬁcient with MS Word, Excel, Powerpoint, and the internet
• 
Enjoy working with colleagues’ and customers’
&YQFSJFODF
Ofﬁce Assistant (part time), Western mineral resources, Tucson, Arizona 
June 2009 to present
• 
Gather and distribute data for minerals related reports
• 
Keyboard and format Letters, Memos and Reports in MS Word
• 
Respond to inquirys from the public, industry and goverment 
 
agencys
Assistant Manger, Southwest Housewares, Tucson, Arizona
July 2008 to May 2009
• 
Managed store in mangers absence.
• 
Ordered merchandise and supervised 2 employees; earned 
 
rapid promotion
• 
Assisted manger in opening and closing registers; balanced 
 
daily reciepts
&EVDBUJPO
Mesa community college, Mesa, Arizona
Major: organizational leadership
Aa degree expected June 2010. GPA in major: 3.7 (4.0 = A)
JONATHAN M. DEMPSEY
UI"WFOVF
5VDTPO"SJ[

412 
Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters
Network Your Way to a Job in the Hidden Market
The “hidden” job market may account for as many as 70 to 80 percent of all positions 
available.40 Companies don’t always announce openings publicly because interviewing 
all the applicants, many of whom aren’t qualified, is time consuming and costly. What’s 
more, even when a job is advertised, companies dislike hiring “strangers.” They are more 
comfortable hiring a person they know.
Smart job seekers won’t count on the Internet or a newspaper’s classified section to 
land a job. Recruitmax, an applicant-tracking company that powers corporate career 
sites, along with countless other human resources experts, admitted that “most new hires 
come by word of mouth and employee referrals.”41 The key to finding a good job, then, 
is converting yourself from a “stranger” into a known quantity. Probably the best way to 
become a known quantity is by networking. You can use either traditional methods or 
online resources.
Traditional Networking
Develop a list. Make a list of anyone who would be willing to talk with you about finding 
a job. List your friends, relatives, former employers, former coworkers, members of your 
religious community, people in social and athletic clubs, present and former teachers, 
neighbors, and friends of your parents. Also consider asking your campus career cen-
ter for alumni contacts who will talk with students.
Make contacts. Call the people on your list or, even better, try to meet with them in 
person. To set up a meeting, say, Hi, Aunt Martha! I’m looking for a job and I wonder if you 
could help me out. When could I come over to talk about it? During your visit be friendly, 
well organized, polite, and interested in what your contact has to say. Provide a copy 
of your résumé, and try to keep the conversation centered on your job-search area. 
Your goal is to get two or more referrals. In pinpointing your request, ask two questions: 
Do you know of anyone who might have an opening for a person with my skills? If the person 
doesn’t, ask, Do you know of anyone else who might know of someone who would?
Follow up on your referrals. Call the people whose names are on your referral list. 
You might say something like, Hello. I’m Eric Rivera, a friend of Meredith Medcalf. She 
suggested that I call and ask you for help. I’m looking for a position as a management 
trainee, and she thought you might be willing to spare a few minutes and steer me in the 
right direction. Don’t ask for a job. During your referral interview ask how the individual 
got started in this line of work, what he or she likes best (or least) about the work, what 
career paths exist in the field, and what problems must be overcome by a newcomer. 
Most important, ask how a person with your background and skills might get started in 
the field. Send an informal thank-you note to anyone who helps you in your job search, 
and stay in touch with the most promising contacts. Ask whether you may call every 
three weeks or so during your job search.
Online Networking
As with traditional networking, the goal of online networking is to make connections with 
people who are advanced in their fields. Ask for their advice about finding a job. Most 
people like talking about themselves, and asking them about their experiences is an 
excellent way to begin an online correspondence that might lead to “electronic mentor-
ing,” a letter of recommendation from an expert in the field, or information on an intern-
ship opportunity. Making online connections with industry professionals is a great way to 
keep tabs on the latest business trends and potential job leads. Here are possible online 
networking sources:
Join a career networking groups. Build your own professional network by joining one 
or more of the following: http://www.linkedin.com, http://twitter.com, http://ryze.com, 
http://zerodegrees.com, and http://itsnotwhatyouknow.com. Some of these sites are 
fee based while others are free. Typically, joining a network requires creating a pass-
word, filling in your profile, and adding your business contacts. At some sites, you can 
•
•
•
•
Communication Workshop: Career Skills

Chapter 13: The Job Search, Résumés, and Cover Letters 
413
specify search criteria to locate and then contact individuals directly. At other sites both 
parties’ e-mail addresses are hidden. The site then acts as an intermediary connecting 
people only after they agree to share their contact information. Once you have connected 
with an individual, the content of your discussions and the follow-up will be similar to that 
of traditional networking. The medium, however, will center on electronic communication 
through e-mail and chat room discussions.
Participate in a discussion groups and mailing lists. Two especially good discus-
sion group resources for beginners are Yahoo! Groups (http://groups.yahoo.com) 
and Google Groups (http://groups.google.com/). You may choose from groups in a 
variety of fields including business and computer technology. For example, if you click 
the Business/Finance listing, you will see links leading to more specialized groups. Click 
Employment and Work, and you will find career groups including construction, customer 
service, office administration, court reporting, and interior design.
Locate relevant blogs. Blogs are the latest trend for networking and sharing informa-
tion. A quick Web search will result in hundreds of career-related blogs and blogs in 
your field of study. Many companies, such as Microsoft, also maintain employment-
related blogs. A good list of career blogs can be found at http://www.quintcareers
.com/career-related_blogs.html. You can also search a worldwide blog directory at 
http://www.blogcatalog.com/. Once you locate a relevant blog, you can read recent 
postings, search archives, and make replies.
Career Application. Everyone who enters the job market must develop a personal net-
work. Assume you are ready to change jobs or look for a permanent position.
Your Task
To begin developing your personal network, do one of the following:
Conduct at least one referral interview and report your experience to your class.
Join one professional discussion group or mailing list. Ask your instructor to recommend 
an appropriate group for your field. Take notes on group discussions, and describe 
your reactions and findings to your class
Find a blog related to your career or your major. After monitoring the blog for several 
days, describe your experience to your class.
•
•
•
•
•

414 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Differentiate among screening, one-on-one, panel, group, sequential, and stress 
interviews.
• Describe what to do before the interview to make an impressive initial contact.
• Explain how to prepare for employment interviews, including researching the 
target company.
• Recognize how to fight interview fears and control nonverbal messages.
• Be prepared to answer common interview questions and know how to close an 
interview positively.
• Outline the activities that take place after an interview, including thanking the 
interviewer and contacting references.
• Write follow-up letters and other employment messages.
A job interview can change your life. Because employment is a major part of 
everyone’s life, the job interview takes on enormous importance. Interviewing is 
equally significant whether you are completing your education and searching for 
your first serious position or whether you are in the workforce and striving to 
change jobs.
Everyone agrees that job interviews are extremely stressful. However, the more 
you learn about the process and the more prepared you are, the less stress you 
will feel. It is also important to realize that a job interview is a two-way street. It 
is not just about being judged by the employer. You, the applicant, will be using 
the job interview to evaluate the employer. Do you really want to work for this 
organization?
An interview has several purposes for you as a job candidate. It is an oppor-
tunity to (a) convince the employer of your potential, (b) find out more about 
the job and the company, and (c) expand on the information in your résumé. 
This is the time to gather information about whether you would fit into the 
company culture. You should also be thinking about whether this job suits your 
career goals.
From the employer’s perspective, the interview is an opportunity to (a) assess your 
abilities in relation to the requirements for the position; (b) discuss your  training, 
Interviewing and 
Following Up
14
14
C H A P T E R  1 4
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / JACOB WACKERHAUSEN

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
415
experience, knowledge, and qualifications in more detail; (c) see what drives and 
motivates you; and (d) decide whether you would fit into the organization.
This chapter presents various kinds of interviews and shows you how to pre-
pare for them. You will learn how to project a professional image in your initial 
phone contact, gather information about an employer, and reduce interview  jitters. 
You will receive advice on how to send positive nonverbal messages that will help 
you stay in control during an interview. You will pick up tips for responding 
to recruiters’ favorite questions and learn how to cope with illegal questions. 
Moreover, you will receive pointers on significant questions you can ask during 
an interview. Finally, you will learn what you should do as a successful follow-up 
to an interview.
Yes, job interviews can be intimidating and stressful. However, you can expect 
to ace an interview if you know what’s coming and prepare thoroughly. Remember, 
preparation often determines who gets the job. First, though, you need to know 
what types of interviews you might encounter in your job search.
Types of Employment Interviews
Job applicants generally face two kinds of interviews: screening interviews and hiring/
placement interviews. You must succeed in the first to proceed to the second. Once 
you make it to the hiring/placement interview, you will find a variety of interview 
styles, including one-on-one, panel, group, sequential, and stress interviews. You 
will be better prepared if you know what to expect in these types of interviews.
Screening Interviews
Screening interviews do just that—they screen candidates to eliminate those who fail 
to meet minimum requirements. Companies use screening interviews to save time 
and money by weeding out lesser-qualified candidates before scheduling face-to-face 
interviews. Although some screening interviews are conducted during job fairs or on 
college campuses, most take place on the telephone.1
Some companies computerize their screening interviews. For example, 
Lowe’s Home Improvement has applicants access a Web site where they answer 
a series of ethics-related questions, and Wal-Mart uses a multiple-choice ques-
tionnaire, which applicants answer by pushing buttons on a phone keypad, to 
screen cashiers, stockers, and customer service representatives.2 Increasingly, 
employers use videoconferencing to interview candidates. This allows multiple 
hiring managers in distant locations to participate in the interview. Workplace 
experts predict that in the future job seekers will need video capability on their 
computers for interviewing.3
During a screening interview you will likely be asked to provide details about 
the education and experience listed on your résumé, so you must be prepared to 
sell your qualifications. Remember that the person conducting the screening inter-
view is trying to determine whether you should move on to the next step in the 
interview process.
A screening interview may be as short as five minutes. Even though it may be 
short, don’t treat it casually. If you don’t perform well during the screening inter-
view, it may be your last interview with that organization. You can use the tips that 
follow in this chapter to succeed during the screening process.
Hiring/Placement Interviews
The most promising candidates selected from screening interviews will be invited to 
hiring/placement interviews. Hiring managers want to learn whether candidates are 
motivated, qualified, and a good fit for the position. Their goal is to learn how the 
candidate would fit into their organization. Conducted in depth, hiring/placement 
interviews may take many forms.
Screening interviews are 
intended to eliminate 
those who fail to meet 
minimum requirements.
In hiring/placement 
interviews, recruiters 
try to learn how the 
candidate would ﬁ t into 
their organization.

416 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
One-on-One Interviews. In one-on-
one interviews, which are the most com-
mon type, you can expect to sit down with 
a company representative and talk about the 
job and your qualifications. If the representa-
tive is the hiring manager, questions will be 
specific and job related. If the representative 
is from human resources, the questions will 
probably be more general.
Panel Interviews. Panel interviews are 
typically conducted by people who will be your 
supervisors and colleagues. Usually seated around a table, interviewers may take 
turns asking questions. Panel interviews are advantageous because they save time 
and show you how the staff works together. For these interviews, you can prepare 
basic biographical information about each panel member. In answering questions, 
keep eye contact with the questioner as well as with the other team members. Try to 
take notes during the interview so that you can remember each person’s questions 
and what was important to that individual.4
Group Interviews. Group interviews occur when a company interviews several 
candidates for the same position at the same time. Some employers use this technique 
to measure leadership skills and communication styles. During a group interview, 
stay focused on the interviewer, and treat the other candidates with respect.5
Sequential Interviews. Sequential interviews allow a candidate to meet 
individually with two or more interviewers over the course of several hours or 
days. For example, job candidates seeking tenure-track academic positions undergo 
sequential interviewing. You must listen carefully and respond positively to all inter-
viewers. Sell your qualifications to each one; don’t assume that any interviewer 
knows what was said in a previous interview. Keep your responses fresh, even when 
repeating yourself many times over.6
Stress Interviews. Stress interviews are meant to test your reactions dur-
ing nerve-wracking situations. You may be forced to wait a long time before being 
greeted by the interviewer, you may be given a test with an impossible time limit, 
or you may be treated rudely by one or more of the interviewers. Another stress 
interview technique is to have interviewers ask questions at a rapid rate. If asked 
rapid-fire questions from many directions, take the time to slow things down. For 
example, you might say, I would be happy to answer your question, Ms. X, but first 
I must finish responding to Mr. Z. If greeted with silence, another stress technique, 
you might say, Would you like me to begin the interview? Let me tell you about 
myself. Or ask a question such as Can you give me more information about the posi-
tion? The best way to handle stress questions is to remain calm and give thoughtful 
answers. However, you might also reconsider whether you would want to work for 
this kind of organization.
No matter what interview structure you encounter, you will feel more com-
fortable and better prepared if you know what to do before, during, and after the 
interview.
Before the Interview
Once you have sent out at least one résumé or filled out at least one job applica-
tion, you must consider yourself an active job seeker. Being active in the job market 
means that you must be prepared to be contacted by potential employers. As dis-
cussed earlier, employers use screening interviews to narrow the list of candidates. If 
“You seem intelligent, capable, level-headed and mature. 
That’s a shame because I was really hoping you’d fit in here.”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
Hiring interview types 
include one-on-one, 
panel, group, sequential, 
and stress.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
417
you do well in the screening interview, you will be invited to an in-person meeting. 
Here are tips for sounding professional and acting appropriately from the beginning 
and for preparing for a job interview once it has been scheduled.
Using Professional Phone Techniques
Even with the popularity of e-mail, most employers contact job applicants by phone 
to set up interviews. Employers can get a better sense of how applicants communi-
cate by hearing their voices over the phone. Therefore, once you are actively looking 
for a job, anytime the phone rings, it could be a potential employer. Don’t make the 
mistake of letting an unprofessional voice mail message or a lazy roommate ruin 
your chances. Here’s how you can avoid such problems:
• Invest in a good answering machine or voice mail service. Make sure that 
your outgoing message is concise and professional, with no distracting back-
ground sounds. It should be in your own voice and include your full name for 
clarity. You will find more tips for creating professional outgoing messages in 
Chapter 11.
• Tell those who might answer your phone at home about your job search. Explain to 
them the importance of acting professionally and taking complete messages. Family 
members or roommates can affect the first impression an employer has of you.
• If you have children, prevent them from answering the phone during your job 
search. Children of all ages are not known for taking good messages!
• If you have put your cell phone number on your résumé, don’t answer your 
cell phone unless you are in a good location to carry on a conversation with an 
employer. It is hard to pay close attention when you are driving down the high-
way or eating in a noisy restaurant!
• Use voice mail to screen calls. By screening incoming calls, you can be totally in 
control when you return a prospective employer’s call. Organize your materials 
and ready yourself psychologically for the conversation.
Making the First Conversation Impressive
Whether you answer the phone directly or return an employer’s call, make sure you 
are prepared for the conversation. Remember that this is the first time the employer 
has heard your voice. How you conduct yourself on the phone will create a lasting 
impression. Here are tips to make that first impression a positive one:
• Keep a list near the telephone of positions for which you have applied.
• Treat any call from an employer just like an interview. Use a professional tone and 
businesslike language. Be polite and enthusiastic, and sell your qualifications.
• If caught off guard by the call, ask whether you can call back in a few minutes. 
Organize your materials and yourself.
• Have a copy of your résumé available so that you can answer any questions that 
come up. Also have your list of references, a calendar, and a notepad handy.
• Be prepared for a screening interview. As discussed earlier, this might occur dur-
ing the first phone call.
• Take good notes during the phone conversation. Obtain accurate directions, and 
verify the spelling of your interviewer’s name. If you will be interviewed by more 
than one person, get all of their names.
• Before you hang up, reconfirm the date and time of your interview. You could say 
something like I look forward to meeting with you next Wednesday at 2 p.m.
Researching the Target Company
After scheduling an in-person interview, you need to begin in-depth research. One 
of the most important steps in effective interviewing is gathering detailed informa-
tion about a prospective employer. Never enter an interview cold. Recruiters are 
impressed by candidates who have done their homework. In an Office Team survey, 
47 percent of executives polled said that the most common mistake job seekers make 
during interviews is having little or no knowledge about the potential employer.7
Job seekers who sound 
ﬂ ustered, unprepared, or 
unprofessional when an 
employer calls may ruin their 
chances with that company.
Before your interview, 
take time to research 
the target company and 
learn about its goals, 
customers, competitors, 
reputation, and so forth. 

418 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
Visit the library, explore your campus career center, or search the Web for 
information and articles about the target company or its field, service, or product. 
Visit the company’s Web site and read everything. Call the company to request 
annual reports, catalogs, or brochures. Ask about the organization and possibly the 
interviewer. Learn something about the company’s mission and goals, size, number 
of employees, customers, competitors, culture, management structure and names of 
leaders, reputation in the community, financial condition, future plans, strengths, 
and weaknesses.
Analyze the company’s advertising, including sales and marketing brochures. One 
candidate, a marketing major, spent a great deal of time pouring over brochures from 
an aerospace contractor. During his initial interview, he shocked and impressed the 
recruiter with his knowledge of the company’s guidance systems. The candidate had, 
in fact, relieved the interviewer of his least-favorite task—explaining the company’s 
complicated technology.
Talking with company employees is always a good idea, if you can manage it. 
They are probably the best source of inside information. Try to be introduced to 
someone who is currently employed—but not working in the immediate area where 
you wish to be hired. Be sure to seek out someone who is discreet.
Blogs are also good sources for company research. Many employees maintain 
both formal and informal blogs, where they share anecdotes and information about 
their employers. You can use these blogs to learn about a company’s culture, its 
current happenings, and its future plans. Many job seekers find that they can get a 
more realistic picture of a company’s day-to-day culture by reading blogs than they 
would by reading news articles or company Web site information.8
In learning about a company, you may uncover information that convinces you 
that this is not the company for you. It is always better to learn about negatives 
early in the process. More likely, though, the information you collect will help you 
tailor your application and interview responses to the organization’s needs. You 
know how flattered you feel when an employer knows about you and your back-
ground. That feeling works both ways. Employers are pleased when job candidates 
take an interest in them. Be ready to put in plenty of effort in investigating a target 
employer because this effort really pays off at interview time.
Preparing and Practicing
After you have learned about the target organization, study the job description 
or job listing. It not only helps you write a focused résumé but also enables you 
to match your education, experience, and interests with the employer’s position. 
Learning about the duties and responsibilities of the position will help you practice 
your best response strategies.
The most successful job candidates never go into interviews cold. They pre-
pare success stories and practice answers to typical questions. They also plan their 
responses to any problem areas on their résumés. As part of their preparation before 
the interview, they decide what to wear, and they gather the items they plan to take 
with them.
Prepare Success Stories. To feel confident and be able to sell your quali-
fications, prepare and practice success stories. These stories are specific examples of 
your educational and work-related experience that demonstrate your qualifications 
and achievements. Look over the job description and your résumé to determine 
what skills, training, personal characteristics, and experience you want to empha-
size during the interview. Then prepare a success story for each one. Incorporate 
numbers, such as dollars saved or percentage of sales increase, whenever possible. 
Your success stories should be detailed but brief. Think of them as 30-second 
sound bites.
Practice telling your success stories until they fluently roll off your tongue and 
sound natural. Then in the interview be certain to find places to insert them. Tell 
stories about (a) dealing with a crisis, (b) handling a tough interpersonal situation, 
Blogs can provide 
authentic information 
about a company’s culture, 
current happenings, 
and future plans.
Practice success stories 
that emphasize your most 
strategic skills, areas 
of knowledge, strongest 
personality traits, and 
key accomplishments.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
419
(c) successfully juggling many priorities, (d) changing course to deal with changed 
circumstances, (e) learning from a mistake, (f) working on a team, and (g) going 
above and beyond expectations.9
Practice Answers to Possible Questions. Imagine the kinds of ques-
tions you may be asked and work out sample answers. Although you can’t anticipate 
precise questions, you can expect to be asked about your education, skills, experi-
ence, and availability. Recite answers to typical interview questions in a mirror, with 
a friend, while driving in your car, or in spare moments. Keep practicing until you 
have the best responses down pat. Consider recording a practice session to see and 
hear how you answer questions. Do you look and sound enthusiastic?
Clean Up Any Digital Dirt. Many companies that recruit on college cam-
puses are now using Google and Yahoo to screen applicants. The president of a 
small consulting company in Chicago was about to hire a summer intern when he 
discovered the student’s Facebook page. The candidate described his interests as 
“smokin’ blunts [cigars hollowed out and stuffed with marijuana], shooting people, 
and obsessive sex.”10 The executive quickly lost interest in this candidate. Even if 
the student was merely posturing, it showed poor judgment.
Teasing photographs and provocative comments about drinking, drug use, and 
sexual exploits make students look immature and unprofessional. Employers have 
the same access to the Internet as job seekers do, and they are taking a close look: 
“If what pops up is a ranting blog about the evils of corporate America or a picture 
of you topless in Cancun with a beer in your hand, you’re in trouble,” Cynthia 
Shapiro, an employment expert, says. “Your résumé will land in the trash, and you 
won’t even know what happened.”11 Check out your online presence to see if any-
thing needs to be cleaned up.
Expect to Explain Problem Areas on Your Résumé. Interviewers 
are certain to question you about problem areas on your résumé. If you have little 
or no experience, you might emphasize your recent training and up-to-date skills. 
If you have gaps in your résumé, be prepared to answer questions about them posi-
tively and truthfully. If you were fired from a job, accept some responsibility for 
what happened and explain what you gained from the experience. Don’t criticize a 
previous employer, and don’t hide the real reasons. If you received low grades for 
one term, explain why and point to your improved grades in subsequent terms.
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
No longer an adornment restricted to sailors, 
bikers, and ruffians, tattoos have gained popularity 
with celebrities, pro athletes, fashion models and 
youth. The proliferation of the body-art trend has 
meant that markings and piercings are increasingly 
showing up in the white-collar world of business 
executives, accountants, and lawyers. Despite 
their “cool factor” within the broader culture, 
tattoos present unique challenges for job seekers 
who want to know how to dress properly for 
interviews. How should individuals with tattoos or 
piercings dress for success in the workplace?
© DAVID LEES / TAXI / GETTY IMAGES
Make sure everything 
posted about you online is 
professional and positive.

420 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
Decide How to Dress. What you wear to a job interview still matters. Even 
if some employees in the organization dress casually, you should look qualified, 
competent, and successful. One young applicant complained to his girlfriend about 
having to wear a suit for an interview when everyone at the company dressed casu-
ally. She replied, “You don’t get to wear the uniform, though, until you make the 
team!” Avoid loud colors; strive for a coordinated, natural appearance. Favorite 
“power” colors for interviews are gray and dark blue. Cover tattoos and conceal 
body piercings; these can be a turnoff for many interviewers. Don’t overdo jewelry, 
and make sure that what you do wear is clean, pressed, odor-free, and lint-free. 
Shoes should be polished and scuff-free. Forget about flip-flops.
To summarize, ensure that what you wear projects professionalism and shows 
your respect for the interview situation.
Gather Items to Bring. Decide what you should bring with you to the inter-
view, and get everything ready the night before. You should plan to bring copies 
of your résumé, your reference lists, a notebook and pen, money for parking and 
tolls, and samples of your work, if appropriate. Place everything in a businesslike 
briefcase to add that final professional touch to your look.
Traveling to and Arriving at Your Interview
The big day has arrived! Ideally you are fully prepared for your interview. Now you 
need to make sure that everything goes smoothly. That means arriving on time and 
handling that fear you are likely to feel.
On the morning of your interview, give yourself plenty of time to groom and 
dress. Then give yourself ample time to get to the employer’s office. If something 
unexpected happens that will to cause you to be late, such as an accident or bridge 
closure, call the interviewer right away to explain what is happening. Most inter-
viewers will be understanding, and your call will show that you are responsible. On 
the way to the interview, don’t smoke, don’t eat anything messy or smelly, and don’t 
load up on perfume or cologne. Arrive at the interview five or ten minutes early. If 
possible, check your appearance before going in.
When you enter the office, be courteous and congenial to everyone. Remember 
that you are being judged not only by the interviewer but by the receptionist and 
anyone else who sees you before and after the interview. They will notice how you 
sit, what you read, and how you look. Introduce yourself to the receptionist, and 
wait to be invited to sit. You may be asked to fill out a job application while you 
are waiting. You will find tips for doing this effectively later in this chapter.
Greet the interviewer confidently, and don’t be afraid to initiate a handshake. 
Doing so exhibits professionalism and confidence. Extend your hand, look the 
interviewer directly in the eye, smile pleasantly, and say, I’m pleased to meet you, 
Mr. Thomas. I am Constance Ferraro. In this culture a firm, not crushing, handshake 
sends a nonverbal message of poise and assurance. Once introductions have taken 
place, wait for the interviewer to offer you a chair. Make small talk with upbeat 
comments, such as This is a beautiful headquarters or I’m very impressed with the 
facilities you have here. Don’t immediately begin rummaging in your briefcase for 
your résumé. Being at ease and unrushed suggest that you are self-confident.
Fighting Fear
Expect to be nervous before and during the interview. It is natural! Other than 
public speaking, employment interviews are the most dreaded events in people’s 
lives. One of the best ways to overcome fear is to know what happens in a typical 
interview. You can further reduce your fears by following these suggestions.
• Practice interviewing. Try to get as much interviewing practice as you can—
especially with real companies. The more times you experience the interview 
situation, the less nervous you will be. If offered, campus mock interviews also 
provide excellent practice, and the interviewers will offer tips for improvement.
Allow ample time to 
arrive unﬂ ustered, and 
be congenial to everyone 
who greets you.
Fight fear by practicing, 
preparing thoroughly, breath-
ing deeply, and knowing 
that you are in charge for 
part of the interview.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
421
• Prepare thoroughly. Research the company. Know how you will answer the 
most frequently asked questions. Be ready with success stories. Rehearse your 
closing statement. One of the best ways to reduce butterflies is to know that you 
have done all you can to be ready for the interview.
• Breathe deeply. Take deep breaths, particularly if you feel anxious while waiting 
for the interviewer. Deep breathing makes you concentrate on something other 
than the interview and also provides much-needed oxygen.
• Know that you are not alone. Everyone feels some level of anxiety during a job 
interview. Interviewers expect some nervousness, and a skilled interviewer will 
try to put you at ease.
• Remember that it is a two-way street. The interviewer isn’t the only one who is 
gleaning information. You have come to learn about the job and the company. In 
fact, during some parts of the interview, you will be in charge. This should give 
you courage.
During the Interview
During the interview you will be answering questions and asking your own ques-
tions. Your demeanor, body language, and other nonverbal cues will also be on 
display. The interviewer will be trying to learn more about you, and you should 
learn more about the job and the organization. Although you may be asked some 
unique questions, many interviewers ask standard, time-proven questions, which 
means that you can prepare your answers ahead of time.
Sending Positive Nonverbal Messages 
and Acting Professionally
You have already sent nonverbal messages to your interviewer by arriving on time, 
being courteous, dressing professionally, and greeting the receptionist confidently. 
You will continue to send nonverbal messages throughout the interview. Remember 
that what comes out of your mouth and what is written on your résumé are not the 
only messages an interviewer receives from you. Nonverbal messages also create 
powerful impressions. Here are suggestions that will help you send the right non-
verbal messages during interviews:
• Control your body movements. Keep your hands, arms, and elbows to yourself. 
Don’t lean on a desk. Keep your feet on the floor. Don’t cross your arms in front 
of you. Keep your hands out of your pockets.
• Exhibit good posture. Sit erect, leaning forward slightly. Don’t slouch in your 
chair; at the same time, don’t look too stiff and 
uncomfortable. Good posture demonstrates confi-
dence and interest.
• Practice appropriate eye contact. A direct eye 
gaze, at least in North America, suggests interest 
and trustworthiness. If you are being interviewed 
by a panel, remember to maintain eye contact with 
all interviewers.
• Use gestures effectively. Nod to show agreement 
and interest. Gestures should be used as needed, but 
don’t overdo it.
• Smile enough to convey a positive attitude. Have 
a friend give you honest feedback on whether you 
generally smile too much or not enough.
• Listen attentively. Show the interviewer you are 
interested and attentive by listening carefully to 
the questions being asked. This will also help you 
answer questions appropriately.
Send positive nonverbal 
messages by arriving on 
time, being courteous, 
dressing professionally, 
greeting the interviewer 
conﬁ dently, controlling your 
body movements, making 
eye contact, listening 
attentively, and smiling.
“I’m in the middle of a job interview. What are you doing?”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM

422 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
• Turn off your cell phone. Avoid the embarrassment of a ringing cell phone dur-
ing an interview. Turn it off or leave it at home.
• Don’t chew gum. Chewing gum during an interview is distracting and unpro-
fessional.
• Sound enthusiastic and interested—but sincere. The tone of your voice has 
an enormous effect on the words you say. Avoid sounding bored, frustrated, or 
sarcastic during an interview. Employers want employees who are enthusiastic 
and interested.
• Avoid “empty” words. Filling your answers with verbal pauses such as um, uh, 
like, and basically communicates that you are not prepared. Also avoid annoying 
distractions such as clearing your throat repeatedly or sighing deeply.
Above all, remember that employers want to hire people who have confidence 
in their own abilities. Let your body language, posture, dress, and vocal tone prove 
that you are self-assured.
Answering Typical Interview Questions
The way you answer questions can be almost as important as what you say. Use 
the interviewer’s name and title from time to time when you answer. Ms. Lyon, 
I would be pleased to tell you about . . . . People like to hear their own names. Be 
sure you are pronouncing the name correctly, and don’t overuse this technique. 
Avoid answering questions with a simple yes or no; elaborate on your answers to 
better sell yourself.
During the interview it may be necessary to occasionally refocus and clarify vague 
questions. Some interviewers are inexperienced and ill at ease in the role. You may 
even have to ask your own question to understand what was asked, By ____ , do you 
mean _____? Consider closing out some of your responses with Does that answer 
your question? or Would you like me to elaborate on any particular experience?
Always aim your answers at the key characteristics interviewers seek: expertise, 
competence, motivation, interpersonal skills, decision-making skills, enthusiasm for 
the job, and a pleasing personality. Remember to stay focused on your strengths. 
Don’t reveal weaknesses, even if you think they make you look human. You won’t 
be hired for your weaknesses, only for your strengths.
Be sure to use good English and enunciate clearly. Avoid slurred words such as 
gonna and din’t, as well as slangy expressions such as yeah, like, and ya know. As 
you practice answering expected interview questions, it is always a good idea to 
make a recording. Is your speech filled with verbal static? 
© ISTOCKPHOTO.COM / ZSOLT NYULASZI
WORKPLACE IN FOCUS
An old adage of interviewing says, “You never get 
a second chance to make a first impression.” Until 
recently, image consultants differed on how much 
time individuals have to put their best face forward. 
But a study conducted by two Princeton psychologists 
has concluded that it takes only one-tenth of a second 
to form judgments about the key character traits of 
others. In practical terms, this means employers will 
make inferences about one’s likeability, competence, 
trustworthiness, and aggressiveness in the blink of 
an eye. What should job candidates do to make 
a good first impression during an interview?
How you answer questions 
can be as important as 
the answers themselves.
Stay focused on the 
skills and traits that 
employers seek; don’t 
reveal weaknesses.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
423
You can’t expect to be perfect in an employment interview. No one is. But 
you can avert sure disaster by avoiding certain topics and behaviors such as those 
described in Figure 14.1.
Employment interviews are all about questions, and many of the questions inter-
viewers ask are not new. You can anticipate a large percentage of questions that 
will be asked before you ever walk into an interview room. Although you can’t 
anticipate every question, you can prepare for different types.
This section presents questions that are may be asked during employment inter-
views. Some questions are meant to help the interviewer become acquainted with 
you. Others are aimed at measuring your interest, expe-
rience, and accomplishments. Still others will probe 
your future plans and challenge your reactions. Your 
interviewer may use situational or behavioral questions 
and may even occasionally ask an illegal question. To 
get you thinking about how to respond, we have pro-
vided an answer or discussion for one or more of the 
questions in each of the following groups. As you read 
the remaining questions in each group, think about how 
you could respond most effectively. For additional ques-
tions and mock interviews, contact your campus career 
and placement center.
Questions to Get Acquainted. After opening introductions, recruiters 
generally try to start the interview with personal questions that put you at ease. 
They are also striving to gain an overview to see whether you will fit into the 
You can anticipate a 
large percentage of the 
questions you will be 
asked in an interview.
“Yes, I think I have good people skills. 
What kind of idiot question is that?”
© RANDY GLASBERGEN. WWW.GLASBERGEN.COM
FIGURE 14.1 Twelve Interview Actions to Avoid
 1. Don’t be late or too early. Arrive five to ten minutes before your scheduled interview.
 2. Don’t be rude. Treat everyone you come into contact with warmly and respectfully.
 3. Don’t ask for the job. Asking for the job is naive, undignified, and unprofessional. Wait 
to see how the interview develops.
 4. Don’t criticize anyone or anything. Don’t criticize your previous employer, supervisors, 
colleagues, or job. The tendency is for interviewers to wonder if you would speak about 
their companies similarly.
 5. Don’t be a threat to the interviewer. Avoid suggesting directly or indirectly that your 
goal is to become head honcho, a path that might include the interviewer’s job.
 6. Don’t act unprofessionally. Don’t discuss controversial subjects, and don’t use 
profanity. Don’t talk too much.
 7. Don’t emphasize salary or benefits. Don’t bring up salary, vacation, or benefits early 
in an interview. Leave this up to the interviewer.
 8. Don’t focus on your imperfections. Never dwell on your liabilities or talk negatively 
about yourself.
 9. Don’t interrupt. Interrupting is not only impolite but also prevents you from hearing a 
complete question or remark.
10. Don’t bring someone along. Don’t bring a friend or relative with you to the interview. 
If someone must drive you, ask that person to drop you off and come back later.
11. Don’t appear impatient. Your entire focus should be on the interview. Don’t glance at 
your watch, which can imply that you are late for another appointment.
12. Don’t act desperate. A sure way to turn off an interviewer is to act too desperate. Don’t 
focus on why you need  the job; focus on how you will add value to the organization.

424 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
organization’s culture. When answering these questions, keep the employer’s needs 
in mind and try to incorporate your success stories.
 1. Tell me about yourself.
Experts agree that you must keep this answer short (one to two minutes 
tops) but on target. Use this chance to promote yourself. Stick to edu-
cational, professional, or business-related strengths; avoid personal or 
humorous references. Be ready with at least three success stories illus-
trating characteristics important to this job. Demonstrate responsibility 
you have been given; describe how you contributed as a team player. 
Try practicing this formula: I have completed ______ degree with a major 
in ____. Recently I worked for ______ as a _______. Before that I worked 
for _______ as a _____. My strengths are ________ (interpersonal) and 
_________ (technical). Try rehearsing your response in 30-second seg-
ments devoted to your education, work experience, qualifications, and 
skills.
 2. What are your greatest strengths?
Stress your strengths that are related to the position, such as I am well 
organized, thorough, and attentive to detail. Tell success stories and give 
examples that illustrate these qualities: My supervisor says that my research 
is exceptionally thorough. For example, I recently worked on a research 
project in which I . . . .
 3. Do you prefer to work by yourself or with others? Why?
This question can be tricky. Provide a middle-of-the-road answer that not 
only suggests your interpersonal qualities but also reflects an ability to make 
independent decisions and work without supervision.
 4. What was your major in college, and why did you choose it?
 5. What are some things you do in your spare time? Hobbies? Sports?
Questions to Gauge Your Interest. Interviewers want to understand 
your motivation for applying for a position. Although they will realize that you 
are probably interviewing for other positions, they still want to know why you are 
interested in this particular position with this organization. These types of questions 
help them determine your level of interest.
 1. Why do you want to work for (name of company)?
Questions like this illustrate why you must research an organization thor-
oughly before the interview. The answer to this question must prove that 
you understand the company and its culture. This is the perfect place to 
bring up the company research you did before the interview. Show what 
you know about the company, and discuss why you desire to become a part 
of this organization. Describe your desire to work for this organization not 
only from your perspective but also from its point of view. What do you 
have to offer?
 2. Why are you interested in this position?
 3. What do you know about our company?
 4. Why do you want to work in the _______________ industry?
 5. What interests you about our products (services)?
Questions About Your Experience and Accomplishments. 
After questions about your background and education and questions that measure 
your interest, the interview generally becomes more specific with questions about 
your experience and accomplishments. Remember to show confidence when you 
Prepare for get-acquainted 
questions by practicing a 
short formula response.
Recruiters want to know 
how interested you are in 
this organization and in 
this speciﬁ c position.
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Occasionally you bump into 
a talented and competent 
candidate . . . who’s so 
lacking in the EQ components 
of humility and realness that 
you can’t take a chance. 
This young man had a lot of 
the right stuff, but when he 
started telling us that he had 
never made a mistake in his 
life and didn’t expect to, we 
knew we’d heard enough.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
425
answer these questions. If you are not confident in your abilities, why should an 
employer be?
 1. Why should we hire you when we have applicants with more experience or bet-
ter credentials?
In answering this question, remember that employers often hire people who 
present themselves well instead of others with better credentials. Emphasize 
your personal strengths that could be an advantage with this employer. Are 
you a hard worker? How can you demonstrate it? Have you had recent 
training? Some people have had more years of experience but actually have 
less knowledge because they have done the same thing over and over. Stress 
your experience using the latest methods and equipment. Be sure to mention 
your computer training and use of the Web. Tell success stories. Emphasize 
that you are open to new ideas and learn quickly. Above all, show that you 
are confident in your abilities.
 2. Describe the most rewarding experience of your career so far.
 3. How have your education and professional experiences prepared you for this 
position?
 4. What were your major accomplishments in each of your past jobs?
 5. What was a typical workday like?
 6. What job functions did you enjoy most? Least? Why?
 7. Tell me about your computer skills.
 8. Who was the toughest boss you ever worked for and why?
 9. What were your major achievements in college?
 10. Why did you leave your last position? OR: Why are you leaving your current 
position?
Questions About the Future. Questions that look into the future tend 
to stump some candidates, especially those who have not prepared adequately. 
Employers ask these questions to see whether you are goal oriented and to deter-
mine whether your goals are realistic.
 1. Where do you expect to be five (or ten) years from now?
Formulate a realistic plan with respect to your present age and situation. 
The important thing is to be prepared for this question. It is a sure kiss of 
death to respond that you would like to have the interviewer’s job! Instead, 
show an interest in the current job and in making a contribution to the orga-
nization. Talk about the levels of responsibility you would like to achieve. 
One employment counselor suggests showing ambition but not committing 
to a specific job title. Suggest that you hope to have learned enough to have 
progressed to a position where you will continue to grow. Keep your answer 
focused on educational and professional goals, not personal goals.
 2. If you got this position, what would you do to be sure you fit in?
 3. This is a large (or small) organization. Do you think you would like that 
environment?
 4. Do you plan to continue your education?
 5. What do you predict for the future of the ______________ industry?
 6. How do you think you can contribute to this company?
 7. What would you most like to accomplish if you get this position?
 8. How do you keep current with what is happening in your profession?
Challenging Questions. The following questions may make you uncom-
fortable, but the important thing to remember is to answer truthfully without dwell-
ing on your weaknesses. As quickly as possible, convert any negative response into 
a discussion of your strengths.
Employers will hire a 
candidate with less 
experience and fewer 
accomplishments if he 
or she can demonstrate 
the skills required.
Questions about 
your experience and 
accomplishments enable 
you to work in your 
practiced success stories.
When asked about the 
future, show ambition and 
interest in succeeding 
with this company.

426 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
 1. What is your greatest weakness?
It is amazing how many candidates knock themselves out of the competi-
tion by answering this question poorly. Actually, you have many choices. 
You can present a strength as a weakness (Some people complain that I’m a 
workaholic or too attentive to details). You can mention a corrected weak-
ness (I found that I really needed to learn about conducting Web research, 
so I took a course). You could cite an unrelated skill (I really need to brush 
up on my Spanish). You can cite a learning objective (One of my long-term 
goals is to learn more about international management. Does your company 
have any plans to expand overseas?). Another possibility is to reaffirm your 
qualifications (I have no weaknesses that affect my ability to do this job).
 2. What type of people do you have no patience for?
Avoid letting yourself fall into the trap of sounding overly critical. One pos-
sible response is, I have always gotten along well with others. But I confess 
that I can be irritated by complainers who don’t accept responsibility.
 3. If you could live your life over, what would you change and why?
 4. How would your former (or current) supervisor describe you as an employee?
 5. What do you want the most from your job? Money? Security? Power?
 6. What is your grade point average, and does it accurately reflect your abilities?
 7. Have you ever used drugs?
 8. Who in your life has influenced you the most and why?
 9. What are you reading right now?
 10. Describe your ideal work environment.
 11. Is the customer always right?
 12. How do you define success?
Situational Questions. Questions related to situations help employers test 
your thought processes and logical thinking. When using situational questions, 
interviewers will describe a hypothetical situation and ask how you would handle 
it. Situational questions differ based on the type of position for which you are 
interviewing.12 Knowledge of the position and the company culture will help you 
respond favorably to these questions. Even if the situation sounds negative, keep 
your response positive. Here are just a few examples:
 1. You receive a call from an irate customer who complains about the service she 
received last night at your restaurant. She is demanding her money back. How 
would you handle the situation?
 2. If you were aware that a coworker was falsifying data, what would you do?
 3. Your supervisor has just told you that she is dissatisfied with your work, but 
you think it is acceptable. How would you resolve the conflict?
 4. Your supervisor has told you to do something a certain way, and you think that 
way is wrong and that you know a far better way to complete the task. What 
would you do?
 5. Assume that you are hired for this position. You soon learn that one of the staff 
is extremely resentful because she applied for your position and was turned 
down. As a result, she is being unhelpful and obstructive. How would you 
handle the situation?
 6. A work colleague has told you in confidence that she suspects another colleague 
of stealing. What would your actions be?
 7. You have noticed that communication between upper management and first-
level employees is eroding. How would you solve this problem?
Behavioral Questions. Instead of traditional interview questions, you may 
be asked to tell stories. The interviewer may say, Describe a time when . . .  or Tell 
me about a time when . . . . To respond effectively, learn to use the storytelling 
Strive to convert a discussion 
of your weaknesses to topics 
that show your strengths.
Answer challenging 
questions truthfully, but 
try to turn the discussion 
into one that emphasizes 
your strengths.
Employers ﬁ nd that 
situational and behavioral 
interview questions give 
them useful information 
about job candidates.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
427
or STAR technique. Ask yourself, what the Situation or Task was, what Action 
you took, and what the Results were.13 Practice using this method to recall spe-
cific examples of your skills and accomplishments. To be fully prepared, develop 
a coherent and articulate STAR narrative for every bullet point on your résumé. 
When answering behavioral questions, describe only educational and work-related 
situations or tasks, and try to keep them as current as possible. Here are a few 
examples of behavioral questions:
 1. Tell me about a time when you solved a difficult problem.
Tell a concise story explaining the situation or task, what you did, and the 
result. For example, When I was at Ace Products, we continually had a 
problem of excessive back orders. After analyzing the situation, I discov-
ered that orders went through many unnecessary steps. I suggested that 
we eliminate much paperwork. As a result, we reduced back orders by 30 
percent. Go on to emphasize what you learned and how you can apply that 
learning to this job. Practice your success stories in advance so that you will 
be ready.
 2. Describe a situation in which you were able to use persuasion to successfully 
convince someone to see things your way.
The recruiter is interested in your leadership and teamwork skills. You might 
respond, I have learned to appreciate the fact that the way you present an 
idea is just as important as the idea itself. When trying to influence people, 
I put myself in their shoes and find some way to frame my idea from their 
perspective. I remember when I . . . .
 3. Describe a time when you had to analyze information and make a recommen-
dation.
 4. Describe a time that you worked successfully as part of a team.
 5. Tell me about a time you dealt with confidential information.
 6. Give me an example of a time when you were under stress to meet a deadline.
 7. Tell me about a time when you had to go above and beyond the call of duty in 
order to get a job done.
 8. Tell me about a time you were able to successfully deal with another person 
even when that person may not have personally liked you (or vice versa).
 9. Give me an example of when you showed initiative and took the lead.
 10. Tell me about a recent situation in which you had to deal with an upset cus-
tomer or coworker.
Illegal and Inappropriate Questions. Federal laws prohibit employ-
ment discrimination based on gender, age, religion, color, race, national origin, 
and disability. In addition, many state and city laws exist that prohibit employment 
discrimination based on such factors as sexual orientation.14 Therefore, it is inap-
propriate for interviewers to ask any question related to these areas. These questions 
become illegal, though, only when a court of law determines that the employer is 
asking them with the intent to discriminate.15 Most illegal interview questions are 
asked innocently by inexperienced interviewers. Some are only trying to be friendly 
when they inquire about your personal life and family. Regardless of the intent, how 
should you react?
If you find the question harmless and if you want the job, go ahead and answer it. 
If you think that answering it would damage your chance to be hired, try to deflect 
the question tactfully with a response such as Could you tell me how my marital 
status relates to the responsibilities of this position? or, I prefer to keep my personal 
and professional lives separate. If you are uncomfortable answering a question, try 
to determine the reason behind it; you might answer, I don’t let my personal life 
interfere with my ability to do my job, or, Are you concerned with my availability 
to work overtime? Another option, of course, is to respond to any inappropriate or 
Candidates who are asked 
illegal questions must decide 
whether to answer, deﬂ ect 
the question tactfully, or 
confront the interviewer.
OFFICE I N S I D E R
Questions are only questions. 
You can start to feel quite full 
of yourself asking good ones, 
but the real power of an 
interview lies in how well you 
listen to the answers. Really 
listen, to the end, between 
the lines, through the pauses, 
and after the awkward 
silences.

428 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
illegal question by confronting the interviewer and threatening a lawsuit or refusing 
to answer. However, you could not expect to be hired under these circumstances. In 
any case, you might wish to reconsider working for an organization that sanctions 
such procedures.
Here are some inappropriate and illegal questions that you may or may not want 
to answer:16
 1. What is your marital status? Are you married? Do you live with anyone? Do 
you have a boyfriend (or girlfriend)? (However, employers can ask your marital 
status after hiring for tax and insurance forms.)
 2. Do you have any disabilities? Have you had any recent illnesses? (But it is legal 
to ask if the person can perform specific job duties, such as, Can you carry a 
50-pound sack up a 10-foot ladder five times daily?)
 3. I notice you have an accent. Where are you from? What is the origin of your 
last name? What is your native language? (However, it is legal to ask what lan-
guages you speak fluently if language ability is related to the job.)
 4. Have you ever filed a worker’s compensation claim or been injured on the 
job?
 5. Have you ever had a drinking problem or been addicted to drugs? (But it is legal 
to ask if a person uses illegal drugs.)
 6. Have you ever been arrested? (But it is legal to ask, Have you ever been con-
victed of ___________? when the crime is related to the job.)
 7. How old are you? What is your date of birth? When did you graduate from high 
school? (But it is legal to ask, Are you 16 years (or 18 years or 21 years) old or 
older? depending on the age requirements for the position.)
 8. Of what country are you a citizen? Where were you born? (But it is legal to ask, 
Are you a citizen of the United States? or, Can you legally work in the United 
States?)
 9. What is your maiden name? (But it is legal to ask, What is your full name? or,
Have you worked under another name?)
 10. Do you have any religious beliefs that would prevent you from working week-
ends or holidays? (An employer can, however, ask you if you are available to 
work weekends and holidays.)
 11. Do you have children? Do you plan to have children? Do you have adequate 
child-care arrangements? (However, employers can ask for dependent informa-
tion for tax and insurance purposes after you are hired.)
 12. How much do you weigh? How tall are you? (However, employers can ask 
you about your height and weight if minimum standards are necessary to safely 
perform a job.)17
Asking Your Own Questions
At some point in the interview, usually near the end, you will be asked whether 
you have any questions. The worst thing you can do is say No, which suggests that 
you are not interested in the position. Instead, ask questions that will help you gain 
information and will impress the interviewer with your thoughtfulness and inter-
est in the position. Remember that this interview is a two-way street. You must be 
happy with the prospect of working for this organization. You want a position for 
which your skills and personality are matched. Use this opportunity to find out 
whether this job is right for you. Be aware that you don’t have to wait for the inter-
viewer to ask you for questions. You can ask your own questions throughout the 
interview to learn more about the company and position. Here are some questions 
you might ask:
 1. What will my duties be (if not already discussed)?
 2. Tell me what it is like working here in terms of the people, management prac-
tices, workloads, expected performance, and rewards.
 3. What training programs are available from this organization? What specific 
training will be given for this position?
Interview questions become 
illegal only if a court of law 
determines that the intent 
was to discriminate.
Your questions should 
impress the interviewer 
but also provide valuable 
information about the job.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
429
 4. Who would be my immediate supervisor?
 5. What is the organizational structure, and where does this position fit in?
 6. Is travel required in this position?
 7. How is job performance evaluated?
 8. Assuming my work is excellent, where do you see me in five years?
 9. How long do employees generally stay with this organization?
 10. What are the major challenges for a person in this position?
 11. What do you see in the future of this organization?
 12. What do you like best about working for this organization?
 13. May I have a tour of the facilities?
 14. When do you expect to make a decision?
Ending Positively
After you have asked your questions, the interviewer will signal the end of the 
interview, usually by standing up or by expressing appreciation that you came. 
If not addressed earlier, you should at this time find out what action will follow. 
Demonstrate your interest in the position by asking when it will be filled or what 
the next step will be. Too many candidates leave the interview without knowing 
their status or when they will hear from the recruiter. Don’t be afraid to say that 
you want the job!
Before you leave, summarize your strongest qualifications, show your enthusiasm 
for obtaining this position, and thank the interviewer for a constructive interview 
and for considering you for the position. Ask the interviewer for a business card, 
which will provide the information you need to write a thank-you letter, which is 
discussed later. Shake the interviewer’s hand with confidence, and acknowledge 
anyone else you see on the way out. Be sure to thank the receptionist. Leaving the 
interview gracefully and enthusiastically will leave a lasting impression on those 
responsible for making the final hiring decision.
After the Interview
After leaving the interview, immediately make notes of what was said in case you are 
called back for a second interview. Write down key points that were discussed, the 
names of people you spoke with, and other details of the interview. Ask yourself what 
went really well and what could have been improved. Note your strengths and weak-
nesses during the interview so that you can work to improve in future interviews. Next, 
write down your follow-up plans. To whom should you send thank-you letters? Will 
you contact the employer by phone? If so, when? Then be sure to follow up on those 
plans, beginning with writing a thank-you letter and contacting your references.
Thanking Your Interviewer
After a job interview you should always send a thank-you letter, also called a  follow-
up letter. This courtesy sets you apart from other applicants, most of whom will not 
bother. Your letter also reminds the interviewer of your visit as well as suggesting 
your good manners and genuine enthusiasm for the job.
Follow-up letters are most effective if sent immediately after the interview. 
Experts believe that a thoughtful follow-up note carries as much weight as the cover 
letter does. Almost nine out of ten senior executives admit that in their evaluation of 
a job candidate they are swayed by a written thank you.18 In your thank-you letter 
refer to the date of the interview, the exact job title for which you were interviewed, 
and specific topics discussed. “An effective thank-you letter should hit every one of 
the employer’s hot buttons,” author and career consultant Wendy Enelow says.19 
Don’t get carried away after a successful interview and send an ill-conceived thank-
you e-mail that reads like a text message or sounds too chummy. Smart interviewees 
don’t ruin their chances by communicating with recruiters in hasty, poorly thought-
out textspeak from their mobile devices.
At the end of the interview 
summarize your strongest 
qualiﬁ cations, thank the 
interviewer, and ask for 
the interviewer’s card.
A follow-up thank-you 
letter shows your good 
manners and your 
enthusiasm for the job.

430 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
In addition to being respectful when following up after an interview, avoid 
worn-out phrases, such as Thank you for taking the time to interview me. Be care-
ful, too, about overusing I, especially to begin sentences. Most important, show that 
you really want the job and that you are qualified for it. Notice how the letter in 
Figure 14.2 conveys enthusiasm and confidence.
If you have been interviewed by more than one person, send a separate letter to 
each interviewer. It is also a good idea to send a thank-you letter to the receptionist 
and to the person who set up the interview. Your thank-you letter will probably 
make more of an impact if prepared in proper business format and sent by regular 
mail. However, if you know the decision will be made quickly, send your follow-up 
message by e-mail. One job candidate now makes a follow-up e-mail a practice. She 
summarizes what was discussed during the face-to-face interview and adds informa-
tion that she had not thought to mention during the interview.20
OF F I C E  I N S I DER
Nearly 15 percent of hiring 
managers won’t hire someone 
who doesn’t send a thank-you 
note . . . . Thirty-two percent 
would still consider the 
candidate but would think 
less of him or her.
FIGURE 14.2 Interview Follow-Up Letter

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
431
Contacting Your References
Once you have thanked your interviewer, it is time to alert your references that 
they may be contacted by the employer. You might also have to request a letter 
of recommendation to be sent to the employer by a certain date. As discussed in 
Chapter 13, you should have already asked permission to use these individuals as 
references, and you should have supplied them with a copy of your résumé, high-
lighted with sales points.
To provide the best possible recommendation, your ref-
erences need information. What position have you applied 
for with what company? What should they stress to the 
prospective employer? Let’s say you are applying for a spe-
cific job that requires a letter of recommendation. Professor 
Orenstein has already agreed to be a reference for you. 
To get the best letter of recommendation from Professor 
Orenstein, help her out. Write a letter telling her about the 
position, its requirements, and the recommendation dead-
line. Include a copy of your résumé. You might remind 
her of a positive experience with you that she could use in 
the recommendation. Remember that recom menders need 
evidence to support generalizations. Give them appropri-
ate ammunition, as the student has done in the following 
request:
Dear Professor Orenstein:
Recently I interviewed for the position of administrative assistant in the 
Human Resources Department of Host International. Because you kindly 
agreed to help me, I am now asking you to write a letter of recommendation 
to Host.
The position calls for good organizational, interpersonal, and writing skills, 
as well as computer experience. To help you review my skills and training, I 
enclose my résumé. As you may recall, I earned an A in your business commu-
nication class last fall; and you commended my long report for its clarity and 
organization.
Please send your letter to Mr. James Jenkins at Host International before July 1 
in the enclosed stamped, addressed envelope. I’m grateful for your support, and 
I promise to let you know the results of my job search.
Following Up
If you don’t hear from the interviewer within five days, or at the specified time, call 
him or her. Practice saying something like, I’m wondering what else I can do to con-
vince you that I’m the right person for this job, or, I’m calling to find out the status 
of your search for the ____________ position. You could also e-mail the interviewer 
to find out how the decision process is going. When following up, it is important 
to sound professional and courteous. Sounding desperate, angry, or frustrated that 
you haven’t been contacted can ruin your chances. The following follow-up e-mail 
message would impress the interviewer:
Dear Ms. Jamison:
I enjoyed my interview with you last Thursday for the receptionist position. 
You should know that I’m very interested in this opportunity with Coastal 
Enterprises. Because you mentioned that you might have an answer this week, 
I’m eager to know how your decision process is coming along. I look forward 
to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
“Why do all your references scream and slam 
down the phone when I mention your name?”
© TED GOFF WWW.TEDGOFF.COM
In a reference request letter, 
tell immediately why you are 
writing. Identify the target 
position and company.
Specify the job requirements 
so that the recommender 
knows what to stress.
Provide a stamped, 
addressed envelope.
A follow-up letter inquires 
courteously and does not 
sound angry or desperate.

432 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
Depending on the response you get to your first follow-up request, you may have 
to follow up additional times. Keep in mind, though, that some employers won’t 
tell you about their hiring decision unless you are the one hired.21 Don’t harass the 
interviewer, and don’t force a decision. If you don’t hear back from an employer 
within several weeks after following up, it is best to assume that you didn’t get the 
job and to continue with your job search.
Other Employment Documents
Although the résumé and cover letter are your major tasks, other important docu-
ments and messages are often required during the employment process. You may 
need to complete an employment application form and write follow-up letters. You 
might also have to write a letter of resignation when leaving a job. Because each of 
these tasks reveals something about you and your communication skills, you will 
want to put your best foot forward. These documents often subtly influence com-
pany officials to offer a job.
Application Form
Some organizations require job candidates to fill out job application forms instead 
of, or in addition to, submitting résumés. This practice permits them to gather and 
store standardized data about each applicant. Whether the application is on paper or 
online, follow the directions carefully and provide accurate information. The follow-
ing suggestions can help you be prepared:
• Carry a card summarizing vital statistics not included on your résumé. If you 
are asked to fill out an application form in an employer’s office, you will 
need a handy reference to the following data: graduation dates, beginning and 
ending dates of all employment; salary history; full names, titles, and present 
work addresses of former supervisors; full addresses and phone numbers of 
current and previous employers; and full names, occupational titles, occupa-
tional addresses, and telephone numbers of persons who have agreed to serve 
as references.
• Look over all the questions before starting.
• Fill out the form neatly, using blue or black ink. Many career counselors recom-
mend printing your responses; cursive handwriting can be difficult to read.
• Answer all questions honestly. Write Not applicable or N/A if appropriate.
• Use accurate spelling, grammar, and punctuation.
• If asked for the position desired, give a specific job title or type of position. Don’t 
say, Anything or Open. These answers will make you look unfocused; moreover, 
they make it difficult for employers to know what you are qualified for or inter-
ested in.
• Be prepared for a salary question. Unless you know what comparable employees 
are earning in the company, the best strategy is to suggest a salary range or to 
write Negotiable or Open. See the Communication Workshop at the end of this 
chapter for tips on dealing with money matters while interviewing.
• Be prepared to explain the reasons for leaving previous positions. Use positive 
or neutral phrases such as Relocation, Seasonal, To accept a position with more 
responsibility, Temporary position, To continue education, or Career change. 
Avoid words or phrases such as Fired, Quit, Didn’t get along with supervisor, or 
Pregnant.
• Look over the application before submitting to make sure it is complete and that 
you have followed all instructions. Sign and date the application.
Application or Résumé Follow-Up Letter
If your résumé or application generates no response within a reasonable time, you 
may decide to send a short follow-up letter such as the following. Doing so (a) jogs 
When applying for jobs, keep 
with you a card summarizing 
your important data.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
433
the memory of the personnel officer, (b) demonstrates your serious interest, and (c) 
allows you to emphasize your qualifications or to add new information.
Dear Ms. Lopez:
Please know I am still interested in becoming an administrative support specialist 
with Quad, Inc.
Since I submitted an application [or résumé] in May, I have completed my degree 
and have been employed as a summer replacement for office workers in several 
downtown offices. This experience has honed my word processing and commu-
nication skills. It has also introduced me to a wide range of office procedures.
Please keep my application in your active file and let me know when I may put 
my formal training, technical skills, and practical experience to work for you.
Rejection Follow-Up Letter
If you didn’t get the job and you think it was perfect for you, don’t give up. 
Employment specialists encourage applicants to respond to a rejection. The can-
didate who was offered the position may decline, or other positions may open up. 
In a rejection follow-up letter, it is OK to admit you are disappointed. Be sure to 
add, however, that you are still interested and will contact the company again in a 
month in case a job opens up. Then follow through for a couple of months—but 
don’t overdo it. You should be professional and persistent, but not a pest. Here’s 
an example of an effective rejection follow-up letter:
Dear Mr. O’Neal:
Although I’m disappointed that someone else was selected for your accounting 
position, I appreciate your promptness and courtesy in notifying me.
Because I firmly believe that I have the technical and interpersonal skills needed 
to work in your fast-paced environment, I hope you will keep my résumé in your 
active file. My desire to become a productive member of your Transamerica staff 
remains strong.
I enjoyed our interview, and I especially appreciate the time you and Ms. 
Goldstein spent describing your company’s expansion into international mar-
kets. To enhance my qualifications, I have enrolled in a course in International 
Accounting at CSU.
Should you have an opening for which I am qualified, you may reach me at (818) 
719-3901. In the meantime, I will call you in a month to discuss employment 
possibilities.
Sincerely,
Job Acceptance and Rejection Letters
When all your hard work pays off, you will be offered the position you want. 
Although you will likely accept the position over the phone, it is a good idea to 
follow up with an acceptance letter to confirm the details and to formalize the 
acceptance. Your acceptance letter might look like this:
Dear Ms. Scarborough:
It was a pleasure talking with you earlier today. As I mentioned, I am delighted 
to accept the position of web designer with Innovative Creations, Inc., in your 
Seattle office. I look forward to becoming part of the IC team and to starting 
work on a variety of exciting and innovative projects.
As we agreed, my starting salary will be $46,000, with a full benefits package 
including health and life insurance, retirement plan, stock options, and three 
weeks of vacation per year.
Open by reminding the 
reader of your interest.
Review your strengths or 
add new qualiﬁ cations.
Subordinate your disappoint-
ment to your appreciation 
at being notiﬁ ed promptly 
and courteously.
Refer to speciﬁ cs of your 
interview.
Take the initiative; tell when 
you will call for an update.
Review salary and beneﬁ ts 
details.
Conﬁ rm your acceptance of 
the position with enthusiasm.

434 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
I look forward to starting my position with Innovative Creations on September 
15, 2011. Before that date I will send you the completed tax and insurance forms 
you need. Thanks again for everything, Ms. Scarborough.
Sincerely,
If you must turn down a job offer, show your professionalism by writing a sin-
cere letter. This letter should thank the employer for the job offer and explain briefly 
that you are turning it down. Taking the time to extend this courtesy could help you 
in the future if this employer has a position you really want. Here’s an example of 
a job rejection letter:
Dear Mr. Opperman:
Thank you very much for offering me the position of sales representative with 
Bendall Pharmaceuticals. It was a difficult decision to make, but I have accepted 
a position with another company.
I appreciate your taking the time to interview me, and I wish Bendall much suc-
cess in the future.
Resignation Letter
After you have been in a position for a period of time, you may find it necessary to 
leave. Perhaps you have been offered a better position, or maybe you have decided 
to return to school full-time. Whatever the reason, you should leave your position 
gracefully and tactfully. Although you will likely discuss your resignation in person 
with your supervisor, it is a good idea to document your resignation by writing a 
formal letter. Some resignation letters are brief, while others contain great detail. 
Remember that many resignation letters are placed in personnel files; therefore, it 
should be formatted and written using the professional business letter writing tech-
niques you learned earlier. Here is an example of a basic letter of resignation:
Dear Ms. Patrick:
This letter serves as formal notice of my resignation from Allied Corporation, 
effective Friday, August 15. I have enjoyed serving as your office assistant for 
the past two years, and I am grateful for everything I have learned during my 
employment with Allied.
Please let me know what I can do over the next two weeks to help you prepare for 
my departure. I would be happy to help with finding and training my replacement.
Thanks again for providing such a positive employment experience. I will long 
remember my time here.
Sincerely,
Although this employee gave a standard two-week notice, you may find that 
a longer notice is necessary. The higher and more responsible your position, the 
longer the notice you should give your employer. You should, however, always give 
some notice as a courtesy.
Writing job acceptance, job rejection, and resignation letters requires effort. 
That effort, however, is worth it because you are building bridges that later may 
carry you to even better jobs in the future.
Include the speciﬁ c 
starting date.
Conﬁ rm exact date of 
resignation. Remind employer 
of your contributions.
Visit www.meguffey.com
• Chapter Review Quiz 
• PowerPoint Slides
• Flash Cards 
• Personal Language Trainer
• Grammar Practice 
• Beat the Clock Quiz
Thank the employer for the 
job offer and decline the offer 
without giving speciﬁ cs. 
Express gratitude and best 
wishes for the future.
Offer assistance to prepare 
for your resignation. Offer 
thanks and end with a 
forward-looking statement.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
435
 6. Name the main purposes of interviews—for job candidates as well as for employers.
 7. Briefly describe the types of hiring/placement interviews you may encounter.
S
Summing Up and Looking Forward
Whether you face a screening interview or a hiring/placement 
interview, you must be well prepared. You can increase your 
chances of success and reduce your anxiety considerably 
by knowing how interviews are typically conducted and by 
researching the target company thoroughly. Practice answer-
ing typical questions, including situational, behavioral, and 
challenging ones. Consider audio or video recording a mock 
interview so that you can check your body language and 
improve your answering techniques.
At the end of the interview, thank the interviewer, review 
your main strengths for the position, and ask what the next 
step is. Follow up with a thank-you letter and a follow-up 
call or message, if appropriate. Prepare other employment-
related documents as needed, including application forms, 
application and résumé follow-up letters, rejection follow-up 
letters, job acceptance and rejection letters, and resignation 
letters.
You have now completed 14 chapters of rigorous instruc-
tion aimed at developing your skills so that you can be a 
successful business communicator in today’s rapidly chang-
ing world of information. Remember that this is but a starting 
point. Your skills as a business communicator will continue to 
grow on the job as you apply the principles you have learned 
and expand your expertise.
C
Critical Thinking
 1. How can recruiters and job seekers connect on the Web, 
and what are the advantages and potential disadvantages 
of doing so?
 2. What can you do to improve the first impression you make 
at an interview?
 3. In employment interviews, do you think that behavioral 
questions (such as Tell me about a business problem you 
have had and how you solved it) are more effective than 
traditional questions (such as Tell me what you are good 
at )? Why?
 4. Why is it important to ask one’s own questions of the 
interviewer?
 5. Why should a job candidate write a thank-you letter after 
an interview?
C
Chapter Review

436 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
 8. How can you address problem areas on your résumé such as lack of experience, getting fired, or 
earning low grades?
 9. You have scheduled an interview with a large local company. What kind of information should you 
seek about this company, and where could you expect to find it?
 10. Name at least six interviewing behaviors you can exhibit that send positive nonverbal messages.
 11. What is your greatest fear of what you might do or what might happen to you during an employment 
interview? How can you overcome your fears?
 12. Should you be candid with an interviewer when asked about your weaknesses?
 13. How should you respond to questions you feel are inappropriate or illegal?

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
437
 14. List the steps you should take immediately following your job interview.
 15. List various kinds of follow-up letters.
A
Activities and Cases
WEB
14.1 Researching an Organization
An important part of your preparation for an interview is finding out about the target company.
Your Task. Select an organization where you would like to be employed. Assume you have been selected for an interview. 
Using resources described in this chapter, locate information about the organization’s leaders and their business philoso-
phies. Find out about the organization’s accomplishments, setbacks, finances, products, customers, competition, and adver-
tising. Prepare a summary report documenting your findings.
WEB
14.2 Learning What Jobs Are Really About Through Blogs
Blogs are becoming an important tool in the employment search process. By accessing blogs, job seekers can learn more 
about a company’s culture and day-to-day activities.
Your Task. Using the Web, locate a blog that is maintained by an employee of a company where you would like to 
work. Monitor the blog for at least a week. Prepare a short report that summarizes what you learned about the company 
through reading the blog postings. Include a statement of whether this information would be valuable during your job 
search.
WEB
14.3 Taking a Look at Corporate Web Videos
Would you like to know what it is like to work for the company that interests you? Check out Web videos posted by companies 
on their career pages, job boards, and even YouTube. Currently about 7,000 corporate videos await you on Jobing, a job 
board that lists openings in specific geographic regions.
Your Task. Search company recruiting Web sites, YouTube, or Jobing for videos featuring two or three companies in your 
chosen industry. Compare how the employers introduce themselves, which aspects they emphasize about their organiza-
tions, how they present their employees, what they offer potential applicants, and so forth. Write a short report addressed to 
your instructor comparing and contrasting the corporate Web videos you examined.
14.4 Building Interview Skills
Successful interviews require diligent preparation and repeated practice. To be well prepared, you need to know what skills 
are required for your targeted position. In addition to computer and communication skills, employers generally want to know 
whether a candidate works well with a team, accepts responsibility, solves problems, is efficient, meets deadlines, shows 
leadership, saves time and money, and is a hard worker.
Your Task. Consider a position for which you are eligible now or one for which you will be eligible when you complete your 
education. Identify the skills and traits necessary for this position. If you prepared a résumé in Chapter 13, be sure that it 
addresses these targeted areas. Now prepare interview worksheets listing at least ten technical and other skills or traits you 
think a recruiter will want to discuss in an interview for your targeted position.

438 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
14.5 Preparing Success Stories
You can best showcase your talents if you are ready with your own success stories that show how you have developed the 
skills or traits required for your targeted position.
Your Task. Using the worksheets you prepared in Activity 14.4, prepare success stories that highlight the required skills or 
traits. Select three to five stories to develop into answers to potential interview questions. For example, here’s a typical ques-
tion: How does your background relate to the position we have open? A possible response: As you know, I have just completed 
an intensive training program in _____________. In addition, I have over three years of part-time work experience in a variety of busi-
ness settings. In one position I was selected to manage a small business in the absence of the owner. I developed responsibility 
and customer-service skills in filling orders efficiently, resolving shipping problems, and monitoring key accounts. I also inventoried 
and organized products worth over $200,000. When the owner returned from a vacation to Florida, I was commended for increas-
ing sales and was given a bonus in recognition of my efforts. People relate to and remember stories. Try to shape your answers 
into memorable stories.
WEB
14.6 Exploring Appropriate Interview Attire
As you prepare for your interview by learning about the company and the industry, don’t forget a key component of interview 
success: creating a favorable first impression by wearing appropriate business attire. Job seekers often have nebulous ideas 
about proper interview wear. Some wardrobe mishaps include choosing a conservative “power” suit but accessorizing it with 
beat-up casual shoes or a shabby bag. Grooming glitches include dandruff on dark suit fabric, dirty fingernails, or mothball 
odor. Women sometimes wrongly assume that any black clothing items are acceptable, even if they are too tight, revealing, 
sheer, or made of low-end fabrics. Most image consultants agree that workplace attire falls into three main categories: busi-
ness formal, business casual, and casual. Only business formal is considered proper interview apparel.
Your Task. To prepare for your big day, search the Web for descriptions and images of business formal. You may research 
business casual and casual styles, but for an interview, always dress on the side of caution—conservatively. Compare prices 
and look for suit sales to buy one or two attractive interview outfits. Share your findings (notes, images, and price range for 
suits, solid shoes, and accessories) with the class and your instructor.
14.7 Polishing Answers to Interview Questions
Practice makes perfect in interviewing. The more often you rehearse responses to typical interview questions, the closer you 
are to getting the job.
Your Task. Select three questions from each of these question categories discussed in this chapter: Questions to Get 
Acquainted, Questions to Gauge Your Interest, Questions About Your Experience and Accomplishments, Questions About 
the Future, and Challenging Questions. Write your answers to each set of questions. Try to incorporate skills and traits 
required for the targeted position, and include success stories where appropriate. Polish these answers and your delivery 
technique by practicing in front of a mirror or into an audio recorder. 
WEB
TEAM
14.8 Learning to Answer Situational Interview Questions
Situational interview questions can vary widely from position to position. You should know enough about a position to under-
stand some of the typical situations you would encounter on a regular basis.
Your Task. Use your favorite search tool to locate typical job descriptions of a position in which you are interested. Based on 
these descriptions, develop a list of six to eight typical situations someone in this position would face; then write situational 
interview questions for each of these scenarios. In pairs of two students, role-play interviewer and interviewee alternating 
with your listed questions.
WEB
TEAM
14.9 Developing Skill With Behavioral Interview Questions
Behavioral interview questions are increasingly popular, and you will need a little practice before you can answer them 
easily.
Your Task. Use your favorite search tool to locate lists of behavioral questions on the Web. Select five skills areas such as 
communication, teamwork, and decision making. For each skills area find three behavioral questions that you think would be 
effective in an interview. In pairs of two students, role-play interviewer and interviewee alternating with your listed questions. 
You goal is to answer effectively in one or two minutes. Remember to use the STAR method when answering.
WEB
14.10 Answering Puffball and Killer Questions in a Virtual Interview
Two Web sites offer excellent interview advice. At Monster Career Advice (http://career-advice.monster.com/interview-tips/
home.aspx) you can improve your interviewing skills in virtual interviews. You will find questions, answers, and explanations 

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
439
for interviews in job fields ranging from administrative support to human resources to technology. At WetFeet (http://www
.wetfeet.com) you can learn how to answer résumé-based questions and how to handle preinterview jitters, and see dozens 
of articles filled with helpful tips.
Your Task. Visit one or both of the targeted Web sites. If these URLs have been changed, use your favorite search tool to 
locate Monster Interviews and WetFeet Interviews.
14.11 Creating an Interview Cheat Sheet
Even the best-rehearsed applicants sometimes forget to ask the questions they prepared, or they fail to stress their major 
accomplishments in job interviews. Sometimes applicants are so rattled they even forget the interviewer’s name. To help you 
keep your wits during an interview, make a “cheat sheet” that summarizes key facts, answers, and questions. Use it before 
the interview and also review it as the interview is ending to be sure you have covered everything that is critical.
Your Task. Prepare a cheat sheet with the following information:
Day and time of interview:
Meeting with: (Name of interviewer(s), title, company, city, state, zip, telephone, cell, fax, e-mail)
Major accomplishments: (four to six)
Management or work style: (four to six)
Things you need to know about me: (three or four items)
Reason I left my last job:
Answers to difficult questions: (four or five answers)
Questions to ask interviewer:
Things I can do for you:
14.12 Handling Inappropriate and Illegal Interview Questions
Although some questions are considered illegal by the government, many interviewers will ask them anyway—whether inten-
tionally or unknowingly. Being prepared is important.
Your Task. How would you respond in the following scenario? You are being interviewed at one of the top companies on your 
list of potential employers. The interviewing committee consists of a human resources manager and the supervising manager 
of the department where you would work. At various times during the interview, the supervising manager asks questions that 
make you feel uncomfortable. For example, he asks whether you are married. You know this question is illegal, but you saw 
no harm in answering it. But then he asks how old you are. Because you started college early and graduated in three and a 
half years, you are worried that you may not be considered mature enough for this position. You have most of the qualifica-
tions required, and you are convinced you could succeed on the job. How should you answer this question?
14.13 Knowing What to Ask
When it is your turn to ask questions during the interview process, be ready.
Your Task. Decide on three to five questions that you would like to ask during an interview. Write these questions out and 
practice asking them so that you sound confident and sincere.
TEAM
14.14 Role-Playing in a Mock Interview
One of the best ways to understand interview dynamics and to develop confidence is to role-play the parts of interviewer 
and candidate in a mock interview.
Your Task. Choose a partner for this activity. Each partner makes a list of two interview questions for each of the eight interview 
question categories presented in this chapter. In team sessions you and your partner will role-play an actual interview. One 
acts as interviewer; the other is the candidate. Prior to the interview, the candidate tells the interviewer what job and company 
he or she is applying to. For the interview, the interviewer and candidate should dress appropriately and sit in chairs facing 
each other. The interviewer greets the candidate and makes the candidate comfortable. The candidate gives the interviewer a 
copy of his or her résumé. The interviewer asks three (or more, depending on your instructor’s time schedule) questions from 
the candidate’s list. The interviewer may also ask follow-up questions if appropriate. When finished, the interviewer ends the 
meeting graciously. After one interview, reverse roles and repeat.
14.15 Video Recording an Interview
Seeing how you look during an interview can help you improve your body language and presentation style. Your instructor 
may act as the interviewer, or an outside businessperson may be asked to conduct mock interviews in your classroom.
Your Task. Engage a student or campus specialist to videotape each interview. Review your performance, and critique it 
looking for ways to improve. Your instructor may ask class members to offer comments and suggestions on individual inter-
views. Alternatively, visit your campus career center and sign up for a mock interview. Ask if your session could be recorded 
for subsequent viewing.

440 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
14.16 Saying Thanks for the Interview
You have just completed an exciting employment interview, and you want the interviewer to remember you.
Your Task. Write a follow-up thank-you letter to Ronald T. Ranson, Human Resources Development, Electronic Data Sources, 
1328 Peachtree Plaza, Atlanta, GA 30314 (or a company of your choice). Make up any details needed.
14.17 Refusing to Take No for an Answer
After an excellent interview with Electronic Data Sources (or a company of your choice), you are disappointed to learn that 
someone else was hired. However, you really want to work for EDS.
Your Task. Write a follow-up letter to Ronald T. Ranson, Human Resources Development, Electronic Data Sources, 1328 
Peachtree Plaza, Atlanta, GA 30314 (or a company of your choice). Indicate that you are disappointed but still interested.
14.18 Following Up After Submitting Your Résumé
A month has passed since you sent your résumé and cover letter in response to a job advertisement. You are still interested 
in the position and would like to find out whether you still have a chance.
Your Task. Write a follow-up letter that doesn’t offend the reader or damage your chances of employment.
14.19 Requesting a Reference
Your favorite professor has agreed to be one of your references. You have just arrived home from a job interview that went 
well, and you must ask your professor to write a letter of recommendation.
Your Task. Write to the professor requesting that a letter of recommendation be sent to the company where you interviewed. 
Explain that the interviewer asked that the letter be sent directly to him. Provide data about the job description and about 
yourself so that the professor can target its content.
14.20 Saying Yes to a Job Offer
Your dream has come true: you have just been offered an excellent position. Although you accepted the position on the 
phone, you want to send a formal acceptance letter.
Your Task. Write a job acceptance letter to an employer of your choice. Include the specific job title, your starting date, and 
details about your compensation package. Make up any necessary details.
E-MAIL
WEB
14.21 Searching for Advice
You can find wonderful, free, and sometimes entertaining job-search strategies, career tips, and interview advice on the Web.
Your Task. Use an electronic database or search the Web to locate articles or links to job-search and résumé sites. Make 
a list of at least five good job search pointers—ones that were not covered in this chapter. Send an e-mail message to your 
instructor describing your findings, or post your findings to a class discussion board to share with your classmates.
V
Video Resource
Video Library 1: Building Workplace Skills: Sharpening 
Your Interview Skills. In this video you see the job interview 
of Betsy Chin. Based on what you learned in this chapter and 
your own experience, critique her performance. What did 
she do well, and what could she improve? 
G
Grammar/Mechanics Checkup 14
Punctuation Review
Review Sections 1.17 and 2.01–2.29 in the Grammar/Mechanics Handbook. Study the following 
groups of sentences. In the space provided write the letter of the one that is correctly punctuated. 
When you finish, compare your responses with those at the end of the book. If your responses 
differ, study carefully the principles in parentheses.
 1. a.  Our products will not be ready for the first month of the holiday shopping season, 
therefore we must hire additional seasonal workers.
 
 b.  We know that the extra staff will cut into our slim profit margin; however, not delivering 
the goods on time could hurt us more in the longer term.
 
 c.  Our company could pick up the slack by instituting extra shifts in our flagship plant, or 
by subcontracting at least part of the lot to our Mexican partner plant.

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
441
 2. a.   Our accounting team makes a point of analyzing your business operations, and getting 
to know what’s working for you and what’s not.
 
 b.  We are dedicated to understanding your business needs over the long term, and taking 
an active role when it comes to creating solutions.
 
 c.  We understand that you may be downsizing or moving into new markets, and we want 
to help you make a seamless transition.
 3. a.  If you decide to use throwaway batteries, or fear the high upfront cost of incandescent 
lamps, you can still be somewhat “green” by disposing of hazardous waste safely.
 
 b.  When the batteries are fully charged, unplug the battery chargers to save power.
 
 c.  Although they are switched off many office appliances continue to draw a small amount 
of power.
 4. a.  There is a direct relationship between fuel economy and carbon dioxide emissions; 
therefore, a car that produces less carbon dioxide will cost less to fill up.
 
 b.  Although tangible advantages exist; the decision to buy a hybrid vehicle is not easy or 
clear-cut.
 
 c.   Efforts to clean up automotive emissions started as an attempt to cut smog, and also 
to slow global warming.
 5. a.  One of the reasons we are decreasing the number of our ATMs, is that two thirds of the 
bank’s customers depend on tellers for transactions.
 
 b. We are looking for an article titled, “Online Banking.”
 
 c.  Banks are at this time competing with nontraditional rivals that can provide extensive 
financial services.
 6. a.  We care deeply about the environment; but we also care about safety and good 
customer service.
 
 b.  The president worked with environmental concerns; the vice president focused on 
customer support.
 
 c.  Our Web site increases our productivity, it also improves customer service.
 7. a. Employees who will be receiving salary increases are: Terri, Mark, Rob, and Ellen.
 
 b. The following employees are eligible for bonuses: Robin, Jeff, Bill, and Jose.
 
 c.  Our consulting firm is proud to offer Web services for: site design, market analysis, 
e-commerce, and hosting.
 8. a. Independent Web workers’ schedules tend to be very flexible.
 
 b. The two supervisors irresponsibility caused injury on the shop floor.
 
 c.  Several smaller suppliers trucks and passenger vans are running on CNG to substitute 
for expensive gasoline.
 9. a.  Our committee considered convention sites in Scottsdale, Arizona, Palm Springs, 
California; and Dallas, Texas.
 
 b.  Serena was from Columbus, Ohio; Josh was from Denver, Colorado, and Rachel was 
from Seattle, Washington.
 
 c.  The following engineers were approved: J. W. Ellis, civil; Dr. Thomas Lee, structural; 
and W. R. Verey, mechanical.
 10. a.  The package from Albany, New York was never delivered.
 
 b. We have scheduled an inspection tour on Tuesday, March 5, at 4 p.m.
 
 c.  Send the check to M. E. Williams, 320 Summit Ridge, Ogden, Utah 84404 before the 
last mail pickup.

442 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
The following letter has faults in grammar, punctuation, spelling, capitalization, wordiness, 
and other problems. Correct the errors with standard proofreading marks (see Appendix B) 
or revise the message online at www.meguffey.com.
G
Grammar/Mechanics Challenge 14
842 New Durham Rd.
Edison, NJ 08817
June 4, 200x
Mr. Frederick M. Eadgar
Human Resources Department
Marketing and Sales Pros
1050 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036
Dear Mr. Edgar:
I would really wellcome the opportunity to work for you. I appriciated 
the interview yesterday for the newly-listed Position of Sales Trainee.  
It was really a pleasure meeting yourself and learning more about 
Marketing and Sales Pros, you have a ﬁne staff and a sophisticated 
approach to marketing.
You are organization appears to be growing in a directional manner 
that parralels my interests’ and career goals. The interview with 
yourself and your staff yesterday conﬁrmed my initale positive 
impressions of Marketing and Sales Pros and I want to reiterate my 
strong interest in working with and for you.  My prior Retail sales 
experience as a sales associate with The Gap; plus my recent 
training in Microsoft Word and Excel would enable me to make 
progress steadily through your programs of training and become 
a productive member of your sales team in no time at all.
Again, thank-you for your kind and gracius consideration. In the 
event that you need any additional information from me, all you have 
to do is give me a jingle at (732) 598-3557.
Sincerly yours,

Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up 
443
Let’s Talk Money: Negotiating a Salary
When to talk about salary causes many job applicants concern. The important thing to 
remember is that almost all salaries are negotiable. Research conducted by the Society for 
Human Resource Management and CareerJournal.com shows that approximately 90 percent 
of human resources professionals say salaries are negotiable, and 78 percent of employees 
report negotiating salary.22 If you have proved your worth throughout the interview process, 
employers will want to negotiate with you. To discuss compensation effectively, though, you 
must be prepared for salary questions, and you should know what you are worth. You also 
need to know basic negotiation strategies. As negotiation expert Chester L. Karrass said, 
“In business, you don’t get what you deserve, you get what you negotiate.”23 The following 
negotiating rules, recommended by various career experts, can guide you to a better begin-
ning salary.24
Rule No. 1: Avoid discussing salary for as long as possible in the interview process.
The longer you delay salary discussion, the more time you will have to convince the 
employer that you are worth what you are asking for. Ideally, you should try to avoid 
discussing salary until you know for sure that the interviewing company is making a job 
offer. The best time for you to negotiate your salary is between the time you are offered the 
position and the time you accept it. Wait for the employer to bring salary up first. If salary 
comes up and you are not sure whether the job is being offered to you, it is time for you 
to be blunt. Here are some things you could say:
Are you making me a job offer?
What salary range do you pay for positions with similar requirements?
I’m very interested in the position, and my salary would be negotiable.
Tell me what you have in mind for the salary range.
Rule No. 2: Know in advance the probable salary range for similar jobs in similar 
organizations.
Many job-search Web sites provide salary information. But it is probably better for you to 
call around in your area to learn what similar jobs are paying. The important thing here 
is to think in terms of a wide range. Let’s say you are hoping to start at between $45,000 
and $50,000. To an interviewer, you might say, I was looking for a salary in the high forties 
to the low fifties. This technique is called bracketing. In addition, stating your salary range 
in an annual dollar amount sounds more professional than asking for an hourly wage. Be 
sure to consider such things as geographic location, employer size, industry standards, 
the strength of the economy, and other factors to make sure that the range you come up 
with is realistic.
Rule No. 3: When negotiating, focus on what you are worth, not on what you need.
Throughout the interview and negotiation process, focus continually on your strengths. 
Make sure that the employer knows everything of value that you will bring to the orga-
nization. You have to prove that you are worth what you are asking for. Employers pay 
salaries based on what you will accomplish on the job and contribute to the organiza-
tion. When discussing your salary, focus on how the company will benefit from these 
contributions. Don’t bring personal issues into the negotiation process. No employer will 
be willing to pay you more because you have bills to pay, mouths to feed, or debt to 
get out of.
Rule No. 4: Never say no to a job before it is offered.
Why would anyone refuse a job offer before it is made? It happens all the time. Let’s say 
you were hoping for a salary of, say, $45,000. The interviewer tells you that the salary 
scheduled for this job is $40,000. You respond, Oh, that is out of the question! Before you 
were offered the job, you have, in effect, refused it. Instead, wait for the job offer; then start 
negotiating your salary.
Communication Workshop: Career Skills

444 
Chapter 14: Interviewing and Following Up
Rule No. 5: Ask for a higher salary first, and consider benefits.
Within reason, always try to ask for a higher salary first. This will leave room for this amount 
to decrease during negotiations until it is closer to your original expectations. Remember 
to consider the entire compensation package when negotiating. You may be willing to 
accept a lower salary if benefits such as insurance, flexible hours, time off, and retirement 
are attractive.
Rule No. 6: Be ready to bargain if offered a low starting salary.
Many salaries are negotiable. Companies are often willing to pay more for someone who 
interviews well and fits their culture. If the company seems right to you and you are pleased 
with the sound of the open position but you have been offered a low salary, say, That is 
somewhat lower than I had hoped but this position does sound exciting. If I were to consider 
this, what sorts of things could I do to quickly become more valuable to this organization? Also 
discuss such things as bonuses based on performance or a shorter review period. You 
could say something like, Thanks for the offer. The position is very much what I wanted in 
many ways, and I am delighted at your interest. If I start at this salary, may I be reviewed within 
six months with the goal of raising the salary to ____?
Another possibility is to ask for more time to think about the low offer. Tell the interviewer 
that this is an important decision, and you need some time to consider the offer. The next 
day you can call and say, I am flattered by your offer, but I cannot accept because the sal-
ary is lower than I would like. Perhaps you could reconsider your offer or keep me in mind for 
future openings.
Rule No. 7: Be honest.
Be honest throughout the entire negotiation process. Don’t inflate the salaries of your 
previous positions to try to get more money. Don’t tell an employer that you have received 
other job offers unless it is true. These lies can be grounds for being fired later on.
Rule No. 8: Get the final offer in writing.
Once you have agreed on a salary and compensation package, get the offer in writing. 
You should also follow up with a position acceptance letter, as discussed earlier in the 
chapter.
Career Application. You have just passed the screening interview and have been asked 
to come in for a personal interview with the human resources representative and the hiring 
manager of a company for which you are very eager to work. Although you are delighted 
with the company, you have promised yourself that you will not accept any position that 
pays less than $45,000 to start.
Your Task
In teams of two, role-play the position of interviewer and interviewee. The interviewer sets 
the scene by discussing preliminaries and offers a salary of $42,500. The interviewee 
responds to preliminary questions and to the salary offer of $42,500. Then, reverse roles 
so that the interviewee becomes the interviewer, and repeat the scenario.

 
A-1
A Guide to Document Formats
APPENDIX A
Business communicators produce numerous documents that have standardized 
 formats. Becoming familiar with these formats is important because business doc-
uments actually carry two kinds of messages. Verbal messages are conveyed by 
the words chosen to express the writer’s ideas. Nonverbal messages are conveyed 
largely by the appearance of a document and its adherence to recognized formats. 
To ensure that your documents carry favorable nonverbal messages about you and 
your organization, you’ll want to give special attention to the appearance and for-
matting of your e-mail messages, letters, envelopes, and fax cover sheets.
E-Mail Messages
E-mail messages are sent by computers through networks. After reading e-mail mes-
sages, receivers may print, store, or delete them. E-mail is an appropriate channel 
for short messages. E-mail should not replace business letters or memos that are 
lengthy, require permanent records, or transmit confidential or sensitive informa-
tion. Chapter 5 presented guidelines on using e-mail smartly and safely. This section 
provides information on formats and usage. The following suggestions, illustrated 
in Figure A.1 and also in Figure 5.2 on page 104, may guide you in setting up the 
parts of any e-mail message. Always check, however, with your organization so that 
you can follow its practices.
To Line. Include the receiver’s e-mail address after To. If the receiver’s address 
is recorded in your address book, you just have to click on it. Be sure to enter all 
addresses very carefully since one mistyped letter prevents delivery.
From Line. Most mail programs automatically include your name and e-mail 
address after From.
Cc and Bcc. Insert the e-mail address of anyone who is to receive a copy of the 
message. Cc stands for carbon copy or courtesy copy. Don’t be tempted, though, to 
send needless copies just because it is easy. Bcc stands for blind carbon copy. Some 
writers use bcc to send a copy of the message without the addressee’s knowledge. 
Writers also use the bcc line for mailing lists. When a message is sent to a number 
of people and their e-mail addresses should not be revealed, the bcc line works well 
to conceal the names and addresses of all receivers.
Subject. Identify the subject of the e-mail message with a brief but descriptive 
summary of the topic. Be sure to include enough information to be clear and com-
pelling. Capitalize the initial letters of main words. Main words are all words except 
(a) the articles a, an, and the; (b) prepositions containing two or three letters (such 
as at, to, on, by, for); (c) the word to in an infinitive (to work, to write); and (d) the 
word as—unless any of these words are the first or last word in the subject line.
Salutation. Include a brief greeting, if you like. Some writers use a salutation 
such as Dear Erica followed by a comma or a colon. Others are more informal with 
Hi, Erica; Hello, Erica; Good morning; or Greetings. See Chapter 5 for a more com-
plete discussion of e-mail salutations.

A-2 
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats
Message. Cover just one topic in your message, and try to keep your total 
message under two or three screens in length. Single-space and be sure to use both 
upper- and lowercase letters. Double-space between paragraphs.
Closing. Conclude an e-mail message, if you like, with Cheers, Best wishes, 
or Warm regards, followed by your name and complete contact information. 
Some people omit their e-mail address because they think it is provided auto-
matically. However, some programs and routers do not transmit the address 
automatically. Therefore, always include it along with other identifying infor-
mation in the closing.
Attachment. Use the attachment window or button to select the path and file 
name of any file you wish to send with your e-mail message. You can also attach a 
Web page to your message.
Business Letters
Business communicators write business letters primarily to correspond with 
people outside the organization. Letters may go to customers, vendors, other 
businesses, and the government, as discussed in Chapters 6, 7, and 8. The fol-
lowing information will help you format your letters following conventional 
guidelines.
FIGURE A.1 E-Mail Message

Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats 
A-3 
Spacing and Punctuation
For some time typists left two spaces after end punctuation (periods, question marks, 
and so forth). This practice was necessary, it was thought, because typewriters did 
not have proportional spacing and sentences were easier to read if two spaces sepa-
rated them. Professional typesetters, however, never followed this practice because 
they used proportional spacing, and readability was not a problem. Influenced by 
the look of typeset publications, many writers now leave only one space after end 
punctuation. As a practical matter, however, it is not wrong to use two spaces.
Letter Placement and Line Endings
The easiest way to place letters on the page is to use the defaults of your word pro-
cessing program. In Microsoft Word 2003, default side margins are set at 11/4 inch; 
in Word 2007 they are set at 1 inch. Many companies today find these margins 
acceptable. If you want to adjust your margins to better balance shorter letters, use 
the following chart:
Words in Body of Letter
Margin Settings
Blank Lines After Date
Under 200
1.5 inches
4 to 10
Over 200 
1 inch
2 to 3
Experts say that a ragged-right margin is easier to read than a justified (even) mar-
gin. You might want to turn off the justification feature of your word processing 
program if it automatically justifies the right margin.
Business Letter Parts
Professional-looking business letters are arranged in a conventional sequence with 
standard parts. Following is a discussion of how to use these letter parts properly. 
Figure A.2 illustrates the parts of a block style letter. (See Chapter 6 for additional 
discussion of letters and their parts.)
Letterhead. Most business organizations use 81/2 3 11-inch paper printed 
with a letterhead displaying their official name, street address, Web address, e-mail 
address, and telephone and fax numbers. The letterhead may also include a logo 
and an advertising message.
Dateline. On letterhead paper you should place the date one blank line below 
the last line of the letterhead or 2 inches from the top edge of the paper (line 13). On 
plain paper place the date immediately below your return address. Because the date 
goes on line 13, start the return address an appropriate number of lines above it. The 
most common dateline format is as follows: June 9, 2010. Don’t use th (or rd, nd or 
st) when the date is written this way. For European or military correspondence, use 
the following dateline format: 9 June 2010. Notice that no commas are used.
Addressee and Delivery Notations. Delivery notations such as 
FAX TRANSMISSION, FEDERAL EXPRESS, MESSENGER DELIVERY, 
CONFIDENTIAL, or CERTIFIED MAIL are typed in all capital letters two blank 
lines above the inside address.
Inside Address. Type the inside address—that is, the address of the organiza-
tion or person receiving the letter—single-spaced, starting at the left margin. The 
number of lines between the dateline and the inside address depends on the size of 
the letter body, the type size (point or pitch size), and the length of the typing lines. 
Generally, one to nine blank lines are appropriate.
Be careful to duplicate the exact wording and spelling of the recipient’s name 
and address on your documents. Usually, you can copy this information from 

A-4 
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats
FIGURE A.2 Block and Modified Block Letter Styles
In the modified block style letter shown at 
the left, the date is centered or aligned with 
the complimentary close and signature block, 
which start at the center. Mixed punctuation 
includes a colon after the salutation and a 
comma after the complimentary close, as 
shown above and at the left.

Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats 
A-5 
the letterhead of the correspondence you are answering. If, for example, you are 
responding to Jackson & Perkins Company, do not address your letter to Jackson 
and Perkins Corp.
Always be sure to include a courtesy title such as Mr., Ms., Mrs., Dr., or Professor 
before a person’s name in the inside address—for both the letter and the envelope. 
Although many women in business today favor Ms., you should use whatever title 
the addressee prefers.
In general, avoid abbreviations such as Ave. or Co. unless they appear in the 
printed letterhead of the document being answered.
Attention Line. An attention line allows you to send your message officially 
to an organization but to direct it to a specific individual, officer, or department. 
However, if you know an individual’s complete name, it is always better to use it as 
the first line of the inside address and avoid an attention line. Here are two common 
formats for attention lines:
The MultiMedia Company
931 Calkins Avenue
Rochester, NY 14301
Attention Marketing Director
The MultiMedia Company
Attention: Marketing Director
931 Calkins Avenue
Rochester, NY 14301
Attention lines may be typed in all caps or with upper- and lowercase letters. The 
colon following Attention is optional. Notice that an attention line may be placed 
two lines below the address block or printed as the second line of the inside address. 
Use the latter format so that you may copy the address block to the envelope and 
the attention line will not interfere with the last-line placement of the zip code. Mail 
can be sorted more easily if the zip code appears in the last line of a typed address. 
Whenever possible, use a person’s name as the first line of an address instead of 
putting that name in an attention line.
Salutation. For most letter styles place the letter greeting, or salutation, one 
blank line below the last line of the inside address or the attention line (if used). 
If the letter is addressed to an individual, use that person’s courtesy title and last 
name (Dear Mr. Lanham). Even if you are on a first-name basis (Dear Leslie), be 
sure to add a colon (not a comma or a semicolon) after the salutation. Do not use 
an individual’s full name in the salutation (not Dear Mr. Leslie Lanham) unless you 
are unsure of gender (Dear Leslie Lanham).
For letters with attention lines or those addressed to organizations, the selec-
tion of an appropriate salutation has become more difficult. Formerly, writers used 
Gentlemen generically for all organizations. With increasing numbers of women in 
business management today, however, Gentlemen is problematic. Because no univer-
sally acceptable salutation has emerged as yet, you could use Ladies and Gentlemen 
or Gentlemen and Ladies.
Subject and Reference Lines. Although experts suggest placing the sub-
ject line one blank line below the salutation, many businesses actually place it above 
the salutation. Use whatever style your organization prefers. Reference lines often 
show policy or file numbers; they generally appear one blank line above the saluta-
tion. Use initial capital letters for the main words or all capital letters.
Body. Most business letters and memorandums are single-spaced, with double-
spacing between paragraphs. Very short messages may be double-spaced with 
indented paragraphs.
Complimentary Close. Typed one blank line below the last line of the let-
ter, the complimentary close may be formal (Very truly yours) or informal (Sincerely 
or Cordially).

A-6 
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats
Signature Block. In most letter styles the writer’s typed name and optional 
identification appear three or four blank lines below the complimentary close. The 
combination of name, title, and organization information should be arranged to 
achieve a balanced look. The name and title may appear on the same line or on 
separate lines, depending on the length of each. Use commas to separate categories 
within the same line, but not to conclude a line.
Sincerely yours,
Jeremy M. Wood, Manager
Technical Sales and Services
Cordially yours,
Casandra Baker-Murillo
Executive Vice President
Courtesy titles (Ms., Mrs., or Miss) should be used before names that are not readily 
distinguishable as male or female. They should also be used before names contain-
ing only initials and international names. The title is usually placed in parentheses, 
but it may appear without them.
Yours truly,
(Ms.) K. C. Morris
Project Manager 
Sincerely,
(Mr.) Leslie Hill
Public Policy Department
Some organizations include their names in the signature block. In such cases the 
organization name appears in all caps one blank line below the complimentary 
close, as shown here:
Cordially,
LIPTON COMPUTER SERVICES
Ms. Shelina A. Simpson
Executive Assistant
Reference Initials. If used, the initials of the typist and writer are typed 
one blank line below the writer’s name and title. Generally, the writer’s initials are 
capitalized and the typist’s are lowercased, but this format varies.
Enclosure Notation. When an enclosure or attachment accompanies a docu-
ment, a notation to that effect appears one blank line below the reference initials. 
This notation reminds the typist to insert the enclosure in the envelope, and it 
reminds the recipient to look for the enclosure or attachment. The notation may be 
spelled out (Enclosure, Attachment), or it may be abbreviated (Enc., Att.). It may 
indicate the number of enclosures or attachments, and it may also identify a specific 
enclosure (Enclosure: Form 1099).
Copy Notation. If you make copies of correspondence for other individuals, 
you may use cc to indicate carbon copy or courtesy copy, pc to indicate photocopy, 
or merely c for any kind of copy. A colon following the initial(s) is optional.
Second-Page Heading. When a letter extends beyond one page, use plain 
paper of the same quality and color as the first page. Identify the second and suc-
ceeding pages with a heading consisting of the name of the addressee, the page 
number, and the date. Use the following format or the one shown in Figure A.3:
Ms. Sara Hendricks
2
May 3, 2010

Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats 
A-7 
Both headings appear six blank lines (1 inch) from the top edge of the paper fol-
lowed by two blank lines to separate them from the continuing text. Avoid using 
a second page if you have only one line or the complimentary close and signature 
block to fill that page.
Plain-Paper Return Address. If you prepare a personal or business 
letter on plain paper, place your address immediately above the date. Do not 
include your name; you will type (and sign) your name at the end of your 
 letter. If your return address contains two lines, begin typing so that the date 
appears 2 inches from the top. Avoid abbreviations except for a two-letter 
state abbreviation.
580 East Leffels Street
Springfield, OH 45501
December 14, 2010
Ms. Ellen Siemens
Escrow Department
TransOhio First Federal
1220 Wooster Boulevard
Columbus, OH 43218-2900
Dear Ms. Siemens:
For letters in the block style, type the return address at the left margin. For modified 
block style letters, start the return address at the center to align with the compli-
mentary close.
Letter and Punctuation Styles
Most business letters today are prepared in either block or modified block style, and 
they generally use mixed punctuation.
FIGURE A.3 Second-Page Heading

A-8 
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats
Block Style. In the block style, shown in Figure A.2, all lines begin at the left 
margin. This style is a favorite because it is easy to format.
Modified Block Style. The modified block style differs from block style in that 
the date and closing lines appear in the center, as shown at the bottom of Figure A.2. 
The date may be (a) centered, (b) begun at the center of the page (to align with the clos-
ing lines), or (c) backspaced from the right margin. The signature block—including the 
complimentary close, writer’s name and title, or organization identification—begins 
at the center. The first line of each paragraph may begin at the left margin or may be 
indented five or ten spaces. All other lines begin at the left margin.
Mixed Punctuation Style. Most businesses today use mixed punctua-
tion, shown in Figure A.2 on page A-4. It requires a colon after the salutation and 
a comma after the complimentary close. Even when the salutation is a first name, 
a colon is appropriate.
Envelopes
An envelope should be of the same quality and color of stationery as the letter it 
carries. Because the envelope introduces your message and makes the first impres-
sion, you need to be especially careful in addressing it. Moreover, how you fold the 
letter is important.
Return Address. The return address is usually printed in the upper left corner 
of an envelope, as shown in Figure A.4. In large companies some form of identi-
FIGURE A.4 Envelope Formats
Rick Lopez
M H R Financial Services
4910 Lake Street
Oak Park, IL 60719-4910
TINISHA JAMES
1390 DANDINI BLVD
RENO NV 89512
MR WILLIAM R EVERSON
3210 W ROOSEVELT RD
LITTLE ROCK AR 72203-2280
Shield Security Systems
Attention Accounting Department
2108 Geneva Road, Suite 210
Elmhurst, IL 60219-2108
CERTIFIED MAIL – RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED
No. 63/4 envelope, Postal Service uppercase format
No. 10 envelope,
Upper- and lowercase format
11/2 inches
line 3
41/4 inches
21/2 inches
1/2 inch
2 inches
2 inches

Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats 
A-9 
fication (the writer’s initials, name, or location) may be typed above the company 
name and address. This identification helps return the letter to the sender in case 
of nondelivery.
On an envelope without a printed return address, single-space the return address 
in the upper left corner. Beginning on line 3 on the fourth space (1/2 inch) from the 
left edge, type the writer’s name, title, company, and mailing address. On a word 
processor, select the appropriate envelope size and make adjustments to approxi-
mate this return address location.
Mailing Address. On legal-sized No. 10 envelopes (41/8 3 91/2 inches), begin 
the address on line 13 about 41/4 inches from the left edge, as shown in Figure A.4. 
For small envelopes (35/ 8 3 61/2 inches), begin typing on line 12 about 21/2 inches 
from the left edge. On a word processor, select the correct envelope size and check 
to be sure your address falls in the desired location.
The U.S. Postal Service recommends that addresses be typed in all caps with-
out any punctuation. This Postal Service style, shown in the small envelope in 
Figure A.4, was originally developed to facilitate scanning by optical character 
readers (OCRs). Today’s OCRs, however, are so sophisticated that they scan 
upper- and lowercase letters easily. Many companies today do not follow the 
Postal Service format because they prefer to use the same format for the envelope 
as for the inside address. If the same format is used, writers can take advantage 
of word processing programs to copy the inside address to the envelope, thus 
saving keystrokes and reducing errors. Having the same format on both the 
inside address and the envelope also looks more professional and consistent. For 
those reasons you may choose to use the familiar upper- and lowercase combi-
nation format. But you will want to check with your organization to learn its 
preference.
In addressing your envelopes for delivery in this country or in Canada, use the 
two-letter state and province abbreviations shown in Figure A.5. Notice that these 
abbreviations are in capital letters without periods.
Folding. The way a letter is folded and inserted into an envelope sends addi-
tional nonverbal messages about a writer’s professionalism and carefulness. Most 
businesspeople follow the procedures shown here, which produce the least number 
of creases to distract readers.
For large No. 10 envelopes, begin with the letter face up. Fold slightly less than 
one third of the sheet toward the top, as shown in the following diagram. Then fold 
down the top third to within 1/ 3 inch of the bottom fold. Insert the letter into the 
envelope with the last fold toward the bottom of the envelope.
For small No. 63/4 envelopes, begin by folding the bottom up to within 1/ 3 inch of 
the top edge. Then fold the right third over to the left. Fold the left third to within 
1/ 3 inch of the last fold. Insert the last fold into the envelope first.

A-10 
Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats
FIGURE A.5 Abbreviations of States, Territories, and Provinces
State or Territory
Two-Letter Abbreviation
State or Territory
Two-Letter Abbreviation
Alabama
AL
North Dakota
ND
Alaska
AK
Ohio
OH
Arizona
AZ
Oklahoma
OK
Arkansas
AR
Oregon
OR
California
CA
Pennsylvania
PA
Canal Zone
CZ
Puerto Rico
PR
Colorado
CO
Rhode Island
RI
Connecticut
CT
South Carolina
SC
Delaware
DE
South Dakota
SD
District of Columbia
DC
Tennessee
TN
Florida
FL
Texas
TX
Georgia
GA
Utah
UT
Guam
GU
Vermont
VT
Hawaii
HI
Virgin Islands
VI
Idaho
ID
Virginia
VA
Illinois
IL
Washington
WA
Indiana
IN
West Virginia
WV
Iowa
IA
Wisconsin
WI
Kansas
KS
Wyoming
WY
Kentucky
KY
Louisiana
LA
Maine
ME
Canadian Province
Maryland
MD
Alberta
AB
Massachusetts
MA
British Columbia
BC
Michigan
MI
Labrador
LB
Minnesota
MN
Manitoba
MB
Mississippi
MS
New Brunswick
NB
Missouri
MO
Newfoundland
NF
Montana
MT
Northwest Territories
NT
Nebraska
NE
Nova Scotia
NS
Nevada
NV
Ontario
ON
New Hampshire
NH
Prince Edward Island
PE
New Jersey
NJ
Quebec
PQ
New Mexico
NM
Saskatchewan
SK
New York
NY
Yukon Territory
YT
North Carolina
NC

Appendix A: A Guide to Document Formats 
A-11
Fax Cover Sheet
Documents transmitted by fax are usually introduced by a cover sheet, such as that 
shown in Figure A.6. As with memos, the format varies considerably. Important 
items to include are (a) the name and fax number of the receiver, (b) the name and 
fax number of the sender, (c) the number of pages being sent, and (d) the name and 
telephone number of the person to notify in case of unsatisfactory transmission.
When the document being transmitted requires little explanation, you may pre-
fer to attach an adhesive note (such as a Post-it fax transmittal form) instead of a 
full cover sheet. These notes carry essentially the same information as shown in our 
printed fax cover sheet. They are perfectly acceptable in most business organizations 
and can save considerable paper and transmission costs.
FIGURE A.6 Fax Cover Sheet
DATE:
TO:
FROM:
NUMBER OF PAGES TRANSMITTED INCLUDING THIS COVER SHEET:
MESSAGE:
FAX
NUMBER:
FAX TRANSMISSION
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
________________________
If any part of this fax transmission is missing or not clearly received, please call:
NAME:
PHONE:
______________________________________
______________________________________
________________________
________________________
FAX
NUMBER:

A-12
Correction Symbols and Proofreading Marks
APPENDIX B
In marking your papers, your instructor may use the following symbols or 
abbreviations to indicate writing weaknesses. Studying these symbols and suggestions 
will help you understand your instructor’s remarks. Knowing this information can 
also help you evaluate and improve your own memos, e-mail, letters, reports, and 
other writing. These symbols are keyed to your Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
and to the text.
Adj 
Hyphenate two or more adjectives that are joined to create a compound 
modifier before a noun. See G/M 1.17e.
Adv 
Use adverbs, not adjectives, to describe or limit the action. See G/M 
1.17d.
Apos 
Use apostrophes to show possession. See G/M 2.20.
Assgn 
Follow the assignment instructions.
Awk 
Recast to avoid awkward expression.
Bias 
Use inclusive, bias-free language. See Ch. 2, page 42.
Cap 
Use capitalization appropriately. See G/M 3.01–3.16.
CmConj 
Use a comma before the coordinating conjunction in a compound 
sentence. See G/M 2.05.
CmDate 
Use commas appropriately in dates, addresses, geographical names, 
degrees, and long numbers. See G/M 2.04.
CmIn 
Use commas to set off internal sentence interrupters. See G/M 2.06c.
CmIntr 
Use commas to separate introductory clauses and certain phrases from 
independent clauses. See G/M 2.06.
CmSer 
Use commas to separate three or more items (words, phrases, or short 
clauses) in a series. See G/M 2.01.
Coh 
Improve coherence between ideas. Repeat key ideas, use pronouns, or 
use transitional expressions. See Ch. 3, page 65.
Cl 
Improve the clarity of ideas or expression so that the point is better 
understood.
CS 
Avoid comma-splice sentences. Do not use a comma to splice (join) 
two independent clauses. See Ch. 3, page 60.
CmUn 
Avoid unnecessary commas. See G/M 2.15.
: 
Use a colon after a complete thought that introduces a list of items. Use 
a colon in business letter salutations and to introduce long quotations. 
See G/M 2.17–2.19.
Direct 
Use the direct strategy by emphasizing the main idea. See Ch. 3, page 
56.
Dash 
Use a dash to set off parenthetical elements, to emphasize sentence 
interruptions, or to separate an introductory list from a summarizing 
statement. See G/M 2.26.
DM 
Avoid dangling modifiers by placing modifiers close to the words they 
describe or limit. See Ch. 3, page 64.
Frag 
Avoid fragments by expressing ideas in complete sentences. A fragment 
is a broken-off part of a sentence. See Ch. 3, page 59.

Appendix B: Correction Symbols and Proofreading Marks 
A-13 
Filler 
Avoid fillers such as there are or long lead-ins such as this is to inform 
you that. See Ch. 4, page 77.
Format 
Choose an appropriate format for this document.
GH 
Use graphic highlighting (bullets, lists, indentions, or headings) to 
enhance readability. See Ch. 4, page 83.
MM 
Avoid misplaced modifiers by placing modifiers close to the words they 
describe or limit. See Ch. 3, page 64.
Num 
Use number or word form appropriately. See G/M 4.01– 4.13.
Ob 
Avoid stating the obvious.
Org 
Improve organization by grouping similar ideas.
Par 
Express ideas in parallel form. See Ch. 3, pages 62–63.
Paren 
Use parentheses to set off nonessential sentence elements such as 
explanations, directions, questions, or references. See G/M 2.27.
Period 
Use one period to end a statement, command, indirect question, or 
polite request. See G/M 2.23.
Pos 
Express an idea positively rather than negatively. See Ch. 2, page 41.
PosPro 
Use possessive-case pronouns to show ownership. See G/M 1.07 and 
1.08d.
Pro 
Use nominative-case pronouns as subjects of verbs and as subject 
complements. Use objective-case pronouns as objects of prepositions 
and verbs. See G/M 1.07–1.08.
ProAgr 
Make pronouns agree in number and gender with the words to which 
they refer (their antecedents). See G/M 1.09.
ProVag 
Be sure that pronouns such as it, which, this, and that refer to clear 
antecedents. See G/M 1.09i.
? 
Use a question mark after a direct question and after statements with 
questions appended. See G/M 2.24.
Quo 
Use quotation marks to enclose the exact words of a speaker or writer, 
to distinguish words used in a special sense, or to enclose titles of 
articles, chapters, or other short works. See G/M 2.28.
Redun 
Avoid expressions that repeat meaning or include unnecessary words. 
See Ch. 4, pages 77–78.
RunOn 
Avoid run-on (fused) sentences. A sentence with two independent 
clauses must be joined by a coordinating conjunctions (and, or, nor, 
but) or by a semicolon (;). See Ch. 3, page 60.
Sp 
Check misspelled words.
Self 
Use self-ending pronouns only when they refer to previously mentioned 
nouns or pronouns. See G/M 1.08h.
; 
Use a semicolon to join closely related independent clauses. A semicolon 
is also an option to join separate items in a series when one or more of 
the items contain internal commas. See G/M 2.16.
Shift 
Avoid a confusing shift in verb tense, mood, or voice. See G/M 1.15c.
Trans 
Use an appropriate transition. See Ch. 3, page 65, and Ch. 12,  
page 344.
Tone 
Use a conversational, positive, and courteous tone that promotes 
goodwill. See Ch. 2, page 41.
You 
Focus on developing the “you” view. See Ch. 2, pages 38–39.
VbAgr 
Make verbs agree with subjects. See G/M 1.10.
VbMood Use the subjunctive mood to express hypothetical (untrue) ideas.  
See G/M 1.12.

A-14 
Appendix B: Correction Symbols and Proofreading Marks
VbTnse 
Use present-tense, past-tense, and part-participle forms correctly.  
See G/M 1.13
VbVce 
Use active- and passive-voice verbs appropriately. See G/M 1.11.
WC 
Focus on precise word choice. See Ch. 4, pages 80–81.
Wordy 
Avoid wordiness including fillers, long lead-ins, redundancies, 
compound prepositions, wordy noun phrases, and empty words.  
See Ch. 4, pages 76–78.
Proofreading Marks
Proofreading Mark
Draft Copy
Final Copy
 
Align horizontally
TO: Rick Munoz
TO: Rick Munoz
 
Align vertically 
166.32
166.32
 
 
132.45
132.45
 
Capitalize 
Coca-cola
Coca-Cola
 
 
sending a pdf ﬁle
sending a PDF ﬁle
 
Close up space
meeting at 3 p. m.
meeting at 3 p.m.
 
Center 
Recommendations
Recommendations
 
Delete 
in my ﬁnal judgement
in my judgment
 
Insert apostrophe 
our companys product 
our company’s product
 
Insert comma
you will of course
you will, of course,
 
Insert hyphen
tax free income
tax-free income
 
Insert period
Ms Holly Hines
Ms. Holly Hines
 
Insert quotation mark 
shareholders receive a bonus. 
shareholders receive a “bonus.”
 
Insert space
wordprocessing program 
word processing program
 
Lowercase (remove
the Vice President 
the vice president
capitals)
HUMAN RESOURCES
Human Resources
 
Move to left
   I. Labor costs
I. Labor costs
 
Move to right
A. Findings of study
A. Findings of study
 
Spell out
aimed at 2 depts
aimed at two departments
 
Start new paragraph
Keep the screen height of your
  Keep the screen height of
 
 
computer at eye level.
your computer at eye level.
 
Stet (don’t delete)
ofﬁcials talked openly
ofﬁcials talked openly
 
Transpose 
accounts recievable 
accounts receivable
 
Use boldface
Conclusions
Conclusions
 
Use italics
The Perfect Résumé
The Perfect Résumé

 
A-15
Documentation Formats
APPENDIX C
For many reasons business writers are careful to properly document report data. 
Citing sources strengthens a writer’s argument, as you learned in Chapter 10. 
Acknowledging sources also shields writers from charges of plagiarism. Moreover, 
good references help readers pursue further research.
Source Notes and Content Notes
Before we discuss specific documentation formats, you must understand the differ-
ence between source notes and content notes. Source notes identify quotations, 
paraphrased passages, and author references. They lead readers to the sources of 
cited information, and they must follow a consistent format. Content notes, on 
the other hand, enable writers to add comments, explain information not directly 
related to the text, or refer readers to other sections of a report. Because content 
notes are generally infrequent, most writers identify them in the text with a raised 
asterisk (*). At the bottom of the page, the asterisk is repeated with the content note 
following. If two content notes appear on one page, a double asterisk identifies the 
second reference.
Your real concern will be with source notes. These identify quotations or para-
phrased ideas in the text, and they direct readers to a complete list of references (a 
bibliography) at the end of your report. Source notes are usually cited in two places: 
a brief citation appears in the text and a complete citation appears in a bibliography 
at the end of the report. How you arrange your source notes depends on the docu-
mentation system you choose.
Which System Is Best?
Students frequently ask, “But what documentation system is most used in busi-
ness?” That is not an easy question to answer because no one method dominates. 
Researchers have struggled for years to develop the perfect documentation system, 
one that is efficient for the writer and crystal clear to the reader. As a result, various 
systems exist, each with its advantages.
Some businesses have developed their own hybrid systems. These companies 
generally supply guidelines illustrating their in-house style to employees. Before 
starting any research project on the job, you will want to inquire about your orga-
nization’s preferred documentation style. You can also look in the files for examples 
of previous reports.
A number of databases now provide ready-made bibliographic citation formats. 
When you find articles in databases, you might copy the suggested format. However, 
the formats are not always accurate, so be sure you know the conventions of your 
style.
The two most common formats for citations and bibliographies in academic 
work are those of the Modern Language Association (MLA) and the American 
Psychological Association (APA). Each has its own style for textual references and 
bibliography lists. The citations in this textbook are based on the APA style, which 
is increasingly the standard in business communication.
Modern Language Association Format
Writers in the humanities frequently use the MLA format, as illustrated in Figure C.1. 
In parentheses close to the textual reference appears the author’s name and page cited. 
If no author is known, a shortened version of the source title is used. At the end of the 

A-16 
Appendix C: Documentation Formats
report, the writer lists alphabetically all references in a bibliography called Works Cited. 
For more information consult Joseph Gibaldi, MLA Handbook for Writers of Research 
Papers, 6e (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 2003).
MLA In-Text Format. In-text citations generally appear close to the point 
where the reference is mentioned or at the end of the sentence inside the closing 
period. Follow these guidelines:
• Include the last name of the author(s) and the page number. Omit a comma, as 
(Smith 310).
• If the author’s name is mentioned in the text, cite only the page number in paren-
theses. Do not include either the word page or the abbreviations p. or pp.
• If no author is known, refer to the document title or a shortened version of it, as 
(“Facts at Fingertips” 102).
MLA Bibliographic Format. The works-cited bibliography lists all refer-
ences cited in a report. Some writers include all works consulted. A portion of an 
MLA bibliography is shown in Figure C.1. An expanded list of model references 
appears in Figure C.2. Following are selected guidelines summarizing important 
points regarding MLA bibliographic format:
• Use italics or underscores for the titles of books, magazines, newspapers, and 
journals. Check with your organization or instructor for guidance. Capitalize all 
main words.
• Enclose the titles of magazine, newspaper, and journal articles in quotation marks. 
Include volume and issue numbers for journals only.
• For Internet citations, include a retrieval date. Although MLA format does not 
include the words Retrieved or Accessed, such wording helps distinguish the 
retrieval date from the document date.
• In citing online documents, list only the search term and main search site page for 
URLs that are impractically long and complicated (e.g., “Wendy’s International,” 
Hoovers.com).
FIGURE C.1 Portions of MLA Text Page and Bibliography

Appendix C: Documentation Formats 
A-17 
• If you are working from a database that provides citation formats, you may copy 
the suggested format for your reference, but know the style conventions to catch 
errors.
FIGURE C.2 MLA Sample Works Cited
Note 1: Where italics are shown, MLA style originally prescribed the use of underlines. With 
today’s word processors, most writers use italics.
Note 2: To prevent confusion, you might add the words Accessed or Retrieved preceding the 
date you accessed an online source. 
Note 3: Although MLA style prescribes double spacing for the works cited, we show single 
spacing to conserve space and to represent preferred business usage.

A-18 
Appendix C: Documentation Formats
American Psychological Association Format
Popular in the social and physical sciences, the American Psychological Association 
(APA) documentation style uses parenthetic citations. That is, each author refer-
ence is shown in parentheses when cited in the text, as shown in Figure C.3. At 
the end of the report, all references are listed alphabetically in a bibliography 
called References. For more information about APA formats, see the Publication 
Manual of the American Psychological Association, 5e (Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association, 2001), Concise Rules of APA Style (Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association, 2005), or APA Style Guide to Electronic 
References (2007, available in PDF format from http://www.apa.org/books/).
APA In-Text Format. Within the text, document each specific textual source 
with a short description in parentheses. Following are selected guidelines summariz-
ing important elements of APA style:
• Include the last name of the author(s), date of publication, and page number, as 
(Jones, 2007, p. 36). Use n.d. if no date is available.
• If no author is known, refer to the first few words of the reference list entry and 
the year, as (Computer Privacy, 2008, p. 59).
• Omit page numbers for general references, but always include page numbers for 
direct quotations.
APA Reference Format. List all citations alphabetically in a section called 
References. A portion of an APA reference page is shown in Figure C.3. A more 
complete list of model references appears in Figure C.4. APA style requires specific 
capitalization and sequencing guidelines, some of which are summarized here:
• Include an author’s name with the last name first followed by initials, such as 
Smith, M. A. First and middle names are not used.
FIGURE C.3 Portions of APA Text Page and References

Appendix C: Documentation Formats 
A-19 
• Show the date of publication in parentheses immediately after the author’s name, 
as Smith, M. A. (2008).
• Italicize the titles of books. Use “sentence-style” capitalization. This means that 
only the first word of a title, proper nouns, and the first word after an internal 
colon are capitalized.
• Do not italicize or underscore the titles of magazine and journal articles. Use 
sentence-style capitalization for article titles.
• Italicize the names of magazines, newspapers, and journals. Capitalize the initial 
letters of all main words.
• In citing online documents, list only the search term and main search site page 
for URLs that are impractically long and complicated.
FIGURE C.4 APA Sample References

A-20 
Appendix C: Documentation Formats
• To reference a published article that you viewed only in its electronic form, add 
in brackets after the article title [Electronic version]. Use this form only if the 
electronic version is identical to the published version.
• To reference an online article that you have reason to believe has been changed 
(e.g., the format is different from that of the print version or page numbers are 
not indicated), add the date you retrieved the document and the URL. Do not 
include a period after a URL that appears at the end of a line.
• For excellent examples of current electronic sources in APA style, visit The OWL 
at Purdue (http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/).

 
GM-1
Because many students need a quick review of basic grammar and mechanics, 
we provide a number of resources in condensed form. The Grammar/Mechanics 
Handbook, which offers you a rapid systematic review, consists of four parts:
• Grammar/Mechanics Diagnostic Test. This 65-point pretest helps you assess 
your strengths and weaknesses in eight areas of grammar and mechanics. Your 
instructor may later give you a posttest to assess your improvement.
• Grammar/Mechanics Profile. The G/M Profile enables you to pinpoint specific 
areas in which you need remedial instruction or review.
• Grammar/Mechanics Review. Provided here is a concise review of basic princi-
ples of grammar, punctuation, capitalization, and number style. The review also 
provides reinforcement and quiz exercises that help you interact with the prin-
ciples of grammar and test your comprehension. The guidelines not only provide 
a study guide for review but will also serve as a reference manual throughout the 
writing course. The grammar review can be used for classroom-centered instruc-
tion or for self-guided learning.
• Confusing Words and Frequently Misspelled Words. A list of selected confus-
ing words, along with a list of 160 frequently misspelled words, completes the 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook.
Some of you want all the help you can get in improving your language skills. 
For additional assistance with grammar and language fundamentals, Essentials of 
Business Communication, 8e, offers you unparalleled interactive and print resources 
at www.meguffey.com.
• Your Personal Language Trainer. In this self-paced learning tool, Dr. Guffey 
acts as your personal trainer in helping you pump up your language muscles. 
Your Personal Language Trainer provides the rules plus hundreds of sentence 
applications so that you can try out your knowledge and build your skills with 
immediate feedback and explanations.
• Sentence Competency Skill Builders offer interactive exercises similar to the 
grammar/mechanics checkups in this book. These drills focus on common writ-
ing weaknesses so that you can learn to avoid them.
• Speak Right! reviews frequently mispronounced words. You’ll hear correct pro-
nunciations from Dr. Guffey so that you will never be embarrassed by mispro-
nouncing these terms.
• Spell Right! presents frequently misspelled words along with exercises to help 
you improve your skills.
• Advanced Grammar/Mechanics Checkups take you to the next level in devel-
oping language confidence. These self-teaching exercises provide challenging 
sentences that test your combined grammar, punctuation, spelling, and usage 
skills.
More comprehensive treatment of grammar, punctuation, and usage can be 
found in Clark and Clark’s A Handbook for Office Workers or Guffey’s Business 
English.
The first step in your systematic review of grammar and mechanics involves 
completing a diagnostic pretest found on the next page.
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook

GM-2 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Grammar/Mechanics Diagnostic Pretest
This diagnostic pretest is intended to reveal your strengths and weaknesses in using 
the following:
plural nouns 
adjectives 
punctuation
possessive nouns 
adverbs 
capitalization style
pronouns 
prepositions 
number style
verbs 
conjunctions
The pretest is organized into sections corresponding to the preceding categories. In 
Sections A through H, each sentence is either correct or has one error related to the 
category under which it is listed. If a sentence is correct, write C. If it has an error, 
underline the error and write the correct form in the space provided. When you fin-
ish, check your answers with your instructor and fill out the Grammar/Mechanics 
Profile at the end of the test.
A. Plural Nouns
Example All CPAs must keep backup copys of their files.
 1. Since the early 2000s, most attornies have invested in software packages that 
detect computer viruses.
 2. Four freshmans discussed the pros and cons of using laptops and cell phones in 
their classes.
 3. Both of Mark’s sister-in-laws worked as secretaries at different companies.
 4. Neither the Cortezes nor the Morris’s knew about the changes in beneficiaries.
 5. All job candidates are asked whether they can work on Sunday’s.
B. Possessive Nouns
 6. We sincerely hope that the jurys judgment reflects the stories of all the 
witnesses.
 7. In a little over two months time, the analysts finished their reports.
 8. Ms. Hartmans staff is responsible for all accounts receivable for customers 
purchasing electronics parts.
 9. At the next stockholders meeting, we will discuss benefits for employees and 
dividends for shareholders.
 10. For the past 90 days, employees in the sales department have complained about 
Mr. Logan smoking.
C. Pronouns
Example Whom did you ask to replace Francisco and I?
 11. The chief and myself were quite willing to send copies to whoever requested 
them.
 12. Much of the project assigned to Samantha and I had to be reassigned to Matt 
and them.
 13. Although it’s CPU was noisy, the computer worked for Jeremy and me.
 14. Just between you and me, only you and I know that she will be transferred.
 15. My friend and I applied at GM because of their excellent benefits.
copies
me

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-3
D. Verb Agreement
Example The list of payments have to be approved by the boss.
 16. This cell phone and its calling plan costs much less than I expected.
 17. A description of the property, together with several other legal documents, were 
submitted by my attorney.
 18. There are a wide range of proposals for taming spam.
 19. Neither the manager nor the employees in the office think the solution is fair.
 20. Because of the holiday, our committee were unable to meet.
E. Verb Mood, Voice, and Tense
 21. If I was in charge, I would certainly change things.
 22. To make a copy, first open the disk drive door and then you insert the disk.
 23. If I could chose any city, I would select Hong Kong.
 24. Those contracts have laid on his desk for more than two weeks.
 25. The auditors have went over these accounts carefully, and they have found no 
discrepancies.
F. Adjectives and Adverbs
 26. Until we have a more clearer picture of what is legal, we will proceed cautiously.
 27. Britney thought she had done good in her job interview.
 28. A recently appointed official was in charge of monitoring peer to peer file-
sharing systems.
 29. Robert only has two days before he must submit his end-of-the-year report.
 30. The architects submitted there drawings in a last-minute attempt to beat the 
deadline.
G. Prepositions and Conjunctions
 31. Can you tell me where the meeting is scheduled at?
 32. It seems like we have been taking this pretest forever.
 33. Our investigation shows that cell phones may be cheaper then landlines.
 34. My courses this semester are totally different than last semester’s.
 35. Do you know where this shipment is going to?
H. Commas
For each of the following sentences, insert any necessary commas. Count the num-
ber of commas that you added. Write that number in the space provided. All punc-
tuation must be correct to receive credit for the sentence. If a sentence requires no 
punctuation, write C.
Example Because of developments in theory and computer applications 
management is becoming more of a science.
 36. For example management determines how orders assignments and responsibili-
ties are delegated to employees.
 37. Your order Ms. Lee will be sent from Memphis Tennessee on July 1.
 38. When you need service on any of your equipment we will be happy to help you 
Mr. Lopez.
 39. Michelle Wong who is the project manager at TeleCom suggested that I call you.
 40. You have purchased from us often and your payments in the past have always 
been prompt.
has
1
^,

GM-4 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
I. Commas and Semicolons 1
Add commas and semicolons to the following sentences. In the space provided, 
write the number of punctuation marks that you added.
 41. The salesperson turned in his report however he did not indicate the time period 
it covered.
 42. Interest payments on bonds are tax deductible dividend payments are not.
 43. We are opening a branch office in Scottsdale and hope to be able to serve all 
your needs from that office by the middle of January.
 44. As suggested by the committee we must first secure adequate funding then we 
may consider expansion.
 45. When you begin to research a report consider many sources of information namely 
the Internet, books, periodicals, government publications, and databases.
J. Commas and Semicolons 2
 46. After our chief had the printer repaired it jammed again within the first week 
although we treated it carefully.
 47. Our experienced courteous staff has been trained to anticipate your every need.
 48. In view of the new law that went into effect on April 1 our current liability 
insurance must be increased therefore we need to adjust our budget.
 49. As stipulated in our contract your agency will supervise our graphic arts and 
purchase our media time.
 50. As you know Ms. Mears we aim for long-term business relationships not quick 
profits.
K. Other Punctuation
Each of the following sentences may require colons, question marks, quotation 
marks, periods, parentheses, and underscores, as well as commas and semicolons. 
Add the appropriate punctuation to each sentence. Then in the space provided, 
write the total number of marks that you added or changed.
Example Fully recharging your digital camera’s battery see page 6 of the 
instruction manual takes only 90 minutes.
 51. The following members of the department volunteered to help on Saturday Kim 
Carlos Dan and Sylvia.
 52. Mr Phillips, Miss Reed, and Mrs Garcia usually arrived at the office by 830 a m.
 53. We recommend that you use hearing protectors see the warning on page 8 when 
using this electric drill.
 54. Did the president really say “All employees may take Friday off
 55. We are trying to locate an edition of Newsweek that carried an article titled 
Who Is Reading Your E-Mail
L. Capitalization
For each of the following sentences, underline any letter that should be capitalized. 
In the space provided, write the number of words you marked.
Example vice president daniels devised a procedure for expediting purchase 
orders from area 4 warehouses.
 56. although english was his native language, he also spoke spanish and could read 
french.
 57. on a trip to the east coast, uncle henry visited the empire state building.
 58. karen enrolled in classes in history, german, and sociology.
 59. the business manager and the vice president each received a new dell computer.
 60. james lee, the president of kendrick, inc., will speak to our conference in the spring.
2
4
(
)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-5
M. Number Style
Decide whether the numbers in the following sentences should be written as words 
or as figures. Each sentence either is correct or has one error. If it is correct, write C. 
If it has an error, underline it and write the correct form in the space provided.
Example The bank had 5 branches in three suburbs.
 61. More than 2,000,000 people have visited the White House in the past five years.
 62. Of the 28 viewer comments we received regarding our TV commercial, only 
three were negative.
 63. We set aside forty dollars for petty cash, but by December 1 our fund was depleted.
 64. The meeting is scheduled for May 5th at 3 p.m.
 65. In the past five years, nearly fifteen percent of the population changed residences 
at least once.
Grammar/Mechanics Profile
In the spaces at the right, place a check mark to indicate the number of correct 
answers you had in each category of the Grammar/Mechanics Diagnostic Pretest.
Number Correct
5
4
3
2
1
 1–5
Plural Nouns
 
 
 
 
 
 6–10
Possessive Nouns
 
 
 
 
 
11–15
Pronouns
 
 
 
 
 
16–20
Verb Agreement
 
 
 
 
 
21–25
Verb Mood, Voice, and Tense
 
 
 
 
 
26–30
Adjectives and Adverbs
 
 
 
 
 
31–35
Prepositions and Conjunctions
 
 
 
 
 
36–40
Commas
 
 
 
 
 
41–45
Commas and Semicolons 1
 
 
 
 
 
46–50
Commas and Semicolons 2
 
 
 
 
 
51–55
Other Punctuation
 
 
 
 
 
56–60
Capitalization
 
 
 
 
 
61–65
Number Style
 
 
 
 
 
Note: 5 = have excellent skills; 4 = need light review; 3 = need careful review; 2 = need to study rules; 
1 = need serious study and follow-up reinforcement.
Grammar/Mechanics Review
Parts of Speech (1.01)
1.01 Functions. English has eight parts of speech. Knowing the functions of 
the parts of speech helps writers better understand how words are used and how 
sentences are formed.
 a. Nouns: name persons, places, things, qualities, concepts, and activities (for 
example, Kevin, Phoenix, computer, joy, work, banking).
five

GM-6 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 b. Pronouns: substitute for nouns (for example, he, she, it, they).
 c. Verbs: show the action of a subject or join the subject to words that describe it 
(for example, walk, heard, is, was jumping).
 d. Adjectives: describe or limit nouns and pronouns and often answer the ques-
tions what kind? how many? and which one? (for example, red car, ten items, 
good manager).
 e. Adverbs: describe or limit verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs and frequently 
answer the questions when? how? where? or to what extent? (for example, 
tomorrow, rapidly, here, very).
 f. Prepositions: join nouns or pronouns to other words in sentences (for example, 
desk in the office, ticket for me, letter to you).
 g. Conjunctions: connect words or groups of words (for example, you and I, 
Mark or Jill).
 h. Interjections: express strong feelings (for example, Wow! Oh!).
Nouns (1.02–1.06)
Nouns name persons, places, things, qualities, concepts, and activities. Nouns may 
be classified into a number of categories.
1.02 Concrete and Abstract. Concrete nouns name specific objects that 
can be seen, heard, felt, tasted, or smelled. Examples of concrete nouns are tele-
phone, dollar, IBM, and tangerine. Abstract nouns name generalized ideas such as 
qualities or concepts that are not easily pictured. Emotion, power, and tension are 
typical examples of abstract nouns.
Business writing is most effective when concrete words predominate. It’s clearer 
to write We need 16-pound copy paper than to write We need office supplies. 
Chapter 4 provides practice in developing skill in the use of concrete words.
1.03 Proper and Common. Proper nouns name specific persons, places, or 
things and are always capitalized (General Electric, Baltimore, Jennifer). All other 
nouns are common nouns and begin with lowercase letters (company, city, student). 
Rules for capitalization are presented in Sections 3.01–3.16.
1.04 Singular and Plural. Singular nouns name one item; plural nouns name 
more than one. From a practical view, writers seldom have difficulty with singular nouns. 
They may need help, however, with the formation and spelling of plural nouns.
1.05 Guidelines for Forming Noun Plurals
 a. Add s to most nouns (chair, chairs; mortgage, mortgages; Monday, Mondays).
 b. Add es to nouns ending in s, x, z, ch, or sh (bench, benches; boss, bosses; box, 
boxes; Lopez, Lopezes).
 c. Change the spelling in irregular noun plurals (man, men; foot, feet; mouse, 
mice; child, children).
 d. Add s to nouns that end in y when y is preceded by a vowel (attorney, attorneys; 
valley, valleys; journey, journeys).
 e. Drop the y and add ies to nouns ending in y when y is preceded by a consonant 
(company, companies; city, cities; secretary, secretaries).
 f. Add s to the principal word in most compound expressions (editors in chief, 
fathers-in-law, bills of lading, runners-up).
 g. Add s to most numerals, letters of the alphabet, words referred to as words, 
degrees, and abbreviations (5s, 2000s, Bs, ands, CPAs, qts.).
 h. Add ’s only to clarify letters of the alphabet that might be misread, such as A’s, 
I’s, M’s, and U’s and i’s, p’s, and q’s. An expression like c.o.d.s requires no 
apostrophe because it would not easily be misread.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-7
1.06 Collective Nouns. Nouns such as staff, faculty, committee, group,
and herd refer to a collection of people, animals, or objects. Collective nouns may 
be considered singular or plural depending on their action. See Section 1.10i for a 
discussion of collective nouns and their agreement with verbs.
Review Exercise A—Nouns
In the space provided for each item, write a or b to complete the following state-
ments accurately. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. 
Answers are provided for odd-numbered items. Your instructor has the remaining 
answers. For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered principle 
shown in parentheses.
 1. Two of the contest (a) runner-ups, (b) runners-up protested the judges’ choice.
 2. Several (a) attorneys, (b) attornies worked on the case together.
 3. Please write to the (a) Davis’s, (b) Davises about the missing contract.
 4. The industrial complex has space for nine additional (a) companys, (b) companies.
 5. That accounting firm employs two (a) secretaries, (b) secretarys for five CPAs.
 6. Four of the wooden (a) benches, (b) benchs must be repaired.
 7. The home was constructed with numerous (a) chimneys, (b) chimnies.
 8. Tours of the production facility are made only on (a) Tuesdays, (b) Tuesday’s.
 9. We asked the (a) Lopez’s, (b) Lopezes to contribute to the fund-raising drive.
 10. Both my (a) sister-in-laws, (b) sisters-in-law agreed to the settlement.
 11. The stock market is experiencing abnormal (a) ups and downs, (b) up’s and down’s.
 12. Three (a) mouses, (b) mice were seen near the trash cans.
 13. This office is unusually quiet on (a) Sundays, (b) Sunday’s.
 14. Several news (a) dispatchs, (b) dispatches were released during the strike.
 15. Two major (a) countries, (b) countrys will participate in arms negotiations.
 16. Some young children have difficulty writing their (a) bs and ds, (b) b’s and d’s.
 17. The (a) board of directors, (b) boards of directors of all the major companies 
 participated in the surveys.
 18. In their letter the (a) Metzes, (b) Metzs said they intended to purchase the property.
 19. In shipping we are careful to include all (a) bill of sales, (b) bills of sale.
 20. Over the holidays many (a) turkies, (b) turkeys were consumed.
1. b (1.05f)  3. b (1.05b)  5. a (1.05e)  7. a (1.05d)  9. b (1.05b)  11. a (1.05g)  13. a (1.05a)  
15. a (1.05e)  17. b (1.05f)  19. b (1.05f) (Only odd-numbered answers are provided. Consult 
your instructor for the others.)
Pronouns (1.07–1.09)
Pronouns substitute for nouns. They are classified by case.
1.07 Case. Pronouns function in three cases, as shown in the following chart.
Nominative Case
(Used for subjects 
of verbs and subject 
complements)
I
we
you
he
she
it
Objective Case
(Used for objects 
of prepositions and 
objects of verbs)
me
us
you
him
her
it
Possessive Case
(Used to show 
possession)
my, mine
our, ours
your, yours
his
her, hers
its

GM-8 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Nominative Case
(Used for subjects 
of verbs and subject 
complements)
they
who, whoever
Objective Case
(Used for objects 
of prepositions and 
objects of verbs)
them
whom, whomever
Possessive Case
(Used to show 
possession)
their, theirs
whose
1.08 Guidelines for Selecting Pronoun Case 
 a. Pronouns that serve as subjects of verbs must be in the nominative case:
He and I (not Him and me) decided to apply for the jobs.
 b. Pronouns that follow linking verbs (such as am, is, are, was, were, be, being, 
been) and rename the words to which they refer must be in the nominative case.
It must have been she (not her) who placed the order. (The nominative-case 
pronoun she follows the linking verb been and renames it.)
If it was he (not him) who called, I have his number. (The nominative-case 
pronoun he follows the linking verb was and renames it.)
 c. Pronouns that serve as objects of verbs or objects of prepositions must be in the 
objective case:
Mr. Andrews asked them to complete the proposal. (The pronoun them is 
the object of the verb asked.)
All computer printouts are sent to him. (The pronoun him is the object of the 
preposition to.)
Just between you and me, profits are falling. (The pronoun me is one of the 
objects of the preposition between.)
 d. Pronouns that show ownership must be in the possessive case. Possessive pro-
nouns (such as hers, yours, ours, theirs, and its) require no apostrophes:
I bought a cheap cell phone, but yours (not your’s) is expensive.
All parts of the machine, including its (not it’s) motor, were examined.
The house and its (not it’s) contents will be auctioned.
Don’t confuse possessive pronouns and contractions. Contractions are short-
ened forms of subject–verb phrases (such as it’s for it is, there’s for there is,
and they’re for they are).
 e. When a pronoun appears in combination with a noun or another pronoun, 
ignore the extra noun or pronoun and its conjunction. In this way pronoun case 
becomes more obvious:
The manager promoted Jeff and me (not I). (Ignore Jeff and.)
 f. In statements of comparison, mentally finish the comparative by adding the 
implied missing words:
Next year I hope to earn as much as she. (The verb earns is implied here: . . . 
as much as she earns.)
 g. Pronouns must be in the same case as the words they replace or rename. When 
pronouns are used with appositives, ignore the appositive:
A new contract was signed by us (not we) employees. (Temporarily ignore 
the appositive employees in selecting the pronoun.)
We (not us) citizens have formed our own organization. (Temporarily ignore 
the appositive citizens in selecting the pronoun.)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-9
 h. Pronouns ending in self should be used only when they refer to previously men-
tioned nouns or pronouns:
The CEO himself answered the telephone.
Robert and I (not myself) are in charge of the campaign.
 i. Use objective-case pronouns as objects of the prepositions between, but, like,
and except:
Everyone but John and him (not he) qualified for the bonus.
Employees like Miss Gillis and her (not she) are hard to replace.
 j. Use who or whoever for nominative-case constructions and whom or whomever
for objective-case constructions. In making the correct choice, it’s sometimes 
helpful to substitute he for who or whoever and him for whom or whomever:
For whom was this book ordered? (This book was ordered for him/whom?)
Who did you say would drop by? (Who/he . . . would drop by?)
Deliver the package to whoever opens the door. (In this sentence the clause 
whoever opens the door functions as the object of the preposition to. Within 
the clause itself whoever is the subject of the verb opens. Again, substitution 
of he might be helpful: He/Whoever opens the door.)
1.09 Guidelines for Making Pronouns Agree With Their Ante-
ce dents. Pronouns must agree with the words to which they refer (their antece-
dents) in gender and in number.
 a. Use masculine pronouns to refer to masculine antecedents, feminine pronouns 
to refer to feminine antecedents, and neuter pronouns to refer to antecedents 
without gender:
The man opened his office door. (Masculine gender applies.)
A woman sat at her desk. (Feminine gender applies.)
This computer and its programs fit our needs. (Neuter gender applies.)
 b. Use singular pronouns to refer to singular antecedents:
 
 Common-gender pronouns (such as him or his) traditionally have been used when 
the gender of the antecedent is unknown. Sensitive writers today, however, prefer 
to recast such constructions to avoid the need for common-gender pronouns. 
Study these examples for alternatives to the use of common-gender pronouns:*
Each student must submit a report on Monday.
All students must submit their reports on Monday.
Each student must submit his or her report on Monday. (This alternative is 
least acceptable since it is wordy and calls attention to itself.)
 c. Use singular pronouns to refer to singular indefinite subjects and plural pro-
nouns for plural indefinite subjects. Words such as anyone, something, and any-
body are considered indefinite because they refer to no specific person or object. 
Some indefinite pronouns are always singular; others are always plural.
Always Singular
anybody 
either 
nobody
anyone 
everyone 
no one
anything 
everything 
somebody
each 
neither 
someone
Always Plural
both
few
many
several
*See Chapter 2, page 42, for additional discussion of common-gender pronouns and inclusive language.

GM-10 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Somebody in the group of touring women left her (not their) purse in the 
museum.
Either of the companies has the right to exercise its (not their) option to sell 
stock.
 d. Use singular pronouns to refer to collective nouns and organization names:
The engineering staff is moving its (not their) facilities on Friday. (The singu-
lar pronoun its agrees with the collective noun staff because the members of 
staff function as a single unit.)
Jones, Cohen, & James, Inc., has (not have) canceled its (not their) contract 
with us. (The singular pronoun its agrees with Jones, Cohen, & James, Inc.,
because the members of the organization are operating as a single unit.)
 e. Use a plural pronoun to refer to two antecedents joined by and, whether the 
antecedents are singular or plural:
Our company president and our vice president will be submitting their
expenses shortly.
 f. Ignore intervening phrases—introduced by expressions such as together with, as 
well as, and in addition to—that separate a pronoun from its antecedent:
One of our managers, along with several salespeople, is planning his
retirement. (If you wish to emphasize both subjects equally, join them 
with and: One of our managers and several salespeople are planning their
retirements.)
 g. When antecedents are joined by or or nor, make the pronoun agree with the 
antecedent closest to it.
Neither Jackie nor Kim wanted her (not their) desk moved.
Review Exercise B—Pronouns
In the space provided for each item, write a, b, or c to complete the statement accu-
rately. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. For each item 
on which you need review, consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. Send e-mail copies of the policy to the manager or (a) me, (b) myself.
 2. James promised that he would call; was it (a) him, (b) he who left the message?
 3. Much preparation for the seminar was made by Mrs. Washington and (a) I,
(b) me before the brochures were sent out.
 4. The Employee Benefits Committee can be justly proud of (a) its, (b) their 
achievements.
 5. A number of inquiries were addressed to Jeff and (a) I, (b) me, (c) myself.
 6. (a) Who, (b) Whom did you say the letter was addressed to?
 7. When you visit Sears Savings Bank, inquire about (a) its, (b) their certificates.
 8. All e-mail messages for Taylor and (a) I, (b) me, (c) myself will become part of the 
lawsuit.
 9. Apparently one of the female applicants forgot to sign (a) her, (b) their application.
 10. Both the printer and (a) it’s, (b) its cover are missing.
 11. I’ve never known any man who could work as fast as (a) him, (b) he.
 12. Just between you and (a) I, (b) me, the stock price will fall by afternoon.
 13. Give the supplies to (a) whoever, (b) whomever ordered them.
 14. (a) Us, (b) We employees have been given an unusual voice in choosing benefits.
 15. On her return from Mexico, Mrs. Sanchez, along with many other passengers, 
had to open (a) her, (b) their luggage for inspection.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-11
 16. Either James or Robert must submit (a) his, (b) their report next week.
 17. Any woman who becomes a charter member of this organization will be able to 
have (a) her, (b) their name inscribed on a commemorative plaque.
 18. We are certain that (a) our’s, (b) ours is the smallest smart phone available.
 19. Everyone has completed the reports except Debbie and (a) he, (b) him.
 20. Lack of work disturbs Mr. Thomas as much as (a) I, (b) me.
1. a (1.08h)  3. b (1.08c)  5. b (1.08c, 1.08e)  7. a (1.09d)  9. a (1.09b)  11. b (1.08f)  
13. a (1.08j)  15. a (1.09f)  17. a (1.09b)  19. b (1.08i)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 1
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors in the following sen-
tences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. Check with 
your instructor for the answers.
Example Nicholas and him made all there money in the 1990’s.
 1. Just between you and I, whom do you think would make the best manager?
 2. Either Stacy or me is responsible for correcting all errors in news dispatchs.
 3. Several attornies asked that there cases be postponed.
 4. One of the secretarys warned Bill and I to get the name of whomever answered 
the phone.
 5. The committee sent there decision to the president and I last week.
 6. Who should Susan or me call to verify the three bill of sales received today?
 7. Several of we employees complained that it’s keyboard made the new computer 
difficult to use.
 8. All the CEO’s agreed that the low interest rates of the early 2000s could not 
continue.
 9. Every customer has a right to expect there inquirys to be treated courteously.
 10. You may send you’re contribution to Eric or myself or to whomever is listed as 
your representative.
Verbs (1.10–1.15)
Verbs show the action of a subject or join the subject to words that describe it.
1.10 Guidelines for Agreement With Subjects. One of the most 
troublesome areas in English is subject–verb agreement. Consider the following 
guidelines for making verbs agree with subjects.
 a. A singular subject requires a singular verb:
The stock market opens at 10 a.m. (The singular verb opens agrees with the 
singular subject market.)
He doesn’t (not don’t) work on Saturday.
 b. A plural subject requires a plural verb:
On the packing slip several items seem (not seems) to be missing.
 c. A verb agrees with its subject regardless of prepositional phrases that may 
intervene:
This list of management objectives is extensive. (The singular verb is agrees 
with the singular subject list.)
Every one of the letters shows (not show) proper form.
^
^

GM-12 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 d. A verb agrees with its subject regardless of intervening phrases introduced 
by as well as, in addition to, such as, including, together with, and similar 
expressions:
An important memo, together with several contracts, is missing. (The singu-
lar verb is agrees with the singular subject memo.)
The president as well as several other top-level executives approves of our 
proposal. (The singular verb approves agrees with the subject president.)
 e. A verb agrees with its subject regardless of the location of the subject:
Here is one of the contracts about which you asked. (The verb is agrees 
with its subject one, even though it precedes one. The adverb here cannot 
function as a subject.)
There are many problems yet to be resolved. (The verb are agrees with the 
subject problems. The word there does not function as a subject.)
In the next office are several printers. (In this inverted sentence the verb are
must agree with the subject printers.)
 f. Subjects joined by and require a plural verb:
Analyzing the reader and organizing a strategy are the first steps in letter 
writing. (The plural verb are agrees with the two subjects, analyzing and 
organizing.)
The tone and the wording of the letter were persuasive. (The plural verb 
were agrees with the two subjects, tone and wording.)
 g. Subjects joined by or or nor may require singular or plural verbs. Make the verb 
agree with the closer subject:
Neither the memo nor the report is ready. (The singular verb is agrees with 
report, the closer of the two subjects.)
 h. The following indefinite pronouns are singular and require singular verbs: any-
one, anybody, anything, each, either, every, everyone, everybody, everything, 
many a, neither, nobody, nothing, someone, somebody, and something:
Either of the alternatives that you present is acceptable. (The verb is agrees 
with the singular subject either.)
 i. Collective nouns may take singular or plural verbs, depending on whether the 
members of the group are operating as a unit or individually:
Our management team is united in its goal.
The faculty are sharply divided on the tuition issue. (Although acceptable, 
this sentence sounds better recast: The faculty members are sharply divided 
on the tuition issue.)
 j. Organization names and titles of publications, although they may appear to be 
plural, are singular and require singular verbs.
Clark, Anderson, and Horne, Inc., has (not have) hired a marketing consultant.
Thousands of Investment Tips is (not are) again on the best-seller list.
1.11 Voice. Voice is that property of verbs that shows whether the subject 
of the verb acts or is acted upon. Active-voice verbs direct action from the sub-
ject toward the object of the verb. Passive-voice verbs direct action toward the 
subject.
Active voice: 
Our employees send many e-mail messages.
Passive voice: Many e-mail messages are sent by our employees.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-13
Business writers generally prefer active-voice verbs because they are specific 
and forceful. However, passive-voice constructions can help a writer be tact-
ful. Chapter 3 presents strategies for effective use of active- and passive-voice 
verbs.
1.12 Mood. Three verb moods express the attitude or thought of the speaker 
or writer toward a subject: (a) the indicative mood expresses a fact; (b) the impera-
tive mood expresses a command; and (c) the subjunctive mood expresses a doubt, 
a conjecture, or a suggestion.
Indicative: 
I am looking for a job.
Imperative: 
Begin your job search with the want ads.
Subjunctive: 
I wish I were working.
Only the subjunctive mood creates problems for most speakers and writers. 
The most common use of subjunctive mood occurs in clauses including if or 
wish. In such clauses substitute the subjunctive verb were for the indicative verb 
was:
If he were (not was) in my position, he would understand.
Mr. Simon acts as if he were (not was) the boss.
We wish we were (not was) able to ship your order.
The subjunctive mood can maintain goodwill while conveying negative information. 
The sentence We wish we were able to ship your order sounds more pleasing to a 
customer than We cannot ship your order, although, for all practical purposes, both 
sentences convey the same negative message.
1.13 Tense. Verbs show the time of an action by their tense. Speakers and 
writers can use six tenses to show the time of sentence action; for example:
Present tense: 
I work; he works.
Past tense: 
I worked; she worked.
Future tense: 
I will work; he will work.
Present perfect tense: I have worked; he has worked.
Past perfect tense: 
I had worked; she had worked.
Future perfect tense: 
I will have worked; he will have worked.
1.14 Guidelines for Verb Tense
 a. Use present tense for statements that, although introduced by past-tense verbs, 
continue to be true:
What did you say his name is? (Use the present tense is if his name has not 
changed.)
 b. Avoid unnecessary shifts in verb tenses:
The manager saw (not sees) a great deal of work yet to be completed and 
remained to do it herself.
Although unnecessary shifts in verb tense are to be avoided, not all the verbs 
within one sentence have to be in the same tense; for example:
She said (past tense) that she likes (present tense) to work late.
1.15 Irregular Verbs. Irregular verbs cause difficulty for some writers and 
speakers. Unlike regular verbs, irregular verbs do not form the past tense and 
past participle by adding -ed to the present form. Here is a partial list of selected 
troublesome irregular verbs. Consult a dictionary if you are in doubt about a 
verb form.

GM-14 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Troublesome Irregular Verbs
Present
begin
break
choose
come
drink
go
lay (to place)
lie (to rest)
ring
see
write
Past
began
broke
chose
came
drank
went
laid
lay
rang
saw
wrote
Past Participle (always use helping verbs)
begun
broken
chosen
come
drunk
gone
laid
lain
rung
seen
written
 a. Use only past-tense verbs to express past tense. Notice that no helping verbs are 
used to indicate simple past tense:
The auditors went (not have went) over our books carefully.
He came (not come) to see us yesterday.
 b. Use past-participle forms for actions completed before the present time. Notice 
that past-participle forms require helping verbs:
Steve had gone (not had went) before we called. (The past-participle gone is 
used with the helping verb had.)
 c. Avoid inconsistent shifts in subject, voice, and mood. Pay particular attention to this 
problem area because undesirable shifts are often characteristic of student writing.
Inconsistent: When Mrs. Taswell read the report, the error was found. (The 
first clause is in the active voice; the second, passive.)
Improved: 
When Mrs. Taswell read the report, she found the error. (Both 
clauses are in the active voice.)
Inconsistent: The clerk should first conduct an inventory. Then supplies 
should be requisitioned. (The first sentence is in the active 
voice; the second, passive.)
Improved: 
The clerk should first conduct an inventory. Then he or she should 
requisition supplies. (Both sentences are in the active voice.)
Inconsistent: All workers must wear security badges, and you must also sign 
a daily time card. (This sentence contains an inconsistent shift 
in subject from all workers in the first clause to you in the 
second clause.)
Improved: 
All workers must wear security badges, and they must also 
sign a daily time card.
Inconsistent: Begin the transaction by opening an account; then you enter 
the customer’s name. (This sentence contains an inconsistent 
shift from the imperative mood in the first clause to the 
indicative mood in the second clause.)
Improved: 
Begin the transaction by opening an account; then enter the 
customer’s name. (Both clauses are now in the imperative mood.)
Review Exercise C —Verbs
In the space provided for each item, write a or b to complete the statement accu-
rately. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. For each item 
on which you need review, consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-15
 1. Our directory of customer names and addresses (a) was (b) were out-of-date.
 2. There (a) is, (b) are a customer service engineer and two salespeople waiting to 
see you.
 3. Improved communication technologies and increased global competition (a) is,
(b) are changing the world of business.
 4. Crews, Meliotes, and Bove, Inc., (a) has, (b) have opened an office in Boston.
 5. Yesterday Mrs. Phillips (a) choose, (b) chose a new office on the second floor.
 6. The man who called said that his name (a) is, (b) was Johnson.
 7. U.S. News & World Report (a) is, (b) are beginning a campaign to increase 
readership.
 8. Either of the flight times (a) appears, (b) appear to fit my proposed itinerary.
 9. If you had (a) saw, (b) seen the rough draft, you would better appreciate the 
final copy.
 10. Across from our office (a) is, (b) are the parking structure and the information 
office.
 11. Although we have (a) began, (b) begun to replace outmoded equipment, the 
pace is slow.
 12. Specific training as well as ample experience (a) is, (b) are important for that 
position.
 13. Changing attitudes and increased job opportunities (a) is, (b) are resulting in 
increased numbers of working women.
 14. Neither the organizing nor the staffing of the program (a) has been, (b) have 
been completed.
 15. If I (a) was, (b) were you, I would ask for a raise.
 16. If you had (a) wrote, (b) written last week, we could have sent a brochure.
 17. The hydraulic equipment that you ordered (a) is, (b) are packed and will be 
shipped Friday.
 18. One of the reasons that sales have declined in recent years (a) is, (b) are lack of 
effective advertising.
 19. Either of the proposed laws (a) is, (b) are going to affect our business negatively.
 20. Merger statutes (a) requires, (b) require that a failing company accept bids from 
several companies before merging with one.
1. a (1.10c)  3. b (1.10f)  5. b (1.15a)  7. a (1.10j)  9. b (1.15b)  11. b (1.15b)  13. b (1.10f)  
15. b (1.12)  17. a (1.10a)  19. a (1.10h)
Review Exercise D—Verbs
In the following sentence pairs, choose the one that illustrates consistency in use of 
subject, voice, and mood. Write a or b in the space provided. When you finish, com-
pare your responses with those provided. For each item on which you need review, 
consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. (a)  You need more than a knowledge of technology; one also must be able to 
interact well with people.
 
 (b)  You need more than a knowledge of technology; you also must be able to 
interact well with people.
 2. (a) Tim and Jon were eager to continue, but Bob wanted to quit.
 
 (b) Tim and Jon were eager to continue, but Bob wants to quit.
 3. (a)  The salesperson should consult the price list; then you can give an accurate 
quote to a customer.
 
 (b)  The salesperson should consult the price list; then he or she can give an 
accurate quote to a customer.

GM-16 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 4. (a) Read all the instructions first; then you install the printer program.
 
 (b) Read all the instructions first, and then install the printer program.
 5. (a) She was an enthusiastic manager who always had a smile for everyone.
 
 (b) She was an enthusiastic manager who always has a smile for everyone.
1. b (1.15c)  3. b (1.15c)  5. a (1.14b)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 2
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors in the following sen-
tences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. Check with 
your instructor for the answers.
 1. Assets and liabilitys is what my partner and myself must investigate.
 2. If I was you, I would ask whomever is in charge for their opinion.
 3. The faculty agree that it’s first concern is educating students.
 4. The book and it’s cover was printed in Japan.
 5. Waiting to see you is a sales representative and a job applicant who you told 
to drop by.
 6. Every employee could have picked up his ballot if he had went to the 
 cafeteria.
 7. Your choice of hospitals and physicians are reduced by this plan and it’s 
restrictions.
 8. My uncle and her come to visit my parents and myself last night.
 9. According to both editor in chiefs, the tone and wording of all our letters needs 
revision.
 10. The Davis’es, about who the article was written, said they were unconcerned 
with the up’s and down’s of the stock market.
Adjectives and Adverbs (1.16–1.17)
Adjectives describe or limit nouns and pronouns. They often answer the questions 
what kind? how many? or which one? Adverbs describe or limit verbs, adjectives, 
or other adverbs. They often answer the questions when? how? where? or to what 
extent?
1.16 Forms. Most adjectives and adverbs have three forms, or degrees: positive, 
comparative, and superlative.
 
Positive 
Comparative 
Superlative
Adjective: 
clear 
clearer 
clearest
Adverb: 
clearly 
more clearly 
most clearly
Some adjectives and adverbs have irregular forms.
 
Positive 
Comparative 
Superlative
Adjective: 
good 
better 
best
 
bad 
worse 
worst
Adverb: 
well 
better 
best
Adjectives and adverbs composed of two or more syllables are usually compared 
by the use of more and most; for example:
The Payroll Department is more efficient than the Shipping Department.
Payroll is the most efficient department in our organization.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-17
1.17 Guidelines for Use
 a. Use the comparative degree of the adjective or adverb to compare two persons 
or things; use the superlative degree to compare three or more:
Of the two plans, which is better (not best)?
Of all the plans, we like this one best (not better).
 b. Do not create a double comparative or superlative by using -er with more or 
-est with most:
His explanation couldn’t have been clearer (not more clearer).
 c. A linking verb (is, are, look, seem, feel, sound, appear, and so forth) may intro-
duce a word that describes the verb’s subject. In this case be certain to use an 
adjective, not an adverb:
The characters on the monitor look bright (not brightly). (Use the adjective bright 
because it follows the linking verb look and modifies the noun characters.)
The company’s letter made the customer feel bad (not badly). (The adjective 
bad follows the linking verb feel and describes the noun customer.)
 d. Use adverbs, not adjectives, to describe or limit the action of verbs:
The business is running smoothly (not smooth). (Use the adverb smoothly to 
describe the action of the verb is running. Smoothly tells how the business 
is running.)
Don’t take his remark personally (not personal). (The adverb personally 
describes the action of the verb take.)
Serena said she did well (not good) on the test. (Use the adverb well to tell 
how she did.)
 e. Two or more adjectives that are joined to create a compound modifier before a 
noun should be hyphenated:
The four-year-old child was tired.
Our agency is planning a coast-to-coast campaign.
 
 Hyphenate a compound modifier following a noun only if your dictionary 
shows the hyphen(s):
Our speaker is very well-known. (Include the hyphen because most diction-
aries do.)
The tired child was four years old. (Omit the hyphens because the expres-
sion follows the word it describes, child, and because dictionaries do not 
indicate hyphens.)
 f. Keep adjectives and adverbs close to the words they modify:
She asked for a cup of hot coffee (not a hot cup of coffee).
Patty had only two days of vacation left (not only had two days).
Students may sit in the first five rows (not in five first rows).
He has saved almost enough money for the trip (not has almost saved).
 g. Don’t confuse there with the possessive pronoun their or the contraction they’re:
Put the documents there. (The adverb there means “at that place or at that 
point.”)
There are two reasons for the change. (The pronoun there is used as function 
word to introduce a sentence or a clause.)

GM-18 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
We already have their specifications. (The possessive pronoun their shows 
ownership.)
They’re coming to inspect today. (The contraction they’re is a shortened 
form of they are.)
Review Exercise E—Adjectives and Adverbs
In the space provided for each item, write a, b, or c to complete the statement accurately. 
If two sentences are shown, select a or b to indicate the one expressed more effectively. 
When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. For each item on which 
you need review, consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. After the interview, Tim looked (a) calm, (b) calmly.
 2. If you had been more (a) careful, (b) carefuler, the box might not have broken.
 3. Because we appointed a new manager, the advertising campaign is running 
(a) smooth, (b) smoothly.
 4. To avoid a (a) face to face, (b) face-to-face confrontation, she sent an e-mail.
 5. Darren completed the employment test (a) satisfactorily, (b) satisfactory.
 6. I felt (a) bad, (b) badly that he was not promoted.
 7. Which is the (a) more, (b) most dependable of the two cars?
 8. Can you determine exactly what (a) there, (b) their, (c) they’re company wants 
us to do?
 9. Of all the copiers we tested, this one is the (a) easier, (b) easiest to operate.
 10. (a) Mr. Aldron almost was ready to accept the offer.
 
 (b) Mr. Aldron was almost ready to accept the offer.
 11. (a) We only thought that it would take two hours for the test.
 
 (b) We thought that it would take only two hours for the test.
 12. (a) Please bring me a glass of cold water.
 
 (b) Please bring me a cold glass of water.
 13. (a) The committee decided to retain the last ten tickets.
 
 (b) The committee decided to retain the ten last tickets.
 14. New owners will receive a (a) 60-day, (b) 60 day trial period.
 15. The time passed (a) quicker, (b) more quickly than we expected.
 16. We offer a (a) money back, (b) money-back guarantee.
 17. Today the financial news is (a) worse, (b) worst than yesterday.
 18. Please don’t take his comments (a) personal, (b) personally.
 19. You must check the document (a) page by page, (b) page-by-page.
 20. (a) We try to file only necessary paperwork.
 
 (b) We only try to file necessary paperwork.
1. a (1.17c)  3. b (1.17d)  5. a (1.17d)  7. a (1.17a)  9. b (1.17a)  11. b (1.17f)  13. a (1.17f)  
15. b (1.17d)  17. a (1.17a)  19. a (1.17e)
PREPOSITIONS (1.18)
Prepositions are connecting words that join nouns or pronouns to other words in a 
sentence. The words about, at, from, in, and to are examples of prepositions.
1.18 Guidelines for Use
 a. Include necessary prepositions:
What type of software do you need (not what type software)?
I graduated from high school two years ago (not I graduated high school).

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-19
 b. Omit unnecessary prepositions:
Where is the meeting? (Not Where is the meeting at?)
Both printers work well. (Not Both of the printers.)
Where are you going? (Not Where are you going to?)
 c. Avoid the overuse of prepositional phrases.
Weak: 
We have received your application for credit at our branch in the 
Fresno area.
Improved: We have received your Fresno credit application.
 d. Repeat the preposition before the second of two related elements:
Applicants use the résumé effectively by summarizing their most important 
experiences and by relating their education to the jobs sought.
 e. Include the second preposition when two prepositions modify a single object:
George’s appreciation of and aptitude for computers led to a promising career.
Conjunctions (1.19)
Conjunctions connect words, phrases, and clauses. They act as signals, indicating 
when a thought is being added, contrasted, or altered. Coordinate conjunctions (such 
as and, or, but) and other words that act as connectors (such as however, therefore, 
when, as) tell the reader or listener in what direction a thought is heading. They’re 
like road signs signaling what’s ahead.
1.19 Guidelines for Use
 a. Use coordinating conjunctions to connect only sentence elements that are parallel 
or balanced.
Weak: 
His report was correct and written in a concise manner.
Improved: His report was correct and concise.
Weak: 
Management has the capacity to increase fraud, or reduction can 
be achieved through the policies it adopts.
Improved: Management has the capacity to increase or reduce fraud through 
the policies it adopts.
 b. Do not use the word like as a conjunction:
It seems as if (not like) this day will never end.
 c. Avoid using when or where inappropriately. A common writing fault occurs 
in sentences with clauses introduced by is when and is where. Written English 
ordinarily requires a noun (or a group of words functioning as a noun) follow-
ing the linking verb is. Instead of acting as conjunctions in these constructions, 
the words where and when function as adverbs, creating faulty grammatical 
equations (adverbs cannot complete equations set up by linking verbs). To 
avoid the problem, revise the sentence, eliminating is when or is where.
Weak: 
A bullish market is when prices are rising in the stock market.
Improved: A bullish market is created when prices are rising in the stock market.
Weak: 
A flowchart is when you make a diagram showing the step-by-step 
progression of a procedure.
Improved: A flowchart is a diagram showing the step-by-step progression of 
a procedure.
Weak: 
Word processing is where you use a computer and software to write.
Improved: Word processing involves the use of a computer and software to 
write.

GM-20 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 
 A similar faulty construction occurs in the expression I hate when. English 
requires nouns, noun clauses, or pronouns to act as objects of verbs, not 
adverbs.
Weak: 
I hate when we’re asked to work overtime.
Improved: I hate it when we’re asked to work overtime.
Improved: I hate being asked to work overtime.
 d. Don’t confuse the adverb then with the conjunction than. Then means “at that 
time”; than indicates the second element in a comparison:
We would rather remodel than (not then) move.
First, the equipment is turned on; then (not than) the program is loaded.
Review Exercise F—Prepositions and Conjunctions
In the space provided for each item, write a or b to indicate the sentence that is 
expressed more effectively. When you finish, compare your responses with those 
provided. For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered principle 
shown in parentheses.
 1. (a) The chief forgot to tell everyone where today’s meeting is.
 
 (b) The chief forgot to tell everyone where today’s meeting is at.
 2. (a) She was not aware of nor interested in the company insurance plan.
 
 (b) She was not aware nor interested in the company insurance plan.
 3. (a) Mr. Samuels graduated college last June.
 
 (b) Mr. Samuels graduated from college last June.
 4. (a) “Flextime” is when employees arrive and depart at varying times.
 
 (b)  “Flextime” is a method of scheduling worktime in which employees arrive 
and depart at varying times.
 5. (a) Both employees enjoyed setting their own hours.
 
 (b) Both of the employees enjoyed setting their own hours.
 6. (a) I hate when my cell loses its charge.
 
 (b) I hate it when my cell loses its charge.
 7. (a) What style of typeface should we use?
 
 (b) What style typeface should we use?
 8. (a) Business letters should be concise, correct, and written clearly.
 
 (b) Business letters should be concise, correct, and clear.
 9. (a)  Mediation in a labor dispute occurs when a neutral person helps union and 
management reach an agreement.
 
 (b)  Mediation in a labor dispute is where a neutral person helps union and 
management reach an agreement.
10. (a) It looks as if the plant will open in early January.
 
 (b) It looks like the plant will open in early January.
 11. (a) We expect to finish up the work soon.
 
 (b) We expect to finish the work soon.
 12. (a)  At the beginning of the program in the fall of the year at the central office, 
we experienced staffing difficulties.
 
 (b)  When the program began last fall, the central office experienced staffing 
difficulties.
 13. (a) Your client may respond by e-mail or a telephone call may be made.
 
 (b) Your client may respond by e-mail or by telephone.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-21
 14. (a)  A résumé is when you make a written presentation of your education and 
experience for a prospective employer.
 
 (b)  A résumé is a written presentation of your education and experience for a 
prospective employer.
 15. (a)  Stacy exhibited both an awareness of and talent for developing inno-
vations.
 
 (b) Stacy exhibited both an awareness and talent for developing innovations.
 16. (a) This course is harder then I expected.
 
 (b) This course is harder than I expected.
 17. (a)  An ombudsman is an individual hired by management to investigate and 
resolve employee complaints.
 
 (b)  An ombudsman is when management hires an individual to investigate and 
resolve employee complaints.
 18. (a) I’m uncertain where to take this document to.
 
 (b) I’m uncertain where to take this document.
 19. (a)  By including accurate data and by writing clearly, you will produce effective 
messages.
 
 (b)  By including accurate data and writing clearly, you will produce effective 
messages.
 20. (a)  We need computer operators who can load software, monitor networks, 
and files must be duplicated.
 
 (b)  We need computer operators who can load software, monitor networks, 
and duplicate files.
1. a (1.18b)  3. b (1.18a)  5. a (1.18b)  7. a (1.18a)  9. a (1.19c)  11. b (1.18b)  
13. b (1.19a)  15. a (1.18e)  17. a (1.19c)  19. a (1.18d)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 3
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors in the following sen-
tences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. Check with 
your instructor for the answers.
 1. If Cindy works faster then her, shouldn’t Cindy be hired?
 2. We felt badly that Mark’s home was not chose for the tour.
 3. Neither the company nor the workers is pleased at how slow the talks seems to 
be progressing.
 4. Just between you and I, it’s better not to take his remarks personal.
 5. After completing there floor by floor inventory, managers will deliver there 
reports to Mr. Quinn and I.
 6. If my cell phone was working, Jean and myself could have completed our 
calls.
 7. Powerful software and new hardware allows us to send the newsletter to whom-
ever is currently listed in our database.
 8. The eighteen year old girl and her mother was given hot cups of tea after there 
ordeal.
 9. We begun the work two years ago, but personnel and equipment has been espe-
cially difficult to obtain.
 10. Today’s weather is worst then yesterday.

GM-22 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Punctuation Review
Commas 1 (2.01–2.04)
2.01 Series. Commas are used to separate three or more equal elements 
(words, phrases, or short clauses) in a series. To ensure separation of the last 
two elements, careful writers always use a comma before the conjunction in a 
series:
Business letters usually contain a dateline, address, salutation, body, and closing. 
(This series contains words.)
The job of an ombudsman is to examine employee complaints, resolve disagree-
ments between management and employees, and ensure fair treatment. (This 
series contains phrases.)
Trainees complete basic keyboarding tasks, technicians revise complex docu-
ments, and editors proofread completed projects. (This series contains short 
clauses.)
2.02 Direct Address. Commas are used to set off the names of individuals 
being addressed:
Your inquiry, Mrs. Johnson, has been referred to me.
We genuinely hope that we may serve you, Mr. Lee.
2.03 Parenthetical Expressions. Skilled writers use parenthetical words, 
phrases, and clauses to guide the reader from one thought to the next. When these 
expressions interrupt the flow of a sentence and are unnecessary for its grammati-
cal completeness, they should be set off with commas. Examples of commonly used 
parenthetical expressions follow:
all things considered
as a matter of fact
as a result
as a rule
at the same time
consequently
for example
furthermore
however
in addition
incidentally
in fact
in my opinion
in the first place
in the meantime
moreover
needless to say
nevertheless
no doubt
of course
on the contrary
on the other hand
therefore
under the circumstances
As a matter of fact, I wrote to you just yesterday. (Phrase used at the beginning 
of a sentence.)
We will, in the meantime, send you a replacement order. (Phrase used in the 
middle of a sentence.)
Your satisfaction is our first concern, needless to say. (Phrase used at the end of 
a sentence.)
Do not use commas if the expression is necessary for the completeness of the sentence:
Kimberly had no doubt that she would finish the report. (Omit commas because 
the expression is necessary for the completeness of the sentence.)
2.04 Dates, Addresses, and Geographical Items. When dates, 
addresses, and geographical items contain more than one element, the second and 
succeeding elements are normally set off by commas.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-23
 a. Dates:
The conference was held February 2 at our home office. (No comma is 
needed for one element.)
The conference was held February 2, 2009, at our home office. (Two com-
mas set off the second element.)
The conference was held Tuesday, February 2, 2009, at our home office. 
(Commas set off the second and third elements.)
In February 2009 the conference was held. (This alternate style omitting 
commas is acceptable if only the month and year are written.)
 b. Addresses:
The letter addressed to Mr. Jim W. Ellman, 600 Via Novella, Agoura, CA 
91306, should be sent today. (Commas are used between all elements except 
the state and zip code, which in this special instance act as a single unit.)
 c. Geographical items:
She moved from Toledo, Ohio, to Champaign, Illinois. (Commas set off the 
state unless it appears at the end of the sentence, in which case only one 
comma is used.)
In separating cities from states and days from years, many writers remember the 
initial comma but forget the final one, as in the examples that follow:
The package from Austin, Texas{,} was lost.
We opened June 1, 2004{,} and have grown steadily since.
Review Exercise G—Commas 1
Insert necessary commas in the following sentences. In the space provided write the 
number of commas that you add. Write C if no commas are needed. When you fin-
ish, compare your responses with those provided. For each item on which you need 
review, consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. As a rule we do not provide complimentary tickets.
 2. You may be certain Mr. Martinez that your policy will be issued immediately.
 3. I have no doubt that your calculations are correct.
 4. The safety hazard on the contrary can be greatly reduced if workers wear 
rubber gloves.
 5. Every accredited TV newscaster radio broadcaster and blogger had access to the 
media room.
 6. Deltech’s main offices are located in Boulder Colorado and Seattle Wash ington.
 7. The employees who are eligible for promotions are Terry Evelyn Vicki Rosanna 
and Steve.
 8. During the warranty period of course you are protected from any parts or 
service charges.
 9. Many of our customers include architects engineers attorneys and others who 
are interested in database management programs.
 10. I wonder Mrs. Stevens if you would send my letter of recommendation as soon 
as possible.
 11. The new book explains how to choose appropriate legal protection for ideas 
trade secrets copyrights patents and restrictive covenants.
 12. The factory is scheduled to be moved to 2250 North Main Street Ann Arbor 
Michigan 48107 within two years.

GM-24 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 13. You may however prefer to correspond directly with the manufacturer in 
Hong Kong.
 14. Are there any alternatives in addition to those that we have already considered?
 15. The rally has been scheduled for Monday January 12 in the football stadium.
 16. A check for the full amount will be sent directly to your home Mr. Jefferson.
 17. Goodstone Tire & Rubber for example recalled 400,000 steelbelted radial tires 
because some tires failed their rigorous tests.
 18. Kevin agreed to unlock the office open the mail and check all the equipment in 
my absence.
 19. In the meantime thank you for whatever assistance you are able to furnish.
 20. Research facilities were moved from Austin Texas to Santa Cruz California.
1. rule, (2.03)  3. C (2.03)  5. newscaster, radio broadcaster, (2.01)  7. Terry, Evelyn, Vicki, 
Rosanna, (2.01)  9. architects, engineers, attorneys, (2.01)  11. ideas, trade secrets, copyrights, 
patents, (2.01)  13. may, however, (2.03)  15. Monday, January 12, (2.04a)  17. Rubber, for 
example, (2.03)  19. meantime, (2.03)
Commas 2 (2.05–2.09)
2.05 Independent Clauses. An independent clause is a group of words 
that has a subject and a verb and that could stand as a complete sentence. When 
two such clauses are joined by and, or, nor, or but, use a comma before the 
conjunction:
We can ship your merchandise July 12, but we must have your payment first.
Net income before taxes is calculated, and this total is then combined with 
income from operations.
Notice that each independent clause in the preceding two examples could stand 
alone as a complete sentence. Do not use a comma unless each group of words is a 
complete thought (that is, has its own subject and verb).
Our CPA calculates net income before taxes and then combines that figure 
with income from operations. (No comma is needed because no subject follows 
and.)
2.06 Dependent Clauses. Dependent clauses do not make sense by them-
selves; for their meaning they depend on independent clauses.
 a. Introductory clauses. When a dependent clause precedes an independent 
clause, it is followed by a comma. Such clauses are often introduced by when, if, 
and as:
When your request came, we responded immediately.
As I mentioned earlier, Mrs. James is the manager.
 b. Terminal clauses. If a dependent clause falls at the end of a sentence, use a 
comma only if the dependent clause is an afterthought:
We have rescheduled the meeting for October 23, if this date meets with 
your approval. (Comma used because dependent clause is an afterthought.)
We responded immediately when we received your request. (No comma is 
needed.)
 c. Essential versus nonessential clauses. If a dependent clause provides informa-
tion that is unneeded for the grammatical completeness of a sentence, use com-
mas to set it off. In determining whether such a clause is essential or  nonessential, 

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-25
ask yourself whether the reader needs the information contained in the clause to 
identify the word it explains:
Our district sales manager, who just returned from a trip to the Southwest 
District, prepared this report. (This construction assumes that there is only 
one district sales manager. Since the sales manager is clearly identified, the 
dependent clause is not essential and requires commas.)
The salesperson who just returned from a trip to the Southwest District
prepared this report. (The dependent clause in this sentence is neces-
sary to identify which salesperson prepared the report. Therefore, use 
no commas.)
The position of assistant sales manager, which we discussed with you last 
week, is still open. (Careful writers use which to introduce nonessential 
clauses. Commas are also necessary.)
The position that we discussed with you last week is still open. (Careful 
writers use that to introduce essential clauses. No commas are used.)
2.07 Phrases. A phrase is a group of related words that lacks both a subject and 
a verb. A phrase that precedes a main clause is followed by a comma if the phrase 
contains a verb form or has five or more words:
Beginning November 1, Worldwide Savings will offer two new combination 
checking/savings plans. (A comma follows this introductory phrase because the 
phrase contains the verb form beginning.)
To promote our plan, we will conduct an extensive direct mail advertising cam-
paign. (A comma follows this introductory phrase because the phrase contains 
the verb form to promote.)
In a period of only one year, we were able to improve our market share by 30 
percent. (A comma follows the introductory phrase—actually two prepositional 
phrases—because its total length exceeds five words.)
In 2009 our organization installed a multiuser system that could transfer pro-
grams easily. (No comma needed after the short introductory phrase.)
2.08 Two or More Adjectives. Use a comma to separate two or more 
adjectives that equally describe a noun. A good way to test the need for a comma 
is this: Mentally insert the word and between the adjectives. If the resulting phrase 
sounds natural, a comma is used to show the omission of and:
We’re looking for a versatile, error-free operating system. (Use a comma to 
separate versatile and error-free because they independently describe operating 
system. And has been omitted.)
Our experienced, courteous staff is ready to serve you. (Use a comma to separate 
experienced and courteous because they independently describe staff. And has 
been omitted.)
It was difficult to refuse the sincere young telephone caller. (No commas are 
needed between sincere and young because and has not been omitted.)
2.09 Appositives. Words that rename or explain preceding nouns or pro-
nouns are called appositives. An appositive that provides information not essential 
to the identification of the word it describes should be set off by commas:
James Wilson, the project director for Sperling’s, worked with our architect. (The 
appositive, the project director for Sperling’s, adds nonessential information. 
Commas set it off.)

GM-26 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Review Exercise H—Commas 2
Insert only necessary commas in the following sentences. In the space provided, indi-
cate the number of commas that you add for each sentence. If a sentence requires no 
commas, write C. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. 
For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered principle shown in 
parentheses.
 1. A corporation must register in the state in which it does business and it must 
operate within the laws of that state.
 2. The manager made a point-by-point explanation of the distribution dilemma 
and then presented his plan to solve the problem.
 3. If you will study the cost analysis you will see that our company offers the best 
system at the lowest price.
 4. Molly Epperson who amassed the greatest number of sales points won a bonus 
trip to Hawaii.
 5. The salesperson who amasses the greatest number of sales points will win a bonus 
trip to Hawaii.
 6. To promote goodwill and to generate international trade we are opening offices 
in South Asia and in Europe.
 7. On the basis of these findings I recommend that we retain Jane Rada as our 
counsel.
 8. Scott Cook is a dedicated hardworking employee for our company.
 9. The bright young student who worked for us last summer will be able to return 
this summer.
 10. When you return the completed form we will be able to process your application.
 11. We will be able to process your application when you return the completed 
form.
 12. The employees who have been with us over ten years automatically receive 
additional insurance benefits.
 13. Knowing that you wanted this merchandise immediately I took the liberty of 
sending it by FedEx.
 14. The central processing unit requires no scheduled maintenance and has a self-test 
function for reliable performance.
 15. A tax credit for energy-saving homes will expire at the end of the year but 
Congress might extend it if pressure groups prevail.
 16. Stacy Wilson our newly promoted office manager has made a number of worth-
while suggestions.
 17. For the benefit of employees recently hired we are offering a two-hour seminar 
regarding employee benefit programs.
 18. Please bring your suggestions and those of Mr. Mason when you attend our 
meeting next month.
 19. The meeting has been rescheduled for September 30 if this date meets with your 
approval.
 20. Some of the problems that you outline in your recent memo could be rectified 
through more stringent purchasing procedures.
1. business, (2.05)  3. analysis, (2.06a)  5. C (2.06c)  7. findings, (2.07)  9. C (2.08)  11. C 
(2.06b)  13. immediately, (2.07)  15. year, (2.05)  17. hired, (2.07)  19. September 30, (2.06b)
Commas 3 (2.10–2.15)
2.10 Degrees and Abbreviations. Degrees following individuals’ names 
are set off by commas. Abbreviations such as Jr. and Sr. are also set off by commas 
unless the individual referred to prefers to omit the commas:

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-27
Anne G. Turner, MBA, joined the firm.
Michael Migliano, Jr., and Michael Migliano, Sr., work as a team.
Anthony A. Gensler Jr. wrote the report. (The individual referred to prefers to omit 
commas.)
The abbreviations Inc. and Ltd. are set off by commas only if a company’s legal 
name has a comma just before this kind of abbreviation. To determine a company’s 
practice, consult its stationery or a directory listing:
Firestone and Blythe, Inc., is based in Canada. (Notice that two commas are 
used.)
Computers Inc. is extending its franchise system. (The company’s legal name 
does not include a comma before Inc.)
2.11 Omitted Words. A comma is used to show the omission of words that 
are understood:
On Monday we received 15 applications; on Friday, only 3. (Comma shows the 
omission of we received.)
2.12 Contrasting Statements. Commas are used to set off contrasting 
or opposing expressions. These expressions are often introduced by such words as 
not, never, but, and yet:
The president suggested cutbacks, not layoffs, to ease the crisis.
Our budget for the year is reduced, yet adequate.
The greater the effort, the greater the reward.
If increased emphasis is desired, use dashes instead of commas, as in Only the sum 
of $100—not $1,000—was paid on this account.
2.13 Clarity. Commas are used to separate words repeated for emphasis. 
Commas are also used to separate words that may be misread if not separated:
The building is a long, long way from completion.
Whatever is, is right.
No matter what, you know we support you.
2.14 Quotations and Appended Questions
 a. A comma is used to separate a short quotation from the rest of a sentence. If the 
quotation is divided into two parts, two commas are used:
The manager asked, “Shouldn’t the managers control the specialists?”
“Not if the specialists,” replied Tim, “have unique information.”
 b. A comma is used to separate a question appended (added) to a statement:
You will confirm the shipment, won’t you?
2.15 Comma Overuse. Do not use commas needlessly. For example, com-
mas should not be inserted merely because you might drop your voice if you were 
speaking the sentence:
One of the reasons for expanding our East Coast operations is{,} that we 
anticipate increased sales in that area. (Do not insert a needless comma before 
a clause.)

GM-28 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
I am looking for an article entitled{,} “State-of-the-Art Communications.” (Do 
not insert a needless comma after the word entitled.)
Customers may purchase many food and nonfood items in convenience stores 
such as{,} 7-Eleven and Stop-N-Go. (Do not insert a needless comma after 
such as.)
We have{,} at this time{,} an adequate supply of parts. (Do not insert needless 
commas around prepositional phrases.)
Review Exercise I—Commas 3
Insert only necessary commas in the following sentences. Remove unnecessary 
commas with the delete sign (
). In the space provided, indicate the number of 
commas inserted or deleted in each sentence. If a sentence requires no changes, 
write C. When you finish, compare your responses with those provided. For 
each item on which you need review, consult the numbered principle shown in 
parentheses.
 1. We expected Anna Cortez not Tyler Rosen to conduct the audit.
 2. Brian said “We simply must have a bigger budget to start this project.”
 3. “We simply must have” said Brian “a bigger budget to start this project.”
 4. In August customers opened at least 50 new accounts; in September only 
about 20.
 5. You returned the merchandise last month didn’t you?
 6. In short employees will now be expected to contribute more to their own 
retirement funds.
 7. The better our advertising and recruiting the stronger our personnel pool 
will be.
 8. Mrs. Delgado investigated selling her stocks not her real estate to raise the 
 necessary cash.
 9. “On the contrary” said Mr. Stevens “we will continue our present marketing 
strategies.”
 10. Our company will expand into surprising new areas such as, women’s apparel 
and fast foods.
 11. What we need is more not fewer suggestions for improvement.
 12. Randall Clark Esq. and Jonathon Georges MBA joined the firm.
 13. “America is now entering” said President Saunders “the Age of Information.”
 14. One of the reasons that we are inquiring about the publisher of the software is, 
that we are concerned about whether that publisher will be in the market five 
years from now.
 15. The talk by D. A. Spindler PhD was particularly difficult to follow because of 
his technical and abstract vocabulary.
 16. The month before a similar disruption occurred in distribution.
 17. We are very fortunate to have, at our disposal, the services of excellent pro-
fessionals.
 18. No matter what you can count on us for support.
 19. Mrs. Sandoval was named legislative counsel; Mr. Freeman executive advisor.
 20. The data you are seeking can be found in an article entitled, “The Fastest 
Growing Games in Computers.”
1. Cortez, Rosen, (2.12)  3. have,” said Brian, (2.14a)  5. month, (2.14b)  7. recruiting, (2.12)  
9. contrary,” Stevens, (2.14a)  11. more, not fewer, (2.12)  13. entering,” Saunders, (2.14a)  
15. Spindler, PhD, (2.10)  17. have at our disposal (2.15)  19. Freeman, (2.11)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-29
Cumulative Editing Quiz 4
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors and omissions in the 
following sentences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. 
Check with your instructor for the answers.
 1. Business documents must be written clear, to ensure that readers comprehend 
the message quick.
 2. Needless to say the safety of our employees have always been most important 
to the president and I.
 3. The Small Business Administration which provide disaster loans are setting up 
an office in Miami Florida.
 4. Many entrepreneurs who want to expand there markets, have choosen to 
advertise heavy.
 5. Our arbitration committee have unanimously agreed on a compromise package 
but management have been slow to respond.
 6. Although the business was founded in the 1970’s its real expansion took place 
in the 1990s.
 7. According to the printed contract either the dealer or the distributor are respon-
sible for repair of the product.
 8. Next June, Lamont and Jones, Inc., are moving their headquarters to Denton 
Texas.
 9. Our company is looking for intelligent, articulate, young, people who has a 
desire to grow with an expanding organization.
 10. As you are aware each member of the jury were asked to avoid talking about 
the case.
Semicolons (2.16)
2.16 Independent Clauses, Series, Introductory Expressions
 a. Independent clauses with conjunctive adverbs. Use a semicolon before 
a conjunctive adverb that separates two independent clauses. Some of the 
most common conjunctive adverbs are therefore, consequently, however, and 
moreover:
Business messages should sound conversational; therefore, writers often use 
familiar words and contractions.
The bank closes its doors at 5 p.m.; however, the ATM is open 24 hours 
a day.
Notice that the word following a semicolon is not capitalized (unless, of 
course, that word is a proper noun).
 b. Independent clauses without conjunctive adverbs. Use a semicolon to sepa-
rate closely related independent clauses when no conjunctive adverb is used:
Bond interest payments are tax deductible; dividend payments are not.
Ambient lighting fills the room; task lighting illuminates each workstation.
Use a semicolon in compound sentences, not in complex sentences:
After one week the paper feeder jammed; we tried different kinds of paper. 
(Use a semicolon in a compound sentence.)
After one week the paper feeder jammed, although we tried different kinds 
of paper. (Use a comma in a complex sentence. Do not use a semicolon after 
jammed.)

GM-30 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
The semicolon is very effective for joining two closely related thoughts. 
Don’t use it, however, unless the ideas are truly related.
 c. Independent clauses with other commas. Normally, a comma precedes and, 
or, and but when those conjunctions join independent clauses. However, if 
either clause contains commas, change the comma preceding the conjunction to 
a semicolon to ensure correct reading:
If you arrive in time, you may be able to purchase a ticket; but ticket sales 
close promptly at 8 p.m.
Our primary concern is financing; and we have discovered, as you warned 
us, that money sources are quite scarce.
 d. Series with internal commas. Use semicolons to separate items in a series when 
one or more of the items contains internal commas:
Delegates from Miami, Florida; Freeport, Mississippi; and Chatsworth, 
California, attended the conference.
The speakers were Kevin Lang, manager, Riko Enterprises; Henry Holtz, 
vice president, Trendex, Inc.; and Margaret Slater, personnel director, West 
Coast Productions.
 e. Introductory expressions. Use a semicolon when an introductory expression 
such as namely, for instance, that is, or for example introduces a list following 
an independent clause:
Switching to computerized billing are several local companies; namely, 
Ryson Electronics, Miller Vending Services, and Black Advertising.
The author of a report should consider many sources; for example, books, 
periodicals, databases, and newspapers.
Colons (2.17–2.19)
2.17 Listed Items
 a. With colon. Use a colon after a complete thought that introduces a formal list of 
items. A formal list is often preceded by such words and phrases as these, thus, 
the following, and as follows. A colon is also used when words and phrases like 
these are implied but not stated:
Additional costs in selling a house involve the following: title examination 
fee, title insurance costs, and closing fee. (Use a colon when a complete 
thought introduces a formal list.)
Collective bargaining focuses on several key issues: cost-of-living adjust-
ments, fringe benefits, job security, and work hours. (The introduction of 
the list is implied in the preceding clause.)
 b. Without colons. Do not use a colon when the list immediately follows a to be 
verb or a preposition:
The employees who should receive the preliminary plan are James Sears, 
Monica Spears, and Rose Lopez. (No colon is used after the verb are.)
We expect to consider equipment for Accounting, Legal Services, and Payroll. 
(No colon is used after the preposition for.)
2.18 Quotations. Use a colon to introduce long one-sentence quotations and 
quotations of two or more sentences:
Our consultant said: “This system can support up to 32 users. It can be used for 
decision support, computer-aided design, and software development operations 
at the same time.”

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-31
2.19 Salutations. Use a colon after the salutation of a business letter:
Gentlemen:  
Dear Mrs. Seaman: 
Dear Jamie:
Review Exercise J—Semicolons, Colons
In the following sentences, add semicolons, colons, and necessary commas. For 
each sentence indicate the number of punctuation marks that you add. If a sentence 
requires no punctuation, write C. When you finish, compare your responses with 
those provided. For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered 
principle shown in parentheses.
 1. Technological advances make full-motion video viewable on small screens conse-
quently mobile phone makers and carriers are rolling out new services and phones.
 2. Our branch in Sherman Oaks specializes in industrial real estate our branch in 
Canoga Park concentrates on residential real estate.
 3. The sedan version of the automobile is available in these colors Olympic red 
metallic silver and Aztec gold.
 4. If I can assist the new manager please call me however I will be gone from June 
10 through June 15.
 5. The individuals who should receive copies of this announcement are Jeff Doogan 
Alicia Green and Kim Wong.
 6. We would hope of course to send personal letters to all prospective buyers but 
we have not yet decided just how to do this.
 7. Many of our potential customers are in Southern California therefore our pro-
motional effort will be strongest in that area.
 8. Since the first of the year we have received inquiries from one attorney two 
accountants and one information systems analyst.
 9. Three dates have been reserved for initial interviews January 15 February 1 and 
February 12.
 10. Several staff members are near the top of their salary ranges and we must 
reclassify their jobs.
 11. Several staff members are near the top of their salary ranges we must reclassify 
their jobs.
 12. Several staff members are near the top of their salary ranges therefore we must 
reclassify their jobs.
 13. If you open an account within two weeks you will receive a free cookbook 
moreover your first 500 checks will be imprinted at no cost to you.
 14. Monthly reports from the following departments are missing Legal Department 
Human Resources Department and Engineering Department.
 15. Monthly reports are missing from the Legal Department Human Resources 
Department and Engineering Department.
 16. Since you became director of that division sales have tripled therefore I am rec-
ommending you for a bonus.
 17. The convention committee is considering Portland Oregon New Orleans Louisiana 
and Phoenix Arizona.
 18. Several large companies allow employees access to their personnel files namely 
General Electric Eastman Kodak and Infodata.
 19. Sherry first asked about salary next she inquired about benefits.
 20. Sherry first asked about the salary and she next inquired about benefits.
1. screens; consequently, (2.16a)  3. colors: Olympic red, metallic silver, (2.01, 2.17a)  
5. Doogan, Alicia Green, (2.01, 2.17b)  7. California; therefore, (2.16a)  9. interviews: January 
15, February 1, (2.01, 2.17a)  11. ranges; (2.16b)  13. weeks, cookbook; moreover, (206a, 
2.16a)  15. Department, Human Resources Department, (2.01, 2.17b)  17. Portland, Oregon; 
New Orleans, Louisiana; Phoenix, (2.16d)  19. salary; (2.16b)

GM-32 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Apostrophes (2.20–2.22)
2.20 Basic Rule. The apostrophe is used to show ownership, origin, author-
ship, or measurement.
Ownership: 
We are looking for Brian’s keys.
Origin: 
At the president’s suggestion, we doubled the order.
Authorship: 
The accountant’s annual report was questioned.
Measurement: In two years’ time we expect to reach our goal.
 a. Ownership words not ending in s. To place the apostrophe correctly, you must 
first determine whether the ownership word ends in an s sound. If it does not, 
add an apostrophe and an s to the ownership word. The following examples 
show ownership words that do not end in an s sound:
the employee’s file 
(the file of a single employee)
a member’s address 
(the address of a single member)
a year’s time 
(the time of a single year)
a month’s notice 
(notice of a single month)
the company’s building 
(the building of a single company)
 b. Ownership words ending in s. If the ownership word does end in an s sound, 
usually add only an apostrophe:
several employees’ files 
(files of several employees)
ten members’ addresses 
(addresses of ten members)
five years’ time 
(time of five years)
several months’ notice 
(notice of several months)
many companies’ buildings 
(buildings of many companies)
A few singular nouns that end in s are pronounced with an extra syllable when they 
become possessive. To these words, add ’s.
my boss’s desk 
the waitress’s table 
the actress’s costume
Use no apostrophe if a noun is merely plural, not possessive:
All the sales representatives, as well as the assistants and managers, had their 
names and telephone numbers listed in the directory.
2.21 Names. The writer may choose either traditional or popular style in mak-
ing singular names that end in an s sound possessive. The traditional style uses the 
apostrophe plus an s, whereas the popular style uses just the apostrophe. Note that 
only with singular names ending in an s sound does this option exist.
Traditional style
Russ’s computer
Mr. Jones’s car
Mrs. Morris’s desk
Ms. Horowitz’s job
Popular style
Russ’ computer
Mr. Jones’ car
Mrs. Morris’ desk
Ms. Horowitz’ job
The possessive form of plural names is consistent: the Joneses’ car, the Horowitzes’ 
home, the Lopezes’ daughter.
2.22 Gerunds. Use ’s to make a noun possessive when it precedes a gerund, a 
verb form used as a noun:
Mr. Smith’s smoking prompted a new office policy. (Mr. Smith is possessive 
because it modifies the gerund smoking.)
It was Betsy’s careful proofreading that revealed the discrepancy.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-33
Review Exercise K—Apostrophes
Insert necessary apostrophes in the following sentences. In the space provided for 
each sentence, write the corrected word. If none were corrected, write C. When you 
finish, compare your responses with those provided. For each item on which you 
need review, consult the numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. In five years time Lisa hopes to repay all of her student loans.
 2. If you go to the third floor, you will find Mr. Londons office.
 3. All the employees personnel folders must be updated.
 4. In a little over a years time, that firm was able to double its sales.
 5. The Harrises daughter lived in Florida for two years.
 6. An inventors patent protects his or her invention for 17 years.
 7. Both companies headquarters will be moved within the next six months.
 8. That position requires at least two years experience.
 9. Some of their assets could be liquidated; therefore, a few of the creditors received 
funds.
 10. All secretaries workstations were equipped with Internet access.
 11. The package of electronics parts arrived safely despite two weeks delay.
 12. Many nurses believe that nurses notes are not admissable evidence.
 13. According to Mr. Cortez latest proposal, all employees would receive an addi-
tional holiday.
 14. Many of our members names and addresses must be checked.
 15. His supervisor frequently had to correct Jacks financial reports.
 16. We believe that this firms service is much better than that firms.
 17. Mr. Jackson estimated that he spent a years profits in reorganizing his staff.
 18. After paying six months rent, we were given a receipt.
 19. The contract is not valid without Mrs. Harris signature.
 20. It was Mr. Smiths signing of the contract that made us happy.
1. years’ (2.20b)  3. employees’ (2.20b)  5. Harrises’ (2.21)  7. companies’ (2.20b)  9. C (2.20b)  
11. weeks’ (2.20b)  13. Cortez’ or Cortez’s (2.21)  15. Jack’s (2.21)  17. year’s (2.20a)  
19. Harris’ or Harris’s (2.21)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 5
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors and omissions in the 
following sentences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. 
Check with your instructor for the answers.
 1. The three C’s of credit are the following character capacity and capital.
 2. We hope that we will not have to sell the property however that may be our 
only option.
 3. As soon as the supervisor and her can check this weeks sales they will place an 
order.
 4. Any of the auditors are authorized to proceed with an independent action how-
ever only the CEO can alter the councils directives.
 5. Although reluctant technicians sometimes must demonstrate there computer 
software skills.
 6. On April 6 2009 we opened an innovative fully-equipped fitness center.
 7. A list of maintenance procedures and recommendations are in the owners 
manual.

GM-34 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 8. The Morrises son lived in Flint Michigan however there daughter lived in 
Albany New York.
 9. Employment interviews were held in Dallas Texas Miami Florida and Chicago 
Illinois.
 10. Mr. Lees determination courage and sincerity could not be denied however his 
methods was often questioned.
Other Punctuation (2.23–2.29)
2.23 Periods
 a. Ends of sentences. Use a period at the end of a statement, command, indirect 
question, or polite request. Although a polite request may have the same struc-
ture as a question, it ends with a period:
Corporate legal departments demand precise skills from their workforce. 
(End a statement with a period.)
Get the latest data by reading current periodicals. (End a command with a 
period.)
Mr. Rand wondered whether we had sent any follow-up literature. (End an 
indirect question with a period.)
Would you please reexamine my account and determine the current balance. 
(A polite request suggests an action rather than a verbal response.)
 b. Abbreviations and initials. Use periods after initials and after many abbreviations.
R. M. Johnson
p.m.
Inc.
c.o.d.
a.m.
i.e.
Ms.
Mr.
Mrs.
 
 The latest trend is to omit periods in degrees and professional designations: BA, 
PhD, MD, RN, DDS.
Use just one period when an abbreviation falls at the end of a sentence:
Guests began arriving at 5:30 p.m.
2.24 Question Marks. Direct questions are followed by question marks:
Did you send your proposal to Datatronix, Inc.?
Statements with questions added are punctuated with question marks.
We have completed the proposal, haven’t we?
2.25 Exclamation Points. Use an exclamation point after a word, phrase, 
or clause expressing strong emotion. In business writing, however, exclamation 
points should be used sparingly:
Incredible! Every terminal is down.
2.26 Dashes. The dash (constructed at a keyboard by striking the hyphen key 
twice in succession) is a legitimate and effective mark of punctuation when used 
according to accepted conventions. As an emphatic punctuation mark, however, the 
dash loses effectiveness when overused.
 a. Parenthetical elements. Within a sentence a parenthetical element is usually set 
off by commas. If, however, the parenthetical element itself contains internal 
commas, use dashes (or parentheses) to set it off:
Three top salespeople—Tom Judkins, Tim Templeton, and Mary Yashimoto—
received bonuses.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-35
 b. Sentence interruptions. Use a dash to show an interruption or abrupt change 
of thought:
News of the dramatic merger—no one believed it at first—shook the financial 
world.
Ship the materials Monday—no, we must have them sooner.
 
 Sentences with abrupt changes of thought or with appended afterthoughts can 
usually be improved through rewriting.
 c. Summarizing statements. Use a dash (not a colon) to separate an introductory 
list from a summarizing statement:
Sorting, merging, and computing—these are tasks that our data processing 
programs must perform.
2.27 Parentheses. One means of setting off nonessential sentence elements 
involves the use of parentheses. Nonessential sentence elements may be punctuated 
in one of three ways: (a) with commas, to make the lightest possible break in the 
normal flow of a sentence; (b) with dashes, to emphasize the enclosed material; 
and (c) with parentheses, to de-emphasize the enclosed material. Parentheses are 
frequently used to punctuate sentences with interpolated directions, explanations, 
questions, and references:
The cost analysis (which appears on page 8 of the report) indicates that the copy 
machine should be leased.
Units are lightweight (approximately 13 oz.) and come with a leather case and 
operating instructions.
The latest laser printer (have you heard about it?) will be demonstrated for us 
next week.
A parenthetical sentence that is not embedded within another sentence should be 
capitalized and punctuated with end punctuation:
The Model 20 has stronger construction. (You may order a Model 20 brochure 
by circling 304 on the reader service card.)
2.28 Quotation Marks
 a. Direct quotations. Use double quotation marks to enclose the exact words of a 
speaker or writer:
“Keep in mind,” Mrs. Frank said, “that you’ll have to justify the cost of 
networking our office.”
The boss said that automation was inevitable. (No quotation marks are 
needed because the exact words are not quoted.)
 b. Quotations within quotations. Use single quotation marks (apostrophes on the 
keyboard) to enclose quoted passages within quoted passages:
In her speech, Mrs. Deckman remarked, “I believe it was the poet Robert 
Frost who said, ‘All the fun’s in how you say a thing.’”
 c. Short expressions. Slang, words used in a special sense, and words following 
stamped or marked are often enclosed within quotation marks:
Jeffrey described the damaged shipment as “gross.” (Quotation marks enclose 
slang.)
Students often have trouble spelling the word “separate.” (Quotation marks 
enclose words used in a special sense.)

GM-36 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Jobs were divided into two categories: most stressful and least stressful. 
The jobs in the “most stressful” list involved high risk or responsibility. 
(Quotation marks enclose words used in a special sense.)
The envelope marked “Confidential” was put aside. (Quotation marks 
enclose words following marked.)
In the four preceding sentences, the words enclosed within quotation marks can be 
set in italics, if italics are available.
 d. Definitions. Double quotation marks are used to enclose definitions. The word 
or expression being defined should be underscored or set in italics:
The term penetration pricing is defined as “the practice of introducing a 
product to the market at a low price.”
 e. Titles. Use double quotation marks to enclose titles of literary and artistic works, 
such as magazine and newspaper articles, chapters of books, movies, televi-
sion shows, poems, lectures, and songs. Names of major publications—such as 
books, magazines, pamphlets, and newspapers—are set in italics (underscored) 
or typed in capital letters.
Particularly helpful was the chapter in Smith’s EFFECTIVE WRITING 
TECHNIQUES entitled “Right Brain, Write On!”
In the Los Angeles Times appeared John’s article, “E-Mail Blunders”; how-
ever, we could not locate it in a local library.
 f. Additional considerations. In this country periods and commas are always 
placed inside closing quotation marks. Semicolons and colons, on the other 
hand, are always placed outside quotation marks:
Mrs. James said, “I could not find the article entitled ‘Cell Phone 
Etiquette.’”
The president asked for “absolute security”: All written messages were to 
be destroyed.
Question marks and exclamation points may go inside or outside closing quotation 
marks, as determined by the form of the quotation:
Sales Manager Martin said, “Who placed the order?” (The quotation is a 
question.)
When did the sales manager say, “Who placed the order?” (Both the incorporat-
ing sentence and the quotation are questions.)
Did the sales manager say, “Ryan placed the order”? (The incorporating sen-
tence asks a question; the quotation does not.)
“In the future,” shouted Bob, “ask me first!” (The quotation is an exclamation.)
2.29 Brackets. Within quotations, brackets are used by the quoting writer to 
enclose his or her own inserted remarks. Such remarks may be corrective, illustra-
tive, or explanatory:
Mrs. Cardillo said, “OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] 
has been one of the most widely criticized agencies of the federal government.”
Review Exercise L—Other Punctuation
Insert necessary punctuation in the following sentences. In the space provided for 
each item, indicate the number of punctuation marks that you added. Count sets of 
parentheses, dashes, and quotation marks as two marks. Emphasis or de-emphasis 
will be indicated for some parenthetical elements. When you finish, compare your 

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-37
responses with those provided. For each item on which you need review, consult the 
numbered principle shown in parentheses.
 1. Will you please send me your latest catalog
 2. (Emphasize) Three of my friends Carmen Lopez, Stan Meyers, and Ivan Sergo 
were all promoted.
 3. Mr Lee, Miss Evans, and Mrs Rivera have not responded.
 4. We have scheduled your interview for 4 45 p m
 5. (De-emphasize) The appliance comes in limited colors black, ivory, and beige, 
but we accept special orders.
 6. The expression de facto means exercising power as if legally constituted.
 7. Was it the president who said “This, too, will pass
 8. Should this package be marked Fragile
 9. Did you see the Newsweek article titled How Far Can Wireless Go
 10. Amazing All sales reps made their targets
1. catalog. (2.23a)  3. Mr. Mrs. (2.23a)  5. colors (black, ivory, and beige) (2.26a) 
7. said, pass”?  9. Newsweek “How Go?” (2.28e)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 6
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors and omissions in the 
following sentences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. 
Check with your instructor for the answers.
 1. Although the envelope was marked Confidential the vice presidents secretary 
thought it should be opened.
 2. Would you please send my order c.o.d?
 3. To be eligible for an apartment you must pay two months rent in advance.
 4. We wanted to use Russ computer, but forgot to ask for permission.
 5. Wasnt it Jeff Song not Eileen Lee who requested a 14 day leave.
 6. Miss. Judith L. Beam is the employee who the employees council elected as their 
representative.
 7. The Evening Post Dispatch our local newspaper featured an article entitled The 
Worlds Most Expensive Memo.
 8. As soon as my manager or myself can verify Ricks totals we will call you, in the 
meantime you must continue to disburse funds.
 9. Just inside the entrance, is the receptionists desk and a complete directory of all 
departments’.
 10. Exports from small companys has increased thereby affecting this countrys 
trade balance positively.
Style and Usage
Capitalization (3.01–3.16)
Capitalization is used to distinguish important words. However, writers are 
not free to capitalize all words they consider important. Rules or guidelines 
governing capitalization style have been established through custom and use. 
Mastering these guidelines will make your writing more readable and more 
comprehensible.

GM-38 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
3.01 Proper Nouns. Capitalize proper nouns, including the specific names 
of persons, places, schools, streets, parks, buildings, religions, holidays, months, 
agreements, programs, services, and so forth. Do not capitalize common nouns that 
make only general references.
Proper nouns
Michael DeNiro
Germany, Japan
El Camino College
Sam Houston Park
Phoenix Room, Statler Inn
Catholic, Presbyterian
Memorial Day, New Year’s Day
Express Mail
George Washington Bridge
Consumer Product Safety Act
Orlando Chamber of Commerce
Will Rogers World Airport
Common nouns
a salesperson in electronics
U.S. trading partners
a community college
a park in the city
a meeting room in the hotel
two religions
two holidays
a special package delivery service
a bridge
a law to protect consumers
a chamber of commerce
a municipal airport
3.02 Proper Adjectives. Capitalize most adjectives that are derived from 
proper nouns:
Greek symbol
Roman numeral
Xerox copy
British thermal unit
Norwegian ship
Hispanic markets
Do not capitalize the few adjectives that, although originally derived from proper 
nouns, have become common adjectives through usage. Consult your dictionary 
when in doubt:
manila folder
india ink
diesel engine
china dishes
3.03 Geographic Locations. Capitalize the names of specific places such 
as cities, states, mountains, valleys, lakes, rivers, oceans, and geographic regions:
New York City
Allegheny Mountains
San Fernando Valley
the East Coast
Great Salt Lake
Pacific Ocean
Delaware Bay
the Pacific Northwest
3.04 Organization Names. Capitalize the principal words in the names of 
all business, civic, educational, governmental, labor, military, philanthropic, politi-
cal, professional, religious, and social organizations:
Matrix Steel Company
The Wall Street Journal*
New York Stock Exchange
United Way
Commission to Restore the 
Statue of Liberty
Board of Directors, Midwest Bank
San Antonio Museum of Art
Securities and Exchange Commission
National Association of Letter Carriers
Association of Information Systems 
Professionals
*Note: Capitalize the only when it is part of the official name of an organization, as printed on 
the organization’s stationery.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-39
3.05 Academic Courses and Degrees. Capitalize particular academic 
degrees and course titles. Do not capitalize general academic degrees and subject 
areas:
Professor Bernadette Ordian, PhD, will teach Accounting 221 next fall.
Mrs. Snyder, who holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees, teaches marketing
classes.
Jim enrolled in classes in history, business English, and management.
3.06 Personal and Business Titles
 a. Capitalize personal and business titles when they precede names:
Vice President Ames
Board Chairman Frazier
Governor G. W. Thurmond
Professor McLean
Uncle Edward
Councilman Herbert
Sales Manager Klein
Dr. Samuel Washington
 b. Capitalize titles in addresses, salutations, and closing lines:
Mr. Juan deSanto
Director of Purchasing
Space Systems, Inc.
Boxborough, MA 01719 
Very truly yours,
Clara J. Smith
Supervisor, Marketing
 c. Generally, do not capitalize titles of high government rank or religious office 
when they stand alone or follow a person’s name in running text.
The president conferred with the joint chiefs of staff and many senators.
Meeting with the chief justice of the Supreme Court were the senator from 
Ohio and the mayor of Cleveland.
Only the cardinal from Chicago had an audience with the pope.
 d. Do not capitalize most common titles following names:
The speech was delivered by Robert Lynch, president, Academic Publishing.
Lois Herndon, chief executive officer, signed the order.
 e. Do not capitalize common titles appearing alone:
Please speak to the supervisor or to the office manager.
Neither the president nor the vice president could attend.
 
 However, when the title of an official appears in that organization’s minutes, 
bylaws, or other official document, it may be capitalized.
 f. Do not capitalize titles when they are followed by appositives naming specific 
individuals:
We must consult our director of research, Ronald E. West, before 
responding.
 g. Do not capitalize family titles used with possessive pronouns:
my mother
our aunt
your father
his cousin
 h. Capitalize titles of close relatives used without pronouns:
Both Mother and Father must sign the contract.

GM-40 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
3.07 Numbered and Lettered Items. Capitalize nouns followed by 
numbers or letters (except in page, paragraph, line, and verse references):
Flight 34, Gate 12
Volume I, Part 3
Invoice No. 55489
Model A5673
State Highway 10
Plan No. 2
Warehouse 33-A
Figure 8.3
Serial No. C22865404-2
page 6, line 5
3.08 Points of the Compass. Capitalize north, south, east, west, and their 
derivatives when they represent specific geographical regions. Do not capitalize the 
points of the compass when they are used in directions or in general references.
Specific regions
from the South
living in the Midwest
Easterners, Southerners
going to the Middle East
from the East Coast
General references
heading north on the highway
west of the city
western Nevada, southern Indiana
the northern part of the United States
the east side of the street
3.09 Departments, Divisions, and Committees. Capitalize the names 
of departments, divisions, or committees within your own organization. Outside your 
organization capitalize only specific department, division, or committee names:
The inquiry was addressed to the Legal Department in our Consumer Products 
Division.
John was appointed to the Employee Benefits Committee.
Send your résumé to their human resources division.
A planning committee will be named shortly.
3.10 Governmental Terms. Do not capitalize the words federal, govern-
ment, nation, or state unless they are part of a specific title:
Unless federal support can be secured, the state project will be abandoned.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation protects depositors from bank failure.
3.11 Product Names. Capitalize product names only when they refer to 
trademarked items. Except in advertising, common names following manufacturers’ 
names are not capitalized:
Magic Marker 
Kleenex tissues 
Q-tips 
Levi 501 jeans 
DuPont Teflon 
Dell computer
Swingline stapler
3M diskettes
Sony dictation machine
Canon camera
3.12 Literary Titles. Capitalize the principal words in the titles of books, 
magazines, newspapers, articles, movies, plays, songs, poems, and reports. Do not
capitalize articles (a, an, the), short conjunctions (and, but, or, nor), and preposi-
tions of fewer than four letters (in, to, by, for) unless they begin or end the title:
Jackson’s What Job Is for You? (Capitalize book titles.)
Gant’s “Software for the Executive Suite” (Capitalize principal words in article 
titles.)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-41
“Performance Standards to Go By” (Capitalize article titles.)
“The Improvement of Fuel Economy With Alternative Fuels” (Capitalize report 
titles.)
3.13 Beginning Words. In addition to capitalizing the first word of a com-
plete sentence, capitalize the first word in a quoted sentence, independent phrase, 
item in an enumerated list, and formal rule or principle following a colon:
The business manager said, “All purchases must have requisitions.” (Capitalize 
first word in a quoted sentence.)
Yes, if you agree. (Capitalize an independent phrase.)
Some of the duties of the position are as follows:
 1. Editing and formatting Word files
 2. Arranging video and teleconferences
 3. Verifying records, reports, and applications (Capitalize items in an enumer-
ated list.)
One rule has been established through the company: No smoking is allowed in 
open offices. (Capitalize a rule following a colon.)
3.14 Celestial Bodies. Capitalize the names of celestial bodies such as 
Mars, Saturn, and Neptune. Do not capitalize the terms earth, sun, or moon unless 
they appear in a context with other celestial bodies:
Where on earth did you find that manual typewriter?
Venus and Mars are the closest planets to Earth.
3.15 Ethnic References. Capitalize terms that refer to a particular culture, 
language, or race:
Asian
Caucasian
Latino
Persian
Hebrew
Indian
Japanese
Judeo-Christian
3.16 Seasons. Do not capitalize seasons:
In the fall it appeared that winter and spring sales would increase.
Review Exercise M—Capitalization
In the following sentences correct any errors that you find in capitalization. 
Underscore any lowercase letter that should be changed to a capital letter. Draw a 
slash (/) through a capital letter that you wish to change to a lowercase letter. In the 
space provided, indicate the total number of changes you have made in each sen-
tence. If you make no changes, write 0. When you finish, compare your responses 
with those provided. For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered 
principle shown in parentheses.
Example Bill McAdams, currently Assistant Manager in our Personnel 
department, will be promoted to Manager of the Employee Services 
division.
 1. The social security act, passed in 1935, established the present system of social 
security.
 2. Our company will soon be moving its operations to the west coast.
 3. Marilyn Hunter, mba, received her bachelor’s degree from Ohio university in 
athens.
5

GM-42 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
 4. The President of Datatronics, Inc., delivered a speech entitled “Taking off into 
the future.”
 5. Please ask your Aunt and your Uncle if they will come to the Attorney’s office 
at 5 p.m.
 6. Your reservations are for flight 32 on american airlines leaving from gate 14 at 
2:35 p.m.
 7. Once we establish an organizing committee, arrangements can be made to rent 
holmby hall.
 8. Bob was enrolled in history, spanish, business communications, and physical 
education courses.
 9. Either the President or the Vice President of the company will make the decision 
about purchasing xerox copiers.
 10. Rules for hiring and firing Employees are given on page 7, line 24, of the 
Contract.
 11. Some individuals feel that american companies do not have the sense of loyalty 
to their employees that japanese companies do.
 12. Where on Earth can we find better workers than Robots?
 13. The secretary of state said, “we must protect our domestic economy from 
Foreign competition.”
 14. After crossing the sunshine skyway bridge, we drove to Southern Florida for 
our vacation.
 15. All marketing representatives of our company will meet in the empire room of 
the red lion motor inn.
 16. Richard Elkins, phd, has been named director of research for spaceage strate-
gies, inc.
 17. The special keyboard for the Dell Computer must contain greek symbols for 
Engineering equations.
 18. After she received a master’s degree in electrical engineering, Joanne Dudley 
was hired to work in our product development department.
 19. In the Fall our organization will move its corporate headquarters to the franklin 
building in downtown los angeles.
 20. Dean Amador has one cardinal rule: always be punctual.
1. Social Security Act (3.01)  3. MBA  University  Athens (3.01, 3.05)  5. aunt  uncle  
attorney’s (3.06e, 3.06g)  7. Holmby Hall (3.01)  9. president  vice president  Xerox (3.06e, 
3.11)  11. American  Japanese (3.02)  13. We  foreign (3.10, 3.13)  15. Empire Room  
Red Lion Motor Inn (3.01)  17. computer  Greek  engineering (3.01, 3.02, 3.11)  19. fall  
Franklin Building  Los Angeles (3.01, 3.03, 3.16)
Cumulative Editing Quiz 7
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors and omissions in the 
following sentences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. 
Check with your instructor for the answers.
 1. The Manager thinks that you attending the three day seminar is a good idea, 
however we must find a replacement.
 2. We heard that professor watson invited edward peters, president of micropro, 
inc. to speak to our business law class.
 3. Carla Jones a new systems programmer in our accounting department will start 
monday.

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-43
 4. After year’s of downsizing and restructuring the u.s. has now become one of the 
worlds most competitive producers.
 5. When our company specialized in asian imports our main office was on the west 
coast.
 6. Company’s such as amway discovered that there unique door to door selling 
methods was very successful in japan.
 7. If you had given your sony camera to she or I before you got on the roller 
coaster it might have stayed dry.
 8. Tracy recently finished a bachelors degree in accounting, consequently she is 
submitting many résumé’s to companys across the country.
 9. The Lopezs moved from San Antonio Texas to Urbana Illinois when mr lopez 
enrolled at the university of illinois.
 10. When we open our office in montréal we will need employees whom are fluent 
in english and french.
Number Style (4.01–4.13)
Usage and custom determine whether numbers are expressed in the form of figures (for 
example, 5, 9) or in the form of words (for example, five, nine). Numbers expressed 
as figures are shorter and more easily understood, yet numbers expressed as words 
are necessary in certain instances. The following guidelines are observed in express-
ing numbers in written sentences. Numbers that appear on business forms—such as 
invoices, monthly statements, and purchase orders—are always expressed as figures.
4.01 General Rules
 a. The numbers one through ten are generally written as words. Numbers above 
ten are written as figures:
The bank had a total of nine branch offices in three suburbs.
All 58 employees received benefits in the three categories shown.
A shipment of 45,000 light bulbs was sent from two warehouses.
 b. Numbers that begin sentences are written as words. If a number beginning a 
sentence involves more than two words, however, the sentence should be writ-
ten so that the number does not fall at the beginning.
Fifteen different options were available in the annuity programs.
A total of 156 companies participated in the promotion (not One hundred 
fifty-six companies participated in the promotion).
4.02 Money. Sums of money $1 or greater are expressed as figures. If a sum 
is a whole dollar amount, omit the decimal and zeros (whether or not the amount 
appears in a sentence with additional fractional dollar amounts):
We budgeted $300 for a digital camera, but the actual cost was $370.96.
On the invoice were items for $6.10, $8, $33.95, and $75.
Sums less than $1 are written as figures that are followed by the word cents:
By shopping carefully, we can save 15 cents per unit.
4.03 Dates. In dates, numbers that appear after the name of the month are 
written as cardinal figures (1, 2, 3, etc.). Those that stand alone or appear before 
the name of a month are written as ordinal figures (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.):
The Personnel Practices Committee will meet May 7.
On the 5th day of February and again on the 25th, we placed orders.

GM-44 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
In domestic business documents, dates generally take the following form: 
January 4, 2009. An alternative form, used primarily in military and foreign cor-
respondence, begins with the day of the month and omits the comma: 4 January 
2009.
4.04 Clock Time. Figures are used when clock time is expressed with a.m. or 
p.m. Omit the colon and zeros in referring to whole hours. When exact clock time 
is expressed with the contraction o’clock, either figures or words may be used:
Mail deliveries are made at 11 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
At four (or 4) o’clock employees begin to leave.
4.05 Addresses and Telephone Numbers
 a. Except for the number one, house numbers are expressed in figures:
540 Elm Street
One Colorado Boulevard
17802 Washington Avenue
2 Highland Street
 b. Street names containing numbers ten or lower are written entirely as words. For 
street names involving numbers greater than ten, figures are used:
330 Third Street 
6945 East 32nd Avenue 
3440 Seventh Avenue
4903 West 23rd Street
 c. Telephone numbers are expressed with figures. When used, the area code is 
placed in parentheses preceding the telephone number:
Please call us at (818) 347-0551 to place an order.
Mr. Sims asked you to call (619) 554-8923, Ext. 245, after 10 a.m.
4.06 Related Numbers. Numbers are related when they refer to simi-
lar items in a category within the same reference. All related numbers should be 
expressed as the largest number is expressed. Thus if the largest number is greater 
than ten, all the numbers should be expressed in figures:
Only 5 of the original 25 applicants completed the processing. (Related numbers 
require figures.)
The two plans affected 34 employees working in three sites. (Unrelated numbers 
use figures and words.)
Exxon Oil operated 86 rigs, of which 6 were rented. (Related numbers require 
figures.)
The company hired three accountants, one customer service representative, and 
nine sales representatives. (Related numbers under ten use words.)
4.07 Consecutive Numbers. When two numbers appear consecutively 
and both modify a following noun, generally express the first number in words and 
the second in figures. If, however, the first number cannot be expressed in one or two 
words, place it in figures also (120 37-cent stamps). Do not use commas to separate 
the figures.
Historians divided the era into four 25-year periods. (Use word form for the first 
number and figure form for the second.)
We ordered ten 30-page color brochures. (Use word form for the first number 
and figure form for the second.)
Did the manager request 150 100-watt bulbs? (Use figure form for the first 
number since it would require more than two words.)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-45
4.08 Periods of Time. Seconds, minutes, days, weeks, months, and years 
are treated as any other general number. Numbers above ten are written in figure 
form. Numbers below ten are written in word form unless they represent a business 
concept such as a discount rate, interest rate, or warranty period.
This business was incorporated over 50 years ago. (Use figures for a number 
above ten.)
It took three hours to write this short report. (Use words for a number under 
ten.)
The warranty period is limited to 2 years. (Use figures for a business term.)
4.09 Ages. Ages are generally expressed in word form unless the age appears 
immediately after a name or is expressed in exact years and months:
At the age of twenty-one, Elizabeth inherited the business.
Wanda Tharp, 37, was named acting president.
At the age of 4 years and 7 months, the child was adopted.
4.10 Round Numbers. Round numbers are approximations. They may be 
expressed in word or figure form, although figure form is shorter and easier to 
comprehend:
About 600 (or six hundred) stock options were sold.
It is estimated that 1,000 (or one thousand) people will attend.
For ease of reading, round numbers in the millions or billions should be expressed 
with a combination of figures and words:
At least 1.5 million readers subscribe to the ten top magazines.
Deposits in money market accounts totaled more than $115 billion.
4.11 Weights and Measurements. Weights and measurements are 
expressed with figures:
The new deposit slip measures 2 by 6 inches.
Her new suitcase weighed only 2 pounds 4 ounces.
Toledo is 60 miles from Detroit.
4.12 Fractions. Simple fractions are expressed as words. Complex fractions 
may be written either as figures or as a combination of figures and words:
Over two thirds of the stockholders voted.
This microcomputer will execute the command in 1 millionth of a second. (A 
combination of words and numbers is easier to comprehend.)
She purchased a one-fifth share in the business.*
4.13 Percentages and Decimals. Percentages are expressed with fig-
ures that are followed by the word percent. The percent sign (%) is used only on 
business forms or in statistical presentations:
We had hoped for a 7 percent interest rate, but we received a loan at 
8 percent.
Over 50 percent of the residents supported the plan.
*Note: Fractions used as adjectives require hyphens.

GM-46 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
Decimals are expressed with figures. If a decimal expression does not contain a 
whole number (an integer) and does not begin with a zero, a zero should be placed 
before the decimal point:
The actuarial charts show that 1.74 out of 1,000 people will die in any given 
year.
Inspector Norris found the setting to be .005 inch off. (Decimal begins with a 
zero and does not require a zero before the decimal point.)
Considerable savings will accrue if the unit production cost is reduced 0.1 percent. 
(A zero is placed before a decimal that neither contains a whole number nor begins 
with a zero.)
Quick Chart—Expression of Numbers
Use Words
Numbers ten and under
Numbers at beginning of sentence
Ages
Fractions
Use Figures
Numbers 11 and over
Money
Dates
Addresses and telephone numbers
Weights and measurements
Percentages and decimals
Review Exercise N—Number Style
Circle a or b to indicate the preferred number style. Assume that these numbers 
appear in business correspondence. When you finish, compare your responses with 
those provided. For each item on which you need review, consult the numbered 
principle shown in parentheses.
 1. (a) 2 alternatives 
(b) two alternatives
 2. (a) Seventh Avenue 
(b) 7th Avenue
 3. (a) sixty sales reps 
(b) 60 sales reps
 4. (a) November ninth 
(b) November 9
 5. (a) forty dollars 
(b) $40
 6. (a) on the 23rd of May 
(b) on the twenty-third of May
 7. (a) at 2:00 p.m. 
(b) at 2 p.m.
 8. (a) 4 two-hundred-page books 
(b) four 200-page books
 9. (a) at least 15 years ago 
(b) at least fifteen years ago
 10. (a) 1,000,000 viewers 
(b) 1 million viewers
 11. (a) twelve cents 
(b) 12 cents
 12. (a) a sixty-day warranty 
(b) a 60-day warranty
 13. (a) ten percent interest rate 
(b) 10 percent interest rate
 14. (a) 4/5 of the voters 
(b) four fifths of the voters
 15. (a) the rug measures four by six feet 
(b) the rug measures 4 by 6 feet
 16. (a) about five hundred people 
(b) about 500 people attended
 
attended
 17. (a) at eight o’clock 
(b) at 8 o’clock
 18. (a) located at 1 Wilshire Boulevard 
(b) located at One Wilshire Boulevard
 19. (a) three computers for twelve people (b) three computers for 12 people 
 20. (a) 4 out of every 100 licenses 
(b) four out of every 100 licenses
1. b (4.01a)  3. b (4.01a)  5. b (4.02)  7. b (4.04)  9. a (4.08)  11. b (4.02)  13. b (4.13)  
15. b (4.11)  17. a or b (4.04)  19. b (4.06)

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-47
Cumulative Editing Quiz 8
Use proofreading marks (see Appendix B) to correct errors and omissions in the 
following sentences. All errors must be corrected to receive credit for the sentence. 
Check with your instructor for the answers.
 1. The president of the U.S. recommended a 30 day cooling off period in the middle 
east peace negotiations.
 2. Please meet at my attorneys office at four p.m. on May 10th to sign our papers 
of incorporation.
 3. A Retail Store at 405 7th avenue had sales of over one million dollars last year.
 4. Every new employee must receive their permit to park in lot 5-A or there car 
will be cited.
 5. Mr thompson left three million dollars to be divided among his 4 children 
rachel, timothy, rebecca and kevin.
 6. Most companys can boost profits almost one hundred percent by retaining only 
5% more of there current customers.
 7. Although the bill for coffee and doughnuts were only three dollars and forty 
cents Phillip and myself had trouble paying it.
 8. Only six of the 19 employees, who filled out survey forms, would have went to 
hawaii as their vacation choice.
 9. Danielles report is more easier to read then david because her’s is better orga-
nized and has good headings.
 10. At mcdonald’s we devoured 4 big macs 3 orders of french fries and 5 coca colas 
for lunch.
Confusing Words
accede: 
to agree or consent
exceed: 
over a limit
accept: 
to receive
except: 
to exclude; (prep) but
adverse: 
opposing; antagonistic
averse: 
unwilling; reluctant
advice: 
suggestion, opinion
advise: 
to counsel or 
recommend
affect: 
to influence
effect: 
(n) outcome, result; 
(v) to bring about, to 
create
all ready: 
prepared
already: 
by this time
all right: 
satisfactory
alright: 
unacceptable variant 
spelling
altar: 
structure for worship
alter: 
to change
appraise: 
to estimate
apprise: 
to inform
ascent: 
(n) rising or going up
assent: 
(v) to agree or consent
assure: 
to promise
ensure: 
to make certain
insure: 
to protect from loss
capital: 
(n) city that is seat of 
government; wealth 
of an individual; (adj) 
chief
capitol: 
building that houses 
state or national 
lawmakers
cereal: 
breakfast food
serial: 
arranged in sequence
cite: 
to quote; to summon
site: 
location
sight: 
a view; to see
coarse: 
rough texture
course: 
a route; part of a meal; 
a unit of learning

GM-48 
Grammar/Mechanics Handbook
complement: that which completes
compliment: 
(n) praise, flattery; 
(v) to praise or flatter
conscience: 
regard for fairness
conscious: 
aware
council: 
governing body
counsel: 
(n) advice, attorney; 
(v) to give advice
credible: 
believable
creditable: 
good enough for praise 
or esteem; reliable
desert: 
arid land; to abandon
dessert: 
sweet food
device: 
invention or 
mechanism
devise: 
to design or arrange
disburse: 
to pay out
disperse: 
to scatter widely
elicit: 
to draw out
illicit: 
unlawful
envelop: 
(v) to wrap, surround, 
or conceal
envelope: 
(n) a container for a 
written message
every day: 
each single day
everyday: 
ordinary
farther: 
a greater distance
further: 
additional
formally: 
in a formal manner
formerly: 
in the past
grate: 
(v) to reduce to small 
particles; to cause 
irritation; (n) a frame 
of crossed bars 
blocking a passage
great: 
(adj) large in size; 
numerous; eminent or 
distinguished
hole: 
an opening
whole: 
complete
imply: 
to suggest indirectly
infer: 
to reach a conclusion
lean: 
(v) to rest against; (adj) 
not fat
lien: 
(n) a legal right or 
claim to property
liable: 
legally responsible
libel: 
damaging written 
statement
loose: 
not fastened
lose: 
to misplace
miner: 
person working in 
a mine
minor: 
a lesser item; person 
under age
patience: 
calm perseverance
patients: 
people receiving 
medical treatment
personal: 
private, individual
personnel: 
employees
plaintiff: 
(n) one who initiates 
a lawsuit
plaintive: 
(adj) expressive of 
suffering or woe
populace: 
(n) the masses; 
population of a place
populous: 
(adj) densely 
populated
precede: 
to go before
proceed: 
to continue
precedence: 
priority
precedents: 
events used as an 
example
principal: 
(n) capital sum; 
school official; 
(adj) chief
principle: 
rule of action
stationary: 
immovable
stationery: 
writing material
than: 
conjunction showing 
comparison
then: 
adverb meaning “at 
that time”
their: 
possessive form 
of they
there: 
at that place or point
they’re: 
contraction of 
they are
to: 
a preposition; the sign 
of the infinitive
too: 
an adverb meaning 
“also” or “to an 
excessive extent”
two: 
a number
waiver: 
abandonment of a 
claim
waver: 
to shake or fluctuate

Grammar/Mechanics Handbook 
GM-49
160 Frequently Misspelled Words
absence
accommodate
achieve
acknowledgment
across
adequate
advisable
analyze
annually
appointment
argument
automatically
bankruptcy
becoming
beneficial
budget
business
calendar
canceled
catalog
changeable
column
committee
congratulate
conscience
conscious
consecutive
consensus
consistent
control
convenient
correspondence
courteous
criticize
decision
deductible
defendant
definitely
dependent
describe
desirable
destroy
development
disappoint
dissatisfied
division
efficient
embarrass
emphasis
emphasize
employee
envelope
equipped
especially
evidently
exaggerate
excellent
exempt
existence
extraordinary
familiar
fascinate
feasible
February
fiscal
foreign
forty
fourth
friend
genuine
government
grammar
grateful
guarantee
harass
height
hoping
immediate
incidentally
incredible
independent
indispensable
interrupt
irrelevant
itinerary
judgment
knowledge
legitimate
library
license
maintenance
manageable
manufacturer
mileage
miscellaneous
mortgage
necessary
nevertheless
ninety
ninth
noticeable
occasionally
occurred
offered
omission
omitted
opportunity
opposite
ordinarily
paid
pamphlet
permanent
permitted
pleasant
practical
prevalent
privilege
probably
procedure
profited
prominent
qualify
quantity
questionnaire
receipt
receive
recognize
recommendation
referred
regarding
remittance
representative
restaurant
schedule
secretary
separate
similar
sincerely
software
succeed
sufficient
supervisor
surprise
tenant
therefore
thorough
though
through
truly
undoubtedly
unnecessarily
usable
usage
using
usually
valuable
volume
weekday
writing
yield

This page intentionally left blank 

 
K-1
Chapter 1
1. inquiries (1.05e) 2. C (1.05g) 3. companies (1.05e) 
4. Saturdays (1.05a) 5. turkeys (1.05d) 6. Bushes (1.05b) 
7. 2000s (1.05g) 8. editors in chief (1.05f) 9. complexes (1.05b) 
10. counties (1.05e) 11. Cassidys (1.05a) 12. C (1.05d) 13. liabil-
ities (1.05e) 14. C (1.05h) 15. women (1.05c)
Chapter 2
1. she (1.08b) 2. his (1.09b) 3. him (1.08c) 4. whom (1.08j) 
5. hers (1.08d) 6. me (1.08c) 7. I (1.08a) 8. yours (1.08d) 
9. whoever (1.08j) 10. me (1.08i) 11. he (1.08f) 12. us (1.08g) 
13. her (1.09c) 14. its (1.09g) 15. his or her (1.09b)
Chapter 3
1. was for were (1.10c) 2. were for was (1.12) 3. is for are 
(1.10c) 4. was for were (1.10d) 5. knows for know (1.10g) 
6. written for wrote (1.15b) 7. are for is (1.10f) 8. C (1.10g) 
9. begun (1.15b) 10. seen (1.15b) 11. gone for went (1.15b) 
12. b (1.15c) 13. b (1.15c) 14. a (1.15c) 15. b (1.15c)
Chapter 4
1. state-of-the-art (1.17e) 2. work-related (1.17e) 3. equally 
(1.17d) 4. their (1.17g) 5. had only (1.17f) 6. point-by-point 
(1.17e) 7. their (1.17g) 8. spur-of-the-moment (1.17e) 9. C 
(1.17e) 10. well-thought-out (1.17e) 11. change-of-address 
(1.17e) 12. case-by-case (1.17e) 13. were nearer (1.17b) 14. bad 
(1.17c) 15. smoothly (1.17d)
Chapter 5
1. a (1.18b) 2. b. (1.19c) 3. b (1.19d) 4. b (1.19c) 5. a (1.19a) 
6. b (1.18a) 7. a (1.19d) 8. b (1.18c) 9. a (1.19c) 10. b (1.18e) 
11. b (1.19a) 12. b (1.19b) 13. b (1.19c) 14. a (1.18b) 
15. b (1.19c)
Chapter 6
1. (2) not, rule, (2.03) 2. (2) sure, Mr. Sanchez, (2.02) 3. (2) 
reliable, conscientious, (2.01) 4. (0) 5. (1) fact, (2.03) 6. (3) 
Memphis, Tennessee, Des Moines, (2.04c) 7. (1) meantime, 
(2.03) 8. (2) February 4, 2008, (2.04a) 9. (2) Mr. Loh, Mrs. 
Adams, (2.01) 10. (4) Ms. Leslie Holmes, 3430 Larkspur Lane, 
San Diego, CA 92110, (2.04b) 11. (2) feels, needless to say, 
(2.03) 12. (2) supplies, inventories, (2.01) 13. (1) business, (2.02) 
14. (2) feels, however, (2.03) 15. (0)
Chapter 7
1. (1) culture, (2.06a) 2. (1) world, (2.05) 3. 0 (2.05) 4. (2) 
Tolstaya, 2007, (2.06c) 5. (1) imaginative, (2.08) 6. (0) (2.06c) 
7. (2) Manning, Generation, (2.09) 8. (1) year, (2.07) 9. (1) lan-
guage, (2.06a) 10. (1) successful, (2.07) 11. (2) automation, cut-
ting, (2.01) 12. (3) hired, Monday, June 2, (2.06a, 2.04a) 13. (1) 
Sunnyvale, (2.06c) 14. (3) telephone, Thursday, March 4, (2.06a, 
2.04a) 15. (1) clasp, (2.05)
Chapter 8
1. (2) gains,” Franklin, (2.14a) 2. (3) Krahnke, PhD, Kostiz, 
(2.10) 3. (1) site, (2.14b) 4. (0) (2.15) 5. (1) monitor, (2.12) 
6. (3) know, work, travel, (2.06a, 2.01) 7. (2) think, however, 
(2.03) 8. (2) position, Robinson, (2.07, 2.06c) 9. (3) considered, 
Vegas, Scottsdale, (2.03, 2.01) 10. (2) closely, Friday, (2.06a, 
2.11) 11. (2) years, individuals, (2.07, 2.09) 12. (2) Rubey, 
week, (2.06c, 2.15) 13. (0) (2.06c) 14. (4) weapons, report, 
companies, more robots, (2.06c, 2.01) 15. (2) fact, unprotected, 
(2.03, 2.08) 
Chapter 9
1. (3) informational; reports, hand, (2.03, 2.16b) 2. (2) delayed; 
however, (2.16a) 3. (3) months: June, July, (2.01, 2.17a) 4. (1) 
are [delete colon] (2.17b) 5. (1) handbook, (2.06a, 2.16b) 6. (3) 
credit; resort, however, (2.03, 2.16b) 7. (3) credit: commercial, 
paper, (2.01, 2.17a) 8. (9) businesspeople: Lynne Krause, 
financial manager, American International Investments; Patrick 
Coughlin, comptroller, NationsBank; and Shannon Daly, legal 
counsel, (2.16d, 2.17) 9. (1) site, (2.05) 10. (5) charges; for 
example, average daily balance, adjusted balance, two-cycle aver-
age daily balance, (2.16e, 2.01) 11. (3) rating, loan; however, 
(2.06c, 2.16a) 12. (2) Union Bank, to [delete colon] (2.06a, 
2.17b) 13. (2) high; therefore, (2.16a) 14. (2) 18 percent, pro-
hibitive, (2.06a, 2.16c) 15. (1) high; (2.16b)
Chapter 10
1. Hanley’s (2.20) 2. weeks’ (2.20b) 3. year’s (2.20b) 
4. Peterson’s (2.21) 5. employees’ (2.20b) 6. witness’s (2.20b) 
7. Robin’s (2.22) 8. money’s (2.20a) 9. C (2.20a) 10. month’s 
(2.20a) 11. boss’s (2.20b) 12. secretary’s (2.20a) 13. C (2.20a) 
14. company’s (2.20a) 15. businesses’ (2.20b) 
Chapter 11
1. (2) four key areas—education, experience, hard skills, and soft 
skills— (2.26a) 2. (3) please, Eddie, five o’clock. (2.02, 2.23a) 
3. (2) (see Figure 5.1) (2.27) 4. (3) “Web site” two, (2.06a, 2.28c) 
5. (3) Mars—these U.S. (2.23b, 2.26c) 6. (2) said, “Why like?” 
(2.28f) 7. (4) The Wall Street Journal “Oracle’s Study”? (2.28e, 
2.28f) 8. (2) states—California Oregon—are- (2.26a) 9. (5) Ms. 
Alice Theodor, Mr. Ron P. Gill, and Dr. Wei Li Chin? (2.23b, 
2.24) 10. (3) “The Meeting” The Etiquette Advantage in Business 
(2.28e) 11. (2) task”; however, (2.16a, 2.28f) 12. (2) “gross.” 
(2.28c) 13. (3) 9 a.m.? (2.23b, 2.24) 14. (3) Wow! techniques, 
you? (2.24, 2.25) 15. (3) speculator “one changes.” (2.28d) 
Chapter 12 
1. (7) Suzuki branch Suite Yorba Linda Fire Department (3.01, 
3.02, 3.07) 2. (6) Europe dollar; French accounting director 
Hotels (3.01, 3.02, 3.04, 3.06d) 3. (3) chauffeur limo service 
(3.01) 4. (5) German history, geography, and political sci-
ence (3.05) 5. (4) Harry Potter Endless Cash (3.12) 6. (4) Dell 
Inspiron notebook computer (3.11) 7. (4) federal government 
state county (3.10) 8. (4) United States We foreign (3.01, 3.06c, 
3.13) 9. (8) comptroller president board directors Securities 
Exchange Commission company (3.01, 3.04, 3.06e) 10. (5) father 
Death Valley moon stars (3.03, 3.06g, 3.14) 11. (7) market-
ing director manager ad campaign wireless phone (3.01, 3.06d, 
3.06e, 3.09, 3.11) 12. (7) summer faculty advisor Japan, Korea, 
and China sponsors (3.01, 3.06a, 3.16) 13. (4) Park island River 
Bridge (3.01, 3.03) 14. (3) Accounting Department master’s 
(3.05, 3.07, 3.09) 15. (5) Figure Chapter Census Bureau English 
(3.02, 3.04, 3.07) 
Key to Grammar/Mechanics Checkups

K-2 
Key to Grammar/Mechanics Checkups
Chapter 13 
1. b (4.01a) 2. a (4.05b) 3. a (4.01a) 4. b (4.03) 5. b (4.02) 6. a 
(4.03) 7. b (4.04) 8. b (4.07) 9. b (4.08) 10. b (4.10) 11. b (4.02) 
12. b (4.08) 13. b (4.12) 14. a (4.06) 15. a (4.06) 
Chapter 14 
1. b (2.16a) 2. c (2.05) 3. b (2.06) 4. a (2.16a) 5. c (2.15)  
6. b (2.16b) 7. b (2.17a) 8. a (2.20) 9. c (2.16d)  
10. b (2.04a) 

 
N-1
Notes
Chapter 1
1 Kinsman, M. (2004, February 1). Are poor writing skills hold-
ing back your career? California Job Journal. Retrieved 
January 22, 2008, from http://www.jobjournal.com/article_
full_text.asp?artid=1039. See also Smerd, J. (2007, December 
10). New workers sorely lacking literacy skills. Workforce 
Management, 6; Stevens, B. (2005, March). What commu-
nication skills do employers want? Silicon Valley recruiters 
respond. Journal of Employment Counseling, 42, 1; Gray, F., 
Emerson, L., & MacKay, B. (2005). Meeting the demands 
of the workplace: Science students and written skills. Journal 
of Science Education and Industry, 14, 425–435; Tucker, 
M. L., & McCarthy, A. M. (2001, Summer). Presentation 
self-efficacy: Increasing communication skills through service-
learning. Journal of Managerial Issues, 227–244; Cohen, A. 
(1999). The right stuff. Sales and Marketing Management, 
151; and Messmer, M. (1999, August). Skills for a new mil-
lennium. Strategic Finance, 10–12.
2 Moody, J., Stewart, B., & Bolt-Lee, C. (2002, March). 
Showcasing the skilled business graduate: Expanding the tool 
kit. Business Communication Quarterly, 65(1), 23.
3 Vance, E. (2007, February 2). College graduates lack key skills, 
report says. The Chronicle of Higher Education, p. A30.
4 Robinson, T. M. (2008, January 26). Quoted in Same office, 
different planets. The New York Times, p. B5.
5 Messmer, M. (2001, January). Enhancing your writing skills. 
Strategic Finance, 8. See also Staples, B. (2005, May 15). 
The fine art of getting it down on paper, fast. The New York 
Times, p. WK13(L).
6 The National Commission on Writing. [press release] (2004, 
September 14). Writing skills necessary for employment, 
says big business. Retrieved January 22, 2008, from http://
www.writingcommission.org/pr/writing_for_employ.html
7 Survey shows workers should write better. (2004, September 
14). Associated Press. Retrieved May 18, 2008, from MSNBC 
at http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6000685
8 The National Commission on Writing. [press release] (2004, 
September 14). Writing skills necessary for employment, 
says big business. Retrieved January 22, 2008, from http://
www.writingcommission.org/pr/writing_for_employ.html
9 Laff, M. (2006, December). Wanted: CFOs with communica-
tions skills. T + D, 20. PDF file retrieved January 22, 2008, 
from Business Source Premier database.
10 Stranger. J. (2007, July). How to make yourself offshore-proof. 
Certification Magazine, 9(7), 34–40. Retrieved January 22, 
2008, from Business Source Premier database.
11 Marsan, C. D. (2007, December 31). Job skills that matter: 
Where you can leave a mark. Network World, 24(50), 38–40. 
Retrieved January 23, 2008, from Business Source Premier 
database.
12 Professional demeanor and personal management. (2004, 
January). Keying In, National Business Education Association 
Newsletter, 1.
13 Daniels, C. (2004, June 28). 50 best companies for minorities. 
Fortune, 136.
14 Burgoon, J., Coker, D., & Coker, R. (1986). Communicative 
explanations. Human Communication Research, 12, 463–494.
15 Birdwhistell, R. (1970). Kinesics and context. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
16 Nolen W. E. (1995, April). Reading people. Internal Auditor, 
48–51.
17 Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, pp. 107–122.
18 Wilkie, H. (2003, Fall). Professional presence. The Canadian 
Manager, 28(3), 14–19. Retrieved January 28, 2008, from 
Business Source Premier database.
19 Hall, E. T., & Hall, M. R. (1990). Understanding cultural dif-
ferences. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, pp. 183–184.
20 Chaney, L. H., & Martin, J. S. (2000). Intercultural business 
communication (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, p. 83.
21 Beamer, L., & Varner, I. (2008). Intercultural communication 
in the global workplace. Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin, p. 129.
22 Sheer, V. C., & Chen, L. (2003, January). Successful Sino-
Western business negotiation: Participants’ accounts of 
national and professional cultures. The Journal of Business 
Communication, 40(1), 62; see also Luk, L., Patel, M., & 
White, K. (1990, December). Personal attributes of American 
and Chinese business associates. The Bulletin of the 
Association for Business Communication, 67.
23 Gallois, C., & Callan, V. (1997). Communication and culture. 
New York: Wiley, p. 24.
24 Jarvis, S. S. (1990, June). Preparing employees to work south 
of the border. Personnel, 763.
25 Gallois, C., & Callan, V. (1997). Communication and culture. 
New York: Wiley, p. 29.
26 Copeland, L., & Griggs, L. (1985). Going international. 
New York: Penguin, p. 94. See also Beamer, L. & Varner, I. 
(2008). Intercultural communication in the global workplace. 
Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin, p. 340.
27 Copeland, L., & Griggs, L. (1985). Going international. New 
York: Penguin, p. 12.
28 Flannery, R. (2005, May 10). China is a big prize. Forbes, 
173(10), 163.
29 Martin, J. S., & Chaney, L. H. (2006). Global business etiquette. 
Westport, CT: Praeger, p. 36.
30 Based on 2000 U.S. Census figures, as reported by Little, J. S., 
& Triest, R. K. (2001). Proceedings from the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston Conference Series. The impact of demo-
graphic change on U.S. labor markets. Seismic shifts: The 
economic impact of demographic change. Retrieved January 
29, 2008, from http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/conf/conf46/
conf46a.pdf
31 Neff, J. (1998, February 16). Diversity. Advertising Age, S1.
32 Terhune, C. (2005, April 19). Pepsi, vowing diversity isn’t just 
image polish, seeks inclusive culture. The Wall Street Journal, 
p. B4.
33 Schwartz, J., & Wald, M. L. (2003, March 9). Smart people 
working collectively can be dumber than the sum of their 

N-2 
Notes
brains. Appeared originally in The New York Times. 
Retrieved January 28, 2008, from http://www.mindfully.org/
Reform/2003/Smart-People-Dumber9mar03.htm
34 Simons, G., & Dunham, D. (1995, December). Making inclu-
sion happen. Managing Diversity. Retrieved January 28, 
2008, from http://www.jalmc.org/mk-incl.htm
35 Kerrey, B. (2004). Quoted in National Commission on Writing: 
Writing skills necessary for employment, says big business. 
Retrieved January 28, 2008, from http://www.writingcommission 
.org/pr/writing_for_employ.html
36 What’s the universal hand sign for ‘I goofed’? (1996, December 
16). Santa Barbara News-Press, p. D2.
37 Makower, J. (1995, Winter). Managing diversity in the work-
place. Business & Society Review, 92, 48–54. Retrieved 
February 2, 2008, from Business Source Premier database.
Chapter 2
1 Arnold, V. D. (1986, August). Benjamin Franklin on writing 
well. Personnel Journal, 17.
2 Bacon, M. (1988, April). Quoted in Business writing: One-on-one 
speaks best to the masses. Training, 95. See also Danziger, E. 
(1998, February). Communicate up. Journal of Accountancy, 67.
3 Pomerenke, P. J. (1999). A short introduction to the plain 
English movement. Issues in Writing, 10(1), 30. See also 
Letunic, N. (2007, October). Beyond plain English: Ten best 
practices for creating citizen-friendly planning documents.  
Planning, 73(9), 4. Retrieved February 9, 2008, from 
InfoTrac College Edition database.
4 Center for Plain Language home page. Retrieved February 10, 
2008, from http://www.centerforplainlanguage.org
5 Pickens, J. E. (1985, August). Communication: Terms of equal-
ity: A guide to bias-free language. Personnel Journal, 5.
Chapter 3
1 National Commission on Writing. (2004, September 14). Writing 
skills necessary for employment, says big business. Retrieved 
February 13, 2008, from http://www.writingcommission.org/
pr/writing_for_employ.html
2 Adapted from Conaway, R. N., & Fernandez, T. L. (2000, 
March). Ethical preferences among business leaders: 
Implications for business schools. Business Communication 
Quarterly, 23–38.
Chapter 4
1 Cook, C. K. (1985) Line by line. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,  
p. 17.
2 Lague, L., People magazine editor (personal communication 
with Mary Ellen Guffey, February 5, 1992).
3 Moore, R. (2007, July). Beyond spell check. Officeproletter.com, 
p. 6.
Chapter 5
1 Sandberg, J. (2006, September 26). Employees forsake dreaded 
email for the beloved phone. The Wall Street Journal, p. B1.
2 More clicks than conversations: Shift to e-mail in business 
makes crafting meaningful messages more important. (2007, 
December 12). PR Newswire. Retrieved March 30, 2008, 
from InfoTrac College Edition database.
3 Maney, K. (2003, July 24). How the big names tame e-mail. 
USA Today, p. 2A.
4 Hogan, R. C. (2006, February 16). Cure for an epidemic of bad 
e-mail—explicit business writing. PR Newswire. Retrieved 
March 30, 2008, from InfoTrac College Edition database.
5 Brown, P. B. (2008, January 26). Same office, different planets. 
The New York Times, p. B5.
6 Improving workplace safety. (2007, June). Officepro Newsletter, 
p. 6.
7 DeLisser, E. (1999, September 27). One-click commerce: What 
people do now to goof off at work. The Wall Street Journal. 
Retrieved April 11, 2008, from http://www.kenmaier.com/
wsj19990927.htm
8 Ibid.
9 The 2007 electronic monitoring and surveillance survey.  
(2008, February 29). Retrieved April 10, 2008, from http://
www.gpsdaily
Chapter 6
1 Fallows, J. (2005, June 12). Enough keyword searches. Just 
answer my question. The New York Times, p. BU3.
2 Mascolini, M. (1994, June). Another look at teaching the 
external negative message. The Bulletin of the Association of 
Business Communication, 46.
3 Emily Post Institute. (2008). Conveying sympathy Q & A. 
Retrieved May 5, 2008, from 1-800-flowers.com 
4 Caddell, M. H. (2003, November/December). Is letter writing 
dead? OfficePro, p. 22.
5 Fallows, J. (2005, June 12). Enough keyword searches. Just 
answer my question. The New York Times, p. BU3.
Chapter 7
1 American Management Association. 2004 survey on workplace 
e-mail and IM reveals unmanaged risks. (2004). Retrieved 
May 9, 2008, from http://www.amanet.org/press/amanews/
im_survey.htm
2 McCord, E. A. (1991, April). The business writer, the law, 
and routine business communication: A legal and rhetorical 
analysis. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 
183.
3 Ibid.
4 Shuit, D. P. (2003, September). Do it right or risk getting 
burned. Workforce Management, 80.
5 Brodkin, J. (2007, March 19). Corporate apologies don’t mean 
much. Networkworld, 24(11), 8. PDF file retrieved May 9, 
2008, from Business Source Premier database.
6 Schweitzer, M. E. (2006, December). Wise negotiators know 
when to say “I’m sorry.” Negotiation, 4. PDF file retrieved 
June 6, 2007, from Business Source Premier database.
7 Brodkin, J. (2007, March 19). Rating apologies. Networkworld, 
24(11), 14. PDF file retrieved June 6, 2007, from Business 
Source Premier database.
8 Neeleman, D. (2007). An apology from David Neeleman. 
Retrieved June 10, 2007, from http://www.jetblue.com/about/
ourcompany/apology/index.html
9 Letters to Lands’ End. (1991, February). 1991 Lands’ End cata-
log. Dodgeville, WI: Lands’ End, 100.
10 Mowatt, J. (2002, February). Breaking bad news to customers.  
Agency Sales, 30; and Dorn, E. M. (1999, March). Case 
method instruction in the business writing classroom. Business 
Communication Quarterly, 62(1), 51–52.
11 Forbes, M. (1999). How to write a business letter. In K. Harty 
(Ed.), Strategies for business and technical writing. Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon, p. 108.
12 Browning, M. (2003, November 24). Work dilemma: 
Delivering bad news a good way. Government Computer 
News, p. 41; and Mowatt, J. (2002, February). Breaking bad 
news to customers. Agency Sales, 30.

Notes 
N-3
13 Engels, J. (2007, July). Delivering difficult messages. Journal of 
Accountancy, 204(1), 50–52. Retrieved May 11, 2008, from 
Business Source Premier database. See also Lewis, B. (1999, 
September 13). To be an effective leader, you need to perfect 
the art of delivering bad news. InfoWorld, 124. Retrieved 
May 11, 2008, from http://www.infoworld.com/columnists/
archive/survival_guide_bob.html
14 O’Neal, S. (2003, November). Quoted in Need to deliver bad 
news? How & why to tell it like it is. HR Focus, 3.
15 Granberry, M. (1992, November 14). Lingerie chain fined 
$100,000 for gift certificates. Los Angeles Times, p. D3.
16 Based on Lee, L. (2007, June 11). A smoothie you can chew 
on. BusinessWeek, 64.
17 Based on Sloan, G. (1996, November). Under 21? Carnival says 
cruise is off. USA Today; Sieder, J. (1996, October 16). Full 
steam ahead: Carnival Cruise Line makes boatloads of money 
by selling fun. U.S. News & World Report, 72; and Fun ship 
fleet. Retrieved July 2, 2005, from http://www.carnival.com/
CMS/Ships/FunShips.aspx
18 Based on Burbank, L. (2007, June 8). Personal items can be 
swept away between flights. USA Today, p. 3D.
19 Sorkin, A. (1999, November 11). J. Crew web goof results in 
discount. The New York Times, p. D3.
20 Based on Harari, O. (1999, July-August). The power of com-
plaints. Management Review, 31.
21 Based on SUV Surprise. (2004, June 15). The Wall Street 
Journal, p. W7.
Chapter 8
1 How to ask for—and get—what you want! (1990, February 1).  
Supervision, p. 11. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from http:// 
www.allbusiness.com/human-resources/workforce-management/ 
117804–1.html
2 Rieck, D. (1998, June). Great letters and why they work. 
Direct Marketing, pp. 20–24. See also Graham, J. R. (2002, 
January). Improving direct mail. Agency Sales, pp. 47–50; and 
Weitzer, S. (2004, April 19). The secret’s out: Private sales 
spur big returns. Twice: This Week in Consumer Electronics, 
p. 18. Retrieved March 1, 2008, from Academic Search 
Premier (EBSCO).
3 Nicastro, E. W. (2006, May 12). Five deadly sales letter mis-
takes. SalesVantage.com. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from 
http://www.salesvantage.com/article/view.php?w=934
4 Chambers, D. (1998). The agile manager’s guide to writing to 
get action. Bristol, VT: Velocity Press, p. 86; Kennedy, D. S.  
(2006). The ultimate sales letter: Attract new customers. 
Avon, MA: Adams Media.
5 McLaughlin, K. (1990, October). Words of wisdom. 
Entrepreneur, p. 101; and Lowenstein, M. (2007, September 
24). Make both an emotional and rational appeal to your  
customers: Inside-out and outside-in commitment and advo-
cacy. CustomerThink.net. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from 
http://www.customerthink.net/article/make_emotional_ 
rational_appeal_customers
6 To learn more about this tool, visit http://www.hp.com/phinfo/
blogs/
7 PR Week and Burson Marsteller study cited in Rubel, S. (2005, 
November 7). Study: 47% of CEOs say blogs useful for PR. 
Micro Persuasion Blog. Retrieved March 1, 2008, from http://
www.micropersuasion.com/2005/11/study_47_of_ceo.html
8 Based on Asbrand, D. (2007, August 30). Designing a new  
way to connect. Microsoft Business & Industry. Retrieved 
March 1, 2008, from http://www.microsoft.com/business/ 
peopleready/business/operations/insight/portals.mspx
9 Pilgrim, M. (2002, December 18). What is RSS. O’Reilly XML.
com. Retrieved March 1, 2008, from http://www.xml.com/
pub/a/2002/12/18/dive-into-xml.html
10 Based on Heffernan, V. (2005, June 17). For the age of do-it- 
yourself finance, she wrote the book(s) and the programs. The 
New York Times, p. E30. Retrieved March 1, 2008, from 
LexisNexis.
11 Grant, K. B. (2008, February 29). Seven places to retire during 
an economic downturn. SmartMoney.com. Retrieved March 
24, 2008, from http://finance.yahoo.com
12 Rubel, S. (2005, November 7). PR Week and Burson Marsteller 
study cited in Study: 47% of CEOs say blogs useful for PR. 
Micro Persuasion Blog. Retrieved March 1, 2008, from http://
www.micropersuasion.com/2005/11/study_47_of_ceo.html
13 Federal Trade Commission. (2002, April 18). FTC warns 
Internet marketers about making misleading claims about 
the benefits of gas-saving and other energy-related devices. 
Retrieved March 24, 2008, from http://www.ftc.gov
Chapter 9
1 Takeuchi Cullen, L. (2007, April 26). Employee diversity  
training doesn’t work. Time.com. Retrieved May 29, 2008, 
from http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171, 
1615183,00.html
Chapter 10
1 Holtz, H. (1998). Proven proposal strategies to win more 
business. Chicago: Upstart Publishing Company/Dearborn 
Publishing Group, pp. 104–107.
2 Based on Grinyer, M., Raytheon proposal consultant (personal 
communication with Mary Ellen Guffey, July 23, 2007).
3 From an online RTF by OMRI company: Basor, B. (June 6, 
2008). OMNI Website RFP. The RFP Database. Retrieved 
June 8, 2008, from http://www.rfpdb.com/view/document/
id/4415
4 Netcraft Ltd., November 2006 Web Server Survey. 
Retrieved June 6, 2008, from http://news.netcraft.com/
archives/2006/11/01/november_2006_web_server_survey.html 
and Killmer, K. A., & Koppel, N. B. (2002, August). So much 
information, so little time: Evaluating Web resources with 
search engines. THE Journal. Retrieved June 6, 2008, from 
http://www.thejournal.com/articles/16051
5 Brooks Suzukamo, L. (2002, July 3). Search engines become 
popular for fact-finding, game playing. Knight-Ridder/Tribune 
News Service, p. K6110
6 Integrated Web services: Technologies and definitions. (2008). 
Cornell University. Retrieved June 6, 2008, from http:// 
iws.cit.cornell.edu/iws2/technology/techinfo.cfm
7 Bulkeley, W. M. (2005, June 23). Marketers scan blogs for 
brand insights. The Wall Street Journal, p. B1. Retrieved  
June 6, 2008, from http://online.wsj.com/public/us
8 Pimentel, B. (2001, June 13). Writing the codes on blogs: 
Companies figure out what’s OK, what’s not in online realm. 
San Francisco Chronicle, p. E1. Retrieved June 6, 2008, from 
http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2005/06/13/
BLOG.TMP
9 Beutler, W. (2007, April 10). Yes, but how many blogs are 
there really? Blog, P. I. Retrieved June 6, 2008, from http://
www.blogpi.net/yes-but-how-many-blogs-are-there-really 
10 Baker, S., & Green, H. (2008, May 22). Beyond blogs: What 
business needs to know. BusinessWeek Online. Retrieved  
June 6, 2008, from http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/ 
content/08_22/b4086044617865.htm?chan=search
11 Ibid.

N-4 
Notes
12 Ibid.
13 Baltimore Sun columnist quits amid plagiarism charges. (2006, 
January 4). Associated Press/FoxNews.com. Retrieved June 6, 
2008, from http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,180569,00 
.html; Large, J. (2004, March 29). Jayson Blair and Jack 
Kelley are journalism’s unbelievable problem. The Seattle 
Times. Retrieved June 6, 2008, from http://seattletimes.
nwsource.com/html/living/2001889442_jdl28.html; and 
Snyder, G. (2004, January 19). Journalists devour their own 
in eager scrutiny. Variety, p. 3.
14 Writing Tutorial Services, Indiana University, Plagiarism:  
What it is and how to recognize and avoid it. Retrieved  
June 6, 2008, from http://www.indiana.edu/~wts/pamphlets/
plagiarism.shtml; Learning Center. (2008). iParadigms, LLC. 
Retrieved June 7, 2008, from http://www.plagiarism.org
15 Brady, D. (2006, December 4). *!#?@ the e-mail. Can we talk? 
BusinessWeek, 109.
16 Based on Sterkel, K. S. (1988). Integrating intercultural com-
munication and report writing in the communication class. 
The Bulletin of the Association for Business Communication, 
pp. 14–16.
17 Activity is based on Skidmore, S. (2008, June 10). Some retail-
ers give vinyl records a spin. The Los Angeles Times, p. C6.
18 Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2007, March 26). 
BusinessWeek Online. Retrieved June 10, 2008, from 
http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/mar2007/
id20070326_237620.htm
Chapter 11
1 Buhler, P. M. (2003, April). Workplace civility: Has it fallen 
by the wayside? SuperVision, p. 20. Retrieved June 24, 2008, 
from ProQuest database.
2 Wikipedia: Civility. (2008, June 18). Wikipedia. Retrieved June 
20, 2008, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:CIV
3 Johnson, D. (1988–2006). Dine like a diplomat. Seminar Script. 
The Protocol School of Washington.
4 Albrecht, K. (2005). Social intelligence: The new science of 
 success. San Francisco: Pfeiffer, p. 3.
5 Chismar, D. (2001). Vice and virtue in everyday (business) life. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 29, 169–176.
6 Hughes, T. (2008). Being a professional. Wordconstructions.com. 
Retrieved June 16, 2008, from http://www.wordconstructions 
.com/articles/business/professional.html; Grove, C., & 
Hallowell, W. (2002). The seven balancing acts of professional 
behavior in the United States: A cultural values perspective. 
Grovewell.com. Retrieved July 18, 2008, from http://www 
.grovewell.com/pub-usa-professional.html
7 Brent, P. (2006, November). Soft skills speak volumes. CA 
Magazine, 139, 112. Retrieved June 16, 2008, from ProQuest 
database.
8 Laff, M. (2006, December). Wanted: CFOs with communica-
tions skills. ASTD, 60(12), 20. Retrieved June 16, 2008, from 
http://store.astd.org/product.asp?prodid=4282
9 Martin, C. (2007, March 6). The importance of face-to-face 
communication at work. CIO.com. Retrieved June 16, 2008, 
from http://www.cio.com/article/29898/The_Importance_ 
of_Face_to_Face_Communication_at_Work; Duke, S. (2001, 
Winter). E-Mail: Essential in media relations, but no replace-
ment for face-to-face communication. Public Relations 
Quarterly, p. 19
10 Brenner, R. (2007, October 17). Virtual conflict. Point 
Lookout, Chaco Canyon Consulting. Retrieved June 16, 2008, 
from http://www.chacocanyon.com/pointlookout/071017 
.shtml; Drolet, A. L., & Morris, M. W. (2000, January). 
Rapport in conflict resolution: Accounting for how face-to-
face contact fosters mutual cooperation in mixed-motive  
conflicts. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, p. 26.
11 Miculka, J. (1999). Speaking for success. Cincinnati: South-
Western, p. 19.
12 Motivational and Inspirational Corner. (2005, June 27). 
Retrieved June 16, 2008, from http://www.motivational-
 inspirational-corner.com/getquote.html?startrow=11& 
categoryid=207
13 Burge, J. (2002, June). Telephone safety protocol for today. 
The National Public Accountant. FindArticles.com. Retrieved 
June 17, 2008, from http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_
m4325/is_2002_June/ai_n25049376
14 Lanman, S. (2005, July 9). Mobile-phone users become a 
majority. San Francisco Chronicle, p. C1.
15 Sidener, J. (2008, January 27). Cell phones taking on many 
roles, transforming market, generation. SignOnSanDiego.com. 
Retrieved June 17, 2008, from http://www.signonsandiego 
.com/news/metro/20080127–9999–1n27phone.html
16 Hockenberry, J., Adaora, U., & Colgan, J. (2008, May 20).  
For many Americans, cell phones are supplanding the landline. 
Retrieved June 17, 2008, from http://www.thetakeaway.org/
archives/2008/05/20/7
17 Ennen, S. (2003, April). Red Baron soars with teamwork: New 
pizza products sate lifestyle needs. Food Processing, 64, p. 40. 
Retrieved June 17, 2008, from Factiva database.
18 Edmondson, G. (2006, October 16). BMW’s dream factory. 
BusinessWeek, p. 80. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from http://
www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_42/b4005072 
.htm
19 Brown, M. K., Huettner, B., & James-Tanny, C. (2007). 
Managing virtual teams: Getting the most of wikis, blogs, and 
other collaborative tools. Plano, TX: Wordware Publishing; 
Lipnack, J., & Stamps, J. (2000). Virtual teams: People work-
ing across boundaries with technology (2nd ed.). New York: 
Wiley, p. 18.
20 Kiger, P. J. (2006, September 25). Flexibility to the fullest: 
Throwing out the rules of work—Part 1 of 2. Workforce 
Management, 85(18), 1. See also Holland, K. (2006, 
December).When work time isn’t face time. The New York 
Times, p. BU3.
21 Cutler, G. (2007, January–February). Mike leads his first 
virtual team. Research-Technology Management, 50(1), 66. 
Retrieved June 17, 2008, from ABI/INFORM database.
22 Amason, A. C., Hochwarter, W. A., Thompson, K. R., & 
Harrison, A. W. (1995, Autumn). Conflict: An important 
dimension in successful management teams. Organizational 
Dynamics, 24(2), 1. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from EBSCO 
database; Romando, R. (2006, November 9). Advantages of 
corporate team building. Ezine Articles. Retrieved June 17,  
2008, from http://ezinearticles.com/?Advantages-of-Corporate-
Team-Building&id=352961
23 Ruffin, B. (2006, January). T.E.A.M. work: Technologists, 
educators, and media specialists collaborating. Library Media 
Connection, 24(4), 49. Retrieved June 20, 2008, from EBSCO 
database.
24 Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, K. (1994). The wisdom of teams. 
New York: HarperBusiness, p. 45.
25 Holstein, W. J. (2008, May 30). Getting the most from man-
agement teams. BusinessWeek. Retrieved June 21, 2008, from 
http://www.businessweek.com/managing/content/may2008/
ca20080530_775110.htm?chan=search 
26 Gale, S. F. (2006, July). Common ground. PM Network, p. 48. 
Retrieved June 17, 2008, from EBSCO database.
27 Bayot, J. (2000, November 8). Developers bet on theaters in 
glutted L.A. The Wall Street Journal, Eastern edition, p. C1.

Notes 
N-5
28 Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, K. (1994). The wisdom of teams. 
New York: HarperBusiness, p. 50.
29 Dull meeting? I’d rather see the dentist. (2004, October 19).  
Personnel Today, p. 1. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from 
LexisNexis database.
30 Maher, K. (2004, January 13). The jungle: Focus on recruit-
ment, pay and getting ahead. The Wall Street Journal,  
p. B6.
31 Schechtman, M. quoted in Lancaster, H. (1998, May 26). 
Learning some ways to make meetings less awful. The Wall 
Street Journal, p. B1; How to stand out at meetings. (n. d.) 
eHow.com. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from http://www.ehow 
.com/how_2096879_stand-out-meetings.html
32 ThinkExist.com. Retrieved June 16, 2008, from http://en. 
thinkexist.com/quotation/by_failing_to_prepare-you_are_ 
preparing_to_fail/199949.html
33 Bruening, J. C. (1996, July). There’s good news about meet-
ings. Managing Office Technology, pp. 24–25. Retrieved June 
17, 2008, from ProQuest database.
34 Marquis, C. (2003, July 13). Doing well and doing good. The 
New York Times, p. BU 2.
35 Imperato, G. (2007, December 19). You have to start meeting 
like this! FastCompany.com. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from 
http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/23/begeman.html 
36 Schabacker, K. (1991, June). A short, snappy guide to mean-
ingful meetings. Working Women, p. 73.
37 Hamilton, C., & Parker, C. (2001). Communicating for success 
(6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, pp. 311–312.
38 Marquis, C. (2003, July). Doing well and doing good. The New 
York Times, p. BU 2.
39 Gerke, S. Cited in The two sides of conflict. (2008). Team 
Building. Retrieved June 24, 2008, from http://www 
.teambuildingportal.com/articles/team-failure/good-bad- 
conflict.php
40 Dörnyei, Z., & Murphey, T. (2004). Group dynamics in the 
language classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, p. 142.
41 Steinway, T. E. as quoted by Gerke, S. (2008). Useful quotes: 
Conflict. Gerke Consulting & Development LLC. Retrieved 
June 21, 2008, from http://www.susangerke.com/
42 LeBaron, M., & Pillay, V. (2007). Conflict across cultures. 
Boston: Intercultural Press, p. 16.
43 Based on Thomas, K., & Killman, R. as quoted by Podmoroff, 
D. (2006, May 23). Be positive: Resolve conflict. Mind Tools. 
Retrieved June 22, 2008, from http://www.mindtools.com/
pages/Newsletters/23May06.htm#article2
44 Hamilton, E. A., Gordon, J. R., & Whelan-Berry, K. S. 
(2006). Understanding the work-life conflict of never- 
married women without children. Women in Management 
Review, 21(5), 397–398. Retrieved June 22, 2008, from 
ProQuest database.
Chapter 12
1 Hooey, B. (2005). Speaking for success! Speaking success. 
Retrieved June 24, 2008, from Toastmasters International 
Web site, http://members.shaw.ca/toasted/speaking_succes.htm
2 Barrington, L., Casner-Lotto, J., & Wright, M. (2008, May). 
Are they really ready to work? The Conference Board. 
Retrieved June 26, 2008, from http://www.conference-board.
org/pdf_free/BED-06-Workforce.pdf
3 Pincus, A. (2007, July 3). The fear factor, and the alpha boss. 
BusinessWeek. Retrieved June 24, 2008, from http://www 
.businessweek.com/careers/content/jul2007/ca2007073_
045947.htm?chan=search
4 Ginsberg, S. (2006). I’m such a moron—self-deprecating 
humor basics. Ezinearticles. Retrieved June 25, 2008, from 
http://ezinearticles.com/?Im-Such-a-Moron–Self-Deprecating-
Humor-Basics&id=385150
5 Wharton Applied Research Center. (1981). A study of the 
effects of the use of overhead transparencies on business meet-
ings, final report cited in Visual Being Blog Archive. (2005, 
July 14). The 1981 Wharton study. Retrieved June 26, 2008, 
from http://www.visualbeing.com
6 Pope, J. (2007, August 5). Business school requires PowerPoint. 
Oakland Tribune, p. 1. Retrieved July 1, 2008, from 
ProQuest database.
7 Nass, C. quoted in Simons, T. (2001, July). When was the 
last time PowerPoint made you sing? Presentations, 6. See 
also Tufte, E. R. (2006). The cognitive style of PowerPoint: 
Pitching out corrupts within. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
8 Booher, D. (2003). Speak with confidence: Powerful presenta-
tions that inform, inspire, and persuade. New York: McGraw-
Hill Professional, p. 126. See also http://www.indezine.com/ 
ideas/prescolors.html
9 Bates, S. (2005). Speak like a CEO: Secrets for command-
ing attention and getting results. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Professional, p. 113.
10 Sommerville, J. (n. d.). The seven deadly sins of PowerPoint 
Presentations. About.com: Entrepreneurs. Retrieved June 
26, 2008, from http://entrepreneurs.about.com/cs/marketing/
a/7sinsofppt.htm
11 Burrows, P., Grover, R., & Green, H. (2006, February 6). 
Steve Jobs’ magic kingdom. BusinessWeek, 62. Retrieved 
June 26, 2008, from http://www.businessweek.com; see also 
Gallo, C. (2006, April 6). How to wow ’em like Steve Jobs. 
BusinessWeek. Retrieved June 26, 2008, from http://www 
.businessweek.com
12 See http://www.tlccreative.com/images/tutorials/
PreShowChecklist.pdf
13 Ellwood, J. (2004, August 4). Less PowerPoint, more powerful 
points. The Times (London), p. 6.
14 Ozer, J. (2006, January 11). Ovation for PowerPoint. PC 
Magazine. Retrieved July 18, 2007, from http://www.pcmag.
com/article2/0,1759,1921436,00.asp; See more information at 
http://www.adobe.com/products/ovation/
15 Boeri, R. J. (2002, March). Fear of flying? Or the mail? Try the 
Web conferencing cure. Emedia Magazine, 49.
16 Booher, D. (2003) Speak with confidence. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, p. 14; and Booher, D. (1991). Executive’s port-
folio of model speeches for all occasions. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, p. 259.
17 Jackson, M. quoted in Garbage in, garbage out. (1992, 
December). Consumer Reports, 755.
Chapter 13
1 Ryan, L. (2007). Online job searching. BusinessWeek. Video 
interview retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://feedroom 
.businessweek.com/index.jsp?fr_story=5e1ec1bacf73ae689d
381f30e80dfea30cd52108; Wolgemuth, L. (2008, February 
25). Using the Web to search for a job. U.S. News & World 
Report. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://www.usnews.com/
articles/business/careers/2008/02/25/using-the-web-to-search-
for-a-job.html
2 Jansen, J. (n. d.) What’s keeping you from changing careers?  
CareerJournal.com. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://208.144 
.115.170/jobhunting/change/20030225-jansen.html
3 O’Connell, B. (2003). The career survival guide. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, pp. 11–12.

N-6 
Notes
4 Kimmit, R. M. (2007, January 23). Why job churn is good. 
Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://
www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/22/
AR2007012201089.html
5 Kharif, O. (2007, January 3). Online job sites battle for share. 
BusinessWeek. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http://www.
businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2007/tc20070103_
369308.htm
6 Korkki, P. (2007, July 1). So easy to apply, so hard to be 
noticed. The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from 
LexisNexis database.
7 Marquardt, K. (2008, February 21). 5 tips on finding a new 
job. U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved July 6, 2008, 
from http://www.usnews.com/articles/business/careers/ 
2008/02/21/5-tips-on-finding-a-new-job.html; Wolgemuth, L. 
(2008, February 25). Using the Web to search for a job. U.S. 
News & World Report. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://
www.usnews.com/articles/business/careers/2008/02/25/using-
the-web-to-search-for-a-job.html
8 Crispin, G., & Mehler, M. (2003, January). Impact of the 
Internet on source of hires—2002. CareerXroads.com. 
Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://www.careerxroads.com/
news/03sourceofhire.html
9 Ryan, L. (2007). Online job searching. BusinessWeek. Video 
interview retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://feedroom 
.businessweek.com/index.jsp?fr_story=5e1ec1bacf73ae689d38
1f30e80dfea30cd52108
10 Top job boards. (2006, November/December). Office Pro, 
66(8), 5. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from Business Source 
Premier (EBSCO) database.
11 Pont, J. (2005, November 7). Leading job boards address 
challenges of globalization. Workforce Management, 49. 
Retrieved July 7, 2008, from http://www.workforce.com/
archive/feature/24/21/06/index.php
12 Farquharson, L. (2003, September 15). Technology special 
report: The best way to find a job. The Wall Street Journal,  
p. R8. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http://www.taleo.com/
news/media/pdf/74En_20030916_WallStreetJournal.pdf
13 Ryan, L. (2007). Online job searching. BusinessWeek. Video 
interview retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://feedroom 
.businessweek.com/index.jsp?fr_story=5e1ec1bacf73ae689d38
1f30e80dfea30cd52108
14 Kharif, O. (2007, January 3). Online job sites battle for share. 
BusinessWeek. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http://www 
.businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2007/tc20070103_
369308.htm
15 McConnon, A. (2007, August 30). Social networking gradu-
ates and hits the job market. BusinessWeek. Retrieved July 8, 
2008, from http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/
aug2007/id20070830_886412.htm?chan=search
16 Ibid.
17 Cheeseman, J. quoted by Wolgemuth, L. (2008, February 
25). Using the Web to search for a job. U.S. News & World 
Report. Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://www.usnews.com/
articles/business/careers/2008/02/25/using-the-web-to-search-
for-a-job.html
18 Feldman, D. quoted by Marquardt, K. (2008, February 21). 
5 tips on finding a new job. U.S. News & World Report. 
Retrieved July 6, 2008, from http://www.usnews.com/articles/
business/careers/2008/02/21/5-tips-on-finding-a-new-job.html
19 Brown, D. J., Cober, R. T., Kane, K., Levy, P. E., & Shalhoop, 
J. (2006). Proactive personality and the successful job search: 
A field investigation with college graduates. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 91(3), 717–726. Retrieved July 8, 2008, 
from Business Source Premier (EBSCO) database.
20 Koeppel, D. (2006, December 31). Those low grades in  
college may haunt your job search. The New York Times, 
p. 1. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from Academic Search Premier 
(EBSCO) database.
21 Black, D. quoted by Brandon, E. (2007, January 31). Tips for 
getting that first job. U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 
July 8, 2008, from http://www.usnews.com/usnews/biztech/
articles/070131/31firstjob.htm
22 Korkki, P. (2007, July 1). So easy to apply, so hard to be 
noticed. The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from 
LexisNexis database.
23 The Creative Group. (2008, February 21). Substance over  
style: Survey shows off-the-wall job-hunting tactics can be 
risky. Press Release. Retrieved July 9, 2008, from http:// 
www.creativegroup.com/portal/site/tcg-us/template.PAGE/
menuitem.926b08198c67974b735e0c5c02f3dfa0/
24 Jones, C. (2007). What do recruiters want anyway? Yahoo 
HotJobs Exclusive. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http:// 
hotjobs.yahoo.com/jobseeker/tools/article_print.html?id= 
What_Do_Recruiters_Want_Anyway__20021114–1412.xml
25 Blackburn-Brockman, E., & Belanger, K. (2001, January). One 
page or two?: A national study of CPA recruiters’ preferences 
for résumé length. The Journal of Business Communication, 
29–57. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from Sage Journals Online.
26 Isaacs, K. (2005, July 27). How to decide on résumé length. 
Monster Career Advice. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http://
career-advice.monster.com/resume-writing-basics/How-to-
Decide-on-Resume-Length/home.aspx
27 Fisher, A. (2007, March 29). Does a resume have to be one 
page long? CNNMoney.com. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from 
http://money.cnn.com/2007/03/28/news/economy/resume 
.fortune/index.htm
28 Hansen, K. (n. d.). Should you use a career objective on your 
résumé? Quintessential Careers. Retrieved July 8, 2008, 
from http://www.quintcareers.co/resume_objectives.html; 
Domkowski, D., & Saunders, D. (2007). Career objective  
guide. (2007). Career Center, Florida State University. 
Retrieved July 8, 2008, from http://www.career.fsu.edu/ 
advising/guides.html
29 Korkki, P. (2007, July 1). So easy to apply, so hard to be 
noticed. The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from 
LexisNexis database.
30 Koeppel, D. (2006, December 31). Those low grades in college 
may haunt your job search. The New York Times, p. 1.  
Retrieved July 8, 2008, from Academic Search Premier 
(EBSCO) database.
31 Locke, A. (2008, June 18). Is your resume telling the wrong 
story? The Ladders.com. Retrieved July 9, 2008, from http://
www.theladders.com/career-advice/Is-Your-Resume-Telling-
the-Wrong-Story-
32 Washington, T. (n. d.) Effective resumes bring results to life. 
HM Price. Retrieved July 9, 2008, from http://www.hmprice 
.com/resume.html#3
33 The video resume technique. (2007). Retrieved July 9, 2008, 
from http://www.collegegrad.com/jobsearch/guerrilla-insider-
techniques/the-video-resume-technique/
34 Peter, T. A. (2007, March 26). Résumés get a technology 
makeover. Christian Science Monitor, p. 13. Retrieved July 8, 
2008, from LexisNexis database.
35 Kidwell Jr., R. E. (2004, May). “Small” lies, big trouble: The 
unfortunate consequences of résumé padding from Janet 
Cooke to George O’Leary. Journal of Business Ethics, 175.
36 Korver, C. D. (2008, May 19). The ethics of resume writing. 
BusinessWeek/Harvard Business Online. Retrieved July 9, 

Notes 
N-7
2008, from http://www.businessweek.com/print/managing/
content/may2008/ca20080527_367723.htm
37 Needleman, S. E. (2007, March 6). Why sneaky tactics may 
not help résumé. The Wall Street Journal, p. B8.
38 Ryan, L. (2007). For job-hunters: How to find a contact name 
inside a target company. Ezine Articles. Retrieved July 9, 2008, 
from http://ezinearticles.com/?For-Job-Hunters:-How-to-Find-a-
Contact-Name-Inside-a-Target-Company&id=101910
39 Korkki, P. (2007, July 1). So easy to apply, so hard to be 
noticed. The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from 
LexisNexis database.
40 Safani, B. (2007, October 24). Seven rules for networking  
success. The Ladders.com. Retrieved July 9, 2008, from 
http://www.theladders.com/career-advice/Networking
41 Dussert, B. quoted in Shuit, D. P. (2003, November). 
Monster’s competitors are nipping at its heels. Workforce 
Management. Retrieved July 9, 2008, from http://www 
.workforce.com/archive/feature/23/55/14/index.php?ht=
Chapter 14
1 Wilmott, N. (n. d.). Interviewing styles: Tips for interview 
approaches. About.com: Human Resources. Retrieved July 
10, 2008, from http://humanresources.about.com/cs/ 
selectionstaffing/a/interviews.htm
2 Ibid.
3 Needleman, S. E. (2008, February 12). Need a new situation? 
Check the Internet: Recruiters and job seekers find each other 
through Facebook, “fan” pages, videos. The Wall Street Journal, 
p. B6. Retrieved July 20, 2008, from ProQuest database.
4 Panel interview. (2007). Job-Employment-Guide.com. Retrieved 
July 11, 2008, from http://www.job-employment-guide.com/
panel-interview.html
5 Niznik, J. S. (2002). What’s a group interview? About.com: Tech 
Careers. Retrieved July 11, 2008, from http://jobsearchtech 
.about.com/od/interview/l/aa121602.htm
6 Dorio, M. (2000). The complete idiot’s guide to the perfect 
interview. Indianapolis: Alpha Books, pp. 217–218.
7 Domeyer, D. (2007, January/February). OfficePro, 5.
8 Maher, K. (2004, September 28). Blogs catch on as online 
tool for job seekers and recruiters. The Wall Street Journal 
(Eastern Edition), p. B10. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from 
ProQuest database.
9 Ryan, L. (2006, February 9). Job seekers: Prepare your stories.  
EzineArticles.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http:// 
ezinearticles.com/?Job-Seekers:-Prepare-Your-Stories&id= 
142327
10 Finder, A. (2006, June 11). For some, online persona under-
mines a résumé. The New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 
2008, from http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/11/us/11recruit 
.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=For%20some,%20online%20persona
%20undermines&st=cse&oref=slogin
11 Needleman, S. E. (2008, February 12). Need a new situation? 
Check the Internet: Recruiters and job seekers find each other 
through Facebook, “fan” pages, videos. The Wall Street Journal, 
p. B6. Retrieved July 20, 2008, from ProQuest database.
12 Situational interview. (2004–2008). Money-Zine.com. 
Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://www.money-zine.com/
Definitions/Career-Dictionary/Situational-Interview
13 Wright, D. (2004, August/September). Tell stories, get hired. 
OfficePro, 64(6), 32–33. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from 
Business Source Premier (EBSCO).
14 Illegal interview questions. (n. d.). FindLaw.com. Retrieved 
July 19, 2008, from http://www.employment.findlaw.com/
employment/employment-employee-hiring/employment- 
employee-hiring-interview-questions.html; Employment 
 discrimination. (n. d.). YourLawyer.com. Retrieved July 19, 
2008, from http://www.yourlawyer.com/topics/overview/
employment_discrimination
15 Doyle, A. (n. d.). Illegal interview questions. About.com. 
Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://jobsearchtech.about.com/
od/interview/l/aa022403.htm
16 Illegal interview questions. (2001, January 29). USA Today 
.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://www.usatoday 
.com/careers/resources/interviewillegal.htm; Illegal interview 
questions. (2007). FindLaw.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008,  
from http://employment.findlaw.com/employment/employment- 
employee-hiring/employment-employee-hiring-interview- 
questions.html
17 Illegal interview questions. (2001, January 29). USA Today 
.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://www.usatoday 
.com/careers/resources/interviewillegal.htm; Sack, S. M. 
(1998). Illegal interview questions: Special considerations 
for women. The Working Woman’s Legal Survival Guide. 
Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://employment.findlaw 
.com/articles/2446.html; Asking the right question. (n. d.). 
Lawyers.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://labor-
employment-law.lawyers.com/human-resources-law/Asking-
the-Right-Questions.html
18 Lublin, J. S. (2008, February 5). Notes to interviewers  
should go beyond a simple thank you. The Wall Street 
Journal, p. B1. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from ProQuest  
database.
19 Ibid.
20 Needleman, S. E. (2006, February 7). Be prepared when oppor-
tunity calls. The Wall Street Journal, p. B4.
21 Bazen, K. L. (n. d.). The art of the follow-up after job inter-
views. QuintCareers.com. Retrieved July 19, 2008, from 
http://www.quintcareers.com/job_interview_follow-up.html
22 Patterson, V. (2004, March 30). Earning the salary you want 
in today’s tough economy. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 
July 20, 2008, from ProQuest database.
23 About Karrass: The Karrass Story. (n. d.). Retrieved July 20, 
2008, from http://www.karrass.com/kar_eng/about.htm 
24 Boardman, J. (n. d.). Know what you’re worth BEFORE your 
salary negotiation. CBsalary.com. Retrieved July 20, 2008, 
from http://www.cbsalary.com; Dawson, R. (2006). Secrets  
of power salary negotiating. Franklin Lakes, NJ: Career Press, 
pp. 117–125. Hansen, R. S. (n. d.). Job offer too low? Use 
these key salary negotiation techniques to write a counter  
proposal letter. Quintessential Careers. Retrieved July 20, 
2008, from http://www.quintcareers.com/salary_counter_ 
proposal.html; Hansen, R. S. (n. d.). Salary negotiation do’s 
and don’ts. Quintessential Careers. Retrieved July 20, 2008, 
from http://www.quintcareers.com/salary-dos-donts.html; 
Ireland, S. (n. d.). Salary negotiation guide. Retrieved July 20, 
2008, from http://susanireland.com/salarywork.html; Powell, 
J. (n. d.). Salary negotiation: The art of the deal. Resume-
Resource. Retrieved July 20, 2008, from http://www.resume-
resource.com/article16.html

This page intentionally left blank 

 
ACK-1
Acknowledgments
Chapter 1
p. 4 Office Insider based on Hendricks, M. (2007, July 2). 
Entrepreneur, 35(7), 85–86. Retrieved January 22, 2008, 
from Business Source Premier database.
p. 6 Source to Figure 1.3, Chao, E. L. (2007, September 3). 
Knowledge fuels U.S. work force. Santa Barbara News­Press, 
p. A9.
p. 12 Office Insider based on Bucero, A. (2006, July). Listen 
and learn. PM Network. Retrieved February 1, 2008, from 
Business Source Premier database.
Chapter 2
p. 32 Office Insider based on Stevens, B. (2005, March). What 
communication skills do employees want? Silicon Valley 
recruiters respond. Journal of Employment Counseling, 42, 3. 
Retrieved January 24, 2008, from Business Source Premier 
database.
p. 34 Office Insider based on step up to the soft skills. (2004, 
January). Marilyn Mackes, National Association of Colleges 
and Employers, quoted in Keying In, Newsletter of the 
National Business Education Association, p. 1.
p. 41 Office Insider based on Blake, G. (2002, November 4). 
Insurers need to upgrade their employees’ writing skills. 
National Underwriter Life & Health­Financial Services 
Edition, 106 (44), 35. Retrieved February 8, 2008, from 
InfoTrac College Edition database.
p. 42 Office Insider based on La Corte, R. (2006, December 
11). Wash. state sees results from ‘plain talk’ initiative. USA 
Today, p. 18A.
p. 43 Figure 2.5 based on U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission. (1998, August). A plain English handbook. 
Retrieved February 4, 2008, from http://www.sec.gov/pdf/
handbook.pdf
Chapter 3
p. 53 Office Insider based on National Commission on Writing. 
(2004, September). Writing: A ticket to work . . . or a 
ticket out. Retrieved February 11, 2008, from http://www
.writingcommission.org/prod_downloads/writingcom/writing-
ticket-to-work.pdf
p. 56 Office Insider based on National Commission on 
Writing. (2003). The neglected “R”: The need for a writing 
revolution. Retrieved February 10, 2008, from http://www
.writingcommission.org/prod_downloads/writingcom/
neglectedr.pdf
Chapter 4
p. 76 Office Insider based on Powell, E. (2003, November/Decem-
ber). Ten tips for better business writing. Office Solutions, 
20(6), 36. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from ProQuest database.
p. 78 Office Insider based on Ilja van Roon, quoted in Sorry, no 
more excuses for bad business writing. (2006, May 23). PR 
Newswire. Retrieved March 30, 2008, from InfoTrac College 
Edition.
Chapter 5
p. 99 Workplace in Focus based on Hunter, G. (2008, January 
30). GM’s Lutz on hybrids, global warming and cars as art. 
D Magazine. Retrieved May 20, 2008, from http://frontburner
.dmagazine.com/2008/01/30/gms-lutz-on-hybrids-global-
warming-and-cars-as-art; Lutz, B. (2008, February 21). Talk 
about a crock. GM Fastlane blog. Retrieved May 20, 2008, 
from http://fastlane.gmblogs.com/archives/2008/02/talk_
about_a_cr.html
p. 100 Office Insider based on Domeyer, D. (2007, December 
12). Quoted in More clicks than conversations: Shift to e-mail 
in business makes crafting meaningful messages more impor-
tant. Retrieved April 10, 2008, from InfoTrac College Edition 
database.
p. 107 Office Insider based on Sandberg, J. (2006, September 
26). Employees forsake dreaded e-mail for the beloved phone. 
The Wall Street Journal, p. B1.
p. 109 Workplace in Focus based on Lashinsky, A. (2006, June 
1). Razr’s edge: How a team of engineers and designers defied 
Motorola’s own rules to create the cellphone that revived 
their company. Fortune. Retrieved May 13, 2008, from 
http://money.cnn.com/2006/05/31/magazines/fortune/razr_
greatteams_fortune/index.htm
p. 110 Office Insider based on Anderson, T. M. (2008, January 
26). Quoted in Same office, different planets. The New York 
Times, p. B5.
p. 114 Office Insider based on Bloch, M. (n.d.). Instant messag-
ing and live chat etiquette tips. Retrieved June 20, 2008, 
from http://www.tamingthebeast.net/articles6/messaging-
chat-etiquette.htm
Chapter 6
p. 134 Office Insider based on Caddell, M. H. (2003, November/
December). Is letter writing dead? OfficePro, 22–23.
p. 134 Workplace in Focus based on Department of the 
Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. (2008, March). Economic 
stimulus payment notice. Retrieved May 29, 2008, from 
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/economic_stimulus_payment_
notice.pdf
p. 141 Office Insider based on Kerrey, B. (2004, September 14). 
Writing skills necessary for employment, says big business. 
The National Commission on Writing. Retrieved April 27, 
2008, from http://www.writingcommission.org/pr/writing_
for_employ.html
p. 142 Workplace in Focus based on Goldman, D., & and 
Musante, K. (2008, April 12). American: Back to normal 
on Sunday. CNNMoney. Retrieved May 29, 2008, from 
http://money.cnn.com/2008/04/11/news/companies/airline_
woes/index.htm; Stoller, G. (2008, May 19). How satisfied 
are travelers with their services? USA Today. Retrieved May 
29, 2008, from http://www.usatoday.com/money/industries/
travel/2008-05-19-customer-satisfaction_N.htm
p. 144 Office Insider based on Ashton, R. (2008, April 11). 
To whom it may concern. Utility Week. Retrieved April 27, 
2008, from InfoTrac College Edition database.

ACK-2 
Acknowledgments
Chapter 7
p. 161 Office Insider based on Engels, J. (2007, July). Delivering 
difficult messages. Journal of Accountancy, 204(1), 50. 
Retrieved May 11, 2008, from Business Source Premier  
database.
p. 162 Workplace in Focus based on Bouton, D. (2008, January 
24). Letter from Societe General CEO Daniel Bouton. 
Retrieved June 10, 2008, from http://www.marketwatch.com; 
Report spreads blame at Societe Generale. (2008, May 23). 
The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 10, 2008, from http:// 
www.boston.com/business/articles/2008/05/23/report_spreads_
blame_at_societe_generale/
p. 168 Photo essay based on Demos, T. (2008, May 12). Bag 
Revolution. Fortune, p.18.
p. 175 Office Insider based on Mishory, J. (2004, June). Don’t 
shoot the messenger: How to deliver bad news and still keep 
customers satisfied. Sales & Marketing Management, 156(6), 
18. Retrieved May 8, 2008, from Business Source Premier 
database.
Chapter 8
p. 194 Office Insider based on [Ms. pg. 395] Mortensen, K. W. 
(2006, June 9). The ultra-prosperous study persuasion.  
EzineArticles. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from http://
ezinearticles.com/?The-Ultra-Prosperous—Study—
Persuasion&id=216435
p. 196 Office Insider based on Sandler, P. M. (2003, March 31). 
Cited in Power of persuasion. SourceWatch. Retrieved March 2, 
2008, from http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Power_
of_persuasion
p. 198 Office Insider based on how to create and structure a win-
ning complaint: Being positive and fair gets you more. (2008, 
January 4). The Travel Insider. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from 
http://www.thetravelinsider.info/info/howtocomplain2.htm
p. 201 Photo Essay based on Kim, V. (2008, January 27). 
Saving the world from paper tyranny. The Los Angeles 
Times, p. C2.
p. 205 Office Insider based on Stevenson, V. S. (2007, August 7).  
New VSS forecast released: Shift to alternative media strate-
gies will drive U.S. communications spending growth in 
2007–2011 period. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from http://
www.vss.com/news/index.asp?d_News_ID=166ad sales fore-
cast; Green, H. (2007, August 7). Blog, podcast, RSS online 
sales to be nearly half size of mobile sales. Blogspotting. 
BusinessWeek Online. Retrieved March 2, 2008, from  
www.businessweek.com
Chapter 9
p. 226 Office Insider based on The College Board: The National 
Commission on Writing. (2004, September). Writing: A ticket 
to work . . . or a ticket out. Retrieved April 6, 2008, from 
http://www.writingcommission.org/report.html
p. 233 Office Insider based on The College Board: The National 
Commission on Writing. (2004, September). Writing: A ticket 
to work . . . or a ticket out. Retrieved April 6, 2008, from 
http://www.writingcommission.org/report.html
Chapter 10
p. 255 Office Insider based on Piecewicz, M., proposal manager, 
Hewlett-Packard (personal communication with Mary Ellen 
Guffey, January 12, 1999).
p. 267 Office Insider based on Believe it or not . . . (2008). 
Learning Center. iParadigms. Retrieved June 7, 2008, from 
http://www.plagiarism.org
Chapter 11
p. 305 Office Insider based on Bosrock, R. M. (2005, October 
5). Business forum: Good manners bring good results. Star 
Tribune.com. Retrieved June 16, 2008, from http://www 
.startribune.com/146/v-print/story/70672.html
p. 306 Office Insider based on Chismar, D. (2001). Vice and  
virtue in everyday (business) life. Journal of Business Ethics, 
29, 169–176.
p. 310 Office Insider based on Johnson, D. (1988–2006). Dine 
like a diplomat. Seminar Script. The Protocol School of 
Washington.
p. 311 Office Insider based on Andrew Carnegie quoted in 
Johnson, D. (1988–2006). Dine like a diplomat. Seminar 
Script. The Protocol School of Washington.
p. 320 Office Insider based on Andrew Carnegie quoted in 
HeartQuotes: Quotes of the Heart. Retrieved June 17, 2008, 
from http://www.heartquotes.net/teamwork-quotes.html
p. 322 Office Insider based on Meeting Quotes. (2004). Manage­
ment by Meetings. Retrieved June 17, 2008, from http://www 
.managementbymeetings.com/links/quotes/quotes.htm
Chapter 12
p. 337 Office Insider based on Dlugan, A. (2008, April 10).  
10 ways your presentation skills generate career promotions.  
Six Minutes. Retrieved June 26, 2008, from http://sixminutes 
.dlugan.com/2008/04/10/career-promotions-presentation-skills
p. 339 Office Insider based on Booher, D. (2003). On speaking. 
Quotes by Dianna Booher. Booher Consultants. Retrieved June 
26, 2008, from http://www.booher.com/quotes.html#speaking
p. 348 Office Insider based on Paradi, D. (2004). PowerPoint 
sucks! No it doesn’t!! multimedia presentations. Think 
Outside The Slide. Retrieved July 1, 2008, from http://www 
.thinkoutsidetheslide.com/articles/powerpointnotsucks.htm
p. 359 Office Insider based on Booher, D. (2003). On speaking. 
Quotes by Dianna Booher. Booher Consultants. Retrieved 
June 26, 2008, from http://www.booher.com/quotes.
html#speaking
Chapter 13
p. 378 Office Insider based on Granovetter, M. quoted in Wells, 
S. J. (1998, March 12). Many jobs on Web. The New York 
Times, p. A12.
p. 395 Office Insider based on Cheesman, J. quoted in 
Wolgemuth, L. (2008, February 25). Using the Web to 
search for a job. U. S. News & World Report. Retrieved 
July 6, 2008, from http://www.usnews.com/articles/business/
careers/2008/02/25/using-the-web-to-search-for-a-job.html
p. 397 Office Insider based on Enelow, W. S. quoted in Korkki, P. 
(2007, July 1). So easy to apply, so hard to be noticed. The New 
York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2008, from LexisNexis database.
p. 404 Office Insider based on Patrick Beausoleil, Bouma 
Construction Company. (2008, March 3). E-mail message to 
Mary Ellen Guffey.
Chapter 14
p. 424 Office Insider based on Welch, J., & Welch, S. (2008, 
July 7). Hiring is hard work. BusinessWeek, 80.
p. 427 Office Insider based on Welch, J., & Welch, S. (2008, 
April 7). Getting to know your next CEO. BusinessWeek, 124.
p. 430 Office Insider based on Carol Roth quoted in Bachel, B. 
(2007, February/March). Fantastic follow-ups: Touching base 
after a good interview can give you an edge. Career World, p. 20. 
Retrieved July 19, 2008, from Academic Search Premier (EBSCO).

 
I-1
Index
Italic page numbers indicate 
illustrative information in figures
A
Abbreviations
avoid, 20
commas with, GM-26–GM-27
of state, territories, and provinces, 
A-10
ABI/Inform, 260
Abstract nouns, GM-6
Abusive language, 164
Academic courses and degrees, 
capitalization of, GM-39
Acceptance letters, 433–434
Acronyms, 20
Action item list for meeting minutes, 
240
Action request
close with, 137
end claim letter with specific, 138
in business letters, 135–137
in persuasive message, 194–196
in sales message, 203
Action verbs, 383
Action-specific verbs, 20
Active voice, 62, 63, GM-12
Adaptation, 163
of text and color selections to 
multimedia presentation, 349
to audience, 33, 38–44, 107
to task, 38–44
Address
commas with, GM-22–GM-23
commas with direct, GM-22
inside, A-3–A-5
mailing, A-9
number style of, GM-44
plain-paper return, A-7
return, A-8–A-9
Addressee, A-3
Adjectives, GM-16–GM-18
capitalization of proper, GM-38
commas with, GM-25
forms, GM-16
function of, GM-6
guidelines for use, GM-17–GM-18
Adjustment letters, 141–145, 143
Adverbs, GM-16–GM-18
conjunctive, 60, GM-29–GM-30
forms, GM-16
function of, GM-6
guidelines for use, GM-17–GM-18
Age
capitalizing on workforce 
diversity, 21–22
number style of, GM-45
Agenda of meeting, 322, 323
Agreement
guidelines for pronoun-
antecedent, GM-9–GM-10
guidelines for verb-subject, GM-
11–GM-12
of team on purpose and 
procedures, 320
AIDA pattern (attention, interest, 
desire, and action), 200
Ambiguous wording, avoid, 20
American Psychological Association 
(APA), 267, A-18–A-20
format, 288
in-text format, A-18
reference format, A-18–A-20
references, A-19
text page and references, A-18
Analogies, 343
Analysis, 163
of audience, 33, 34
of purpose 34
of task, 107
Analytical reports, 223, 225–226
Anticipation, 163
of audience, 33, 36–37, 107, 349
what employers want, 307–308
Apology
in adjustment letter, 144
in bad news, 166–167
Apostrophes, GM-32
Appearance
of business documents, 15
personal, 15
power of, 15
Appended questions, commas with, 
GM-27
Appendix, 288
Applicant-tracking software, 
390–391
Application follow-up letter, 432–433
Application form, 432
Appositives, commas with, GM-25
Articles, omit in Web search, 261
ASCII résumé, 393
Association Web sites, 377
Attachment, e-mail message, A-2
Attention
faking in listening, 11
writing sales and marketing 
messages, 200–201
Attention line of business letter, A-5
Audience
adapting to, 33, 38–44, 107
analysis and report organization, 
223
analyzing, 33, 34
anticipating, 33, 36–37, 107, 349
attention, 340
benefits of, 38
improving communication 
among diverse workplace, 
22
keeping engaged during 
slideshow, 354–355
profiling, 37
rapport, oral presentation 
building, 343–345
response determines pattern of 
organization, 57
types of, 338
understanding, 337
using PowerPoint effectively with, 
354
Authorization request, 258
Awards, honors, and activities on 
résumé, 384
B
Background, in report, 282–283
Bad news
announcing to employees, 179
delivering to customers, 172–177
delivering within organizations, 
177–179
delivering workplace, 178–179
follow-up message, 174
four-part indirect pattern for, 162
giving personally, 177–178
ideas for delivering sensitively, 
165
presenting reasons in, 167
primary and secondary goals in 
communicating, 162
strategies for delivering, 161–165
techniques for cushioning of, 169
techniques for delivering 
sensitively, 165–170
Balanced wording, 63
Bar chart, 271, 272–273, 352
Barriers to effective listening, 11
Bcc, (blind carbon copy) e-mail 
message, A-1
Beginning words, capitalization of, 
GM-41
Behavior
controlling dysfunctional, 326
positive and negative team, 318, 
319
professional, 305, 307
recognizing importance of ethical, 
304–308
understanding relationship 
between ethics and 
professional, 306
Best practices
for instant messaging, 114
for using e-mail smartly, safely, 
and professionally, 108–111
Bibliographic indexes, 260
Bibliography, 288
Blanket mailings, 205
Block style, A-8
and modified block letter styles, 
A-4
Blogs, 9, 36, 262
defined, 100
used for research, 418
using to convey company 
and product information, 
205–206
Body
in oral presentations, 340–342
of adjustment letter, 142–144
of business letter, A-5
of cover letter, 401–402
of direct claim, 137–138
of e-mail message or memo, 
101–102, 105
of report, 287–288
of request letter, 136
Boldface, 82–83
for emphasis, 61
Books provide historical in-depth 
data, 259
Boss, persuading, 196–198
Brackets, GM-36
Brainstorming, 55
Budget, 257
Buffett, Warren, 193
Bullets
in slides, 349–351, 351
lists for quick comprehension, 
83
6 x 6 rule, 349
Bureaucratic gobbledygook, 42
Business
conducting productive, 321–327
using cell phones for, 314–316
Business communicators, 
comparing high- and low-
context, 17
Business documents, appearance 
of, 15
Business e-mail messages, 3
Business etiquette, 304–308
Business letters, 99, A-2–A-11
confidential, 134
formality and sensitivity of, 134
parts of, A-3–A-7
permanent record of, 134
persuasive, 134–135
power of, 133–134

I-2 
Index
Business messages
primary purpose to inform or 
persuade, 35
secondary purpose to promote 
goodwill, 35
writing process for, 33–34
Business presentation
after, 360
during, 359
polishing delivery and following 
up, 356–360
preparation before, 357–358
Business proposals, understanding, 
253–254
Business reports, 262
Business titles, capitalization of, 
GM-39
Business writing, basics of, 32–33
Businesslike, professional e-mail 
message, 4
C
Campus career center, 375
Capabilities on résumé, 383–384
Caperton, Gaston, 3
Capitalization, 82, 83, GM-37– 
GM-41
for emphasis, 61
Career communication skills, 6
Career information, 375
Career objective on résumé, 381
Career path, choosing, 375
Career, importance of 
communication skills to, 2–3
CareerBuilder, 377
CareerJournal, 377
Careless language, 164
Carter, Stephen L., 306
Case
guidelines for selecting,  
GM-8–GM-9
of pronouns, GM-7–GM-8
sensitivity in Web search, 261
Cc, (carbon copy or courtesy copy) 
e-mail message, A-1
Celestial bodies, capitalization of, 
GM-41
Cell phones, 5, 36
practicing professional etiquette, 
313–317, 315
turn off for interview, 422
using for business, 314–316
Center for Plain Language, 42
Ceremony, important in some 
cultures, 18
Channel, 10
choosing communication, 36
selecting the best, 35
switching to faster, 36
Charts, using computer to produce, 
276
Chismar, Douglas, 306
Chronological order, 268–269
Chronological résumés, 379
with limited experience, 386
with limited related experience, 
388
with related experience, 387
with substantial experience, 389
Citation formats, 267
Civility, 304, 305
Claim letters, 137
direct, 139
Claim messages, composing, 
198–199
Claim request, 199
Claims
denying, 175, 176
open with clear statement, 137
refusing direct, 170–172
Clarity
commas with, GM-27
revising for, 78–80, 108
Clichés, 79–80
defined, 79
Clock time, number style of, GM-44
Closing
bad news messages, 169
e-mail message, 105, A-2
of business letter, A-5
of claim letter, 138
of cover letter, 402–403
pleasantly and personally, 141
show confidence and helpfulness 
in, 144–145
with a purpose, 102
with action request, 137
Coherence, 65, 65
Collaboration, teams ability in, 320
Collaborative technologies, 
communication and, 8–9
Collective nouns, GM-7
College Recruiter, 377
Colons, GM-30–GM-31
Commas, GM-22–GM-28
overuse of, GM-27–GM-28
Comma-splice sentences, defined, 
60
Commercial job boards, 376
Committee names, capitalization of, 
GM-40
Common nouns, GM-6
Communication
and collaborative technologies, 
8–9
channels, choosing, 36
different styles in high- and low-
text cultures, 18
defined, 7
how culture affects, 15–21
improving among diverse 
workplace audiences, 22
innovative technologies in, 7
instant message for brief, fast, 112
projecting professionalism in, 5
Communication process, 10
understanding, 7–11
Communication skills, 2–7
build career, 6
enhancing nonverbal, 12–15
importance of to career, 2–3
Communication techniques, 
effective teams use of, 320
Communication technologies, 
reshaping the world of work, 8
Company and product information, 
using blogs, wikis, and other 
new media to convey, 205–207
Company database for online 
résumé information, 398
Company intranets, 8
Company policy, bad news 
messages, 168
Company records, facts for reports 
from, 229
Comparative form of adjectives and 
adverbs, GM-16
Complaint messages, 198–199, 199
Complex documents, proofreading 
of, 86–87
Complex sentence, defined, 59
Compose first draft, 108
Compose messages, collecting 
information to, 53–55
Composition, 163
Compound sentence, defined, 59
Compound-complex sentence, 
defined, 59
Comprehension, numbering and 
bulleting lists for quick, 83
Compromise or alternative, 
suggestion of in bad news 
message, 169
Conciseness
in e-mail, 110
revising for, 76, 77–78, 108
Conclusion, 286, 288
of meeting, 326
placement of in direct and 
indirect strategies, 268
summarizing in oral presentation, 
342–343
Concrete nouns, GM-6
Condolences, express, 148
Conflict
dealing with, 325
teams ability to confront, 320
Confusing words, GM-47–GM-48
Conjunctions, GM-19–GM-20
coordinating, 60
function of, GM-6
guidelines for use, GM-19–GM-20
Conjunctive adverbs, 60, GM-29– 
GM-30
Consecutive numbers, number style 
of, GM-44
Constructive criticism on the job, 
offering, 312
Content
e-mail, 109–110
notes, A-15
organizing for impact, 338–343
Context, 16–17
Contractions, 20
Contrasting statements, commas 
with, GM-27
Conventional teams in workplace, 
318
Conversation, face-to-face, 36
Conversational but professional, 
40–41
Coordinating conjunction, 60
Copy notation, A-6
Corporate assets, focus on 
information and knowledge as, 7
Corporate Web sites, 377
Correction symbols, A-12–A-14
Correctness
e-mail, 109–110
proofread for, 108
Courteous language, 41
Cover letter
body of, 401–402
closing of, 402–403
final tips for, 404
persuasive, 398–404
sent by e-mail or fax, 403, 
403–404
solicited, 400
unsolicited, 401
Credit, refusing, 175–177
Criticism
constructive, 312
responding professionally, 
311–312
Cultural differences, 111
Cultures
diverse, 15
group-oriented, 18
affects communication, 15–21
low-context, 16
nonverbal messages, meanings 
in different, 13
Customers
adjustment letter, 143
dealing with disappointed, 
172–175
delivering bad news to, 172–177
D
Damage control, dealing with 
disappointed customers, 
172–175
Dangling and misplaced modifiers, 
avoiding, 64
Dashes, GM-34–GM-35
for emphasis, 61
Data
documenting, 264–267
gathering, 229
illustrating, 270–276
organizing and outlining, 267–270
primary, 259, 262–264
report gathering of, 228–230
secondary, 259–262
table summarizing, 272
Dateline of business letter, A-3
Dates
commas with, GM-22–GM-23
number style of, GM-43–GM-44
Decimals, number style of, GM-45– 
GM-46
Deck, 348
Decoding, 10
skills, 15
Defamation, 164
Degrees, commas with,  
GM-26–GM-27
Delivery method for business 
presentation, 357

Index 
I-3 
Delivery notations, A-3
Denying claims, 175, 176
Department names, capitalization 
of, GM-40
Dependent clauses, commas with, 
GM-24–GM-25
Desire, writing sales and marketing 
messages, 202
Diction, levels of, 40
Digital dirt, 419
Digital format, 226
Direct address, commas with, 
GM-22
Direct claims, 137, 139
Direct pattern, 56–57
defined, 56
in reports, 224
justification/recommendation 
reports, 236
when to use, 163
Direct replies, 138–141, 140
Direct requests
for information or action, 135–137
refusing claims and , 170–172
Direct strategy, 137
placement of conclusions and 
recommendations, 268
Direct-mail marketing, 200
Directness, revising for vigor and, 
80–81
Diverse cultures, associate with 
people from, 15
Division names, capitalization of, 
GM-40
Documentation, 264–267
formats, A-15–A-20
Documents
designing for readability, 81–85, 
84
learning what to give credit to, 
265
other employment, 432–434
proofreading complex, 86–87
proofreading routine, 86
tips for designing better, 232
Donation request, refusing, 171
Doublespeak, 42
Downsizing, 374
Dual appeal, 202
Dysfunctional behavior, controlling, 
326
E
EBSCO Business Source Premier, 
260
Education
income and, 5, 6
on résumé, 382
Electronic databases, 54, 260
Electronic mail, 3
Electronic messages, 98, 99–100
Electronic presentations, 8
Electronic resources, for reports, 
230
Electronic searches, 55
E-mail, 5, 36
attachments, 107
best practices for, 108–111
cover letter, 403
cover note with attached 
persuasive memo, 197
defined, 99
for goodwill messages, 148
format, applying, 102–107
knowing when to send, 100–101
other smart practices, 111
plain-text résumé for, 393
reading and replying to, 110–111
report delivery by, 228
selling by, 205
E-mail messages, A-1, A-2
components of, 101–102
formatting of, 103–105
improving tone in, 44
information and procedure, 
114–116
organizing, 100–102
request and reply, 116–118, 117
revising information, 103
E-mail request
formatting, 104
making direct, 117–118
replying to, 118
E-mail sales message to opt-in 
recipients, 206
Emotional appeal, 202
Empathy
conveying of, 167
defined, 38
Emphasis, 309
achieving through mechanics, 
60–61
achieving through style, 61–62
de-emphasizing when necessary, 
62
developing, 60–62
Employees, writing plan for 
announcing bad news to, 178, 
179
Employers
anticipating what they want, 
307–308
professionalism counts with, 4–5
Employment
advertisements, 308
documents, 432–434
history on résumé, 382–383
interviews, types of, 415–416
preparing for, 372–378
search, 373
Web sites, 378
Enclosure notation, A-6
Encoding, 10
Endnotes, 288
Enterprise-class IM systems, 113
Envelopes, A-8–A-9
E-portfolio, 394–395
Ethical behavior, 304–308
Ethical responsibilities, teams 
acceptance of, 320, 321
Ethics
indirect strategy and, 179–180
understanding relationship 
between professional 
behavior and, 306
Ethnic references, capitalization of, 
GM-41
Ethnicity, capitalizing on workforce 
diversity, 21–22
Ethnocentrism
and stereotyping, controlling, 
19–20
defined, 19
Etiquette checklist for meeting 
leaders and participants, 324
Evaluation, 163
of slideshow, 352–354
Exclamation points, GM-34
Executive summary, 241, 277, 281
Experimentation, 264
Extemporaneous delivery, 357
Exuberance, controlling, 80
Eye contact, 13
establish and maintain, 15
maintain during presentation,  
359
F
Face-to face
communication, 308
conversation, 36, 310
group meeting, 36
meeting, 322
settings, professional 
communicator in, 308–312
Facial expression, 13
Fact from opinion, separate, 230
Factiva, 260
Familiar words, 43–44
FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions), 
261
Favor
requesting, 194–196, 195
send thanks for, 146, 147
Fax, 36
cover sheet, A-11
report delivery by, 228
résumés, 398
sending cover letter by, 403
Feasibility reports, 233, 236–238, 
238
Federalese, 42
Feedback, 10–11
plan for, 108
Figures and tables, 283–285
Fillers, 77
Final report, presenting, 277–288
Findings, discussion of, 283–286, 288
First draft, 66, 108
Flabby expressions, 77
eliminating, 76
Flipcharts, 346
Flowchart, 271, 275
Flynn, Nancy, 164
Folding of business letters, A-9
Follow up for business presentation, 
356–360
Following up after interview, 
431–432
Follow-up letter, 431
application or résumé, 432–433
bad news, 174
rejection, 433
thank-you letter after interview, 
429, 430
Fonts
capitalizing on type, 82–83
change for emphasis, 61
Formal proposals, 258
Formal report, 278–287
preparing to write, 258–259
Formal research methods, 54–55
Formality, 18
Format
APA in-text, A-18
APA reference, A-18–A-20
citation, 267
digital, 226
documentation, A-15–A-20
e-mail, 102–107
envelope, A-8
letter, 226
manuscript, 226
memo, 102–107, 226
MLA bibliographic, A-16–A-17
MLA in-text, A-16
MLA referencing, 288
outline, 269
outline, 56
PDF, 228
proofreading for, 86
report, 226
Fractions, number style of, GM-45
Fragments, 59–60
defined, 59
Franklin, Benjamin, 38, 322
Freewriting, 66
Front-loading, 57
Functional headings, 232
Functional résumés, 379–380, 390
G
Gender, capitalizing on workforce 
diversity, 21–22
Geographic locations, capitalization 
of, GM-38
Geographical items, commas with, 
GM-22–GM-23
Geographical or spatial 
arrangement, 269
Gerunds, apostrophes with,  
GM-32
Gestures, posture and, 13–14
Gift, express thanks for, 147
Global competition, heightened, 7
Good news, reveal in the opening, 
142
Good-guy syndrome, 164–165
Goodwill messages, 145–148
e-mail appropriate for, 148
responding to, 147
Gore, Al, 339
Governmental terms, capitalization 
of, GM-40
Grammar, proofreading for, 85
Grandstanding, 11
Graphics
incorporating in reports, 276
matching objectives and, 271

I-4 
Index
Greeting, e-mail, 105
Group interviews, 416
Group meeting, face-to-face, 36
Group members
and leaders, ethical 
responsibilities of, 321
handling difficult, 326
Grouped bar chart, 273
Group-oriented cultures, 18
Group-think, 22
Guide words, e-mail, 104–105
H
Hall, Edward T., 14, 16
Handheld wireless devices, 8
Handouts, 346, 347, 360
Hard-copy memos, 105
Headings, 269
adding for visual impact, 83–85
creating, 230–233
functional, 232
level of in reports, 270
of résumé, 380–381
report, 231–233
High-context cultures, more 
collectivist, 17
High-text and low-text business 
communicators, comparing, 17
Hiring/placement interviews, 
415–416
Hits, 392
Home page, 261
Homogeneous teams, 319
Hoover, J. Edgar, 14
Horizontal bar chart, 272
Hospitality, extend thanks for, 147
I
Ideas for delivering bad news 
sensitively, 165
Idioms, 20
Illustrations, maps, and 
photographs, 271, 275–276
Imagery, in oral presentations, 
343–344
Inclusive language, 42
Income
and unemployment in relation to 
education, 6
education affects, 5–6
Independent clauses
commas with, GM-24
semicolons with, GM-29–GM-30
Indirect pattern, 57–58
defined, 56
for bad news, 162
in reports, 228
justification/recommendation 
reports, 236
using to prepare reader, 162–163
Indirect strategy
ethics and, 179–180
placement of conclusions and 
recommendations, 268
Individualism, 17–18
Informal proposals, 254–258, 
256–257
Informal reports, preparing typical, 
233–241
Informal research and idea 
generation, 55
Informal survey, conducting, 55
Informal writing style, 230
Information
arrange logically and make 
readable, 140–141
collecting to compose messages, 
53–55
direct request for, 135–137
letter that requests, 136
organizations exchange 
messages and, 98–100
organizing, 108, 234
probe for more, 15
reader wants, open with, 140
reports, 233, 234, 224–225, 227
researching, 34
Information and knowledge as 
corporate assets, focus on, 7
Information e-mail message, 
revising, 103
Information messages and memos, 
114–116
flow downward from management 
to employees, 115
Informative reports, 223
Inside address, A-3–A5
Instant messaging (IM), 36, 40
best practices for, 114
defined, 99–100
for brief, fast communication, 112
how it works, 112
pros and cons of, 113
using professionally, 112
weighing pros and cons of, 
112–113
Intercultural audiences
miscommunication and, 20–21
oral miscommunication and, 20
Interest, writing sales and marketing 
messages by building, 
201–202
Interests, identifying your, 373–374
Interjections, function of, GM-6
Internal messages, using writing 
process to create effective, 
107–108
Internal persuasive messages, 196
Internal requests, refusing, 172, 173
Internet, 5
options for slide presentations, 356
Internship, 375
Interoffice memos, 99
formatting of, 105–107
that responds to request, 106
Interpersonal keywords most 
requested by employers using 
résumé-scanning software, 393
Interview questions
about experience and 
accomplishments, 424–425
about the future, 425
ask your own, 428–429
behavioral, 426–427
challenging, 425–426
illegal and inappropriate, 427–428
situational, 426
to gauge your interest, 424
to get acquainted, 423–424
Interviews, 263
actions to avoid, 423
after, 429–432
answering questions during, 
422–428
arrive on time for, 420
ending positively, 429
facts for reports from, 229
fighting fear, 420–421
follow-up thank-you letter,  
429, 430
group, 416
hiring/placement, 415–416
job, 414–415
one-on-one, 416
panel, 416
preparing for, 416–429
screening, 416
sequential, 416
stress, 416
types of employment, 415–416
Intimate zone, 14
Introduction, 287–288
capturing attention in, 338–339
Introductory expressions, 
semicolons with,  
GM-29–GM-30
Inventories, facts for reports from, 229
Irregular verbs, GM-13–GM-14
Issue, present both sides of, 230
Italics, 82–83
for emphasis, 61
J
Jargon, 20, 78–79
defined, 78
Job acceptance letters, 433–434
Job applicant
make first conversation 
impressive, 417
research target company, 
417–418
use professional phone 
techniques, 417
Job boards, 376–378
Job interview, 414–415
See also. Interviews
Job rejection letters, 433–434
Job search
electronically, 375–378
on Web, 375, 376
using traditional techniques, 378
Job security, 374
JobCentral National Labor 
Exchange, 377
Jobs, changing nature of, 374–375
Justification/recommendation 
reports, 233, 235–236, 237
K
Kerrey, Bob, 3
Keys to building
powerful listening skills, 12
strong nonverbal skills, 15
Keywords, 391, 392
Knowledge as corporate assets, 
focus on information and, 7
L
Language
abusive, 164
careless, 164
choice of, 231
courteous, 41
inclusive, 42
positive, 41
Leadership, teams share, 320
Legal problems, avoiding three 
causes of, 164–165
Legalese, 42
Letter, 36
adjustment, 141–145, 143
application or résumé follow-up, 
432–433
business, 99, A-2–A-11
complaint, 199
composing, 34
direct claim, 139
direct reply, 140
format, 226
interview follow-up, 429, 430
job acceptance and rejection, 
433–434
of application, 398
of thanks, 145–147
or memo of transmittal, 277,  
279
organizing, 34
rejection follow-up, 433
resignation, 434
sales, 203, 204
that requests information, 136
Letter placement and line endings, 
A-3
Letter proposals, 254
Letter styles, A-7–A-8
block and modified block,  
A-4
Lettered items, capitalization of, 
GM-40
Letterhead, A-3
LexisNexis, 260
Libel, 164
Libraries, 54
Line charts, 271, 273–274
List of figures, 277, 280
Listed items, colons with, GM-30
Listen to learn, 310
Listening, barriers to effective, 11
Listening skills, 11–12
keys to building powerful, 12
Literary titles, capitalization of,  
GM-40–GM-41
Local employment Web sites,  
377
Location
for placing and accepting cell 
phone calls, 315
of meeting, 322
Long lead-ins, limiting, 76–77
Low-context cultures, 16
tend to value individualism, 17

Index 
I-5 
Low-text business communicators, 
comparing high-and, 17
M
Mail, report delivery by, 228
Mailing address, A-9
Main idea, opening with, 101
Malware, 113
Management
flattened hierarchies of, 7
more participatory, 7
Manual searches, 55
Manuscript format, 226
Maps, photographs, and 
illustrations, 271, 275–276
Margins
memo forms and, 105–106
understanding, 81
Marketing messages
writing sales and, 200–204
writing online sales and, 204–207
Measurements, number style of, 
GM-45
Media richness, 35
Meeting location and materials, 
preparing, 323
Meetings
agenda, 323
avoid issues that sidetrack, 325
conducting professional, 321–327
ending and following up on, 
326–327
etiquette checklist for leaders and 
participants of, 324
minutes of, 234, 238–239, 240
purpose and number of 
participants in, 323
Memo format, 102–107, 226
Memo forms and margins, 105–106
Memo requests
making direct, 117–118
replying to, 118
Memorandums. See Memos
Memos, 36
as e-mail attachments, 107
components of, 101–102
e-mail cover note with attached 
persuasive, 197
hard-copy, 105
interoffice, 99, 105–107, 106
knowing when to send, 100–101
organizing, 100–102
writing information and 
procedure, 114–116
writing request and reply, 
116–118
Messages
audience focus, 38
bad news follow-up, 174
collecting information to 
compose, 53–55
communicating with electronic, 
99–100
communicating with paper-
based, 99
e-mail, 103–105, 117, 148,  
A-1, A-2
evaluating, 34
goodwill, 145–148
organizations exchange, 98–100
paper-based and electronic 98
sender focus, 38
sending positive written, outside 
your organization, 133–135
silent, 13–14, 15
writing online sales and 
marketing, 204–207
writing sales and marketing, 
200–204
Metaphors, 343
Microsoft PowerPoint, 347
Minutes of meetings, 234, 238–240
distribution of, 327
report format, 239
Miscommunication and intercultural 
audiences
oral, 20
written, 20–21
Misplaced modifiers, avoiding 
dangling and, 64
Misspelled words, GM-49
Mixed punctuation style, A-8
Modern Language Association 
(MLA), 267, A-15–A-17
bibliographic format, A-16–A-17
in-text format, A-16
referencing format, 288
text page and bibliography,  
A-16
works cited, A-17
Modified block style, A-8
Money, number style of, GM-43
Monster, 377
Multifunctional printers, 8
Multimedia presentation
adapting text and color 
selections, 349
designing an impressive, 347–356
eight steps to making powerful, 
355–356
slides, 346, 349, 353
Multiple line chart, 273
N
Names
apostrophes with, GM-32
proofreading for, 85–86
National Commission on Writing, 3
National origin, capitalizing on 
workforce diversity, 21–22
Neeleman, 167
Negative remarks, 310
Negative team behavior, 318, 319
Netiquette, e-mail, 110
Niche Web sites, 377
Noise, 10
Nominative case, GM-7–GM-8
Non profit organization, volunteer 
with, 375
Nonverbal communication skill, 
enhancing of, 12–15
Nonverbal meanings out of context, 
avoid assigning, 15
Nonverbal messages, 344–345
different cultures interpret verbal 
and, 15
different meanings in different 
cultures, 13
Nonverbal skills, keys to building 
strong, 15
Nouns, GM-6–GM-7
abstract, GM-6
as search words, 261
collective, GM-7
common, GM-6
concrete, GM-6
function of, GM-5
plural, GM-6
proper, GM-6
singular, GM-6
Number of participants, meeting 
purpose and, 323
Number style, GM-43–GM-46
general rules, GM-43
Numbered items, capitalization of, 
GM-40
Numbered lists, 83
for quick comprehension, 83
Numbers
cite carefully, 21
proofreading for, 85–86
O
Objective case, GM-7–GM-8
Observation, 264
facts for reports from, 229
Observe yourself on video, 15
Official style, 42
Offshoring, 374
Omitted words, commas with, 
GM-27
One-on-one interviews, 416
Online
report delivery by, 228
résumé information, company 
database for, 398
sales and marketing messages, 
204–207
Open offices, 8
Opening
buffering of, 165–166
claim letter with clear statement, 
137
cover letter, 398–401
for solicited jobs, 399
for unsolicited jobs, 399–401
reveal good news in, 142
with information reader wants, 
140
Opinion, separate fact from, 230
Optical character recognition 
(OCR), 390
Oral miscommunication and 
intercultural audiences, 20
Oral presentation, 337
building audience rapport, 
343–345
identifying purpose, 337
outline, 341
understanding audience, 337
writing process for, 33–34
Organization chart, 271, 276, 275
Organizational patterns for reports, 
223–226, 268
Organizational stationery, 165
Organizational strategies, 267–269
Organizations, 163
capitalization of names of, GM-38
delivering bad news within, 
177–179
exchange messages and 
information, 98–100
persuasion within, 196–198
to show relationships, 55–58
Organize information, 108
Outlines, 56, 269
Outsourcing, 374
P
Panel interviews, 416
Paper-based messages, 98, 99
Paragraph
building coherence, 65
controlling length, 65
drafting powerful, 64–65
Parallel construction, 232
Parallelism, 83
achieving, 62–63
Paraphrase, 264
Paraphrasing, 266
Parentheses, GM-35
Parenthetical expressions, commas 
with, GM-22–GM-23
Participants of meeting, number of, 
322–323
Parts of speech, GM-5–GM-6
Passive voice, 62, 63, GM-12
in bad news messages, 169
PDF document, résumé as, 397–398
Percentages, number style of, 
GM-45
Periodicals provide limited current 
coverage, 259, 260
Periods, GM-34
Periods of time, number style of, 
GM-45
Person, report delivery in, 228
Personal anecdotes, 343
Personal appearance, 15
Personal data on résumé, 384
Personal digital assistants (PDAs), 
315
Personal titles, capitalization of, 
GM-39
Personal use of company 
computers, 111
Personal zone, 14
Personalized statistics, 344
Persuasion within organizations, 
196–198
Persuasive favor request, 195
Persuasive memo, e-mail cover note 
with attached, 197
Persuasive requests, 193–199
Phishing schemes, 113
Phone call, 36
Photographs, maps, and 
illustrations, 271, 275–276
Phrases, commas with, GM-25
Physical ability, capitalizing on 
workforce diversity, 21–22
Pie charts, 271, 274

I-6 
Index
Pitch, 309
Plagiarism, 264
Plagiarized version of paraphrasing, 
266
Plain English, 42, 43
Plain-paper return address, A-7
Plain-text résumé, 393, 394, 397
Plural nouns, GM-6
Podcasts, 9, 207
defined, 100
Points of the compass, capitalization 
of, GM-40
Polish, 304, 305
delivery and follow up for 
business presentation, 
356–360
your résumé, 397
Portable Document Format (PDF), 
228
Portal, 261
Positive form of adjectives and 
adverbs, GM-16
Positive language, 41
Positive team behavior, 318, 319
Positive words, choosing in bad 
news messages, 168
Positive written messages, sending 
outside your organization, 
133–135
Possessive case, GM-7–GM-8
Post, Emily, 166
Post, Peter, 166
Posture
and gestures, 13–14
use to show interest, 15
PowerPoint, 347
Diagram Gallery, 351
presentation, 348–354
using effectively with audience, 
354
Praise, give sincere and specific,  
311
Prefatory parts, 277–287
Prepositions, GM-18–GM-19
function of, GM-6
guidelines for use, GM-18–GM-19
omit in Web search, 261
Presence technology, 9
Presentation résumés, 387
Presentation skills, 336
Prewriting
first phase of writing process, 33
thank-you letter, 146
Primary audience, 37
Primary data, 259, 262–264
Primary goals in communicating bad 
news, 162
Primary information sources, 55
Print resources, 259–260
Print-based résumé, 387–390
Printed forms, 226
Printed material, facts for reports 
from, 230
Printers, multifunctional, 8
Problem, determining in report, 
228–229, 282
Procedure e-mail messages and 
memos, 114–116, 115
flow downward from management 
to employees, 115
Procedures, team agreement on, 
320
Product names, capitalization of, 
GM-40
Professional behavior, 307
defining, 305
understanding relationship 
between ethics and, 306
Professional communicator in face-
to-face settings, 308–312
Professional, conversational but, 
40–41
Professional meeting etiquette, 324
Professional networking sites, 
377–378
Professional teams
becoming team player in, 
317–321
characteristics of successful, 
319–321
Professionalism
counts with employers, 4–5
projecting when you 
communicate, 5
recognizing importance of, 
304–308
Profile, responding to, 37
Profiling the audience, 37
Progress reports, 233, 234, 235
Pronouns, GM-7–GM-10
case of, GM-7–GM-8
function of, GM-6
guidelines for making pronouns-
antecedents agreement, 
GM-9–GM-10
guidelines for selecting case, 
GM-8–GM-9
Pronunciation, 309
Proofreading, 34, 163
for correctness, 108
marks, 86, A-14
résumé, 397
search words, 261
slideshow, 352–354
understanding the process of, 
85–87
what to watch for in, 85–86
Proper adjectives, capitalization of, 
GM-38
Proper nouns, GM-6
capitalization of, GM-38
Proposals, 36
background, problem, and 
purpose of, 255
budget, 257
defined, 253
formal, 258
informal, 254–258, 256–257
introduction, 254–255
letter, 254
plan and schedule of, 255–256
staffing, 256
understanding business, 253–254
Props, 346
Protocol, 304
Public zone, 14
Punctuation, 83
other, GM-34–GM-36
proofreading for, 85
styles, A-7–A-8
Purpose
analyzing, 34
and number of participants of 
meeting, 323
identifying, 35, 337
of meeting, 322
of report, defining, 228–230
team agreement on, 320
Q
Qualifications
evaluating your, 374
showcasing in an e-portfolio, 
394–395
summary of, on résumé, 381
Question marks, GM-34
Questionnaires, facts for reports 
from, 229
Quotation marks, GM-35–GM-36
Web search, 261
Quotations
colons with, GM-30
commas with, GM-27
knowing when and how to use, 
267
R
Race, capitalizing on workforce 
diversity, 21–22
Rapport, oral presentation building 
audience, 343–345
Rational appeal, 202
Readability, 111
designing documents for, 81–85, 
84
revise for, 108
Reader, using indirect pattern to 
prepare, 162–163
Readers’ Guide to periodical 
Literature, 260
Reasons-before-refusal pattern, 171
Receiver, 10
Recommendations, 286, 288
placement of in direct and 
indirect strategies, 268
Redundancies, 77–78
defined, 77
Reference format, American 
Psychological Association, A-
18–A-20
Reference initials, A-6
Reference lines, A-5
Reference list, 385
Reference request letter, 431
References, 288
cited, 287
contacting your, 431
on résumé, 384–385
Refusing direct requests and claims, 
170–172, 173
Rejection follow-up letter, 433
Rejection letters, 433–434
Related numbers, number style of, 
GM-44
Relationships, organizing to show, 
55–58
Relative pronouns, 20
Reply e-mail messages and memos, 
writing, 116–118
Reply letter, direct, 138–141, 140
Report delivery, 228
Report findings, 268, 268
Report headings, using effective, 
231–233
Report organization, audience 
analysis and, 223
Reports, 36
analytical, 223, 225–226
being objective, 230–231
body of, 287–288
feasibility, 233, 236–238
formal, 258–259, 278–287
formats for, 226
functions of, 223
graphics in, 276
informal, 233–241
information, 233, 234
informative, 223
justification/recommendation, 233, 
235–236
level of headings in, 270
organizational patterns for, 
223–226
presenting final, 277–278
progress, 233, 234–235
supplementary parts of, 288
understanding basics of, 222–228
writing style of, 230–233, 231
Request e-mail messages and 
memos, 116–118, 117
Request for proposal (RFP), 254
Requests
authorization, 258
claim, 199
close with action, 137, 138
for favors and action, 194–196
for information or action, direct, 
135–137
formatting e-mail, 104
interoffice memo that responds 
to, 106
making direct e-mail and memo, 
117–118
open directly, 135–136
persuasive, 193–199, 195
refusing direct, 170–172
refusing donation, 171
refusing internal, 172, 173
rejecting typical, 171
replying to e-mail and memo, 118
Research, 53, 107, 163
developing good habits, 265–266
formal methods, 54–55
secondary data, 259–262
Resignation letter, 434
Résumé
applying final touches to, 
395–398
arranging parts of, 380
ASCII, 393

Index 
I-7 
awards, honors, and activities 
on, 384
be honest and ethical, 395–396
capabilities and skills on, 
383–384
career objective on, 381
choosing a style, 379–380
chronological, 386, 387–389
creating customized, 378–385
designing a print-based, 387–390
education on, 382
follow-up letter, 432–433
functional, 390
length of, 380
main heading, 380–381
optimizing for today’s 
technologies, 385–395
personal data, 384
plain-text, 393, 394
polishing, 397
presentation, 387
proofreading, 397
references on, 384–385
scannable, 390–393, 391
strengthen with action verbs, 383
submitting, 397–398
summary of qualifications on, 381
work experience or employment 
history on, 382–383
Return address, A-8–A-9
Revising/revision, 102, 138, 163
for clarity and conciseness, 108
for readability, 108
of slideshow, 352–354
thank-you letter, 146
third phase of writing process, 34
understanding process of, 75–76
Round numbers, number style of, 
GM-45
Routine documents, how to 
proofread, 86
RSS (really simple syndication), 207
Run-on (fused) sentences, defined, 
60
S
Sales and marketing messages
writing, 200–204
writing online, 204–207
Sales letter, 204
putting it all together, 203–204
Salutation
colons with, GM-31
e-mail message, A-1
of business letter A-5
Sans serif typefaces, 82
Scannable résumé, 390–393, 391
Scientific experiments, conducting, 55
Screening interviews, 416
Search tools, 261
Seasons, capitalization of, GM-41
Secondary audience, 37
Secondary data, researching, 
259–262
Secondary goals in communicating 
bad news, 162
Second-page heading, A-6, A-7
Segmented 100% bar chart, 273
Segmented line (surface) chart, 274
Semicolons, GM-29–GM-30
Sender, 10
Sentences
achieving variety, 58–59
avoiding three common faults, 
59–60
composing effective, 58–60
controlling length of, 59
crafting topic, 64–65
developing support, 65
Sequential interviews, 416
Series
commas in, GM-22
semicolons with, GM-29–GM-30
Serif typefaces, 81
Shapiro, Cynthia, 419
Short Message Service (SMS), 100
Signature block, A-6
Silent messages, 13–14, 15
Similes, 343
Simple line chart, 273
Simple sentence, defined, 59
Singular nouns, GM-6
6-x-6 rule, 349
Skills on résumé, 383–384
Skim value, 83
Slander, 164
Slang, 20, 78–79
defined, 79
Slides
converting a bulleted slide into an 
animated diagram, 351
designing more effective, 352
organizing, 349
Internet options for, 356
revising and enhancing for 
greater impact, 350
that summarize and illustrate 
multimedia presentation, 353
Slideshow
composing, 349–351
practicing and preparing for, 354
revising, proofreading, and 
evaluating, 352–354
situation and purpose of, 348
Smart phones, 5
Snail mail, 134
Social intelligence, 304, 305
Social interaction, four space zones 
for, 14
Social networks, 262
Social rules important in some 
cultures, 18
Social situations, act professionally 
in, 311
Social zone, 14
Society for Information 
Management, 4
Soft skills, 304, 305–306
Source notes, A-15
Source of paraphrasing, 266
Sources, cite, 231
Space, 14
zones for social interaction, 14
Spacing after punctuation, A-3
Speaker’s notes, 347
Speaking skills, 336
Speech habits, 5
Spelling, proofreading for, 85
Spim, 113
Staffing, 256
Stage fright, 357, 358
STAR technique, 427
Stereotypes, defined, 19
Stereotyping, controlling 
ethnocentrism and, 19–20
Stress interviews, 416
Subject line, writing, 101
Subject, e-mail message, A-1
Subordinates, persuading, 196
Summaries, 234, 240–241
Summary, 288
of qualifications on résumé, 381
Superlative form of adjectives and 
adverbs, GM-16
Supplementary parts of report, 288
Surface charts, 274
Surveys, 263
facts for reports from, 229
Sympathy, conveying, 147–148
T
Table of contents, 277, 280
Table summarizing precise data, 
272
Tables, 271, 272 
Tabulation for emphasis, 61
Target audience, 55
Targeted mailings, 205
Task
adapting to, 38–44
analyzing, 107
completing assigned, 327
Team behavior, positive and 
negative, 318, 319
Team player in professional groups 
and teams, 317–321
Teams
characteristics of successful 
professional, 319–321
homogeneous, 319
small size and diverse makeup, 
319–320
Technologies, innovative 
communication, 7
Telephone, 5
numbers, number style of, GM-44
practicing professional etiquette, 
313–317
VoIP, 8
Territory, 14
Text alignment, understanding, 81
Text messaging, defined, 100
Thanks, expressing, 145–147
for a favor, 146, 147
for a gift, 147
for hospitality, 147
Time, 14
for placing and accepting cell 
phone calls, 315
orientation, 18–19
perception of, 19
start meetings on, 324
Tips
or maximizing hits, 392
for maximizing scannability, 392
Title page, 277, 278
Titles, use correct names and, 310
Tolerance, defined, 19–20
Tone, 38, 116
composing claim and complaint 
messages, 198–199
e-mail, 44, 109–110
Topical or functional arrangement, 
269
Topics, choose appropriate, 310
Top-of-screen test, e-mail, 109
Tradition important in some  
cultures, 18
Transitional expressions, 65
Transparencies, overhead, 346
Trite business phrases, 78
Type fonts and sizes, capitalizing 
on, 82–83
Typefaces
choosing appropriate, 81–82
with different personalities for 
different purposes, 82
U
Underlining, 82–83
for emphasis, 61
Unemployment in relation to 
education, income and, 6
Uptalk, 5, 309
URL (Uniform Resource Locator), 261
V
Verbal and nonverbal messages, 
different cultures interpret, 15
Verbal signposts, 344
Verbs, GM-11–GM-14
action-specific, 20
buried, 80
function of, GM-6
guidelines for agreement with 
subjects, GM-11–GM-12
irregular, GM-13–GM-14
mood, GM-13
tense, GM-13
unburying, 80
voice, GM-12–GM-13
Vertical bar chart, 272
Video, 346
or teleconference, 36
phones, 9
Videoconferencing, 9
Vigor and directness, revising for, 
80–81
Virtual meeting, 322
Virtual teams
in workplace, 318
increased emphasis on, 7
Viruses, 113
Visual aids
for business presentation, 
345–347
options, pros and cons of, 346
types of, 345

I-8 
Index
Visual clichés, 350
Vivid words, 61
Voice
as communication tool, 309
conferencing, 9
quality, 309
recognition, 8
using active and passive, 62, 63
Voice mail, 5, 36
making best use of, 316–317
practicing professional etiquette, 
313–317
Volume and rate, 309
W
Web browsers, 261
Web conferencing, 9
Web search tips and techniques, 
261–262
Web sites, 36
Weblogs, 262
Weights, number style of, GM-45
White space, 81
Whiteboards, 346
Wikis, 9, 36, 262
defined, 100
using to convey company 
and product information, 
206–207
Wireless devices, handheld, 8
Women, capitalizing on workforce 
diversity, 21–22
Word document, résumé as, 397
Words
capitalization of beginning,  
GM-41
choosing clear, precise, 80–81
choosing positive in bad news 
messages, 168
commas with omitted, GM-27
confusing, GM-47–GM-48
e-mail guide, 104–105
familiar, 43–44
frequently misspelled, GM-49
used differently in high- and  
low-text cultures, 18
vivid, 61
Work
changing world of, 6–7
communication technologies 
reshaping the world of, 8
Work environments, new, 7
Work experience on résumé, 
382–383
Work groups, increased emphasis 
on self-directed, 7
Work together, collaboration 
technologies rethinking the 
way we, 9
Workforce diversity, capitalizing on, 
21–22
Workplace
importance of conventional and 
virtual teams in, 318
promoting positive relations 
through conversation, 
310–311
Workplace audiences, improving 
communication among diverse, 
22
Workplace bad news, delivering, 
178–179
Workplace criticism, responding 
professionally, 311–312
Works cited, 287, 288
World Wide Web, 260–262
Worst- and best-case scenarios, 
344
Writer’s block, 66
Writing
basics of business, 32–33
formal reports, 258–259
information and procedure 
e-mail messages and 
memos, 114
online sales and marketing 
messages, 204–207
request and reply e-mail 
messages and memos, 
116–118
sales and marketing messages, 
200–204
second phase of writing process, 
34
techniques, improving, 60–64
thank-you letter, 146
Writing plan for
adjustment letters, 141
announcing bad news to 
employees, 178
direct claim, 137
direct replies, 138
e-mail and memo replies, 118
information and procedure e-mail 
messages and memos, 
114–116
information or action request,  
135
persuasive request, 194
refusing routine requests and 
claims, 170
request e-mails and memos, 116
sales message, 200
Writing process, 33, 54
applying, 163
for business messages and oral 
presentations, 33–34
scheduling, 34
using to create effective internal 
messages, 107–108
Writing skills, 3–4
Writing style,
adopting an appropriate, 230
of report, 231
Written claims, 138
Written messages outside your 
organization, sending positive, 
133–135
Written miscommunication and 
intercultural audiences, 20–21
Y
Yahoo Hot Jobs, 377
”You” view, 38–39

