
This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights 
 
 
  
 
restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial
review has deemed that any suppres ed content does not materially
 affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent
rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous 
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit
www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword 
 for materials in your areas of interest.
s

N. Gregory Mankiw
HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Sixth Edition
Essentials of
Economics

© 2012, 2009 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form  
or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not  
limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web  
distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval 
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976  
United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission  
of the publisher.
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. Windows 
is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation used herein  
under license. Macintosh and Power Macintosh are registered  
trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. used herein under license. 
© 2008 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010941873
Cengage Learning WebTutorTM is a trademark of Cengage Learning.
ISBN 13: 978-0-538-45308-0
ISBN 10: 0-538-45308-7
South-Western Cengage Learning 
5191 Natorp Boulevard 
Mason, OH 45040 
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by  
Nelson ­Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit  www.cengage.com 
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our  
preferred online store www.cengageBrain.com
Essentials of Economics, 6E
N. Gregory Mankiw
Vice President of Editorial, Business:  
Jack W. Calhoun
Editor-in-Chief: Joseph Sabatino
Executive Editor: Mike Worls
Developmental Editor: Jane Tufts
Contributing Editors: Jennifer E. Thomas  
and Katie Trotta
Editorial Assistant: Allyn Bissmeyer
Senior Marketing Manager: John Carey
Associate Marketing Manager: Betty Jung
Senior Content Project Manager:  
Colleen A. Farmer
Media Editor: Sharon Morgan
Senior Frontlist Buyer, Manufacturing:  
Kevin Kluck
Senior Marketing Communications Manager: 
Sarah Greber
Production Service: Cadmus
Senior Art Director: Michelle Kunkler
Cover and Internal Designer: Ke Design
Internal Illustrations: Larry Moore 
Cover Image: © Chalmers Bequest, Hackney 
Art Gallery, UK / Bridgeman Art Library 
International; © marc ﬁscher / iStockphoto
Rights Acquisitions Specialist, Photos: John Hill
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at  
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,  
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America  
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  14  13  12  11

To Catherine, Nicholas, and Peter,
my other contributions to the next generation

author
about the
N. Gregory Mankiw is professor of economics 
at Harvard University. As a student, he studied 
economics at Princeton University and MIT. As 
a teacher, he has taught macroeconomics, micro-
economics, statistics, and principles of economics. 
He even spent one summer long ago as a sailing 
instructor on Long Beach Island.
	
Professor Mankiw is a prolific writer and a regu-
lar participant in academic and policy debates. His 
work has been published in scholarly journals, such 
as the American Economic Review, Journal of Political 
Economy, and Quarterly Journal of Economics, and in 
more popular forums, such as The New York Times 
and The Wall Street Journal. He is also author of the 
best-selling intermediate-level textbook Macroeconomics (Worth Publishers). In 
addition to his teaching, research, and writing, Professor Mankiw has been a 
research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, an adviser to the 
Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and New 
York, and a member of the ETS test development committee for the Advanced 
Placement exam in economics. From 2003 to 2005, he served as chairman of the 
President’s Council of Economic Advisers.
	
Professor Mankiw lives in Wellesley, Massachusetts, with his wife, Deborah, 
three children, Catherine, Nicholas, and Peter, and their border terrier, Tobin.
iv

contents
brief
Part I  Introduction   1
	 1	 Ten Principles of Economics   3
	 2	 Thinking Like an Economist   21
	 3	 Interdependence and the Gains from Trade   49
Part II  How Markets Work   63
	 4	 The Market Forces of Supply and Demand   65
	 5	 Elasticity and Its Application   89
	 6	 Supply, Demand, and Government Policies   111
Part III  Markets and Welfare   133
	 7	 Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets   135
	 8	 Application: The Costs of Taxation   155
	 9	 Application: International Trade   171
Part IV  The Economics of the Public Sector   193
	10	 Externalities   195
	11	 Public Goods and Common Resources   217
Part V  Firm Behavior and the Organization 
of Industry   233
	12	 The Costs of Production   235
	13	 Firms in Competitive Markets   255
	14	 Monopoly   275
Part VI  The Data of Macro­economics   305
	15	 Measuring a Nation’s Income   307
	16	 Measuring the Cost of Living   329
Part VII  The Real Economy in the Long Run   345
	17	 Production and Growth   347
	18	 Saving, Investment, and the Financial System   371
	19	 The Basic Tools of Finance   393
	20	 Unemployment   409
Part VIII  Money and Prices in the Long Run   433
	21	 The Monetary System   435
	22	 Money Growth and Inflation   459
Part IX  Short-Run ­Economic ­Fluctuations   485
	23	 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply   487
	24	 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate 
Demand   525
v

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
to the student
preface
E
conomics is a study of mankind in the ordinary business of life.” So 
wrote Alfred Marshall, the great 19th-century economist, in his textbook, 
Principles of Economics. Although we have learned much about the economy 
since Marshall’s time, this definition of economics is as true today as it 
was in 1890, when the first edition of his text was published.
	
Why should you, as a student at the beginning of the 21st century, embark on 
the study of economics? There are three reasons.
	
The first reason to study economics is that it will help you understand the 
world in which you live. There are many questions about the economy that might 
spark your curiosity. Why are apartments so hard to find in New York City? Why 
do airlines charge less for a round-trip ticket if the traveler stays over a Saturday 
night? Why is Johnny Depp paid so much to star in movies? Why are living stan-
dards so meager in many African countries? Why do some countries have high 
rates of inflation while others have stable prices? Why are jobs easy to find in 
some years and hard to find in others? These are just a few of the questions that a 
course in economics will help you answer.
	
The second reason to study economics is that it will make you a more astute 
participant in the economy. As you go about your life, you make many economic 
decisions. While you are a student, you decide how many years to stay in school. 
Once you take a job, you decide how much of your income to spend, how much 
to save, and how to invest your savings. Someday you may find yourself running 
a small business or a large corporation, and you will decide what prices to charge 
for your products. The insights developed in the coming chapters will give you 
a new perspective on how best to make these decisions. Studying economics will 
not by itself make you rich, but it will give you some tools that may help in that 
endeavor.
	
The third reason to study economics is that it will give you a better understand-
ing of both the potential and the limits of economic policy. Economic questions 
are always on the minds of policymakers in mayors’ offices, governors’ mansions, 
and the White House. What are the burdens associated with alternative forms of 
taxation? What are the effects of free trade with other countries? What is the best 
way to protect the environment? How does a government budget deficit affect 
the economy?  As a voter, you help choose the policies that guide the allocation of 
society’s resources. An understanding of economics will help you carry out that 
responsibility. And who knows: Perhaps someday you will end up as one of those 
policymakers yourself. 
	
Thus, the principles of economics can be applied in many of life’s situations. 
Whether the future finds you reading the newspaper, running a business, or sit-
ting in the Oval Office, you will be glad that you studied economics.
N. Gregory Mankiw
December 2010
“
vii

The Art of Instruction, The Power of Engagement, 
The Spark of Discovery
Experience
Mankiw
Self-Study Resources
I n t e ra c t i v e  Q ui z z i n g ,  V i d e o s  a n d  M o r e !
Economics CourseMate: Engaging,  
Trackable, Affordable  
Economics CourseMate brings course concepts to life with interactive 
learning and study tools that support the printed textbook. Economics 
CourseMate goes beyond the book to deliver what you need! 
Interactive Learning Tools:
Economics CourseMate includes interactive learning tools including:
• Quizzes	 	
	
	
• Flashcards
• Videos	
	
	
	
• Graphing Tutorials
• News, Debates, and Data
Interactive eBook:
In addition to interactive learning tools, Economics CourseMate  
includes an interactive eBook. You can take notes, highlight, search  
and interact with embedded media specific to your book. Use it as  
a supplement to the printed text, or as a substitute—the choice is  
up to you with CourseMate. 
To purchase access to CourseMate and these interactive tools, visit  
www.cengagebrain.com. 
The Power of
Engagement

ix
Maximize your efforts — and results — when you  
Experience Mankiw’s engaging learning tools. With  
Economics CourseMate, you’ll quickly reinforce 
chapter concepts and sharpen your skills with  
interactive, hands-on applications online.
 
If a printed Study Guide better suits your needs  
and study habits, the Mankiw 6e Study Guide 
is unsurpassed in its careful attention to accuracy,  
concise language, and practice that enhances  
your study time.
Mankiw 6e Study Guide  
Completely revised for the Sixth Edition, this Study Guide covers chapter material comprehensively — and accurately. Very 
hands-on, each chapter thoroughly covers the material in the corresponding chapter of Mankiw. Every key word and con-
cept is addressed within the Study Guide chapter — meaning you’ll feel confident that if you can do the study guide, you 
will understand all of the material in that chapter of Mankiw.
 
The “types” of questions used in the Study Guide reflect what you find most useful when studying. Our student surveys 
show that students like you felt that fill-in-the-blank questions, matching questions, and questions without specific single 
answers were an inefficient use of their time — and the Mankiw Study Guide avoids these kinds of questions.
To purchase a study guide, visit www.cengagebrain.com. 

x
acknowledgments
x
I
n writing this book, I benefited from the input of many talented people. Indeed, the 
list of people who have contributed to this project is so long, and their contributions 
so valuable, that it seems an injustice that only a single name appears on the cover. 
	
Let me begin with my colleagues in the economics profession. The six editions 
of this text and its supplemental materials have benefited enormously from their 
input. In reviews and surveys, they have offered suggestions, identified challeng-
es, and shared ideas from their own classroom experience. I am indebted to them 
for the perspectives they have brought to the text. Unfortunately, the list has be-
come too long to thank those who contributed to previous editions, even though 
students reading the current edition are still benefiting from their insights. 
	
Most important in this process have been Ron Cronovich (Carthage College) 
and David Hakes (University of Northern Iowa). Ron and David, both dedicated 
teachers, have served as reliable sounding boards for ideas and hardworking part-
ners with me in putting together the superb package of supplements. 
	
For this new edition, the following diary reviewers recorded their day-to-day 
experience over the course of a semester, offering detailed suggestions about how 
to improve the text. 
Mark Abajian, San Diego Mesa College
Jennifer Bailly, Long Beach City College
J. Ulyses Balderas, Sam Houston State 
University
Antonio Bos, Tusculum College
Greg Brock, Georgia Southern 
University
Donna Bueckman, University of 
Tennessee Knoxville
Rita Callahan, Keiser University
Tina Collins, San Joaquin Valley College
Bob Holland, Purdue University
Tom Holmes, University of Minnesota
Simran Kahai, John Carroll University
Miles Kimball, University of Michigan
Jason C. Rudbeck, University of Georgia
Kent Zirlott, University of Alabama 
Tuscaloosa
	
The following reviewers of the fifth edition provided suggestions for refining 
the content, organization, and approach in the sixth.
Mark Abajian, San Diego Mesa College 
Hamid Bastin, Shippensburg University 
Laura Jean Bhadra, Northern Virginia 
Community College
Benjamin Blair, Mississippi State 
University
Lane Boyte, Troy University 
Greg Brock, Georgia Southern University
Andrew Cassey, Washington State 
University 
Joni Charles, Texas State University - 
San Marcos
Daren Conrad, Bowie State University 
Diane de Freitas, Fresno City College 
Veronika Dolar, Cleveland State 
University 
Justin Dubas, Texas Lutheran 
University 
Robert L Holland, Purdue University 
Andres Jauregui, Columbus State 
University 
Miles Kimball, University of Michigan 
Andrew Kohen,  James Madison 
University

xi
Daniel Lee, Shippensburg University 
David Lindauer, Wellesley College
Joshua Long, Ivy Tech Community College 
James Makokha, Collin College 
Jim McAndrew, Luzerne County 
Community College 
William Mertens, University of Colorado
Cindy Munson, Western Technical 
College 
David Mushinski, Colorado State 
University 
Fola Odebunmi, Cypress College 
Jeff Rubin, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick 
Lynda Rush, California State 
Polytechnic University Pomona
Naveen Sarna, Northern Virginia 
Community College
Jesse Schwartz, Kennesaw State 
University
Mark Showalter, Brigham Young 
University 
Michael Tasto, Southern New 
Hampshire University
	
I received detailed feedback on specific elements in the text, including all end-
of-chapter problems and applications, from the following instructors.
Mark Abajian, San Diego Mesa College
Afolabi Adebayo, University of New 
Hampshire
Mehdi Afiat, College of Southern 
Nevada
Douglas Agbetsiafa, Indiana University 
South Bend
Richard Agnello, University of 
Delaware
Henry Akian, Gibbs College
Constantine Alexandrakis, Hofstra 
University
Michelle Amaral, University of the 
Pacific
Shahina Amin, University of Northern 
Iowa
Larry Angel, South Seattle Community 
College
Kathleen Arano, Fort Hays State 
University
J. J. Arias, Georgia College & State 
University
Nestor Azcona, Babson College
Steve Balassi, St. Mary’s College/Napa 
Valley College
Juventino Ulyses Balderas, Sam 
Houston State University
Tannista Banerjee, Purdue University
Jason Barr, Rutgers University, Newark
Alan Barreca, Tulane University
Hamid Bastin, Shippensburg University
Tammy Batson, Northern Illinois 
University / Rock Valley College
Carl Bauer, Oakton Community College
Klaus Becker, Texas Tech University
Robert Beekman, University of Tampa
Christian Beer, Cape Fear Community 
College
Gary Bennett, State University of New 
York Fredonia
Bettina Berch, Borough of Manhattan 
Community College
Thomas M. Beveridge, Durham 
Technical Community College
Abhijeet Bhattacharya, Illinois Valley 
Community College
Prasad Bidarkota, Florida International 
University
Jekab Bikis, Dallas Baptist University
Michael Bognanno, Temple University
Cecil Bohanon, Ball State University 
Natalia Boliari, Manhattan College
Melanie Boyte, Troy University
Charles Braymen, Kansas State
William Brennan, Minnesota State 
University at Mankato
Greg Brock, Georgia Southern 
University
Ken Brown, University of Northern 
Iowa
Laura Bucila, Texas Christian 
University
Stan Buck, Huntington University
Donna Bueckman, University of 
Tennessee Knoxville
Joe Bunting, St. Andrews Presbyterian 
College
Rita Callahan, Keiser University
Michael G. Carew, Baruch College
John Carter, Modesto Junior College
Kalyan Chakraborty, Emporia State 
University
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xii
Henry Check, Penn State University
Xudong Chen, Baldwin-Wallace College
Clifton M. Chow, Mass Bay 
Community College
Tina Collins, San Joaquin Valley College
Valerie Collins, Sheridan College
Sarah Cosgrove, University of 
Massachusetts Dartmouth
Dana Costea, Indiana University South 
Bend
Maria DaCosta, University of Wisconsin 
Eau Claire
Mian Dai, Drexel University
Joel Dalafave, Bucks County 
Community College
Maylene Damoense, Monash 
University South Africa
Lorie Darche, Southwest Florida College
Diane de Freitas, Fresno City College
Ejigou Demissie, University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore
Richard DePolt, Guilford Technical 
Community College
Aaron Dighton, University of 
Minnesota
Veronika Dolar, Cleveland State 
University
Fisher Donna, Georgia Southern 
University
Harold Elder, University of Alabama
Jamie Emerson, Salisbury University
Elena Ermolenko, Oakton Community 
College
Pat Euzent, University of Central 
Florida
Yan Feng, Hunter College, Queens 
College, CUNY
Donna K. Fisher, Georgia Southern 
University
Paul Fisher, Henry Ford Community 
College
Fred Foldvary, Santa Clara University
Nikki Follis, Chadron State College
Kent Ford, State University of New York / 
Onondaga Community College
Ryan Ford, Pasadena City College
Timothy Ford, California State 
University Sacramento
Johanna Francis, Fordham University
Robert Francis, Shoreline Community 
College
Mark Frascatore, Clarkson University
David Furst, University of South Florida
Monica Galizzi, University of 
Massachusetts Lowell
Jean-Philippe Gervais, North Carolina 
State University
Dipak Ghosh, Emporia State University
Bill Goffe, State University of New York 
Oswego
Ryan Gorka, University of Nebraska 
Lincoln
Marshall Gramm, Rhodes College
Elias C. Grivoyannis, Yeshiva 
University
Eleanor Gubins, Rosemont College
Darrin Gulla, University of Kentucky
Karen Gulliver, Argosy University
Ranganai Gwati, University of 
Washington Seattle
Mike Haupert, University of Wisconsin  
La Crosse
L Jay Helms, University of California 
Davis
Dr. David Hennessy, University of 
Dubuque
Curry Hilton, Guilford Technical 
Community College
George Hoffer, Virginia Commonwealth 
University
Mark Holmes, University of Waikato
Carl Hooker, Community College of 
Vermont
Daniel Horton, Cleveland State University
Scott Houser, Colorado School of the 
Mines
Fanchang Huang, Washington 
University in St Louis
Gregory Hunter, California State 
Polytechnic University Pomona
Christopher Hyer, University of New 
Mexico
Leke Ijiyode, St. Mary’s University of 
Minnesota
Chris Inama, Golden Gate University
Sarbaum Jeff, University of North 
Carolina Greensboro
Chad Jennings, Tennessee Temple 
University
Philipp Jonas, Kalamazoo Valley 
Community College
Robert Jones, Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute
Prathibha Joshi, Gordon College
acknowledgments

xiii
James Jozefowicz, Indiana University of 
Pennsylvania
Mahbubul Kabir, Lyon College
Simran Kahai, John Carroll University
David Kalist, Shippensburg University
Camilla Kazimi, St. Mary’s College
Chris Kelton, Naval Postgraduate School
Brian Kench, University of Tampa
Hyeongwoo Kim, Auburn University
Miles Kimball, University of Michigan
Alfreda L. King, Lawson State 
Community College
Elizabeth Knowles, –Univeristy of 
Wisconsin La Crosse
Fred Kolb, University of Wisconsin Eau 
Claire
Risa Kumazawa, Duquesne University
Sumner La Croix, University of Hawaii
Christopher Laincz, Drexel University
Ghislaine Lang, San Jose State 
University
Carolyn Langston, South Arkansas 
Community College
Richard Le, Cosumnes River College
Daniel Lee, Shippensburg University
Tom Lehman, Indiana Wesleyan 
University
Megan Leonard, Hendrix College
Larry Lichtenstein, Canisius College
Tad Lincoln, Middlesex Community 
College
David Linthicum, Cecil College North 
East 
Sam Liu, West Valley College
Melody Lo, University of Texas at San 
Antonio
Volodymyr Logovskyy, Georgia 
Institute of Technology
Min Lu, Robert Morris University
Gennady Lyakir, Champlain College
Bruce Madariaga, Montgomery 
Community College
Brinda Mahalingam, University of 
California Riverside
Rubana Mahjabeen, Truman State 
University
Bahman Maneshni, Paradise Valley 
Community College
Denton Marks, University of Wisconsin-
Whitewater
Timothy Mathews, Kennesaw State 
University
Frances Mc Donald, Northern Virginia 
Community College
Edward McGrath, Holyoke Community 
College
Shirley Ann Merchant, George 
Washington University
William Mertens, University of 
Colorado
Mitch Mitchell, Bladen Community College 
Mitch Mitchell, North Carolina Wesleyan 
Mike Mogavero, University of Notre 
Dame
Prof Ramesh Mohan, Bryant University
Daniel Monchuk, University of 
Southern Mississippi
Vasudeva Murthy, Creighton University
David Mushinsk, Colorado State 
University
Paula Nas, University of Michigan Flint
Russ Neal, Collin County Community 
College
Megumi Nishimura, University of 
Colorado
Peter Olson, Indiana University
Esen Onur, California State University 
Sacramento
Stephen Onyeiwu, Allegheny College
Margaret Oppenheimer, DePaul 
University 
Glenda Orosco, Oklahoma State 
University Institute of Technology
David Ortmeyer, Bentley University
Thomas Owen, College of the Redwoods
Jan Palmer, Ohio University
Amar Parai, State University of New 
York at Fredonia
Nitin Paranjpe, Wayne State and 
Oakland University
Carl Parker, Fort Hays State University
Michael Petrack, Oakland Community 
College
Gyan Pradhan, Eastern Kentucky 
University
Michael Pries, University of Notre Dame
Joe Quinn, Boston College
Mahesh Ramachandran, Clark 
University
Ratha Ramoo, Diablo Valley College
Surekha Rao, Indiana University 
Northwest
Ryan Ratcliff, University of San Diego
Scott Redenius, Brandeis University
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xiv
Susan Reilly, Florida State College at 
Jacksonville
Imke Reimers, University of Minnesota
Christopher Richardson, Merrillville 
High School
Art Riegal, State University of New 
York Sullivan
Richard Risinit, Middlesex Community 
College 
Michael Rogers, Albany State 
University
Paul Roscelli, Canada College
Larry Ross, University of Alaska 
Anchorage
Jeff Rubin, Rutgers University
Allen Sanderson, University of Chicago
Jeff Sarbaum, University of North 
Carolina Greensboro
Dennis Shannon, Southwestern Illinois 
College
Xuguang Sheng, State University of 
New York at Fredonia
Mark Showalter, Brigham Young 
University
Johnny Shull, Central Carolina 
Community College
Suann Shumaker, Las Positas 
Community College
Jonathan Silberman, Oakland University
Steven Skinner, Western Connecticut 
State University
Catherine Skura, Sandhills Community 
College
Gary Smith, D’Youville College
Warren Smith, Keiser University
William Snyder, Peru State College
Ken Somppi, Southern Union State 
Community College
Dale Steinreich, Drury University
Liliana Stern, Auburn University
Derek Stimel, Menlo College
Carolyn Fabian Stumph, Indiana 
University Purdue University Fort Wayne
Bryce Sutton, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham
Justin Tapp, Southwest Baptist University
Dosse Toulaboe, Fort Hays State 
University
Richard Trainer, State University of 
New York at Nassau
Ngoc Bich Tran, San Jacinto College
Sandra Trejos, Clarion University of 
Pennsylvania
Julie Trivitt, Arkansas Tech University
Arja Turunen-Red, University of New 
Orleans
Diane Tyndall, Craven Community 
College
Kay Unger, University of Montana 
Lee J. Van Scyoc, University of 
Wisconsin Oshkosh
Lisa Verissimo-Bates, Foothill College
Priti Verma, Texas A&M University, 
Kingsville
Patrick Walsh, St. Michael’s College
Jing Wang, Northeastern University
Donald Waters, Brayant and Stratton 
College, Virginia Beach, Virgina 
Campus
Patrick Welle, Bemidji State University
Elizabeth Wheaton, Southern Methodist 
University
Luther White, Central Carolina 
Community College
Oxana Wieland, University of 
Minnesota Crookston
John Winters, Auburn University at 
Montgomery
Suzanne Wisniewski, University of 
St. Thomas
Patricia Wiswell, Columbia-Greene 
Community College
Mark Witte, College of Charleston
Louis A. Woods, University of North 
Florida
Guy Yamashiro, California State 
University Long Beach
Benhua Yang, Stetson University
Leslie Young, Kilian Community 
College
Karen Zempel, Bryant and Stratton 
College
acknowledgments

xv
	
The team of editors who worked on this book improved it tremendously. Jane 
Tufts, developmental editor, provided truly spectacular editing—as she always 
does. Mike Worls, economics executive editor, did a splendid job of overseeing the 
many people involved in such a large project. Jennifer Thomas (supervising devel-
opmental editor) and Katie Yanos (supervising developmental editor) were crucial 
in assembling an extensive and thoughtful group of reviewers to give me feed-
back on the previous edition, while putting together an excellent team to revise the 
supplements. Colleen Farmer, senior content project manager, and Malvine Litten, 
project manager, had the patience and dedication necessary to turn my manu-
script into this book. Michelle Kunkler, senior art director, gave this book its clean,  
friendly look. Larry Moore, the illustrator, helped make the book more visually 
appealing and the economics in it less abstract. Sheryl Nelson, copyeditor, refined 
my prose, and Cindy Kerr, indexer, prepared a careful and thorough index.  John 
Carey, senior marketing manager, worked long hours getting the word out to po-
tential users of this book. The rest of the Cengage team was also consistently pro-
fessional, enthusiastic, and dedicated: Allyn Bissmeyer, Darrell Frye, Sarah Greber, 
Betty Jung, Deepak Kumar, Kim Kusnerak, Sharon Morgan, Suellen Ruttkay, and 
Joe Sabatino.
	
I am grateful also to Stacy Carlson and Daniel Norris, two star Harvard under-
graduates, who helped me refine the manuscript and check the page proofs for 
this edition. Josh Bookin, a former Advanced Placement economics teacher and 
recently an extraordinary section leader for Harvard’s Ec 10, gave invaluable 
advice on some of the new material in this edition.
	
As always, I must thank my “in-house” editor Deborah Mankiw. As the first 
reader of most things I write, she continued to offer just the right mix of criticism 
and encouragement.
	
Finally, I would like to mention my three children Catherine, Nicholas, and 
Peter. Their contribution to this book was putting up with a father spending too 
many hours in his study. The four of us have much in common—not least of 
which is our love of ice cream (which becomes apparent in Chapter 4). Maybe 
sometime soon one of them will pick up my passion for economics as well.
N. Gregory Mankiw
December 2010
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

table of
contents
Preface: To the Student   vii
Acknowledgments   x
PartI  Introduction   1
Chapter 1
Ten Principles of Economics   3
How People Make Decisions   4
Principle 1: People Face Trade-offs   4
Principle 2: The Cost of Something Is What You Give Up to 
Get It   5
Principle 3: Rational People Think at the Margin   6
Principle 4: People Respond to Incentives   7
Case Study: The Incentive Effects of Gasoline Prices   8
In The News: Incentive Pay   9
How People Interact   10
Principle 5: Trade Can Make Everyone Better Off   10
Principle 6: Markets Are Usually a Good Way to Organize 
Economic Activity   10
Principle 7: Governments Can Sometimes Improve Market 
Outcomes   11
FYI: Adam Smith and the Invisible Hand   12
How the Economy as a Whole Works   13
Principle 8: A Country’s Standard of Living Depends on Its 
Ability to Produce Goods and Services   13
In The News: Why You Should Study Economics   14
Principle 9: Prices Rise When the Government Prints Too 
Much Money   15
Principle 10: Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-off between 
Inflation and Unemployment   16
FYI: How to Read This Book   17
Conclusion   17
Chapter 2
Thinking Like an Economist   21
The Economist as Scientist   22
The Scientific Method: Observation, Theory, and More 
Observation   22
The Role of Assumptions   23
Economic Models   24
Our First Model: The Circular-Flow Diagram   24
Our Second Model: The Production Possibilities  
Frontier   26
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics   29
The Economist as Policy Adviser   29
FYI: Who Studies Economics?   30
Positive versus Normative Analysis   30
Economists in Washington   31
In The News: The Economics of President Obama   32
Why Economists’ Advice Is Not Always Followed   32
Why Economists Disagree   34
Differences in Scientific Judgments   34
Differences in Values   34
Perception versus Reality   35
Let’s Get Going   35
In The News: Environmental Economics   37
APPENDIX  Graphing: A Brief Review   40
Graphs of a Single Variable   40
Graphs of Two Variables: The Coordinate System   41
Curves in the Coordinate System   42
Slope   44
Cause and Effect   46
xvi

Chapter 3
Interdependence and the  
Gains from Trade   49
A Parable for the Modern Economy   50
Production Possibilities   50
Specialization and Trade   52
Comparative Advantage: The Driving Force of  
Specialization   54
Absolute Advantage   54
Opportunity Cost and Comparative Advantage   54
Comparative Advantage and Trade   55
The Price of the Trade   56
FYI: The Legacy of Adam Smith and David Ricardo   57
Applications of Comparative Advantage   57
Should Tom Brady Mow His Own Lawn?   57
Should the United States Trade with Other Countries?   58
In The News: The Changing Face of International Trade   59
Conclusion   59
Demand   67
The Demand Curve: The Relationship between Price and 
Quantity Demanded   67
Market Demand versus Individual Demand   68
Shifts in the Demand Curve   69
Case Study: Two Ways to Reduce the Quantity of Smoking 
Demanded   71
Supply   73
The Supply Curve: The Relationship between Price and 
Quantity Supplied   73
Market Supply versus Individual Supply   73
Shifts in the Supply Curve   74
Supply and Demand Together   77
Equilibrium   77
Three Steps to Analyzing Changes in Equilibrium   79
In The News: Price Increases after Disasters   82
Conclusion: How Prices Allocate Resources   84
Chapter 5
Elasticity and Its Application   89
The Elasticity of Demand   90
The Price Elasticity of Demand and Its Determinants   90
Computing the Price Elasticity of Demand   91
The Midpoint Method: A Better Way to Calculate Percentage 
Changes and Elasticities   91
The Variety of Demand Curves   92
FYI: A Few Elasticities from the Real World   94
Total Revenue and the Price Elasticity of Demand   94
Elasticity and Total Revenue along a Linear Demand Curve   96
Other Demand Elasticities   97
The Elasticity of Supply   98
The Price Elasticity of Supply and Its Determinants   98
Computing the Price Elasticity of Supply   98
The Variety of Supply Curves   99
Three Applications of Supply, Demand, and Elasticity   101
Can Good News for Farming Be Bad News for Farmers?   101
Why Did OPEC Fail to Keep the Price of Oil High?   103
Does Drug Interdiction Increase or Decrease Drug-Related 
Crime?   105
Conclusion   106
Chapter 6
Supply, Demand, and Government  
Policies   111
Controls on Prices   112
How Price Ceilings Affect Market Outcomes   112
Case Study: Lines at the Gas Pump   114
Case Study: Rent Control in the Short Run and the Long 
Run   115
How Price Floors Affect Market Outcomes   116
Case Study: The Minimum Wage   117
PartII  How Markets 
Work   63
Chapter 4
The Market Forces of Supply and  
Demand   65
Markets and Competition   66
What Is a Market?   66
What Is Competition?   66
xvii
contents

xviii
contents
Evaluating Price Controls   119
In The News: Should Unpaid Internships Be Allowed?   120
Taxes   121
How Taxes on Sellers Affect Market Outcomes   121
How Taxes on Buyers Affect Market Outcomes   123
Case Study: Can Congress Distribute the Burden of a Payroll 
Tax?   124
Elasticity and Tax Incidence   125
Case Study: Who Pays the Luxury Tax?   127
Conclusion   128
Evaluating the Market Equilibrium   146
In The News: Ticket Scalping   148
Case Study: Should There Be a Market in 
Organs?   149
Conclusion: Market Efficiency and Market Failure   150
Chapter 8
Application: The Costs of Taxation   155
The Deadweight Loss of Taxation   156
How a Tax Affects Market Participants   157
Deadweight Losses and the Gains from Trade   159
The Determinants of the Deadweight Loss   160
Case Study: The Deadweight Loss Debate   162
Deadweight Loss and Tax Revenue as Taxes Vary   163
Case Study: The Laffer Curve and Supply-Side 
Economics   165
In The News: New Research on Taxation   166
Conclusion   166
Chapter 9
Application: International Trade   171
The Determinants of Trade   172
The Equilibrium without Trade   172
The World Price and Comparative Advantage   173
The Winners and Losers from Trade   174
The Gains and Losses of an Exporting  
Country   174
The Gains and Losses of an Importing  
Country   175
The Effects of a Tariff   177
FYI: Import Quotas: Another Way to Restrict 
Trade   179
The Lessons for Trade Policy   179
Other Benefits of International Trade   180
In The News: Trade Skirmishes   181
The Arguments for Restricting Trade   182
The Jobs Argument   182
In The News: Should the Winners from Free Trade 
Compensate the Losers?   183
The National-Security Argument   184
In The News: Second Thoughts about Free 
Trade   184
The Infant-Industry Argument   185
The Unfair-Competition Argument   186
The Protection-as-a-Bargaining-Chip Argument   186
Case Study: Trade Agreements and the World Trade 
Organization   186
Conclusion   187
PartIII  Markets and 
Welfare   133
Chapter 7
Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency 
of Markets   135
Consumer Surplus   136
Willingness to Pay   136
Using the Demand Curve to Measure Consumer  
Surplus   137
How a Lower Price Raises Consumer Surplus   138
What Does Consumer Surplus Measure?   140
Producer Surplus   141
Cost and the Willingness to Sell   141
Using the Supply Curve to Measure Producer Surplus   142
How a Higher Price Raises Producer Surplus   144
Market Efficiency   145
The Benevolent Social Planner   145

xix
contents
Chapter 11
Public Goods and Common Resources   217
The Different Kinds of Goods   218
Public Goods   220
The Free-Rider Problem   220
Some Important Public Goods   220
Case Study: Are Lighthouses Public Goods?   222
The Difficult Job of Cost-Benefit Analysis   223
Case Study: How Much Is a Life Worth?   223
Common Resources   224
The Tragedy of the Commons   224
Some Important Common Resources   225
In The News: The Case for Toll Roads   226
Case Study: Why the Cow Is Not Extinct   228
Conclusion: The Importance of Property Rights   229
PartIV  The Economics 
of the Public  
Sector   193
Chapter 10
Externalities   195
Externalities and Market Inefficiency   197
Welfare Economics: A Recap   197
Negative Externalities   198
Positive Externalities   199
In The News: The Externalities of Country 
Living   200
Case Study: Technology Spillovers, Industrial Policy, 
and Patent Protection   201
Public Policies toward Externalities   202
Command-and-Control Policies: Regulation   203
Market-Based Policy 1: Corrective Taxes and  
Subsidies   203
Case Study: Why Is Gasoline Taxed So Heavily?   204
Market-Based Policy 2: Tradable Pollution Permits   205
Objections to the Economic Analysis of Pollution   207
In The News: Cap and Trade   208
Private Solutions to Externalities   209
The Types of Private Solutions   210
The Coase Theorem   210
Why Private Solutions Do Not Always Work   211
Conclusion   212
PartV  Firm Behavior and 
the Organization  
of Industry   233
Chapter 12
The Costs of Production   235
What Are Costs?   236
Total Revenue, Total Cost, and Profit   236
Costs as Opportunity Costs   236
The Cost of Capital as an Opportunity Cost   237

xx
contents
Economic Profit versus Accounting Profit   238
Production and Costs   239
The Production Function   239
From the Production Function to the Total-Cost Curve   241
The Various Measures of Cost   241
Fixed and Variable Costs   242
Average and Marginal Cost   243
Cost Curves and Their Shapes   244
Typical Cost Curves   246
Costs in the Short Run and in the Long Run   247
The Relationship between Short-Run and Long-Run Average 
Total Cost   247
Economies and Diseconomies of Scale   248
FYI: Lessons from a Pin Factory   249
Conclusion   250
Chapter 13
Firms in Competitive Markets   255
What Is a Competitive Market?   256
The Meaning of Competition   256
The Revenue of a Competitive Firm   256
Profit Maximization and the Competitive Firm’s  
Supply Curve   258
A Simple Example of Profit Maximization   258
The Marginal-Cost Curve and the Firm’s Supply Decision   259
The Firm’s Short-Run Decision to Shut Down   261
Spilt Milk and Other Sunk Costs   262
Case Study: Near-Empty Restaurants and Off-Season 
Miniature Golf   263
The Firm’s Long-Run Decision to Exit or Enter a Market   264
Measuring Profit in Our Graph for the Competitive Firm   264
The Supply Curve in a Competitive Market   265
The Short Run: Market Supply with a Fixed Number of Firms   266
The Long Run: Market Supply with Entry and Exit   266
Why Do Competitive Firms Stay in Business If They  
Make Zero Profit?   268
A Shift in Demand in the Short Run and Long Run   269
Why the Long-Run Supply Curve Might Slope Upward   269
Conclusion: Behind the Supply Curve   271
Chapter 14
Monopoly   275
Why Monopolies Arise   276
Monopoly Resources   277
Government-Created Monopolies   277
Natural Monopolies   278
How Monopolies Make Production and Pricing Decisions   279
Monopoly versus Competition   279
A Monopoly’s Revenue   280
Profit Maximization   282
A Monopoly’s Profit   284
FYI: Why a Monopoly Does Not Have a Supply Curve   284
Case Study: Monopoly Drugs versus Generic Drugs   285
The Welfare Cost of Monopolies   286
The Deadweight Loss   287
The Monopoly’s Profit: A Social Cost?   289
Price Discrimination   290
A Parable about Pricing   290
The Moral of the Story   291
The Analytics of Price Discrimination   291
Examples of Price Discrimination   293
Public Policy toward Monopolies   294
In The News: TKTS and Other Schemes   294
Increasing Competition with Antitrust Laws   295
In The News: President Obama’s Antitrust Policy   296
Regulation   297
Public Ownership   299
Doing Nothing   299
Conclusion: The Prevalence of Monopolies   299
PartVI  The Data 
of Macro­
economics   305
Chapter 15
Measuring a Nation’s Income   307
The Economy’s Income and Expenditure   308
The Measurement of Gross Domestic Product   310
“GDP Is the Market Value…”   310

xxi
contents
PartVII  The Real 
Economy in  
the Long Run   345
Chapter 17
Production and Growth   347
Economic Growth around the World   348
FYI: A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Statistics   350
FYI: Are You Richer Than the Richest American?   352
Productivity: Its Role and Determinants   352
Why Productivity Is So Important   352
How Productivity Is Determined   353
FYI: The Production Function   355
Case Study: Are Natural Resources a Limit to Growth?   355
Economic Growth and Public Policy   356
Saving and Investment   356
Diminishing Returns and the Catch-Up Effect   357
Investment from Abroad   358
Education   359
Health and Nutrition   360
In The News: Promoting Human Capital   361
Property Rights and Political Stability   362
Free Trade   363
Research and Development   364
Population Growth   364
In The News: One Economist’s Answer   366
Conclusion: The Importance of Long-Run Growth   368
“…of All…”   310
“…Final…”   311
“…Goods and Services…”   311
“…Produced…”   311
“…Within a Country…”   311
“…In a Given Period of Time.”   311
The Components of GDP   312
FYI: Other Measures of Income   313
Consumption   313
Investment   313
Government Purchases   314
Net Exports   314
Case Study: The Components of U.S. 
GDP   315
Real versus Nominal GDP   315
A Numerical Example   316
The GDP Deflator   317
Case Study: Real GDP over Recent 
History   318
Is GDP a Good Measure of Economic  
Well-Being?   319
In The News: The Underground 
Economy   320
In The News: Beyond Gross Domestic 
Product   322
Case Study: International Differences in 
GDP and the Quality of Life   323
Conclusion   324
Chapter 16
Measuring the Cost of Living   329
The Consumer Price Index   330
How the Consumer Price Index Is Calculated   330
FYI: What Is in the CPI’s Basket?   332
Problems in Measuring the Cost of Living   333
In The News: Shopping for the CPI   334
The GDP Deflator versus the Consumer Price  
Index   336
Correcting Economic Variables for the Effects  
of Inflation   337
Dollar Figures from Different Times   338
Indexation   338
FYI: Mr. Index Goes to Hollywood   339
Real and Nominal Interest Rates   339
Case Study: Interest Rates in the U.S. 
Economy   341
Conclusion   342

xxii
contents
Chapter 18
Saving, Investment, and the Financial 
System   371
Financial Institutions in the U.S. Economy   372
Financial Markets   372
Financial Intermediaries   374
FYI: Key Numbers for Stock Watchers   375
Summing Up   376
FYI: Financial Crises   377
Saving and Investment in the National Income  
Accounts   377
Some Important Identities   378
The Meaning of Saving and Investment   379
The Market for Loanable Funds   380
Supply and Demand for Loanable Funds   380
Policy 1: Saving Incentives   382
Policy 2: Investment Incentives   384
Policy 3: Government Budget Deficits and Surpluses   384
Case Study: The History of U.S. Government Debt   386
Conclusion   388
Chapter 19
The Basic Tools of Finance   393
Present Value: Measuring the Time Value of Money   394
FYI: The Magic of Compounding and the Rule of 70   396
Managing Risk   396
Risk Aversion   396
The Markets for Insurance   397
Diversification of Firm-Specific Risk   398
The Trade-off between Risk and Return   399
Asset Valuation   400
Fundamental Analysis   401
The Efficient Markets Hypothesis   401
In The News: A Cartoonist’s Guide to Stock Picking   402
Case Study: Random Walks and Index Funds   403
In The News: Is the Efficient Markets Hypothesis Kaput?   404
Market Irrationality   406
Conclusion   406
Chapter 20
Unemployment   409
Identifying Unemployment   410
How Is Unemployment Measured?   410
Case Study: Labor-Force Participation of Men and Women 
in the U.S. Economy   413
Does the Unemployment Rate Measure What We  
Want It To?   414
How Long Are the Unemployed without Work?   416
Why Are There Always Some People Unemployed?   416
PartVIII  Money and 
Prices in the 
Long Run   433
Chapter 21
The Monetary System   435
The Meaning of Money   436
The Functions of Money   437
The Kinds of Money   437
In The News: The Rise of Long-Term Unemployment   417
FYI: The Jobs Number   418
Job Search   418
Why Some Frictional Unemployment Is Inevitable   419
Public Policy and Job Search   419
Unemployment Insurance   420
In The News: How Much Do the Unemployed Respond to 
Incentives?   420
Minimum-Wage Laws   422
FYI: Who Earns the Minimum Wage?   424
Unions and Collective Bargaining   424
The Economics of Unions   425
Are Unions Good or Bad for the Economy?   426
The Theory of Efficiency Wages   426
Worker Health   427
Worker Turnover   427
Worker Quality   427
Worker Effort   428
Case Study: Henry Ford and the Very Generous $5-a-Day 
Wage   428
Conclusion   429

xxiii
contents
PartIX  Short-Run 
­Economic 
­Fluctuations   485
Chapter 23
Aggregate Demand and Aggregate  
Supply   487
Three Key Facts about Economic Fluctuations   488
Fact 1: Economic Fluctuations Are Irregular and  
Unpredictable   488
Fact 2: Most Macroeconomic Quantities Fluctuate  
Together   490
Fact 3: As Output Falls, Unemployment Rises   490
Explaining Short-Run Economic Fluctuations   490
The Assumptions of Classical Economics   490
The Reality of Short-Run Fluctuations   491
In The News: The Social Influences of Economic 
Downturns   492
The Model of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply   492
The Aggregate-Demand Curve   494
Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve Slopes Downward   494
Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve Might Shift   497
The Aggregate-Supply Curve   499
Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve Is Vertical in the  
Long Run   499
Why the Long-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Might Shift   500
Using Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply to Depict 
Long-Run Growth and Inflation   502
Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve Slopes Upward in  
the Short Run   502
Why the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Might Shift   506
In The News: Mackereleconomics   438
Money in the U.S. Economy   439
FYI: Why Credit Cards Aren’t Money   440
Case Study: Where Is All the Currency?   440
The Federal Reserve System   441
The Fed’s Organization   442
The Federal Open Market Committee   442
Banks and the Money Supply   443
The Simple Case of 100-Percent-Reserve Banking   443
Money Creation with Fractional-Reserve Banking   444
The Money Multiplier   445
Bank Capital, Leverage, and the Financial Crisis of  
2008–2009   447
The Fed’s Tools of Monetary Control   448
How the Fed Influences the Quantity of Reserves   449
How the Fed Influences the Reserve Ratio   450
Problems in Controlling the Money Supply   451
Case Study: Bank Runs and the Money 
Supply   452
The Federal Funds Rate   452
In The News: Bernanke on the Fed’s Toolbox   454
Conclusion   456
Chapter 22
Money Growth and Inflation   459
The Classical Theory of Inflation   460
The Level of Prices and the Value of Money   461
Money Supply, Money Demand, and Monetary  
Equilibrium   461
The Effects of a Monetary Injection   463
A Brief Look at the Adjustment Process   464
The Classical Dichotomy and Monetary Neutrality   465
Velocity and the Quantity Equation   466
Case Study: Money and Prices during Four 
Hyperinflations   468
The Inflation Tax   468
FYI: Hyperinflation in Zimbabwe   470
The Fisher Effect   471
The Costs of Inflation   472
A Fall in Purchasing Power? The Inflation Fallacy   472
Shoeleather Costs   473
Menu Costs   474
Relative-Price Variability and the Misallocation of  
Resources   474
Inflation-Induced Tax Distortions   475
Confusion and Inconvenience   476
A Special Cost of Unexpected Inflation: Arbitrary 
Redistributions of Wealth   477
Inflation Is Bad, But Deflation May Be Worse   478
Case Study: The Wizard of Oz and the Free-Silver 
Debate   478
In The News: Inflationary Threats   480
Conclusion   480

xxiv
contents
Two Causes of Economic Fluctuations   508
The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Demand   508
FYI: Monetary Neutrality Revisited   511
Case Study: Two Big Shifts in Aggregate Demand: The Great 
Depression and World War II   512
Case Study: The Recession of 2008–2009   513
In The News: Modern Parallels to the Great 
Depression   514
The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Supply   516
Case Study: Oil and the Economy   518
FYI: The Origins of the Model of Aggregate Demand and 
Aggregate Supply   519
Conclusion   520
Chapter 24
The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal 
Policy on Aggregate Demand   525
How Monetary Policy Influences Aggregate Demand   526
The Theory of Liquidity Preference   527
The Downward Slope of the Aggregate-Demand Curve   529
FYI: Interest Rates in the Long Run and the Short Run   530
Changes in the Money Supply   532
The Role of Interest-Rate Targets in Fed Policy   533
FYI: The Zero Lower Bound   534
Case Study: Why the Fed Watches the Stock Market (and 
Vice Versa)   534
How Fiscal Policy Influences Aggregate Demand   535
Changes in Government Purchases   536
The Multiplier Effect   536
A Formula for the Spending Multiplier   537
Other Applications of the Multiplier Effect   538
The Crowding-Out Effect   539
Changes in Taxes   540
FYI: How Fiscal Policy Might Affect Aggregate Supply   541
Using Policy to Stabilize the Economy   541
The Case for Active Stabilization Policy   541
Case Study: Keynesians in the White House   543
The Case against Active Stabilization Policy   543
In The News: How Large Is the Fiscal Policy 
Multiplier?   544
Automatic Stabilizers   545
In The News: Offbeat Indicators    547
Conclusion   548
Glossary    553
Index    558

Introduction
I
Part


3
1
Ten Principles of 
    Economics
T
he word economy comes from the Greek word oikonomos, which means 
“one who manages a household.” At first, this origin might seem pecu-
liar. But in fact, households and economies have much in common. 
A household faces many decisions. It must decide which members of 
the household do which tasks and what each member gets in return: Who cooks 
dinner? Who does the laundry? Who gets the extra dessert at dinner? Who gets to 
choose what TV show to watch? In short, the household must allocate its scarce 
resources among its various members, taking into account each member’s abili-
ties, efforts, and desires. 
Like a household, a society faces many decisions. A society must find some 
way to decide what jobs will be done and who will do them. It needs some people 
to grow food, other people to make clothing, and still others to design computer 
software. Once society has allocated people (as well as land, buildings, and 
machines) to various jobs, it must also allocate the output of goods and services 

4
PART I	
Introduction
they produce. It must decide who will eat caviar and who will eat potatoes. It 
must decide who will drive a Ferrari and who will take the bus.
The management of society’s resources is important because resources are 
scarce. Scarcity means that society has limited resources and therefore cannot 
produce all the goods and services people wish to have. Just as each member of 
a household cannot get everything he or she wants, each individual in a society 
cannot attain the highest standard of living to which he or she might aspire.
Economics is the study of how society manages its scarce resources. In most 
societies, resources are allocated not by an all-powerful dictator but through the 
combined actions of millions of households and firms. Economists therefore study 
how people make decisions: how much they work, what they buy, how much they 
save, and how they invest their savings. Economists also study how people inter-
act with one another. For instance, they examine how the multitude of buyers and 
sellers of a good together determine the price at which the good is sold and the 
quantity that is sold. Finally, economists analyze forces and trends that affect the  
economy as a whole, including the growth in average income, the fraction of  
the population that cannot find work, and the rate at which prices are rising.
The study of economics has many facets, but it is unified by several central 
ideas. In this chapter, we look at Ten Principles of Economics. Don’t worry if you 
don’t understand them all at first or if you aren’t completely convinced. We will 
explore these ideas more fully in later chapters. The ten principles are introduced 
here to give you an overview of what economics is all about. Consider this chapter 
a “preview of coming attractions.”
How People Make Decisions
There is no mystery to what an economy is. Whether we are talking about the 
economy of Los Angeles, the United States, or the whole world, an economy 
is just a group of people dealing with one another as they go about their lives. 
Because the behavior of an economy reflects the behavior of the individuals who 
make up the economy, we begin our study of economics with four principles of 
individual decision making.
Principle 1: People Face Trade-offs
You may have heard the old saying, “There ain’t no such thing as a free lunch.” 
Grammar aside, there is much truth to this adage. To get one thing that we like, 
we usually have to give up another thing that we like. Making decisions requires 
trading off one goal against another.
Consider a student who must decide how to allocate her most valuable 
resource—her time. She can spend all her time studying economics, spend all of 
it studying psychology, or divide it between the two fields. For every hour she 
studies one subject, she gives up an hour she could have used studying the other. 
And for every hour she spends studying, she gives up an hour that she could have 
spent napping, bike riding, watching TV, or working at her part-time job for some 
extra spending money.
Or consider parents deciding how to spend their family income. They can buy 
food, clothing, or a family vacation. Or they can save some of the family income 
for retirement or the children’s college education. When they choose to spend an 
extra dollar on one of these goods, they have one less dollar to spend on some 
other good. 
scarcity 
the limited nature of  
society’s resources
economics 
the study of how society 
manages its scarce 
resources

5
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
When people are grouped into societies, they face different kinds of trade-offs. 
One classic trade-off is between “guns and butter.” The more a society spends 
on national defense (guns) to protect its shores from foreign aggressors, the less 
it can spend on consumer goods (butter) to raise the standard of living at home. 
Also important in modern society is the trade-off between a clean environment 
and a high level of income. Laws that require firms to reduce pollution raise the 
cost of producing goods and services. Because of the higher costs, these firms end 
up earning smaller profits, paying lower wages, charging higher prices, or some 
combination of these three. Thus, while pollution regulations yield the benefit of 
a cleaner environment and the improved health that comes with it, the regulations 
come at the cost of reducing the incomes of the regulated firms’ owners, workers, 
and customers.
Another trade-off society faces is between efficiency and equality. Efficiency 
means that society is getting the maximum benefits from its scarce resources. 
Equality means that those benefits are distributed uniformly among society’s 
members. In other words, efficiency refers to the size of the economic pie, and 
equality refers to how the pie is divided into individual slices. 
When government policies are designed, these two goals often conflict. Con-
sider, for instance, policies aimed at equalizing the distribution of economic 
well-being. Some of these policies, such as the welfare system or unemployment 
insurance, try to help the members of society who are most in need. Others, such 
as the individual income tax, ask the financially successful to contribute more than 
others to support the government. While achieving greater equality, these policies 
reduce efficiency. When the government redistributes income from the rich to the 
poor, it reduces the reward for working hard; as a result, people work less and 
produce fewer goods and services. In other words, when the government tries to 
cut the economic pie into more equal slices, the pie gets smaller.
Recognizing that people face trade-offs does not by itself tell us what decisions 
they will or should make. A student should not abandon the study of psychol-
ogy just because doing so would increase the time available for the study of 
economics. Society should not stop protecting the environment just because envi-
ronmental regulations reduce our material standard of living. The poor should 
not be ignored just because helping them distorts work incentives. Nonetheless, 
people are likely to make good decisions only if they understand the options they 
have available. Our study of economics, therefore, starts by acknowledging life’s 
trade-offs.
Principle 2: The Cost of Something Is  
What You Give Up to Get It
Because people face trade-offs, making decisions requires comparing the costs 
and benefits of alternative courses of action. In many cases, however, the cost of 
an action is not as obvious as it might first appear. 
Consider the decision to go to college. The main benefits are intellectual enrich-
ment and a lifetime of better job opportunities. But what are the costs? To answer 
this question, you might be tempted to add up the money you spend on tuition, 
books, room, and board. Yet this total does not truly represent what you give up 
to spend a year in college.
There are two problems with this calculation. First, it includes some things 
that are not really costs of going to college. Even if you quit school, you need a 
place to sleep and food to eat. Room and board are costs of going to college only 
to the extent that they are more expensive at college than elsewhere. Second, this 
efficiency 
the property of society 
getting the most it can 
from its scarce resources
equality 
the property of distrib­
uting economic prosperity 
uniformly among the 
members of society

6
PART I	
Introduction
­calculation ignores the largest cost of going to college—your time. When you 
spend a year listening to lectures, reading textbooks, and writing papers, you can-
not spend that time working at a job. For most students, the earnings given up to 
attend school are the largest single cost of their education.
The opportunity cost of an item is what you give up to get that item. When 
making any decision, decision makers should be aware of the opportunity costs 
that accompany each possible action. In fact, they usually are. College athletes 
who can earn millions if they drop out of school and play professional sports are 
well aware that their opportunity cost of college is very high. It is not surprising 
that they often decide that the benefit of a college education is not worth the cost.
Principle 3: Rational People Think at the Margin
Economists normally assume that people are rational. Rational people systemati-
cally and purposefully do the best they can to achieve their objectives, given the 
available opportunities. As you study economics, you will encounter firms that 
decide how many workers to hire and how much of their product to manufacture 
and sell to maximize profits. You will also encounter individuals who decide how 
much time to spend working and what goods and services to buy with the result-
ing income to achieve the highest possible level of satisfaction.
Rational people know that decisions in life are rarely black and white but usu-
ally involve shades of gray. At dinnertime, the decision you face is not between 
fasting or eating like a pig but whether to take that extra spoonful of mashed pota-
toes. When exams roll around, your decision is not between blowing them off or 
studying 24 hours a day but whether to spend an extra hour reviewing your notes 
instead of watching TV. Economists use the term marginal change to describe 
a small incremental adjustment to an existing plan of action. Keep in mind that 
margin means “edge,” so marginal changes are adjustments around the edges of 
what you are doing. Rational people often make decisions by comparing marginal 
benefits and marginal costs.
For example, consider an airline deciding how much to charge passengers who 
fly standby. Suppose that flying a 200-seat plane across the United States costs the 
airline $100,000. In this case, the average cost of each seat is $100,000/200, which is 
$500. One might be tempted to conclude that the airline should never sell a ticket 
for less than $500. Actually, a rational airline can often find ways to raise its profits 
by thinking at the margin. Imagine that a plane is about to take off with ten empty 
seats, and a standby passenger waiting at the gate will pay $300 for a seat. Should 
the airline sell the ticket? Of course it should. If the plane has empty seats, the cost 
of adding one more passenger is tiny. Although the average cost of flying a pas-
senger is $500, the marginal cost is merely the cost of the bag of peanuts and can 
of soda that the extra passenger will consume. As long as the standby passenger 
pays more than the marginal cost, selling the ticket is profitable.
Marginal decision making can help explain some otherwise puzzling eco-
nomic phenomena. Here is a classic question: Why is water so cheap, while 
diamonds are so expensive? Humans need water to survive, while diamonds 
are unnecessary; but for some reason, people are willing to pay much more for 
a diamond than for a cup of water. The reason is that a person’s willingness to 
pay for a good is based on the marginal benefit that an extra unit of the good 
would yield. The marginal benefit, in turn, depends on how many units a person 
already has. Water is essential, but the marginal benefit of an extra cup is small 
because water is plentiful. By contrast, no one needs diamonds to survive, but 
because diamonds are so rare, people consider the marginal benefit of an extra 
diamond to be large.
opportunity cost 
whatever must be given 
up to obtain some item
rational people
people who systematically 
and purposefully do the 
best they can to achieve 
their objectives
marginal change 
a small incremental 
adjustment to a plan of 
action

7
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
A rational decision maker takes an action if and only if the marginal benefit of the 
action exceeds the marginal cost. This principle can explain why airlines are will-
ing to sell a ticket below average cost and why people are willing to pay more for 
diamonds than for water. It can take some time to get used to the logic of marginal 
thinking, but the study of economics will give you ample opportunity to practice.
Principle 4: People Respond to Incentives
An incentive is something that induces a person to act, such as the prospect of a 
punishment or a reward. Because rational people make decisions by comparing 
costs and benefits, they respond to incentives. You will see that incentives play 
a central role in the study of economics. One economist went so far as to suggest 
that the entire field could be summarized simply: “People respond to incentives. 
The rest is commentary.”
Incentives are crucial to analyzing how markets work. For example, when the 
price of an apple rises, people decide to eat fewer apples. At the same time, apple 
orchards decide to hire more workers and harvest more apples. In other words, 
a higher price in a market provides an incentive for buyers to consume less and 
an incentive for sellers to produce more. As we will see, the influence of prices on 
the behavior of consumers and producers is crucial for how a market economy 
allocates scarce resources.
Public policymakers should never forget about incentives: Many policies change 
the costs or benefits that people face and, therefore, alter their behavior. A tax on 
gasoline, for instance, encourages people to drive smaller, more fuel-efficient cars. 
That is one reason people drive smaller cars in Europe, where gasoline taxes are 
high, than in the United States, where gasoline taxes are low. A gasoline tax also 
encourages people to carpool, take public transportation, and live closer to where 
they work. If the tax were larger, more people would be driving hybrid cars, and 
if it were large enough, they would switch to electric cars.
When policymakers fail to consider how their policies affect incentives, they 
often end up with unintended consequences. For example, consider public policy 
regarding auto safety. Today, all cars have seat belts, but this was not true 50 years 
ago. In the 1960s, Ralph Nader’s book Unsafe at Any Speed generated much public 
concern over auto safety. Congress responded with laws requiring seat belts as 
standard equipment on new cars.
How does a seat belt law affect auto safety? The direct effect is obvious: When 
a person wears a seat belt, the probability of surviving an auto accident rises. But 
that’s not the end of the story because the law also affects behavior by altering 
incentives. The relevant behavior here is the speed and care with which ­drivers 
operate their cars. Driving slowly and carefully is costly because it uses the 
driver’s time and energy. When deciding how safely to drive, rational people com-
pare, perhaps unconsciously, the marginal benefit from safer driving to the mar-
ginal cost. As a result, they drive more slowly and carefully when the benefit of 
increased safety is high. For example, when road conditions are icy, people drive 
more attentively and at lower speeds than they do when road conditions are clear.
Consider how a seat belt law alters a driver’s cost–benefit calculation. Seat belts 
make accidents less costly because they reduce the likelihood of injury or death. 
In other words, seat belts reduce the benefits of slow and careful driving. People 
respond to seat belts as they would to an improvement in road conditions—by 
driving faster and less carefully. The result of a seat belt law, therefore, is a larger 
number of accidents. The decline in safe driving has a clear, adverse impact on 
pedestrians, who are more likely to find themselves in an accident but (unlike the 
drivers) don’t have the benefit of added protection.
incentive
something that induces a 
person to act

8
PART I	
Introduction
At first, this discussion of incentives and seat belts might seem like idle specula-
tion. Yet in a classic 1975 study, economist Sam Peltzman argued that auto-­safety 
laws have had many of these effects. According to Peltzman’s evidence, these 
laws produce both fewer deaths per accident and more accidents. He concluded 
that the net result is little change in the number of driver deaths and an increase 
in the number of pedestrian deaths. 
Peltzman’s analysis of auto safety is an offbeat and controversial example of 
the general principle that people respond to incentives. When analyzing any pol-
icy, we must consider not only the direct effects but also the less obvious indirect 
effects that work through incentives. If the policy changes incentives, it will cause 
people to alter their behavior. 
The Incentive Effects of  
Gasoline Prices
From 2005 to 2008 the price of oil in world oil markets skyrocketed, the result of 
limited supplies together with surging demand from robust world growth, espe-
cially in China. The price of gasoline in the United States rose from about $2 to 
about $4 a gallon. At the time, the news was filled with stories about how people 
responded to the increased incentive to conserve, sometimes in obvious ways, 
sometimes in less obvious ways.
	
Here is a sampling of various stories:
• 	 “As Gas Prices Soar, Buyers Are Flocking to Small Cars”
• 	 “As Gas Prices Climb, So Do Scooter Sales”
• 	 “Gas Prices Knock Bicycles Sales, Repairs into Higher Gear”
• 	 “Gas Prices Send Surge of Riders to Mass Transit”
• 	 “Camel Demand Up as Oil Price Soars“: Farmers in the Indian state of 
Rajasthan are rediscovering the humble camel. As the cost of running gas-
guzzling tractors soars, even-toed ungulates are making a comeback.
• 	 “The Airlines Are Suffering, But the Order Books of Boeing and Airbus 
Are Bulging“: Demand for new, more fuel-efficient aircraft has never been 
greater. The latest versions of the Airbus A320 and Boeing 737, the single-
aisle workhorses for which demand is strongest, are up to 40% cheaper to 
run than the vintage planes some American airlines still use.
• 	 “Home Buying Practices Adjust to High Gas Prices“: In his hunt for a new 
home, Demetrius Stroud crunched the numbers to find out that, with gas  
prices climbing, moving near an Amtrak station is the best thing for his wallet.
• 	 “Gas Prices Drive Students to Online Courses“: For Christy LaBadie, a sopho-
more at Northampton Community College, the 30-minute drive from her 
home to the Bethlehem, Pa., campus has become a financial hardship now 
that gasoline prices have soared to more than $4 a gallon. So this semester she 
decided to take an online course to save herself the trip­—and the money.
•  “Diddy Halts Private Jet Flights Over Fuel Prices“: Fuel prices have 
grounded an unexpected frequent-flyer: Sean “Diddy” Combs. . . . The 
hip-hop mogul said he is now flying on commercial airlines instead of in 
private jets, which Combs said had previously cost him $200,000 and up for 
a roundtrip between New York and Los Angeles. ”I’m actually flying com-
mercial,“ Diddy said before walking onto an airplane, sitting in a first-class 
seat and flashing his boarding pass to the camera. ”That’s how high gas 
prices are.”
Hip-hop mogul Sean  
“Diddy” Combs responds 
to incentives.
© AP Photo/Stephan Savoia

9
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
Many of these developments proved transitory. The economic downturn that 
began in 2008 and continued into 2009 reduced the world demand for oil, and the 
price of gasoline declined substantially. No word yet on whether Mr. Combs has 
returned to his private jet.  ■
Quick Quiz  Describe an important trade-off you recently faced. • Give an example of 
some action that has both a monetary and nonmonetary opportunity cost. • Describe an 
incentive your parents offered to you in an effort to influence your behavior.
 Incentive Pay
As this article illustrates, how people are paid affects their incentives and 
the decisions they make.  (The article’s author, by the way, subsequently 
became one of the chief economic advisers to President Barack Obama.)
in the news
Where the Buses  
Run on Time
By Austan Goolsbee
O
n a summer afternoon, the drive home 
from the University of Chicago to the 
north side of the city must be one of the 
most beautiful commutes in the world. On 
the left on Lake Shore Drive you pass Grant 
Park, some of the world’s first skyscrapers, 
and the Sears Tower. On the right is the 
intense blue of Lake Michigan. But for all the 
beauty, the traffic can be hell. So, if you drive 
the route every day, you learn the shortcuts. 
You know that if it backs up from the Buck-
ingham Fountain all the way to McCormick 
Place, you’re better off taking the surface 
streets and getting back onto Lake Shore 
Drive a few miles north. 
 
A lot of buses, however, wait in the traf-
fic jams. I have always wondered about that: 
Why don’t the bus drivers use the shortcuts? 
Surely they know about them—they drive 
the same route every day, and they probably 
avoid the traffic when they drive their own 
cars. Buses don’t stop on Lake Shore Drive, 
so they wouldn’t strand anyone by detour-
ing around the congestion. And when buses 
get delayed in heavy traffic, it wreaks havoc 
on the scheduled service. Instead of arriving 
once every 10 minutes, three buses come in 
at the same time after half an hour. That sort 
of bunching is the least efficient way to run 
a public transportation system. So, why not 
take the surface streets if that would keep 
the schedule properly spaced and on time?
 
You might think at first that the problem 
is that the drivers aren’t paid enough to 
strategize. But Chicago bus drivers are the 
seventh-highest paid in the nation; full-timers 
earned more than $23 an hour, according to 
a November 2004 survey. The problem may 
have to do not with how much they are paid, 
but how they are paid. At least, that’s the 
implication of a new study of Chilean bus driv-
ers by Ryan Johnson and David Reiley of the 
University of Arizona and Juan Carlos Muñoz 
of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. 
 
Companies in Chile pay bus drivers one 
of two ways: either by the hour or by the 
passenger. Paying by the passenger leads 
to significantly shorter delays. Give them 
incentives, and drivers start acting like regu-
lar people do. They take shortcuts when the 
traffic is bad. They take shorter meal breaks 
and bathroom breaks. They want to get on 
the road and pick up more passengers as 
quickly as they can. In short, their productiv-
ity increases….
 
Not everything about incentive pay is 
perfect, of course. When bus drivers start 
moving from place to place more quickly, 
they get in more accidents (just like the rest 
of us). Some passengers also complain that 
the rides make them nauseated because the 
drivers stomp on the gas as soon as the last 
passenger gets on the bus. Yet when given 
the choice, people overwhelmingly choose 
the bus companies that get them where 
they’re going on time. More than 95 percent 
of the routes in Santiago use incentive pay. 
 
Perhaps we should have known that 
incentive pay could increase bus driver pro-
ductivity. After all, the taxis in Chicago take 
the shortcuts on Lake Shore Drive to avoid 
the traffic that buses just sit in. Since taxi 
drivers earn money for every trip they make, 
they want to get you home as quickly as 
possible so they can pick up somebody else. 
Source: Slate.com, March 16, 2006.

10
PART I	
Introduction
How People Interact
The first four principles discussed how individuals make decisions. As we go 
about our lives, many of our decisions affect not only ourselves but other people 
as well. The next three principles concern how people interact with one another.
Principle 5: Trade Can Make Everyone Better Off
You may have heard on the news that the Japanese are our competitors in the 
world economy. In some ways, this is true because American and Japanese firms 
produce many of the same goods. Ford and Toyota compete for the same ­customers 
in the market for automobiles. Apple and Sony compete for the same ­customers in 
the market for digital music players.
Yet it is easy to be misled when thinking about competition among countries. 
Trade between the United States and Japan is not like a sports contest in which 
one side wins and the other side loses. In fact, the opposite is true: Trade between 
two countries can make each country better off. 
To see why, consider how trade affects your family. When a member of your 
family looks for a job, he or she competes against members of other families who 
are looking for jobs. Families also compete against one another when they go 
shopping because each family wants to buy the best goods at the lowest prices. In 
a sense, each family in the economy is competing with all other families.
Despite this competition, your family would not be better off isolating itself 
from all other families. If it did, your family would need to grow its own food, 
make its own clothes, and build its own home. Clearly, your family gains much 
from its ability to trade with others. Trade allows each person to specialize in the 
activities he or she does best, whether it is farming, sewing, or home building. 
By trading with others, people can buy a greater variety of goods and services at 
lower cost.
Countries as well as families benefit from the ability to trade with one another. 
Trade allows countries to specialize in what they do best and to enjoy a greater 
variety of goods and services. The Japanese, as well as the French and the 
­Egyptians and the Brazilians, are as much our partners in the world economy as 
they are our competitors.
Principle 6: Markets Are Usually a Good Way to 
Organize Economic Activity
The collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in the 1980s 
may be the most important change in the world during the past half century. 
Communist countries worked on the premise that government officials were in 
the best position to allocate the economy’s scarce resources. These central plan-
ners decided what goods and services were produced, how much was produced, 
and who produced and consumed these goods and services. The theory behind 
central planning was that only the government could organize economic activity 
in a way that promoted economic well-being for the country as a whole.
Most countries that once had centrally planned economies have abandoned 
the system and are instead developing market economies. In a market economy, 
the decisions of a central planner are replaced by the decisions of millions of 
firms and households. Firms decide whom to hire and what to make. Households 
decide which firms to work for and what to buy with their incomes. These firms 
market economy
an economy that allocates 
resources through the 
decentralized decisions  
of many firms and  
households as they  
interact in markets for 
goods and services
“For $5 a week you can 
watch baseball without 
being nagged to cut the 
grass!”
FROM THE WALL STREET JOURNAL—
PERMISSION, CARTOON FEATURES SYNDICATE

11
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
and households interact in the marketplace, where prices and self-interest guide 
their decisions.
At first glance, the success of market economies is puzzling. In a market 
­economy, no one is looking out for the economic well-being of society as a whole. 
Free markets contain many buyers and sellers of numerous goods and services, 
and all of them are interested primarily in their own well-being. Yet despite 
decentralized decision making and self-interested decision makers, market econo-
mies have proven remarkably successful in organizing economic activity to pro-
mote overall economic well-being.
In his 1776 book An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 
economist Adam Smith made the most famous observation in all of econom-
ics: Households and firms interacting in markets act as if they are guided by an 
“invisible hand” that leads them to desirable market outcomes. One of our goals 
in this book is to understand how this invisible hand works its magic. 
As you study economics, you will learn that prices are the instrument with 
which the invisible hand directs economic activity. In any market, buyers look at 
the price when determining how much to demand, and sellers look at the price 
when deciding how much to supply. As a result of the decisions that buyers and 
sellers make, market prices reflect both the value of a good to society and the 
cost to society of making the good. Smith’s great insight was that prices adjust to 
guide these individual buyers and sellers to reach outcomes that, in many cases, 
maximize the well-being of society as a whole.
Smith’s insight has an important corollary: When the government prevents 
prices from adjusting naturally to supply and demand, it impedes the invisible 
hand’s ability to coordinate the decisions of the households and firms that make 
up the economy. This corollary explains why taxes adversely affect the alloca-
tion of resources, for they distort prices and thus the decisions of households 
and firms. It also explains the great harm caused by policies that directly control 
prices, such as rent control. And it explains the failure of communism. In com-
munist countries, prices were not determined in the marketplace but were dic-
tated by central planners. These planners lacked the necessary information about 
­consumers’ tastes and producers’ costs, which in a market economy is reflected 
in prices. Central planners failed because they tried to run the economy with one 
hand tied behind their backs—the invisible hand of the marketplace.
Principle 7: Governments Can Sometimes  
Improve Market Outcomes
 If the invisible hand of the market is so great, why do we need government? One 
purpose of studying economics is to refine your view about the proper role and 
scope of government policy.
One reason we need government is that the invisible hand can work its magic 
only if the government enforces the rules and maintains the institutions that are 
key to a market economy. Most important, market economies need institutions 
to enforce property rights so individuals can own and control scarce resources. 
A farmer won’t grow food if he expects his crop to be stolen; a restaurant won’t 
serve meals unless it is assured that customers will pay before they leave; and an 
entertainment company won’t produce DVDs if too many potential ­customers 
avoid paying by making illegal copies. We all rely on government-provided 
police and courts to enforce our rights over the things we produce—and the invis-
ible hand counts on our ability to enforce our rights.
property rights
the ability of an individual 
to own and exercise  
control over scarce 
resources

12
PART I	
Introduction
Yet there is another reason we need government: The invisible hand is powerful, 
but it is not omnipotent. There are two broad reasons for a government to intervene 
in the economy and change the allocation of resources that people would choose 
on their own: to promote efficiency or to promote equality. That is, most policies 
aim either to enlarge the economic pie or to change how the pie is divided.
Consider first the goal of efficiency. Although the invisible hand usually leads 
markets to allocate resources to maximize the size of the economic pie, this is not 
always the case. Economists use the term market failure to refer to a situation in 
which the market on its own fails to produce an efficient allocation of resources. 
As we will see, one possible cause of market failure is an externality, which is 
the impact of one person’s actions on the well-being of a bystander. The classic 
market failure
a situation in which a 
market left on its own 
fails to allocate resources 
efficiently
externality
the impact of one  
person’s actions on the 
well-being of a bystander
FYI
 Adam Smith and the Invisible Hand
I
t may be only a coincidence that Adam Smith’s great book The 
Wealth of Nations was published in 1776, the exact year Ameri-
can revolutionaries signed the Declaration of Independence. But 
the two documents share a point of view that was prevalent at the 
time: Individuals are usually best left to their own devices, without 
the heavy hand of government guiding their actions. This political 
philosophy provides the intellectual basis for the market economy 
and for free society more generally. 
 
Why do decentralized market economies work so well? Is it 
because people can be counted on to treat one another with love 
and kindness? Not at all. Here is Adam Smith’s description of how 
people interact in a market economy:
Man has almost constant occasion for the 
help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to 
expect it from their benevolence only. He will 
be more likely to prevail if he can interest their 
self-love in his favour, and show them that it 
is for their own advantage to do for him what 
he requires of them. . . . Give me that which I 
want, and you shall have this which you want, 
is the meaning of every such offer; and it is in 
this manner that we obtain from one another 
the far greater part of those good offices 
which we stand in need of. 
It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, 
or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard 
to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their 
humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of 
our own necessities but of their advantages. Nobody but a 
beggar chooses to depend chiefly upon the benevolence of 
his fellow-citizens. . . . 
Every individual . . . neither intends to promote the public 
interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. . . . He 
intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other 
cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was 
no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the 
society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he 
frequently promotes that of the society more effec-
tually than when he really intends to promote it.
Smith is saying that participants in the economy 
are motivated by self-interest and that the “invisible 
hand” of the marketplace guides this self-interest 
into promoting general economic well-being.
 
Many of Smith’s insights remain at the center of 
modern economics. Our analysis in the coming chap-
ters will allow us to express Smith’s conclusions more 
precisely and to analyze more fully the strengths and 
weaknesses of the market’s invisible hand.
Adam Smith
© BETTMANN/CORBIS

13
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
example of an externality is pollution. Another possible cause of market failure 
is market power, which refers to the ability of a single person (or small group) 
to unduly influence market prices. For example, if everyone in town needs water 
but there is only one well, the owner of the well is not subject to the rigorous 
competition with which the invisible hand normally keeps self-interest in check. 
In the presence of externalities or market power, well-designed public policy can 
enhance economic efficiency.
Now consider the goal of equality. Even when the invisible hand is yielding 
efficient outcomes, it can nonetheless leave sizable disparities in economic well-
being. A market economy rewards people according to their ability to produce 
things that other people are willing to pay for. The world’s best basketball 
player earns more than the world’s best chess player simply because people are 
willing to pay more to watch basketball than chess. The invisible hand does not 
ensure that everyone has sufficient food, decent clothing, and adequate health-
care. This inequality may, depending on one’s political philosophy, call for gov-
ernment intervention. In practice, many public policies, such as the income tax 
and the welfare system, aim to achieve a more equal distribution of economic 
well-being.
To say that the government can improve on market outcomes at times does 
not mean that it always will. Public policy is made not by angels but by a political 
process that is far from perfect. Sometimes policies are designed simply to reward 
the politically powerful. Sometimes they are made by well-intentioned leaders 
who are not fully informed. As you study economics, you will become a better 
judge of when a government policy is justifiable because it promotes efficiency or 
equality and when it is not.
Quick Quiz  Why is a country better off not isolating itself from all other coun-
tries?  •  Why do we have markets, and, according to economists, what roles should 
government play in them?
How the Economy as a Whole Works
We started by discussing how individuals make decisions and then looked at how 
people interact with one another. All these decisions and interactions together 
make up “the economy.” The last three principles concern the workings of the 
economy as a whole.
Principle 8: A Country’s Standard of Living Depends 
on Its Ability to Produce Goods and Services
The differences in living standards around the world are staggering. In 2008, the 
average American had an income of about $47,000. In the same year, the average 
Mexican earned about $10,000, and the average Nigerian earned only $1,400. Not 
surprisingly, this large variation in average income is reflected in various mea-
sures of the quality of life. Citizens of high-income countries have more TV sets, 
more cars, better nutrition, better healthcare, and a longer life expectancy than 
citizens of low-income countries.
	
Changes in living standards over time are also large. In the United States, 
incomes have historically grown about 2 percent per year (after adjusting for 
market power
the ability of a single 
economic actor (or small 
group of actors) to have 
a substantial influence on 
market prices

14
PART I	
Introduction
changes in the cost of living). At this rate, average income doubles every 35 years. 
Over the past century, average U.S. income has risen about eightfold. 
What explains these large differences in living standards among countries and 
over time? The answer is surprisingly simple. Almost all variation in living stan-
dards is attributable to differences in countries’ productivity—that is, the amount 
of goods and services produced from each unit of labor input. In nations where 
workers can produce a large quantity of goods and services per unit of time, most 
people enjoy a high standard of living; in nations where workers are less produc-
tive, most people endure a more meager existence. Similarly, the growth rate of a 
nation’s productivity determines the growth rate of its average income.
The fundamental relationship between productivity and living standards is 
simple, but its implications are far-reaching. If productivity is the primary deter-
minant of living standards, other explanations must be of secondary importance. 
For example, it might be tempting to credit labor unions or minimum-wage laws 
for the rise in living standards of American workers over the past century. Yet the 
real hero of American workers is their rising productivity. As another example, 
some commentators have claimed that increased competition from Japan and 
other countries explained the slow growth in U.S. incomes during the 1970s and 
1980s. Yet the real villain was not competition from abroad but flagging produc-
tivity growth in the United States.
The relationship between productivity and living standards also has profound 
implications for public policy. When thinking about how any policy will affect liv-
ing standards, the key question is how it will affect our ability to produce goods 
and services. To boost living standards, policymakers need to raise productivity 
by ensuring that workers are well educated, have the tools needed to produce 
goods and services, and have access to the best available technology.
productivity
the quantity of goods and 
services produced from 
each unit of labor input
The Dismal Science? 
Hardly!
By Robert D. McTeer, Jr.
M
y take on training in economics is that 
it becomes increasingly valuable as 
you move up the career ladder. I can’t imag-
ine a better major for corporate CEOs, con-
gressmen, or American presidents. You’ve 
learned a systematic, disciplined way of 
thinking that will serve you well. By contrast, 
the economically challenged must be per-
plexed about how it is that economies work 
better the fewer people they have in charge. 
Who does the planning? Who makes deci-
sions? Who decides what to produce? 
 
For my money, Adam Smith’s invisible 
hand is the most important thing you’ve 
learned by studying economics. You under-
stand how we can each work for our own 
self-interest and still produce a desirable 
social outcome. You know how uncoordi-
nated activity gets coordinated by the market 
to enhance the wealth of nations. You under-
stand the magic of markets and the dangers 
of tampering with them too much. You know 
better what you first learned in kindergarten: 
that you shouldn’t kill or cripple the goose 
that lays the golden eggs. . . .
 
Economics training will help you under-
stand fallacies and unintended ­consequences. 
 Why You Should Study Economics
In this excerpt from a commencement address, the former president  
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas makes the case for studying  
economics
in the news

15
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
“Well it may have 
been 68 cents when 
you got in line, but 
it’s 74 cents now!”
Source: The Wall Street Journal, June 4, 2003.
In fact, I am inclined to define economics as 
the study of how to anticipate unintended 
consequences. . . . 
 
Little in the literature seems more rele­
vant to contemporary economic debates 
than what usually is called the broken 
window fallacy. Whenever a government 
program is justified not on its merits but by 
the jobs it will create, remember the broken 
window: Some teenagers, being the little 
beasts that they are, toss a brick through 
a bakery window. A crowd gathers and 
laments, “What a shame.” But before you 
know it, someone suggests a silver lining to 
the situation: Now the baker will have to 
spend money to have the window repaired. 
This will add to the income of the repair-
man, who will spend his additional income, 
which will add to another seller’s income, 
and so on. You know the drill. The chain of 
spending will multiply and generate higher 
income and employment. If the broken 
window is large enough, it might produce 
an economic boom! . . .
 
Most voters fall for the broken window 
fallacy, but not economics majors. They will 
say, “Hey, wait a minute!” If the baker 
hadn’t spent his money on window repair, 
he would have spent it on the new suit he 
was saving to buy. Then the tailor would 
have the new income to spend, and so on. 
The broken window didn’t create net new 
spending; it just diverted spending from 
somewhere else. The broken window does 
not create new activity, just different activ-
ity. People see the activity that takes place. 
They don’t see the activity that would have 
taken place.
 
The broken window fallacy is perpetu-
ated in many forms. Whenever job ­creation 
or retention is the primary objective I call 
it the job-counting fallacy. Economics 
majors understand the non-intuitive real-
ity that real progress comes from job 
destruction. It once took 90 percent of 
our population to grow our food. Now it 
takes 3 percent. Pardon me, Willie, but are 
we worse off because of the job losses in 
agriculture? The would-have-been farmers 
are now college professors and computer 
gurus. . . .
 
So instead of counting jobs, we 
should make every job count. We will 
occasionally hit a soft spot when we 
have a mismatch of supply and demand 
in the labor market. But that is tempo-
rary. Don’t become a Luddite and destroy 
the machinery, or become a protectionist 
and try to grow bananas in New York 
City.
Principle 9: Prices Rise When the Government  
Prints Too Much Money
In January 1921, a daily newspaper in Germany cost 0.30 marks. Less than two 
years later, in November 1922, the same newspaper cost 70,000,000 marks. All 
other prices in the economy rose by similar amounts. This episode is one of his-
tory’s most spectacular examples of inflation, an increase in the overall level of 
prices in the economy.
Although the United States has never experienced inflation even close to 
that of Germany in the 1920s, inflation has at times been an economic prob-
lem. During the 1970s, for instance, when the overall level of prices more 
than doubled, President Gerald Ford called inflation “public enemy number 
one.” By contrast, inflation in the first decade of the 21st century has run 
about 2½ percent per year; at this rate, it would take almost 30 years for 
prices to double. Because high inflation imposes various costs on society, 
keeping inflation at a low level is a goal of economic policymakers around 
the world.
What causes inflation? In almost all cases of large or persistent inflation, the 
culprit is growth in the quantity of money. When a government creates large 
quantities of the nation’s money, the value of the money falls. In Germany in 
the early 1920s, when prices were on average tripling every month, the quantity 
of money was also tripling every month. Although less dramatic, the economic 
history of the United States points to a similar conclusion: The high inflation of 
the 1970s was associated with rapid growth in the quantity of money, and the 
low inflation of more recent experience was associated with slow growth in the 
quantity of money.
inflation
an increase in the overall 
level of prices in the 
economy
Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Reprinted with permission.

16
PART I	
Introduction
Principle 10: Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-off 
between Inflation and Unemployment
Although a higher level of prices is, in the long run, the primary effect of 
increasing the quantity of money, the short-run story is more complex and con-
troversial. Most economists describe the short-run effects of monetary injections 
as follows: 
• 	 Increasing the amount of money in the economy stimulates the overall level 
of spending and thus the demand for goods and services. 
• 	 Higher demand may over time cause firms to raise their prices, but in the 
meantime, it also encourages them to hire more workers and produce a 
larger quantity of goods and services. 
• 	 More hiring means lower unemployment. 
This line of reasoning leads to one final economy-wide trade-off: a short-run 
trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
Although some economists still question these ideas, most accept that society 
faces a short-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment. This simply 
means that, over a period of a year or two, many economic policies push infla-
tion and unemployment in opposite directions. Policymakers face this trade-off 
regardless of whether inflation and unemployment both start out at high levels (as 
they did in the early 1980s), at low levels (as they did in the late 1990s), or some-
place in between. This short-run trade-off plays a key role in the analysis of the 
business cycle—the irregular and largely unpredictable fluctuations in economic 
activity, as measured by the production of goods and services or the number of 
people employed.
Policymakers can exploit the short-run trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment using various policy instruments. By changing the amount 
that the government spends, the amount it taxes, and the amount of money 
it prints, policymakers can influence the overall demand for goods and ser-
vices. Changes in demand in turn influence the combination of inflation and 
unemployment that the economy experiences in the short run. Because these 
instruments of economic policy are potentially so powerful, how policymakers 
should use these instruments to control the economy, if at all, is a subject of 
continuing debate.
This debate heated up in the early years of Barack Obama’s presidency.  In 2008 
and 2009, the U.S. economy, as well as many other economies around the world, 
experienced a deep economic downturn. Problems in the financial system, caused 
by bad bets on the housing market, spilled over into the rest of the economy, 
causing incomes to fall and unemployment to soar. Policymakers responded in 
various ways to increase the overall demand for goods and services. President 
Obama’s first major initiative was a stimulus package of reduced taxes and 
increased government spending. At the same time, the nation’s central bank, the 
Federal Reserve, increased the supply of money. The goal of these policies was to 
reduce unemployment. Some feared, however, that these policies might over time 
lead to an excessive level of inflation.
Quick Quiz  List and briefly explain the three principles that describe how the 
economy as a whole works.
business cycle
fluctuations in  
economic activity, such  
as employment and  
production

17
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
Conclusion
You now have a taste of what economics is all about. In the coming chapters, we 
develop many specific insights about people, markets, and economies. Mastering 
these insights will take some effort, but it is not an overwhelming task. The field of 
economics is based on a few big ideas that can be applied in many different situations.
Throughout this book, we will refer back to the Ten Principles of Economics high-
lighted in this chapter and summarized in Table 1. Keep these building blocks 
in mind: Even the most sophisticated economic analysis is founded on the ten 
principles introduced here. 
FYI
 How to Read This Book
E
conomics is fun, but it can also be hard to learn. My aim in writ-
ing this text is to make it as enjoyable and easy as possible. But 
you, the student, also have a role to play. Experience shows that if 
you are actively involved as you study this book, you will enjoy a 
better outcome both on your exams and in the years that follow. 
Here are a few tips about how best to read this book.
1. Read before class. Students do better when they read the 
relevant textbook chapter before attending a lecture. You will 
understand the lecture better, and your questions will be better 
focused on where you need extra help.
2. Summarize, don’t highlight. Running a yellow marker over 
the text is too passive an activity to keep your mind engaged. 
Instead, when you come to the end of a section, take a minute 
and summarize what you just learned in your own words, writing 
your summary in the wide margins we’ve provided. When you’ve 
finished the chapter, compare your summaries with the one at 
the end of the chapter. Did you pick up the main points? 
3. Test yourself. Throughout the book, Quick Quizzes offer instant 
feedback to find out if you’ve learned what you are supposed to. 
Take the opportunity to write down your answer, and then check 
it against the answers provided at this book’s website. The quiz-
zes are meant to test your basic comprehension. If your answer 
is incorrect, you probably need to review the section.
4. Practice, practice, practice. At the end of each chapter, Ques-
tions for Review test your understanding, and Problems and 
Applications ask you to apply and extend the material. Perhaps 
your instructor will assign some of these exercises as homework. 
If so, do them. If not, do them anyway. The more you use your 
new knowledge, the more solid it becomes.
5. Go online. The publisher of this book maintains an extensive 
website to help you in your study of economics. It includes 
additional examples, applications, and problems, as well as quiz-
zes so you can test yourself. Check it out. The website is www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
6. Study in groups. After you’ve read the book and worked prob-
lems on your own, get together with classmates to discuss the 
material. You will learn from each other—an example of the 
gains from trade. 
7. Teach someone. As all teachers know, there is no better way 
to learn something than to teach it to someone else. Take the 
opportunity to teach new economic concepts to a study partner, 
a friend, a parent, or even a pet.
8. Don’t skip the real-world examples. In the midst of all the num-
bers, graphs, and strange new words, it is easy to lose sight of 
what economics is all about. The Case Studies and In the News 
boxes sprinkled throughout this book should help remind you. 
They show how the theory is tied to events happening in all our 
lives.
9. Apply economic thinking to your daily life. Once you’ve read 
about how others apply economics to the real world, try it 
yourself! You can use economic analysis to better understand 
your own decisions, the economy around you, and the events 
you read about in the newspaper. The world may never look the 
same again.

18
PART I	
Introduction
Summary 
scarcity, p. 4
economics, p. 4
efficiency, p. 5
equality, p. 5
opportunity cost, p. 6
rational people, p. 6
marginal change, p. 6
incentive, p. 7
market economy, p. 10
property rights, p. 11
market failure, p. 12
externality, p. 12
market power, p. 13
productivity, p. 14
inflation, p. 15
business cycle, p. 16
• The fundamental lessons about individual deci-
sion making are that people face trade-offs 
among alternative goals, that the cost of any 
action is measured in terms of forgone oppor-
tunities, that rational people make decisions by 
comparing marginal costs and marginal bene­
fits, and that people change their behavior in 
response to the incentives they face.
• The fundamental lessons about interactions 
among people are that trade and interdepen-
dence can be mutually beneficial, that ­markets 
are usually a good way of coordinating ­economic 
activity among people, and that the government 
can potentially improve market outcomes by 
remedying a market failure or by promoting 
greater economic equality.
• The fundamental lessons about the economy 
as a whole are that productivity is the ultimate 
source of living standards, that growth in the 
quantity of money is the ultimate source of infla-
tion, and that society faces a short-run trade-off 
between inflation and unemployment.
Key Concepts
Questions for Review
	 1.	 Give three examples of important trade-offs that 
you face in your life. 
	 2.	 What is the opportunity cost of seeing a movie?
	 3.	 Water is necessary for life. Is the marginal bene­
fit of a glass of water large or small?
	 4.	 Why should policymakers think about incentives?
Ten Principles of Economics
Table 1
How People Make Decisions
  1: People Face Trade-offs
  2: The Cost of Something Is What You Give Up to Get It
  3: Rational People Think at the Margin
  4: People Respond to Incentives
How People Interact
  5: Trade Can Make Everyone Better Off
  6: Markets Are Usually a Good Way to Organize Economic Activity
  7: Governments Can Sometimes Improve Market Outcomes
How the Economy as a Whole Works
  8: A Country’s Standard of Living Depends on Its Ability to Produce Goods and 
Services
  9: Prices Rise When the Government Prints Too Much Money
10: Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-off between Inflation and Unemployment

19
CHAPTER 1    Ten Principles of Economics
	 5.	 Why isn’t trade among countries like a game 
with some winners and some losers?
	 6.	 What does the “invisible hand” of the market-
place do?
	 7.	 Explain the two main causes of market failure 
and give an example of each.
	 8.	 Why is productivity important?
	 9.	 What is inflation and what causes it?
	10.	 How are inflation and unemployment related in 
the short run?
Problems and Applications
	 1.	 Describe some of the trade-offs faced by each of 
the following:
a.	 a family deciding whether to buy a new car
b.	a member of Congress deciding how much 
to spend on national parks
c.	 a company president deciding whether to 
open a new factory
d.	a professor deciding how much to prepare 
for class
e.	 a recent college graduate deciding whether 
to go to graduate school
	 2.	 You are trying to decide whether to take a 
vacation. Most of the costs of the vacation (air-
fare, hotel, and forgone wages) are measured in 
dollars, but the benefits of the vacation are psy-
chological. How can you compare the benefits 
to the costs?
	 3.	 You were planning to spend Saturday working 
at your part-time job, but a friend asks you to 
go skiing. What is the true cost of going skiing? 
Now suppose you had been planning to spend 
the day studying at the library. What is the cost 
of going skiing in this case? Explain.
	 4.	 You win $100 in a basketball pool. You have 
a choice between spending the money now or 
putting it away for a year in a bank account 
that pays 5 percent interest. What is the oppor-
tunity cost of spending the $100 now?
	 5.	 The company that you manage has invested  
$5 million in developing a new product, but the 
development is not quite finished. At a recent 
meeting, your salespeople report that the intro-
duction of competing products has reduced  
the expected sales of your new product to  
$3 million. If it would cost $1 million to finish 
development and make the product, should 
you go ahead and do so? What is the most that 
you should pay to complete development?
	 6.	 The Social Security system provides income for 
people over age 65. If a recipient of Social  
Security decides to work and earn some 
income, the amount he or she receives in Social 
Security benefits is typically reduced.
a.	 How does the provision of Social Security  
affect people’s incentive to save while 
­working?
b.	How does the reduction in benefits associ-
ated with higher earnings affect people’s 
incentive to work past age 65?
	 7.	 A 1996 bill reforming the federal government’s 
antipoverty programs limited many welfare 
recipients to only two years of benefits.
a.	 How does this change affect the incentives 
for working?
b.	How might this change represent a trade-off 
between equality and efficiency?
	 8.	 Your roommate is a better cook than you are, 
but you can clean more quickly than your 
roommate can. If your roommate did all the 
cooking and you did all the cleaning, would 
your chores take you more or less time than if 
you divided each task evenly? Give a similar 
example of how specialization and trade can 
make two countries both better off.
	 9.	 Explain whether each of the following govern-
ment activities is motivated by a concern about 
equality or a concern about efficiency. In the 
case of efficiency, discuss the type of market 
failure involved.
a.	 regulating cable TV prices
b.	providing some poor people with vouchers 
that can be used to buy food
c.	 prohibiting smoking in public places
d.	breaking up Standard Oil (which once 
owned 90 percent of all oil refineries) into 
several smaller companies
e.	 imposing higher personal income tax rates 
on people with higher incomes
f.	 instituting laws against driving while 
­intoxicated

20
PART I	
Introduction
	10.	 Discuss each of the following statements from 
the standpoints of equality and efficiency.
a.	 “Everyone in society should be guaranteed 
the best healthcare possible.” 
b.	“When workers are laid off, they should be 
able to collect unemployment benefits until 
they find a new job.”
	11.	 In what ways is your standard of living differ-
ent from that of your parents or grandparents 
when they were your age? Why have these 
changes occurred?
	12.	 Suppose Americans decide to save more of 
their incomes. If banks lend this extra saving to 
businesses, which use the funds to build new 
factories, how might this lead to faster growth 
in productivity? Who do you suppose benefits 
from the higher productivity? Is society getting 
a free lunch?
	13.	 In 2010, President Barack Obama and Congress 
enacted a healthcare reform bill in the United 
States. Two goals of the bill were to provide 
more Americans with health insurance (via sub-
sidies for lower-income households financed 
by taxes on higher-income households) and 
to reduce the cost of healthcare (via various 
reforms in how healthcare is provided).  
a.	 How do these goals relate to equality and 
efficiency?
b.	How might healthcare reform increase pro-
ductivity in the United States?  
c.	 How might healthcare reform decrease pro-
ductivity in the United States?
	14.	 During the Revolutionary War, the American 
colonies could not raise enough tax revenue 
to fully fund the war effort; to make up this 
difference, the colonies decided to print more 
money. Printing money to cover expenditures 
is sometimes referred to as an “inflation tax.” 
Who do you think is being “taxed” when more 
money is printed? Why?
	15.	 Imagine that you are a policymaker trying to 
decide whether to reduce the rate of inflation. 
To make an intelligent decision, what would 
you need to know about inflation, unemploy-
ment, and the trade-off between them?
	16.	 A policymaker is deciding how to finance the 
construction of a new airport.  He can either 
pay for it by increasing citizens’ taxes or by 
printing more money. What are some of the 
short-run and long-run consequences of each 
option?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at  
www.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.

21
2
Thinking Like an     
     Economist
E
very field of study has its own language and its own way of thinking. 
Mathematicians talk about axioms, integrals, and vector spaces. Psycholo-
gists talk about ego, id, and cognitive dissonance. Lawyers talk about 
venue, torts, and promissory estoppel.
Economics is no different. Supply, demand, elasticity, comparative advantage, 
consumer surplus, deadweight loss—these terms are part of the economist’s lan-
guage. In the coming chapters, you will encounter many new terms and some 
familiar words that economists use in specialized ways. At first, this new lan-
guage may seem needlessly arcane. But as you will see, its value lies in its ability 
to provide you with a new and useful way of thinking about the world in which 
you live.
The purpose of this book is to help you learn the economist’s way of thinking. 
Just as you cannot become a mathematician, psychologist, or lawyer overnight, 
learning to think like an economist will take some time. Yet with a combination of 

22
PART I	
Introduction
theory, case studies, and examples of economics in the news, this book will give 
you ample opportunity to develop and practice this skill.
Before delving into the substance and details of economics, it is helpful to have 
an overview of how economists approach the world. This chapter discusses the 
field’s methodology. What is distinctive about how economists confront a ques-
tion? What does it mean to think like an economist?
The Economist as Scientist
Economists try to address their subject with a scientist’s objectivity. They 
approach the study of the economy in much the same way a physicist 
approaches the study of matter and a biologist approaches the study of life: 
They devise theories, collect data, and then analyze these data in an attempt to 
verify or refute their theories.
To beginners, it can seem odd to claim that economics is a science. After all, 
economists do not work with test tubes or telescopes. The essence of science, 
however, is the scientific method—the dispassionate development and testing of 
theories about how the world works. This method of inquiry is as applicable to 
studying a nation’s economy as it is to studying the earth’s gravity or a species’ 
evolution. As Albert Einstein once put it, “The whole of science is nothing more 
than the refinement of everyday thinking.”
Although Einstein’s comment is as true for social sciences such as economics 
as it is for natural sciences such as physics, most people are not accustomed to 
looking at society through the eyes of a scientist. Let’s discuss some of the ways in 
which economists apply the logic of science to examine how an economy works.
The Scientific Method: Observation,  
Theory, and More Observation
Isaac Newton, the famous 17th-century scientist and mathematician, allegedly 
became intrigued one day when he saw an apple fall from a tree. This observation 
motivated Newton to develop a theory of gravity that applies not only to an apple 
falling to the earth but to any two objects in the universe. Subsequent testing of 
Newton’s theory has shown that it works well in many circumstances (although, 
as Einstein would later emphasize, not in all circumstances). Because Newton’s 
theory has been so successful at explaining observation, it is still taught in under-
graduate physics courses around the world.
This interplay between theory and observation also occurs in the field 
of economics. An economist might live in a country experiencing rapidly 
increasing prices and be moved by this observation to develop a theory of 
inflation. The theory might assert that high inflation arises when the govern-
ment prints too much money. To test this theory, the economist could collect 
and analyze data on prices and money from many different countries. If 
growth in the quantity of money were not at all related to the rate at which 
prices are rising, the economist would start to doubt the validity of this 
theory of inflation. If money growth and inflation were strongly correlated 
in international data, as in fact they are, the economist would become more 
confident in the theory.
Although economists use theory and observation like other scientists, they face 
an obstacle that makes their task especially challenging: In economics, ­conducting 
“I’m a social scientist, 
Michael. That means I 
can’t explain electricity 
or anything like that, 
but if you ever want to 
know about people, I’m 
your man.”
© J.B. Handelsman. The New Yorker  
Collection/ www.cartoonbank.com

23
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
experiments is often difficult and sometimes impossible. Physicists studying 
gravity can drop many objects in their laboratories to generate data to test their 
theories. By contrast, economists studying inflation are not allowed to manipu-
late a nation’s monetary policy simply to generate useful data. Economists, like 
astronomers and evolutionary biologists, usually have to make do with whatever 
data the world happens to give them.
To find a substitute for laboratory experiments, economists pay close atten-
tion to the natural experiments offered by history. When a war in the Middle 
East interrupts the flow of crude oil, for instance, oil prices skyrocket around the 
world. For consumers of oil and oil products, such an event depresses living stan-
dards. For economic policymakers, it poses a difficult choice about how best to 
respond. But for economic scientists, the event provides an opportunity to study 
the effects of a key natural resource on the world’s economies. Throughout this 
book, therefore, we consider many historical episodes. These episodes are valu-
able to study because they give us insight into the economy of the past and, more 
important, because they allow us to illustrate and evaluate economic theories of 
the present.
The Role of Assumptions
If you ask a physicist how long it would take a marble to fall from the top of a ten-
story building, she will likely answer the question by assuming that the marble 
falls in a vacuum. Of course, this assumption is false. In fact, the building is sur-
rounded by air, which exerts friction on the falling marble and slows it down. 
Yet the physicist will point out that the friction on the marble is so small that its 
effect is negligible. Assuming the marble falls in a vacuum simplifies the problem 
without substantially affecting the answer.
Economists make assumptions for the same reason: Assumptions can simplify 
the complex world and make it easier to understand. To study the effects of 
international trade, for example, we might assume that the world consists of only 
two countries and that each country produces only two goods.  In reality, there 
are numerous countries, each of which produces thousands of different types of 
goods. But by assuming two countries and two goods, we can focus our thinking 
on the essence of the problem. Once we understand international trade in this sim-
plified imaginary world, we are in a better position to understand international 
trade in the more complex world in which we live. 
The art in scientific thinking—whether in physics, biology, or economics—is 
deciding which assumptions to make. Suppose, for instance, that instead of drop-
ping  a marble from the top of the building, we were dropping a beachball of the 
same weight. Our physicist would realize that the assumption of no friction is 
less accurate in this case: Friction exerts a greater force on a beachball than on a 
marble because a beachball is much larger. The assumption that gravity works 
in a vacuum is reasonable for studying a falling marble but not for studying a 
falling beachball. 
Similarly, economists use different assumptions to answer different ques-
tions. Suppose that we want to study what happens to the economy when the 
government changes the number of dollars in circulation. An important piece 
of this analysis, it turns out, is how prices respond. Many prices in the economy 
change infrequently; the newsstand prices of magazines, for instance, change only 
every few years. Knowing this fact may lead us to make different assumptions 
when studying the effects of the policy change over different time horizons. For 

24
PART I	
Introduction
­studying the short-run effects of the policy, we may assume that prices do not 
change much. We may even make the extreme and artificial assumption that all 
prices are completely fixed. For studying the long-run effects of the policy, how-
ever, we may assume that all prices are completely flexible. Just as a physicist 
uses different assumptions when studying falling marbles and falling beachballs, 
economists use different assumptions when studying the short-run and long-run 
effects of a change in the quantity of money.
Economic Models
High school biology teachers teach basic anatomy with plastic replicas of the 
human body. These models have all the major organs: the heart, the liver, the 
kidneys, and so on. The models allow teachers to show their students very 
simply how the important parts of the body fit together. Because these plas-
tic models are stylized and omit many details, no one would mistake one of 
them for a real person. Despite this lack of realism—indeed, because of this 
lack of realism—studying these models is useful for learning how the human 
body works.
Economists also use models to learn about the world, but instead of being 
made of plastic, they are most often composed of diagrams and equations. Like a 
biology teacher’s plastic model, economic models omit many details to allow us to 
see what is truly important. Just as the biology teacher’s model does not include 
all the body’s muscles and capillaries, an economist’s model does not include 
every feature of the economy. 
As we use models to examine various economic issues throughout this book, 
you will see that all the models are built with assumptions. Just as a physicist 
begins the analysis of a falling marble by assuming away the existence of friction, 
economists assume away many of the details of the economy that are irre­le­vant for 
studying the question at hand. All models—in physics, biology, and ­economics—
simplify reality to improve our understanding of it.
Our First Model: The Circular-Flow Diagram
The economy consists of millions of people engaged in many activities—buying, 
selling, working, hiring, manufacturing, and so on. To understand how the economy 
works, we must find some way to simplify our thinking about all these activities. In 
other words, we need a model that explains, in general terms, how the economy is 
organized and how participants in the economy interact with one another.
Figure 1 presents a visual model of the economy called a circular-flow diagram. 
In this model, the economy is simplified to include only two types of decision 
makers—firms and households. Firms produce goods and services using inputs, 
such as labor, land, and capital (buildings and machines). These inputs are called 
the factors of production. Households own the factors of production and consume 
all the goods and services that the firms produce.
Households and firms interact in two types of markets. In the markets for goods 
and services, households are buyers, and firms are sellers. In particular, households 
buy the output of goods and services that firms produce. In the markets for the fac-
tors of production, households are sellers, and firms are buyers. In these markets, 
households provide the inputs that firms use to produce goods and services. The 
circular-flow diagram offers a simple way of organizing the economic transac-
tions that occur between households and firms in the economy. 
The two loops of the circular-flow diagram are distinct but related. The inner 
loop represents the flows of inputs and outputs. The households sell the use of 
circular-flow 
diagram
a visual model of the 
economy that shows 
how dollars flow 
through markets among 
households and firms

25
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
their labor, land, and capital to the firms in the markets for the factors of pro-
duction. The firms then use these factors to produce goods and services, which 
in turn are sold to households in the markets for goods and services. The outer 
loop of the diagram represents the corresponding flow of dollars. The households 
spend money to buy goods and services from the firms. The firms use some of the 
revenue from these sales to pay for the factors of production, such as the wages 
of their workers. What’s left is the profit of the firm owners, who themselves are 
members of households.
Let’s take a tour of the circular flow by following a dollar bill as it makes its 
way from person to person through the economy. Imagine that the dollar begins 
at a household, say, in your wallet. If you want to buy a cup of coffee, you take 
the dollar to one of the economy’s markets for goods and services, such as your 
local Starbucks coffee shop. There, you spend it on your favorite drink. When the 
dollar moves into the Starbucks cash register, it becomes revenue for the firm. 
The dollar doesn’t stay at Starbucks for long, however, because the firm uses it to 
buy inputs in the markets for the factors of production. Starbucks might use the 
dollar to pay rent to its landlord for the space it occupies or to pay the wages of 
its workers. In either case, the dollar enters the income of some household and, 
once again, is back in someone’s wallet. At that point, the story of the economy’s 
circular flow starts once again.
The circular-flow diagram in Figure 1 is a very simple model of the econ-
omy. It dispenses with details that, for some purposes, are significant. A more 
The Circular Flow
This diagram is a schematic 
representation of the organization 
of the economy. Decisions are 
made by households and firms. 
Households and firms interact in 
the markets for goods and services 
(where households are buyers and 
firms are sellers) and in the markets 
for the factors of production (where 
firms are buyers and households 
are sellers). The outer set of arrows 
shows the flow of dollars, and 
the inner set of arrows shows the 
corresponding flow of inputs and 
outputs.
Figure 1
Spending
Goods and
services
bought
Revenue
Goods
and services
sold
Labor, land,
and capital
Income
 Flow of inputs
 
and outputs
 Flow of dollars
Factors of
production
Wages, rent,
and proﬁt
FIRMS
• Produce and sell
 
goods and services
• Hire and use factors
 
of production
• Buy and consume
 
goods and services
• Own and sell factors
 
of production
HOUSEHOLDS
• Households sell
• Firms buy
MARKETS
FOR
FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
• Firms sell
• Households buy
MARKETS
FOR
GOODS AND SERVICES

26
PART I	
Introduction
­complex and realistic circular-flow model would include, for instance, the roles 
of government and international trade. (A portion of that dollar you gave to 
Starbucks might be used to pay taxes or to buy coffee beans from a farmer in 
Brazil.) Yet these details are not crucial for a basic understanding of how the 
economy is organized. Because of its simplicity, this circular-flow diagram is 
useful to keep in mind when thinking about how the pieces of the economy fit 
together. 
Our Second Model: The Production  
Possibilities Frontier 
Most economic models, unlike the circular-flow diagram, are built using the tools 
of mathematics. Here we use one of the simplest such models, called the produc-
tion possibilities frontier, to illustrate some basic economic ideas.
Although real economies produce thousands of goods and services, let’s 
assume an economy that produces only two goods—cars and computers. 
Together, the car industry and the computer industry use all of the economy’s 
factors of production. The production possibilities frontier is a graph that shows 
the various combinations of output—in this case, cars and computers—that the 
economy can possibly produce given the available factors of production and the 
available production technology that firms use to turn these factors into output.
Figure 2 shows this economy’s production possibilities frontier. If the economy 
uses all its resources in the car industry, it produces 1,000 cars and no computers. 
If it uses all its resources in the computer industry, it produces 3,000 computers 
and no cars. The two endpoints of the production possibilities frontier represent 
these extreme possibilities. 
More likely, the economy divides its resources between the two industries, 
producing some cars and some computers. For example, it can produce 600 cars 
production 
possibilities frontier
a graph that shows the 
combinations of output 
that the economy can 
possibly produce given 
the available factors 
of production and the 
available production 
technology
Figure 2
1,000
2,200
Production
possibilities
frontier
B
D
A
Quantity of
Cars Produced
700
600
300
0
2,000
3,000
1,000
Quantity of
Computers
Produced
C
F
E
The Production Possibilities Frontier
The production possibilities frontier 
shows the combinations of output—in 
this case, cars and computers—that the 
economy can possibly produce. The 
economy can produce any combination 
on or inside the frontier. Points outside 
the frontier are not feasible given the 
economy’s resources.

27
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
and 2,200 computers, shown in the figure by point A. Or, by moving some of the 
factors of production to the car industry from the computer industry, the economy 
can produce 700 cars and 2,000 computers, represented by point B.
Because resources are scarce, not every conceivable outcome is feasible. For 
example, no matter how resources are allocated between the two industries, 
the economy cannot produce the amount of cars and computers represented by 
point C. Given the technology available for manufacturing cars and computers, 
the economy does not have enough of the factors of production to support that 
level of output. With the resources it has, the economy can produce at any point 
on or inside the production possibilities frontier, but it cannot produce at points 
outside the frontier.
An outcome is said to be efficient if the economy is getting all it can from 
the scarce resources it has available. Points on (rather than inside) the produc-
tion possibilities frontier represent efficient levels of production. When the 
economy is producing at such a point, say point A, there is no way to produce 
more of one good without producing less of the other. Point D represents an 
inefficient outcome. For some reason, perhaps widespread unemployment, the 
economy is producing less than it could from the resources it has available: 
It is producing only 300 cars and 1,000 computers. If the source of the inef-
ficiency is eliminated, the economy can increase its production of both goods. 
For example, if the economy moves from point D to point A, its production of 
cars increases from 300 to 600, and its production of computers increases from 
1,000 to 2,200.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in Chapter 1 is that people face 
trade-offs. The production possibilities frontier shows one trade-off that society 
faces. Once we have reached the efficient points on the frontier, the only way of 
producing more of one good is to produce less of the other. When the economy 
moves from point A to point B, for instance, society produces 100 more cars but 
at the expense of producing 200 fewer computers. 
This trade-off helps us understand another of the Ten Principles of Economics: 
The cost of something is what you give up to get it. This is called the opportunity 
cost. The production possibilities frontier shows the opportunity cost of one 
good as measured in terms of the other good. When society moves from point 
A to point B, it gives up 200 computers to get 100 additional cars. That is, at 
point A, the opportunity cost of 100 cars is 200 computers. Put another way, the 
opportunity cost of each car is two computers. Notice that the opportunity cost 
of a car equals the slope of the production possibilities frontier. (If you don’t 
recall what slope is, you can refresh your memory with the graphing appendix 
to this chapter.)
The opportunity cost of a car in terms of the number of computers is not con-
stant in this economy but depends on how many cars and computers the economy 
is producing. This is reflected in the shape of the production possibilities frontier. 
Because the production possibilities frontier in Figure 2 is bowed outward, the 
opportunity cost of a car is highest when the economy is producing many cars and 
few computers, such as at point E, where the frontier is steep. When the economy 
is producing few cars and many computers, such as at point F, the frontier is 
­flatter, and the opportunity cost of a car is lower.
Economists believe that production possibilities frontiers often have this 
bowed shape. When the economy is using most of its resources to make comput-
ers, such as at point F, the resources best suited to car production, such as skilled 

28
PART I	
Introduction
autoworkers, are being used in the computer industry. Because these workers 
probably aren’t very good at making computers, the economy won’t have to lose 
much computer production to increase car production by one unit. The opportu-
nity cost of a car in terms of computers is small, and the frontier is relatively flat. 
By contrast, when the economy is using most of its resources to make cars, such as 
at point E, the resources best suited to making cars are already in the car industry. 
Producing an additional car means moving some of the best computer techni-
cians out of the computer industry and making them autoworkers. As a result, 
producing an additional car will mean a substantial loss of computer output. The 
opportunity cost of a car is high, and the frontier is steep.
The production possibilities frontier shows the trade-off between the out-
puts of different goods at a given time, but the trade-off can change over time. 
For example, suppose a technological advance in the computer industry raises 
the number of computers that a worker can produce per week. This advance 
expands society’s set of opportunities. For any given number of cars, the 
economy can make more computers. If the economy does not produce any 
computers, it can still produce 1,000 cars, so one endpoint of the frontier stays 
the same. But the rest of the production possibilities frontier shifts outward, 
as in Figure 3.
This figure illustrates economic growth. Society can move production from a 
point on the old frontier to a point on the new frontier. Which point it chooses 
depends on its preferences for the two goods. In this example, society moves from 
point A to point G, enjoying more computers (2,300 instead of 2,200) and more 
cars (650 instead of 600).
The production possibilities frontier simplifies a complex economy to highlight 
some basic but powerful ideas: scarcity, efficiency, trade-offs, opportunity cost, 
Figure 3
2,300
2,200
A
G
Quantity of
Cars Produced
600 650
0
4,000
3,000
1,000
Quantity of
Computers
Produced
A Shift in the Production 
Possibilities Frontier
A technological advance in the 
computer industry enables the 
economy to produce more computers 
for any given number of cars. As a 
result, the production possibilities 
frontier shifts outward. If the economy 
moves from point A to point G, then 
the production of both cars and 
computers increases.

29
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
and economic growth. As you study economics, these ideas will recur in various 
forms. The production possibilities frontier offers one simple way of thinking 
about them.
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
Many subjects are studied on various levels. Consider biology, for example. 
Molecular biologists study the chemical compounds that make up living things. 
Cellular biologists study cells, which are made up of many chemical compounds 
and, at the same time, are themselves the building blocks of living organisms. 
Evolutionary biologists study the many varieties of animals and plants and how 
species change gradually over the centuries.
Economics is also studied on various levels. We can study the decisions of indi-
vidual households and firms. Or we can study the interaction of households and 
firms in markets for specific goods and services. Or we can study the operation 
of the economy as a whole, which is the sum of the activities of all these decision 
makers in all these markets.
The field of economics is traditionally divided into two broad subfields. Micro-
economics is the study of how households and firms make decisions and how 
they interact in specific markets. Macroeconomics is the study of economywide 
phenomena. A microeconomist might study the effects of rent control on housing 
in New York City, the impact of foreign competition on the U.S. auto industry, 
or the effects of compulsory school attendance on workers’ earnings. A macro-
economist might study the effects of borrowing by the federal government, the 
changes over time in the economy’s rate of unemployment, or alternative policies 
to promote growth in national living standards.  
Microeconomics and macroeconomics are closely intertwined. Because 
changes in the overall economy arise from the decisions of millions of indi-
viduals, it is impossible to understand macroeconomic developments without 
considering the associated microeconomic decisions. For example, a macroecon-
omist might study the effect of a federal income tax cut on the overall production 
of goods and services. But to analyze this issue, he or she must consider how the 
tax cut affects the decisions of households about how much to spend on goods 
and services. 
Despite the inherent link between microeconomics and macroeconomics, the 
two fields are distinct. Because they address different questions, each field has its 
own set of models, which are often taught in separate courses. 
Quick Quiz  In what sense is economics like a science?  •  Draw a production possi-
bilities frontier for a society that produces food and clothing. Show an efficient point, 
an inefficient point, and an infeasible point. Show the effects of a drought.  •  Define 
microeconomics and macroeconomics.
The Economist as Policy Adviser
Often, economists are asked to explain the causes of economic events. Why, for 
example, is unemployment higher for teenagers than for older workers? Some-
times, economists are asked to recommend policies to improve economic out-
comes. What, for instance, should the government do to improve the economic 
microeconomics
the study of how 
households and firms 
make decisions and how 
they interact in markets
macroeconomics
the study of economywide 
phenomena, including 
inflation, unemployment, 
and economic growth

30
PART I	
Introduction
well-being of teenagers? When economists are trying to explain the world, they 
are scientists. When they are trying to help improve it, they are policy advisers.
Positive versus Normative Analysis
To help clarify the two roles that economists play, let’s examine the use of lan-
guage. Because scientists and policy advisers have different goals, they use lan-
guage in different ways.
For example, suppose that two people are discussing minimum-wage laws. 
Here are two statements you might hear:
Polly:	 Minimum-wage laws cause unemployment.
Norm:	 The government should raise the minimum wage.
Ignoring for now whether you agree with these statements, notice that Polly 
and Norm differ in what they are trying to do. Polly is speaking like a scientist: 
She is making a claim about how the world works. Norm is speaking like a pol-
icy adviser: He is making a claim about how he would like to change the world.
FYI
 Who Studies Economics?
A
s a college student, you might be asking yourself: How many 
economics classes should I take? How useful will this stuff be to 
me later in life? Economics can seem abstract at first, but the field is 
fundamentally very practical, and the study of economics is useful in 
many different career paths. Here is a small sampling of some well-
known people who majored in economics when they were in college.
George H. W. Bush	
Former President of the United States
Donald Trump	
Business and  
TV Mogul 
Meg Whitman	
Former Chief 
Executive  
Officer of eBay
Danny Glover	
Actor
Barbara Boxer	
U.S. Senator 
John Elway	
Former NFL 
Quarterback
Kofi Annan	
Former  
Secretary General, 
United Nations
Ted Turner	
Founder of CNN
Lionel Richie	
Singer
Diane von Furstenberg	
Fashion Designer
Michael Kinsley	
Journalist
Ben Stein	
Political Speechwriter, Journalist,  
and Actor
Cate Blanchett	
Actor 
Anthony Zinni	
General (ret.), U.S. Marine Corps
Steve Ballmer	
Chief Executive Officer, Microsoft
Arnold Schwarzenegger	
Governor of California
Sandra Day-O’Connor	
Former 
Supreme 
Court Justice
Scott Adams	
Cartoonist for 
Dilbert
Mick Jagger	
Singer for the 
Rolling Stones 
Having studied at the London School of 
Economics may not help Mick Jagger hit 
the high notes, but it has probably given 
him some insight about how to invest the 
substantial sums he has earned during his 
rock ’n’ roll career.
When asked in 2005 why The Rolling 
Stones were going on tour again, former 
economics major Mick Jagger replied, 
“Supply and demand.” Keith Richards 
added, “If the demand’s there, we’ll ­supply.”
© Brad Barket/ Everett/Photoshot 

31
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
In general, statements about the world come in two types. One type, such as 
Polly’s, is positive. Positive statements are descriptive. They make a claim about 
how the world is. A second type of statement, such as Norm’s, is normative. Norma-
tive statements are prescriptive. They make a claim about how the world ought to be. 
A key difference between positive and normative statements is how we judge 
their validity. We can, in principle, confirm or refute positive statements by exam-
ining evidence. An economist might evaluate Polly’s statement by analyzing data 
on changes in minimum wages and changes in unemployment over time. By 
contrast, evaluating normative statements involves values as well as facts. Norm’s 
statement cannot be judged using data alone. Deciding what is good or bad policy 
is not just a matter of science. It also involves our views on ethics, religion, and 
political philosophy.
Positive and normative statements are fundamentally different, but they are 
often intertwined in a person’s set of beliefs. In particular, positive views about 
how the world works affect normative views about what policies are desirable. 
Polly’s claim that the minimum wage causes unemployment, if true, might lead 
her to reject Norm’s conclusion that the government should raise the minimum 
wage. Yet normative conclusions cannot come from positive analysis alone; they 
involve value judgments as well.
As you study economics, keep in mind the distinction between positive and 
normative statements because it will help you stay focused on the task at hand. 
Much of economics is positive: It just tries to explain how the economy works. Yet 
those who use economics often have normative goals: They want to learn how to 
improve the economy. When you hear economists making normative statements, 
you know they are speaking not as scientists but as policy advisers.
Economists in Washington
President Harry Truman once said that he wanted to find a one-armed economist. 
When he asked his economists for advice, they always answered, “On the one 
hand, . . . On the other hand, . . . “
Truman was right in realizing that economists’ advice is not always straight-
forward. This tendency is rooted in one of the Ten Principles of Economics: People 
face trade-offs. Economists are aware that trade-offs are involved in most policy 
decisions. A policy might increase efficiency at the cost of equality. It might help 
future generations but hurt current generations. An economist who says that all 
policy decisions are easy is an economist not to be trusted.
Truman was not the only president who relied on the advice of economists. 
Since 1946, the president of the United States has received guidance from the 
Council of Economic Advisers, which consists of three members and a staff of a 
few dozen economists. The council, whose offices are just a few steps from the 
White House, has no duty other than to advise the president and to write the 
annual Economic Report of the President, which discusses recent developments in 
the economy and presents the council’s analysis of current policy issues. 
The president also receives input from economists in many administrative 
departments. Economists at the Office of Management and Budget help formulate 
spending plans and regulatory policies.  Economists at the Department of the Trea-
sury help design tax policy. Economists at the Department of Labor analyze data 
on workers and those looking for work to help formulate labor-market policies. 
Economists at the Department of Justice help enforce the nation’s antitrust laws.
Economists are also found outside the administrative branch of government. 
To obtain independent evaluations of policy proposals, Congress relies on the 
advice of the Congressional Budget Office, which is staffed by economists. The 
normative 
statements
claims that attempt to 
prescribe how the world 
should be
positive statements
claims that attempt to 
describe the world as it is
“Let’s switch. I’ll make 
the policy, you implement 
it, and he’ll explain it.”
© James Stevenson. The New Yorker  
Collection/ www.cartoonbank.com

32
PART I	
Introduction
A Vision for 
Innovation, Growth, 
and Quality Jobs 
By Lawrence H. Summers
P
resident Obama laid out his vision for 
innovation, growth, and quality jobs earlier 
today at Hudson Valley Community College. 
Ths President’s plan is grounded not only in the 
American tradition of ­entrepreneurship, but also 
in the traditions of robust economic thought.
	
During the past two years, the ideas 
propounded by John Maynard Keynes have 
assumed greater importance than most 
people would have thought in the previous 
generation.  As Keynes famously observed, 
during those rare times of deep financial 
and economic crisis, when the “invisible 
hand” Adam Smith talked about has tem-
porarily ceased to function, there is a more 
urgent need for government to play an 
active role in restoring markets to their 
healthy ­function. 
	
The wisdom of Keynesian policies has  
been confirmed by the performance of the econ-
omy over the past year.  After the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers last September, government 
policy moved in a strongly activist direction. 
	
As a result of those policies, our outlook 
today has shifted from rescue to recovery, 
from worrying about the very real prospect 
of depression to thinking about what kind of 
an expansion we want to have. 
	
An important aspect of any economic 
expansion is the role innovation plays as 
 The Economics of President Obama
Here is how Larry Summers, a chief economic adviser to Barack 
Obama, describes the president’s policies.
in the news
Federal Reserve, the institution that sets the nation’s monetary policy, employs 
hundreds of economists to analyze economic developments in the United States 
and throughout the world.
The influence of economists on policy goes beyond their role as advisers: Their 
research and writings often affect policy indirectly. Economist John Maynard 
Keynes offered this observation:
The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right 
and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly under-
stood. Indeed, the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe 
themselves to be quite exempt from intellectual influences, are usually the 
slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices 
in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few 
years back.
Although these words were written in 1935, they remain true. Indeed, the “aca-
demic scribbler” now influencing public policy is often Keynes himself.
Why Economists’ Advice Is Not Always Followed
Any economist who advises presidents or other elected leaders knows that his 
or her recommendations are not always heeded. Frustrating as this can be, it 
is easy to understand. The process by which economic policy is actually made 
differs in many ways from the idealized policy process assumed in economics 
textbooks. 

33
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
Source: The White House Blog, September 21, 2009. http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/A-Vision-for-Innovation-Growth-and-Quality-Jobs/
an engine of economic growth.   In this 
regard, the most important economist of 
the twenty-first century might actually turn 
out to be not Smith or Keynes, but Joseph 
Schumpeter. 
	
One of Schumpeter’s most important 
contributions was the emphasis he placed 
on the tremendous power of innovation and 
entrepreneurial initiative to drive growth 
through a process he famously characterized 
as “creative destruction.”   His work cap-
tured not only an economic truth, but also 
the particular source of America’s strength 
and dynamism.
	
One of the ways to view the trajectory 
of economic history is through the key tech-
nologies that have reverberated across the 
economy.  In the nineteenth century, these 
included the transcontinental railroad, the 
telegraph, and the steam engine, among 
others.  In the twentieth, the most powerful 
innovations included the automobile, the jet 
plane, and, over the last generation, infor-
mation technology.
	
While we can’t know exactly where the 
next great area of American innovation will 
be, we already see a number of prominent 
sectors where American entrepreneurs are 
unleashing explosive, innovative energy:
• In information technology, where tremen-
dous potential remains for a range of 
applications to increase for years to come;
• In life-science technologies, where devel-
opments made at the National Institutes 
of Health and in research facilities around 
the country will have profound implica-
tions not just for human health, but also 
for the environment, agriculture, and a 
range of other areas that require techno-
logical creativity; and,
• In energy, where the combination of environ-
mental and geopolitical imperatives have 
created the context for an enormously 
productive period in developing energy 
technologies as well.
	
Looking across the breadth of the U.S. 
economy, the prospects for transformational 
innovation to occur are enormous.  But to ensure 
that the entrepreneurial spirit that Schumpeter 
recognized in the early twentieth century will 
continue to drive the American economy in the 
twenty-first century requires a role for govern-
ment as well: to create an environment that is 
conducive to generating those developments.  
Throughout this text, whenever we discuss economic policy, we often focus on 
one question: What is the best policy for the government to pursue? We act as if 
policy were set by a benevolent king. Once the king figures out the right policy, 
he has no trouble putting his ideas into action.
In the real world, figuring out the right policy is only part of a leader’s job, 
sometimes the easiest part. After a president hears from his economic advisers 
about what policy is best from their perspective, he turns to other advisers for 
related input. His communications advisers will tell him how best to explain 
the proposed policy to the public, and they will try to anticipate any misunder-
standings that might make the challenge more difficult. His press advisers will 
tell him how the news media will report on his proposal and what opinions 
will likely be expressed on the nation’s editorial pages. His legislative affairs 
advisers will tell him how Congress will view the proposal, what amendments 
members of Congress will suggest, and the likelihood that Congress will pass 
some version of the president’s proposal into law. His political advisers will tell 
him which groups will organize to support or oppose the proposed policy, how 
this proposal will affect his standing among different groups in the electorate, 
and whether it will affect support for any of the president’s other policy initia-
tives. After hearing and weighing all this advice, the president then decides 
how to proceed.
Making economic policy in a representative democracy is a messy affair—and 
there are often good reasons presidents (and other politicians) do not advance the 
© Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

34
PART I	
Introduction
policies that economists advocate. Economists offer crucial input into the policy 
process, but their advice is only one ingredient of a complex recipe. 
Quick Quiz  Give an example of a positive statement and an example of a norma-
tive statement that somehow relates to your daily life.  •  Name three parts of govern-
ment that regularly rely on advice from economists.
Why Economists Disagree
“If all economists were laid end to end, they would not reach a conclusion.” This 
quip from George Bernard Shaw is revealing. Economists as a group are often 
criticized for giving conflicting advice to policymakers. President Ronald Reagan 
once joked that if the game Trivial Pursuit were designed for economists, it would 
have 100 questions and 3,000 answers.
Why do economists so often appear to give conflicting advice to policymakers? 
There are two basic reasons:
• 	 Economists may disagree about the validity of alternative positive theories 
about how the world works.
• 	 Economists may have different values and therefore different normative 
views about what policy should try to accomplish.
Let’s discuss each of these reasons.
Differences in Scientific Judgments
Several centuries ago, astronomers debated whether the earth or the sun was at the 
center of the solar system. More recently, meteorologists have debated whether 
the earth is experiencing global warming and, if so, why. Science is a search for 
understanding about the world around us. It is not surprising that as the search 
continues, scientists can disagree about the direction in which truth lies.
Economists often disagree for the same reason. Economics is a young science, 
and there is still much to be learned. Economists sometimes disagree because they 
have different hunches about the validity of alternative theories or about the size 
of important parameters that measure how economic variables are related.
For example, economists disagree about whether the government should tax 
a household’s income or its consumption (spending). Advocates of a switch 
from the current income tax to a consumption tax believe that the change would 
encourage households to save more because income that is saved would not be 
taxed. Higher saving, in turn, would free resources for capital accumulation, 
leading to more rapid growth in productivity and living standards. Advocates of 
the current income tax system believe that household saving would not respond 
much to a change in the tax laws. These two groups of economists hold different 
normative views about the tax system because they have different positive views 
about the responsiveness of saving to tax incentives.
Differences in Values
Suppose that Peter and Paula both take the same amount of water from the town 
well. To pay for maintaining the well, the town taxes its residents. Peter has 
income of $100,000 and is taxed $10,000, or 10 percent of his income. Paula has 
income of $20,000 and is taxed $4,000, or 20 percent of her income. 

35
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
Is this policy fair? If not, who pays too much and who pays too little? Does it 
matter whether Paula’s low income is due to a medical disability or to her deci-
sion to pursue an acting career? Does it matter whether Peter’s high income is 
due to a large inheritance or to his willingness to work long hours at a dreary job?
These are difficult questions on which people are likely to disagree. If the town 
hired two experts to study how the town should tax its residents to pay for the 
well, we would not be surprised if they offered conflicting advice.
This simple example shows why economists sometimes disagree about public 
policy. As we learned earlier in our discussion of normative and positive analysis, 
policies cannot be judged on scientific grounds alone. Economists give conflicting 
advice sometimes because they have different values. Perfecting the science of 
economics will not tell us whether Peter or Paula pays too much.  
Perception versus Reality
Because of differences in scientific judgments and differences in values, some 
disagreement among economists is inevitable. Yet one should not overstate the 
amount of disagreement. Economists agree with one another far more than is 
sometimes understood. 
Table 1 contains 20 propositions about economic policy. In surveys of profes-
sional economists, these propositions were endorsed by an overwhelming major-
ity of respondents. Most of these propositions would fail to command a similar 
consensus among the public. 
The first proposition in the table is about rent control, a policy that sets a legal 
maximum on the amount landlords can charge for their apartments. Almost all 
economists believe that rent control adversely affects the availability and quality 
of housing and is a costly way of helping the neediest members of society. None-
theless, many city governments ignore the advice of economists and place ceilings 
on the rents that landlords may charge their tenants.
The second proposition in the table concerns tariffs and import quotas, two poli-
cies that restrict trade among nations. For reasons we discuss more fully later in this 
text, almost all economists oppose such barriers to free trade. Nonetheless, over the 
years, presidents and Congress have chosen to restrict the import of certain goods.
Why do policies such as rent control and trade barriers persist if the experts are 
united in their opposition? It may be that the realities of the political process stand 
as immovable obstacles. But it also may be that economists have not yet convinced 
enough of the public that these policies are undesirable. One purpose of this book 
is to help you understand the economist’s view of these and other subjects and, 
perhaps, to persuade you that it is the right one.
Quick Quiz  Why might economic advisers to the president disagree about a ques-
tion of policy?
Let’s Get Going
The first two chapters of this book have introduced you to the ideas and meth-
ods of economics. We are now ready to get to work. In the next chapter, we start 
learning in more detail the principles of economic behavior and economic policy. 
As you proceed through this book, you will be asked to draw on many of your 
intellectual skills. You might find it helpful to keep in mind some advice from the 
great economist John Maynard Keynes:

36
PART I	
Introduction
The study of economics does not seem to require any specialized gifts of an 
unusually high order. Is it not . . . a very easy subject compared with the higher 
branches of philosophy or pure science? An easy subject, at which very few 
excel! The paradox finds its explanation, perhaps, in that the master-economist 
must possess a rare combination of gifts. He must be mathematician, historian, 
statesman, philosopher—in some degree. He must understand symbols and 
speak in words. He must contemplate the particular in terms of the general, 
and touch abstract and concrete in the same flight of thought. He must study 
the present in the light of the past for the purposes of the future. No part 
of man’s nature or his institutions must lie entirely outside his regard. He 
must be purposeful and disinterested in a simultaneous mood; as aloof and 
­incorruptible as an artist, yet sometimes as near the earth as a politician.
It is a tall order. But with practice, you will become more and more accustomed 
to thinking like an economist.
Propositions about 
Which Most Economists 
Agree
Table 1
Proposition (and percentage of economists who agree)
  1.	 A ceiling on rents reduces the quantity and quality of housing available. (93%)
  2.	 Tariffs and import quotas usually reduce general economic welfare. (93%)
  3.	 Flexible and floating exchange rates offer an effective international monetary arrangement. (90%)
  4.	 Fiscal policy (e.g., tax cut and/or government expenditure increase) has a significant stimulative 
impact on a less than fully employed economy. (90%)
  5.	 The United States should not restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries. (90%)
  6.	 Economic growth in developed countries like the United States leads to greater levels of well-
being. (88%)
  7.	 The United States should eliminate agricultural subsidies. (85%)
  8.	 An appropriately designed fiscal policy can increase the long-run rate of capital formation. (85%)
  9.	 Local and state governments should eliminate subsidies to professional sports franchises. (85%)
10.	 If the federal budget is to be balanced, it should be done over the business cycle rather than 
yearly. (85%)
11.	 The gap between Social Security funds and expenditures will become unsustainably large within 
the next 50 years if current policies remain unchanged. (85%)
12.	 Cash payments increase the welfare of recipients to a greater degree than do transfers-in-kind 
of equal cash value. (84%)
13.	 A large federal budget deficit has an adverse effect on the economy. (83%)
14.	 The redistribution of income in the United State is a legitimate role for the government. (83%)
15.	 Inflation is caused primarily by too much growth in the money supply. (83%)
16.	 The United States should not ban genetically modified crops. (82%)
17.	 A minimum wage increases unemployment among young and unskilled workers. (79%)
18.	 The government should restructure the welfare system along the lines of a “negative income 
tax.” (79%)
19.	 Effluent taxes and marketable pollution permits represent a better approach to pollution control 
than imposition of pollution ceilings. (78%)
20.	 Government subsidies on ethanol in the United States should be reduced or eliminated. (78%)
Source: Richard M. Alston, J. R. Kearl, and Michael B. Vaughn, “Is There Consensus among Economists in the 1990s?” 
American Economic Review (May 1992): 203–209; Dan Fuller and Doris Geide-Stevenson, “Consensus among Economists 
Revisited,” Journal of Economics Education (Fall 2003): 369–387; Robert Whaples, “Do Economists Agree on Anything? Yes!” 
Economists’ Voice (November 2006): 1–6; Robert Whaples, “The Policy Views of American Economic Association Members: The 
Results of a New Survey, Econ Journal Watch (September 2009): 337–348.

37
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
 Environmental Economics
Some economists are helping to save the planet.
in the news
Green Groups See 
Potent Tool in 
Economics
By Jessica E. Vascellaro 
M
any economists dream of getting 
high-paying jobs on Wall Street, at 
prestigious think tanks and universities or 
at powerful government agencies like the 
Federal Reserve.
	
But a growing number are choosing 
to use their skills not to track inflation or 
interest rates but to rescue rivers and trees. 
These are the “green economists,” more 
formally known as environmental econo-
mists, who use economic arguments and 
systems to persuade companies to clean 
up pollution and to help conserve natural 
areas.
	
Working at dozens of advocacy groups 
and a myriad of state and federal envi-
ronmental agencies, they are helping to 
formulate the intellectual framework behind 
approaches to protecting endangered spe-
cies, reducing pollution and preventing cli-
mate change. They also are becoming a link 
between left-leaning advocacy groups and 
the public and private sectors.
	
“In the past, many advocacy groups 
interpreted economics as how to make a 
profit or maximize income,” says Lawrence 
Goulder, a professor of environmental and 
resource economics at Stanford University 
in Stanford, Calif. “More economists are 
­realizing that it offers a framework for 
resource allocation where resources are not 
only labor and capital but natural resources 
as well.”
	
Environmental economists are on 
the payroll of government agencies (the 
Environmental Protection Agency had 
about 164 on staff in 2004, up 36% 
from 1995) and groups like the Wilderness 
Society, a Washington-based conservation 
group, which has four of them to work 
on projects such as assessing the eco-
nomic impact of building off-road driving 
trails. Environmental Defense, also based in 
Washington, was one of the first environ-
mental-advocacy groups to hire economists 
and now has about eight, who do such 
things as develop market incentives to 
address environmental problems like climate 
change and water shortages. . . .
	
“There used to be this idea that we 
shouldn’t have to monetize the environment 
because it is invaluable,” says Caroline 
Alkire, who in 1991 joined the Wilderness 
Society, an advocacy group in Washington, 
D.C., as one of the group’s first economists. 
“But if we are going to engage in debate on 
the Hill about drilling in the Arctic we need 
to be able to combat the financial argu-
ments. We have to play that card or we are 
going to lose.”
	
The field of environmental economics 
began to take form in the 1960s when 
academics started to apply the tools of 
economics to the nascent green movement. 
The discipline grew more popular through-
out the 1980s when the Environmental 
Protection Agency adopted a system of trad-
able permits for phasing out leaded gaso-
line. It wasn’t until the 1990 amendment 
to the Clean Air Act, however, that most 
environmentalists started to take economics 
seriously.
	
The amendment implemented a system 
of tradable allowances for acid rain, a 
program pushed by Environmental Defense. 
Under the law, plants that can reduce their 
emissions more cost-effectively may sell 
their allowances to more heavy polluters. 
Today, the program has exceeded its goal 
of reducing the amount of acid rain to half 
its 1980 level and is celebrated as evidence 
that markets can help achieve environmen-
tal goals.
	
Its success has convinced its former 
critics, who at the time contended that 
environmental regulation was a matter of 
ethics, not economics, and favored installing 
expensive acid rain removal technology in 
all power plants instead.
	
Greenpeace, the international environ-
mental giant, was one of the leading oppo-
nents of the 1990 amendment. But Kert 
Davies, research director for Greenpeace 
USA, said its success and the lack of any 
significant action on climate policy through-
out [the] early 1990s brought the organi-
zation around to the concept. “We now 
believe that [tradable permits] are the most 
straightforward system of reducing emis-
sions and creating the incentives necessary 
for massive reductions.”
Source: The Wall Street Journal, August 23, 2005.

• Economists try to address their subject with a 
scientist’s objectivity. Like all scientists, they 
make appropriate assumptions and build sim-
plified models to understand the world around 
them. Two simple economic models are the 
circular-flow diagram and the production pos-
sibilities frontier.
• The field of economics is divided into two 
subfields: microeconomics and macroeconom-
ics. Microeconomists study decision making 
by households and firms and the interaction 
among households and firms in the marketplace. 
Macroeconomists study the forces and trends 
that affect the economy as a whole. 
• A positive statement is an assertion about 
how the world is. A normative statement is 
an assertion about how the world ought to be. 
When economists make normative statements, 
they are acting more as policy advisers than 
scientists.
• Economists who advise policymakers offer con-
flicting advice either because of differences in 
scientific judgments or because of differences 
in values. At other times, economists are united 
in the advice they offer, but policymakers may 
choose to ignore it.
Summary
Key Concepts
circular-flow diagram, p. 24
production possibilities  
frontier, p. 26
microeconomics, p. 29
macroeconomics, p. 29
positive statements, p. 31
normative statements, p. 31
Questions for Review
	 1.	 How is economics a science?
	 2.	 Why do economists make assumptions?
	 3.	 Should an economic model describe reality 
exactly?
	 4.	 Name a way that your family interacts in the 
factor market and a way that it interacts in the 
product market.
	 5.	 Name one economic interaction that isn’t cov-
ered by the simplified circular-flow diagram.
	 6.	 Draw and explain a production possibilities 
frontier for an economy that produces milk and 
cookies. What happens to this frontier if disease 
kills half of the economy’s cows?
	 7.	 Use a production possibilities frontier to 
describe the idea of “efficiency.”
	 8.	 What are the two subfields into which eco-
nomics is divided? Explain what each subfield 
­studies.
	 9.	 What is the difference between a positive and a 
normative statement? Give an example of each.
	10.	 Why do economists sometimes offer conflicting 
advice to policymakers?
Problems and Applications
	 1.	 Draw a circular-flow diagram. Identify the 
parts of the model that correspond to the flow 
of goods and services and the flow of dollars 
for each of the following activities.
a.	 Selena pays a storekeeper $1 for a quart of 
milk.
b.	Stuart earns $4.50 per hour working at a fast-
food restaurant.
c.	 Shanna spends $30 to get a haircut.
d.	Sally earns $10,000 from her 10 percent 
owner­ship of Acme Industrial.
38
PART I	
Introduction

	 2.	 Imagine a society that produces military goods 
and consumer goods, which we’ll call “guns” 
and “butter.”
a.	 Draw a production possibilities frontier for 
guns and butter. Using the concept of oppor-
tunity cost, explain why it most likely has a 
bowed-out shape.
b.	Show a point that is impossible for the econ-
omy to achieve. Show a point that is feasible 
but inefficient.
c.	 Imagine that the society has two politi-
cal parties, called the Hawks (who want a 
strong military) and the Doves (who want a 
smaller military). Show a point on your pro-
duction possibilities frontier that the Hawks 
might choose and a point the Doves might 
choose.
d.	Imagine that an aggressive neighboring 
country reduces the size of its military. As a 
result, both the Hawks and the Doves reduce 
their desired production of guns by the same 
amount. Which party would get the bigger 
“peace dividend,” measured by the increase 
in butter production? Explain.
	 3.	 The first principle of economics discussed in 
Chapter 1 is that people face trade-offs. Use 
a production possibilities frontier to illustrate 
society’s trade-off between two “goods”—a 
clean environment and the quantity of indus­
trial output. What do you suppose determines 
the shape and position of the frontier? Show 
what happens to the frontier if engineers  
develop a new way of producing electricity 
that emits fewer pollutants.
	 4.	 An economy consists of three workers: Larry, 
Moe, and Curly. Each works ten hours a day 
and can produce two services: mowing lawns 
and washing cars. In an hour, Larry can either 
mow one lawn or wash one car; Moe can either 
mow one lawn or wash two cars; and Curly 
can either mow two lawns or wash one car. 
a.	 Calculate how much of each service is pro-
duced under the following circumstances, 
which we label A, B, C, and D:
• All three spend all their time mowing 
lawns. (A)
• All three spend all their time washing 
cars. (B)
• All three spend half their time on each 
activity. (C)
• Larry spends half his time on each activity, 
while Moe only washes cars and Curly 
only mows lawns. (D)
b.	Graph the production possibilities frontier 
for this economy. Using your answers to 
part (a), identify points A, B, C, and D on 
your graph. 
c.	 Explain why the production possibilities 
frontier has the shape it does.
d.	Are any of the allocations calculated in part 
(a) inefficient? Explain.
	 5.	 Classify the following topics as relating to 
microeconomics or macroeconomics.
a.	 a family’s decision about how much income 
to save
b.	the effect of government regulations on auto 
emissions
c.	 the impact of higher national saving on eco-
nomic growth
d.	a firm’s decision about how many workers 
to hire
e.	 the relationship between the inflation rate 
and changes in the quantity of money
	 6.	 Classify each of the following statements as 
positive or normative. Explain.
a.	 Society faces a short-run trade-off between 
inflation and unemployment.
b.	A reduction in the rate of money growth will 
reduce the rate of inflation.
c.	 The Federal Reserve should reduce the rate 
of money growth.
d.	Society ought to require welfare recipients to 
look for jobs.
e.	 Lower tax rates encourage more work and 
more saving.
	 7.	 If you were president, would you be more 
interested in your economic advisers’ positive 
views or their normative views? Why?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at  
www.cengage.com/economics/mankiw. 
39
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist

40
PART I	
Introduction
Appendix
Graphing: A Brief Review
Many of the concepts that economists study can be expressed with numbers—the 
price of bananas, the quantity of bananas sold, the cost of growing bananas, and 
so on. Often, these economic variables are related to one another: When the price 
of bananas rises, people buy fewer bananas. One way of expressing the relation-
ships among variables is with graphs. 
Graphs serve two purposes. First, when developing economic theories, graphs 
offer a way to visually express ideas that might be less clear if described with 
equations or words. Second, when analyzing economic data, graphs provide a 
powerful way of finding and interpreting patterns. Whether we are working with 
theory or with data, graphs provide a lens through which a recognizable forest 
emerges from a multitude of trees.
Numerical information can be expressed graphically in many ways, just as 
there are many ways to express a thought in words. A good writer chooses words 
that will make an argument clear, a description pleasing, or a scene dramatic. An 
effective economist chooses the type of graph that best suits the purpose at hand. 
In this appendix, we discuss how economists use graphs to study the mathe­
matical relationships among variables. We also discuss some of the pitfalls that 
can arise in the use of graphical methods.
Graphs of a Single Variable
Three common graphs are shown in Figure A-1. The pie chart in panel (a) shows 
how total income in the United States is divided among the sources of income, 
including compensation of employees, corporate profits, and so on. A slice of the 
The pie chart in panel (a) shows how U.S. national income in 2008 was derived from 
various sources. The bar graph in panel (b) compares the 2008 average income in four 
countries. The time-series graph in panel (c) shows the productivity of labor in U.S. 
businesses from 1950 to 2000.
Types of Graphs
Figure A-1
Rental 
income (2%)
Corporate 
proﬁts (11%)
(a) Pie Chart
(c) Time-Series Graph
Income per
Person in 2008
United 
States
($46,720)
United 
Kingdom
($43,090)
(b) Bar Graph
Mexico
($10,210)
India
($1,070)
Compensation
of employees 
(72%)
Proprietors’ 
income (9%)
Interest 
income (6%)
Productivity 
Index 
115
95
75
55
35
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
40,000
$50,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0

41
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
pie represents each source’s share of the total. The bar graph in panel (b) compares 
income for four countries. The height of each bar represents the average income 
in each country. The time-series graph in panel (c) traces the rising productivity in 
the U.S. business sector over time. The height of the line shows output per hour in 
each year. You have probably seen similar graphs in newspapers and magazines.
Graphs of Two Variables: The Coordinate System
The three graphs in Figure A-1 are useful in showing how a variable changes 
over time or across individuals, but they are limited in how much they can tell us. 
These graphs display information only on a single variable. Economists are often 
concerned with the relationships between variables. Thus, they need to display 
two variables on a single graph. The coordinate system makes this possible. 
Suppose you want to examine the relationship between study time and grade 
point average. For each student in your class, you could record a pair of numbers: 
hours per week spent studying and grade point average. These numbers could 
then be placed in parentheses as an ordered pair and appear as a single point on the 
graph. Albert E., for instance, is represented by the ordered pair (25 hours/week, 
3.5 GPA), while his “what-me-worry?” classmate Alfred E. is represented by the 
ordered pair (5 hours/week, 2.0 GPA). 
We can graph these ordered pairs on a two-dimensional grid. The first number 
in each ordered pair, called the x-coordinate, tells us the horizontal location of the 
point. The second number, called the y-coordinate, tells us the vertical location 
of the point. The point with both an x-coordinate and a y-coordinate of zero is 
known as the origin. The two coordinates in the ordered pair tell us where the 
point is located in relation to the origin: x units to the right of the origin and y 
units above it.
Figure A-2 graphs grade point average against study time for Albert E., Alfred E.,  
and their classmates. This type of graph is called a scatterplot because it plots 
scattered points. Looking at this graph, we immediately notice that points farther 
Figure A-2
Grade
Point
Average
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
40 Study
Time
(hours per week)
3.0
3.5
4.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Alfred E.
(5, 2.0)
Albert E.
(25, 3.5)
Using the Coordinate 
System
Grade point average is 
measured on the vertical 
axis and study time on the 
horizontal axis. Albert E., 
Alfred E., and their classmates 
are represented by various 
points. We can see from the 
graph that students who 
study more tend to get higher 
grades.

42
PART I	
Introduction
to the right (indicating more study time) also tend to be higher (indicating a better 
grade point average). Because study time and grade point average typically move 
in the same direction, we say that these two variables have a positive correlation. 
By contrast, if we were to graph party time and grades, we would likely find that 
higher party time is associated with lower grades; because these variables typi-
cally move in opposite directions, we call this a negative correlation. In either case, 
the coordinate system makes the correlation between the two variables easy to see. 
Curves in the Coordinate System
Students who study more do tend to get higher grades, but other factors also influ-
ence a student’s grade. Previous preparation is an important factor, for instance, 
as are talent, attention from teachers, even eating a good breakfast. A scatterplot 
like Figure A-2 does not attempt to isolate the effect that studying has on grades 
from the effects of other variables. Often, however, economists prefer looking at 
how one variable affects another, holding everything else constant.
To see how this is done, let’s consider one of the most important graphs in eco-
nomics: the demand curve. The demand curve traces out the effect of a good’s price 
on the quantity of the good consumers want to buy. Before showing a demand 
curve, however, consider Table A-1, which shows how the number of novels that 
Emma buys depends on her income and on the price of novels. When novels are 
cheap, Emma buys them in large quantities. As they become more expensive, she 
instead borrows books from the library or chooses to go to the movies rather than 
read. Similarly, at any given price, Emma buys more novels when she has a higher 
income. That is, when her income increases, she spends part of the additional 
income on novels and part on other goods.
We now have three variables—the price of novels, income, and the number 
of novels purchased—which are more than we can represent in two dimensions. 
To put the information from Table A-1 in graphical form, we need to hold one of 
the three variables constant and trace out the relationship between the other two. 
Because the demand curve represents the relationship between price and quantity 
demanded, we hold Emma’s income constant and show how the number of nov-
els she buys varies with the price of novels. 
Suppose that Emma’s income is $30,000 per year. If we place the number of 
novels Emma purchases on the x-axis and the price of novels on the y-axis, we 
Novels Purchased by Emma
This table shows the number 
of novels Emma buys at various 
incomes and prices. For any given 
level of income, the data on 
price and quantity demanded can 
be graphed to produce Emma’s 
demand curve for novels, as shown 
in Figures A-3 and A-4.
Table A-1
Price
For 
$20,000 
Income:
For 
$30,000 
Income:
For 
$40,000 
Income:
$10
  2 novels
  5 novels
  8 novels
9
  6
  9
12
8
10
13
16
7
14
17
20
6
18
21
24
5
22
25
28
Demand curve, D3
Demand curve, D1
Demand curve, D2

43
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
can graphically represent the middle column of Table A-1. When the points that 
­represent these entries from the table—(5 novels, $10), (9 novels, $9), and so on—are 
connected, they form a line. This line, pictured in Figure A-3, is known as Emma’s 
demand curve for novels; it tells us how many novels Emma purchases at any 
given price. The demand curve is downward sloping, indicating that a higher price 
reduces the quantity of novels demanded. Because the quantity of novels demanded 
and the price move in opposite directions, we say that the two variables are nega-
tively related. (Conversely, when two variables move in the same direction, the curve 
relating them is upward sloping, and we say the variables are positively related.)
Now suppose that Emma’s income rises to $40,000 per year. At any given price, 
Emma will purchase more novels than she did at her previous level of income. 
Just as earlier we drew Emma’s demand curve for novels using the entries from 
the middle column of Table A-1, we now draw a new demand curve using the 
entries from the right column of the table. This new demand curve (curve D2) is 
pictured alongside the old one (curve D1) in Figure A-4; the new curve is a similar 
line drawn farther to the right. We therefore say that Emma’s demand curve for 
novels shifts to the right when her income increases. Likewise, if Emma’s income 
were to fall to $20,000 per year, she would buy fewer novels at any given price 
and her demand curve would shift to the left (to curve D3).
In economics, it is important to distinguish between movements along a curve 
and shifts of a curve. As we can see from Figure A-3, if Emma earns $30,000 per 
year and novels cost $8 apiece, she will purchase 13 novels per year. If the price of 
novels falls to $7, Emma will increase her purchases of novels to 17 per year. The 
demand curve, however, stays fixed in the same place. Emma still buys the same 
Figure A-3
Price of
Novels
5
4
3
2
1
30
Quantity
of Novels
Purchased
6
7
8
9
10
$11
0
5
10
15
20
25
Demand, D1
(5, $10)
(9, $9)
(13, $8)
(17, $7)
(21, $6)
(25, $5)
Demand Curve
The line D1 shows how 
Emma’s purchases of novels 
depend on the price of novels 
when her income is held 
constant. Because the price 
and the quantity demanded 
are negatively related, 
the demand curve slopes 
downward.

44
PART I	
Introduction
number of novels at each price, but as the price falls, she moves along her demand 
curve from left to right. By contrast, if the price of novels remains fixed at $8 but 
her income rises to $40,000, Emma increases her purchases of novels from 13 to 16 
per year. Because Emma buys more novels at each price, her demand curve shifts 
out, as shown in Figure A-4.
There is a simple way to tell when it is necessary to shift a curve: When a vari-
able that is not named on either axis changes, the curve shifts. Income is on neither 
the x-axis nor the y-axis of the graph, so when Emma’s income changes, her 
demand curve must shift. The same is true for any change that affects Emma’s 
purchasing habits besides a change in the price of novels. If, for instance, the 
public library closes and Emma must buy all the books she wants to read, she 
will demand more novels at each price, and her demand curve will shift to the 
right. Or if the price of movies falls and Emma spends more time at the mov-
ies and less time reading, she will demand fewer novels at each price, and her 
demand curve will shift to the left. By contrast, when a variable on an axis of 
the graph changes, the curve does not shift. We read the change as a movement 
along the curve. 
Slope
One question we might want to ask about Emma is how much her purchasing 
habits respond to price. Look at the demand curve pictured in Figure A-5. If this 
curve is very steep, Emma purchases nearly the same number of novels ­regardless 
Figure A-4
Price of
Novels
5
4
3
2
1
30
Quantity
of Novels
Purchased
6
7
8
9
10
$11
0
5
13
16
10
15
20
25
(13, $8)
(16, $8)
D3
(income =
$20,000)
D1
(income =
$30,000)
D2 (income =
$40,000)
(10, $8)
When income increases, the
demand curve shifts to
the right.
When income
decreases, the
demand curve
shifts to the left.
Shifting Demand Curves
The location of Emma’s 
demand curve for novels 
depends on how much 
income she earns. The more 
she earns, the more novels 
she will purchase at any given 
price, and the farther to 
the right her demand curve 
will lie. Curve D1 represents 
Emma’s original demand 
curve when her income 
is $30,000 per year. If her 
income rises to $40,000 per 
year, her demand curve shifts 
to D2. If her income falls to 
$20,000 per year, her demand 
curve shifts to D3.

45
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
of whether they are cheap or expensive. If this curve is much flatter, the number 
of novels Emma purchases is more sensitive to changes in the price. To answer 
questions about how much one variable responds to changes in another variable, 
we can use the concept of slope.
The slope of a line is the ratio of the vertical distance covered to the horizontal 
distance covered as we move along the line. This definition is usually written out 
in mathematical symbols as follows:
slope =
Δy
Δx ,
where the Greek letter ∆ (delta) stands for the change in a variable. In other words, 
the slope of a line is equal to the “rise” (change in y) divided by the “run” (change 
in x). The slope will be a small positive number for a fairly flat upward-sloping 
line, a large positive number for a steep upward-sloping line, and a negative num-
ber for a downward-sloping line. A horizontal line has a slope of zero because in 
this case the y-variable never changes; a vertical line is said to have an infinite 
slope because the y-variable can take any value without the x-variable changing 
at all.
What is the slope of Emma’s demand curve for novels? First of all, because the 
curve slopes down, we know the slope will be negative. To calculate a numerical 
value for the slope, we must choose two points on the line. With Emma’s income 
Figure A-5
Price of
Novels
5
4
3
2
1
30
Quantity
of Novels
Purchased
6
7
8
9
10
$11
0
5
21
13
10
15
20
25
Demand, D1
(13, $8)
(21, $6)
6  8  2
21  13  8
Calculating the Slope  
of a Line
To calculate the slope of the 
demand curve, we can look 
at the changes in the x- and 
y-coordinates as we move 
from the point (21 novels, 
$6) to the point (13 novels, 
$8). The slope of the line is 
the ratio of the change in 
the y-coordinate (∙2) to the 
change in the x-coordinate 
(∙8), which equals ∙1⁄4

46
PART I	
Introduction
at $30,000, she will purchase 21 novels at a price of $6 or 13 novels at a price of 
$8. When we apply the slope formula, we are concerned with the change between 
these two points; in other words, we are concerned with the difference between 
them, which lets us know that we will have to subtract one set of values from the 
other, as follows:
slope =
Δy

first y-coordinate – second y-coordinate

6  8

2

1
Δx
first x-coordinate – second x-coordinate
21  13
8
4
Figure A-5 shows graphically how this calculation works. Try computing the 
slope of Emma’s demand curve using two different points. You should get exactly 
the same result, 1⁄4. One of the properties of a straight line is that it has the same 
slope everywhere. This is not true of other types of curves, which are steeper in 
some places than in others.
The slope of Emma’s demand curve tells us something about how responsive 
her purchases are to changes in the price. A small slope (a number close to zero) 
means that Emma’s demand curve is relatively flat; in this case, she adjusts the 
number of novels she buys substantially in response to a price change. A larger 
slope (a number farther from zero) means that Emma’s demand curve is relatively 
steep; in this case, she adjusts the number of novels she buys only slightly in 
response to a price change. 
Cause and Effect
Economists often use graphs to advance an argument about how the economy 
works. In other words, they use graphs to argue about how one set of events 
causes another set of events. With a graph like the demand curve, there is no 
doubt about cause and effect. Because we are varying price and holding all other 
variables constant, we know that changes in the price of novels cause changes in 
the quantity Emma demands. Remember, however, that our demand curve came 
from a hypothetical example. When graphing data from the real world, it is often 
more difficult to establish how one variable affects another.
The first problem is that it is difficult to hold everything else constant when 
studying the relationship between two variables. If we are not able to hold other 
variables constant, we might decide that one variable on our graph is causing 
changes in the other variable when actually those changes are caused by a third 
omitted variable not pictured on the graph. Even if we have identified the correct 
Courtesy of Randall Munroe/xkcd.com

47
CHAPTER 2    Thinking Like an Economist
two variables to look at, we might run into a second problem—reverse causality. 
In other words, we might decide that A causes B when in fact B causes A. The 
omitted-variable and reverse-causality traps require us to proceed with caution 
when using graphs to draw conclusions about causes and effects.
Omitted Variables  To see how omitting a variable can lead to a deceptive 
graph, let’s consider an example. Imagine that the government, spurred by 
public concern about the large number of deaths from cancer, commissions 
an exhaustive study from Big Brother Statistical Services, Inc. Big Brother 
examines many of the items found in people’s homes to see which of them 
are associated with the risk of cancer. Big Brother reports a strong relation-
ship between two variables: the number of cigarette lighters that a household  
owns and the probability that someone in the household will develop cancer. 
Figure A-6 shows this relationship. 
What should we make of this result? Big Brother advises a quick policy 
response. It recommends that the government discourage the ownership of 
­cigarette ­lighters by taxing their sale. It also recommends that the government 
require warning labels: “Big Brother has determined that this lighter is danger-
ous to your health.” 
In judging the validity of Big Brother’s analysis, one question is paramount: 
Has Big Brother held constant every relevant variable except the one under 
consideration? If the answer is no, the results are suspect. An easy explanation 
for Figure A-6 is that people who own more cigarette lighters are more likely to 
smoke cigarettes and that cigarettes, not lighters, cause cancer. If Figure A-6 does 
not hold constant the amount of smoking, it does not tell us the true effect of own-
ing a cigarette lighter. 
This story illustrates an important principle: When you see a graph used to 
support an argument about cause and effect, it is important to ask whether the 
movements of an omitted variable could explain the results you see.
Reverse Causality  Economists can also make mistakes about causality by 
misreading its direction. To see how this is possible, suppose the Association of 
American Anarchists commissions a study of crime in America and arrives at  
Figure A-6
Risk of
Cancer
Number of Lighters in House
0
Graph with an Omitted Variable
The upward-sloping curve shows 
that members of households 
with more cigarette lighters are 
more likely to develop cancer. 
Yet we should not conclude that 
ownership of lighters causes 
cancer because the graph does not 
take into account the number of 
cigarettes smoked.

48
PART I	
Introduction
Figure A-7, which plots the number of violent crimes per thousand people in 
major cities against the number of police officers per thousand people. The anar-
chists note the curve’s upward slope and argue that because police increase rather 
than decrease the amount of urban violence, law enforcement should be abolished.
If we could run a controlled experiment, we would avoid the danger of reverse 
causality. To run an experiment, we would set the number of police officers in dif-
ferent cities randomly and then examine the correlation between police and crime. 
Figure A-7, however, is not based on such an experiment. We simply observe that 
more dangerous cities have more police officers. The explanation for this may be 
that more dangerous cities hire more police. In other words, rather than police 
causing crime, crime may cause police. Nothing in the graph itself allows us to 
establish the direction of causality.
It might seem that an easy way to determine the direction of causality is to 
examine which variable moves first. If we see crime increase and then the police 
force expand, we reach one conclusion. If we see the police force expand and then 
crime increase, we reach the other. Yet there is also a flaw with this approach: 
Often, people change their behavior not in response to a change in their present 
conditions but in response to a change in their expectations of future conditions. A 
city that expects a major crime wave in the future, for instance, might hire more 
police now. This problem is even easier to see in the case of babies and minivans. 
Couples often buy a minivan in anticipation of the birth of a child. The minivan 
comes before the baby, but we wouldn’t want to conclude that the sale of mini-
vans causes the population to grow!
There is no complete set of rules that says when it is appropriate to draw causal 
conclusions from graphs. Yet just keeping in mind that cigarette lighters don’t 
cause cancer (omitted variable) and minivans don’t cause larger families (reverse 
causality) will keep you from falling for many faulty economic arguments.
Figure A-7
Violent
Crimes
 (per 1,000
people)
Police Ofﬁcers
(per 1,000 people)
0
Graph Suggesting Reverse 
Causality
The upward-sloping curve 
shows that cities with a higher 
concentration of police are more 
dangerous. Yet the graph does 
not tell us whether police cause 
crime or crime-plagued cities hire 
more police.

49
3
Interdependence and
    the Gains from Trade
C
onsider your typical day. You wake up in the morning and pour your-
self juice from oranges grown in Florida and coffee from beans grown in 
Brazil. Over breakfast, you watch a news program broadcast from New 
York on your television made in China. You get dressed in clothes made 
of cotton grown in Georgia and sewn in factories in Thailand. You drive to class 
in a car made of parts manufactured in more than a dozen countries around the 
world. Then you open up your economics textbook written by an author living 
in Massachusetts, published by a company located in Ohio, and printed on paper 
made from trees grown in Oregon. 
Every day, you rely on many people, most of whom you have never met, to 
provide you with the goods and services that you enjoy. Such interdependence 
is possible because people trade with one another. Those people providing you 
goods and services are not acting out of generosity. Nor is some government 
agency directing them to satisfy your desires. Instead, people provide you and 

50
PART I	
Introduction
other consumers with the goods and services they produce because they get 
something in return. 
In subsequent chapters, we examine how our economy coordinates the activi-
ties of millions of people with varying tastes and abilities. As a starting point for 
this analysis, here we consider the reasons for economic interdependence. One 
of the Ten Principles of Economics highlighted in Chapter 1 is that trade can make 
everyone better off. In this chapter, we examine this principle more closely. What 
exactly do people gain when they trade with one another? Why do people choose 
to become interdependent?
The answers to these questions are key to understanding the modern global 
economy. In most countries today, many goods and services consumed are 
imported from abroad, and many goods and services produced are exported to 
foreign customers. The analysis in this chapter explains interdependence not only 
among individuals but also among nations. As we will see, the gains from trade 
are much the same whether you are buying a haircut from your local barber or a 
T-shirt made by a worker on the other side of the globe.
A Parable for the Modern Economy
To understand why people choose to depend on others for goods and services and 
how this choice improves their lives, let’s look at a simple economy. Imagine that 
there are two goods in the world: meat and potatoes. And there are two people 
in the world—a cattle rancher and a potato farmer—each of whom would like to 
eat both meat and potatoes.
The gains from trade are most obvious if the rancher can produce only meat 
and the farmer can produce only potatoes. In one scenario, the rancher and the 
farmer could choose to have nothing to do with each other. But after several 
months of eating beef roasted, boiled, broiled, and grilled, the rancher might 
decide that self-sufficiency is not all it’s cracked up to be. The farmer, who has 
been eating potatoes mashed, fried, baked, and scalloped, would likely agree. It is 
easy to see that trade would allow them to enjoy greater variety: Each could then 
have a steak with a baked potato or a burger with fries.
Although this scene illustrates most simply how everyone can benefit from 
trade, the gains would be similar if the rancher and the farmer were each capable 
of producing the other good, but only at great cost. Suppose, for example, that the 
potato farmer is able to raise cattle and produce meat, but that he is not very good 
at it. Similarly, suppose that the cattle rancher is able to grow potatoes but that her 
land is not very well suited for it. In this case, the farmer and the rancher can each 
benefit by specializing in what he or she does best and then trading with the other.
The gains from trade are less obvious, however, when one person is better at 
producing every good. For example, suppose that the rancher is better at raising 
cattle and better at growing potatoes than the farmer. In this case, should the 
rancher choose to remain self-sufficient? Or is there still reason for her to trade 
with the farmer? To answer this question, we need to look more closely at the fac-
tors that affect such a decision.
Production Possibilities
Suppose that the farmer and the rancher each work 8  hours per day and can 
devote this time to growing potatoes, raising cattle, or a combination of the two. 

51
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
The table in Figure 1 shows the amount of time each person requires to produce 
1 ounce of each good. The farmer can produce an ounce of potatoes in 15 minutes 
and an ounce of meat in 60 minutes. The rancher, who is more productive in both 
activities, can produce an ounce of potatoes in 10 minutes and an ounce of meat 
in 20 minutes. The last two columns in the table show the amounts of meat or 
potatoes the farmer and rancher can produce if they work an 8-hour day produc-
ing only that good.
Panel (b) of Figure 1 illustrates the amounts of meat and potatoes that the 
farmer can produce. If the farmer devotes all 8 hours of his time to potatoes, he 
produces 32 ounces of potatoes (measured on the horizontal axis) and no meat. If 
he devotes all his time to meat, he produces 8 ounces of meat (measured on the 
vertical axis) and no potatoes. If the farmer divides his time equally between the 
two activities, spending 4 hours on each, he produces 16 ounces of potatoes and 
4 ounces of meat. The figure shows these three possible outcomes and all others 
in between.
The Production 
Possibilities Frontier
Figure 1
Panel (a) shows the production opportunities available to the farmer and the rancher. 
Panel (b) shows the combinations of meat and potatoes that the farmer can produce. 
Panel (c) shows the combinations of meat and potatoes that the rancher can produce. 
Both production possibilities frontiers are derived assuming that the farmer and rancher 
each work 8 hours per day. If there is no trade, each person’s production possibilities 
frontier is also his or her consumption possibilities frontier.
4
8
Potatoes (ounces)
16
32
A
0
Meat (ounces)
(b) The Farmer’s Production Possibilities Frontier
If there is no
trade, the farmer
chooses this
production and 
consumption.
12
Potatoes (ounces)
24
B
0
Meat (ounces)
(c) The Rancher’s Production Possibilities Frontier
48
24
If there is no
trade, the rancher
chooses this
production and
consumption.
(a) Production Opportunities
Minutes Needed to  
Make 1 Ounce of:
Amount  
Produced in 8 Hours
Meat
Potatoes
Meat
Potatoes
Farmer
60 min/oz
15 min/oz
  8 oz
32 oz
Rancher
20 min/oz
10 min/oz
24 oz
48 oz

52
PART I	
Introduction
This graph is the farmer’s production possibilities frontier. As we discussed in 
Chapter 2, a production possibilities frontier shows the various mixes of output 
that an economy can produce. It illustrates one of the Ten Principles of Economics 
in Chapter 1: People face trade-offs. Here the farmer faces a trade-off between 
producing meat and producing potatoes. 
You may recall that the production possibilities frontier in Chapter 2 was 
drawn bowed out. In that case, the rate at which society could trade one good for 
the other depended on the amounts that were being produced. Here, however, the 
farmer’s technology for producing meat and potatoes (as summarized in Figure 1) 
allows him to switch between the two goods at a constant rate. Whenever the 
farmer spends 1 hour less producing meat and 1 hour more producing potatoes, 
he reduces his output of meat by 1 ounce and raises his output of potatoes by 
4 ounces—and this is true regardless of how much he is already producing. As a 
result, the production possibilities frontier is a straight line.
Panel (c) of Figure 1 shows the production possibilities frontier for the rancher. 
If the rancher devotes all 8 hours of her time to potatoes, she produces 48 ounces of 
potatoes and no meat. If she devotes all her time to meat, she produces 24 ounces 
of meat and no potatoes. If the rancher divides her time equally, spending 4 hours 
on each activity, she produces 24 ounces of potatoes and 12 ounces of meat. Once 
again, the production possibilities frontier shows all the possible outcomes.
If the farmer and rancher choose to be self-sufficient rather than trade with 
each other, then each consumes exactly what he or she produces. In this case, the 
production possibilities frontier is also the consumption possibilities frontier. That 
is, without trade, Figure 1 shows the possible combinations of meat and potatoes 
that the farmer and rancher can each produce and then consume.
These production possibilities frontiers are useful in showing the trade-offs 
that the farmer and rancher face, but they do not tell us what the farmer and 
rancher will actually choose to do. To determine their choices, we need to know 
the tastes of the farmer and the rancher. Let’s suppose they choose the combina-
tions identified by points A and B in Figure 1: The farmer produces and consumes 
16 ounces of potatoes and 4 ounces of meat, while the rancher produces and con-
sumes 24 ounces of potatoes and 12 ounces of meat. 
Specialization and Trade
After several years of eating combination B, the rancher gets an idea and goes to 
talk to the farmer:
	Rancher:	 Farmer, my friend, have I got a deal for you! I know how to improve 
life for both of us. I think you should stop producing meat alto-
gether and devote all your time to growing potatoes. According to 
my calculations, if you work 8 hours a day growing potatoes, you’ll 
produce 32 ounces of potatoes. If you give me 15 of those 32 ounces, 
I’ll give you 5 ounces of meat in return. In the end, you’ll get to eat 
17 ounces of potatoes and 5 ounces of meat every day, instead of the 
16 ounces of potatoes and 4 ounces of meat you now get. If you go 
along with my plan, you’ll have more of both foods. [To illustrate her 
point, the rancher shows the farmer panel (a) of Figure 2.]
	 Farmer:	 (sounding skeptical) That seems like a good deal for me. But I don’t 
understand why you are offering it. If the deal is so good for me, it 
can’t be good for you too.
	Rancher:	 Oh, but it is! Suppose I spend 6 hours a day raising cattle and 
2 hours growing potatoes. Then I can produce 18 ounces of meat 

53
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
and 12 ounces of potatoes. After I give you 5 ounces of my meat in 
exchange for 15 ounces of your potatoes, I’ll end up with 13 ounces of 
meat and 27 ounces of potatoes, instead of the 12 ounces of meat and 
24 ounces of potatoes that I now get. So I will also consume more of 
both foods than I do now. [She points out panel (b) of Figure 2.] 
	 Farmer:	 I don’t know. . . . This sounds too good to be true.
	Rancher:	 It’s really not as complicated as it first seems. Here—I’ve summa-
rized my proposal for you in a simple table. [The rancher shows the 
farmer a copy of the table at the bottom of Figure 2.]
	 Farmer:	 (after pausing to study the table) These calculations seem correct, but 
I am puzzled. How can this deal make us both better off?
How Trade Expands 
the Set of Consumption 
Opportunities
Figure 2
The proposed trade between the farmer and the rancher offers each of them a 
combination of meat and potatoes that would be impossible in the absence of trade. 
In panel (a), the farmer gets to consume at point A* rather than point A. In panel (b), 
the rancher gets to consume at point B* rather than point B. Trade allows each to 
consume more meat and more potatoes. 
4
5
8
Potatoes (ounces)
16
17
32
A
A*
0
Meat (ounces)
(a) The Farmer’s Production and Consumption
Farmer's 
production and 
consumption 
without trade
Farmer's 
consumption 
with trade
Farmer's 
production 
with trade
12
13
Potatoes (ounces)
24
12
27
B
0
Meat (ounces)
48
24
18
B*
(b) The Rancher’s Production and Consumption
Rancher's 
consumption 
with trade
Rancher's 
production 
with trade
Rancher's 
production and 
consumption 
without trade
(c) The Gains from Trade: A Summary
Farmer
Rancher
Meat
Potatoes
Meat
Potatoes
Without Trade:
	
Production and Consumption
4 oz
16 oz
12 oz
24 oz
With Trade:
	
Production
0 oz
32 oz
18 oz
12 oz
	
Trade
Gets 5 oz
Gives 15 oz
Gives 5 oz
Gets 15 oz
	
Consumption
5 oz
17 oz
13 oz
27 oz
GAINS FROM TRADE:
	
Increase in Consumption
+1 oz
+1 oz
+1 oz
+3 oz

54
PART I	
Introduction
	Rancher:	 We can both benefit because trade allows each of us to specialize in 
doing what we do best. You will spend more time growing potatoes 
and less time raising cattle. I will spend more time raising cattle and 
less time growing potatoes. As a result of specialization and trade, 
each of us can consume more meat and more potatoes without work-
ing any more hours. 
Quick Quiz  Draw an example of a production possibilities frontier for Robinson 
Crusoe, a shipwrecked sailor who spends his time gathering coconuts and catching 
fish. Does this frontier limit Crusoe’s consumption of coconuts and fish if he lives by 
himself? Does he face the same limits if he can trade with natives on the island?
Comparative Advantage: The Driving Force of Specialization
The rancher’s explanation of the gains from trade, though correct, poses a puzzle: 
If the rancher is better at both raising cattle and growing potatoes, how can the 
farmer ever specialize in doing what he does best? The farmer doesn’t seem to do 
anything best. To solve this puzzle, we need to look at the principle of comparative 
advantage.
As a first step in developing this principle, consider the following question: 
In our example, who can produce potatoes at a lower cost—the farmer or the 
rancher? There are two possible answers, and in these two answers lie the solution 
to our puzzle and the key to understanding the gains from trade.
Absolute Advantage
One way to answer the question about the cost of producing potatoes is to com-
pare the inputs required by the two producers. Economists use the term absolute 
advantage when comparing the productivity of one person, firm, or nation to that 
of another. The producer that requires a smaller quantity of inputs to produce a 
good is said to have an absolute advantage in producing that good. 
In our example, time is the only input, so we can determine absolute advan-
tage by looking at how much time each type of production takes. The rancher 
has an absolute advantage both in producing meat and in producing potatoes 
because she requires less time than the farmer to produce a unit of either good. 
The rancher needs to input only 20 minutes to produce an ounce of meat, whereas 
the farmer needs 60 minutes. Similarly, the rancher needs only 10 minutes to pro-
duce an ounce of potatoes, whereas the farmer needs 15 minutes. Based on this 
information, we can conclude that the rancher has the lower cost of producing 
potatoes, if we measure cost by the quantity of inputs.
Opportunity Cost and Comparative Advantage
There is another way to look at the cost of producing potatoes. Rather than 
comparing inputs required, we can compare the opportunity costs. Recall from 
Chapter 1 that the opportunity cost of some item is what we give up to get that 
item. In our example, we assumed that the farmer and the rancher each spend 
8  hours a day working. Time spent producing potatoes, therefore, takes away 
from time available for producing meat. When reallocating time between the two 
goods, the rancher and farmer give up units of one good to produce units of the 
other, thereby moving along the production possibilities frontier. The opportunity 
cost measures the trade-off between the two goods that each producer faces.
absolute advantage
the ability to produce a 
good using fewer inputs 
than another producer
opportunity cost
whatever must be given 
up to obtain some item

55
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
Let’s first consider the rancher’s opportunity cost. According to the table in 
panel (a) of Figure 1, producing 1 ounce of potatoes takes 10 minutes of work. 
When the rancher spends those 10 minutes producing potatoes, she spends 
10 minutes less producing meat. Because the rancher needs 20 minutes to produce 
1 ounce of meat, 10 minutes of work would yield ½ ounce of meat. Hence, the 
rancher’s opportunity cost of producing 1 ounce of potatoes is ½ ounce of meat.
Now consider the farmer’s opportunity cost. Producing 1 ounce of potatoes 
takes him 15 minutes. Because he needs 60 minutes to produce 1 ounce of meat, 
15 minutes of work would yield ¼ ounce of meat. Hence, the farmer’s opportunity 
cost of 1 ounce of potatoes is ¼ ounce of meat.
Table 1 shows the opportunity costs of meat and potatoes for the two producers. 
Notice that the opportunity cost of meat is the inverse of the opportunity cost of pota-
toes. Because 1 ounce of potatoes costs the rancher ½ ounce of meat, 1 ounce of meat 
costs the rancher 2 ounces of potatoes. Similarly, because 1 ounce of potatoes costs 
the farmer ¼ ounce of meat, 1 ounce of meat costs the farmer 4 ounces of potatoes.
Economists use the term comparative advantage when describing the oppor-
tunity cost of two producers. The producer who gives up less of other goods to 
produce Good X has the smaller opportunity cost of producing Good X and is 
said to have a comparative advantage in producing it. In our example, the farmer 
has a lower opportunity cost of producing potatoes than the rancher: An ounce of 
potatoes costs the farmer only ¼ ounce of meat, but it costs the rancher ½ ounce of 
meat. Conversely, the rancher has a lower opportunity cost of producing meat than 
the farmer: An ounce of meat costs the rancher 2 ounces of potatoes, but it costs 
the farmer 4 ounces of potatoes. Thus, the farmer has a comparative advantage in 
growing potatoes, and the rancher has a comparative advantage in producing meat.
Although it is possible for one person to have an absolute advantage in both 
goods (as the rancher does in our example), it is impossible for one person to 
have a comparative advantage in both goods. Because the opportunity cost of one 
good is the inverse of the opportunity cost of the other, if a person’s opportunity 
cost of one good is relatively high, the opportunity cost of the other good must 
be relatively low. Comparative advantage reflects the relative opportunity cost. 
Unless two people have exactly the same opportunity cost, one person will have a 
comparative advantage in one good, and the other person will have a comparative 
advantage in the other good. 
Comparative Advantage and Trade
The gains from specialization and trade are based not on absolute advantage but on 
comparative advantage. When each person specializes in producing the good for 
which he or she has a comparative advantage, total production in the economy rises. 
This increase in the size of the economic pie can be used to make everyone better off. 
comparative 
advantage
the ability to produce 
a good at a lower 
opportunity cost than 
another producer
The Opportunity Cost 
of Meat and Potatoes
Table 1
Opportunity Cost of:
1 oz of Meat
1 oz of Potatoes
Farmer
4 oz potatoes
1/4 oz meat
Rancher
2 oz potatoes
1/2 oz meat

56
PART I	
Introduction
In our example, the farmer spends more time growing potatoes, and the rancher 
spends more time producing meat. As a result, the total production of potatoes 
rises from 40 to 44  ounces, and the total production of meat rises from 16 to 
18 ounces. The farmer and rancher share the benefits of this increased production. 
We can also look at the gains from trade in terms of the price that each party 
pays the other. Because the farmer and rancher have different opportunity costs, 
they can both get a bargain. That is, each benefits from trade by obtaining a good 
at a price that is lower than his or her opportunity cost of that good. 
Consider the proposed deal from the viewpoint of the farmer. The farmer gets 
5 ounces of meat in exchange for 15 ounces of potatoes. In other words, the farmer 
buys each ounce of meat for a price of 3 ounces of potatoes. This price of meat is 
lower than his opportunity cost for an ounce of meat, which is 4 ounces of potatoes. 
Thus, the farmer benefits from the deal because he gets to buy meat at a good price. 
Now consider the deal from the rancher’s viewpoint. The rancher buys 
15 ounces of potatoes for a price of 5 ounces of meat. That is, the price of potatoes 
is ¹∕³ ounce of meat. This price of potatoes is lower than her opportunity cost of 
an ounce of potatoes, which is ½ ounce of meat. The rancher benefits because she 
gets to buy potatoes at a good price.
The moral of the story of the farmer and the rancher should now be clear: Trade 
can benefit everyone in society because it allows people to specialize in activities in which 
they have a comparative advantage. 
The Price of the Trade
The principle of comparative advantage establishes that there are gains from spe-
cialization and trade, but it leaves open a couple of related questions: What deter-
mines the price at which trade takes place? How are the gains from trade shared 
between the trading parties? The precise answer to these questions is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, but we can state one general rule: For both parties to gain from 
trade, the price at which they trade must lie between the two opportunity costs.
In our example, the farmer and rancher agreed to trade at a rate of 3 ounces of 
potatoes for each ounce of meat. This price is between the rancher’s opportunity 
cost (2 ounces of potatoes per ounce of meat) and the farmer’s opportunity cost 
(4 ounces of potatoes per ounce of meat). The price need not be exactly in the 
middle for both parties to gain, but it must be somewhere between 2 and 4.
To see why the price has to be in this range, consider what would happen if it 
were not. If the price of meat were below 2 ounces of potatoes, both the farmer 
and the rancher would want to buy meat, because the price would be below their 
opportunity costs. Similarly, if the price of meat were above 4 ounces of potatoes, 
both would want to sell meat, because the price would be above their opportunity 
costs. But there are only two members of this economy. They cannot both be buyers 
of meat, nor can they both be sellers. Someone has to take the other side of the deal.
A mutually advantageous trade can be struck at a price between 2 and 4. In this 
price range, the rancher wants to sell meat to buy potatoes, and the farmer wants 
to sell potatoes to buy meat. Each party can buy a good at a price that is lower 
than his or her opportunity cost. In the end, both of them specialize in the good 
for which he or she has a comparative advantage and are, as a result, better off.
Quick Quiz  Robinson Crusoe can gather 10 coconuts or catch 1 fish per hour. His 
friend Friday can gather 30 coconuts or catch 2 fish per hour. What is Crusoe’s oppor-
tunity cost of catching one fish? What is Friday’s? Who has an absolute advantage in 
catching fish? Who has a comparative advantage in catching fish?

57
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
Applications of Comparative Advantage
The principle of comparative advantage explains interdependence and the gains 
from trade. Because interdependence is so prevalent in the modern world, the 
principle of comparative advantage has many applications. Here are two exam-
ples, one fanciful and one of great practical importance.
Should Tom Brady Mow His Own Lawn?
Tom Brady spends a lot of time running around on grass. One of the most talented 
football players of all time, he can throw a pass with a speed and accuracy that 
most casual athletes can only dream of. Most likely, he is talented at other physical 
activities as well. For example, let’s imagine that Brady can mow his lawn faster than 
anyone else. But just because he can mow his lawn fast, does this mean he should?
To answer this question, we can use the concepts of opportunity cost and com-
parative advantage. Let’s say that Brady can mow his lawn in 2 hours. In that 
FYI
 The Legacy of Adam Smith 
and David Ricardo
E
conomists have long understood the gains from trade. Here is 
how the great economist Adam Smith put the argument: 
It is a maxim of every prudent master of a family, never 
to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more 
to make than to buy. The tailor does not attempt to make 
his own shoes, but buys them of the shoemaker. The 
shoe­maker does not attempt to make his own clothes but 
employs a tailor. The farmer attempts to make neither the 
one nor the other, but employs those different artificers. 
All of them find it for their interest to employ their whole 
industry in a way in which they have some 
advantage over their neighbors, and to purchase 
with a part of its produce, or what is the same 
thing, with the price of part of it, whatever else 
they have occasion for.
This quotation is from Smith’s 1776 book An Inquiry 
into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 
which was a landmark in the analysis of trade and 
economic interdependence.
	
Smith’s book inspired David Ricardo, a millionaire 
stockbroker, to become an economist. In his 1817 
book Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, Ricardo devel-
oped the principle of comparative advantage as we know it today. 
He considered an example with two goods (wine and cloth) and two 
countries (England and Portugal). He showed that both countries 
can gain by opening up trade and specializing based on comparative 
advantage.
	
Ricardo’s theory is the starting point of modern international 
economics, but his defense of free trade was not a mere academic 
exercise. Ricardo put his beliefs to work as a member of the British 
Parliament, where he opposed the Corn Laws, which restricted the 
import of grain.
	
The conclusions of Adam Smith and David 
Ricardo on the gains from trade have held up well 
over time. Although economists often disagree on 
questions of policy, they are united in their support 
of free trade. Moreover, the central argument for 
free trade has not changed much in the past two 
centuries. Even though the field of economics has 
broadened its scope and refined its theories since the 
time of Smith and Ricardo, economists’ opposition to 
trade restrictions is still based largely on the principle 
of comparative advantage.
David Ricardo
© BETTMANN/CORBIS

58
PART I	
Introduction
same 2 hours, he could film a television commercial and earn $20,000. By contrast, 
Forrest Gump, the boy next door, can mow Brady’s lawn in 4 hours. In that same 
4 hours, Gump could work at McDonald’s and earn $40. 
In this example, Brady has an absolute advantage in mowing lawns because he 
can do the work with a lower input of time. Yet because Brady’s opportunity cost 
of mowing the lawn is $20,000 and Gump’s opportunity cost is only $40, Gump 
has a comparative advantage in mowing lawns.
The gains from trade in this example are tremendous. Rather than mowing his 
own lawn, Brady should make the commercial and hire Gump to mow the lawn. 
As long as Brady pays Gump more than $40 and less than $20,000, both of them 
are better off.
Should the United States Trade  
with Other Countries?
Just as individuals can benefit from specialization and trade with one another, as 
the farmer and rancher did, so can populations of people in different countries. 
Many of the goods that Americans enjoy are produced abroad, and many of the 
goods produced in the United States are sold abroad. Goods produced abroad 
and sold domestically are called imports. Goods produced domestically and sold 
abroad are called exports.
To see how countries can benefit from trade, suppose there are two countries, 
the United States and Japan, and two goods, food and cars. Imagine that the two 
countries produce cars equally well: An American worker and a Japanese worker 
can each produce one car per month. By contrast, because the United States has 
more and better land, it is better at producing food: A U.S. worker can produce 
2 tons of food per month, whereas a Japanese worker can produce only 1 ton of 
food per month. 
The principle of comparative advantage states that each good should be 
produced by the country that has the smaller opportunity cost of producing 
that good. Because the opportunity cost of a car is 2 tons of food in the United 
States but only 1 ton of food in Japan, Japan has a comparative advantage in 
producing cars. Japan should produce more cars than it wants for its own use 
and export some of them to the United States. Similarly, because the opportu-
nity cost of a ton of food is 1 car in Japan but only ½ car in the United States, 
the United States has a comparative advantage in producing food. The United 
States should produce more food than it wants to consume and export some 
to Japan. Through specialization and trade, both countries can have more food 
and more cars.
In reality, of course, the issues involved in trade among nations are more com-
plex than this example suggests. Most important among these issues is that each 
country has many citizens with different interests. International trade can make 
some individuals worse off, even as it makes the country as a whole better off. 
When the United States exports food and imports cars, the impact on an American 
farmer is not the same as the impact on an American autoworker. Yet, contrary to 
the opinions sometimes voiced by politicians and pundits, international trade is 
not like war, in which some countries win and others lose. Trade allows all coun-
tries to achieve greater prosperity.
Quick Quiz  Suppose that a skilled brain surgeon also happens to be the world’s 
fastest typist. Should she do her own typing or hire a secretary? Explain.
imports
goods produced abroad 
and sold domestically
exports
goods produced domesti-
cally and sold abroad
© Tom Hauck/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images
“They did a nice job 
mowing this grass.”

59
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
Conclusion
You should now understand more fully the benefits of living in an interdependent 
economy. When Americans buy tube socks from China, when residents of Maine 
drink orange juice from Florida, and when a homeowner hires the kid next door 
 The Changing Face of International Trade
A decade ago, no one would have asked which nation has a comparative 
advantage in slaying ogres. But technology is rapidly changing the goods 
and services that are traded across national borders.
in the news
Ogre to Slay? 
Outsource It to 
Chinese
By David Barboza
F
uzhou, China—One of China’s newest 
factories operates here in the basement 
of an old warehouse. Posters of World 
of Warcraft and Magic Land hang above 
a corps of young people glued to their 
computer screens, pounding away at their 
keyboards in the latest hustle for money.
	
The people working at this clandestine 
locale are “gold farmers.” Every day, in 
12-hour shifts, they “play” computer games 
by killing onscreen monsters and winning 
battles, harvesting artificial gold coins and 
other virtual goods as rewards that, as it 
turns out, can be transformed into real cash.
	
That is because, from Seoul to San 
Francisco, affluent online gamers who lack 
the time and patience to work their way up 
to the higher levels of gamedom are willing 
to pay the young Chinese here to play the 
early rounds for them. 
	
“For 12 hours a day, 7 days a week, my 
colleagues and I are killing monsters,” said 
a 23-year-old gamer who works here in this 
makeshift factory and goes by the online 
code name Wandering. “I make about $250 
a month, which is pretty good compared 
with the other jobs I’ve had. And I can play 
games all day.”
	
He and his comrades have created 
yet another new business out of cheap 
Chinese labor. They are tapping into the 
fast-growing world of “massively multi-
player online games,” which involve role 
playing and often revolve around fantasy 
or warfare in medieval kingdoms or distant 
galaxies. . . . 
	
For the Chinese in game-playing facto-
ries like these, though, it is not all fun and 
games. These workers have strict quotas 
and are supervised by bosses who equip 
them with computers, software and Internet 
connections to thrash online trolls, gnomes 
and ogres.
	
As they grind through the games, they 
accumulate virtual currency that is valu-
able to game players around the world. 
The games allow players to trade cur-
rency to other players, who can then use 
it to buy better armor, amulets, magic 
spells and other accoutrements to climb 
to higher levels or create more powerful 
characters. 
	
The Internet is now filled with classified 
advertisements from small companies—
many of them here in China—auctioning 
for real money their powerful figures, called 
avatars. . . . 
	
“It’s unimaginable how big this is,” 
says Chen Yu, 27, who employs 20 full-time 
gamers here in Fuzhou. “They say that in 
some of these popular games, 40 or 50 
percent of the players are actually Chinese 
farmers.”
Source: New York Times, December 9, 2005.
© MARK RALSTON/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

60
PART I	
Introduction
to mow the lawn, the same economic forces are at work. The principle of compara-
tive advantage shows that trade can make everyone better off.
Having seen why interdependence is desirable, you might naturally ask how it 
is possible. How do free societies coordinate the diverse activities of all the people 
involved in their economies? What ensures that goods and services will get from 
those who should be producing them to those who should be consuming them? In 
a world with only two people, such as the rancher and the farmer, the answer is 
simple: These two people can bargain and allocate resources between themselves. 
In the real world with billions of people, the answer is less obvious. We take up 
this issue in the next chapter, where we see that free societies allocate resources 
through the market forces of supply and demand.
absolute advantage, p. 54
opportunity cost, p. 54
comparative advantage, p. 55
imports, p. 58
exports, p. 58
• Each person consumes goods and services pro-
duced by many other people both in the United 
States and around the world. Interdependence 
and trade are desirable because they allow 
everyone to enjoy a greater quantity and variety 
of goods and services.
• There are two ways to compare the ability of two 
people in producing a good. The person who 
can produce the good with the smaller quantity 
of inputs is said to have an absolute advantage in 
producing the good. The person who has the 
smaller opportunity cost of producing the good 
is said to have a comparative advantage. The gains 
from trade are based on comparative advantage, 
not absolute advantage.
• Trade makes everyone better off because it 
allows people to specialize in those activities in 
which they have a comparative advantage. 
• The principle of comparative advantage applies 
to countries as well as to people. Economists 
use the principle of comparative advantage to 
advocate free trade among countries.
Summary
Key Concepts
	 1.	 Under what conditions is the production possi-
bilities frontier linear rather than bowed out?
	 2.	 Explain how absolute advantage and compara-
tive advantage differ.
	 3.	 Give an example in which one person has an 
absolute advantage in doing something but 
another person has a comparative advantage.
	 4.	 Is absolute advantage or comparative advan-
tage more important for trade? Explain your 
reasoning using the example in your answer to 
Question 3.
	 5.	 If two parties trade based on comparative 
advantage and both gain, in what range must 
the price of the trade lie? 
	 6.	 Will a nation tend to export or import goods for 
which it has a comparative advantage? Explain.
	 7.	 Why do economists oppose policies that restrict 
trade among nations?
Questions for Review

61
CHAPTER 3    Interdependence and the Gains from Trade
	 1.	 Maria can read 20 pages of economics in an 
hour. She can also read 50 pages of sociology in 
an hour. She spends 5 hours per day studying.
a.	 Draw Maria’s production possibilities fron-
tier for reading economics and sociology.
b.	What is Maria’s opportunity cost of reading 
100 pages of sociology?
	 2.	 American and Japanese workers can each pro-
duce 4 cars a year. An American worker can 
produce 10 tons of grain a year, whereas a 
Japanese worker can produce 5 tons of grain a 
year. To keep things simple, assume that each 
country has 100 million workers.
a.	 For this situation, construct a table analogous 
to the table in Figure 1. 
b.	Graph the production possibilities frontier of 
the American and Japanese economies.
c.	 For the United States, what is the opportunity 
cost of a car? Of grain? For Japan, what is the 
opportunity cost of a car? Of grain? Put this 
information in a table analogous to Table 1.
d.	Which country has an absolute advantage in 
producing cars? In producing grain?
e.	 Which country has a comparative advantage 
in producing cars? In producing grain?
f.	 Without trade, half of each country’s workers 
produce cars and half produce grain. What 
quantities of cars and grain does each coun-
try produce?
g.	Starting from a position without trade, give 
an example in which trade makes each coun-
try better off.
	 3.	 Pat and Kris are roommates. They spend most 
of their time studying (of course), but they leave 
some time for their favorite activities: making 
pizza and brewing root beer. Pat takes 4 hours 
to brew a gallon of root beer and 2 hours to 
make a pizza. Kris takes 6 hours to brew a gal-
lon of root beer and 4 hours to make a pizza.
a.	 What is each roommate’s opportunity cost 
of making a pizza? Who has the absolute 
advantage in making pizza? Who has the 
comparative advantage in making pizza?
b.	If Pat and Kris trade foods with each other, 
who will trade away pizza in exchange for 
root beer?
c.	 The price of pizza can be expressed in terms 
of gallons of root beer. What is the high-
est price at which pizza can be traded that 
would make both roommates better off? 
What is the lowest price? Explain.
	 4.	 Suppose that there are 10 million workers in 
Canada and that each of these workers can pro-
duce either 2 cars or 30 bushels of wheat in a year.
a.	 What is the opportunity cost of producing a 
car in Canada? What is the opportunity cost 
of producing a bushel of wheat in Canada? 
Explain the relationship between the oppor-
tunity costs of the two goods.
b.	Draw Canada’s production possibilities fron-
tier. If Canada chooses to consume 10 million 
cars, how much wheat can it consume with-
out trade? Label this point on the production 
possibilities frontier.
c.	 Now suppose that the United States offers to 
buy 10 million cars from Canada in exchange 
for 20 bushels of wheat per car. If Canada 
continues to consume 10 million cars, how 
much wheat does this deal allow Canada to 
consume? Label this point on your diagram. 
Should Canada accept the deal?
	 5.	 England and Scotland both produce scones and 
sweaters. Suppose that an English worker can 
produce 50 scones per hour or 1 sweater per 
hour. Suppose that a Scottish worker can pro-
duce 40 scones per hour or 2 sweaters per hour.
a.	 Which country has the absolute advantage in 
the production of each good? Which country 
has the comparative advantage?
b.	If England and Scotland decide to trade, 
which commodity will Scotland trade to 
England? Explain.
c.	 If a Scottish worker could produce only 1 
sweater per hour, would Scotland still gain 
from trade? Would England still gain from 
trade? Explain.
	 6.	 The following table describes the production pos-
sibilities of two cities in the country of Baseballia:
	
Pairs of Red Socks	
Pairs of White Socks 
	
per Worker per Hour	
per Worker per Hour
Boston	
3	
3
Chicago	
2	
1
a.	 Without trade, what is the price of white 
socks (in terms of red socks) in Boston? What 
is the price in Chicago?
b.	Which city has an absolute advantage in the 
production of each color sock? Which city has 
Problems and Applications

62
PART I	
Introduction
a comparative advantage in the production of 
each color sock? 
c.	 If the cities trade with each other, which color 
sock will each export?
d.	What is the range of prices at which trade can 
occur?
	 7.	 Suppose that in a year an American worker  
can produce 100 shirts or 20 computers, while  
a Chinese worker can produce 100 shirts or  
10 computers.
a.	 Graph the production possibilities curve for 
the two countries. Suppose that without trade 
the workers in each country spend half their 
time producing each good. Identify this point 
in your graph.
b.	If these countries were open to trade, which 
country would export shirts? Give a specific 
numerical example and show it on your 
graph. Which country would benefit from 
trade? Explain.
c.	 Explain at what price of computers (in terms 
of shirts) the two countries might trade.
d.	Suppose that China catches up with 
American productivity so that a Chinese 
worker can produce 100 shirts or 20 com-
puters. What pattern of trade would you 
predict now? How does this advance  
in Chinese productivity affect the eco-
nomic well-being of the citizens of the two 
countries?
	 8.	 An average worker in Brazil can produce an 
ounce of soybeans in 20 minutes and an ounce  
of coffee in 60 minutes, while an average worker 
in Peru can produce an ounce of soybeans in  
50 minutes and an ounce of coffee in 75 minutes.
a.	 Who has the absolute advantage in coffee? 
Explain.
b.	Who has the comparative advantage in cof-
fee? Explain.
c.	 If the two countries specialize and trade  
with each other, who will import coffee? 
Explain.
d.	Assume that the two countries trade and that 
the country importing coffee trades 2 ounces 
of soybeans for 1 ounce of coffee. Explain why 
both countries will benefit from this trade.
	 9.	 Are the following statements true or false? 
Explain in each case.
a.	 “Two countries can achieve gains from trade 
even if one of the countries has an absolute 
advantage in the production of all goods.”
b.	 “Certain very talented people have a compara-
tive advantage in everything they do.”
c.	 “If a certain trade is good for one person, it 
can’t be good for the other one.”
d.	“If a certain trade is good for one person, it is 
always good for the other one.”
e.	 “If trade is good for a country, it must be 
good for everyone in the country.”
	10.	 The United States exports corn and aircraft to the 
rest of the world, and it imports oil and clothing 
from the rest of the world. Do you think this pat-
tern of trade is consistent with the principle of 
comparative advantage? Why or why not?
	11.	 Bill and Hillary produce food and clothing. In 
an hour, Bill can produce 1 unit of food or 1 unit 
of clothing, while Hillary can produce 2 units 
of food or 3 units of clothing. They each work 
10 hours a day.
a.	 Who has an absolute advantage in producing 
food? Who has an absolute advantage in pro-
ducing clothing? Explain.
b.	Who has a comparative advantage in produc-
ing food? Who has a comparative advantage 
in producing clothing? Explain.
c.	 Draw the production possibilities frontier 
for the household (that is, Bill and Hillary 
together) assuming that each spends the 
same number of hours each day as the other 
producing food and clothing.
d.	Hillary suggests, instead, that she specialize 
in making clothing. That is, she will do all the 
clothing production for the family; however, if 
all her time is devoted to clothing and they still 
want more, then Bill can help with clothing 
production. What does the household produc-
tion possibilities frontier look like now?
e.	 Bill suggests that Hillary specialize in produc-
ing food. That is, Hillary will do all the food 
production for the family; however, if all her 
time is devoted to food and they still want 
more, then Bill can help with food production. 
What does the household production possi-
bilities frontier look like under Bill’s proposal?
f.	 Comparing your answers to parts c, d, and e,  
which allocation of time makes the most 
sense? Relate your answer to the theory of 
comparative advantage.
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.

How Markets 
Work
I I
Part


65
4
The Market Forces of
    Supply and Demand
W
hen a cold snap hits Florida, the price of orange juice rises in supermar-
kets throughout the country. When the weather turns warm in New 
England every summer, the price of hotel rooms in the Caribbean plum-
mets. When a war breaks out in the Middle East, the price of gasoline 
in the United States rises, and the price of a used Cadillac falls. What do these events 
have in common? They all show the workings of supply and demand.
Supply and demand are the two words economists use most often—and for good 
reason. Supply and demand are the forces that make market economies work. 
They determine the quantity of each good produced and the price at which it is 
sold. If you want to know how any event or policy will affect the economy, you 
must think first about how it will affect supply and demand.
This chapter introduces the theory of supply and demand. It considers how 
buyers and sellers behave and how they interact with one another. It shows how 
supply and demand determine prices in a market economy and how prices, in 
turn, allocate the economy’s scarce resources.

66
PART II	
How Markets Work
Markets and Competition
The terms supply and demand refer to the behavior of people as they interact with 
one another in competitive markets. Before discussing how buyers and sellers 
behave, let’s first consider more fully what we mean by the terms market and 
competition. 
What Is a Market?
A market is a group of buyers and sellers of a particular good or service. The buy-
ers as a group determine the demand for the product, and the sellers as a group 
determine the supply of the product. 
Markets take many forms. Some markets are highly organized, such as the 
markets for many agricultural commodities. In these markets, buyers and sellers 
meet at a specific time and place, where an auctioneer helps set prices and arrange 
sales. 
More often, markets are less organized. For example, consider the market for 
ice cream in a particular town. Buyers of ice cream do not meet together at any 
one time. The sellers of ice cream are in different locations and offer somewhat 
different products. There is no auctioneer calling out the price of ice cream. Each 
seller posts a price for an ice-cream cone, and each buyer decides how much ice 
cream to buy at each store. Nonetheless, these consumers and producers of ice 
cream are closely connected. The ice-cream buyers are choosing from the various 
ice-cream sellers to satisfy their cravings, and the ice-cream sellers are all trying 
to appeal to the same ice-cream buyers to make their businesses successful. Even 
though it is not as organized, the group of ice-cream buyers and ice-cream sellers 
forms a market. 
What Is Competition?
The market for ice cream, like most markets in the economy, is highly competitive. 
Each buyer knows that there are several sellers from which to choose, and each 
seller is aware that his or her product is similar to that offered by other sellers. As a 
result, the price of ice cream and the quantity of ice cream sold are not determined 
by any single buyer or seller. Rather, price and quantity are determined by all buy-
ers and sellers as they interact in the marketplace.
Economists use the term competitive market to describe a market in which 
there are so many buyers and so many sellers that each has a negligible impact 
on the market price. Each seller of ice cream has limited control over the price 
because other sellers are offering similar products. A seller has little reason 
to charge less than the going price, and if he or she charges more, buyers will 
make their purchases elsewhere. Similarly, no single buyer of ice cream can 
influence the price of ice cream because each buyer purchases only a small 
amount.
In this chapter, we assume that markets are perfectly competitive. To reach this 
highest form of competition, a market must have two characteristics: (1) the goods 
offered for sale are all exactly the same, and (2) the buyers and sellers are so 
numerous that no single buyer or seller has any influence over the market price. 
Because buyers and sellers in perfectly competitive markets must accept the price 
the market determines, they are said to be price takers. At the market price, buyers 
can buy all they want, and sellers can sell all they want.
market
a group of buyers and 
sellers of a particular 
good or service
competitive market
a market in which there 
are many buyers and 
many sellers so that each 
has a negligible impact on 
the market price

67
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
There are some markets in which the assumption of perfect competition applies 
perfectly. In the wheat market, for example, there are thousands of farmers 
who sell wheat and millions of consumers who use wheat and wheat products. 
Because no single buyer or seller can influence the price of wheat, each takes the 
price as given.
Not all goods and services, however, are sold in perfectly competitive markets. 
Some markets have only one seller, and this seller sets the price. Such a seller is 
called a monopoly. Your local cable television company, for instance, may be a 
monopoly. Residents of your town probably have only one cable company from 
which to buy this service. Still other markets fall between the extremes of perfect 
competition and monopoly.
Despite the diversity of market types we find in the world, assuming perfect 
competition is a useful simplification and, therefore, a natural place to start. 
Perfectly competitive markets are the easiest to analyze because everyone par-
ticipating in the market takes the price as given by market conditions. Moreover, 
because some degree of competition is present in most markets, many of the les-
sons that we learn by studying supply and demand under perfect competition 
apply in more complicated markets as well. 
Quick Quiz  What is a market? • What are the characteristics of a perfectly competi-
tive market?
Demand
We begin our study of markets by examining the behavior of buyers. To focus our 
thinking, let’s keep in mind a particular good—ice cream.
The Demand Curve: The Relationship between  
Price and Quantity Demanded
The quantity demanded of any good is the amount of the good that buyers 
are willing and able to purchase. As we will see, many things determine the 
quantity demanded of any good, but in our analysis of how markets work, one 
determinant plays a central role—the price of the good. If the price of ice cream 
rose to $20 per scoop, you would buy less ice cream. You might buy frozen 
yogurt instead. If the price of ice cream fell to $0.20 per scoop, you would buy 
more. This relationship between price and quantity demanded is true for most 
goods in the economy and, in fact, is so pervasive that economists call it the 
law of demand: Other things equal, when the price of a good rises, the quantity 
demanded of the good falls, and when the price falls, the quantity demanded 
rises. 
The table in Figure 1 shows how many ice-cream cones Catherine buys each 
month at different prices of ice cream. If ice cream is free, Catherine eats 12 cones 
per month. At $0.50 per cone, Catherine buys 10 cones each month. As the price 
rises further, she buys fewer and fewer cones. When the price reaches $3.00, 
Catherine doesn’t buy any ice cream at all. This table is a demand schedule, a 
table that shows the relationship between the price of a good and the quantity 
demanded, holding constant everything else that influences how much of the 
good consumers want to buy.
quantity demanded
the amount of a good 
that buyers are willing 
and able to purchase
law of demand
the claim that, other things 
equal, the quantity 
demand­ed of a good falls 
when the price of the 
good rises
demand schedule
a table that shows the 
relationship between the 
price of a good and the 
quantity demanded

68
PART II	
How Markets Work
The graph in Figure 1 uses the numbers from the table to illustrate the law 
of demand. By convention, the price of ice cream is on the vertical axis, and the 
quantity of ice cream demanded is on the horizontal axis. The downward-sloping 
line relating price and quantity demanded is called the demand curve. 
Market Demand versus Individual Demand
The demand curve in Figure 1 shows an individual’s demand for a product. To 
analyze how markets work, we need to determine the market demand, the sum of 
all the individual demands for a particular good or service.
The table in Figure 2 shows the demand schedules for ice cream of the two 
individuals in this market—Catherine and Nicholas. At any price, Catherine’s 
demand schedule tells us how much ice cream she buys, and Nicholas’s demand 
schedule tells us how much ice cream he buys. The market demand at each price 
is the sum of the two individual demands.
The graph in Figure 2 shows the demand curves that correspond to these 
demand schedules. Notice that we sum the individual demand curves horizon­
tally to obtain the market demand curve. That is, to find the total quantity 
demanded at any price, we add the individual quantities, which are found on 
the horizontal axis of the individual demand curves. Because we are interested in 
analyzing how markets function, we work most often with the market demand 
curve. The market demand curve shows how the total quantity demanded of a 
demand curve
a graph of the 
relationship between the 
price of a good and the 
quantity demanded
The demand schedule is a table that shows the quantity demanded at each price. 
The demand curve, which graphs the demand schedule, illustrates how the quantity 
demanded of the good changes as its price varies. Because a lower price increases the 
quantity demanded, the demand curve slopes downward.
Figure 1
Price of 
Ice-Cream Cone
Quantity of 
Cones Demanded
$0.00
12 cones
0.50
10
1.00
8
1.50
6
2.00
4
2.50
2
3.00
0
Price of
Ice-Cream Cone
0
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
$3.00
12
1. A decrease in 
price . . .
2. . . . increases quantity of 
cones demanded.
Demand curve
Catherine’s Demand 
Schedule and Demand 
Curve

69
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
good varies as the price of the good varies, while all the other factors that affect 
how much consumers want to buy are held constant. 
Shifts in the Demand Curve
Because the market demand curve holds other things constant, it need not be 
stable over time. If something happens to alter the quantity demanded at any 
given price, the demand curve shifts. For example, suppose the American Medi-
cal Association discovered that people who regularly eat ice cream live longer, 
healthier lives. The discovery would raise the demand for ice cream. At any given 
price, buyers would now want to purchase a larger quantity of ice cream, and the 
demand curve for ice cream would shift. 
Figure 3 illustrates shifts in demand. Any change that increases the quantity 
demanded at every price, such as our imaginary discovery by the American Medi-
cal Association, shifts the demand curve to the right and is called an increase in 
demand. Any change that reduces the quantity demanded at every price shifts the 
demand curve to the left and is called a decrease in demand.
There are many variables that can shift the demand curve. Here are the most 
important.
Market Demand as the 
Sum of Individual Demands
Figure 2
The quantity demanded in a market is the sum of the quantities demanded by all the 
buyers at each price. Thus, the market demand curve is found by adding horizontally 
the individual demand curves. At a price of $2.00, Catherine demands 4 ice-cream 
cones, and Nicholas demands 3 ice-cream cones. The quantity demanded in the 
market at this price is 7 cones.
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
DCatherine
7
8
9 10 11 12
Catherine's Demand
Nicholas's Demand
Market Demand
+
=
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
7
8
9 10 11 12
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
2
4
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
8
10 12
14
16
18
DNicholas
DMarket
Price of Ice-Cream Cone
Catherine
Nicholas
Market
$0.00
12
+
7
=
19 cones
0.50
10
6
16
1.00
8
5
13
1.50
6
4
10
2.00
4
3
7
2.50
2
2
4
3.00
0
1
1

70
PART II	
How Markets Work
Income  What would happen to your demand for ice cream if you lost your 
job one summer? Most likely, it would fall. A lower income means that you have 
less to spend in total, so you would have to spend less on some—and probably 
most—goods. If the demand for a good falls when income falls, the good is called 
a normal good.
Not all goods are normal goods. If the demand for a good rises when income 
falls, the good is called an inferior good. An example of an inferior good might be 
bus rides. As your income falls, you are less likely to buy a car or take a cab and 
more likely to ride a bus.
Prices of Related Goods  Suppose that the price of frozen yogurt falls. The 
law of demand says that you will buy more frozen yogurt. At the same time, 
you will probably buy less ice cream. Because ice cream and frozen yogurt are 
both cold, sweet, creamy desserts, they satisfy similar desires. When a fall in the 
price of one good reduces the demand for another good, the two goods are called 
­substitutes. Substitutes are often pairs of goods that are used in place of each 
other, such as hot dogs and hamburgers, sweaters and sweatshirts, and movie 
tickets and DVD rentals.
Now suppose that the price of hot fudge falls. According to the law of demand, 
you will buy more hot fudge. Yet in this case, you will buy more ice cream as 
well because ice cream and hot fudge are often used together. When a fall in the 
price of one good raises the demand for another good, the two goods are called 
­complements. Complements are often pairs of goods that are used together, such 
as gasoline and automobiles, computers and software, and peanut butter and jelly.
Tastes  The most obvious determinant of your demand is your tastes. If you like 
ice cream, you buy more of it. Economists normally do not try to explain people’s 
tastes because tastes are based on historical and psychological forces that are 
beyond the realm of economics. Economists do, however, examine what happens 
when tastes change.
normal good
a good for which, other 
things equal, an increase 
in income leads to an 
increase in demand
inferior good
a good for which, other 
things equal, an increase 
in income leads to a 
decrease in demand
substitutes
two goods for which an 
increase in the price of 
one leads to an increase in 
the demand for the other
complements
two goods for which an 
increase in the price of 
one leads to a decrease in 
the demand for the other
Figure 3
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
Increase
in demand
Decrease
in demand
Demand curve, D3
Demand
curve, D1
Demand
curve, D2
0
Shifts in the Demand 
Curve
Any change that raises the 
quantity that buyers wish to 
purchase at any given price 
shifts the demand curve to 
the right. Any change that 
lowers the quantity that 
buyers wish to purchase at 
any given price shifts the 
demand curve to the left.

71
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Expectations  Your expectations about the future may affect your demand for 
a good or service today. If you expect to earn a higher income next month, you 
may choose to save less now and spend more of your current income buying ice 
cream. If you expect the price of ice cream to fall tomorrow, you may be less will-
ing to buy an ice-cream cone at today’s price.
Number of Buyers  In addition to the preceding factors, which influence the 
behavior of individual buyers, market demand depends on the number of these 
buyers. If Peter were to join Catherine and Nicholas as another consumer of ice 
cream, the quantity demanded in the market would be higher at every price, and 
market demand would increase.
Summary  The demand curve shows what happens to the quantity demanded of 
a good when its price varies, holding constant all the other variables that influence 
buyers. When one of these other variables changes, the demand curve shifts. Table 
1 lists the variables that influence how much consumers choose to buy of a good. 
If you have trouble remembering whether you need to shift or move along the 
demand curve, it helps to recall a lesson from the appendix to Chapter 2. A curve 
shifts when there is a change in a relevant variable that is not measured on either 
axis. Because the price is on the vertical axis, a change in price represents a move-
ment along the demand curve. By contrast, income, the prices of related goods, 
tastes, expectations, and the number of buyers are not measured on either axis, so 
a change in one of these variables shifts the demand curve.
Two Ways to Reduce the Quantity  
of Smoking Demanded
Public policymakers often want to reduce the amount that people smoke because 
of smoking’s adverse health effects. There are two ways that policy can attempt 
to achieve this goal.
	
One way to reduce smoking is to shift the demand curve for cigarettes and other 
tobacco products. Public service announcements, mandatory health warnings on 
cigarette packages, and the prohibition of cigarette advertising on ­tele­vision are 
all policies aimed at reducing the quantity of cigarettes demanded at any given 
price. If successful, these policies shift the demand curve for cigarettes to the left, 
as in panel (a) of Figure 4. 
Variables That Influence Buyers
This table lists the variables that 
affect how much consumers choose 
to buy of any good. Notice the 
special role that the price of the 
good plays: A change in the good’s 
price represents a movement 
along the demand curve, whereas 
a change in one of the other 
variables shifts the demand curve.
Table 1
Variable
A Change in This Variable . . .
Price of the good itself
Represents a movement along the demand curve
Income
Shifts the demand curve
Prices of related goods
Shifts the demand curve
Tastes
Shifts the demand curve
Expectations
Shifts the demand curve
Number of buyers
Shifts the demand curve
What is the best way  
to stop this?
© acestock/Ace Stock Limited/Alamy

72
PART II	
How Markets Work
	
Alternatively, policymakers can try to raise the price of cigarettes. If the gov-
ernment taxes the manufacture of cigarettes, for example, cigarette companies 
pass much of this tax on to consumers in the form of higher prices. A higher price 
encourages smokers to reduce the numbers of cigarettes they smoke. In this case, 
the reduced amount of smoking does not represent a shift in the demand curve. 
Instead, it represents a movement along the same demand curve to a point with a 
higher price and lower quantity, as in panel (b) of Figure 4.
	
How much does the amount of smoking respond to changes in the price of 
cigarettes? Economists have attempted to answer this question by studying what 
happens when the tax on cigarettes changes. They have found that a 10 percent 
increase in the price causes a 4 percent reduction in the quantity demanded. 
Teenagers are found to be especially sensitive to the price of cigarettes: A 10 per-
cent increase in the price causes a 12 percent drop in teenage smoking.
	
A related question is how the price of cigarettes affects the demand for illicit 
drugs, such as marijuana. Opponents of cigarette taxes often argue that tobacco 
and marijuana are substitutes so that high cigarette prices encourage marijuana 
use. By contrast, many experts on substance abuse view tobacco as a “gateway 
drug” leading the young to experiment with other harmful substances. Most stud-
ies of the data are consistent with this latter view: They find that lower cigarette 
prices are associated with greater use of marijuana. In other words, tobacco and 
marijuana appear to be complements rather than substitutes.  ■
Figure 4
If warnings on cigarette packages convince smokers to smoke less, the demand curve 
for cigarettes shifts to the left. In panel (a), the demand curve shifts from D1 to D2. At 
a price of $2.00 per pack, the quantity demanded falls from 20 to 10 cigarettes per 
day, as reflected by the shift from point A to point B. By contrast, if a tax raises the 
price of cigarettes, the demand curve does not shift. Instead, we observe a movement 
to a different point on the demand curve. In panel (b), when the price rises from $2.00 
to $4.00, the quantity demanded falls from 20 to 12 cigarettes per day, as reflected by 
the movement from point A to point C.
D2
D1
0
10
20
$2.00
B
A
(a) A Shift in the Demand Curve
A policy to discourage
smoking shifts the 
demand curve to the left.
Number of Cigarettes Smoked per Day
Price of
Cigarettes,
per Pack
D1
0
12
20
2.00
$4.00
C
A
(b) A Movement along the Demand Curve
Number of Cigarettes Smoked per Day
Price of
Cigarettes,
per Pack
A tax that raises the price
of cigarettes results in a
movement along the
demand curve.
Shifts in the Demand 
Curve versus Movements 
along the Demand Curve

73
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Quick Quiz  Make up an example of a monthly demand schedule for pizza and 
graph the implied demand curve. • Give an example of something that would shift 
this demand curve, and briefly explain your reasoning. • Would a change in the price 
of pizza shift this demand curve?
Supply
We now turn to the other side of the market and examine the behavior of sellers. 
Once again, to focus our thinking, let’s consider the market for ice cream.
The Supply Curve: The Relationship between Price 
and Quantity Supplied
The quantity supplied of any good or service is the amount that sellers are 
willing and able to sell. There are many determinants of quantity supplied, 
but once again, price plays a special role in our analysis. When the price of 
ice cream is high, selling ice cream is profitable, and so the quantity supplied 
is large. Sellers of ice cream work long hours, buy many ice-cream machines, 
and hire many workers. By contrast, when the price of ice cream is low, the 
business is less profitable, so sellers produce less ice cream. At a low price, 
some sellers may even choose to shut down, and their quantity supplied falls 
to zero. This relationship between price and quantity supplied is called the 
law of supply: Other things equal, when the price of a good rises, the quantity 
supplied of the good also rises, and when the price falls, the quantity supplied 
falls as well.
The table in Figure 5 shows the quantity of ice-cream cones supplied each 
month by Ben, an ice-cream seller, at various prices of ice cream. At a price below 
$1.00, Ben does not supply any ice cream at all. As the price rises, he supplies 
a greater and greater quantity. This is the supply schedule, a table that shows 
the relationship between the price of a good and the quantity supplied, holding 
constant everything else that influences how much producers of the good want 
to sell.
The graph in Figure 5 uses the numbers from the table to illustrate the law 
of supply. The curve relating price and quantity supplied is called the supply 
curve. The supply curve slopes upward because, other things equal, a higher price 
means a greater quantity supplied. 
Market Supply versus Individual Supply
Just as market demand is the sum of the demands of all buyers, market supply is 
the sum of the supplies of all sellers. The table in Figure 6 shows the supply sched-
ules for the two ice-cream producers in the market—Ben and Jerry. At any price, 
Ben’s supply schedule tells us the quantity of ice cream Ben supplies, and Jerry’s 
supply schedule tells us the quantity of ice cream Jerry supplies. The market sup-
ply is the sum of the two individual supplies.
The graph in Figure 6 shows the supply curves that correspond to the supply 
schedules. As with demand curves, we sum the individual supply curves horizon-
tally to obtain the market supply curve. That is, to find the total quantity supplied 
at any price, we add the individual quantities, which are found on the horizontal 
axis of the individual supply curves. The market supply curve shows how the 
quantity supplied
the amount of a good 
that sellers are willing and 
able to sell
law of supply
the claim that, other things 
equal, the quantity supplied 
of a good rises when the 
price of the good rises
supply schedule
a table that shows the 
relationship between the 
price of a good and the 
quantity supplied
supply curve
a graph of the 
relationship between the 
price of a good and the 
quantity supplied

74
PART II	
How Markets Work
total quantity supplied varies as the price of the good varies, holding constant 
all the other factors beyond price that influence producers’ decisions about how 
much to sell.
Shifts in the Supply Curve
Because the market supply curve holds other things constant, the curve shifts 
when one of the factors changes. For example, suppose the price of sugar falls. 
Sugar is an input into producing ice cream, so the fall in the price of sugar makes 
selling ice cream more profitable. This raises the supply of ice cream: At any given 
price, sellers are now willing to produce a larger quantity. The supply curve for 
ice cream shifts to the right.
Figure 7 illustrates shifts in supply. Any change that raises quantity supplied at 
every price, such as a fall in the price of sugar, shifts the supply curve to the right 
and is called an increase in supply. Similarly, any change that reduces the quantity 
supplied at every price shifts the supply curve to the left and is called a decrease 
in supply.
There are many variables that can shift the supply curve. Here are some of the 
most important.
Input Prices  To produce their output of ice cream, sellers use various inputs: 
cream, sugar, flavoring, ice-cream machines, the buildings in which the ice 
cream is made, and the labor of workers to mix the ingredients and operate 
the machines. When the price of one or more of these inputs rises, producing 
Figure 5
The supply schedule is a table that shows the quantity supplied at each price. This 
supply curve, which graphs the supply schedule, illustrates how the quantity supplied 
of the good changes as its price varies. Because a higher price increases the quantity 
supplied, the supply curve slopes upward.
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
0
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
$3.00
12
0.50
1. An
increase
 in price ...
2. ... increases quantity of cones supplied.
Supply curve
Ben’s Supply Schedule and 
Supply Curve
Price of 
Ice-Cream Cone
Quantity of 
Cones Supplied
$0.00
0 cones
0.50
0
1.00
1
1.50
2
2.00
3
2.50
4
3.00
5

75
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Market Supply as the Sum 
of Individual Supplies
Figure 6
The quantity supplied in a market is the sum of the quantities supplied by all the 
sellers at each price. Thus, the market supply curve is found by adding horizontally the 
individual supply curves. At a price of $2.00, Ben supplies 3 ice-cream cones, and Jerry 
supplies 4 ice-cream cones. The quantity supplied in the market at this price is 7 cones.
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
7
8
9 10 11 12
Ben's Supply
Jerry's Supply
Market Supply
+
=
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
7
8
9 10 11 12
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
7
8
9 10 11 12
S Ben
S Jerry
S Market
Price of Ice-Cream Cone
Ben
Jerry
Market
$0.00
0
+
0
=
0 cones
0.50
0
0
0
1.00
1
0
1
1.50
2
2
4
2.00
3
4
7
2.50
4
6
10
3.00
5
8
13
Shifts in the Supply Curve
Any change that raises the 
quantity that sellers wish to 
produce at any given price 
shifts the supply curve to 
the right. Any change that 
lowers the quantity that 
sellers wish to produce at 
any given price shifts the 
supply curve to the left.
Figure 7
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
0
Increase
in supply
Decrease
in supply
Supply curve, S3
Supply
curve, S1
Supply
curve, S2

76
PART II	
How Markets Work
ice cream is less profitable, and firms supply less ice cream. If input prices rise 
substantially, a firm might shut down and supply no ice cream at all. Thus, the 
supply of a good is negatively related to the price of the inputs used to make 
the good.
Technology  The technology for turning inputs into ice cream is another 
determinant of supply. The invention of the mechanized ice-cream machine, for 
example, reduced the amount of labor necessary to make ice cream. By reducing 
firms’ costs, the advance in technology raised the supply of ice cream.
Expectations  The amount of ice cream a firm supplies today may depend on 
its expectations about the future. For example, if a firm expects the price of ice 
cream to rise in the future, it will put some of its current production into storage 
and supply less to the market today.
Number of Sellers  In addition to the preceding factors, which influence the 
behavior of individual sellers, market supply depends on the number of these 
sellers. If Ben or Jerry were to retire from the ice-cream business, the supply in 
the market would fall.
Summary  The supply curve shows what happens to the quantity supplied 
of a good when its price varies, holding constant all the other variables that 
influence sellers. When one of these other variables changes, the supply curve 
shifts. Table 2 lists the variables that influence how much producers choose to 
sell of a good.
Once again, to remember whether you need to shift or move along the supply 
curve, keep in mind that a curve shifts only when there is a change in a relevant 
variable that is not named on either axis. The price is on the vertical axis, so a 
change in price represents a movement along the supply curve. By contrast, 
because input prices, technology, expectations, and the number of sellers are 
not measured on either axis, a change in one of these variables shifts the supply 
curve.
Quick Quiz  Make up an example of a monthly supply schedule for pizza and graph 
the implied supply curve. • Give an example of something that would shift this supply 
curve, and briefly explain your reasoning. • Would a change in the price of pizza shift 
this supply curve?
Variables That Influence Sellers
This table lists the variables that affect how 
much producers choose to sell of any good. 
Notice the special role that the price of the 
good plays: A change in the good’s price 
represents a movement along the supply 
curve, whereas a change in one of the other 
variables shifts the supply curve.
Table 2
Variable
A Change in This Variable . . .
Price of the good itself
Represents a movement along the supply curve
Input prices
Shifts the supply curve
Technology
Shifts the supply curve
Expectations
Shifts the supply curve
Number of sellers
Shifts the supply curve

77
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Supply and Demand Together
Having analyzed supply and demand separately, we now combine them to see 
how they determine the price and quantity of a good sold in a market.
Equilibrium
Figure 8 shows the market supply curve and market demand curve together. 
Notice that there is one point at which the supply and demand curves intersect. 
This point is called the market’s equilibrium. The price at this intersection is 
called the equilibrium price, and the quantity is called the equilibrium quantity. 
Here the equilibrium price is $2.00 per cone, and the equilibrium quantity is 7 ice-
cream cones. 
The dictionary defines the word equilibrium as a situation in which various 
forces are in balance—and this also describes a market’s equilibrium. At the equi-
librium price, the quantity of the good that buyers are willing and able to buy exactly 
balances the quantity that sellers are willing and able to sell. The equilibrium price is 
sometimes called the market-clearing price because, at this price, everyone in the 
market has been satisfied: Buyers have bought all they want to buy, and sellers 
have sold all they want to sell. 
The actions of buyers and sellers naturally move markets toward the equilib-
rium of supply and demand. To see why, consider what happens when the mar-
ket price is not equal to the equilibrium price.
Suppose first that the market price is above the equilibrium price, as in panel (a) 
of Figure 9. At a price of $2.50 per cone, the quantity of the good supplied (10 cones) 
exceeds the quantity demanded (4 cones). There is a surplus of the good: Suppliers 
are unable to sell all they want at the going price. A surplus is sometimes called a 
situation of excess supply. When there is a surplus in the ice-cream market, sellers 
of ice cream find their freezers increasingly full of ice cream they would like to sell 
equilibrium
a situation in which 
the market price has 
reached the level at which 
quantity supplied equals 
quantity demanded
equilibrium price
the price that balances 
quantity supplied and 
quantity demanded
equilibrium 
quantity
the quantity supplied and 
the quantity demanded  
at the equilibrium price
surplus
a situation in which 
quantity supplied is 
greater than quantity 
demanded
The Equilibrium of Supply 
and Demand
The equilibrium is found 
where the supply and 
demand curves intersect. At 
the equilibrium price, the 
quantity supplied equals 
the quantity demanded. 
Here the equilibrium price 
is $2.00: At this price, 7 ice-
cream cones are supplied, 
and 7 ice-cream cones are 
demanded.
Figure 8
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
$2.00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones
13
Equilibrium
quantity
Equilibrium
price
Equilibrium
Supply
Demand

78
PART II	
How Markets Work
but cannot. They respond to the surplus by cutting their prices. Falling prices, in 
turn, increase the quantity demanded and decrease the quantity supplied. These 
changes represent movements along the supply and demand curves, not shifts in 
the curves. Prices continue to fall until the market reaches the equilibrium.
Suppose now that the market price is below the equilibrium price, as in panel 
(b) of Figure 9. In this case, the price is $1.50 per cone, and the quantity of the 
good demanded exceeds the quantity supplied. There is a shortage of the good: 
Demanders are unable to buy all they want at the going price. A shortage is some-
times called a situation of excess demand. When a shortage occurs in the ice-cream 
market, buyers have to wait in long lines for a chance to buy one of the few cones 
available. With too many buyers chasing too few goods, sellers can respond to the 
shortage by raising their prices without losing sales. These price increases cause 
the quantity demanded to fall and the quantity supplied to rise. Once again, these 
changes represent movements along the supply and demand curves, and they 
move the market toward the equilibrium.
Thus, regardless of whether the price starts off too high or too low, the activi-
ties of the many buyers and sellers automatically push the market price toward 
the equilibrium price. Once the market reaches its equilibrium, all buyers and 
sellers are satisfied, and there is no upward or downward pressure on the price. 
How quickly equilibrium is reached varies from market to market depending 
on how quickly prices adjust. In most free markets, surpluses and shortages are 
only temporary because prices eventually move toward their equilibrium levels. 
shortage
a situation in which 
quantity demanded is 
greater than quantity 
supplied
Figure 9
In panel (a), there is a surplus. Because the market price of $2.50 is above the 
equilibrium price, the quantity supplied (10 cones) exceeds the quantity demanded 
(4 cones). Suppliers try to increase sales by cutting the price of a cone, and this moves 
the price toward its equilibrium level. In panel (b), there is a shortage. Because the 
market price of $1.50 is below the equilibrium price, the quantity demanded (10 
cones) exceeds the quantity supplied (4 cones). With too many buyers chasing too few 
goods, suppliers can take advantage of the shortage by raising the price. Hence, in 
both cases, the price adjustment moves the market toward the equilibrium of supply 
and demand.
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
2.00
$2.50
0
4
7
10
Supply
Demand
(a) Excess Supply
Quantity
demanded
Quantity
supplied
Surplus
$2.00
1.50
0
4
7
10
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
Supply
Demand
(b) Excess Demand
Quantity
supplied
Quantity
demanded
Shortage
Markets Not in Equilibrium

79
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Indeed, this phenomenon is so pervasive that it is called the law of supply and 
demand: The price of any good adjusts to bring the quantity supplied and quan-
tity demanded for that good into balance.
Three Steps to Analyzing Changes in Equilibrium
So far, we have seen how supply and demand together determine a market’s equi-
librium, which in turn determines the price and quantity of the good that buyers 
purchase and sellers produce. The equilibrium price and quantity depend on the 
position of the supply and demand curves. When some event shifts one of these 
curves, the equilibrium in the market changes, resulting in a new price and a new 
quantity exchanged between buyers and sellers. 
When analyzing how some event affects the equilibrium in a market, we proceed 
in three steps. First, we decide whether the event shifts the supply curve, the demand 
curve, or, in some cases, both curves. Second, we decide whether the curve shifts to 
the right or to the left. Third, we use the supply-and-demand diagram to compare 
the initial and the new equilibrium, which shows how the shift affects the equilib-
rium price and quantity. Table 3 summarizes these three steps. To see how this recipe 
is used, let’s consider various events that might affect the market for ice cream.
Example: A Change in Market Equilibrium Due to a Shift in Demand 
Suppose that one summer the weather is very hot. How does this event affect the 
market for ice cream? To answer this question, let’s follow our three steps.
	 1.	 The hot weather affects the demand curve by changing people’s taste for 
ice cream. That is, the weather changes the amount of ice cream that people 
want to buy at any given price. The supply curve is unchanged because the 
weather does not directly affect the firms that sell ice cream. 
	 2.	 Because hot weather makes people want to eat more ice cream, the demand 
curve shifts to the right. Figure 10 shows this increase in demand as the shift 
in the demand curve from D1 to D2. This shift indicates that the quantity of 
ice cream demanded is higher at every price.
	 3.	 At the old price of $2, there is now an excess demand for ice cream, and this 
shortage induces firms to raise the price. As Figure 10 shows, the increase in 
demand raises the equilibrium price from $2.00 to $2.50 and the equilibrium 
quantity from 7 to 10 cones. In other words, the hot weather increases the 
price of ice cream and the quantity of ice cream sold.
Shifts in Curves versus Movements along Curves  Notice that when hot 
weather increases the demand for ice cream and drives up the price, the quantity 
of ice cream that firms supply rises, even though the supply curve remains the 
law of supply and 
demand
the claim that the price of 
any good adjusts to bring 
the quantity supplied and 
the quantity demanded 
for that good into balance
Three Steps for 
Analyzing Changes in 
Equilibrium
Table 3
1.  Decide whether the event 
shifts the supply or demand 
curve (or perhaps both).
2.  Decide in which direction 
the curve shifts.
3.  Use the supply-and-demand 
diagram to see how the 
shift changes the equilib-
rium price and quantity.
NON SEQUITUR © Wiley Miller. Reprinted  
with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK.  
All rights reserved.

80
PART II	
How Markets Work
same. In this case, economists say there has been an increase in “quantity sup-
plied” but no change in “supply.”
Supply refers to the position of the supply curve, whereas the quantity supplied 
refers to the amount suppliers wish to sell. In this example, supply does not change 
because the weather does not alter firms’ desire to sell at any given price. Instead, 
the hot weather alters consumers’ desire to buy at any given price and thereby 
shifts the demand curve to the right. The increase in demand causes the equilib-
rium price to rise. When the price rises, the quantity supplied rises. This increase in 
quantity supplied is represented by the movement along the supply curve.
To summarize, a shift in the supply curve is called a “change in supply,” and 
a shift in the demand curve is called a “change in demand.” A movement along a 
fixed supply curve is called a “change in the quantity supplied,” and a movement 
along a fixed demand curve is called a “change in the quantity demanded.”
Example: A Change in Market Equilibrium Due to a Shift in Supply 
Suppose that during another summer, a hurricane destroys part of the sugarcane 
crop and drives up the price of sugar. How does this event affect the market for 
ice cream? Once again, to answer this question, we follow our three steps. 
	 1.	 The change in the price of sugar, an input for making ice cream, affects the 
supply curve. By raising the costs of production, it reduces the amount of 
ice cream that firms produce and sell at any given price. The demand curve 
does not change because the higher cost of inputs does not directly affect the 
amount of ice cream households wish to buy.
	 2.	 The supply curve shifts to the left because, at every price, the total amount 
that firms are willing and able to sell is reduced. Figure 11 illustrates this 
decrease in supply as a shift in the supply curve from S1 to S2.
Figure 10
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
2.00
$2.50
0
7
10
Quantity of 
Ice-Cream Cones
Supply
New equilibrium
Initial
equilibrium
D1
D2
3. . . . and a higher
quantity sold.
2. . . . resulting
in a higher
price . . .
1. Hot weather increases the
demand for ice cream . . .
How an Increase in 
Demand Affects the 
Equilibrium
An event that raises quantity 
demanded at any given price 
shifts the demand curve to the 
right. The equilibrium price 
and the equilibrium quantity 
both rise. Here an abnormally 
hot summer causes buyers 
to demand more ice cream. 
The demand curve shifts 
from D1 to D2, which causes 
the equilibrium price to rise 
from $2.00 to $2.50 and the 
equilibrium quantity to rise 
from 7 to 10 cones.

81
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
	 3.	 At the old price of $2, there is now an excess demand for ice cream, and 
this shortage causes firms to raise the price. As Figure 11 shows, the shift in 
the supply curve raises the equilibrium price from $2.00 to $2.50 and low-
ers the equilibrium quantity from 7 to 4 cones. As a result of the sugar price 
increase, the price of ice cream rises, and the quantity of ice cream sold falls.
Example: Shifts in Both Supply and Demand  Now suppose that a heat 
wave and a hurricane occur during the same summer. To analyze this combina-
tion of events, we again follow our three steps. 
	 1.	 We determine that both curves must shift. The hot weather affects the 
demand curve because it alters the amount of ice cream that households 
want to buy at any given price. At the same time, when the hurricane drives 
up sugar prices, it alters the supply curve for ice cream because it changes 
the amount of ice cream that firms want to sell at any given price.
	 2.	 The curves shift in the same directions as they did in our previous analysis: 
The demand curve shifts to the right, and the supply curve shifts to the left. 
Figure 12 illustrates these shifts.
	 3.	 As Figure 12 shows, two possible outcomes might result depending on the 
relative size of the demand and supply shifts. In both cases, the equilibrium 
price rises. In panel (a), where demand increases substantially while supply 
falls just a little, the equilibrium quantity also rises. By contrast, in panel (b), 
where supply falls substantially while demand rises just a little, the equilib-
rium quantity falls. Thus, these events certainly raise the price of ice cream, 
but their impact on the amount of ice cream sold is ambiguous (that is, it 
could go either way).
How a Decrease in Supply 
Affects the Equilibrium
An event that reduces quantity 
supplied at any given price shifts 
the supply curve to the left. The 
equilibrium price rises, and the 
equilibrium quantity falls. Here an 
increase in the price of sugar (an 
input) causes sellers to supply less 
ice cream. The supply curve shifts 
from S1 to S2, which causes the 
equilibrium price of ice cream to 
rise from $2.00 to $2.50 and the 
equilibrium quantity to fall from 
7 to 4 cones.
Figure 11
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
2.00
$2.50
0
4
7
Quantity of 
Ice-Cream Cones
Demand
New
equilibrium
Initial equilibrium
S1
S2
2. . . . resulting
in a higher
price of ice
cream . . .
1. An increase in the price of
sugar reduces the supply of
ice cream. . .
3. . . . and a lower
quantity sold.

82
PART II	
How Markets Work
What’s Wrong with 
Price Gouging?
By Jeff Jacoby
T
here wasn’t much [Attorney General] 
Martha Coakley could do about the massive 
pipe break that left dozens of Greater Boston 
towns without clean drinking water over the 
weekend. So she kept herself busy instead 
lecturing vendors not to increase the price of 
the bottled water that tens of thousands of 
consumers were suddenly in a frenzy to buy.
	
“We have begun hearing anecdotal 
reports of the possible price gouging of 
store-bought water,’’ Coakley announced 
Sunday. “Businesses and individuals can-
not and should not take advantage of  
this ­public emergency to unfairly charge 
­consumers . . . for water.’’ Inspectors were 
being dispatched, “spot-checks’’ were being 
conducted, and “if we discover that businesses 
are engaging in price gouging,’’ she warned, 
“we will take appropriate legal action.’’
	
Governor Deval Patrick got into the 
act, too. He ordered the state’s Division of 
Standards to “closely monitor bottled water 
prices’’ in the area affected by the water 
emergency. “There is never an excuse for 
taking advantage of consumers,’’ he intoned, 
“especially not during times like this.’’
	
It never fails. No sooner does some 
calamity trigger an urgent need for basic 
resources than self-righteous voices are 
raised to denounce the amazingly efficient 
system that stimulates suppliers to speed 
those resources to the people who need 
them. That system is the free market’s 
price mechanism—the fluctuation of prices 
because of changes in supply and demand.
	
When the demand for bottled water goes 
through the roof—which is another way of 
saying that bottled water has become (rela-
tively) scarce—the price of water quickly rises 
in response. That price spike may be ­annoying, 
but it’s not nearly as annoying as being 
unable to find water for sale at any price.  
 Price Increases after Disasters
For several days in 2010, many towns around Boston found themselves 
without drinkable tap water. This increased the demand for bottled 
water, putting upward pressure on the price. While some policymakers 
cried foul, this opinion piece endorses the market’s natural response.
in the news
Figure 12
Here we observe a simultaneous increase in demand and decrease in supply. Two 
outcomes are possible. In panel (a), the equilibrium price rises from P1 to P2, and the 
equilibrium quantity rises from Q1 to Q2. In panel (b), the equilibrium price again rises 
from P1 to P2, but the equilibrium quantity falls from Q1 to Q2.
(b) Price Rises, Quantity Falls
0
New
equilibrium
Initial
equilibrium
(a) Price Rises, Quantity Rises
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
0
New
equilibrium
Initial equilibrium
S1
S1
D1
D1
D2
D2
S2
S2
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q1
P2
P1
P2
P1
Large
increase in
demand
Small
decrease
in supply
Small
increase in
demand
Large
decrease
in supply
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
A Shift in Both Supply  
and Demand

83
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
Summary  We have just seen three examples of how to use supply and demand 
curves to analyze a change in equilibrium. Whenever an event shifts the supply 
curve, the demand curve, or perhaps both curves, you can use these tools to pre-
dict how the event will alter the price and quantity sold in equilibrium. Table 4 
shows the predicted outcome for any combination of shifts in the two curves. To 
make sure you understand how to use the tools of supply and demand, pick a 
What Happens to Price and Quantity When 
Supply or Demand Shifts?
As a quick quiz, make sure you can explain at 
least a few of the entries in this table using a 
supply-and-demand diagram.
Table 4
No Change 
in Supply
An Increase 
in Supply
A Decrease 
in Supply
No Change
P same
P down
P up
in Demand
Q same
Q up
Q down
An Increase
P up
P ambiguous
P up
in Demand
Q up
Q up
Q ambiguous
A Decrease
P down
P down
P ambiguous
in Demand
Q down
Q ambiguous
Q down
Source: The Boston Globe, May 4, 2010.
Rising prices help keep limited quantities 
from vanishing today, while increasing the 
odds of fresh supplies arriving tomorrow.
	
It is easy to demonize vendors who 
charge what the market will bear follow-
ing a catastrophe. “After storm come the 
vultures’’ USA Today memorably head-
lined a story about the price hikes that fol-
lowed Hurricane Charley in Florida in 2004. 
Coakley hasn’t called anybody a vulture, at 
least not yet, but her office has dedicated 
a telephone hotline and is encouraging the 
public to drop a dime on “price gougers.’’
	
Before you drop that dime, though, con-
sider who really serves the public interest—
the merchant who boosts his price during a 
crisis, or the merchant who refuses to?
	
A thought experiment: A massive pipe 
ruptures, tap water grows undrinkable, and 
consumers rush to buy bottled water from 
the only two vendors who sell it. Vendor 
A, not wanting to annoy the governor 
and attorney general, leaves the price of 
his water unchanged at 69 cents a bottle. 
Vendor B, who is more interested in doing 
business than truckling to politicians, more 
than quadruples his price to $2.99.
	
You don’t need an economics textbook 
to know what happens next.
	
Customers descend on Vendor A in 
droves, loading up on his 69-cent water. 
Within hours his entire stock has been 
cleaned out, and subsequent customers are 
turned away empty-handed. At Vendor B’s, 
on the other hand, sales of water are slower 
and there is a lot of grumbling about the 
high price. But even late-arriving customers 
are able to buy the water they need—and 
almost no one buys more than he truly 
needs.
	
When demand intensifies, prices rise. And 
as prices rise, suppliers work harder to meet 
demand. The same Globe story that reported 
yesterday on Coakley’s “price-gouging’’ state-
ment reported as well on the lengths to which 
bottlers and retailers were going to get more 
water into customers’ hands.
	
“Suppliers worked overtime, pumping 
up production at regional bottling facili-
ties and coordinating deliveries,’’ reporter 
Erin Ailworth noted. Polar Beverages in 
Worcester, for example, “had emptied out 
its plant in the city last night and trucked 
in loads of water from its New York 
facility.’’
	
Letting prices rise freely isn’t the only 
possible response to a sudden shortage. 
Government rationing is an option, and 
so are price controls—assuming you don’t 
object to the inevitable corruption, long 
lines, and black market. Better by far to let 
prices rise and fall freely. That isn’t “goug-
ing,’’ but plain good sense—and the best 
method yet devised for allocating goods and 
services among free men and women.
© Gyro Photography/amanaimagesRF/Jupiter Images
A scarce resource.

84
PART II	
How Markets Work
few entries in this table and make sure you can explain to yourself why the table 
contains the prediction it does.
Quick QuiZ  On the appropriate diagram, show what happens to the market for 
pizza if the price of tomatoes rises. • On a separate diagram, show what happens to 
the market for pizza if the price of hamburgers falls.
Conclusion: How Prices Allocate Resources
This chapter has analyzed supply and demand in a single market. Although our 
discussion has centered on the market for ice cream, the lessons learned here 
apply in most other markets as well. Whenever you go to a store to buy some-
thing, you are contributing to the demand for that item. Whenever you look for 
a job, you are contributing to the supply of labor services. Because supply and 
demand are such pervasive economic phenomena, the model of supply and 
demand is a powerful tool for analysis. We will be using this model repeatedly 
in the following chapters.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in Chapter 1 is that markets are 
usually a good way to organize economic activity. Although it is still too early to 
judge whether market outcomes are good or bad, in this chapter we have begun 
to see how markets work. In any economic system, scarce resources have to be 
allocated among competing uses. Market economies harness the forces of supply 
and demand to serve that end. Supply and demand together determine the prices 
of the economy’s many different goods and services; prices in turn are the signals 
that guide the allocation of resources. 
For example, consider the allocation of beachfront land. Because the amount of 
this land is limited, not everyone can enjoy the luxury of living by the beach. Who 
gets this resource? The answer is whoever is willing and able to pay the price. The 
price of beachfront land adjusts until the quantity of land demanded exactly bal-
ances the quantity supplied. Thus, in market economies, prices are the mechanism 
for rationing scarce resources.
Similarly, prices determine who produces each good and how much is pro-
duced. For instance, consider farming. Because we need food to survive, it is 
crucial that some people work on farms. What determines who is a farmer and 
who is not? In a free society, there is no government planning agency making 
this decision and ensuring an adequate supply of food. Instead, the allocation 
of workers to farms is based on the job decisions of millions of workers. This 
decentralized system works well because these decisions depend on prices. The 
prices of food and the wages of farmworkers (the price of their labor) adjust to 
ensure that enough people choose to be farmers.
If a person had never seen a market economy in action, the whole idea might 
seem preposterous. Economies are enormous groups of people engaged in a 
multitude of interdependent activities. What prevents decentralized decision 
making from degenerating into chaos? What coordinates the actions of the mil-
lions of people with their varying abilities and desires? What ensures that what 
needs to be done is in fact done? The answer, in a word, is prices. If an invisible 
hand guides market economies, as Adam Smith famously suggested, then the 
price system is the baton that the invisible hand uses to conduct the economic 
orchestra.
© Robert Day. The New Yorker  
Collection/ www.cartoonbank.com
“Two dollars”
“—and seventy-five 
cents.”

85
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
• Economists use the model of supply and demand 
to analyze competitive markets. In a competitive 
market, there are many buyers and sellers, each 
of whom has little or no influence on the market 
price.
• The demand curve shows how the quantity of a 
good demanded depends on the price. According 
to the law of demand, as the price of a good falls, 
the quantity demanded rises. Therefore, the 
demand curve slopes downward.
• In addition to price, other determinants of how 
much consumers want to buy include income, 
the prices of substitutes and complements, 
tastes, expectations, and the number of buy-
ers. If one of these factors changes, the demand 
curve shifts.
• The supply curve shows how the quantity of a 
good supplied depends on the price. According 
to the law of supply, as the price of a good rises, 
the quantity supplied rises. Therefore, the supply 
curve slopes upward.
• In addition to price, other determinants of how 
much producers want to sell include input prices, 
technology, expectations, and the number of sell-
ers. If one of these factors changes, the supply 
curve shifts.
• The intersection of the supply and demand 
curves determines the market equilibrium. At 
the equilibrium price, the quantity demanded 
equals the quantity supplied. 
• The behavior of buyers and sellers naturally 
drives markets toward their equilibrium. When 
the market price is above the equilibrium price, 
there is a surplus of the good, which causes the 
market price to fall. When the market price is 
below the equilibrium price, there is a shortage, 
which causes the market price to rise. 
• To analyze how any event influences a mar-
ket, we use the supply-and-demand diagram to 
examine how the event affects the equilibrium 
price and quantity. To do this, we follow three 
steps. First, we decide whether the event shifts 
the supply curve or the demand curve (or both). 
Second, we decide in which direction the curve 
shifts. Third, we compare the new equilibrium 
with the initial equilibrium.
• In market economies, prices are the signals that 
guide economic decisions and thereby allocate 
scarce resources. For every good in the economy, 
the price ensures that supply and demand are in 
balance. The equilibrium price then determines 
how much of the good buyers choose to consume 
and how much sellers choose to produce.
Summary
Key Concepts
Questions for Review
market, p. 66
competitive market, p. 66
quantity demanded, p. 67
law of demand, p. 67
demand schedule, p. 67
demand curve, p. 68
normal good, p. 70
inferior good, p. 70
substitutes, p. 70
complements, p. 70
quantity supplied, p. 73
law of supply, p. 73
supply schedule, p. 73
supply curve, p. 73
equilibrium, p. 77
equilibrium price, p. 77
equilibrium quantity, p. 77
surplus, p. 77
shortage, p. 78
law of supply and  
  demand, p. 79
	 1.	 What is a competitive market? Briefly 
describe a type of market that is not perfectly 
competitive.
	 2.	 What are the demand schedule and the demand 
curve, and how are they related? Why does the 
demand curve slope downward?

86
PART II	
How Markets Work
	 3.	 Does a change in consumers’ tastes lead to a 
movement along the demand curve or a shift in 
the demand curve? Does a change in price lead 
to a movement along the demand curve or a 
shift in the demand curve?
	 4.	 Popeye’s income declines, and as a result, he 
buys more spinach. Is spinach an inferior or 
a normal good? What happens to Popeye’s 
demand curve for spinach?
	 5.	 What are the supply schedule and the supply 
curve, and how are they related? Why does the 
supply curve slope upward?
	 6.	 Does a change in producers’ technology lead to 
a movement along the supply curve or a shift in 
the supply curve? Does a change in price lead to 
a movement along the supply curve or a shift in 
the supply curve?
	 7.	 Define the equilibrium of a market. Describe 
the forces that move a market toward its 
equilibrium.
	 8.	 Beer and pizza are complements because they 
are often enjoyed together. When the price of 
beer rises, what happens to the supply, demand, 
quantity supplied, quantity demanded, and the 
price in the market for pizza? 
	 9.	 Describe the role of prices in market economies.
Problems and Applications
	 1.	 Explain each of the following statements using 
supply-and-demand diagrams. 
a.	 “When a cold snap hits Florida, the price of 
orange juice rises in supermarkets through-
out the country.” 
b.	“When the weather turns warm in New 
England every summer, the price of hotel 
rooms in Caribbean resorts plummets.” 
c.	 “When a war breaks out in the Middle East, 
the price of gasoline rises, and the price of a 
used Cadillac falls.”
	 2.	 “An increase in the demand for notebooks 
­raises the quantity of notebooks demanded but 
not the quantity supplied.” Is this statement 
true or false? Explain.
	 3.	 Consider the market for minivans. For each 
of the events listed here, identify which of the 
determinants of demand or supply are affected. 
Also indicate whether demand or supply 
increases or decreases. Then draw a diagram 
to show the effect on the price and quantity of 
minivans.
a.	 People decide to have more children.
b.	A strike by steelworkers raises steel prices.
c.	 Engineers develop new automated machin-
ery for the production of minivans.
d.	The price of sports utility vehicles rises.
e.	 A stock-market crash lowers people’s wealth.
	 4.	 Consider the markets for DVDs, TV screens, 
and tickets at movie theaters.
a.	 For each pair, identify whether they are 
­complements or substitutes:
• 
DVDs and TV screens 
• 
DVDs and movie tickets
• 
TV screens and movie tickets
b.	Suppose a technological advance reduces the 
cost of manufacturing TV screens. Draw a 
diagram to show what happens in the market 
for TV screens.
c.	 Draw two more diagrams to show how the 
change in the market for TV screens affects 
the markets for DVDs and movie tickets.
	 5.	 Over the past 30 years, technological advances 
have reduced the cost of computer chips. How 
do you think this has affected the market 
for computers? For computer software? For 
typewriters?
	 6.	 Using supply-and-demand diagrams, show the 
effect of the following events on the market for 
sweatshirts.
a.	 A hurricane in South Carolina damages the 
cotton crop.
b.	The price of leather jackets falls.
c.	 All colleges require morning exercise in 
appropriate attire.
d.	New knitting machines are invented.
	 7.	 A survey shows an increase in drug use by 
young people. In the ensuing debate, two 
hypotheses are proposed:
• Reduced police efforts have increased the 
availability of drugs on the street. 
• Cutbacks in education efforts have 
decreased awareness of the dangers of drug 
addiction. 

87
CHAPTER 4    The Market Forces of Supply and Demand
a	 Use supply-and-demand diagrams to show 
how each of these hypotheses could lead to 
an increase in quantity of drugs consumed. 
b	 How could information on what has hap-
pened to the price of drugs help us to distin-
guish between these explanations?
	 8.	 Suppose that in the year 2015 the number of 
births is temporarily high. How does this baby 
boom affect the price of babysitting services in 
2020 and 2030? (Hint: 5-year-olds need baby­
sitters, whereas 15-year-olds can be babysitters.)
	 9.	 Ketchup is a complement (as well as a condi-
ment) for hot dogs. If the price of hot dogs rises, 
what happens to the market for ketchup? For 
tomatoes? For tomato juice? For orange juice?
	10.	 The market for pizza has the following demand 
and supply schedules:
Price
Quantity Demanded
Quantity Supplied
$4
135 pizzas
26 pizzas
5
104
53
6
81
81
7
68
98
8
53
110
9
39
121
a.	 Graph the demand and supply curves. What 
is the equilibrium price and quantity in this 
market? 
b.	If the actual price in this market were above 
the equilibrium price, what would drive the 
market toward the equilibrium? 
c.	 If the actual price in this market were below 
the equilibrium price, what would drive the 
market toward the equilibrium?
	11.	 Consider the following events: Scientists reveal 
that consumption of oranges decreases the risk 
of diabetes, and at the same time, farmers use 
a new fertilizer that makes orange trees more 
productive. Illustrate and explain what effect 
these changes have on the equilibrium price and 
quantity of oranges.
	12.	 Because bagels and cream cheese are often eaten 
together, they are complements.
a.	 We observe that both the equilibrium price of 
cream cheese and the equilibrium quantity of 
bagels have risen. What could be responsible 
for this pattern—a fall in the price of flour 
or a fall in the price of milk? Illustrate and 
explain your answer.
b.	Suppose instead that the equilibrium 
price of cream cheese has risen but the 
equilibrium quantity of bagels has fallen. 
What could be responsible for this pattern—
a rise in the price of flour or a rise in the 
price of milk? Illustrate and explain your 
answer.
	13.	 Suppose that the price of basketball tickets at 
your college is determined by market forces. 
Currently, the demand and supply schedules 
are as follows:
Price
Quantity Demanded
Quantity Supplied
$  4
10,000 tickets
8,000 tickets
8
8,000
8,000
12
6,000
8,000
16
4,000
8,000
20
2,000
8,000
a.	 Draw the demand and supply curves. What 
is unusual about this supply curve? Why 
might this be true?
b.	What are the equilibrium price and quantity 
of tickets?
c.	 Your college plans to increase total enroll-
ment next year by 5,000 students. The 
additional students will have the following 
demand schedule:
Price
Quantity Demanded
$  4
4,000 tickets
8
3,000
12
2,000
16
1,000
20
0
Now add the old demand schedule and the 
demand schedule for the new students to 
calculate the new demand schedule for the 
entire college. What will be the new equilib-
rium price and quantity?
	14.	 Market research has revealed the following 
information about the market for chocolate bars: 
The demand schedule can be represented by 
the equation QD = 1,600 – 300P, where QD is the 
quantity demanded and P is the price. The sup-
ply schedule can be represented by the equation 
QS = 1,400 + 700P, where QS is the quantity sup-
plied. Calculate the equilibrium price and quan-
tity in the market for chocolate bars.
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.


89
5
Elasticity and Its
    Application
I
magine that some event drives up the price of gasoline in the United States. 
It could be a war in the Middle East that disrupts the world supply of oil, a 
booming Chinese economy that boosts the world demand for oil, or a new 
tax on gasoline passed by Congress. How would U.S. consumers respond to 
the higher price?
It is easy to answer this question in broad fashion: Consumers would buy less. 
That is simply the law of demand we learned in the previous chapter But you 
might want a precise answer. By how much would consumption of gasoline fall? 
This question can be answered using a concept called elasticity, which we develop 
in this chapter.
Elasticity is a measure of how much buyers and sellers respond to changes in 
market conditions. When studying how some event or policy affects a market, 
we can discuss not only the direction of the effects but their magnitude as well. 
Elasticity is useful in many applications, as we see toward the end of this chapter.

90
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Before proceeding, however, you might be curious about the answer to the 
gasoline question. Many studies have examined consumers’ response to gasoline 
prices, and they typically find that the quantity demanded responds more in the 
long run than it does in the short run. A 10 percent increase in gasoline prices 
reduces gasoline consumption by about 2.5 percent after a year and about 6 percent 
after five years. About half of the long-run reduction in quantity demanded arises 
because people drive less and half arises because they switch to more fuel-efficient 
cars. Both responses are reflected in the demand curve and its elasticity.
The Elasticity of Demand
When we introduced demand in Chapter 4, we noted that consumers usually buy 
more of a good when its price is lower, when their incomes are higher, when the 
prices of substitutes for the good are higher, or when the prices of complements of 
the good are lower. Our discussion of demand was qualitative, not quantitative. 
That is, we discussed the direction in which quantity demanded moves but not the 
size of the change. To measure how much consumers respond to changes in these 
variables, economists use the concept of elasticity. 
The Price Elasticity of Demand and Its Determinants
The law of demand states that a fall in the price of a good raises the quantity 
demanded. The price elasticity of demand measures how much the quantity 
demanded responds to a change in price. Demand for a good is said to be elastic if the 
quantity demanded responds substantially to changes in the price. Demand is said to 
be inelastic if the quantity demanded responds only slightly to changes in the price.
The price elasticity of demand for any good measures how willing consumers 
are to buy less of the good as its price rises. Because the demand curve reflects 
the many economic, social, and psychological forces that shape consumer prefer-
ences, there is no simple, universal rule for what determines the demand curve’s 
elasticity. Based on experience, however, we can state some rules-of-thumb about 
what influences the price elasticity of demand.
Availability of Close Substitutes  Goods with close substitutes tend to have 
more elastic demand because it is easier for consumers to switch from that good to 
others. For example, butter and margarine are easily substitutable. A small increase 
in the price of butter, assuming the price of margarine is held fixed, causes the quan-
tity of butter sold to fall by a large amount. By contrast, because eggs are a food with-
out a close substitute, the demand for eggs is less elastic than the demand for butter.
Necessities versus Luxuries  Necessities tend to have inelastic demands, whereas 
luxuries have elastic demands. When the price of a doctor’s visit rises, people will not 
dramatically reduce the number of times they go to the doctor, although they might 
go somewhat less often. By contrast, when the price of sailboats rises, the quantity 
of sailboats demanded falls substantially. The reason is that most people view doc-
tor visits as a necessity and sailboats as a luxury. Whether a good is a necessity or a 
luxury depends not on the intrinsic properties of the good but on the preferences of 
the buyer. For avid sailors with little concern over their health, sailboats might be a 
necessity with inelastic demand and doctor visits a luxury with elastic demand. 
Definition of the Market  The elasticity of demand in any market depends on 
how we draw the boundaries of the market. Narrowly defined markets tend to have 
more elastic demand than broadly defined markets because it is easier to find close 
elasticity
a measure of the respon-
siveness of quantity 
demanded or quantity 
supplied to a change in 
one of its determinants
price elasticity of 
demand
a measure of how much 
the quantity demanded 
of a good responds to 
a change in the price of 
that good, computed as 
the percentage change 
in quantity demanded 
divided by the percentage 
change in price

91
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
substitutes for narrowly defined goods. For example, food, a broad category, has a 
fairly inelastic demand because there are no good substitutes for food. Ice cream, a 
narrower category, has a more elastic demand because it is easy to substitute other 
desserts for ice cream. Vanilla ice cream, a very narrow category, has a very elastic 
demand because other flavors of ice cream are almost perfect substitutes for vanilla. 
Time Horizon  Goods tend to have more elastic demand over longer time hori-
zons. When the price of gasoline rises, the quantity of gasoline demanded falls only 
slightly in the first few months. Over time, however, people buy more fuel-efficient 
cars, switch to public transportation, and move closer to where they work. Within 
several years, the quantity of gasoline demanded falls more substantially.
Computing the Price Elasticity of Demand
Now that we have discussed the price elasticity of demand in general terms, let’s 
be more precise about how it is measured. Economists compute the price elas­
ticity of demand as the percentage change in the quantity demanded divided by 
the percentage change in the price. That is, 
Price elasticity of demand 5 Percentage change in quantity demanded.
	
Percentage change in price
For example, suppose that a 10 percent increase in the price of an ice-cream cone 
causes the amount of ice cream you buy to fall by 20 percent. We calculate your 
elasticity of demand as 
Price elasticity of demand 5  20 percent 5 2.
	
   10 percent
In this example, the elasticity is 2, reflecting that the change in the quantity 
demanded is proportionately twice as large as the change in the price.
Because the quantity demanded of a good is negatively related to its price, the 
percentage change in quantity will always have the opposite sign as the percent-
age change in price. In this example, the percentage change in price is a positive 10 
percent (reflecting an increase), and the percentage change in quantity demanded 
is a negative 20 percent (reflecting a decrease). For this reason, price elasticities of 
demand are sometimes reported as negative numbers. In this book, we follow the 
common practice of dropping the minus sign and reporting all price elasticities of 
demand as positive numbers. (Mathematicians call this the absolute value.) With 
this convention, a larger price elasticity implies a greater responsiveness of quan-
tity demanded to changes in price.
The Midpoint Method: A Better Way to Calculate 
Percentage Changes and Elasticities
If you try calculating the price elasticity of demand between two points on a 
demand curve, you will quickly notice an annoying problem: The elasticity from 
point A to point B seems different from the elasticity from point B to point A. For 
example, consider these numbers:
	
Point A:	
Price 5 $4	
Quantity 5 120
	
Point B:	
Price 5 $6	
Quantity 5 80
Going from point A to point B, the price rises by 50 percent, and the quantity falls by 
33 percent, indicating that the price elasticity of demand is 33/50, or 0.66. By contrast, 
going from point B to point A, the price falls by 33 percent, and the quantity rises 

92
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
by 50 percent, indicating that the price elasticity of demand is 50/33, or 1.5. This dif-
ference arises because the percentage changes are calculated from a different base.
One way to avoid this problem is to use the midpoint method for calculating 
elasticities. The standard procedure for computing a percentage change is to 
divide the change by the initial level. By contrast, the midpoint method computes 
a percentage change by dividing the change by the midpoint (or average) of the 
initial and final levels. For instance, $5 is the midpoint between $4 and $6. There-
fore, according to the midpoint method, a change from $4 to $6 is considered a 
40 percent rise because (6 2 4) / 5 3 100 5 40. Similarly, a change from $6 to $4 
is considered a 40 percent fall.
Because the midpoint method gives the same answer regardless of the direc-
tion of change, it is often used when calculating the price elasticity of demand 
between two points. In our example, the midpoint between point A and point B is:
Midpoint:    Price = $5    Quantity = 100
According to the midpoint method, when going from point A to point B, the price 
rises by 40 percent, and the quantity falls by 40 percent. Similarly, when going 
from point B to point A, the price falls by 40 percent, and the quantity rises by 40 
percent. In both directions, the price elasticity of demand equals 1. 
The following formula expresses the midpoint method for calculating the price 
elasticity of demand between two points, denoted (Q1, P1) and (Q2, P2):
Price elasticity of demand 5 (Q2 2 Q1) / [(Q2 1 Q1) / 2]
.
	
  (P2 2 P1) / [(P2 1 P1) / 2]	
The numerator is the percentage change in quantity computed using the midpoint 
method, and the denominator is the percentage change in price computed using 
the midpoint method. If you ever need to calculate elasticities, you should use 
this formula.
In this book, however, we rarely perform such calculations. For most of our 
purposes, what elasticity represents—the responsiveness of quantity demanded 
to a change in price—is more important than how it is calculated.
The Variety of Demand Curves 
Economists classify demand curves according to their elasticity. Demand is con-
sidered elastic when the elasticity is greater than 1, which means the quantity 
moves proportionately more than the price. Demand is considered inelastic when 
the elasticity is less than 1, which means the quantity moves proportionately less 
than the price. If the elasticity is exactly 1, the quantity moves the same amount 
proportionately as the price, and demand is said to have unit elasticity. 
Because the price elasticity of demand measures how much quantity demanded 
responds to changes in the price, it is closely related to the slope of the demand 
curve. The following rule of thumb is a useful guide: The flatter the demand curve 
that passes through a given point, the greater the price elasticity of demand. The 
steeper the demand curve that passes through a given point, the smaller the price 
elasticity of demand.
Figure 1 shows five cases. In the extreme case of a zero elasticity, shown in 
panel (a), demand is perfectly inelastic, and the demand curve is vertical. In this 
case, regardless of the price, the quantity demanded stays the same. As the elasticity 
rises, the demand curve gets flatter and flatter, as shown in panels (b), (c), and (d).  
At the opposite extreme, shown in panel (e), demand is perfectly elastic. This 

93
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
2. . . . leads to a 22% decrease in quantity demanded.
(a) Perfectly Inelastic Demand: Elasticity Equals 0
$5
4
Demand
Quantity
100
0
(b) Inelastic Demand: Elasticity Is Less Than 1
$5
4
Quantity
100
0
90
Demand
(c) Unit Elastic Demand: Elasticity Equals 1
$5
4
Demand
Quantity
100
0
Price
80
1. An
increase
in price . . .
2. . . . leaves the quantity demanded unchanged.
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
Price
Price
2. . . . leads to an 11% decrease in quantity demanded.
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
(d) Elastic Demand: Elasticity Is Greater Than 1
$5
4
Demand
Quantity
100
0
Price
50
(e) Perfectly Elastic Demand: Elasticity Equals Inﬁnity
$4
Quantity
0
Price
Demand
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
2. . . . leads to a 67% decrease in quantity demanded.
3. At a price below $4,
quantity demanded is inﬁnite.
2. At exactly $4,
consumers will
buy any quantity.
1. At any price
above $4, quantity
demanded is zero.
Figure 1
The Price Elasticity of Demand
The price elasticity of demand determines whether the demand curve is steep or flat. 
Note that all percentage changes are calculated using the midpoint method.

94
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
FYI
W
e have talked about what elasticity means, what determines 
it, and how it is calculated. Beyond these general ideas, you 
might ask for a specific number. How much, precisely, does the price 
of a particular good influence the quantity demanded?
	
To answer such a question, economists collect data from market 
outcomes and apply statistical techniques to estimate the price 
elasticity of demand. Here are some price elasticities of demand, 
obtained from various studies, for a range of goods:
Eggs	
0.1
Healthcare	
0.2
Rice	
0.5
Housing 	
0.7
Beef	
1.6
Restaurant Meals	
2.3
Mountain Dew	
4.4
These kinds of numbers are fun to think about, and they can be 
useful when comparing markets.
	
Nonetheless, one should take these estimates with a grain of 
salt. One reason is that the statistical techniques used to obtain 
them require some assumptions about the world, and these 
assumptions might not be true in practice. (The details of these 
techniques are beyond the scope of this book, but you will encoun-
ter them if you take a course in econometrics.) Another reason is 
that the price elasticity of demand need not be the same at all 
points on a demand curve, as we will see shortly in the case of a 
linear demand curve. For both reasons, you should not be surprised 
if different studies report different price elasticities of demand for 
the same good.
occurs as the price elasticity of demand approaches infinity and the demand curve 
becomes horizontal, reflecting the fact that very small changes in the price lead to 
huge changes in the quantity demanded.
Finally, if you have trouble keeping straight the terms elastic and inelastic, here’s 
a memory trick for you: Inelastic curves, such as in panel (a) of Figure 1, look like 
the letter I. This is not a deep insight, but it might help on your next exam.
Total Revenue and the Price Elasticity of Demand
When studying changes in supply or demand in a market, one variable we often 
want to study is total revenue, the amount paid by buyers and received by sellers 
of the good. In any market, total revenue is P 3 Q, the price of the good times the 
quantity of the good sold. We can show total revenue graphically, as in Figure 2. 
The height of the box under the demand curve is P, and the width is Q. The area 
of this box, P 3 Q, equals the total revenue in this market. In Figure 2, where 
P = $4 and Q = 100, total revenue is $4 3 100, or $400.
How does total revenue change as one moves along the demand curve? The 
answer depends on the price elasticity of demand. If demand is inelastic, as in panel 
(a) of Figure 3, then an increase in the price causes an increase in total revenue. Here 
an increase in price from $4 to $5 causes the quantity demanded to fall from 100 to 
90, so total revenue rises from $400 to $450. An increase in price raises P 3 Q because 
the fall in Q is proportionately smaller than the rise in P. In other words, the extra 
revenue from selling units at a higher price (represented by area A in the figure) more 
than offsets the decline in revenue from selling fewer units (represented by area B).
total revenue
the amount paid by 
buyers and received 
by sellers of a good, 
computed as the price 
of the good times the 
quantity sold
 A Few Elasticities from the Real World

95
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
$4
Demand
Quantity
Q
P
0
Price
P  Q  $400
(revenue)
100
Total Revenue
The total amount paid by buyers, and 
received as revenue by sellers, equals 
the area of the box under the demand 
curve, P 3 Q. Here, at a price of $4, the 
quantity demanded is 100, and total 
revenue is $400.
Figure 2
How Total Revenue 
Changes When Price 
Changes
Figure 3
The impact of a price change on total revenue (the product of price and quantity) 
depends on the elasticity of demand. In panel (a), the demand curve is inelastic. In 
this case, an increase in the price leads to a decrease in quantity demanded that is 
proportionately smaller, so total revenue increases. Here an increase in the price from 
$4 to $5 causes the quantity demanded to fall from 100 to 90. Total revenue rises from 
$400 to $450. In panel (b), the demand curve is elastic. In this case, an increase in the 
price leads to a decrease in quantity demanded that is proportionately larger, so total 
revenue decreases. Here an increase in the price from $4 to $5 causes the quantity 
demanded to fall from 100 to 70. Total revenue falls from $400 to $350.
$4
$5
Price
Quantity
A
B
0
100
90
Demand
$4
$5
Price
Quantity
A
B
0
100
70
Demand
(a) The Case of Inelastic Demand
(b) The Case of Elastic Demand
1. When the demand
curve is inelastic. . .
1. When the demand
curve is elastic. . .
3. . . . is greater than the lost revenue
from selling fewer units.
3. . . . is less than the lost revenue
from selling fewer units.
2. . . . the extra revenue from
selling at a higher price. . .
2. . . . the extra revenue from
selling at a higher price. . .

96
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
We obtain the opposite result if demand is elastic: An increase in the price 
causes a decrease in total revenue. In panel (b) of Figure 3, for instance, when the 
price rises from $4 to $5, the quantity demanded falls from 100 to 70, so total rev-
enue falls from $400 to $350. Because demand is elastic, the reduction in the quan-
tity demanded is so great that it more than offsets the increase in the price. That is, 
an increase in price reduces P 3 Q because the fall in Q is proportionately greater 
than the rise in P. In this case, the extra revenue from selling units at a higher price 
(area A) is smaller than the decline in revenue from selling fewer units (area B).
The examples in this figure illustrate some general rules:
• 	 When demand is inelastic (a price elasticity less than 1), price and total  
revenue move in the same direction.
• 	 When demand is elastic (a price elasticity greater than 1), price and total  
revenue move in opposite directions.
• 	 If demand is unit elastic (a price elasticity exactly equal to 1), total revenue 
remains constant when the price changes.
Elasticity and Total Revenue along a Linear  
Demand Curve
Let’s examine how elasticity varies along a linear demand curve, as shown in 
­Figure 4. We know that a straight line has a constant slope. Slope is defined as 
Elasticity of a Linear Demand Curve
The slope of a linear demand curve is constant, but its elasticity 
is not. The demand schedule in the table was used to calculate 
the price elasticity of demand by the midpoint method. At points 
with a low price and high quantity, the demand curve is inelastic. 
At points with a high price and low quantity, the demand curve 
is elastic.
Figure 4
5
6
$7
4
1
2
3
Quantity
12
2
4
6
8
10
14
0
Price
Elasticity is
larger
than 1.
Elasticity is
smaller
than 1.
	
	
	
	
Percentage	
Percentage 
	
	
	
Total Revenue 	
Change	
Change 
	Price	
Quantity	
(Price × Quantity)	
in Price	
in Quantity	
Elasticity	
Description
	 $7	
  0	
$  0	
  15	
200	
13.0	
Elastic
	   6	
  2	
  12	
  18	
  67	
  3.7	
Elastic
	   5	
  4	
  20	
  22	
  40	
  1.8	
Elastic
	   4	
  6	
  24	
  29	
  29	
  1.0	
Unit elastic
	   3	
  8	
  24	
  40	
  22	
  0.6	
Inelastic
	   2	
10	
  20	
  67	
  18	
  0.3	
Inelastic
	   1	
12	
  12	
200	
  15	
  0.1	
Inelastic
	   0	
14	
    0

97
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
“rise over run,” which here is the ratio of the change in price (“rise”) to the change 
in quantity (“run”). This particular demand curve’s slope is constant because each 
$1 increase in price causes the same two-unit decrease in the quantity demanded. 
Even though the slope of a linear demand curve is constant, the elasticity is not. 
This is true because the slope is the ratio of changes in the two variables, whereas 
the elasticity is the ratio of percentage changes in the two variables. You can see 
this by looking at the table in Figure 4, which shows the demand schedule for the 
linear demand curve in the graph. The table uses the midpoint method to calcu-
late the price elasticity of demand. At points with a low price and high quantity, 
the demand curve is inelastic. At points with a high price and low quantity, the 
demand curve is elastic.
The table also presents total revenue at each point on the demand curve. These 
numbers illustrate the relationship between total revenue and elasticity. When the 
price is $1, for instance, demand is inelastic, and a price increase to $2 raises total 
revenue. When the price is $5, demand is elastic, and a price increase to $6 reduces 
total revenue. Between $3 and $4, demand is exactly unit elastic, and total revenue 
is the same at these two prices.
The linear demand curve illustrates that the price elasticity of demand need not 
be the same at all points on a demand curve. A constant elasticity is possible, but 
it is not always the case.
Other Demand Elasticities 
In addition to the price elasticity of demand, economists use other elasticities to 
describe the behavior of buyers in a market. 
The Income Elasticity of Demand   The income elasticity of demand mea-
sures how the quantity demanded changes as consumer income changes. It is 
calculated as the percentage change in quantity demanded divided by the per-
centage change in income. That is,
Income elasticity of demand = Percentage change in quantity demanded .
	
Percentage change in income
As we discussed in Chapter 4, most goods are normal goods: Higher income raises 
the quantity demanded. Because quantity demanded and income move in the 
same direction, normal goods have positive income elasticities. A few goods, such 
as bus rides, are inferior goods: Higher income lowers the quantity demanded. 
Because quantity demanded and income move in opposite directions, inferior 
goods have negative income elasticities.
Even among normal goods, income elasticities vary substantially in size. 
Necessities, such as food and clothing, tend to have small income elasticities 
because consumers choose to buy some of these goods even when their incomes 
are low. Luxuries, such as caviar and diamonds, tend to have large income elas-
ticities because consumers feel that they can do without these goods altogether if 
their incomes are too low. 
The Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand   The cross-price elasticity of demand 
measures how the quantity demanded of one good responds to a change in the price 
of another good. It is calculated as the percentage change in quantity demanded of 
good 1 divided by the percentage change in the price of good 2. That is,
Cross-price elasticity of demand = Percentage change in quantity demanded of good 1.
	
Percentage change in the price of good 2
income elasticity  
of demand
a measure of how much 
the quantity demanded 
of a good responds to 
a change in consumers’ 
income, computed as 
the percentage change 
in quantity demanded 
divided by the percentage 
change in income
cross-price elasticity 
of demand
a measure of how much 
the quantity demanded 
of one good responds to 
a change in the price of 
another good, computed as 
the percentage change in 
quantity demanded of the 
first good divided by the 
percentage change in the 
price of the second good

98
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Whether the cross-price elasticity is a positive or negative number depends on 
whether the two goods are substitutes or complements. As we discussed in ­Chapter 
4, substitutes are goods that are typically used in place of one another, such as 
hamburgers and hot dogs. An increase in hot dog prices induces people to grill 
hamburgers instead. Because the price of hot dogs and the quantity of hamburgers 
demanded move in the same direction, the cross-price elasticity is positive. Con-
versely, complements are goods that are typically used together, such as computers 
and software. In this case, the cross-price elasticity is negative, indicating that an 
increase in the price of computers reduces the quantity of software demanded.
Quick Quiz  Define the price elasticity of demand. • Explain the relationship 
between total revenue and the price elasticity of demand.
The Elasticity of Supply
When we introduced supply in Chapter 4, we noted that producers of a good offer to 
sell more of it when the price of the good rises. To turn from qualitative to quantita-
tive statements about quantity supplied, we once again use the concept of elasticity.
The Price Elasticity of Supply and Its Determinants
The law of supply states that higher prices raise the quantity supplied. The price 
elasticity of supply measures how much the quantity supplied responds to 
changes in the price. Supply of a good is said to be elastic if the quantity supplied 
responds substantially to changes in the price. Supply is said to be inelastic if the 
quantity supplied responds only slightly to changes in the price.
The price elasticity of supply depends on the flexibility of sellers to change the 
amount of the good they produce. For example, beachfront land has an inelastic 
supply because it is almost impossible to produce more of it. By contrast, manu-
factured goods, such as books, cars, and televisions, have elastic supplies because 
firms that produce them can run their factories longer in response to a higher price.
In most markets, a key determinant of the price elasticity of supply is the time 
period being considered. Supply is usually more elastic in the long run than in 
the short run. Over short periods of time, firms cannot easily change the size of 
their factories to make more or less of a good. Thus, in the short run, the quantity 
supplied is not very responsive to the price. By contrast, over longer periods, 
firms can build new factories or close old ones. In addition, new firms can enter a 
market, and old firms can shut down. Thus, in the long run, the quantity supplied 
can respond substantially to price changes.
Computing the Price Elasticity of Supply
Now that we have a general understanding about the price elasticity of supply, 
let’s be more precise. Economists compute the price elasticity of supply as the 
percentage change in the quantity supplied divided by the percentage change in 
the price. That is, 
Price elasticity of supply = Percentage change in quantity supplied .
	
Percentage change in price
For example, suppose that an increase in the price of milk from $2.85 to $3.15 a 
gallon raises the amount that dairy farmers produce from 9,000 to 11,000 gallons 
price elasticity of 
supply
a measure of how much 
the quantity supplied of 
a good responds to a 
change in the price of 
that good, computed as 
the percentage change in 
quantity supplied divided 
by the percentage change 
in price

99
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
per month. Using the midpoint method, we calculate the percentage change in 
price as
Percentage change in price = (3.15 – 2.85) / 3.00 × 100 = 10 percent.
Similarly, we calculate the percentage change in quantity supplied as
Percentage change in quantity supplied = (11,000 – 9,000) / 10,000 × 100 = 20 percent.
In this case, the price elasticity of supply is 
Price elasticity of supply =  20 percent = 2.0.
	
    10 percent
In this example, the elasticity of 2 indicates that the quantity supplied changes 
proportionately twice as much as the price.
The Variety of Supply Curves
Because the price elasticity of supply measures the responsiveness of quantity sup-
plied to the price, it is reflected in the appearance of the supply curve. Figure 5 shows 
five cases. In the extreme case of a zero elasticity, as shown in panel (a), supply is 
perfectly inelastic, and the supply curve is vertical. In this case, the quantity supplied 
is the same regardless of the price. As the elasticity rises, the supply curve gets flat-
ter, which shows that the quantity supplied responds more to changes in the price. 
At the opposite extreme, shown in panel (e), supply is perfectly elastic. This occurs 
as the price elasticity of supply approaches infinity and the supply curve becomes 
horizontal, meaning that very small changes in the price lead to very large changes 
in the quantity supplied.
In some markets, the elasticity of supply is not constant but varies over the 
supply curve. Figure 6 shows a typical case for an industry in which firms have 
factories with a limited capacity for production. For low levels of quantity sup-
plied, the elasticity of supply is high, indicating that firms respond substantially 
to changes in the price. In this region, firms have capacity for production that is 
not being used, such as plants and equipment idle for all or part of the day. Small 
increases in price make it profitable for firms to begin using this idle capacity. As 
the quantity supplied rises, firms begin to reach capacity. Once capacity is fully 
used, increasing production further requires the construction of new plants. To 
induce firms to incur this extra expense, the price must rise substantially, so sup-
ply becomes less elastic.
Figure 6 presents a numerical example of this phenomenon. When the price 
rises from $3 to $4 (a 29 percent increase, according to the midpoint method), the 
quantity supplied rises from 100 to 200 (a 67 percent increase). Because quantity 
supplied changes proportionately more than the price, the supply curve has elas-
ticity greater than 1. By contrast, when the price rises from $12 to $15 (a 22 percent 
increase), the quantity supplied rises from 500 to 525 (a 5 percent increase). In this 
case, quantity supplied moves proportionately less than the price, so the elasticity 
is less than 1.
Quick Quiz  Define the price elasticity of supply. • Explain why the price elasticity 
of supply might be different in the long run than in the short run.

100
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
The price elasticity of supply determines whether the supply curve is steep or flat. 
Note that all percentage changes are calculated using the midpoint method.
The Price Elasticity of Supply
Figure 5
100
110
100
125
(a) Perfectly Inelastic Supply: Elasticity Equals 0
$5
4
Supply
Quantity
100
0
(b) Inelastic Supply: Elasticity Is Less Than 1
$5
4
Quantity
0
(c) Unit Elastic Supply: Elasticity Equals 1
$5
4
Quantity
0
Price
1. An
increase
in price . . .
2. . . . leaves the quantity supplied unchanged.
2.  . . . leads to a 22% increase in quantity supplied.
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
Price
Price
2. . . . leads to a 10% increase in quantity supplied.
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
(d) Elastic Supply: Elasticity Is Greater Than 1
$5
4
Quantity
0
Price
(e) Perfectly Elastic Supply: Elasticity Equals Inﬁnity
$4
Quantity
0
Price
Supply
1. A 22%
increase
in price . . .
2. . . . leads to a 67% increase in quantity supplied.
3. At a price below $4,
quantity supplied is zero.
Supply
Supply
100
200
Supply
2. At exactly $4,
producers will
supply any quantity.
1. At any price
above $4, quantity
supplied is inﬁnite.

101
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
How the Price Elasticity of Supply Can Vary
Because firms often have a maximum capacity for 
production, the elasticity of supply may be very high 
at low levels of quantity supplied and very low at high 
levels of quantity supplied. Here an increase in price 
from $3 to $4 increases the quantity supplied from 100 
to 200. Because the 67 percent increase in quantity 
supplied (computed using the midpoint method) is 
larger than the 29 percent increase in price, the supply 
curve is elastic in this range. By contrast, when the 
price rises from $12 to $15, the quantity supplied rises 
only from 500 to 525. Because the 5 percent increase in 
quantity supplied is smaller than the 22 percent increase 
in price, the supply curve is inelastic in this range.
Figure 6
$15
12
3
Quantity
100
200
500
0
Price
525
Elasticity is small
(less than 1).
Elasticity is large
(greater than 1).
4
Three Applications of Supply, Demand, and Elasticity
Can good news for farming be bad news for farmers? Why did OPEC fail to keep 
the price of oil high? Does drug interdiction increase or decrease drug-related 
crime? At first, these questions might seem to have little in common. Yet all three 
questions are about markets, and all markets are subject to the forces of supply 
and demand. Here we apply the versatile tools of supply, demand, and elasticity 
to answer these seemingly complex questions.
Can Good News for Farming Be Bad News  
for Farmers?
Imagine yourself as a Kansas wheat farmer. Because you earn all your income 
from selling wheat, you devote much effort to making your land as productive 
as possible. You monitor weather and soil conditions, check your fields for pests 
and disease, and study the latest advances in farm technology. You know that the 
more wheat you grow, the more you will have to sell after the harvest, and the 
higher will be your income and your standard of living. 
One day, Kansas State University announces a major discovery. Researchers 
in its agronomy department have devised a new hybrid of wheat that raises the 
amount farmers can produce from each acre of land by 20 percent. How should 
you react to this news? Does this discovery make you better off or worse off than 
you were before?
Recall from Chapter 4 that we answer such questions in three steps. First, we 
examine whether the supply or demand curve shifts. Second, we consider in 
which direction the curve shifts. Third, we use the supply-and-demand diagram 
to see how the market equilibrium changes.

102
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
In this case, the discovery of the new hybrid affects the supply curve. Because 
the hybrid increases the amount of wheat that can be produced on each acre 
of land, farmers are now willing to supply more wheat at any given price. In 
other words, the supply curve shifts to the right. The demand curve remains the 
same because consumers’ desire to buy wheat products at any given price is not 
affected by the introduction of a new hybrid. Figure 7 shows an example of such 
a change. When the supply curve shifts from S1 to S2, the quantity of wheat sold 
increases from 100 to 110, and the price of wheat falls from $3 to $2.
Does this discovery make farmers better off? As a first cut to answering  
this question, consider what happens to the total revenue received by farmers. 
Farmers’ total revenue is P 3 Q, the price of the wheat times the quantity sold. The 
discovery affects farmers in two conflicting ways. The hybrid allows farmers to 
produce more wheat (Q rises), but now each bushel of wheat sells for less (P falls). 
Whether total revenue rises or falls depends on the elasticity of demand. 
In practice, the demand for basic foodstuffs such as wheat is usually inelastic 
because these items are relatively inexpensive and have few good substitutes. 
When the demand curve is inelastic, as it is in Figure 7, a decrease in price causes 
total revenue to fall. You can see this in the figure: The price of wheat falls sub-
stantially, whereas the quantity of wheat sold rises only slightly. Total revenue 
falls from $300 to $220. Thus, the discovery of the new hybrid lowers the total 
revenue that farmers receive from the sale of their crops. 
If farmers are made worse off by the discovery of this new hybrid, one might 
wonder why they adopt it. The answer goes to the heart of how competitive mar-
kets work. Because each farmer is only a small part of the market for wheat, he or 
she takes the price of wheat as given. For any given price of wheat, it is better to 
use the new hybrid to produce and sell more wheat. Yet when all farmers do this, 
the supply of wheat increases, the price falls, and farmers are worse off. 
Although this example may at first seem hypothetical, it helps to explain a 
major change in the U.S. economy over the past century. Two hundred years ago, 
most Americans lived on farms. Knowledge about farm methods was sufficiently 
An Increase in Supply in the Market for Wheat
When an advance in farm technology increases the 
supply of wheat from S1 to S2, the price of wheat 
falls. Because the demand for wheat is inelastic, 
the increase in the quantity sold from 100 to 110 is 
proportionately smaller than the decrease in  
the price from $3 to $2. As a result, farmers’  
total revenue falls from $300 ($3 3 100) to 
$220 ($2 3 110).
Figure 7
$3
2
Quantity of
Wheat
100
0
Price of
Wheat
3.  . . . and a proportionately smaller increase
in quantity sold. As a result, revenue falls
from $300 to $220.  
110
Demand
S1
S2
2. . . . leads
to a large fall
in price . . .
1. When demand is inelastic,
an increase in supply . . .

103
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
primitive that most Americans had to be farmers to produce enough food to feed 
the nation’s population. Yet over time, advances in farm technology increased 
the amount of food that each farmer could produce. This increase in food supply, 
together with inelastic food demand, caused farm revenues to fall, which in turn 
encouraged people to leave farming.
A few numbers show the magnitude of this historic change. As recently as 1950, 
10 million people worked on farms in the United States, representing 17 percent 
of the labor force. Today, fewer than 3 million people work on farms, or 2 percent 
of the labor force. This change coincided with tremendous advances in farm pro-
ductivity: Despite the 70 percent drop in the number of farmers, U.S. farms now 
produce more than twice the output of crops and livestock that they did in 1950.
This analysis of the market for farm products also helps to explain a seeming 
paradox of public policy: Certain farm programs try to help farmers by induc-
ing them not to plant crops on all of their land. The purpose of these programs 
is to reduce the supply of farm products and thereby raise prices. With inelastic 
demand for their products, farmers as a group receive greater total revenue if 
they supply a smaller crop to the market. No single farmer would choose to leave 
his land fallow on his own because each takes the market price as given. But if all 
farmers do so together, each of them can be better off.
When analyzing the effects of farm technology or farm policy, it is important to 
keep in mind that what is good for farmers is not necessarily good for society as a 
whole. Improvement in farm technology can be bad for farmers because it makes 
farmers increasingly unnecessary, but it is surely good for consumers who pay 
less for food. Similarly, a policy aimed at reducing the supply of farm products 
may raise the incomes of farmers, but it does so at the expense of consumers.
Why Did OPEC Fail to Keep the Price of Oil High?
Many of the most disruptive events for the world’s economies over the past sev-
eral decades have originated in the world market for oil. In the 1970s, members 
of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) decided to raise 
the world price of oil to increase their incomes. These countries accomplished this 
goal by jointly reducing the amount of oil they supplied. From 1973 to 1974, the 
price of oil (adjusted for overall inflation) rose more than 50 percent. Then, a few 
years later, OPEC did the same thing again. From 1979 to 1981, the price of oil 
approximately doubled. 
Doonesbury © 1972 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted  
with permission of Universal UCLICK. All rights 
reserved.

104
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Yet OPEC found it difficult to maintain a high price. From 1982 to 1985, the 
price of oil steadily declined about 10 percent per year. Dissatisfaction and disar-
ray soon prevailed among the OPEC countries. In 1986, cooperation among OPEC 
members completely broke down, and the price of oil plunged 45 percent. In 1990, 
the price of oil (adjusted for overall inflation) was back to where it began in 1970, 
and it stayed at that low level throughout most of the 1990s. (In the first decade of 
the 21st century, the price of oil fluctuated substantially once again, but the main 
driving force was changes in world demand rather than OPEC supply restrictions. 
Early in the decade, oil demand and prices spiked up, in part because of a large 
and rapidly growing Chinese economy. Prices plunged in 2008–2009 as the world 
economy fell into a deep recession and then started rising once again as the world 
economy started to recover.)  
The OPEC episodes of the 1970s and 1980s show how supply and demand 
can behave differently in the short run and in the long run. In the short run, both 
the supply and demand for oil are relatively inelastic. Supply is inelastic because 
the quantity of known oil reserves and the capacity for oil extraction cannot be 
changed quickly. Demand is inelastic because buying habits do not respond 
immediately to changes in price. Thus, as panel (a) of Figure 8 shows, the short-
run supply and demand curves are steep. When the supply of oil shifts from S1 to 
S2, the price increase from P1 to P2 is large.
The situation is very different in the long run. Over long periods of time, 
producers of oil outside OPEC respond to high prices by increasing oil explora-
tion and by building new extraction capacity. Consumers respond with greater 
conservation, such as by replacing old inefficient cars with newer efficient ones. 
Thus, as panel (b) of Figure 8 shows, the long-run supply and demand curves are 
When the supply of oil falls, the response depends on the time horizon. In the short 
run, supply and demand are relatively inelastic, as in panel (a). Thus, when the supply 
curve shifts from S1 to S2, the price rises substantially. By contrast, in the long run, 
supply and demand are relatively elastic, as in panel (b). In this case, the same size 
shift in the supply curve (S1 to S2) causes a smaller increase in the price.
A Reduction in Supply in the World Market for Oil
Figure 8
P2
P1
Quantity of Oil
0
Price of Oil
Demand
S2
S1
(a) The Oil Market in the Short Run
P2
P1
Quantity of Oil
0
Price of Oil
Demand
S2
S1
(b) The Oil Market in the Long Run
2. . . . leads
to a large
increase
in price.
1. In the long run, when
supply and demand are
elastic, a shift in
supply . . .
2. . . . leads
to a small
increase
in price.
1. In the short run, when supply and
demand are inelastic, a shift in
supply . . .

105
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
more elastic. In the long run, the shift in the supply curve from S1 to S2 causes a 
much smaller increase in the price.
This analysis shows why OPEC succeeded in maintaining a high price of oil 
only in the short run. When OPEC countries agreed to reduce their production 
of oil, they shifted the supply curve to the left. Even though each OPEC member 
sold less oil, the price rose by so much in the short run that OPEC incomes rose. 
By contrast, in the long run, when supply and demand are more elastic, the same 
reduction in supply, measured by the horizontal shift in the supply curve, caused 
a smaller increase in the price. Thus, OPEC’s coordinated reduction in supply 
proved less profitable in the long run. The cartel learned that raising prices is 
easier in the short run than in the long run.
Does Drug Interdiction Increase or Decrease 
­Drug-Related Crime?
A persistent problem facing our society is the use of illegal drugs, such as heroin, 
cocaine, ecstasy, and crack. Drug use has several adverse effects. One is that drug 
dependence can ruin the lives of drug users and their families. Another is that drug 
addicts often turn to robbery and other violent crimes to obtain the money needed 
to support their habit. To discourage the use of illegal drugs, the U.S. government 
devotes billions of dollars each year to reduce the flow of drugs into the country. 
Let’s use the tools of supply and demand to examine this policy of drug interdiction.
Suppose the government increases the number of federal agents devoted to 
the war on drugs. What happens in the market for illegal drugs? As is usual, 
we answer this question in three steps. First, we consider whether the supply or 
demand curve shifts. Second, we consider the direction of the shift. Third, we see 
how the shift affects the equilibrium price and quantity.
Although the purpose of drug interdiction is to reduce drug use, its direct impact 
is on the sellers of drugs rather than the buyers. When the government stops some 
drugs from entering the country and arrests more smugglers, it raises the cost of 
selling drugs and, therefore, reduces the quantity of drugs supplied at any given 
price. The demand for drugs—the amount buyers want at any given price—is not 
changed. As panel (a) of Figure 9 shows, interdiction shifts the supply curve to the 
left from S1 to S2 and leaves the demand curve the same. The equilibrium price of 
drugs rises from P1 to P2, and the equilibrium quantity falls from Q1 to Q2. The fall 
in the equilibrium quantity shows that drug interdiction does reduce drug use.
But what about the amount of drug-related crime? To answer this question, 
consider the total amount that drug users pay for the drugs they buy. Because 
few drug addicts are likely to break their destructive habits in response to a 
higher price, it is likely that the demand for drugs is inelastic, as it is drawn in the 
figure. If demand is inelastic, then an increase in price raises total revenue in the 
drug market. That is, because drug interdiction raises the price of drugs propor-
tionately more than it reduces drug use, it raises the total amount of money that 
drug users pay for drugs. Addicts who already had to steal to support their habits 
would have an even greater need for quick cash. Thus, drug interdiction could 
increase drug-related crime. 
Because of this adverse effect of drug interdiction, some analysts argue for alter-
native approaches to the drug problem. Rather than trying to reduce the ­supply 
of drugs, policymakers might try to reduce the demand by pursuing a policy of 
drug education. Successful drug education has the effects shown in panel (b) of 
Figure 9. The demand curve shifts to the left from D1 to D2. As a result, the equi-
librium quantity falls from Q1 to Q2, and the equilibrium price falls from P1 to P2. 

106
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Drug interdiction reduces the supply of drugs from S1 to S2, as in panel (a). If the 
demand for drugs is inelastic, then the total amount paid by drug users rises, even 
as the amount of drug use falls. By contrast, drug education reduces the demand for 
drugs from D1 to D2, as in panel (b). Because both price and quantity fall, the amount 
paid by drug users falls.
Policies to Reduce the Use of Illegal Drugs
Figure 9
P2
P1
Quantity of Drugs
0
Q2
Q1
Price of
Drugs
Demand
S2
S1
Q2
Q1
(a) Drug Interdiction
Quantity of Drugs
0
Price of
Drugs
Supply
D2
D1
(b) Drug Education
3. . . . and reduces 
the quantity sold.
2. . . . which
raises the
price . . .
2. . . . which
reduces the 
price . . .
P1
P2
1. Drug interdiction reduces
the supply of drugs . . .
1. Drug education reduces
the demand for drugs . . .
3. . . . and reduces 
the quantity sold.
Total revenue, which is price times quantity, also falls. Thus, in contrast to drug 
interdiction, drug education can reduce both drug use and drug-related crime.
Advocates of drug interdiction might argue that the long-run effects of this 
policy are different from the short-run effects because the elasticity of demand 
depends on the time horizon. The demand for drugs is probably inelastic over 
short periods because higher prices do not substantially affect drug use by estab-
lished addicts. But demand may be more elastic over longer periods because 
higher prices would discourage experimentation with drugs among the young 
and, over time, lead to fewer drug addicts. In this case, drug interdiction would 
increase drug-related crime in the short run while decreasing it in the long run.
Quick Quiz  How might a drought that destroys half of all farm crops be good for 
farmers? If such a drought is good for farmers, why don’t farmers destroy their own 
crops in the absence of a drought?
Conclusion
According to an old quip, even a parrot can become an economist simply by learn-
ing to say “supply and demand.” These last two chapters should have convinced 
you that there is much truth in this statement. The tools of supply and demand 
allow you to analyze many of the most important events and policies that shape 
the economy. You are now well on your way to becoming an economist (or at least 
a well-educated parrot).

107
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
Summary
• The price elasticity of demand measures how 
much the quantity demanded responds to 
­changes in the price. Demand tends to be more 
elastic if close substitutes are available, if the 
good is a luxury rather than a necessity, if the 
market is narrowly defined, or if buyers have 
substantial time to react to a price change.
• The price elasticity of demand is calculated as 
the percentage change in quantity demanded 
divided by the percentage change in price. If 
quantity demanded moves proportionately less 
than the price, then the elasticity is less than 1, 
and demand is said to be inelastic. If quantity 
demanded moves proportionately more than 
the price, then the elasticity is greater than 1, 
and demand is said to be elastic.
• Total revenue, the total amount paid for a good, 
equals the price of the good times the quantity 
sold. For inelastic demand curves, total revenue 
moves in the same direction as the price. For 
elastic demand curves, total revenue moves in 
the opposite direction as the price.
• The income elasticity of demand measures 
how much the quantity demanded responds to 
changes in consumers’ income. The cross-price 
elasticity of demand measures how much the 
quantity demanded of one good responds to 
changes in the price of another good. 
• The price elasticity of supply measures how 
much the quantity supplied responds to changes 
in the price. This elasticity often depends on the 
time horizon under consideration. In most mar-
kets, supply is more elastic in the long run than 
in the short run.
• The price elasticity of supply is calculated as the 
percentage change in quantity supplied divided 
by the percentage change in price. If quantity 
supplied moves proportionately less than the 
price, then the elasticity is less than 1, and sup-
ply is said to be inelastic. If quantity supplied 
moves proportionately more than the price, then 
the elasticity is greater than 1, and supply is said 
to be elastic.
• The tools of supply and demand can be applied 
in many different kinds of markets. This chap-
ter uses them to analyze the market for wheat, 
the market for oil, and the market for illegal 
drugs.
Key Concepts
elasticity, p. 90
price elasticity of demand, p. 90
total revenue, p. 94
income elasticity of demand, p. 97
cross-price elasticity of  
demand, p. 97
price elasticity of supply, p. 98
Questions for Review
	 1.	 Define the price elasticity of demand and the 
income elasticity of demand.
	 2.	 List and explain the four determinants of the 
price elasticity of demand discussed in the 
chapter.
	 3.	 What is the main advantage of using the 
midpoint method for calculating elasticity?
	 4.	 If the elasticity is greater than 1, is demand 
elastic or inelastic? If the elasticity equals 0,  
is demand perfectly elastic or perfectly 
inelastic?
	 5.	 On a supply-and-demand diagram, show 
equilibrium price, equilibrium quantity, and 
the total revenue received by producers.
	 6.	 If demand is elastic, how will an increase in 
price change total revenue? Explain.
	 7.	 What do we call a good whose income 
elasticity is less than 0?
	 8.	 How is the price elasticity of supply calculated? 
Explain what it measures.
	 9.	 What is the price elasticity of supply of Picasso 
paintings?

108
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
	10.	 Is the price elasticity of supply usually larger in 
the short run or in the long run? Why?
	11.	 How can elasticity help explain why drug 
interdiction could reduce the supply of drugs, 
yet possibly increase drug-related crime?
Problems and Applications
	 1.	 For each of the following pairs of goods, which 
good would you expect to have more elastic 
demand and why?
a.	 required textbooks or mystery novels
b.	Beethoven recordings or classical music 
recordings in general
c.	 subway rides during the next six months or 
subway rides during the next five years
d.	root beer or water
	 2.	 Suppose that business travelers and vacationers 
have the following demand for airline tickets 
from New York to Boston:
	
	
Quantity Demanded	
Quantity Demanded 
	
Price	
(business travelers)	
(vacationers)
	
$150	
2,100 tickets	
1,000 tickets
	
  200	
2,000	
   800
	
  250	
1,900	
   600
	
  300	
1,800	
   400
a.	 As the price of tickets rises from $200 to 
$250, what is the price elasticity of demand 
for (i) business travelers and (ii) vacation-
ers? (Use the midpoint method in your 
calculations.)
b.	Why might vacationers have a different  
elasticity from business travelers?
	 3.	 Suppose the price elasticity of demand for  
heating oil is 0.2 in the short run and 0.7 in the 
long run. 
a.	 if the price of heating oil rises from $1.80  
to $2.20 per gallon, what happens to the 
quantity of heating oil demanded in the short 
run? In the long run? (Use the midpoint 
method in your calculations.)
b.	Why might this elasticity depend on the time 
horizon?
	 4.	 A price change causes the quantity demanded 
of a good to decrease by 30 percent, while  
the total revenue of that good increases by  
15 percent. Is the demand curve elastic or 
inelastic? Explain. 
	 5.	 The equilibrium price of coffee mugs rose sharply 
last month, but the equilibrium quantity was 
the same as ever. Three people tried to explain 
the situation. Which explanations could be 
right? Explain your logic.
Billy:	 Demand increased, but supply was 
totally inelastic.
Marian:	 Supply increased, but so did 
demand.
Valerie:	 Supply decreased, but demand was 
totally inelastic.
	 6.	 Suppose that your demand schedule for DVDs 
is as follows:
	
	
Quantity Demanded	
Quantity Demanded 
	
Price	
(income = $10,000)	
(income = $12,000)
	
$  8	
40 DVDs	
50 DVDs
	
  10	
32	
45
	
  12	
24	
30
	
  14	
16	
20
	
  16	
  8	
12
a.	 Use the midpoint method to calculate your 
price elasticity of demand as the price of 
DVDs increases from $8 to $10 if (i) your 
income is $10,000 and (ii) your income is 
$12,000.
b.	Calculate your income elasticity of demand 
as your income increases from $10,000 to 
$12,000 if (i) the price is $12 and (ii) the price 
is $16.
	 7.	 You have the following information about good 
X and good Y:
•	 Income elasticity of demand for good X: –3
•	 Cross-price elasticity of demand for good X 
with respect to the price of good Y: 2
Would an increase in income and a decrease in 
the price of good Y unambiguously decrease 
the demand for good X? Why or why not?
	 8.	 Maria has decided always to spend one-third of 
her income on clothing. 

109
CHAPTER 5    Elasticity and Its Application
a.	 What is her income elasticity of clothing 
demand? 
b.	What is her price elasticity of clothing 
demand?
c.	 If Maria’s tastes change and she decides 
to spend only one-fourth of her income 
on clothing, how does her demand curve 
change? What is her income elasticity and 
price elasticity now?
	 9.	 The New York Times reported (Feb. 17, 1996) that 
subway ridership declined after a fare increase: 
“There were nearly four million fewer riders 
in December 1995, the first full month after the 
price of a token increased 25 cents to $1.50, than 
in the previous December, a 4.3 percent decline.” 
a.	 Use these data to estimate the price elasticity 
of demand for subway rides. 
b.	According to your estimate, what happens 
to the Transit Authority’s revenue when the 
fare rises? 
c.	 Why might your estimate of the elasticity be 
unreliable?
	10.	 Two drivers—Tom and Jerry—each drive up to 
a gas station. Before looking at the price, each 
places an order. Tom says, “I’d like 10 gallons 
of gas.” Jerry says, “I’d like $10 worth of gas.” 
What is each driver’s price elasticity of demand?
	11.	 Consider public policy aimed at smoking. 
a.	 Studies indicate that the price elasticity of 
demand for cigarettes is about 0.4. If a pack  
of cigarettes currently costs $2 and the 
­government wants to reduce smoking by  
20 percent, by how much should it increase 
the price?
b.	If the government permanently increases 
the price of cigarettes, will the policy have a 
larger effect on smoking one year from now 
or five years from now?
c.	 Studies also find that teenagers have a 
­higher price elasticity than do adults. Why 
might this be true?
	12.	 You are the curator of a museum. The 
museum is running short of funds, so you 
decide to increase revenue. Should you  
increase or decrease the price of admission? 
Explain.
	13.	 Pharmaceutical drugs have an inelastic 
demand, and computers have an elastic 
demand. Suppose that technological advance 
doubles the supply of both products (that is, 
the quantity supplied at each price is twice 
what it was). 
a.	 What happens to the equilibrium price and 
quantity in each market?
b.	Which product experiences a larger change 
in price?
c.	 Which product experiences a larger change 
in quantity?
d.	What happens to total consumer spending 
on each product?
	14.	 Several years ago, flooding along the Missouri 
and the Mississippi rivers destroyed thousands 
of acres of wheat.
a.	 Farmers whose crops were destroyed by the 
floods were much worse off, but farmers 
whose crops were not destroyed benefited 
from the floods. Why?
b.	What information would you need about the 
market for wheat to assess whether ­farmers 
as a group were hurt or helped by the 
floods?
	15.	 Explain why the following might be true:  
A drought around the world raises the total 
revenue that farmers receive from the sale of 
grain, but a drought only in Kansas reduces the 
total revenue that Kansas farmers receive. 
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.


111
6
Supply, Demand, and
    Government Policies
E
conomists have two roles. As scientists, they develop and test theories to 
explain the world around them. As policy advisers, they use their theo-
ries to help change the world for the better. The focus of the preceding 
two chapters has been scientific. We have seen how supply and demand 
determine the price of a good and the quantity of the good sold. We have also seen 
how various events shift supply and demand and thereby change the equilibrium 
price and quantity.
This chapter offers our first look at policy. Here we analyze various types of 
government policy using only the tools of supply and demand. As you will see, 
the analysis yields some surprising insights. Policies often have effects that their 
architects did not intend or anticipate.
We begin by considering policies that directly control prices. For example, 
rent-control laws dictate a maximum rent that landlords may charge tenants. 
Minimum-wage laws dictate the lowest wage that firms may pay workers. Price 

112
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
controls are usually enacted when policymakers believe that the market price of a 
good or service is unfair to buyers or sellers. Yet, as we will see, these policies can 
generate inequities of their own. 
After discussing price controls, we consider the impact of taxes. Policymakers 
use taxes to raise revenue for public purposes and to influence market outcomes. 
Although the prevalence of taxes in our economy is obvious, their effects are not. 
For example, when the government levies a tax on the amount that firms pay their 
workers, do the firms or the workers bear the burden of the tax? The answer is not 
at all clear—until we apply the powerful tools of supply and demand.
Controls on Prices
To see how price controls affect market outcomes, let’s look once again at the 
market for ice cream. As we saw in Chapter 4, if ice cream is sold in a competitive 
market free of government regulation, the price of ice cream adjusts to balance 
supply and demand: At the equilibrium price, the quantity of ice cream that buy-
ers want to buy exactly equals the quantity that sellers want to sell. To be concrete, 
suppose the equilibrium price is $3 per cone. 
Not everyone may be happy with the outcome of this free-market process. Let’s 
say the American Association of Ice-Cream Eaters complains that the $3 price is 
too high for everyone to enjoy a cone a day (their recommended daily allowance). 
Meanwhile, the National Organization of Ice-Cream Makers complains that the 
$3 price—the result of “cutthroat competition”—is too low and is depressing the 
incomes of its members. Each of these groups lobbies the government to pass laws 
that alter the market outcome by directly controlling the price of an ice-cream 
cone.
Because buyers of any good always want a lower price while sellers want a 
higher price, the interests of the two groups conflict. If the Ice-Cream Eaters are 
successful in their lobbying, the government imposes a legal maximum on the 
price at which ice-cream cones can be sold. Because the price is not allowed to rise 
above this level, the legislated maximum is called a price ceiling. By contrast, if 
the Ice-Cream Makers are successful, the government imposes a legal minimum 
on the price. Because the price cannot fall below this level, the legislated mini-
mum is called a price floor. Let us consider the effects of these policies in turn.
How Price Ceilings Affect Market Outcomes
When the government, moved by the complaints and campaign contributions of 
the Ice-Cream Eaters, imposes a price ceiling on the market for ice cream, two 
outcomes are possible. In panel (a) of Figure 1, the government imposes a price 
ceiling of $4 per cone. In this case, because the price that balances supply and 
demand ($3) is below the ceiling, the price ceiling is not binding. Market forces 
naturally move the economy to the equilibrium, and the price ceiling has no effect 
on the price or the quantity sold.
Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows the other, more interesting, possibility. In this case, 
the government imposes a price ceiling of $2 per cone. Because the equilibrium 
price of $3 is above the price ceiling, the ceiling is a binding constraint on the mar-
ket. The forces of supply and demand tend to move the price toward the equi-
librium price, but when the market price hits the ceiling, it can, by law, rise no 
further. Thus, the market price equals the price ceiling. At this price, the quantity 
of ice cream demanded (125 cones in the figure) exceeds the quantity supplied 
price ceiling
a legal maximum on the 
price at which a good can 
be sold
price floor
a legal minimum on the 
price at which a good can 
be sold

113
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
A Market with a Price 
Ceiling
Figure 1
In panel (a), the government imposes a price ceiling of $4. Because the price ceiling is 
above the equilibrium price of $3, the price ceiling has no effect, and the market can 
reach the equilibrium of supply and demand. In this equilibrium, quantity supplied 
and quantity demanded both equal 100 cones. In panel (b), the government imposes 
a price ceiling of $2. Because the price ceiling is below the equilibrium price of $3, 
the market price equals $2. At this price, 125 cones are demanded and only 75 are 
supplied, so there is a shortage of 50 cones.
(a) A Price Ceiling That Is Not Binding
$4
3
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
100
Equilibrium
quantity
(b) A Price Ceiling That Is Binding
$3
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
2
Price
ceiling
Demand
Supply
Price
ceiling
Shortage
75
Quantity
supplied
125
Quantity
demanded
Equilibrium
price
Equilibrium
price
Demand
Supply
(75 cones). There is a shortage: 50 people who want to buy ice cream at the going 
price are unable to do so. 
In response to this shortage, some mechanism for rationing ice cream will 
naturally develop. The mechanism could be long lines: Buyers who are willing 
to arrive early and wait in line get a cone, but those unwilling to wait do not. 
Alternatively, sellers could ration ice-cream cones according to their own personal 
biases, selling them only to friends, relatives, or members of their own racial or 
ethnic group. Notice that even though the price ceiling was motivated by a desire 
to help buyers of ice cream, not all buyers benefit from the policy. Some buyers 
do get to pay a lower price, although they may have to wait in line to do so, but 
other buyers cannot get any ice cream at all.
This example in the market for ice cream shows a general result: When the gov-
ernment imposes a binding price ceiling on a competitive market, a shortage of the good 
arises, and sellers must ration the scarce goods among the large number of potential buy-
ers. The rationing mechanisms that develop under price ceilings are rarely desir-
able. Long lines are inefficient because they waste buyers’ time. Discrimination 
according to seller bias is both inefficient (because the good does not necessarily 
go to the buyer who values it most highly) and potentially unfair. By contrast, the 
rationing mechanism in a free, competitive market is both efficient and imper-
sonal. When the market for ice cream reaches its equilibrium, anyone who wants 
to pay the market price can get a cone. Free markets ration goods with prices. 

114
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Lines at the Gas Pump
As we discussed in the preceding chapter, in 1973 the Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries (OPEC) raised the price of crude oil in world oil markets. 
Because crude oil is the major input used to make gasoline, the higher oil prices 
reduced the supply of gasoline. Long lines at gas stations became commonplace, 
and motorists often had to wait for hours to buy only a few gallons of gas.
What was responsible for the long gas lines? Most people blame OPEC. Surely, 
if OPEC had not raised the price of crude oil, the shortage of gasoline would not 
have occurred. Yet economists blame U.S. government regulations that limited 
the price oil companies could charge for gasoline.
Figure 2 shows what happened. As shown in panel (a), before OPEC raised the 
price of crude oil, the equilibrium price of gasoline, P1, was below the price ceil-
ing. The price regulation, therefore, had no effect. When the price of crude oil rose, 
however, the situation changed. The increase in the price of crude oil raised the 
cost of producing gasoline, and this reduced the supply of gasoline. As panel (b) 
shows, the supply curve shifted to the left from S1 to S2. In an unregulated market, 
this shift in supply would have raised the equilibrium price of gasoline from P1 
to P2, and no shortage would have resulted. Instead, the price ceiling prevented 
the price from rising to the equilibrium level. At the price ceiling, producers were 
Panel (a) shows the gasoline market when the price ceiling is not binding because 
the equilibrium price, P1, is below the ceiling. Panel (b) shows the gasoline market 
after an increase in the price of crude oil (an input into making gasoline) shifts the 
supply curve to the left from S1 to S2. In an unregulated market, the price would have 
risen from P1 to P2. The price ceiling, however, prevents this from happening. At the 
binding price ceiling, consumers are willing to buy QD, but producers of gasoline 
are willing to sell only QS. The difference between quantity demanded and quantity 
supplied, QD – QS, measures the gasoline shortage. 
The Market for Gasoline 
with a Price Ceiling
Figure 2
(a) The Price Ceiling on Gasoline Is Not Binding
Quantity of
Gasoline
0
Price of
Gasoline
(b) The Price Ceiling on Gasoline Is Binding
P2
P1
Quantity of
Gasoline
0
Price of
Gasoline
Q1
QD
Demand
S1
S2
Price ceiling
QS
4. . . . 
resulting
in a
shortage.
3. . . . the price
ceiling becomes
binding . . .
2. . . . but when
supply falls . . .
1. Initially,
the price
ceiling
is not
binding . . .
Price ceiling
P1
Q1
Demand
Supply, S1

115
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
willing to sell QS, and consumers were willing to buy QD. Thus, the shift in supply 
caused a severe shortage at the regulated price.
Eventually, the laws regulating the price of gasoline were repealed. Lawmakers 
came to understand that they were partly responsible for the many hours Ameri-
cans lost waiting in line to buy gasoline. Today, when the price of crude oil changes, 
the price of gasoline can adjust to bring supply and demand into equilibrium.  ■
Rent Control in the Short Run 
and the Long Run
One common example of a price ceiling is rent control. In many cities, the local 
government places a ceiling on rents that landlords may charge their tenants. The 
goal of this policy is to help the poor by making housing more affordable. Econo-
mists often criticize rent control, arguing that it is a highly inefficient way to help 
the poor raise their standard of living. One economist called rent control “the best 
way to destroy a city, other than bombing.”
The adverse effects of rent control are less apparent to the general population 
because these effects occur over many years. In the short run, landlords have a 
fixed number of apartments to rent, and they cannot adjust this number quickly as 
market conditions change. Moreover, the number of people searching for housing 
in a city may not be highly responsive to rents in the short run because people take 
time to adjust their housing arrangements. Therefore, the short-run supply and 
demand for housing are relatively inelastic. 
Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows the short-run effects of rent control on the ­housing 
market. As with any binding price ceiling, rent control causes a shortage. Yet because 
Rent Control in the 
Short Run and in the 
Long Run
Figure 3
Panel (a) shows the short-run effects of rent control: Because the supply and demand 
curves for apartments are relatively inelastic, the price ceiling imposed by a rent-
control law causes only a small shortage of housing. Panel (b) shows the long-run 
effects of rent control: Because the supply and demand curves for apartments are 
more elastic, rent control causes a large shortage.
(a) Rent Control in the Short Run
(supply and demand are inelastic)
(b) Rent Control in the Long Run
(supply and demand are elastic)
Quantity of
Apartments
0
Supply
Controlled rent
Shortage
Rental
Price of
Apartment
0
Rental
Price of
Apartment
Quantity of
Apartments
Demand
Supply
Controlled rent
Shortage
Demand

116
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
supply and demand are inelastic in the short run, the initial shortage caused by rent 
control is small. The primary effect in the short run is to reduce rents.
The long-run story is very different because the buyers and sellers of rental 
housing respond more to market conditions as time passes. On the supply side, 
landlords respond to low rents by not building new apartments and by failing to 
maintain existing ones. On the demand side, low rents encourage people to find 
their own apartments (rather than living with their parents or sharing apartments 
with roommates) and induce more people to move into a city. Therefore, both 
supply and demand are more elastic in the long run. 
Panel (b) of Figure 3 illustrates the housing market in the long run. When rent 
control depresses rents below the equilibrium level, the quantity of apartments 
supplied falls substantially, and the quantity of apartments demanded rises sub-
stantially. The result is a large shortage of housing.
In cities with rent control, landlords use various mechanisms to ration hous-
ing. Some landlords keep long waiting lists. Others give a preference to tenants 
without children. Still others discriminate on the basis of race. Sometimes apart-
ments are allocated to those willing to offer under-the-table payments to building 
superintendents. In essence, these bribes bring the total price of an apartment 
(including the bribe) closer to the equilibrium price.
To understand fully the effects of rent control, we have to remember one of the 
Ten Principles of Economics from Chapter 1: People respond to incentives. In free 
markets, landlords try to keep their buildings clean and safe because desirable 
apartments command higher prices. By contrast, when rent control creates short-
ages and waiting lists, landlords lose their incentive to respond to tenants’ con-
cerns. Why should a landlord spend money to maintain and improve the property 
when people are waiting to get in as it is? In the end, tenants get lower rents, but 
they also get lower-quality housing.
Policymakers often react to the effects of rent control by imposing additional 
regulations. For example, various laws make racial discrimination in housing ille-
gal and require landlords to provide minimally adequate living conditions. These 
laws, however, are difficult and costly to enforce. By contrast, when rent control 
is eliminated and a market for housing is regulated by the forces of competition, 
such laws are less necessary. In a free market, the price of housing adjusts to elimi-
nate the shortages that give rise to undesirable landlord behavior.  ■
How Price Floors Affect Market Outcomes
To examine the effects of another kind of government price control, let’s return 
to the market for ice cream. Imagine now that the government is persuaded by 
the pleas of the National Organization of Ice-Cream Makers whose members feel 
the $3 equilibrium price is too low. In this case, the government might institute a 
price floor. Price floors, like price ceilings, are an attempt by the government to 
maintain prices at other than equilibrium levels. Whereas a price ceiling places a 
legal maximum on prices, a price floor places a legal minimum.
When the government imposes a price floor on the ice-cream market, two out-
comes are possible. If the government imposes a price floor of $2 per cone when 
the equilibrium price is $3, we obtain the outcome in panel (a) of Figure 4. In this 
case, because the equilibrium price is above the floor, the price floor is not bind-
ing. Market forces naturally move the economy to the equilibrium, and the price 
floor has no effect.
Panel (b) of Figure 4 shows what happens when the government imposes a 
price floor of $4 per cone. In this case, because the equilibrium price of $3 is below 

117
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
A Market with a Price 
Floor
Figure 4
In panel (a), the government imposes a price floor of $2. Because this is below the 
equilibrium price of $3, the price floor has no effect. The market price adjusts to 
balance supply and demand. At the equilibrium, quantity supplied and quantity 
demanded both equal 100 cones. In panel (b), the government imposes a price floor 
of $4, which is above the equilibrium price of $3. Therefore, the market price equals 
$4. Because 120 cones are supplied at this price and only 80 are demanded, there is a 
surplus of 40 cones.
(a) A Price Floor That Is Not Binding
$3
2
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
100
Equilibrium
quantity
(b) A Price Floor That Is Binding
$4
Quantity of
Ice-Cream
Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
3
Price
ﬂoor
Demand
Supply
Price
ﬂoor
80
Quantity
demanded
120
Quantity
supplied
Equilibrium
price
Equilibrium
price
Demand
Supply
Surplus
the floor, the price floor is a binding constraint on the market. The forces of sup-
ply and demand tend to move the price toward the equilibrium price, but when 
the market price hits the floor, it can fall no further. The market price equals the 
price floor. At this floor, the quantity of ice cream supplied (120 cones) exceeds 
the quantity demanded (80 cones). Some people who want to sell ice cream at the 
going price are unable to. Thus, a binding price floor causes a surplus. 
Just as the shortages resulting from price ceilings can lead to undesirable 
rationing mechanisms, so can the surpluses resulting from price floors. In the 
case of a price floor, some sellers are unable to sell all they want at the market 
price. The sellers who appeal to the personal biases of the buyers, perhaps due to 
racial or familial ties, are better able to sell their goods than those who do not. By 
contrast, in a free market, the price serves as the rationing mechanism, and sellers 
can sell all they want at the equilibrium price.  
The Minimum Wage
An important example of a price floor is the minimum wage. Minimum-wage 
laws dictate the lowest price for labor that any employer may pay. The U.S. 
­Congress first instituted a minimum wage with the Fair Labor Standards Act 
of 1938 to ensure workers a minimally adequate standard of living. In 2009, 
the minimum wage according to federal law was $7.25 per hour. (Some states 

118
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
mandate minimum wages above the federal level.) Most European nations have 
­minimum-wage laws as well; some, such as France and the United Kingdom, 
have significantly higher minimums than the United States.
To examine the effects of a minimum wage, we must consider the market for 
labor. Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows the labor market, which, like all markets, is sub-
ject to the forces of supply and demand. Workers determine the supply of labor, 
and firms determine the demand.  If the government doesn’t intervene, the wage 
normally adjusts to balance labor supply and labor demand.
Panel (b) of Figure 5 shows the labor market with a minimum wage. If the 
minimum wage is above the equilibrium level, as it is here, the quantity of labor 
supplied exceeds the quantity demanded. The result is unemployment. Thus, the 
minimum wage raises the incomes of those workers who have jobs, but it lowers 
the incomes of workers who cannot find jobs. 
To fully understand the minimum wage, keep in mind that the economy 
contains not a single labor market but many labor markets for different types of 
workers. The impact of the minimum wage depends on the skill and experience of 
the worker. Highly skilled and experienced workers are not affected because their 
equilibrium wages are well above the minimum. For these workers, the minimum 
wage is not binding.
The minimum wage has its greatest impact on the market for teenage labor. 
The equilibrium wages of teenagers are low because teenagers are among the least 
skilled and least experienced members of the labor force. In addition, teenagers 
are often willing to accept a lower wage in exchange for on‑the‑job training. (Some 
teenagers are willing to work as “interns” for no pay at all. Because internships 
pay nothing, however, the minimum wage does not apply to them. If it did, these 
Panel (a) shows a labor market in which the wage adjusts to balance labor supply 
and labor demand. Panel (b) shows the impact of a binding minimum wage. Because 
the minimum wage is a price floor, it causes a surplus: The quantity of labor supplied 
exceeds the quantity demanded. The result is unemployment.
How the Minimum Wage 
Affects the Labor Market
Figure 5
(a) A Free Labor Market
Quantity of
Labor
0
Wage
Equilibrium
employment
(b) A Labor Market with a Binding Minimum Wage
Quantity of
Labor
0
Wage
Quantity
demanded
Quantity
supplied
Labor
supply
Labor
demand
Minimum
wage
Labor surplus
(unemployment)
Equilibrium
wage
Labor
demand
Labor
supply

119
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
jobs might not exist.) As a result, the minimum wage is more often binding for 
teenagers than for other members of the labor force.
Many economists have studied how minimum-wage laws affect the teenage 
labor market. These researchers compare the changes in the minimum wage over 
time with the changes in teenage employment. Although there is some debate 
about how much the minimum wage affects employment, the typical study finds 
that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage depresses teenage employment 
between 1 and 3 percent. In interpreting this estimate, note that a 10 percent 
increase in the minimum wage does not raise the average wage of teenagers 
by 10 percent. A change in the law does not directly affect those teenagers who 
are already paid well above the minimum, and enforcement of minimum-wage 
laws is not perfect. Thus, the estimated drop in employment of 1 to 3 percent is 
­significant. 
In addition to altering the quantity of labor demanded, the minimum wage 
alters the quantity supplied. Because the minimum wage raises the wage that 
teenagers can earn, it increases the number of teenagers who choose to look for 
jobs. Studies have found that a higher minimum wage influences which ­teenagers 
are employed. When the minimum wage rises, some teenagers who are still 
attending high school choose to drop out and take jobs. These new dropouts 
displace other teenagers who had already dropped out of school and who now 
become unemployed. 
The minimum wage is a frequent topic of debate. Economists are about evenly 
divided on the issue. In a 2006 survey of Ph.D. economists, 47 percent favored 
eliminating the minimum wage, while 14 percent would maintain it at its current 
level and 38 percent would increase it. 
Advocates of the minimum wage view the policy as one way to raise the 
income of the working poor. They correctly point out that workers who earn the 
minimum wage can afford only a meager standard of living.  In 2009, for instance, 
when the minimum wage was $7.25 per hour, two adults working 40 hours a 
week for every week of the year at minimum-wage jobs had a total annual income 
of only $30,160, which was less than two-thirds of the median family income in 
the United States. Many advocates of the minimum wage admit that it has some 
adverse effects, including unemployment, but they believe that these effects are 
small and that, all things considered, a higher minimum wage makes the poor 
better off.
Opponents of the minimum wage contend that it is not the best way to combat 
poverty. They note that a high minimum wage causes unemployment, encour-
ages teenagers to drop out of school, and prevents some unskilled workers from 
getting the on-the-job training they need. Moreover, opponents of the minimum 
wage point out that it is a poorly targeted policy. Not all minimum-wage workers 
are heads of households trying to help their families escape poverty. In fact, fewer 
than a third of minimum-wage earners are in families with incomes below the 
poverty line. Many are teenagers from middle‑class homes working at part-time 
jobs for extra spending money.  ■
Evaluating Price Controls
One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in Chapter 1 is that markets are 
usually a good way to organize economic activity. This principle explains why 
economists usually oppose price ceilings and price floors. To economists, prices 
are not the outcome of some haphazard process. Prices, they contend, are the 

120
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
 Should Unpaid Internships Be Allowed?
Some students take internships without pay to gain skills and experi-
ence. Regulators are starting to ask whether this should be legal.
in the news
The Unpaid Intern, 
Legal or Not
By Steven Greenhouse
W
ith job openings scarce for young 
people, the number of unpaid intern-
ships has climbed in recent years, leading 
federal and state regulators to worry that 
more employers are illegally using such 
internships for free labor. 
	
Convinced that many unpaid intern-
ships violate minimum wage laws, officials 
in Oregon, California and other states have 
begun investigations and fined employers. 
Last year, M. Patricia Smith, then New York’s 
labor commissioner, ordered investigations 
into several firms’ internships. Now, as the fed-
eral Labor Department’s top law enforcement 
official, she and the wage and hour division 
are stepping up enforcement nationwide…. 
	
The Labor Department says it is crack-
ing down on firms that fail to pay interns 
properly and expanding efforts to educate 
companies, colleges and students on the 
law regarding internships. 
	
“If you’re a for-profit employer or 
you want to pursue an internship with a 
for-profit employer, there aren’t going to be 
many circumstances where you can have 
an internship and not be paid and still be 
in compliance with the law,” said Nancy J. 
Leppink, the acting director of the depart-
ment’s wage and hour division. 
Note from the author: The rules dis-
cussed in this article are being applied to 
for-profit firms but not to government. 
Many government internships, including 
those at congressional offices, are unpaid. 
The Labor Department is not trying to pro-
hibit this arrangement.
Source: New York Times, April 2, 2010.
result of the millions of business and consumer decisions that lie behind the 
supply and demand curves. Prices have the crucial job of balancing supply and 
demand and, thereby, coordinating economic activity. When policymakers set 
prices by legal decree, they obscure the signals that normally guide the allocation 
of society’s resources.
Another one of the Ten Principles of Economics is that governments can some-
times improve market outcomes. Indeed, policymakers are led to control prices 
because they view the market’s outcome as unfair. Price controls are often aimed 
at helping the poor. For instance, rent-control laws try to make housing affordable 
for everyone, and minimum-wage laws try to help people escape poverty.
Yet price controls often hurt those they are trying to help. Rent control may 
keep rents low, but it also discourages landlords from maintaining their buildings 
and makes housing hard to find. Minimum-wage laws may raise the incomes of 
some workers, but they also cause other workers to be unemployed. 
Helping those in need can be accomplished in ways other than controlling 
prices. For instance, the government can make housing more affordable by 
paying a fraction of the rent for poor families. Unlike rent control, such rent 
subsidies do not reduce the quantity of housing supplied and, therefore, do not 
lead to ­housing shortages. Similarly, wage subsidies raise the living standards 
of the working poor without discouraging firms from hiring them. An example 

121
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
of a wage ­subsidy is the earned income tax credit, a government program that 
­supplements the incomes of low-wage workers.
Although these alternative policies are often better than price controls, they are 
not perfect. Rent and wage subsidies cost the government money and, therefore, 
require higher taxes. As we see in the next section, taxation has costs of its own.
Quick Quiz  Define price ceiling and price floor and give an example of each. Which 
leads to a shortage? Which leads to a surplus? Why?
Taxes
All governments—from the federal government in Washington, D.C., to the local 
governments in small towns—use taxes to raise revenue for public projects, such 
as roads, schools, and national defense. Because taxes are such an important 
policy instrument, and because they affect our lives in many ways, we return to 
the study of taxes several times throughout this book. In this section, we begin our 
study of how taxes affect the economy.
To set the stage for our analysis, imagine that a local government decides to 
hold an annual ice-cream celebration—with a parade, fireworks, and speeches by 
town officials. To raise revenue to pay for the event, the town decides to place a 
$0.50 tax on the sale of ice-cream cones. When the plan is announced, our two lob-
bying groups swing into action.  The American Association of Ice-Cream Eaters 
claims that consumers of ice cream are having trouble making ends meet, and it 
argues that sellers of ice cream should pay the tax. The National Organization of 
Ice-Cream Makers claims that its members are struggling to survive in a competi-
tive market, and it argues that buyers of ice cream should pay the tax. The town 
mayor, hoping to reach a compromise, suggests that half the tax be paid by the 
buyers and half be paid by the sellers.
To analyze these proposals, we need to address a simple but subtle question: 
When the government levies a tax on a good, who actually bears the burden of the 
tax? The people buying the good? The people selling the good? Or if buyers and 
sellers share the tax burden, what determines how the burden is divided? Can the 
government simply legislate the division of the burden, as the mayor is suggest-
ing, or is the division determined by more fundamental market forces? The term 
tax incidence refers to how the burden of a tax is distributed among the various 
people who make up the economy. As we will see, some surprising lessons about 
tax incidence can be learned by applying the tools of supply and demand. 
How Taxes on Sellers Affect Market Outcomes
We begin by considering a tax levied on sellers of a good. Suppose the local gov-
ernment passes a law requiring sellers of ice-cream cones to send $0.50 to the gov-
ernment for each cone they sell. How does this law affect the buyers and sellers of 
ice cream? To answer this question, we can follow the three steps in Chapter 4 for 
analyzing supply and demand: (1) We decide whether the law affects the supply 
curve or demand curve. (2) We decide which way the curve shifts. (3) We examine 
how the shift affects the equilibrium price and quantity.
Step One  The immediate impact of the tax is on the sellers of ice cream. 
Because the tax is not levied on buyers, the quantity of ice cream demanded at 
any given price is the same; thus, the demand curve does not change. By contrast, 
tax incidence
the manner in which the 
burden of a tax is shared 
among participants in a 
market

122
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
the tax on sellers makes the ice-cream business less profitable at any given price, 
so it shifts the supply curve.
Step Two  Because the tax on sellers raises the cost of producing and selling ice 
cream, it reduces the quantity supplied at every price. The supply curve shifts to 
the left (or, equivalently, upward).
In addition to determining the direction in which the supply curve moves, we 
can also be precise about the size of the shift. For any market price of ice cream, 
the effective price to sellers—the amount they get to keep after paying the tax—is 
$0.50 lower. For example, if the market price of a cone happened to be $2.00, the 
effective price received by sellers would be $1.50. Whatever the market price, sell-
ers will supply a quantity of ice cream as if the price were $0.50 lower than it is. 
Put differently, to induce sellers to supply any given quantity, the market price 
must now be $0.50 higher to compensate for the effect of the tax. Thus, as shown 
in Figure 6, the supply curve shifts upward from S1 to S2 by the exact size of the 
tax ($0.50).
Step Three   Having determined how the supply curve shifts, we can now com-
pare the initial and the new equilibriums. The figure shows that the equilibrium 
price of ice cream rises from $3.00 to $3.30, and the equilibrium quantity falls from 
100 to 90 cones. Because sellers sell less and buyers buy less in the new equilib-
rium, the tax reduces the size of the ice-cream market. 
Implications  We can now return to the question of tax incidence: Who pays 
the tax? Although sellers send the entire tax to the government, buyers and sell-
ers share the burden. Because the market price rises from $3.00 to $3.30 when the 
tax is introduced, buyers pay $0.30 more for each ice-cream cone than they did 
without the tax. Thus, the tax makes buyers worse off. Sellers get a higher price 
($3.30) from buyers than they did previously, but the effective price after paying 
the tax falls from $3.00 before the tax to $2.80 with the tax ($3.30 – $0.50 = $2.80). 
Thus, the tax also makes sellers worse off.
Figure 6
A Tax on Sellers
When a tax of $0.50 is levied on 
sellers, the supply curve shifts up by 
$0.50 from S1 to S2. The equilibrium 
quantity falls from 100 to 90 cones. 
The price that buyers pay rises from 
$3.00 to $3.30. The price that sellers 
receive (after paying the tax) falls 
from $3.00 to $2.80. Even though the 
tax is levied on sellers, buyers and 
sellers share the burden of the tax.
$3.30
3.00
2.80
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price
without
tax
Price
sellers
receive
100
90
Equilibrium
with tax
Equilibrium without tax
Tax ($0.50)
Price
buyers
pay
S1
S2
Demand, D1
A tax on sellers shifts
the supply curve
upward by the size of
the tax ($0.50).

123
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
To sum up, this analysis yields two lessons:
• 	 Taxes discourage market activity. When a good is taxed, the quantity of the 
good sold is smaller in the new equilibrium.
• 	 Buyers and sellers share the burden of taxes. In the new equilibrium, buyers 
pay more for the good, and sellers receive less.
How Taxes on Buyers Affect Market Outcomes
Now consider a tax levied on buyers of a good. Suppose that our local govern-
ment passes a law requiring buyers of ice-cream cones to send $0.50 to the govern-
ment for each ice-cream cone they buy. What are the effects of this law? Again, 
we apply our three steps.
Step One  The initial impact of the tax is on the demand for ice cream. The sup-
ply curve is not affected because, for any given price of ice cream, sellers have the 
same incentive to provide ice cream to the market. By contrast, buyers now have 
to pay a tax to the government (as well as the price to the sellers) whenever they 
buy ice cream. Thus, the tax shifts the demand curve for ice cream. 
Step Two  We next determine the direction of the shift. Because the tax on 
buyers makes buying ice cream less attractive, buyers demand a smaller quantity 
of ice cream at every price. As a result, the demand curve shifts to the left (or, 
equivalently, downward), as shown in Figure 7.
Once again, we can be precise about the size of the shift.  Because of the $0.50 
tax levied on buyers, the effective price to buyers is now $0.50 higher than the 
market price (whatever the market price happens to be). For example, if the 
market price of a cone happened to be $2.00, the effective price to buyers would 
be $2.50. Because buyers look at their total cost including the tax, they demand a 
quantity of ice cream as if the market price were $0.50 higher than it actually is.  
In other words, to induce buyers to demand any given quantity, the market price 
Figure 7
A Tax on Buyers
When a tax of $0.50 is levied 
on buyers, the demand curve 
shifts down by $0.50 from 
D1 to D2. The equilibrium 
quantity falls from 100 to  
90 cones. The price that 
sellers receive falls from 
$3.00 to $2.80. The price that 
buyers pay (including the 
tax) rises from $3.00 to $3.30. 
Even though the tax is levied 
on buyers, buyers and sellers 
share the burden of the tax.
$3.30
3.00
2.80
Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones
0
Price of
Ice-Cream
Cone
Price
without
tax
Price
sellers
receive
100
90
Equilibrium
with tax
Equilibrium without tax
Tax ($0.50)
Price
buyers
pay
D1
D2
Supply, S1
A tax on buyers shifts
the demand curve
downward by the size
of the tax ($0.50).

124
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
must now be $0.50 lower to make up for the effect of the tax. Thus, the tax shifts 
the demand curve downward from D1 to D2 by the exact size of the tax ($0.50). 
Step Three  Having determined how the demand curve shifts, we can now 
see the effect of the tax by comparing the initial equilibrium and the new equi-
librium. You can see in the figure that the equilibrium price of ice cream falls 
from $3.00 to $2.80, and the equilibrium quantity falls from 100 to 90 cones. Once 
again, the tax on ice cream reduces the size of the ice-cream market.  And once 
again, buyers and sellers share the burden of the tax. Sellers get a lower price 
for their product; buyers pay a lower market price to sellers than they did previ-
ously, but the effective price (including the tax buyers have to pay) rises from 
$3.00 to $3.30.
Implications  If you compare Figures 6 and 7, you will notice a surprising 
conclusion: Taxes levied on sellers and taxes levied on buyers are equivalent. In both 
cases, the tax places a wedge between the price that buyers pay and the price that 
sellers receive. The wedge between the buyers’ price and the sellers’ price is the 
same, regardless of whether the tax is levied on buyers or sellers. In either case, 
the wedge shifts the relative position of the supply and demand curves. In the 
new equilibrium, buyers and sellers share the burden of the tax. The only differ-
ence between taxes on sellers and taxes on buyers is who sends the money to the 
government.
The equivalence of these two taxes is easy to understand if we imagine that the 
government collects the $0.50 ice-cream tax in a bowl on the counter of each ice-
cream store.  When the government levies the tax on sellers, the seller is required 
to place $0.50 in the bowl after the sale of each cone. When the government levies 
the tax on buyers, the buyer is required to place $0.50 in the bowl every time a 
cone is bought. Whether the $0.50 goes directly from the buyer’s pocket into the 
bowl, or indirectly from the buyer’s pocket into the seller’s hand and then into the 
bowl, does not matter. Once the market reaches its new equilibrium, buyers and 
sellers share the burden, regardless of how the tax is levied.
Can Congress Distribute the Burden of a 
Payroll Tax?
If you have ever received a paycheck, you probably noticed that taxes were 
deducted from the amount you earned. One of these taxes is called FICA, an 
acronym for the Federal Insurance Contributions Act. The federal government 
uses the revenue from the FICA tax to pay for Social Security and Medicare, the 
income support and healthcare programs for the elderly. FICA is an example of a 
payroll tax, which is a tax on the wages that firms pay their workers. In 2010, the 
total FICA tax for the typical worker was 15.3 percent of earnings. 
Who do you think bears the burden of this payroll tax—firms or workers? 
When Congress passed this legislation, it tried to mandate a division of the tax 
burden. According to the law, half of the tax is paid by firms, and half is paid by 
workers. That is, half of the tax is paid out of firms’ revenues, and half is deducted 
from workers’ paychecks. The amount that shows up as a deduction on your pay 
stub is the worker contribution.
Our analysis of tax incidence, however, shows that lawmakers cannot so 
easily dictate the distribution of a tax burden. To illustrate, we can analyze a 
payroll tax as merely a tax on a good, where the good is labor and the price is 

125
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
the wage. The key feature of the payroll tax is that it places a wedge between 
the wage that firms pay and the wage that workers receive. Figure 8 shows the 
outcome. When a payroll tax is enacted, the wage received by workers falls, and 
the wage paid by firms rises. In the end, workers and firms share the burden 
of the tax, much as the legislation requires. Yet this division of the tax burden 
between workers and firms has nothing to do with the legislated division: The 
division of the burden in Figure 8 is not necessarily fifty-fifty, and the same 
outcome would prevail if the law levied the entire tax on workers or if it levied 
the entire tax on firms.
This example shows that the most basic lesson of tax incidence is often over-
looked in public debate. Lawmakers can decide whether a tax comes from the 
buyer’s pocket or from the seller’s, but they cannot legislate the true burden of a 
tax. Rather, tax incidence depends on the forces of supply and demand.  ■
Elasticity and Tax Incidence
When a good is taxed, buyers and sellers of the good share the burden of the tax. 
But how exactly is the tax burden divided? Only rarely will it be shared equally. 
To see how the burden is divided, consider the impact of taxation in the two 
markets in Figure 9. In both cases, the figure shows the initial demand curve, the 
initial supply curve, and a tax that drives a wedge between the amount paid by 
buyers and the amount received by sellers. (Not drawn in either panel of the fig-
ure is the new supply or demand curve. Which curve shifts depends on whether 
the tax is levied on buyers or sellers. As we have seen, this is irrelevant for the 
incidence of the tax.) The difference in the two panels is the relative elasticity of 
supply and demand. 
Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows a tax in a market with very elastic supply and rela-
tively inelastic demand. That is, sellers are very responsive to changes in the price 
of the good (so the supply curve is relatively flat), whereas buyers are not very 
responsive (so the demand curve is relatively steep). When a tax is imposed on a 
Figure 8
A Payroll Tax
A payroll tax places a wedge between 
the wage that workers receive and the 
wage that firms pay. Comparing wages 
with and without the tax, you can see 
that workers and firms share the tax 
burden. This division of the tax burden 
between workers and firms does not 
depend on whether the government 
levies the tax on workers, levies the 
tax on firms, or divides the tax equally 
between the two groups.
Wage without tax
Quantity
of Labor
0
Wage
 Labor demand
Labor supply
Tax wedge
Wage workers
receive
Wage ﬁrms pay

126
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Figure 9
How the Burden of a Tax Is Divided
In panel (a), the supply curve is elastic, 
and the demand curve is inelastic. In 
this case, the price received by sellers 
falls only slightly, while the price paid 
by buyers rises substantially. Thus, 
buyers bear most of the burden of 
the tax. In panel (b), the supply curve 
is inelastic, and the demand curve is 
elastic. In this case, the price received 
by sellers falls substantially, while the 
price paid by buyers rises only slightly. 
Thus, sellers bear most of the burden 
of the tax.
Price without tax
Quantity
0
Price
Demand
Supply
Tax
Price sellers
receive
Price buyers pay
(a) Elastic Supply, Inelastic Demand
Price without tax
Quantity
0
Price
Demand
Supply
Tax
Price sellers
receive
Price buyers pay
(b) Inelastic Supply, Elastic Demand
2. . . . the
incidence of the
tax falls more
heavily on
consumers . . .
1. When supply is more elastic than
demand . . .
3. . . . than 
on producers.
2. . . . the
incidence of 
the tax falls 
more heavily 
on producers . . .
3. . . . than on
consumers.
1. When demand is more elastic than
supply . . .
market with these elasticities, the price received by sellers does not fall much, so 
sellers bear only a small burden. By contrast, the price paid by buyers rises sub-
stantially, indicating that buyers bear most of the burden of the tax.
Panel (b) of Figure 9 shows a tax in a market with relatively inelastic supply 
and very elastic demand. In this case, sellers are not very responsive to changes 
in the price (so the supply curve is steeper), whereas buyers are very responsive 
(so the demand curve is flatter). The figure shows that when a tax is imposed, the 
price paid by buyers does not rise much, but the price received by sellers falls 
substantially. Thus, sellers bear most of the burden of the tax.

127
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
The two panels of Figure 9 show a general lesson about how the burden of 
a tax is divided: A tax burden falls more heavily on the side of the market that is 
less elastic. Why is this true? In essence, the elasticity measures the willingness 
of buyers or sellers to leave the market when conditions become unfavorable. 
A small elasticity of demand means that buyers do not have good alternatives 
to consuming this particular good. A small elasticity of supply means that 
sellers do not have good alternatives to producing this particular good. When 
the good is taxed, the side of the market with fewer good alternatives is less 
willing to leave the market and must, therefore, bear more of the burden of 
the tax.
We can apply this logic to the payroll tax discussed in the previous case study. 
Most labor economists believe that the supply of labor is much less elastic than 
the demand. This means that workers, rather than firms, bear most of the burden 
of the payroll tax. In other words, the distribution of the tax burden is not at all 
close to the fifty-fifty split that lawmakers intended.
Who Pays the Luxury Tax?
In 1990, Congress adopted a new luxury tax on items such as yachts, private 
airplanes, furs, jewelry, and expensive cars. The goal of the tax was to raise 
revenue from those who could most easily afford to pay. Because only the rich 
could afford to buy such extravagances, taxing luxuries seemed a logical way 
of taxing the rich.
Yet, when the forces of supply and demand took over, the outcome was quite 
different from the one Congress intended. Consider, for example, the market for 
yachts. The demand for yachts is quite elastic. A millionaire can easily not buy a 
yacht; she can use the money to buy a bigger house, take a European vacation, or 
leave a larger bequest to her heirs. By contrast, the supply of yachts is relatively 
inelastic, at least in the short run. Yacht factories are not easily converted to 
alternative uses, and workers who build yachts are not eager to change careers in 
response to changing market conditions. 
Our analysis makes a clear prediction in this case. With elastic demand and 
inelastic supply, the burden of a tax falls largely on the suppliers. That is, a tax on 
yachts places a burden largely on the firms and workers who build yachts because 
they end up getting a significantly lower price for their product. The workers, 
however, are not wealthy. Thus, the burden of a luxury tax falls more on the 
middle class than on the rich.
The mistaken assumptions about the incidence of the luxury tax quickly 
became apparent after the tax went into effect. Suppliers of luxuries made their 
congressional representatives well aware of the economic hardship they experi-
enced, and Congress repealed most of the luxury tax in 1993.  ■
Quick Quiz  In a supply-and-demand diagram, show how a tax on car buyers of 
$1,000 per car affects the quantity of cars sold and the price of cars. In another dia-
gram, show how a tax on car sellers of $1,000 per car affects the quantity of cars sold 
and the price of cars. In both of your diagrams, show the change in the price paid by 
car buyers and the change in the price received by car sellers.
“If this boat were any 
more expensive, we’d be 
playing golf.”
© mbbirdy/iStockphoto.com

128
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
Conclusion
The economy is governed by two kinds of laws: the laws of supply and demand 
and the laws enacted by governments. In this chapter, we have begun to see how 
these laws interact. Price controls and taxes are common in various markets in 
the economy, and their effects are frequently debated in the press and among 
policymakers. Even a little bit of economic knowledge can go a long way toward 
understanding and evaluating these policies.
In subsequent chapters, we analyze many government policies in greater 
detail. We examine the effects of taxation more fully and consider a broader range 
of policies than we considered here. Yet the basic lessons of this chapter will not 
change: When analyzing government policies, supply and demand are the first 
and most useful tools of analysis.
price ceiling, p. 112
price floor, p. 112
tax incidence, p. 121
• A price ceiling is a legal maximum on the price 
of a good or service. An example is rent control. 
If the price ceiling is below the equilibrium price, 
then the price ceiling is binding, and the quantity 
demanded exceeds the quantity supplied. Because 
of the resulting shortage, sellers must in some way 
ration the good or service among buyers.
• A price floor is a legal minimum on the price of 
a good or service. An example is the ­minimum 
wage. If the price floor is above the ­equilibrium 
price, then the price floor is binding, and the quan-
tity supplied exceeds the quantity ­demanded. 
Because of the resulting surplus, buyers’ demands 
for the good or service must in some way be 
rationed among sellers.
• When the government levies a tax on a good, 
the equilibrium quantity of the good falls. That 
is, a tax on a market shrinks the size of the 
market.
• A tax on a good places a wedge between the 
price paid by buyers and the price received 
by sellers. When the market moves to the new 
equilibrium, buyers pay more for the good and 
sellers receive less for it. In this sense, buyers 
and sellers share the tax burden. The incidence 
of a tax (that is, the division of the tax burden) 
does not depend on whether the tax is levied on 
buyers or sellers.
• The incidence of a tax depends on the price 
elasticities of supply and demand. Most of the 
burden falls on the side of the market that is 
less elastic because that side of the market can 
respond less easily to the tax by changing the 
quantity bought or sold.
Summary
Key Concepts
	 1.	 Give an example of a price ceiling and an exam-
ple of a price floor.
	 2.	 Which causes a shortage of a good—a price 
ceiling or a price floor? Justify your answer 
with a graph.
	 3.	 What mechanisms allocate resources when the 
price of a good is not allowed to bring supply 
and demand into equilibrium? 
	 4.	 Explain why economists usually oppose con-
trols on prices.
Questions for Review

129
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
	 1.	 Lovers of classical music persuade Congress to 
impose a price ceiling of $40 per concert ticket. 
As a result of this policy, do more or fewer 
people attend classical music concerts?
	 2.	 The government has decided that the free-­
market price of cheese is too low.
a.	 Suppose the government imposes a binding 
price floor in the cheese market. Draw  
a ­supply-and-demand diagram to show the 
effect of this policy on the price of cheese and 
the quantity of cheese sold. Is there a short-
age or surplus of cheese?
b.	Farmers complain that the price floor has 
reduced their total revenue. Is this possible? 
Explain.
c.	 In response to farmers’ complaints, the gov-
ernment agrees to purchase all the surplus 
cheese at the price floor. Compared to the 
basic price floor, who benefits from this new 
policy? Who loses?
	 3.	 A recent study found that the demand and 
­supply schedules for Frisbees are as follows: 
	Price per 	
Quantity 	
Quantity 
	Frisbee	
Demanded	
Supplied
	
$11	
1 million Frisbees	
 15 million Frisbees
	
  10	
  2	
12
	     9	
  4	
  9
	     8	
  6	
  6
	     7	
  8	
  3
	     6	
10	
  1
a.	 What are the equilibrium price and quantity 
of Frisbees?
b.	Frisbee manufacturers persuade the gov-
ernment that Frisbee production improves 
scientists’ understanding of aerodynamics 
and thus is important for national security. A 
concerned Congress votes to impose a price 
floor $2 above the equilibrium price. What is 
the new market price? How many Frisbees 
are sold?
c.	 Irate college students march on Washington 
and demand a reduction in the price of 
Frisbees. An even more concerned Congress 
votes to repeal the price floor and impose a 
price ceiling $1 below the former price floor. 
What is the new market price? How many 
Frisbees are sold?
	 4.	 Suppose the federal government requires beer 
drinkers to pay a $2 tax on each case of beer 
purchased. (In fact, both the federal and state 
governments impose beer taxes of some sort.) 
a.	 Draw a supply-and-demand diagram of the 
market for beer without the tax. Show the 
price paid by consumers, the price received 
by producers, and the quantity of beer sold. 
What is the difference between the price 
paid by consumers and the price received by 
producers?
b.	Now draw a supply-and-demand diagram 
for the beer market with the tax. Show the 
price paid by consumers, the price received 
by producers, and the quantity of beer sold. 
What is the difference between the price 
paid by consumers and the price received 
by producers? Has the quantity of beer sold 
increased or decreased?
	 5.	 A senator wants to raise tax revenue and make 
workers better off. A staff member proposes 
raising the payroll tax paid by firms and using 
part of the extra revenue to reduce the payroll 
Problems and Applications
	 5.	 Suppose the government removes a tax on 
­buyers of a good and levies a tax of the same 
size on sellers of the good. How does this 
change in tax policy affect the price that  
buyers pay sellers for this good, the amount 
buyers are out of pocket including the tax, the 
amount sellers receive net of the tax, and the 
quantity of the good sold?
	 6.	 How does a tax on a good affect the price paid 
by buyers, the price received by sellers, and the 
quantity sold?
	 7.	 What determines how the burden of a tax is 
divided between buyers and sellers? Why?

130
PART II	
HOW MARKETS WORK
tax paid by workers. Would this accomplish 
the senator’s goal? Explain.
	 6.	 If the government places a $500 tax on luxury 
cars, will the price paid by consumers rise by 
more than $500, less than $500, or exactly $500? 
Explain.
	 7.	 Congress and the president decide that the 
United States should reduce air pollution by 
reducing its use of gasoline. They impose a 
$0.50 tax for each gallon of gasoline sold.
a.	 Should they impose this tax on producers 
or consumers? Explain carefully using a 
supply-and-demand diagram.
b.	If the demand for gasoline were more elas-
tic, would this tax be more effective or less 
effective in reducing the quantity of gasoline 
consumed? Explain with both words and a 
diagram.
c.	 Are consumers of gasoline helped or hurt by 
this tax? Why?
d.	Are workers in the oil industry helped or 
hurt by this tax? Why?
	 8.	 A case study in this chapter discusses the fed-
eral minimum-wage law. 
a.	 Suppose the minimum wage is above 
the equilibrium wage in the market 
for unskilled labor. Using a supply-
and-demand diagram of the market for 
unskilled labor, show the market wage, 
the number of workers who are employed, 
and the number of workers who are unem-
ployed. Also show the total wage pay-
ments to unskilled workers.
b.	Now suppose the secretary of labor proposes 
an increase in the minimum wage. What 
effect would this increase have on employ-
ment? Does the change in employment 
depend on the elasticity of demand, the elas-
ticity of supply, both elasticities, or neither?
c.	 What effect would this increase in the mini-
mum wage have on unemployment? Does 
the change in unemployment depend on the 
elasticity of demand, the elasticity of supply, 
both elasticities, or neither?
d.	If the demand for unskilled labor were 
inelastic, would the proposed increase in the 
minimum wage raise or lower total wage 
payments to unskilled workers? Would your 
answer change if the demand for unskilled 
labor were elastic?
	 9.	 The U.S. government administers two pro-
grams that affect the market for cigarettes. 
Media campaigns and labeling requirements 
are aimed at making the public aware of the 
dangers of cigarette smoking. At the same 
time, the Department of Agriculture maintains 
a price-support program for tobacco farmers, 
which raises the price of tobacco above the 
equili­brium price.
a.	 How do these two programs affect cigarette 
consumption? Use a graph of the cigarette 
market in your answer.
b.	What is the combined effect of these two 
programs on the price of cigarettes?
c.	 Cigarettes are also heavily taxed. What effect 
does this tax have on cigarette consumption?
	10.	 At Fenway Park, home of the Boston Red Sox, 
seating is limited to 39,000. Hence, the number 
of tickets issued is fixed at that figure. Seeing a 
golden opportunity to raise revenue, the City of 
Boston levies a per ticket tax of $5 to be paid by 
the ticket buyer. Boston sports fans, a famously 
civic-minded lot, dutifully send in the $5 per 
ticket. Draw a well-labeled graph showing the 
impact of the tax. On whom does the tax burden 
fall—the team’s owners, the fans, or both? Why?
	11.	 A subsidy is the opposite of a tax. With a $0.50 
tax on the buyers of ice-cream cones, the gov-
ernment collects $0.50 for each cone purchased; 
with a $0.50 subsidy for the buyers of ice-cream 
cones, the government pays buyers $0.50 for 
each cone purchased.
a.	 Show the effect of a $0.50 per cone subsidy 
on the demand curve for ice-cream cones, 
the effective price paid by consumers, the 
effective price received by sellers, and the 
quantity of cones sold.
b.	Do consumers gain or lose from this policy? 
Do producers gain or lose? Does the govern-
ment gain or lose?
	12.	 In the spring of 2008, Senators John McCain 
and Hillary Clinton (who were then running 
for president) proposed a temporary elimina-
tion of the federal gasoline tax, effective only 
during the summer of 2008, in order to help 
consumers deal with high gasoline prices.  

131
CHAPTER 6   Supply, Demand, and Government Policies
a.	 During the summer, when gasoline demand 
is high because of vacation driving, gasoline 
refiners are operating near full capacity.  
What does this fact suggest about the price 
elasticity of supply?
b.	In light of your answer to (a), who do you 
predict would benefit from the temporary 
gas tax holiday?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, examples, applications, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw. 


Markets and  
Welfare
I I I
Part


135
7
Consumers, Producers,  
    and the Efficiency 
    of Markets
W
hen consumers go to grocery stores to buy their turkeys for 
Thanksgiving dinner, they may be disappointed that the price of 
turkey is as high as it is. At the same time, when farmers bring to 
market the turkeys they have raised, they wish the price of turkey 
were even higher. These views are not surprising: Buyers always want to pay less, 
and sellers always want to be paid more. But is there a “right price” for turkey 
from the standpoint of society as a whole?
In previous chapters, we saw how, in market economies, the forces of supply 
and demand determine the prices of goods and services and the quantities sold. 
So far, however, we have described the way markets allocate scarce resources 
without directly addressing the question of whether these market allocations are 

136
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
desirable. In other words, our analysis has been positive (what is) rather than nor-
mative (what should be). We know that the price of turkey adjusts to ensure that 
the quantity of turkey supplied equals the quantity of turkey demanded. But at 
this equilibrium, is the quantity of turkey produced and consumed too small, too 
large, or just right?
In this chapter, we take up the topic of welfare economics, the study of how 
the allocation of resources affects economic well-being. We begin by examining 
the benefits that buyers and sellers receive from taking part in a market. We then 
examine how society can make these benefits as large as possible. This analysis 
leads to a profound conclusion: The equilibrium of supply and demand in a mar-
ket maximizes the total benefits received by buyers and sellers.
As you may recall from Chapter 1, one of the Ten Principles of Economics is 
that markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. The study of 
welfare economics explains this principle more fully. It also answers our question 
about the right price of turkey: The price that balances the supply and demand for 
turkey is, in a particular sense, the best one because it maximizes the total welfare 
of turkey consumers and turkey producers. No consumer or producer of turkeys 
aims to achieve this goal, but their joint action directed by market prices moves 
them toward a welfare-maximizing outcome, as if led by an invisible hand.
Consumer Surplus
We begin our study of welfare economics by looking at the benefits buyers receive 
from participating in a market. 
Willingness to Pay  
Imagine that you own a mint-condition recording of Elvis Presley’s first album. 
Because you are not an Elvis Presley fan, you decide to sell it. One way to do so 
is to hold an auction.
Four Elvis fans show up for your auction: John, Paul, George, and Ringo. Each 
of them would like to own the album, but there is a limit to the amount that each 
is willing to pay for it. Table 1 shows the maximum price that each of the four pos-
sible buyers would pay. Each buyer’s maximum is called his willingness to pay, 
and it measures how much that buyer values the good. Each buyer would be eager 
to buy the album at a price less than his willingness to pay, and he would refuse to 
buy the album at a price greater than his willingness to pay. At a price equal to his 
willingness to pay, the buyer would be indifferent about buying the good: If the 
price is exactly the same as the value he places on the album, he would be equally 
happy buying it or keeping his money.
welfare economics
the study of how the 
allocation of resources 
affects economic 
well-being
willingness to pay
the maximum amount 
that a buyer will pay for 
a good
Four Possible Buyers’  
Willingness to Pay
Table 1
Buyer	
Willingness to Pay
John	
$100
Paul 	
80
George  	
70
Ringo 	
50

137
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
To sell your album, you begin the bidding at a low price, say, $10. Because all 
four buyers are willing to pay much more, the price rises quickly. The bidding 
stops when John bids $80 (or slightly more). At this point, Paul, George, and 
Ringo have dropped out of the bidding because they are unwilling to bid any 
more than $80. John pays you $80 and gets the album. Note that the album has 
gone to the buyer who values it most highly.
What benefit does John receive from buying the Elvis Presley album? In a 
sense, John has found a real bargain: He is willing to pay $100 for the album but 
pays only $80 for it. We say that John receives consumer surplus of $20. Consumer 
surplus is the amount a buyer is willing to pay for a good minus the amount the 
buyer actually pays for it.
Consumer surplus measures the benefit buyers receive from participating in 
a market. In this example, John receives a $20 benefit from participating in the 
auction because he pays only $80 for a good he values at $100. Paul, George, and 
Ringo get no consumer surplus from participating in the auction because they left 
without the album and without paying anything.
Now consider a somewhat different example. Suppose that you had two identi-
cal Elvis Presley albums to sell. Again, you auction them off to the four possible 
buyers. To keep things simple, we assume that both albums are to be sold for 
the same price and that no buyer is interested in buying more than one album. 
Therefore, the price rises until two buyers are left.
In this case, the bidding stops when John and Paul bid $70 (or slightly higher). 
At this price, John and Paul are each happy to buy an album, and George and 
Ringo are not willing to bid any higher. John and Paul each receive consumer sur-
plus equal to his willingness to pay minus the price. John’s consumer surplus is 
$30, and Paul’s is $10. John’s consumer surplus is higher now than in the previous 
example because he gets the same album but pays less for it. The total consumer 
surplus in the market is $40.
Using the Demand Curve to Measure  
Consumer Surplus
Consumer surplus is closely related to the demand curve for a product. To see 
how they are related, let’s continue our example and consider the demand curve 
for this rare Elvis Presley album. 
We begin by using the willingness to pay of the four possible buyers to find the 
demand schedule for the album. The table in Figure 1 shows the demand sched-
ule that corresponds to Table 1. If the price is above $100, the quantity demanded 
in the market is 0 because no buyer is willing to pay that much. If the price is 
between $80 and $100, the quantity demanded is 1 because only John is willing to 
pay such a high price. If the price is between $70 and $80, the quantity demanded 
is 2 because both John and Paul are willing to pay the price. We can continue this 
analysis for other prices as well. In this way, the demand schedule is derived from 
the willingness to pay of the four possible buyers.
The graph in Figure 1 shows the demand curve that corresponds to this demand 
schedule. Note the relationship between the height of the demand curve and the 
buyers’ willingness to pay. At any quantity, the price given by the demand curve 
shows the willingness to pay of the marginal buyer, the buyer who would leave the 
market first if the price were any higher. At a quantity of 4 albums, for instance, the 
demand curve has a height of $50, the price that Ringo (the marginal buyer) is will-
ing to pay for an album. At a quantity of 3 albums, the demand curve has a height 
of $70, the price that George (who is now the marginal buyer) is willing to pay.
consumer surplus
the amount a buyer is 
willing to pay for a good 
minus the amount the 
buyer actually pays for it

138
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Because the demand curve reflects buyers’ willingness to pay, we can also 
use it to measure consumer surplus. Figure 2 uses the demand curve to compute 
consumer surplus in our two examples. In panel (a), the price is $80 (or slightly 
above), and the quantity demanded is 1. Note that the area above the price and 
below the demand curve equals $20. This amount is exactly the consumer surplus 
we computed earlier when only 1 album is sold.
Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows consumer surplus when the price is $70 (or slightly 
above). In this case, the area above the price and below the demand curve equals 
the total area of the two rectangles: John’s consumer surplus at this price is $30 
and Paul’s is $10. This area equals a total of $40. Once again, this amount is the 
consumer surplus we computed earlier. 
The lesson from this example holds for all demand curves: The area below the 
demand curve and above the price measures the consumer surplus in a market. This is 
true because the height of the demand curve measures the value buyers place on 
the good, as measured by their willingness to pay for it. The difference between 
this willingness to pay and the market price is each buyer’s consumer surplus. 
Thus, the total area below the demand curve and above the price is the sum of the 
consumer surplus of all buyers in the market for a good or service.
How a Lower Price Raises Consumer Surplus  
Because buyers always want to pay less for the goods they buy, a lower price 
makes buyers of a good better off. But how much does buyers’ well-being rise in 
Figure 1
The Demand Schedule  
and the Demand Curve
Price of
Album
50
70
80
0
$100
Quantity of
Albums
Demand
1
2
3
4
John’s willingness to pay
Paul’s willingness to pay
George’s willingness to pay
Ringo’s willingness to pay
Price 
Buyers 
Quantity 
Demanded 
More than $100 
None 
0 
$80 to $100 
John 
1 
$70 to $80 
John, Paul 
2 
$50 to $70 
John, Paul, George
3 
$50 or less 
John, Paul, 
4 
George, Ringo 
The table shows the demand schedule for the buyers in Table 1. The graph shows 
the corresponding demand curve. Note that the height of the demand curve reflects 
buyers’ willingness to pay.

139
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
response to a lower price? We can use the concept of consumer surplus to answer 
this question precisely.
Figure 3 shows a typical demand curve. You may notice that this curve gradu-
ally slopes downward instead of taking discrete steps as in the previous two fig-
ures. In a market with many buyers, the resulting steps from each buyer dropping 
out are so small that they form, in essence, a smooth curve. Although this curve 
has a different shape, the ideas we have just developed still apply: Consumer 
surplus is the area above the price and below the demand curve. In panel (a), 
consumer surplus at a price of P1 is the area of triangle ABC.
Now suppose that the price falls from P1 to P2, as shown in panel (b). The con-
sumer surplus now equals area ADF. The increase in consumer surplus attribut-
able to the lower price is the area BCFD.
This increase in consumer surplus is composed of two parts. First, those buy-
ers who were already buying Q1 of the good at the higher price P1 are better off 
because they now pay less. The increase in consumer surplus of existing buyers 
is the reduction in the amount they pay; it equals the area of the rectangle BCED. 
Second, some new buyers enter the market because they are willing to buy the 
good at the lower price. As a result, the quantity demanded in the market increases 
from Q1 to Q2. The consumer surplus these newcomers receive is the area of the 
triangle CEF.   
Measuring Consumer 
Surplus with the 
Demand Curve
Figure 2
In panel (a), the price of the good is $80, and the consumer surplus is $20. In panel (b), 
the price of the good is $70, and the consumer surplus is $40.
(b) Price = $70
Price of
Album
50
70
80
0
$100
Demand
1
2
3
4
Total
consumer
surplus ($40)
Quantity of
Albums
John’s consumer surplus ($30)
Paul’s consumer
surplus ($10)
(a) Price = $80
Price of
Album
50
70
80
0
$100
Demand
1
2
3
4
Quantity of
Albums
John’s consumer surplus ($20)

140
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
What Does Consumer Surplus Measure?
Our goal in developing the concept of consumer surplus is to make judgments 
about the desirability of market outcomes. Now that you have seen what consumer 
surplus is, let’s consider whether it is a good measure of economic well-being. 
Imagine that you are a policymaker trying to design a good economic system. 
Would you care about the amount of consumer surplus? Consumer surplus, the 
amount that buyers are willing to pay for a good minus the amount they actu-
ally pay for it, measures the benefit that buyers receive from a good as the buyers 
themselves perceive it. Thus, consumer surplus is a good measure of economic well-
being if policymakers want to respect the preferences of buyers.
In some circumstances, policymakers might choose not to care about consumer 
surplus because they do not respect the preferences that drive buyer behavior. For 
example, drug addicts are willing to pay a high price for heroin. Yet we would not 
say that addicts get a large benefit from being able to buy heroin at a low price 
(even though addicts might say they do). From the standpoint of society, will-
ingness to pay in this instance is not a good measure of the buyers’ benefit, and 
consumer surplus is not a good measure of economic well-being, because addicts 
are not looking after their own best interests.
In most markets, however, consumer surplus does reflect economic well-being. 
Economists normally assume that buyers are rational when they make decisions. 
Rational people do the best they can to achieve their objectives, given their oppor-
tunities. Economists also normally assume that people’s preferences should be 
In panel (a), the price is P1, the quantity demanded is Q1, and consumer surplus equals 
the area of the triangle ABC. When the price falls from P1 to P2, as in panel (b), the 
quantity demanded rises from Q1 to Q2, and the consumer surplus rises to the area of 
the triangle ADF. The increase in consumer surplus (area BCFD) occurs in part because 
existing consumers now pay less (area BCED) and in part because new consumers enter 
the market at the lower price (area CEF).
How the Price Affects 
Consumer Surplus
Figure 3
Quantity
(a) Consumer Surplus at Price P1
Price
0
Demand
P1
A
B
C
Consumer
surplus
Q1
Quantity
(b) Consumer Surplus at Price P2
Price
0
Demand
P1
P2
A
B
Initial
consumer
surplus
D
C
E
F
Q1
Q2
Consumer surplus
to new consumers
Additional consumer
surplus to initial 
consumers
P
P

141
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
respected. In this case, consumers are the best judges of how much benefit they 
receive from the goods they buy.
Quick Quiz  Draw a demand curve for turkey. In your diagram, show a price of 
turkey and the consumer surplus at that price. Explain in words what this consumer 
surplus measures.
Producer Surplus
We now turn to the other side of the market and consider the benefits sellers 
receive from participating in a market. As you will see, our analysis of sellers’ 
welfare is similar to our analysis of buyers’ welfare.
Cost and the Willingness to Sell
Imagine now that you are a homeowner and you want to get your house painted. 
You turn to four sellers of painting services: Mary, Frida, Georgia, and Grandma. 
Each painter is willing to do the work for you if the price is right. You decide to 
take bids from the four painters and auction off the job to the painter who will do 
the work for the lowest price.
Each painter is willing to take the job if the price she would receive exceeds 
her cost of doing the work. Here the term cost should be interpreted as the paint-
ers’ opportunity cost: It includes the painters’ out-of-pocket expenses (for paint, 
brushes, and so on) as well as the value that the painters place on their own time. 
Table 2 shows each painter’s cost. Because a painter’s cost is the lowest price she 
would accept for her work, cost is a measure of her willingness to sell her services. 
Each painter would be eager to sell her services at a price greater than her cost, and 
she would refuse to sell her services at a price less than her cost. At a price exactly 
equal to her cost, she would be indifferent about selling her services: She would be 
equally happy getting the job or using her time and energy for another purpose.
When you take bids from the painters, the price might start high, but it quickly 
falls as the painters compete for the job. Once Grandma has bid $600 (or slightly 
less), she is the sole remaining bidder. Grandma is happy to do the job for this 
price because her cost is only $500. Mary, Frida, and Georgia are unwilling to do 
the job for less than $600. Note that the job goes to the painter who can do the 
work at the lowest cost.
What benefit does Grandma receive from getting the job? Because she is willing 
to do the work for $500 but gets $600 for doing it, we say that she receives producer 
surplus of $100. Producer surplus is the amount a seller is paid minus the cost of 
production. Producer surplus measures the benefit sellers receive from participat-
ing in a market. 
cost
the value of everything 
a seller must give up to 
produce a good
producer surplus
the amount a seller is 
paid for a good minus the 
seller’s cost of providing it
The Costs of Four 
Possible Sellers
Table 2
Seller	
Cost
Mary 	
$900
Frida 	
800
Georgia 	
600
Grandma 	
500

142
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Now consider a somewhat different example. Suppose that you have two 
houses that need painting. Again, you auction off the jobs to the four painters. To 
keep things simple, let’s assume that no painter is able to paint both houses and 
that you will pay the same amount to paint each house. Therefore, the price falls 
until two painters are left.
In this case, the bidding stops when Georgia and Grandma each offer to do the 
job for a price of $800 (or slightly less). Georgia and Grandma are willing to do 
the work at this price, while Mary and Frida are not willing to bid a lower price. At 
a price of $800, Grandma receives producer surplus of $300, and Georgia receives 
producer surplus of $200. The total producer surplus in the market is $500.
Using the Supply Curve to Measure  
Producer Surplus
Just as consumer surplus is closely related to the demand curve, producer surplus 
is closely related to the supply curve. To see how, let’s continue our example. 
We begin by using the costs of the four painters to find the supply schedule 
for painting services. The table in Figure 4 shows the supply schedule that corre-
sponds to the costs in Table 2. If the price is below $500, none of the four painters 
is willing to do the job, so the quantity supplied is zero. If the price is between 
$500 and $600, only Grandma is willing to do the job, so the quantity supplied is 1. 
If the price is between $600 and $800, Grandma and Georgia are willing to do the 
job, so the quantity supplied is 2, and so on. Thus, the supply schedule is derived 
from the costs of the four painters.
The graph in Figure 4 shows the supply curve that corresponds to this supply 
schedule. Note that the height of the supply curve is related to the sellers’ costs. 
Figure 4
The Supply Schedule  
and the Supply Curve
The table shows the supply schedule for the sellers in Table 2. The graph shows  
the corresponding supply curve. Note that the height of the supply curve reflects 
sellers’ costs.
Price 
Sellers 
Quantity 
Supplied 
$900 or more 
Mary, Frida, Georgia, 
Grandma 
4 
$800 to $900 
Frida, Georgia, Grandma 
3 
$600 to $800 
Georgia, Grandma 
2 
$500 to $600 
Grandma 
1 
Less than $500 
None 
0 
Price of
House
Painting
500
800
$900
0
Quantity of
Houses Painted
600
1
2
3
4
Supply
Mary’s cost
Frida’s cost
Georgia’s cost
Grandma’s cost

143
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
At any quantity, the price given by the supply curve shows the cost of the marginal 
seller, the seller who would leave the market first if the price were any lower. At a 
quantity of 4 houses, for instance, the supply curve has a height of $900, the cost 
that Mary (the marginal seller) incurs to provide her painting services. At a quan-
tity of 3 houses, the supply curve has a height of $800, the cost that Frida (who is 
now the marginal seller) incurs.
Because the supply curve reflects sellers’ costs, we can use it to measure pro-
ducer surplus. Figure 5 uses the supply curve to compute producer surplus in 
our two examples. In panel (a), we assume that the price is $600. In this case, the 
quantity supplied is 1. Note that the area below the price and above the supply 
curve equals $100. This amount is exactly the producer surplus we computed 
earlier for Grandma.
Panel (b) of Figure 5 shows producer surplus at a price of $800. In this case, the 
area below the price and above the supply curve equals the total area of the two 
rectangles. This area equals $500, the producer surplus we computed earlier for 
Georgia and Grandma when two houses needed painting.
The lesson from this example applies to all supply curves: The area below the 
price and above the supply curve measures the producer surplus in a market. The logic 
is straightforward: The height of the supply curve measures sellers’ costs, and the 
difference between the price and the cost of production is each seller’s producer 
surplus. Thus, the total area is the sum of the producer surplus of all sellers.
Measuring Producer 
Surplus with the  
Supply Curve
Figure 5
In panel (a), the price of the good is $600, and the producer surplus is $100. In panel (b), 
the price of the good is $800, and the producer surplus is $500.
Quantity of
Houses Painted
Quantity of
Houses Painted
Price of
House
Painting
500
800
$900
0
Supply
600
1
2
3
4
(b) Price = $800
Price of
House
Painting
500
800
$900
0
600
1
2
3
4
(a) Price = $600
Supply
Grandma’s producer
surplus ($100)
Georgia’s producer
surplus ($200)
Total
producer
surplus ($500)
Grandma’s producer
surplus ($300)

144
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
How a Higher Price Raises Producer Surplus
You will not be surprised to hear that sellers always want to receive a higher price for 
the goods they sell. But how much does sellers’ well-being rise in response to a higher 
price? The concept of producer surplus offers a precise answer to this question.
Figure 6 shows a typical upward-sloping supply curve that would arise in a 
market with many sellers. Although this supply curve differs in shape from the 
previous figure, we measure producer surplus in the same way: Producer surplus 
is the area below the price and above the supply curve. In panel (a), the price is P1, 
and producer surplus is the area of triangle ABC.
Panel (b) shows what happens when the price rises from P1 to P2. Producer sur-
plus now equals area ADF. This increase in producer surplus has two parts. First, 
those sellers who were already selling Q1 of the good at the lower price P1 are 
better off because they now get more for what they sell. The increase in producer 
surplus for existing sellers equals the area of the rectangle BCED. Second, some 
new sellers enter the market because they are willing to produce the good at the 
higher price, resulting in an increase in the quantity supplied from Q1 to Q2. The 
producer surplus of these newcomers is the area of the triangle CEF.
As this analysis shows, we use producer surplus to measure the well-being of 
sellers in much the same way as we use consumer surplus to measure the well-
being of buyers. Because these two measures of economic welfare are so similar, 
it is natural to use them together. And indeed, that is exactly what we do in the 
next section.
Figure 6
How the Price Affects 
Producer Surplus
In panel (a), the price is P1, the quantity demanded is Q1, and producer surplus equals 
the area of the triangle ABC. When the price rises from P1 to P2, as in panel (b), the 
quantity supplied rises from Q1 to Q2, and the producer surplus rises to the area of 
the triangle ADF. The increase in producer surplus (area BCFD) occurs in part because 
existing producers now receive more (area BCED) and in part because new producers 
enter the market at the higher price (area CEF).
Quantity
(b) Producer Surplus at Price P2 
Quantity
(a)  Producer Surplus at Price P1 
Price
0
Supply
B
A
C
Producer
surplus
Q1
Price
0
P2
P1
B
C
P1
Supply
A
D
Initial
producer
surplus
E
F
Q1
Q2
Producer surplus
to new producers
Additional producer
surplus to initial
producers
P
P

145
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
Quick Quiz  Draw a supply curve for turkey. In your diagram, show a price of turkey 
and the producer surplus at that price. Explain in words what this producer surplus 
measures.
Market Efficiency
Consumer surplus and producer surplus are the basic tools that economists use 
to study the welfare of buyers and sellers in a market. These tools can help us 
address a fundamental economic question: Is the allocation of resources deter-
mined by free markets desirable?
The Benevolent Social Planner
To evaluate market outcomes, we introduce into our analysis a new, hypotheti-
cal character called the benevolent social planner. The benevolent social planner 
is an all-knowing, all-powerful, well-intentioned dictator. The planner wants to 
maximize the economic well-being of everyone in society. What should this plan-
ner do? Should he just leave buyers and sellers at the equilibrium that they reach 
naturally on their own? Or can he increase economic well-being by altering the 
market outcome in some way?
To answer this question, the planner must first decide how to measure the 
economic well-being of a society. One possible measure is the sum of consumer 
and producer surplus, which we call total surplus. Consumer surplus is the benefit 
that buyers receive from participating in a market, and producer surplus is the 
benefit that sellers receive. It is therefore natural to use total surplus as a measure 
of society’s economic well-being.
To better understand this measure of economic well-being, recall how we mea-
sure consumer and producer surplus. We define consumer surplus as
Consumer surplus 5 Value to buyers 2 Amount paid by buyers.
Similarly, we define producer surplus as
Producer surplus 5 Amount received by sellers 2 Cost to sellers.
When we add consumer and producer surplus together, we obtain
Total surplus 5 (Value to buyers 2 Amount paid by buyers) 
	
1 (Amount received by sellers 2 Cost to sellers).
The amount paid by buyers equals the amount received by sellers, so the middle 
two terms in this expression cancel each other. As a result, we can write total 
surplus as
Total surplus 5 Value to buyers 2 Cost to sellers. 
Total surplus in a market is the total value to buyers of the goods, as measured by 
their willingness to pay, minus the total cost to sellers of providing those goods.
If an allocation of resources maximizes total surplus, we say that the alloca-
tion exhibits efficiency. If an allocation is not efficient, then some of the potential 
gains from trade among buyers and sellers are not being realized. For example, 
efficiency
the property of a resource 
allocation of maximizing 
the total surplus received 
by all members of society

146
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
an allocation is inefficient if a good is not being produced by the sellers with low-
est cost. In this case, moving production from a high-cost producer to a low-cost 
producer will lower the total cost to sellers and raise total surplus. Similarly, an 
allocation is inefficient if a good is not being consumed by the buyers who value 
it most highly. In this case, moving consumption of the good from a buyer with a 
low valuation to a buyer with a high valuation will raise total surplus. 
In addition to efficiency, the social planner might also care about equality—
that is, whether the various buyers and sellers in the market have a similar level 
of economic well-being. In essence, the gains from trade in a market are like a pie 
to be shared among the market participants. The question of efficiency concerns 
whether the pie is as big as possible. The question of equality concerns how the 
pie is sliced and how the portions are distributed among members of society. In 
this chapter, we concentrate on efficiency as the social planner’s goal. Keep in 
mind, however, that real policymakers often care about equality as well. 
Evaluating the Market Equilibrium 
Figure 7 shows consumer and producer surplus when a market reaches the 
equilibrium of supply and demand. Recall that consumer surplus equals the area 
above the price and under the demand curve and producer surplus equals the 
area below the price and above the supply curve. Thus, the total area between 
the supply and demand curves up to the point of equilibrium represents the total 
surplus in this market. 
Is this equilibrium allocation of resources efficient? That is, does it maximize 
total surplus? To answer this question, recall that when a market is in equilibrium, 
the price determines which buyers and sellers participate in the market. Those 
buyers who value the good more than the price (represented by the segment 
equality
the property of distrib-
uting economic prosperity 
uniformly among the 
members of society
Figure 7
Consumer and Producer 
Surplus in the Market 
Equilibrium
Total surplus—the sum of 
consumer and producer 
surplus—is the area between the 
supply and demand curves up to 
the equilibrium quantity.
Price
Equilibrium
price
0
Quantity
Equilibrium
quantity
A
Supply
C
B
Demand
D
Producer
surplus
Consumer
surplus
E

147
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
AE on the demand curve) choose to buy the good; buyers who value it less than 
the price (represented by the segment EB) do not. Similarly, those sellers whose 
costs are less than the price (represented by the segment CE on the supply curve) 
choose to produce and sell the good; sellers whose costs are greater than the price 
(represented by the segment ED) do not.
These observations lead to two insights about market outcomes:
	 1.	 Free markets allocate the supply of goods to the buyers who value them 
most highly, as measured by their willingness to pay.
	 2.	 Free markets allocate the demand for goods to the sellers who can produce 
them at the lowest cost.
Thus, given the quantity produced and sold in a market equilibrium, the social 
planner cannot increase economic well-being by changing the allocation of con-
sumption among buyers or the allocation of production among sellers.
But can the social planner raise total economic well-being by increasing or 
decreasing the quantity of the good? The answer is no, as stated in this third 
insight about market outcomes: 
	 3.	 Free markets produce the quantity of goods that maximizes the sum of  
consumer and producer surplus.
Figure 8 illustrates why this is true. To interpret this figure, keep in mind that the 
demand curve reflects the value to buyers and the supply curve reflects the cost 
to sellers. At any quantity below the equilibrium level, such as Q1, the value to the 
marginal buyer exceeds the cost to the marginal seller. As a result, increasing the 
The Efficiency of the Equilibrium Quantity
At quantities less than the equilibrium quantity, such 
as Q1, the value to buyers exceeds the cost to sellers. 
At quantities greater than the equilibrium quantity, 
such as Q2, the cost to sellers exceeds the value to 
buyers. Therefore, the market equilibrium maximizes 
the sum of producer and consumer surplus.
Figure 8
Quantity
Price
0
Equilibrium
quantity
Supply
Demand
Cost
to
sellers
Cost
to
sellers
Value
to
buyers
Value
to
buyers
Value to buyers is greater than
cost to sellers.
Value to buyers is less than
cost to sellers.
Q1
Q2

148
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
quantity produced and consumed raises total surplus. This continues to be true 
until the quantity reaches the equilibrium level. Similarly, at any quantity beyond 
the equilibrium level, such as Q2, the value to the marginal buyer is less than the 
cost to the marginal seller. In this case, decreasing the quantity raises total sur-
plus, and this continues to be true until quantity falls to the equilibrium level. To 
maximize total surplus, the social planner would choose the quantity where the 
supply and demand curves intersect.
Together, these three insights tell us that the market outcome makes the sum of 
consumer and producer surplus as large as it can be. In other words, the equilib-
rium outcome is an efficient allocation of resources. The benevolent social planner 
can, therefore, leave the market outcome just as he finds it. This policy of leaving 
well enough alone goes by the French expression laissez faire, which literally trans-
lates to “allow them to do.” 
Society is lucky that the planner doesn’t need to intervene. Although it has been 
a useful exercise imagining what an all-knowing, all-powerful, well-intentioned 
dictator would do, let’s face it: Such characters are hard to come by. Dictators 
are rarely benevolent, and even if we found someone so virtuous, he would lack 
crucial information.
Suppose our social planner tried to choose an efficient allocation of resources 
on his own, instead of relying on market forces. To do so, he would need to know 
Like It or Not, 
Scalping Is a Force in 
the Free Market
By Charles Stein
C
hip Case devotes a class each year to 
the reselling of sports tickets. He has 
a section in his economics textbook on the 
same subject.
	
But for Case, an economics professor 
at Wellesley College, the sale and scalping 
of sports tickets is more than an interesting 
theoretical pursuit. Like Margaret Mead, he 
has done plenty of firsthand research in the 
jungle, and he has the stories to prove it.
	
In 1984, Case waited in line for two 
nights on Causeway Street to get $11 
tickets to one of the classic Celtics-Lakers 
championship series. The night before the 
climactic seventh game, he was in the 
shower when his daughter called out to 
him: “Dad, there’s a guy on the phone who 
wants to buy your Celtics tickets.” Case said 
he wasn’t selling. “But Dad,” his daughter 
added, “he’s willing to pay at least $1,000 
apiece for them.”
	
Case was selling. An hour later, a limo 
arrived at the house to pick up two tickets—
one that belonged to Case and one to a friend 
of his. The driver left behind $3,000.
	
To Case and other economists, tickets 
are a textbook case of the free market in 
action. When supply is limited and demand 
is not, prices rise and the people willing to 
pay more will eventually get their hands on 
the tickets. “As long as people can com-
municate, there will be trades,” said Case.
	
In the age of the Internet, buyers and 
sellers can link up online, through eBay or 
the sites devoted solely to ticket sales. But 
even in the pre-Internet era, the process 
worked, albeit more slowly. In 1984, the 
man who bought Case’s tickets was a rich 
 Ticket Scalping
To allocate resources efficiently, an economy must get goods—including 
tickets to the Red Sox—to the consumers who value them most highly. 
in the news

149
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
the value of a particular good to every potential consumer in the market and the 
cost of every potential producer. And he would need this information not only for 
this market but for every one of the many thousands of markets in the economy. 
The task is practically impossible, which explains why centrally planned econo-
mies never work very well.
The planner’s job becomes easy, however, once he takes on a partner: Adam 
Smith’s invisible hand of the marketplace. The invisible hand takes all the infor-
mation about buyers and sellers into account and guides everyone in the market 
to the best outcome as judged by the standard of economic efficiency. It is, truly, 
a remarkable feat. That is why economists so often advocate free markets as the 
best way to organize economic activity.
Should There Be a Market in Organs?
Some years ago, the front page of the Boston Globe ran the headline “How a 
Mother’s Love Helped Save Two Lives.” The newspaper told the story of Susan 
Stephens, a woman whose son needed a kidney transplant. When the doctor 
New Yorker whose son attended a Boston 
private school. The man called a friend at 
the school, who called someone else, who 
eventually called Case. Where there is a will, 
there is a way.
	
Trading happens no matter how hard 
teams try to suppress it. The National 
Football League gives some of its Super 
Bowl tickets to its teams, and prohibits them 
from reselling. Yet many of those same tick-
ets wind up back on the secondary market. 
Last season the league caught Minnesota 
Vikings head coach Mike Tice selling his 
tickets to a California ticket agency. “I regret 
it,” Tice told Sports Illustrated afterward. Or 
at least he regretted getting caught.
	
Like any good market, the one for 
tickets is remarkably sensitive to informa-
tion. Case has a story about that, too. He 
was in Kenmore Square just before game 
four of last year’s playoff series between 
the Yankees and Red Sox. The Red Sox 
had dropped the first three games and 
there was no joy in Mudville. Scalpers were 
unloading tickets for the fourth game for 
only slightly more than face value. Tickets 
for a possible fifth game were going for 
even less.
	
But the Red Sox rallied to win game  
four in extra innings. By 2 that morning, 
said Case, top tickets for game five were 
already selling for more than $1,000 online. 
A bear market had become a bull market 
instantaneously.
	
As defenders of the free market, econo-
mists generally see nothing wrong with 
scalping. “Consenting adults should be able 
to make economic trades when they think 
it is to their mutual advantage,” said Greg 
Mankiw, a Harvard economics professor 
who recently stepped down as chairman 
of President Bush’s Council of Economic 
Advisers. Mankiw has a section about scalp-
ing in his own textbook.
	
Teams could eliminate scalping alto-
gether by holding their own online auctions 
for desirable tickets. Case doesn’t expect 
that to happen. “People would burn down 
Fenway Park if the Red Sox charged $2,000 
for a ticket,” he said. The team would be 
accused of price gouging. Yet if you went 
online last week, you could find front-row 
Green Monster seats for the July 15 game 
against the Yankees selling for more than 
$2,000. Go figure.
	
Case will be at Fenway Park this Friday. 
He is taking his father-in-law to the game. 
He paid a small fortune for the tickets 
online. But he isn’t complaining. It’s the free 
market at work.
Source: Boston Globe, May 1, 2005.
© Robin Nelson / PhotoEdit 

150
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
learned that the mother’s kidney was not compatible, he proposed a novel solu-
tion: If Stephens donated one of her kidneys to a stranger, her son would move 
to the top of the kidney waiting list. The mother accepted the deal, and soon two 
patients had the transplant they were waiting for.
	
The ingenuity of the doctor’s proposal and the nobility of the mother’s act can-
not be doubted. But the story raises some intriguing questions. If the mother could 
trade a kidney for a kidney, would the hospital allow her to trade a kidney for 
an expensive, experimental cancer treatment that she could not otherwise afford? 
Should she be allowed to exchange her kidney for free tuition for her son at the 
hospital’s medical school? Should she be able to sell her kidney so she can use the 
cash to trade in her old Chevy for a new Lexus?
	
As a matter of public policy, our society makes it illegal for people to sell their 
organs. In essence, in the market for organs, the government has imposed a price 
ceiling of zero. The result, as with any binding price ceiling, is a shortage of the 
good. The deal in the Stephens case did not fall under this prohibition because no 
cash changed hands.
	
Many economists believe that there would be large benefits to allowing a free 
market in organs. People are born with two kidneys, but they usually need only 
one. Meanwhile, a few people suffer from illnesses that leave them without any 
working kidney. Despite the obvious gains from trade, the current situation is 
dire: The typical patient has to wait several years for a kidney transplant, and 
every year thousands of people die because a compatible kidney cannot be found. 
If those needing a kidney were allowed to buy one from those who have two, the 
price would rise to balance supply and demand. Sellers would be better off with 
the extra cash in their pockets. Buyers would be better off with the organ they 
need to save their lives. The shortage of kidneys would disappear.
	
Such a market would lead to an efficient allocation of resources, but critics of 
this plan worry about fairness. A market for organs, they argue, would benefit the 
rich at the expense of the poor because organs would then be allocated to those 
most willing and able to pay. But you can also question the fairness of the current 
system. Now, most of us walk around with an extra organ that we don’t really 
need, while some of our fellow citizens are dying to get one. Is that fair?  ■
Quick Quiz  Draw the supply and demand for turkey. In the equilibrium, show pro-
ducer and consumer surplus. Explain why producing more turkeys would lower total 
surplus.
Conclusion: Market Efficiency and Market Failure
This chapter introduced the basic tools of welfare economics—consumer and 
producer surplus—and used them to evaluate the efficiency of free markets. We 
showed that the forces of supply and demand allocate resources efficiently. That 
is, even though each buyer and seller in a market is concerned only about his or 
her own welfare, they are together led by an invisible hand to an equilibrium that 
maximizes the total benefits to buyers and sellers.
A word of warning is in order. To conclude that markets are efficient, we made 
several assumptions about how markets work. When these assumptions do not 
hold, our conclusion that the market equilibrium is efficient may no longer be 
true. As we close this chapter, let’s consider briefly two of the most important of 
these assumptions.

151
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
Summary 
First, our analysis assumed that markets are perfectly competitive. In the 
world, however, competition is sometimes far from perfect. In some markets, a 
single buyer or seller (or a small group of them) may be able to control market 
prices. This ability to influence prices is called market power. Market power can 
cause markets to be inefficient because it keeps the price and quantity away from 
the equilibrium of supply and demand.
Second, our analysis assumed that the outcome in a market matters only to 
the buyers and sellers in that market. Yet, in the world, the decisions of buyers 
and sellers sometimes affect people who are not participants in the market at all. 
Pollution is the classic example. The use of agricultural pesticides, for instance, 
affects not only the manufacturers who make them and the farmers who use 
them, but many others who breathe air or drink water that has been polluted with 
these pesticides. Such side effects, called externalities, cause welfare in a market 
to depend on more than just the value to the buyers and the cost to the sellers. 
Because buyers and sellers do not consider these side effects when deciding how 
much to consume and produce, the equilibrium in a market can be inefficient 
from the standpoint of society as a whole. 
Market power and externalities are examples of a general phenomenon 
called market failure—the inability of some unregulated markets to allocate 
resources efficiently. When markets fail, public policy can potentially remedy 
the problem and increase economic efficiency. Microeconomists devote much 
effort to studying when market failure is likely and what sorts of policies are 
best at correcting market failures. As you continue your study of economics, 
you will see that the tools of welfare economics developed here are readily 
adapted to that endeavor.
Despite the possibility of market failure, the invisible hand of the mar-
ketplace is extraordinarily important. In many markets, the assumptions 
we made in this chapter work well, and the conclusion of market efficiency 
applies directly. Moreover, we can use our analysis of welfare economics and 
market efficiency to shed light on the effects of various government policies. In 
the next two chapters, we apply the tools we have just developed to study two 
important policy issues—the welfare effects of taxation and of international 
trade.
• Consumer surplus equals buyers’ willingness to 
pay for a good minus the amount they actually 
pay, and it measures the benefit buyers get from 
participating in a market. Consumer surplus 
can be computed by finding the area below the 
demand curve and above the price.
• Producer surplus equals the amount sellers 
receive for their goods minus their costs of pro-
duction, and it measures the benefit sellers get 
from participating in a market. Producer surplus 
can be computed by finding the area below the 
price and above the supply curve.
• An allocation of resources that maximizes the 
sum of consumer and producer surplus is said 
to be efficient. Policymakers are often concerned 
with the efficiency, as well as the equality, of 
economic outcomes.
• The equilibrium of supply and demand maxi-
mizes the sum of consumer and producer surplus. 
That is, the invisible hand of the marketplace leads 
buyers and sellers to allocate resources efficiently.
• Markets do not allocate resources efficiently in 
the presence of market failures such as market 
power or externalities.

152
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Key Concepts
Questions for Review
welfare economics, p. 136
willingness to pay, p. 136
consumer surplus, p. 137
cost, p. 141
producer surplus, p. 141
efficiency, p. 145
equality, p. 146
	 1.	 Explain how buyers’ willingness to pay, consumer 
surplus, and the demand curve are related.
	 2.	 Explain how sellers’ costs, producer surplus, 
and the supply curve are related.
	 3.	 In a supply-and-demand diagram, show producer 
and consumer surplus in the market equilibrium.
	 4.	 What is efficiency? Is it the only goal of  
economic policymakers?
	 5.	 What does the invisible hand do?
	 6.	 Name two types of market failure. Explain  
why each may cause market outcomes to be 
inefficient.
	 1.	 Melissa buys an iPod for $120 and gets consumer 
surplus of $80. 
a.	 What is her willingness to pay?
b.	If she had bought the iPod on sale for $90, 
what would her consumer surplus have 
been?
c.	 If the price of an iPod were $250, what would 
her consumer surplus have been? 
	 2.	 An early freeze in California sours the lemon 
crop. Explain what happens to consumer  
surplus in the market for lemons. Explain  
what happens to consumer surplus in the  
market for lemonade. Illustrate your answers 
with diagrams.
	 3.	 Suppose the demand for French bread rises. 
Explain what happens to producer surplus 
in the market for French bread. Explain what 
happens to producer surplus in the market for 
flour. Illustrate your answers with diagrams.
	 4.	 It is a hot day, and Bert is thirsty. Here is the 
value he places on a bottle of water:
	
Value of first bottle	
$7
	
Value of second bottle	
  5
	
Value of third bottle	
  3
	
Value of fourth bottle	
  1
a.	 From this information, derive Bert’s demand 
schedule. Graph his demand curve for  
bottled water.
b.	If the price of a bottle of water is $4, how 
many bottles does Bert buy? How much 
consumer surplus does Bert get from his 
purchases? Show Bert’s consumer surplus in 
your graph.
c.	 If the price falls to $2, how does quantity 
demanded change? How does Bert’s  
consumer surplus change? Show these 
changes in your graph.
	 5.	 Ernie owns a water pump. Because pumping 
large amounts of water is harder than pumping 
small amounts, the cost of producing a bottle of 
water rises as he pumps more. Here is the cost 
he incurs to produce each bottle of water:
	
Cost of first bottle	
$1
	
Cost of second bottle	
  3
	
Cost of third bottle	
  5
	
Cost of fourth bottle	
  7
a.	 From this information, derive Ernie’s supply 
schedule. Graph his supply curve for bottled 
water.
b.	If the price of a bottle of water is $4, how 
many bottles does Ernie produce and sell? 
How much producer surplus does Ernie get 
from these sales? Show Ernie’s producer  
surplus in your graph.
c.	 If the price rises to $6, how does quantity 
supplied change? How does Ernie’s producer 
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS

153
CHAPTER 7    Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets
surplus change? Show these changes in your 
graph.
	 6.	 Consider a market in which Bert from Problem 4  
is the buyer and Ernie from Problem 5 is the 
seller. 
a.	 Use Ernie’s supply schedule and Bert’s 
demand schedule to find the quantity 
supplied and quantity demanded at prices of 
$2, $4, and $6. Which of these prices brings 
supply and demand into equilibrium?
b.	What are consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and total surplus in this equilibrium?
c.	 If Ernie produced and Bert consumed one 
fewer bottle of water, what would happen to 
total surplus?
d.	If Ernie produced and Bert consumed one 
additional bottle of water, what would 
happen to total surplus?
	 7.	 The cost of producing flat-screen TVs has fallen 
over the past decade. Let’s consider some 
implications of this fact.
a.	 Draw a supply-and-demand diagram to 
show the effect of falling production costs on 
the price and quantity of flat-screen TVs sold.
b.	In your diagram, show what happens to 
consumer surplus and producer surplus.
c.	 Suppose the supply of flat-screen TVs is 
very elastic. Who benefits most from falling 
production costs—consumers or producers of 
these TVs?
	 8.	 There are four consumers willing to pay the 
following amounts for haircuts:
	
Jerry: $7	
Oprah: $2	
Ellen: $8	
Phil: $5
There are four haircutting businesses with the 
following costs:
	
Firm A: $3	
Firm B: $6	
Firm C: $4	
Firm D: $2
Each firm has the capacity to produce only 
one haircut. For efficiency, how many haircuts 
should be given? Which businesses should cut 
hair and which consumers should have their hair 
cut? How large is the maximum possible total 
surplus?
	 9.	 Suppose a technological advance reduces the 
cost of making computers.
a.	 Draw a supply-and-demand diagram to 
show what happens to price, quantity, 
consumer surplus, and producer surplus in 
the market for computers.
b.	Computers and typewriters are substitutes. 
Use a supply-and-demand diagram to show 
what happens to price, quantity, consumer 
surplus, and producer surplus in the market 
for typewriters. Should typewriter producers 
be happy or sad about the technological 
advance in computers?
c.	 Computers and software are complements. 
Draw a supply-and-demand diagram to 
show what happens to price, quantity, 
consumer surplus, and producer surplus in 
the market for software. Should software 
producers be happy or sad about the 
technological advance in computers? 
d.	Does this analysis help explain why software 
producer Bill Gates is one of the world’s 
richest men?
	10.	 A friend of yours is considering two cell phone 
service providers. Provider A charges $120 per 
month for the service regardless of the number 
of phone calls made. Provider B does not have 
a fixed service fee but instead charges $1 per 
minute for calls. Your friend’s monthly demand 
for minutes of calling is given by the equation 
QD 5 150 2 50P, where P is the price of a 
minute.
a.	 With each provider, what is the cost to your 
friend of an extra minute on the phone?
b.	In light of your answer to (a), how many 
minutes would your friend talk on the phone 
with each provider?
c.	 How much would he end up paying each 
provider every month?
d.	How much consumer surplus would he 
obtain with each provider? (Hint: Graph the 
demand curve and recall the formula for the 
area of a triangle.)
e.	 Which provider would you recommend that 
your friend choose? Why?
	11.	 Consider how health insurance affects the 
quantity of healthcare services performed. 
Suppose that the typical medical procedure 
has a cost of $100, yet a person with health 
insurance pays only $20 out of pocket. Her 
insurance company pays the remaining $80. 
(The insurance company recoups the $80 
through premiums, but the premium a person 
pays does not depend on how many procedures 
that person chooses to undertake.)
a.	 Draw the demand curve in the market 
for medical care. (In your diagram, the 

154
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
horizontal axis should represent the number 
of medical procedures.) Show the quantity of 
procedures demanded if each procedure has 
a price of $100. 
b.	On your diagram, show the quantity of 
procedures demanded if consumers pay 
only $20 per procedure. If the cost of each 
procedure to society is truly $100, and if 
individuals have health insurance as just 
described, will the number of procedures 
performed maximize total surplus? Explain.
c.	 Economists often blame the health insurance 
system for excessive use of medical care. 
Given your analysis, why might the use of 
care be viewed as “excessive”?
d.	What sort of policies might prevent this 
excessive use?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw. 

155
8
Application: T he Costs  
    of Taxation
T
axes are often a source of heated political debate. In 1776, the anger of the 
American colonists over British taxes sparked the American Revolution. 
More than two centuries later, the American political parties continue to 
debate the proper size and shape of the tax system. Yet no one would 
deny that some level of taxation is necessary. As Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. once 
said, “Taxes are what we pay for civilized society.”
Because taxation has such a major impact on the modern economy, we return 
to the topic several times throughout this book as we expand the set of tools we 
have at our disposal. We began our study of taxes in Chapter 6. There we saw 
how a tax on a good affects its price and the quantity sold and how the forces 
of supply and demand divide the burden of a tax between buyers and sellers. 
In this chapter, we extend this analysis and look at how taxes affect welfare, the 
economic well-being of participants in a market. In other words, we see how high 
the price of civilized society can be.

156
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
The effects of taxes on welfare might at first seem obvious. The government 
enacts taxes to raise revenue and that revenue must come out of someone’s pocket. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, both buyers and sellers are worse off when a good is 
taxed: A tax raises the price buyers pay and lowers the price sellers receive. Yet to 
understand more fully how taxes affect economic well-being, we must compare 
the reduced welfare of buyers and sellers to the amount of revenue the govern-
ment raises. The tools of consumer and producer surplus allow us to make this 
comparison. The analysis will show that the cost of taxes to buyers and sellers 
exceeds the revenue raised by the government.
The Deadweight Loss of Taxation
We begin by recalling one of the surprising lessons from Chapter 6: The outcome 
is the same whether a tax on a good is levied on buyers or sellers of the good. 
When a tax is levied on buyers, the demand curve shifts downward by the size 
of the tax; when it is levied on sellers, the supply curve shifts upward by that 
amount. In either case, when the tax is enacted, the price paid by buyers rises, and 
the price received by sellers falls. In the end, the elasticities of supply and demand 
determine how the tax burden is distributed between producers and consumers. 
This distribution is the same regardless of how it is levied.
Figure 1 shows these effects. To simplify our discussion, this figure does not 
show a shift in either the supply or demand curve, although one curve must shift. 
Which curve shifts depends on whether the tax is levied on sellers (the supply 
curve shifts) or buyers (the demand curve shifts). In this chapter, we can keep the 
analysis general and simplify the graphs by not bothering to show the shift. The 
key result for our purposes here is that the tax places a wedge between the price 
buyers pay and the price sellers receive. Because of this tax wedge, the quantity 
sold falls below the level that would be sold without a tax. In other words, a tax on 
Figure 1
The Effects of a Tax
A tax on a good places a wedge 
between the price that buyers pay 
and the price that sellers receive. 
The quantity of the good sold falls.
Price buyers
pay
Size of tax
Price
without tax
Quantity
Quantity
with tax
0
Price
Price sellers
receive
Quantity
without tax
Demand
Supply

157
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
a good causes the size of the market for the good to shrink. These results should 
be familiar from Chapter 6.
How a Tax Affects Market Participants
Let’s use the tools of welfare economics to measure the gains and losses from a 
tax on a good. To do this, we must take into account how the tax affects buyers, 
sellers, and the government. The benefit received by buyers in a market is mea-
sured by consumer surplus—the amount buyers are willing to pay for the good 
minus the amount they actually pay for it. The benefit received by sellers in a 
market is measured by producer surplus—the amount sellers receive for the good 
minus their costs. These are precisely the measures of economic welfare we used 
in Chapter 7.
What about the third interested party, the government? If T is the size of the tax 
and Q is the quantity of the good sold, then the government gets total tax revenue 
of T 3 Q. It can use this tax revenue to provide services, such as roads, police, 
and public education, or to help the needy. Therefore, to analyze how taxes affect 
economic well-being, we use the government’s tax revenue to measure the public 
benefit from the tax. Keep in mind, however, that this benefit actually accrues not 
to the government but to those on whom the revenue is spent.
Figure 2 shows that the government’s tax revenue is represented by the rect-
angle between the supply and demand curves. The height of this rectangle is the 
size of the tax, T, and the width of the rectangle is the quantity of the good sold, 
Q. Because a rectangle’s area is its height times its width, this rectangle’s area is 
T 3 Q, which equals the tax revenue.
Welfare without a Tax  To see how a tax affects welfare, we begin by consider-
ing welfare before the government imposes a tax. Figure 3 shows the supply-and-
demand diagram and marks the key areas with the letters A through F. 
Tax Revenue
The tax revenue that the government 
collects equals T 3 Q, the size of the 
tax T times the quantity sold Q. Thus, 
tax revenue equals the area of the 
rectangle between the supply and 
demand curves.
Figure 2
Price buyers
pay
Size of tax (T)
Quantity
sold (Q)
Tax
revenue
(T  Q )
Quantity
Quantity
with tax
0
Price
Price sellers
receive
Quantity
without tax
Demand
Supply
“You know, the idea 
of taxation with 
representation doesn’t 
appeal to me very 
much, either.”
© J.B. Handelsman. The New Yorker 
Collection/ www.cartoonbank.com

158
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Without a tax, the equilibrium price and quantity are found at the intersection 
of the supply and demand curves. The price is P1, and the quantity sold is Q1. 
Because the demand curve reflects buyers’ willingness to pay, consumer surplus 
is the area between the demand curve and the price, A 1 B 1 C. Similarly, because 
the supply curve reflects sellers’ costs, producer surplus is the area between the 
supply curve and the price, D 1 E 1 F. In this case, because there is no tax, tax 
revenue equals zero. 
Total surplus, the sum of consumer and producer surplus, equals the area  
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F. In other words, as we saw in Chapter 7, total surplus is 
the area between the supply and demand curves up to the equilibrium quantity. 
The first column of the table in Figure 3 summarizes these conclusions.
Welfare with a Tax  Now consider welfare after the tax is enacted. The price 
paid by buyers rises from P1 to PB, so consumer surplus now equals only area A 
(the area below the demand curve and above the buyer’s price). The price received 
by sellers falls from P1 to PS, so producer surplus now equals only area F (the area 
above the supply curve and below the seller’s price). The quantity sold falls from 
Q1 to Q2, and the government collects tax revenue equal to the area B 1 D.
Figure 3
A tax on a good reduces consumer surplus (by the area B 1 C) and producer surplus 
(by the area D 1 E). Because the fall in producer and consumer surplus exceeds tax 
revenue (area B 1 D), the tax is said to impose a deadweight loss (area C 1 E).
 PB
A
F
B
D
C
E
 P1
Quantity
Q2
0
Price
 PS
Q1
Demand
Supply
Price
buyers
pay
Price
without tax
Price
sellers
receive
Without Tax
With Tax 
Change 
Consumer Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 
A 
2(B 1 C) 
Producer Surplus
D 1 E 1 F 
F 
2(D 1 E) 
Tax Revenue
None 
B 1 D 
1(B 1 D) 
Total Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F 
A 1 B 1 D 1 F 
2(C 1 E) 
The area C 1 E shows the fall in total surplus and is the deadweight loss of the tax.
How a Tax Affects Welfare

159
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
To compute total surplus with the tax, we add consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and tax revenue. Thus, we find that total surplus is area A 1 B 1 D 1 F. 
The second column of the table summarizes these results.
Changes in Welfare  We can now see the effects of the tax by comparing wel-
fare before and after the tax is enacted. The third column of the table in Figure 3 
shows the changes. The tax causes consumer surplus to fall by the area B 1 C and 
producer surplus to fall by the area D 1 E. Tax revenue rises by the area B 1 D. 
Not surprisingly, the tax makes buyers and sellers worse off and the government 
better off.
The change in total welfare includes the change in consumer surplus (which is 
negative), the change in producer surplus (which is also negative), and the change 
in tax revenue (which is positive). When we add these three pieces together, we find 
that total surplus in the market falls by the area C 1 E. Thus, the losses to buyers and 
sellers from a tax exceed the revenue raised by the government. The fall in total surplus 
that results when a tax (or some other policy) distorts a market outcome is called the 
deadweight loss. The area C 1 E measures the size of the deadweight loss. 
To understand why taxes impose deadweight losses, recall one of the Ten 
Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: People respond to incentives. In Chapter 7, 
we saw that free markets normally allocate scarce resources efficiently. That is, 
the equilibrium of supply and demand maximizes the total surplus of buyers 
and sellers in a market. When a tax raises the price to buyers and lowers the price 
to sellers, however, it gives buyers an incentive to consume less and sellers an 
incentive to produce less than they would in the absence of the tax. As buyers 
and sellers respond to these incentives, the size of the market shrinks below its 
optimum (as shown in the figure by the movement from Q1 to Q2). Thus, because 
taxes distort incentives, they cause markets to allocate resources inefficiently. 
Deadweight Losses and the Gains from Trade
To get some further insight into why taxes result in deadweight losses, consider 
an example. Imagine that Joe cleans Jane’s house each week for $100. The oppor-
tunity cost of Joe’s time is $80, and the value of a clean house to Jane is $120. Thus, 
Joe and Jane each receive a $20 benefit from their deal. The total surplus of $40 
measures the gains from trade in this particular transaction.
Now suppose that the government levies a $50 tax on the providers of cleaning 
services. There is now no price that Jane can pay Joe that will leave both of them 
better off after paying the tax. The most Jane would be willing to pay is $120, but 
then Joe would be left with only $70 after paying the tax, which is less than his 
$80 opportunity cost. Conversely, for Joe to receive his opportunity cost of $80, 
Jane would need to pay $130, which is above the $120 value she places on a clean 
house. As a result, Jane and Joe cancel their arrangement. Joe goes without the 
income, and Jane lives in a dirtier house. 
The tax has made Joe and Jane worse off by a total of $40 because they have 
each lost $20 of surplus. But note that the government collects no revenue from 
Joe and Jane because they decide to cancel their arrangement. The $40 is pure 
deadweight loss: It is a loss to buyers and sellers in a market that is not offset by 
an increase in government revenue. From this example, we can see the ultimate 
source of deadweight losses: Taxes cause deadweight losses because they prevent buyers 
and sellers from realizing some of the gains from trade.
The area of the triangle between the supply and demand curves (area C 1 E in 
Figure 3) measures these losses. This conclusion can be seen more easily in Figure 4 
deadweight loss
the fall in total surplus 
that results from a market 
distortion, such as a tax

160
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
by recalling that the demand curve reflects the value of the good to consumers 
and that the supply curve reflects the costs of producers. When the tax raises the 
price to buyers to PB and lowers the price to sellers to PS, the marginal buyers and 
sellers leave the market, so the quantity sold falls from Q1 to Q2. Yet as the figure 
shows, the value of the good to these buyers still exceeds the cost to these sellers. 
At every quantity between Q1 and Q2, the situation is the same as in our example 
with Joe and Jane. The gains from trade—the difference between buyers’ value 
and sellers’ cost—are less than the tax. As a result, these trades are not made 
once the tax is imposed. The deadweight loss is the surplus lost because the tax 
discourages these mutually advantageous trades.
Quick Quiz  Draw the supply and demand curves for cookies. If the government 
imposes a tax on cookies, show what happens to the price paid by buyers, the price 
received by sellers, and the quantity sold. In your diagram, show the deadweight loss 
from the tax. Explain the meaning of the deadweight loss.
The Determinants of the Deadweight Loss
What determines whether the deadweight loss from a tax is large or small? The 
answer is the price elasticities of supply and demand, which measure how much 
the quantity supplied and quantity demanded respond to changes in the price. 
Let’s consider first how the elasticity of supply affects the size of the dead-
weight loss. In the top two panels of Figure 5, the demand curve and the size of 
the tax are the same. The only difference in these figures is the elasticity of the 
supply curve. In panel (a), the supply curve is relatively inelastic: Quantity supplied 
Figure 4
The Deadweight Loss
When the government imposes 
a tax on a good, the quantity 
sold falls from Q1 to Q2. At every 
quantity between Q1 and Q2, the 
potential gains from trade among 
buyers and sellers are not realized. 
These lost gains from trade create 
the deadweight loss.
PB
Cost to
sellers
Value to
buyers
Size of tax
Price
without tax
Quantity
Q2
0
Price
PS
Q1
Demand
Supply
Lost gains
from trade
Reduction in quantity due to the tax

161
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
responds only slightly to changes in the price. In panel (b), the supply curve is 
relatively elastic: Quantity supplied responds substantially to changes in the 
price. Notice that the deadweight loss, the area of the triangle between the supply 
and demand curves, is larger when the supply curve is more elastic.
Similarly, the bottom two panels of Figure 5 show how the elasticity of demand 
affects the size of the deadweight loss. Here the supply curve and the size of the 
tax are held constant. In panel (c), the demand curve is relatively inelastic, and the 
Tax Distortions and 
Elasticities
Figure 5
In panels (a) and (b), the demand curve and the size of the tax are the same, but the 
price elasticity of supply is different. Notice that the more elastic the supply curve, the 
larger the deadweight loss of the tax. In panels (c) and (d), the supply curve and  
the size of the tax are the same, but the price elasticity of demand is different.  
Notice that the more elastic the demand curve, the larger the deadweight loss of  
the tax. 
(a) Inelastic Supply
(b) Elastic Supply
Price
0
Quantity
Price
0
Quantity
Demand
Supply
(c) Inelastic Demand
(d) Elastic Demand
Price
0
Quantity
Price
0
Quantity
Size
of
tax
Size of tax
Demand
Supply
Demand
Demand
Supply
Supply
Size
of
tax
Size of tax
When supply is
relatively inelastic,
the deadweight loss
of a tax is small.
When supply is relatively
elastic, the deadweight
loss of a tax is large.
When demand is relatively
elastic, the deadweight
loss of a tax is large.
When demand is
relatively inelastic,
the deadweight loss
of a tax is small.

162
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
deadweight loss is small. In panel (d), the demand curve is more elastic, and the 
deadweight loss from the tax is larger. 
The lesson from this figure is apparent. A tax has a deadweight loss because 
it induces buyers and sellers to change their behavior. The tax raises the price 
paid by buyers, so they consume less. At the same time, the tax lowers the price 
received by sellers, so they produce less. Because of these changes in behavior, 
the size of the market shrinks below the optimum. The elasticities of supply and 
demand measure how much sellers and buyers respond to the changes in the 
price and, therefore, determine how much the tax distorts the market outcome. 
Hence, the greater the elasticities of supply and demand, the greater the deadweight loss 
of a tax.
The Deadweight Loss Debate
Supply, demand, elasticity, deadweight loss—all this economic theory is enough 
to make your head spin. But believe it or not, these ideas go to the heart of a pro-
found political question: How big should the government be? The debate hinges 
on these concepts because the larger the deadweight loss of taxation, the larger 
the cost of any government program. If taxation entails large deadweight losses, 
then these losses are a strong argument for a leaner government that does less 
and taxes less. But if taxes impose small deadweight losses, then government 
programs are less costly than they otherwise might be.
	
So how big are the deadweight losses of taxation? Economists disagree on the 
answer to this question. To see the nature of this disagreement, consider the most 
important tax in the U.S. economy: the tax on labor. The Social Security tax, the 
Medicare tax, and to a large extent, the federal income tax are labor taxes. Many 
state governments also tax labor earnings. A labor tax places a wedge between the 
wage that firms pay and the wage that workers receive. For a typical worker, if all 
forms of labor taxes are added together, the marginal tax rate on labor income—the 
tax on the last dollar of earnings—is about 40 percent. 
	
Although the size of the labor tax is easy to determine, the deadweight loss of 
this tax is less straightforward. Economists disagree about whether this 40 percent 
labor tax has a small or a large deadweight loss. This disagreement arises because 
economists hold different views about the elasticity of labor supply.
	
Economists who argue that labor taxes do not greatly distort market outcomes 
believe that labor supply is fairly inelastic. Most people, they claim, would work 
full time regardless of the wage. If so, the labor supply curve is almost vertical, 
and a tax on labor has a small deadweight loss.
	
Economists who argue that labor taxes are highly distorting believe that labor 
supply is more elastic. While admitting that some groups of workers may supply 
their labor inelastically, these economists claim that many other groups respond 
more to incentives. Here are some examples:
• 	 Many workers can adjust the number of hours they work—for instance, 
by working overtime. The higher the wage, the more hours they choose to 
work.
• 	 Some families have second earners—often married women with children—
with some discretion over whether to do unpaid work at home or paid  
work in the marketplace. When deciding whether to take a job, these second 

163
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
earners compare the benefits of being at home (including savings on the cost 
of child care) with the wages they could earn. 
• 	 Many of the elderly can choose when to retire, and their decisions are partly 
based on the wage. Once they are retired, the wage determines their incen-
tive to work part time.
• 	 Some people consider engaging in illegal economic activity, such as the 
drug trade, or working at jobs that pay “under the table” to evade taxes. 
Economists call this the underground economy. In deciding whether to work 
in the underground economy or at a legitimate job, these potential criminals 
compare what they can earn by breaking the law with the wage they can 
earn legally.
In each of these cases, the quantity of labor supplied responds to the wage (the 
price of labor). Thus, these workers’ decisions are distorted when their labor 
earnings are taxed. Labor taxes encourage workers to work fewer hours, second 
earners to stay at home, the elderly to retire early, and the unscrupulous to enter 
the underground economy.
	
These two views of labor taxation persist to this day. Indeed, whenever you see 
two political candidates debating whether the government should provide more 
services or reduce the tax burden, keep in mind that part of the disagreement may 
rest on different views about the elasticity of labor supply and the deadweight 
loss of taxation.  ■
Quick Quiz  The demand for beer is more elastic than the demand for milk. Would 
a tax on beer or a tax on milk have a larger deadweight loss? Why? 
Deadweight Loss and Tax Revenue as Taxes Vary
Taxes rarely stay the same for long periods of time. Policymakers in local, state, 
and federal governments are always considering raising one tax or lowering 
another. Here we consider what happens to the deadweight loss and tax revenue 
when the size of a tax changes.
Figure 6 shows the effects of a small, medium, and large tax, holding constant 
the market’s supply and demand curves. The deadweight loss—the reduction 
in total surplus that results when the tax reduces the size of a market below 
the optimum—equals the area of the triangle between the supply and demand 
curves. For the small tax in panel (a), the area of the deadweight loss triangle is 
quite small. But as the size of a tax rises in panels (b) and (c), the deadweight loss 
grows larger and larger.
Indeed, the deadweight loss of a tax rises even more rapidly than the size of 
the tax. This occurs because the deadweight loss is an area of a triangle, and the 
area of a triangle depends on the square of its size. If we double the size of a tax, 
for instance, the base and height of the triangle double, so the deadweight loss 
rises by a factor of 4. If we triple the size of a tax, the base and height triple, so the 
deadweight loss rises by a factor of 9.
The government’s tax revenue is the size of the tax times the amount of the 
good sold. As the first three panels of Figure 6 show, tax revenue equals the area 
of the rectangle between the supply and demand curves. For the small tax in panel 
(a), tax revenue is small. As the size of a tax increases from panel (a) to panel (b), 
“What’s your position 
on the elasticity of labor 
supply?”
© Jim Bourg/AFP/Getty Images

164
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
tax revenue grows. But as the size of the tax increases further from panel (b) to 
panel (c), tax revenue falls because the higher tax drastically reduces the size 
of the market. For a very large tax, no revenue would be raised because people 
would stop buying and selling the good altogether.
The last two panels of Figure 6 summarize these results. In panel (d), we see that 
as the size of a tax increases, its deadweight loss quickly gets larger. By contrast, 
Figure 6
The deadweight loss is the reduction in total surplus due to the tax. Tax revenue 
is the amount of the tax times the amount of the good sold. In panel (a), a small 
tax has a small deadweight loss and raises a small amount of revenue. In panel (b), 
a somewhat larger tax has a larger deadweight loss and raises a larger amount of 
revenue. In panel (c), a very large tax has a very large deadweight loss, but because 
it has reduced the size of the market so much, the tax raises only a small amount of 
revenue. Panels (d) and (e) summarize these conclusions. Panel (d) shows that as the 
size of a tax grows larger, the deadweight loss grows larger. Panel (e) shows that 
tax revenue first rises and then falls. This relationship is sometimes called the Laffer 
curve.
How Deadweight Loss 
and Tax Revenue Vary 
with the Size of a Tax
(d) From panel (a) to panel (c), 
deadweight loss continually increases.
(e) From panel (a) to panel (c), tax 
revenue ﬁrst increases, then decreases.
Deadweight
Loss
0
Tax Size
Tax
Revenue
0
Tax Size
Demand
Supply
Tax revenue
PB
Quantity
Q2
0
Price
Q1
(b) Medium Tax
Deadweight
loss
PS
Demand
Supply
Tax revenue
PB
Quantity
Q2
0
Price
Q1
(a) Small Tax
Deadweight
loss
PS
Demand
Supply
Tax revenue
PB
Quantity
Q2
0
Price
Q1
(c) Large Tax
Deadweight
loss
PS
Laffer curve

165
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
panel (e) shows that tax revenue first rises with the size of the tax, but as the tax 
gets larger, the market shrinks so much that tax revenue starts to fall.
The Laffer Curve and Supply-Side Economics
One day in 1974, economist Arthur Laffer sat in a Washington restaurant with 
some prominent journalists and politicians. He took out a napkin and drew a figure 
on it to show how tax rates affect tax revenue. It looked much like panel (e) of 
our Figure 6. Laffer then suggested that the United States was on the downward-
sloping side of this curve. Tax rates were so high, he argued, that reducing them 
would actually increase tax revenue.
	
Most economists were skeptical of Laffer’s suggestion. The idea that a cut in tax 
rates could increase tax revenue was correct as a matter of economic theory, but 
there was more doubt about whether it would do so in practice. There was little evi-
dence for Laffer’s view that U.S. tax rates had in fact reached such extreme levels.
	
Nonetheless, the Laffer curve (as it became known) captured the imagination of 
Ronald Reagan. David Stockman, budget director in the first Reagan administra-
tion, offers the following story:
[Reagan] had once been on the Laffer curve himself. “I came into the Big Money 
making pictures during World War II,” he would always say. At that time the 
wartime income surtax hit 90 percent. “You could only make four pictures and 
then you were in the top bracket,” he would continue. “So we all quit work-
ing after four pictures and went off to the country.” High tax rates caused less 
work. Low tax rates caused more. His experience proved it.
	
When Reagan ran for president in 1980, he made cutting taxes part of his plat-
form. Reagan argued that taxes were so high that they were discouraging hard 
work. He argued that lower taxes would give people the proper incentive to work, 
which would raise economic well-being and perhaps even tax revenue. Because 
the cut in tax rates was intended to encourage people to increase the quantity of 
labor they supplied, the views of Laffer and Reagan became known as supply-side 
economics.
	
Economists continue to debate Laffer’s argument. Many believe that sub­
sequent history refuted Laffer’s conjecture that lower tax rates would raise tax 
revenue. Yet because history is open to alternative interpretations, other econo-
mists view the events of the 1980s as more favorable to the supply siders. To 
evaluate Laffer’s hypothesis definitively, we would need to rerun history without 
the Reagan tax cuts and see if tax revenues were higher or lower. Unfortunately, 
that experiment is impossible. 
	
Some economists take an intermediate position on this issue. They believe 
that while an overall cut in tax rates normally reduces revenue, some taxpayers 
at some times may find themselves on the wrong side of the Laffer curve. Other 
things equal, a tax cut is more likely to raise tax revenue if the cut applies to those 
taxpayers facing the highest tax rates. In addition, Laffer’s argument may be 
more compelling when considering countries with much higher tax rates than the 
United States. In Sweden in the early 1980s, for instance, the typical worker faced 
a marginal tax rate of about 80 percent. Such a high tax rate provides a substantial 
disincentive to work. Studies have suggested that Sweden would indeed have 
raised more tax revenue if it had lowered its tax rates.

166
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
	
Economists disagree about these issues in part because there is no consensus 
about the size of the relevant elasticities. The more elastic supply and demand are 
in any market, the more taxes in the market distort behavior, and the more likely 
it is that a tax cut will increase tax revenue. There is no debate, however, about 
the general lesson: How much revenue the government gains or loses from a tax 
change cannot be computed just by looking at tax rates. It also depends on how 
the tax change affects people’s behavior.  ■
Quick Quiz  If the government doubles the tax on gasoline, can you be sure that 
revenue from the gasoline tax will rise? Can you be sure that the deadweight loss from 
the gasoline tax will rise? Explain.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have used the tools developed in the previous chapter to further 
our understanding of taxes. One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in 
Chapter 1 is that markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. In 
 New Research on Taxation
According to the latest research, most countries are on the left side of 
the Laffer curve. But that is not true everywhere for all taxes.
in the news
ECB Paper Looks at 
U.S., Europe Spots on 
the Laffer Curve
By Brian Blackstone
E
conomist Arthur Laffer’s theory is that, 
after a certain point, tax increases become 
self-defeating by weakening economic 
growth and draining tax revenues. There are 
two points—zero and 100%—where the 
government receives no revenue. The trick is 
finding the peak point between the two.
	
The Laffer curve served as an intel-
lectual foundation for large-scale tax cuts 
in the U.S. in the early 1980s. Now, the 
U.S. is on the “left side” of the Laffer curve 
even more so than Europe, especially when 
it comes to labor taxes, meaning higher tax 
rates would still bring in added revenues, a 
European Central Bank paper concludes.
	
“We find that the U.S. can increase tax 
revenues by 30% by raising labor taxes but 
only 6% by raising capital income taxes, 
while the same numbers for EU-14 are 
8% and 1% respectively,” ECB economist 
Mathias Trabandt and University of Chicago 
economist Harald Uhlig wrote. Germany 
could raise about another 10% in revenues 
by increasing labor taxes, they estimate, but 
just 2% via capital taxes.
	
Only 32% of a cut in U.S. labor taxes 
would be self-financed, the economists 
note, versus 54% self-financing in Europe. 
Just over 50% of a cut in U.S. capital taxes 
would pay for itself, the authors estimate, 
versus 79% in Europe.
	
“In terms of a ‘Laffer hill’, both the 
U.S. and the EU-14 are on the left side of 
the peak with respect to their capital tax 
rates,” the authors wrote. But in the case 
of Denmark and Sweden, “these countries 
are on the ‘slippery side’ of the Laffer curve 
and can actually improve their budgetary 
situation by cutting capital taxes, according 
to our calculations,” they wrote.
Source: Wall Street Journal, Real Time Economics blog, April 21, 2010.

167
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
Chapter 7, we used the concepts of producer and consumer surplus to make this 
principle more precise. Here we have seen that when the government imposes 
taxes on buyers or sellers of a good, society loses some of the benefits of market 
efficiency. Taxes are costly to market participants not only because taxes transfer 
resources from those participants to the government but also because they alter 
incentives and distort market outcomes.
The analysis presented here and in Chapter 6 should give you a good basis for 
understanding the economic impact of taxes, but this is not the end of the story. 
Microeconomists study how best to design a tax system, including how to strike 
the right balance between equality and efficiency. Macroeconomists study how 
taxes influence the overall economy and how policymakers can use the tax system 
to stabilize economic activity and to achieve more rapid economic growth. So as 
you continue your study of economics, don’t be surprised when the subject of 
taxation comes up yet again.
• A tax on a good reduces the welfare of buyers 
and sellers of the good, and the reduction in 
consumer and producer surplus usually exceeds 
the revenue raised by the government. The fall 
in total surplus—the sum of consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, and tax revenue—is called the 
deadweight loss of the tax.
• Taxes have deadweight losses because they cause 
buyers to consume less and sellers to produce less, 
and these changes in behavior shrink the size of 
the market below the level that maximizes total 
surplus. Because the elasticities of supply and 
demand measure how much market participants 
respond to market conditions, larger elasticities 
imply larger deadweight losses.
• As a tax grows larger, it distorts incentives more, 
and its deadweight loss grows larger. Because a 
tax reduces the size of the market, however, tax 
revenue does not continually increase. It first 
rises with the size of a tax, but if a tax gets large 
enough, tax revenue starts to fall. 
Summary 
Key Concept
deadweight loss, p. 159
Questions for Review
	 1.	 What happens to consumer and producer 
surplus when the sale of a good is taxed? How 
does the change in consumer and producer 
surplus compare to the tax revenue? Explain.
	 2.	 Draw a supply-and-demand diagram with a tax 
on the sale of the good. Show the deadweight 
loss. Show the tax revenue.
	 3.	 How do the elasticities of supply and demand 
affect the deadweight loss of a tax? Why do 
they have this effect? 
	 4.	 Why do experts disagree about whether labor 
taxes have small or large deadweight losses? 
	 5.	 What happens to the deadweight loss and tax 
revenue when a tax is increased? 

168
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
	 1.	 The market for pizza is characterized by a 
downward-sloping demand curve and an 
upward-sloping supply curve.
a.	 Draw the competitive market equilibrium. 
Label the price, quantity, consumer 
surplus, and producer surplus. Is there any 
deadweight loss? Explain.
b.	Suppose that the government forces each 
pizzeria to pay a $1 tax on each pizza sold. 
Illustrate the effect of this tax on the pizza 
market, being sure to label the consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, government 
revenue, and deadweight loss. How does 
each area compare to the pre-tax case?
c.	 If the tax were removed, pizza eaters and sellers 
would be better off, but the government would 
lose tax revenue. Suppose that consumers and 
producers voluntarily transferred some of their 
gains to the government. Could all parties 
(including the government) be better off than 
they were with a tax? Explain using the labeled 
areas in your graph.
	 2.	 Evaluate the following two statements. Do you 
agree? Why or why not?
a.	 “A tax that has no deadweight loss cannot 
raise any revenue for the government.”
b.	“A tax that raises no revenue for the 
government cannot have any deadweight 
loss.”
	 3.	 Consider the market for rubber bands.
a.	 If this market has very elastic supply and 
very inelastic demand, how would the 
burden of a tax on rubber bands be shared 
between consumers and producers? Use 
the tools of consumer surplus and producer 
surplus in your answer.
b.	If this market has very inelastic supply and 
very elastic demand, how would the burden 
of a tax on rubber bands be shared between 
consumers and producers? Contrast your 
answer with your answer to part (a).
	 4.	 Suppose that the government imposes a tax on 
heating oil.
a.	 Would the deadweight loss from this tax 
likely be greater in the first year after it is 
imposed or in the fifth year? Explain.
b.	Would the revenue collected from this tax 
likely be greater in the first year after it is 
imposed or in the fifth year? Explain.
	 5.	 After economics class one day, your friend 
suggests that taxing food would be a good way 
to raise revenue because the demand for food 
is quite inelastic. In what sense is taxing food a 
“good” way to raise revenue? In what sense is it 
not a “good” way to raise revenue?
	 6.	 Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the late senator from 
New York, once introduced a bill that would 
levy a 10,000 percent tax on certain hollow-
tipped bullets.
a.	 Do you expect that this tax would raise much 
revenue? Why or why not?
b.	Even if the tax would raise no revenue,  
why might Senator Moynihan have  
proposed it?
	 7.	 The government places a tax on the purchase of 
socks.
a.	 Illustrate the effect of this tax on equilibrium 
price and quantity in the sock market. 
Identify the following areas both before and 
after the imposition of the tax: total spending 
by consumers, total revenue for producers, 
and government tax revenue.
b.	Does the price received by producers rise or 
fall? Can you tell whether total receipts for 
producers rise or fall? Explain.
c.	 Does the price paid by consumers rise or 
fall? Can you tell whether total spending by 
consumers rises or falls? Explain carefully. 
(Hint: Think about elasticity.) If total 
consumer spending falls, does consumer 
surplus rise? Explain.
	 8.	 Suppose the government currently raises $100 
million through a 1-cent tax on widgets, and 
another $100 million through a 10-cent tax on 
gadgets. If the government doubled the tax rate 
on widgets and eliminated the tax on gadgets, 
would it raise more tax revenue than it does 
today, less tax revenue, or the same amount? 
Explain.
	 9.	 This chapter analyzed the welfare effects of 
a tax on a good. Consider now the opposite 
policy. Suppose that the government subsidizes 
a good: For each unit of the good sold, the 
government pays $2 to the buyer. How does 
the subsidy affect consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, tax revenue, and total surplus?  
Does a subsidy lead to a deadweight loss? 
Explain.
Problems and Applications

169
CHAPTER 8    Application: The Costs of Taxation
	10.	 Hotel rooms in Smalltown go for $100, and 
1,000 rooms are rented on a typical day. 
a.	 To raise revenue, the mayor decides to charge 
hotels a tax of $10 per rented room. After 
the tax is imposed, the going rate for hotel 
rooms rises to $108, and the number of rooms 
rented falls to 900. Calculate the amount of 
revenue this tax raises for Smalltown and the 
deadweight loss of the tax. (Hint: The area of 
a triangle is 1⁄2 3 base 3 height.)
b.	The mayor now doubles the tax to $20. The 
price rises to $116, and the number of rooms 
rented falls to 800. Calculate tax revenue 
and deadweight loss with this larger tax. Do 
they double, more than double, or less than 
double? Explain.
	11.	 Suppose that a market is described by the 
following supply and demand equations:
QS 5 2P
QD 5 300 – P
a.	 Solve for the equilibrium price and the 
equilibrium quantity.
b.	Suppose that a tax of T is placed on buyers, 
so the new demand equation is
QD 5 300 – (P 1 T). 
	
Solve for the new equilibrium. What happens 
to the price received by sellers, the price paid 
by buyers, and the quantity sold?
c.	 Tax revenue is T 3 Q. Use your answer to 
part (b) to solve for tax revenue as a function 
of T. Graph this relationship for T between 0 
and 300.
d.	The deadweight loss of a tax is the area of 
the triangle between the supply and demand 
curves. Recalling that the area of a triangle  
is 1⁄2 3 base 3 height, solve for deadweight 
loss as a function of T. Graph this relationship 
for T between 0 and 300. (Hint: Looking 
sideways, the base of the deadweight loss 
triangle is T, and the height is the difference 
between the quantity sold with the tax and 
the quantity sold without the tax.) 
e.	 The government now levies a tax on this 
good of $200 per unit. Is this a good policy? 
Why or why not? Can you propose a better 
policy?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.


171
9
Application:  
International Trade
I
f you check the labels on the clothes you are now wearing, you will probably 
find that some of your clothes were made in another country.  A century ago, 
the textile and clothing industry was a major part of the U.S. economy, but 
that is no longer the case. Faced with foreign competitors that can produce 
quality goods at low cost, many U.S. firms have found it increasingly difficult 
to produce and sell textiles and clothing at a profit.  As a result, they have laid 
off their workers and shut down their factories.  Today, much of the textiles and 
clothing that Americans consume are imported.
The story of the textile industry raises important questions for economic policy: 
How does international trade affect economic well-being? Who gains and who 
loses from free trade among countries, and how do the gains compare to the 
losses? 
Chapter 3 introduced the study of international trade by applying the principle 
of comparative advantage. According to this principle, all countries can benefit 

172
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
from trading with one another because trade allows each country to specialize in 
doing what it does best. But the analysis in Chapter 3 was incomplete. It did not 
explain how the international marketplace achieves these gains from trade or how 
the gains are distributed among various economic participants.
We now return to the study of international trade and take up these questions. 
Over the past several chapters, we have developed many tools for analyzing 
how markets work: supply, demand, equilibrium, consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and so on. With these tools, we can learn more about how international 
trade affects economic well-being.
The Determinants of Trade
Consider the market for textiles. The textile market is well suited to examining 
the gains and losses from international trade: Textiles are made in many countries 
around the world, and there is much world trade in textiles. Moreover, the textile 
market is one in which policymakers often consider (and sometimes implement) 
trade restrictions to protect domestic producers from foreign competitors. We 
examine here the textile market in the imaginary country of Isoland. 
The Equilibrium without Trade
As our story begins, the Isolandian textile market is isolated from the rest of the 
world. By government decree, no one in Isoland is allowed to import or export 
textiles, and the penalty for violating the decree is so large that no one dares try.  
Because there is no international trade, the market for textiles in Isoland con-
sists solely of Isolandian buyers and sellers. As Figure 1 shows, the domestic price 
adjusts to balance the quantity supplied by domestic sellers and the quantity 
demanded by domestic buyers. The figure shows the consumer and producer sur-
plus in the equilibrium without trade. The sum of consumer and producer surplus 
measures the total benefits that buyers and sellers receive from participating in 
the textile market.
Figure 1
The Equilibrium without 
International Trade
When an economy cannot trade 
in world markets, the price 
adjusts to balance domestic 
supply and demand. This figure 
shows consumer and producer 
surplus in an equilibrium without 
international trade for the textile 
market in the imaginary country 
of Isoland.
Price of
Textiles
Equilibrium
price
0
Quantity of
Textiles
Equilibrium
quantity
Domestic
supply
Domestic
demand
Producer
surplus
Consumer
surplus

173
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
Now suppose that, in an election upset, Isoland elects a new president. The 
president campaigned on a platform of “change” and promised the voters bold 
new ideas. Her first act is to assemble a team of economists to evaluate Isolandian 
trade policy. She asks them to report on three questions:
• 	 If the government allows Isolandians to import and export textiles, what 
will happen to the price of textiles and the quantity of textiles sold in the 
domestic textile market? 
• 	 Who will gain from free trade in textiles and who will lose, and will the 
gains exceed the losses?
• 	 Should a tariff (a tax on textile imports) be part of the new trade policy?
After reviewing supply and demand in their favorite textbook (this one, of 
course), the Isolandian economics team begins its analysis. 
The World Price and Comparative Advantage
The first issue our economists take up is whether Isoland is likely to become a 
textile importer or a textile exporter. In other words, if free trade is allowed, will 
Isolandians end up buying or selling textiles in world markets?
To answer this question, the economists compare the current Isolandian 
price of textiles to the price of textiles in other countries. We call the price 
prevailing in world markets the world price. If the world price of textiles is 
higher than the domestic price, then Isoland will export textiles once trade 
is permitted. Isolandian textile producers will be eager to receive the higher 
prices available abroad and will start selling their textiles to buyers in other 
countries. Conversely, if the world price of textiles is lower than the domestic 
price, then Isoland will import textiles. Because foreign sellers offer a better 
price, Isolandian textile consumers will quickly start buying textiles from other 
countries.
In essence, comparing the world price and the domestic price before trade 
indicates whether Isoland has a comparative advantage in producing textiles. 
The domestic price reflects the opportunity cost of textiles: It tells us how much 
an Isolandian must give up to obtain one unit of textiles. If the domestic price is 
low, the cost of producing textiles in Isoland is low, suggesting that Isoland has 
a comparative advantage in producing textiles relative to the rest of the world. If 
the domestic price is high, then the cost of producing textiles in Isoland is high, 
suggesting that foreign countries have a comparative advantage in producing 
textiles. 
As we saw in Chapter 3, trade among nations is ultimately based on compara-
tive advantage. That is, trade is beneficial because it allows each nation to special-
ize in doing what it does best. By comparing the world price and the domestic 
price before trade, we can determine whether Isoland is better or worse at produc-
ing textiles than the rest of the world.
Quick Quiz  The country Autarka does not allow international trade. In Autarka, 
you can buy a wool suit for 3 ounces of gold. Meanwhile, in neighboring countries, 
you can buy the same suit for 2 ounces of gold. If Autarka were to allow free trade, 
would it import or export wool suits? Why?
world price
the price of a good that 
prevails in the world 
market for that good

174
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
The Winners and Losers from Trade
To analyze the welfare effects of free trade, the Isolandian economists begin with 
the assumption that Isoland is a small economy compared to the rest of the world. 
This small-economy assumption means that Isoland’s actions have little effect on 
world markets. Specifically, any change in Isoland’s trade policy will not affect 
the world price of textiles. The Isolandians are said to be price takers in the world 
economy. That is, they take the world price of textiles as given. Isoland can be an 
exporting country by selling textiles at this price or an importing country by buy-
ing textiles at this price. 
The small-economy assumption is not necessary to analyze the gains and losses 
from international trade. But the Isolandian economists know from experience 
(and from reading Chapter 2 of this book) that making simplifying assumptions 
is a key part of building a useful economic model. The assumption that Isoland 
is a small economy simplifies the analysis, and the basic lessons do not change in 
the more complicated case of a large economy.
The Gains and Losses of an Exporting Country
Figure 2 shows the Isolandian textile market when the domestic equilibrium 
price before trade is below the world price. Once trade is allowed, the domestic  
price rises to equal the world price. No seller of textiles would accept less than the 
world price, and no buyer would pay more than the world price.
Figure 2
International Trade in an Exporting 
Country
Once trade is allowed, the domestic price 
rises to equal the world price. The supply 
curve shows the quantity of textiles 
produced domestically, and the demand 
curve shows the quantity consumed 
domestically. Exports from Isoland equal 
the difference between the domestic 
quantity supplied and the domestic 
quantity demanded at the world price. 
Sellers are better off (producer surplus 
rises from C to B 1 C 1 D), and buyers 
are worse off (consumer surplus falls from 
A 1 B to A). Total surplus rises by an 
amount equal to area D, indicating that 
trade raises the economic well-being of 
the country as a whole. 
C
B
D
A
Price of
Textiles
Price
before
trade
Price
after
trade
0
Quantity of
Textiles
Domestic
supply
World
price
Domestic
demand
Exports
Exports
Domestic
quantity
demanded
Domestic
quantity
supplied
Before Trade
After Trade 
Change 
Consumer Surplus
A 1 B 
A 
–B 
Producer Surplus
C 
B 1 C 1 D 
1(B 1 D) 
Total Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 
1D 
The area D shows the increase in total surplus 
and represents the gains from trade.

175
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
After the domestic price has risen to equal the world price, the domestic 
quantity supplied differs from the domestic quantity demanded. The supply 
curve shows the quantity of textiles supplied by Isolandian sellers. The demand 
curve shows the quantity of textiles demanded by Isolandian buyers. Because 
the domestic quantity supplied is greater than the domestic quantity demanded, 
Isoland sells textiles to other countries. Thus, Isoland becomes a textile exporter.
Although domestic quantity supplied and domestic quantity demanded differ, 
the textile market is still in equilibrium because there is now another participant 
in the market: the rest of the world. One can view the horizontal line at the world 
price as representing the rest of the world’s demand for textiles. This demand 
curve is perfectly elastic because Isoland, as a small economy, can sell as many 
textiles as it wants at the world price.
Now consider the gains and losses from opening up trade. Clearly, not every-
one benefits. Trade forces the domestic price to rise to the world price. Domestic 
producers of textiles are better off because they can now sell textiles at a higher 
price, but domestic consumers of textiles are worse off because they have to buy 
textiles at a higher price.
To measure these gains and losses, we look at the changes in consumer and 
producer surplus. Before trade is allowed, the price of textiles adjusts to balance 
domestic supply and domestic demand. Consumer surplus, the area between 
the demand curve and the before-trade price, is area A 1 B. Producer surplus, 
the area between the supply curve and the before-trade price, is area C. Total sur-
plus before trade, the sum of consumer and producer surplus, is area A1 B 1 C.
After trade is allowed, the domestic price rises to the world price. Consumer sur-
plus is reduced to area A (the area between the demand curve and the world price). 
Producer surplus is increased to area B 1 C 1 D (the area between the supply curve 
and the world price). Thus, total surplus with trade is area A 1 B 1 C 1 D.
These welfare calculations show who wins and who loses from trade in an 
exporting country. Sellers benefit because producer surplus increases by the area 
B 1 D. Buyers are worse off because consumer surplus decreases by the area B. 
Because the gains of sellers exceed the losses of buyers by the area D, total surplus 
in Isoland increases.
This analysis of an exporting country yields two conclusions:
• 	 When a country allows trade and becomes an exporter of a good, domestic 
producers of the good are better off, and domestic consumers of the good 
are worse off. 
• 	 Trade raises the economic well-being of a nation in the sense that the gains 
of the winners exceed the losses of the losers.
The Gains and Losses of an Importing Country
Now suppose that the domestic price before trade is above the world price. Once 
again, after trade is allowed, the domestic price must equal the world price. As 
Figure 3 shows, the domestic quantity supplied is less than the domestic quantity 
demanded. The difference between the domestic quantity demanded and the 
domestic quantity supplied is bought from other countries, and Isoland becomes 
a textile importer.
In this case, the horizontal line at the world price represents the supply of the 
rest of the world. This supply curve is perfectly elastic because Isoland is a small 
economy and, therefore, can buy as many textiles as it wants at the world price.

176
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Now consider the gains and losses from trade. Once again, not everyone bene-
fits. When trade forces the domestic price to fall, domestic consumers are better off 
(they can now buy textiles at a lower price), and domestic producers are worse off 
(they now have to sell textiles at a lower price). Changes in consumer and producer 
surplus measure the size of the gains and losses. Before trade, consumer surplus is 
area A, producer surplus is area B 1 C, and total surplus is area A 1 B 1 C. After 
trade is allowed, consumer surplus is area A 1 B 1 D, producer surplus is area C, 
and total surplus is area A 1 B 1 C 1 D. 
These welfare calculations show who wins and who loses from trade in an 
importing country. Buyers benefit because consumer surplus increases by the area 
B 1 D. Sellers are worse off because producer surplus falls by the area B. The gains 
of buyers exceed the losses of sellers, and total surplus increases by the area D.
This analysis of an importing country yields two conclusions parallel to those 
for an exporting country:
• 	 When a country allows trade and becomes an importer of a good, domestic 
consumers of the good are better off, and domestic producers of the good 
are worse off. 
• 	 Trade raises the economic well-being of a nation in the sense that the gains 
of the winners exceed the losses of the losers.
Having completed our analysis of trade, we can better understand one of the Ten 
Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: Trade can make everyone better off. If Isoland 
Figure 3
International Trade in an Importing 
Country
Once trade is allowed, the domestic 
price falls to equal the world price. 
The supply curve shows the amount 
produced domestically, and the demand 
curve shows the amount consumed 
domestically. Imports equal the 
difference between the domestic quantity 
demanded and the domestic quantity 
supplied at the world price. Buyers are 
better off (consumer surplus rises from A 
to A 1 B 1 D), and sellers are worse off 
(producer surplus falls from B 1 C to C). 
Total surplus rises by an amount equal to 
area D, indicating that trade raises the 
economic well-being of the country as a 
whole. 
Before Trade
After Trade 
Change 
Consumer Surplus
A 
A 1 B 1 D 
1(B 1 D) 
Producer Surplus
B 1 C 
C 
2B 
Total Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 
1D
C
B
D
A
Price
before trade
0
Domestic
supply
Domestic
demand
Price
after trade
World
price
Imports
Domestic
quantity
supplied
Domestic
quantity
demanded
Price of
Textiles
Quantity of
Textiles
The area D shows the increase in total surplus  
and represents the gains from trade.

177
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
opens its textile market to international trade, the change will create winners and 
losers, regardless of whether Isoland ends up exporting or importing textiles. 
In either case, however, the gains of the winners would exceed the losses of the 
losers, so the winners could compensate the losers and still be better off. In this 
sense, trade can make everyone better off. But will trade make everyone better off? 
Probably not. In practice, compensation for the losers from international trade is 
rare. Without such compensation, opening an economy to international trade is 
a policy that expands the size of the economic pie, while perhaps leaving some 
participants in the economy with a smaller slice.
We can now see why the debate over trade policy is often contentious. 
Whenever a policy creates winners and losers, the stage is set for a political battle. 
Nations sometimes fail to enjoy the gains from trade because the losers from free 
trade are better organized than the winners. The losers may turn their cohesive-
ness into political clout, lobbying for trade restrictions such as tariffs or import 
quotas.
The Effects of a Tariff
The Isolandian economists next consider the effects of a tariff—a tax on imported 
goods. The economists quickly realize that a tariff on textiles will have no effect 
if Isoland becomes a textile exporter. If no one in Isoland is interested in import-
ing textiles, a tax on textile imports is irrelevant. The tariff matters only if Isoland 
becomes a textile importer. Concentrating their attention on this case, the econo-
mists compare welfare with and without the tariff.
Figure 4 shows the Isolandian market for textiles. Under free trade, the domes-
tic price equals the world price. A tariff raises the price of imported textiles 
above the world price by the amount of the tariff. Domestic suppliers of textiles, 
who compete with suppliers of imported textiles, can now sell their textiles for 
the world price plus the amount of the tariff. Thus, the price of textiles—both 
imported and domestic—rises by the amount of the tariff and is, therefore, closer 
to the price that would prevail without trade.
The change in price affects the behavior of domestic buyers and sellers. Because 
the tariff raises the price of textiles, it reduces the domestic quantity demanded 
from Q1
D to Q2
D and raises the domestic quantity supplied from Q1
S to Q2
S. Thus, the 
tariff reduces the quantity of imports and moves the domestic market closer to its equilib-
rium without trade. 
Now consider the gains and losses from the tariff. Because the tariff raises the 
domestic price, domestic sellers are better off, and domestic buyers are worse off. 
In addition, the government raises revenue. To measure these gains and losses, 
we look at the changes in consumer surplus, producer surplus, and government 
revenue. These changes are summarized in the table in Figure 4. 
Before the tariff, the domestic price equals the world price. Consumer surplus, the 
area between the demand curve and the world price, is area A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F. 
Producer surplus, the area between the supply curve and the world price, is area G.  
Government revenue equals zero. Total surplus, the sum of consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, and government revenue, is area A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F 1 G.
Once the government imposes a tariff, the domestic price exceeds the world 
price by the amount of the tariff. Consumer surplus is now area A 1 B. Producer 
surplus is area C 1 G. Government revenue, which is the quantity of after-tariff 
imports times the size of the tariff, is the area E. Thus, total surplus with the tariff 
is area A 1 B 1 C 1 E 1 G. 
tariff
a tax on goods produced 
abroad and sold  
domestically

178
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
To determine the total welfare effects of the tariff, we add the change in con-
sumer surplus (which is negative), the change in producer surplus (positive), and 
the change in government revenue (positive). We find that total surplus in the 
market decreases by the area D 1 F. This fall in total surplus is called the dead-
weight loss of the tariff.
A tariff causes a deadweight loss because a tariff is a type of tax. Like most 
taxes, it distorts incentives and pushes the allocation of scarce resources away 
from the optimum. In this case, we can identify two effects. First, when the tariff 
raises the domestic price of textiles above the world price, it encourages domestic 
producers to increase production from Q1
S to Q2
S. Even though the cost of making 
these incremental units exceeds the cost of buying them at the world price, the 
Figure 4
The Effects of a Tariff
A tariff reduces the quantity of imports and moves a market closer to the equilibrium 
that would exist without trade. Total surplus falls by an amount equal to area D 1 F. 
These two triangles represent the deadweight loss from the tariff.  
Before Tariff
After Tariff
Change 
Consumer Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F 
A 1 B 
–(C 1 D 1 E 1 F) 
Producer Surplus
G 
C 1 G 
1C 
Government Revenue
None 
E 
1E 
Total Surplus
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F 1 G 
A 1 B 1 C 1 E 1 G 
–(D 1 F) 
The area D 1 F shows the fall in total surplus and represents the deadweight loss of the tariff.
D
E
F
C
G
B
A
0
Domestic
supply
Domestic
demand
Price
with tariff
Tariff
Imports
without tariff
Equilibrium
without trade
Price
without tariff
World
price
Imports
with tariff
2
QS
1
QS
2
QD
1
QD
Price of
Textiles
Quantity of
Textiles

179
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
tariff makes it profitable for domestic producers to manufacture them nonethe-
less. Second, when the tariff raises the price that domestic textile consumers have 
to pay, it encourages them to reduce consumption of textiles from Q1
D to Q2
D. Even 
though domestic consumers value these incremental units at more than the world 
price, the tariff induces them to cut back their purchases. Area D represents the 
deadweight loss from the overproduction of textiles, and area F represents the 
deadweight loss from the underconsumption of textiles. The total deadweight loss 
of the tariff is the sum of these two triangles.
The Lessons for Trade Policy
The team of Isolandian economists can now write to the new president:
Dear Madame President,
You asked us three questions about opening up trade. After much hard work, 
we have the answers.
Question: If the government allows Isolandians to import and export textiles, 
what will happen to the price of textiles and the quantity of textiles sold in the 
domestic textile market? 
Answer: Once trade is allowed, the Isolandian price of textiles will be driven to 
equal the price prevailing around the world. 
FYI
 Import Quotas: 
Another Way to Restrict Trade
B
eyond tariffs, another way that nations sometimes restrict inter-
national trade is by putting limits on how much of a good can be 
imported. In this book, we will not analyze such a policy, other than to 
point out the conclusion: Import quotas are much like tariffs. Both tariffs 
and import quotas reduce the quantity of imports, raise the domestic 
price of the good, decrease the welfare of domestic consumers, increase 
the welfare of domestic producers, and cause deadweight losses. 
	
There is only one difference between these two types of trade 
restriction: A tariff raises revenue for the government, whereas an 
import quota creates surplus for those who obtain the licenses to 
import. The profit for the holder of an import license is the difference 
between the domestic price (at which he sells the imported good) 
and the world price (at which he buys it).
	
Tariffs and import quotas are even more similar if the govern-
ment charges a fee for the import licenses. Suppose the government 
sets the license fee equal to the difference between the domestic 
price and the world price. In this case, all the profit of license hold-
ers is paid to the government in license fees, and the import quota 
works exactly like a tariff. Consumer surplus, producer surplus, and 
government revenue are precisely the same under the two policies.
	
In practice, however, countries that restrict trade with import ­quotas 
rarely do so by selling the import licenses. For example, the U.S. govern-
ment has at times pressured Japan to “voluntarily” limit the sale of 
Japanese cars in the United States. In this case, the Japanese govern-
ment allocates the import licenses to Japanese firms, and the surplus 
from these licenses accrues to those firms. From the standpoint of U.S. 
welfare, this kind of import quota is worse than a U.S. tariff on imported 
cars. Both a tariff and an import quota raise prices, restrict trade, and 
cause deadweight losses, but at least the tariff produces revenue for the 
U.S. government rather than profit for foreign producers.

180
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
If the world price is now higher than the Isolandian price, our price will rise. 
The higher price will reduce the amount of textiles Isolandians consume and 
raise the amount of textiles that Isolandians produce. Isoland will, therefore, 
become a textile exporter. This occurs because, in this case, Isoland has a com-
parative advantage in producing textiles. 
Conversely, if the world price is now lower than the Isolandian price, our 
price will fall. The lower price will raise the amount of textiles that Isolandians 
consume and lower the amount of textiles that Isolandians produce. Isoland 
will, therefore, become a textile importer. This occurs because, in this case, 
other countries have a comparative advantage in producing textiles. 
Question: Who will gain from free trade in textiles and who will lose, and will 
the gains exceed the losses?
Answer: The answer depends on whether the price rises or falls when trade is 
allowed. If the price rises, producers of textiles gain, and consumers of textiles lose. 
If the price falls, consumers gain, and producers lose. In both cases, the gains are 
larger than the losses. Thus, free trade raises the total welfare of Isolandians.
Question: Should a tariff be part of the new trade policy?
Answer: A tariff has an impact only if Isoland becomes a textile importer. In 
this case, a tariff moves the economy closer to the no-trade equilibrium and, 
like most taxes, has deadweight losses. Although a tariff improves the welfare 
of domestic producers and raises revenue for the government, these gains 
are more than offset by the losses suffered by consumers. The best policy, 
from the standpoint of economic efficiency, would be to allow trade without 
a tariff.
We hope you find these answers helpful as you decide on your new policy. 
Your faithful servants,
Isolandian economics team
Other Benefits of International Trade
The conclusions of the Isolandian economics team are based on the standard 
analysis of international trade. Their analysis uses the most fundamental tools in 
the economist’s toolbox: supply, demand, and producer and consumer surplus. 
It shows that there are winners and losers when a nation opens itself up to trade, 
but the gains to the winners exceed the losses of the losers. 
The case for free trade can be made even stronger, however, because there are 
several other economic benefits of trade beyond those emphasized in the standard 
analysis. Here, in a nutshell, are some of these other benefits:
• 	 Increased variety of goods. Goods produced in different countries are not 
exactly the same. German beer, for instance, is not the same as American 
beer. Free trade gives consumers in all countries greater variety from which 
to choose.
• 	 Lower costs through economies of scale. Some goods can be produced at 
low cost only if they are produced in large quantities—a phenomenon called 
economies of scale. A firm in a small country cannot take full advantage of 
economies of scale if it can sell only in a small domestic market. Free trade 

181
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
 Trade Skirmishes
In recent years, trade between the United States and China has not 
been completely free, as the following two articles illustrate.
in the news
U.S. Adds Tariffs on 
Chinese Tires 
By Edmund L. Andrews
W
ashington—In a break with the trade 
policies of his predecessor, President 
Obama announced on Friday night that he 
would impose a 35 percent tariff on automo-
bile and light-truck tires imported from China.
	
The decision is a major victory for 
the United Steelworkers, the union that  
represents American tire workers. And  
Mr. Obama cannot afford to jeopardize his 
relationship with major unions as he pushes 
Congress to overhaul the nation’s health 
care system. 
	
But China is certain to be antagonized 
by the decision….
	
The decision signals the first time that 
the United States has invoked a special 
safeguard provision that was part of its 
agreement to support China’s entry into the 
World Trade Organization in 2001.
	
Under that safeguard provision, American 
companies or workers harmed by imports from 
China can ask the government for protection 
simply by demonstrating that American pro-
ducers have suffered a “market disruption” or 
a “surge” in imports from China. 
	
Unlike more traditional anti-dumping 
cases, the government does not need to deter-
mine that a country is competing unfairly or 
selling its products at less than their true cost.
A U.S. import
China Moves to 
Retaliate Against U.S. 
Tire Tariff 
By Keith Bradsher
H
ong Kong—China unexpectedly in­creased 
pressure Sunday on the United States in a 
widening trade dispute, taking the first steps 
toward imposing tariffs on American exports 
of automotive products and chicken meat in 
retaliation for President Obama’s decision late 
Friday to levy tariffs on tires from China. 
	
The Chinese government’s strong coun-
termove followed a weekend of nationalistic 
vitriol against the United States on Chinese 
Web sites in response to the tire tariff. “The 
U.S. is shameless!” said one posting, while 
another called on the Chinese government to 
sell all of its huge holdings of Treasury bonds.
	
The impact of the dispute extends 
well beyond tires, chickens and cars. 
Both governments are facing domestic 
pressure to take a tougher stand against 
the other on economic issues. But the 
trade battle increases political tensions 
between the two nations even as they 
try to work together to revive the global 
economy and combat mutual security 
threats, like the nuclear ambitions of Iran 
and North Korea. 
A U.S. export
[Three days later]
Source: New York Times, September 11 and 14, 2009.
© Dmitry Rukhlenko/Shutterstock
© Ivonne Wierink/Shutterstock

182
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
gives firms access to larger world markets and allows them to realize  
economies of scale more fully.
• 	 Increased competition. A company shielded from foreign competitors is more 
likely to have market power, which in turn gives it the ability to raise prices 
above competitive levels. This is a type of market failure. Opening up trade fos-
ters competition and gives the invisible hand a better chance to work its magic.
• 	 Enhanced flow of ideas. The transfer of technological advances around the 
world is often thought to be linked to the trading of the goods that embody 
those advances. The best way for a poor agricultural nation to learn about 
the computer revolution, for instance, is to buy some computers from 
abroad rather than trying to make them domestically. 
Thus, free international trade increases variety for consumers, allows firms 
to take advantage of economies of scale, makes markets more competitive, 
and facilitates the spread of technology. If the Isolandian economists also took 
these effects into account, their advice to their president would be even more 
forceful.
Quick Quiz  Draw a supply and demand diagram for wool suits in the country of 
Autarka. When trade is allowed, the price of a suit falls from 3 to 2 ounces of gold. 
In your diagram, show the change in consumer surplus, the change in producer sur-
plus, and the change in total surplus. How would a tariff on suit imports alter these 
effects?
The Arguments for Restricting Trade
The letter from the economics team starts to persuade the new president of Isoland 
to consider allowing trade in textiles. She notes that the domestic price is now high 
compared to the world price. Free trade would, therefore, cause the price of textiles 
to fall and hurt domestic textiles producers. Before implementing the new policy, 
she asks Isolandian textile companies to comment on the economists’ advice.
Not surprisingly, the textile companies oppose free trade in textiles. They 
believe that the government should protect the domestic textile industry from 
foreign competition. Let’s consider some of the arguments they might give to sup-
port their position and how the economics team would respond.
The Jobs Argument
Opponents of free trade often argue that trade with other countries destroys domestic 
jobs. In our example, free trade in textiles would cause the price of textiles to fall, reduc-
ing the quantity of textiles produced in Isoland and thus reducing employment in the 
Isolandian textile industry. Some Isolandian textile workers would lose their jobs.
Yet free trade creates jobs at the same time that it destroys them. When 
Isolandians buy textiles from other countries, those countries obtain the resources 
to buy other goods from Isoland. Isolandian workers would move from the textile 
industry to those industries in which Isoland has a comparative advantage. The 
transition may impose hardship on some workers in the short run, but it allows 
Isolandians as a whole to enjoy a higher standard of living.
Opponents of trade are often skeptical that trade creates jobs. They might 
respond that everything can be produced more cheaply abroad. Under free trade, 
they might argue, Isolandians could not be profitably employed in any industry. 
© Berry’s World reprinted by permission 
of United Feature Syndicate, Inc.
“You like protection-
ism as a ‘working 
man.’ How about  
as a consumer?”

183
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
 Should the Winners from Free Trade 
Compensate the Losers?
Politicians and pundits often say that the government should help work-
ers made worse off by international trade by, for example, paying for their 
retraining. In this opinion piece, an economist makes the opposite case.
in the news
What to Expect When 
You’re Free Trading 
By Steven E. Landsburg
A
ll economists know that when American 
jobs are outsourced, Americans as a 
group are net winners. What we lose through 
lower wages is more than offset by what we 
gain through lower prices. In other words, the 
winners can more than afford to compensate 
the losers. Does that mean they ought to? 
Does it create a moral mandate for taxpayer-
subsidized retraining programs?…
	
Um, no. Even if you’ve just lost your job, 
there’s something fundamentally churlish 
about blaming the very phenomenon that’s 
elevated you above the subsistence level 
since the day you were born. If the world 
owes you compensation for enduring the 
downside of trade, what do you owe the 
world for enjoying the upside?
	
I doubt there’s a human being on earth 
who hasn’t benefited from the opportunity 
to trade freely with his neighbors. Imagine 
what your life would be like if you had to 
grow your own food, make your own clothes 
and rely on your grandmother’s home reme­
dies for health care. Access to a trained 
physician might reduce the demand for 
grandma’s home remedies, but—especially 
at her age—she’s still got plenty of reason 
to be thankful for having a doctor. 
	
Some people suggest, however, that it 
makes sense to isolate the moral effects of a 
single new trading opportunity or free trade 
agreement. Surely we have fellow citizens 
who are hurt by those agreements, at least 
in the limited sense that they’d be better off 
in a world where trade flourishes, except in 
this one instance. What do we owe those 
fellow citizens?
	
One way to think about that is to ask what 
your moral instincts tell you in analogous situa-
tions. Suppose, after years of buying shampoo 
at your local pharmacy, you discover you 
can order the same shampoo for less money 
on the Web. Do you have an obligation to 
compensate your pharmacist? If you move to 
a cheaper apartment, should you compensate 
your landlord? When you eat at McDonald’s, 
should you compensate the owners of the 
diner next door? Public policy should not be 
designed to advance moral instincts that we 
all reject every day of our lives.
	
In what morally relevant way, then, 
might displaced workers differ from dis-
placed pharmacists or displaced land-
lords? You might argue that pharmacists 
and landlords have always faced cutthroat 
competition and therefore knew what 
they were getting into, while decades of 
tariffs and quotas have led manufacturing 
workers to expect a modicum of protec-
tion. That expectation led them to develop 
certain skills, and now it’s unfair to pull 
the rug out from under them. 
	
Once again, that argument does not 
mesh with our everyday instincts. For many 
decades, schoolyard bullying has been a 
profitable occupation. All across America, 
bullies have built up skills so they can take 
advantage of that opportunity. If we toughen 
the rules to make bullying unprofitable, 
must we compensate the bullies?
	
Bullying and protectionism have a lot 
in common. They both use force (either 
directly or through the power of the law) 
to enrich someone else at your involun-
tary expense. If you’re forced to pay $20 
an hour to an American for goods you 
could have bought from a Mexican for $5 
an hour, you’re being extorted. When a 
free trade agreement allows you to buy 
from the Mexican after all, rejoice in your 
liberation. 
Source: New York Times, January 16, 2008.
As Chapter 3 explains, however, the gains from trade are based on comparative 
advantage, not absolute advantage. Even if one country is better than another 
country at producing everything, each country can still gain from trading with the 
other. Workers in each country will eventually find jobs in an industry in which 
that country has a comparative advantage.

184
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
The National-Security Argument
When an industry is threatened with competition from other countries, oppo-
nents of free trade often argue that the industry is vital for national security. For 
example, if Isoland were considering free trade in steel, domestic steel companies 
might point out that steel is used to make guns and tanks. Free trade would allow 
Isoland to become dependent on foreign countries to supply steel. If a war later 
broke out and the foreign supply was interrupted, Isoland might be unable to 
produce enough steel and weapons to defend itself.
Economists acknowledge that protecting key industries may be appropriate when 
there are legitimate concerns over national security. Yet they fear that this argument 
may be used too quickly by producers eager to gain at consumers’ expense. 
One should be wary of the national-security argument when it is made by rep-
resentatives of industry rather than the defense establishment.  Companies have 
an incentive to exaggerate their role in national defense to obtain protection from 
foreign competition. A nation’s generals may see things very differently. Indeed, 
when the military is a consumer of an industry’s output, it would benefit from 
Trouble with Trade 
By Paul Krugman 
W
hile the United States has long import-
ed oil and other raw materials from 
the third world, we used to import manufac-
tured goods mainly from other rich countries 
like Canada, European nations and Japan. 
	
But recently we crossed an important 
watershed: we now import more manu-
factured goods from the third world than 
from other advanced economies. That is, a 
majority of our industrial trade is now with 
countries that are much poorer than we 
are and that pay their workers much lower 
wages.
	
For the world economy as a whole—
and especially for poorer nations—growing 
trade between high-wage and low-wage 
countries is a very good thing. Above all, it 
offers backward economies their best hope 
of moving up the income ladder.
	
But for American workers the story is 
much less positive. In fact, it’s hard to avoid 
the conclusion that growing U.S. trade with 
third-world countries reduces the real wages 
of many and perhaps most workers in this 
country. And that reality makes the politics 
of trade very difficult.
	
Let’s talk for a moment about the  
economics.
	
Trade between high-wage countries 
tends to be a modest win for all, or almost 
all, concerned. When a free-trade pact 
made it possible to integrate the U.S. and 
Canadian auto industries in the 1960s, each 
country’s industry concentrated on produc-
ing a narrower range of products at larger 
scale. The result was an all-round, broadly 
shared rise in productivity and wages.
	
By contrast, trade between countries at 
very different levels of economic develop-
ment tends to create large classes of losers 
as well as winners. 
	
Although the outsourcing of some high-
tech jobs to India has made headlines, on 
balance, highly educated workers in the 
United States benefit from higher wages 
and expanded job opportunities because 
of trade. For example, ThinkPad notebook 
 Second Thoughts about Free Trade
Some economists worry about the impact of trade on the distribution of 
income. Even if free trade enhances efficiency, it may reduce equality.
in the news

185
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
computers are now made by a Chinese 
company, Lenovo, but a lot of Lenovo’s 
research and development is conducted in 
North Carolina. 
	
But workers with less formal education 
either see their jobs shipped overseas or find 
their wages driven down by the ripple effect 
as other workers with similar qualifications 
crowd into their industries and look for 
employment to replace the jobs they lost 
to foreign competition. And lower prices at 
Wal-Mart aren’t sufficient compensation.
	
All this is textbook international eco-
nomics: contrary to what people sometimes 
assert, economic theory says that free trade 
normally makes a country richer, but it 
doesn’t say that it’s normally good for every-
one. Still, when the effects of third-world 
exports on U.S. wages first became an issue 
in the 1990s, a number of economists—
myself included—looked at the data and 
concluded that any negative effects on U.S. 
wages were modest. 
	
The trouble now is that these effects 
may no longer be as modest as they were, 
because imports of manufactured goods from 
the third world have grown dramatically—
from just 2.5 percent of G.D.P. in 1990 to  
6 percent in 2006. 
	
And the biggest growth in imports has 
come from countries with very low wages. 
The original “newly industrializing econo-
mies” exporting manufactured goods—
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and 
Singapore—paid wages that were about 25 
percent of U.S. levels in 1990. Since then, 
however, the sources of our imports have 
shifted to Mexico, where wages are only 11 
percent of the U.S. level, and China, where 
they’re only about 3 percent or 4 percent.
	
There are some qualifying aspects to this 
story. For example, many of those made-in-
China goods contain components made in 
Japan and other high-wage economies. Still, 
there’s little doubt that the pressure of glo-
balization on American wages has increased.
	
So am I arguing for protectionism? No. 
Those who think that globalization is always 
and everywhere a bad thing are wrong. On 
the contrary, keeping world markets rela-
tively open is crucial to the hopes of billions 
of people. 
	
But I am arguing for an end to the 
finger-wagging, the accusation either of not 
understanding economics or of kowtowing 
to special interests that tends to be the 
editorial response to politicians who express 
skepticism about the benefits of free-trade 
agreements.
	
It’s often claimed that limits on trade 
benefit only a small number of Americans, 
while hurting the vast majority. That’s still 
true of things like the import quota on sugar. 
But when it comes to manufactured goods, 
it’s at least arguable that the reverse is true. 
The highly educated workers who clearly 
benefit from growing trade with third-world 
economies are a minority, greatly outnum-
bered by those who probably lose.
	
As I said, I’m not a protectionist. For the 
sake of the world as a whole, I hope that 
we respond to the trouble with trade not 
by shutting trade down, but by doing things 
like strengthening the social safety net. But 
those who are worried about trade have a 
point, and deserve some respect. 
Source: New York Times, December 28, 2007.
imports. Cheaper steel in Isoland, for example, would allow the Isolandian mili-
tary to accumulate a stockpile of weapons at lower cost. 
The Infant-Industry Argument
New industries sometimes argue for temporary trade restrictions to help them 
get started. After a period of protection, the argument goes, these industries will 
mature and be able to compete with foreign firms. 
Similarly, older industries sometimes argue that they need temporary protection 
to help them adjust to new conditions. For example, in 2002, President Bush imposed 
temporary tariffs on imported steel. He said, “I decided that imports were severely 
affecting our industry, an important industry.” The tariff, which lasted 20 months, 
offered “temporary relief so that the industry could restructure itself.” 
Economists are often skeptical about such claims, largely because the infant-
industry argument is difficult to implement in practice. To apply protection suc-
cessfully, the government would need to decide which industries will eventually 
be profitable and decide whether the benefits of establishing these industries 
exceed the costs of this protection to consumers. Yet “picking winners” is extraor-
dinarily difficult. It is made even more difficult by the political process, which 
often awards protection to those industries that are politically powerful. And 

186
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
once a powerful industry is protected from foreign competition, the “temporary” 
policy is sometimes hard to remove.
In addition, many economists are skeptical about the infant-industry argument 
in principle. Suppose, for instance, that an industry is young and unable to compete 
profitably against foreign rivals, but there is reason to believe that the industry can 
be profitable in the long run. In this case, firm owners should be willing to incur tem-
porary losses to obtain the eventual profits. Protection is not necessary for an infant 
industry to grow. History shows that start-up firms often incur temporary losses and 
succeed in the long run, even without protection from competition.
The Unfair-Competition Argument
A common argument is that free trade is desirable only if all countries play by 
the same rules. If firms in different countries are subject to different laws and 
regulations, then it is unfair (the argument goes) to expect the firms to compete 
in the international marketplace. For instance, suppose that the government of 
Neighborland subsidizes its textile industry by giving textile companies large tax 
breaks. The Isolandian textile industry might argue that it should be protected 
from this foreign competition because Neighborland is not competing fairly.
Would it, in fact, hurt Isoland to buy textiles from another country at a subsi-
dized price? Certainly, Isolandian textile producers would suffer, but Isolandian 
textile consumers would benefit from the low price. The case for free trade is no 
different: The gains of the consumers from buying at the low price would exceed 
the losses of the producers. Neighborland’s subsidy to its textile industry may be 
a bad policy, but it is the taxpayers of Neighborland who bear the burden. Isoland 
can benefit from the opportunity to buy textiles at a subsidized price.
The Protection-as-a-Bargaining-Chip Argument
Another argument for trade restrictions concerns the strategy of bargaining. 
Many policymakers claim to support free trade but, at the same time, argue that 
trade restrictions can be useful when we bargain with our trading partners. They 
claim that the threat of a trade restriction can help remove a trade restriction 
already imposed by a foreign government. For example, Isoland might threaten 
to impose a tariff on textiles unless Neighborland removes its tariff on wheat. If 
Neighborland responds to this threat by removing its tariff, the result can be freer 
trade.
The problem with this bargaining strategy is that the threat may not work. If 
it doesn’t work, the country faces a choice between two bad options. It can carry 
out its threat and implement the trade restriction, which would reduce its own 
economic welfare. Or it can back down from its threat, which would cause it to 
lose prestige in international affairs. Faced with this choice, the country would 
probably wish that it had never made the threat in the first place.
Trade Agreements and the World Trade 
Organization
A country can take one of two approaches to achieving free trade. It can take a uni-
lateral approach and remove its trade restrictions on its own. This is the approach 
that Great Britain took in the 19th century and that Chile and South Korea have 
taken in recent years. Alternatively, a country can take a multilateral approach and 

187
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
reduce its trade restrictions while other countries do the same. In other words, it 
can bargain with its trading partners in an attempt to reduce trade restrictions 
around the world. 
	
One important example of the multilateral approach is the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which in 1993 lowered trade barriers among the 
United States, Mexico, and Canada. Another is the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT), which is a continuing series of negotiations among many of 
the world’s countries with the goal of promoting free trade. The United States 
helped to found GATT after World War II in response to the high tariffs imposed 
during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Many economists believe that the high 
tariffs contributed to the worldwide economic hardship of that period. GATT  
has successfully reduced the average tariff among member countries from about 
40 percent after World War II to about 5 percent today. 
	
The rules established under GATT are now enforced by an international insti-
tution called the World Trade Organization (WTO). The WTO was established in 
1995 and has its headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. As of 2009, 153 countries 
have joined the organization, accounting for more than 97 percent of world trade. 
The functions of the WTO are to administer trade agreements, provide a forum 
for negotiations, and handle disputes among member countries. 
	
What are the pros and cons of the multilateral approach to free trade? One 
advantage is that the multilateral approach has the potential to result in freer 
trade than a unilateral approach because it can reduce trade restrictions abroad 
as well as at home. If international negotiations fail, however, the result could be 
more restricted trade than under a unilateral approach.
	
In addition, the multilateral approach may have a political advantage. In most 
markets, producers are fewer and better organized than consumers—and thus 
wield greater political influence. Reducing the Isolandian tariff on textiles, for 
example, may be politically difficult if considered by itself. The textile compa-
nies would oppose free trade, and the buyers of textiles who would benefit are 
so numerous that organizing their support would be difficult. Yet suppose that 
Neighborland promises to reduce its tariff on wheat at the same time that Isoland 
reduces its tariff on textiles. In this case, the Isolandian wheat farmers, who 
are also politically powerful, would back the agreement. Thus, the multilateral 
approach to free trade can sometimes win political support when a unilateral 
approach cannot.  ■
Quick Quiz  The textile industry of Autarka advocates a ban on the import of wool 
suits. Describe five arguments its lobbyists might make. Give a response to each of 
these arguments.
Conclusion
Economists and the public often disagree about free trade. In 2008, the Los Angeles 
Times asked the American public, “Generally speaking, do you believe that free 
international trade has helped or hurt the economy, or hasn’t it made a differ-
ence to the economy one way or the other?” Only 26 percent of those polled said  
free international trade helped, whereas 50 percent thought it hurt. (The rest 
thought it made no difference or were unsure.) By contrast, most economists  
support free international trade. They view free trade as a way of allocating  
production efficiently and raising living standards both at home and abroad. 

188
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
Summary 
Economists view the United States as an ongoing experiment that confirms the 
virtues of free trade. Throughout its history, the United States has allowed unre-
stricted trade among the states, and the country as a whole has benefited from 
the specialization that trade allows. Florida grows oranges, Alaska pumps oil, 
California makes wine, and so on. Americans would not enjoy the high standard 
of living they do today if people could consume only those goods and services 
produced in their own states. The world could similarly benefit from free trade 
among countries.
To better understand economists’ view of trade, let’s continue our parable. 
Suppose that the president of Isoland, after reading the latest poll results, ignores 
the advice of her economics team and decides not to allow free trade in textiles. 
The country remains in the equilibrium without international trade.
Then, one day, some Isolandian inventor discovers a new way to make textiles 
at very low cost. The process is quite mysterious, however, and the inventor 
insists on keeping it a secret. What is odd is that the inventor doesn’t need tradi-
tional inputs such as cotton or wool. The only material input he needs is wheat. 
And even more oddly, to manufacture textiles from wheat, he hardly needs any 
labor input at all.
The inventor is hailed as a genius. Because everyone buys clothing, the lower 
cost of textiles allows all Isolandians to enjoy a higher standard of living. Workers 
who had previously produced textiles experience some hardship when their 
factories close, but eventually, they find work in other industries. Some become 
farmers and grow the wheat that the inventor turns into textiles. Others enter new 
industries that emerge as a result of higher Isolandian living standards. Everyone 
understands that the displacement of workers in outmoded industries is an inevi-
table part of technological progress and economic growth. 
After several years, a newspaper reporter decides to investigate this mysteri-
ous new textiles process. She sneaks into the inventor’s factory and learns that the 
inventor is a fraud. The inventor has not been making textiles at all. Instead, he 
has been smuggling wheat abroad in exchange for textiles from other countries. 
The only thing that the inventor had discovered was the gains from international 
trade.
When the truth is revealed, the government shuts down the inventor’s opera-
tion. The price of textiles rises, and workers return to jobs in textile factories. 
Living standards in Isoland fall back to their former levels. The inventor is jailed 
and held up to public ridicule. After all, he was no inventor. He was just an 
economist.
• The effects of free trade can be determined by 
comparing the domestic price without trade to 
the world price. A low domestic price indicates 
that the country has a comparative advantage 
in producing the good and that the country will 
become an exporter. A high domestic price indi-
cates that the rest of the world has a comparative 
advantage in producing the good and that the 
country will become an importer. 
• When a country allows trade and becomes an 
exporter of a good, producers of the good are 
better off, and consumers of the good are worse 
off. When a country allows trade and becomes an 
importer of a good, consumers are better off, and 
producers are worse off. In both cases, the gains 
from trade exceed the losses.

189
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
• A tariff—a tax on imports—moves a market 
closer to the equilibrium that would exist without 
trade and, therefore, reduces the gains from 
trade. Although domestic producers are better 
off and the government raises revenue, the losses 
to consumers exceed these gains.
• There are various arguments for restricting trade: 
protecting jobs, defending national security, 
helping infant industries, preventing unfair 
competition, and responding to foreign trade 
restrictions. Although some of these arguments 
have some merit in some cases, economists 
believe that free trade is usually the better policy.
Key Concepts
world price, p. 173
tariff, p. 177
Questions for Review
	 1.	 What does the domestic price that prevails 
without international trade tell us about a 
nation’s comparative advantage?
	 2.	 When does a country become an exporter of a 
good? An importer?
	 3.	 Draw the supply-and-demand diagram for an 
importing country. What is consumer surplus 
and producer surplus before trade is allowed? 
What is consumer surplus and producer 
surplus with free trade? What is the change in 
total surplus?
	 4.	 Describe what a tariff is and its economic effects.
	 5.	 List five arguments often given to support trade 
restrictions. How do economists respond to 
these arguments?
	 6.	 What is the difference between the unilateral 
and multilateral approaches to achieving free 
trade? Give an example of each.
Problems and Applications
	 1.	 Mexico represents a small part of the world 
orange market.
a.	 Draw a diagram depicting the equilibrium 
in the Mexican orange market without 
international trade. Identify the equilibrium 
price, equilibrium quantity, consumer 
surplus, and producer surplus.
b.	Suppose that the world orange price is below 
the Mexican price before trade and that the 
Mexican orange market is now opened to 
trade. Identify the new equilibrium price, 
quantity consumed, quantity produced 
domestically, and quantity imported. Also 
show the change in the surplus of domestic 
consumers and producers. Has total surplus 
increased or decreased?
	 2.	 The world price of wine is below the price that 
would prevail in Canada in the absence of trade.
a.	 Assuming that Canadian imports of wine are 
a small part of total world wine production, 
draw a graph for the Canadian market for 
wine under free trade. Identify consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus 
in an appropriate table.
b.	Now suppose that an unusual shift of the 
Gulf Stream leads to an unseasonably cold 
summer in Europe, destroying much of the 
grape harvest there. What effect does this 
shock have on the world price of wine? Using 
your graph and table from part (a), show 
the effect on consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and total surplus in Canada. Who 
are the winners and losers? Is Canada as a 
whole better or worse off?
	 3.	 Suppose that Congress imposes a tariff on 
imported autos to protect the U.S. auto industry 

190
PART Iii	
Markets and Welfare
from foreign competition. Assuming that the 
United States is a price taker in the world auto 
market, show the following on a diagram: the 
change in the quantity of imports, the loss to 
U.S. consumers, the gain to U.S. manufacturers, 
government revenue, and the deadweight 
loss associated with the tariff. The loss to 
consumers can be decomposed into three pieces: 
a gain to domestic producers, revenue for the 
government, and a deadweight loss. Use your 
diagram to identify these three pieces.
	 4.	 When China’s clothing industry expands, the 
increase in world supply lowers the world price 
of clothing. 
a.	 Draw an appropriate diagram to analyze 
how this change in price affects consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus 
in a nation that imports clothing, such as the 
United States. 
b.	Now draw an appropriate diagram to show 
how this change in price affects consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus 
in a nation that exports clothing, such as the 
Dominican Republic. 
c.	 Compare your answers to parts (a) and 
(b). What are the similarities and what are 
the differences? Which country should 
be concerned about the expansion of the 
Chinese textile industry? Which country 
should be applauding it? Explain.
	 5.	 Imagine that winemakers in the state of 
Washington petitioned the state government to 
tax wines imported from California. They argue 
that this tax would both raise tax revenue for 
the state government and raise employment in 
the Washington state wine industry. Do you 
agree with these claims? Is it a good policy?
	 6.	 Consider the arguments for restricting trade.
a.	 Assume you are a lobbyist for timber, an 
established industry suffering from low-
priced foreign competition. Which two or 
three of the five arguments do you think 
would be most persuasive to the average 
member of Congress as to why he or she 
should support trade restrictions? Explain 
your reasoning.
b.	Now assume you are an astute student 
of economics (hopefully not a hard 
assumption). Although all the arguments for 
restricting trade have their shortcomings, 
name the two or three arguments that seem 
to make the most economic sense to you. 
For each, describe the economic rationale 
for and against these arguments for trade 
restrictions.
	 7.	 Senator Ernest Hollings once wrote that 
“consumers do not benefit from lower-priced 
imports. Glance through some mail-order 
catalogs and you’ll see that consumers pay 
exactly the same price for clothing whether it is 
U.S.-made or imported.” Comment.
	 8.	 The nation of Textilia does not allow imports 
of clothing. In its equilibrium without trade, a 
T-shirt costs $20, and the equilibrium quantity is 
3 million T-shirts. One day, after reading Adam 
Smith’s The Wealth of Nations while on vacation, 
the president decides to open the Textilian 
market to international trade. The market 
price of a T-shirt falls to the world price of $16. 
The number of T-shirts consumed in Textilia 
rises to 4 million, while the number of T-shirts 
produced declines to 1 million. 
a.	 Illustrate the situation just described in 
a graph. Your graph should show all the 
numbers.
b.	Calculate the change in consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, and total surplus that 
results from opening up trade. (Hint: Recall 
that the area of a triangle is ½ × base × 
height.)
	 9.	 China is a major producer of grains, such as 
wheat, corn, and rice. In 2008 the Chinese 
government, concerned that grain exports were 
driving up food prices for domestic consumers, 
imposed a tax on grain exports.
a.	 Draw the graph that describes the market for 
grain in an exporting country. Use this graph 
as the starting point to answer the following 
questions.
b.	How does an export tax affect domestic grain 
prices? 
c.	 How does it affect the welfare of domestic 
consumers, the welfare of domestic 
producers, and government revenue?
d.	What happens to total welfare in China, as 
measured by the sum of consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, and tax revenue?
	10.	 Consider a country that imports a good from 
abroad. For each of following statements, say 
whether it is true or false. Explain your answer.
a.	 “The greater the elasticity of demand, the 
greater the gains from trade.”

191
CHAPTER 9    Application: International Trade
b.	“If demand is perfectly inelastic, there are no 
gains from trade.”
c.	 “If demand is perfectly inelastic, consumers 
do not benefit from trade.” 
	11.	 Kawmin is a small country that produces and 
consumes jelly beans. The world price of jelly 
beans is $1 per bag, and Kawmin’s domestic 
demand and supply for jelly beans are governed 
by the following equations:
Demand: QD 5 8 – P
Supply:    QS  5 P,
where P is in dollars per bag and Q is in bags of 
jelly beans.
a.	 Draw a well-labeled graph of the situation in 
Kawmin if the nation does not allow trade. 
Calculate the following (recalling that the 
area of a triangle is ½ 3 base 3 height): the 
equilibrium price and quantity, consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus.
b.	Kawmin then opens the market to trade. 
Draw another graph to describe the 
new situation in the jelly bean market. 
Calculate the equilibrium price, quantities 
of consumption and production, imports, 
consumer surplus, producer surplus, and 
total surplus.
c.	 After a while, the Czar of Kawmin responds 
to the pleas of jelly bean producers by 
placing a $1 per bag tariff on jelly bean 
imports. On a graph, show the effects of 
this tariff. Calculate the equilibrium price, 
quantities of consumption and production, 
imports, consumer surplus, producer surplus, 
government revenue, and total surplus.
d.	What are the gains from opening up 
trade? What are the deadweight losses 
from restricting trade with the tariff? Give 
numerical answers.
	12.	 Having rejected a tariff on textiles (a tax on 
imports), the president of Isoland is now 
considering the same-sized tax on textile 
consumption (including both imported and 
domestically produced textiles).
a.	 Using Figure 4, identify the quantity 
consumed and the quantity produced in 
Isoland under a textile consumption tax. 
b.	Construct a table similar to that in Figure 4 
for the textile consumption tax.
c.	 Which raises more revenue for the 
government—the consumption tax or the 
tariff? Which has a smaller deadweight loss?  
Explain.
	13.	 Assume the United States is an importer of 
televisions and there are no trade restrictions. 
U.S. consumers buy 1 million televisions 
per year, of which 400,000 are produced 
domestically and 600,000 are imported. 
a.	 Suppose that a technological advance among 
Japanese television manufacturers causes 
the world price of televisions to fall by $100. 
Draw a graph to show how this change 
affects the welfare of U.S. consumers and U.S. 
producers and how it affects total surplus in 
the United States.
b.	After the fall in price, consumers buy 1.2 
million televisions, of which 200,000 are 
produced domestically and 1 million are 
imported. Calculate the change in consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus 
from the price reduction.
c.	 If the government responded by putting a 
$100 tariff on imported televisions, what 
would this do? Calculate the revenue 
that would be raised and the deadweight 
loss. Would it be a good policy from the 
standpoint of U.S. welfare? Who might 
support the policy? 
d.	Suppose that the fall in price is attributable 
not to technological advance but to a $100 
per television subsidy from the Japanese 
government to Japanese industry. How 
would this affect your analysis? 
	14.	 Consider a small country that exports steel. 
Suppose that a “pro-trade” government 
decides to subsidize the export of steel by 
paying a certain amount for each ton sold 
abroad. How does this export subsidy affect 
the domestic price of steel, the quantity 
of steel produced, the quantity of steel 
consumed, and the quantity of steel exported? 
How does it affect consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, government revenue, and 
total surplus? Is it a good policy from the 
standpoint of economic efficiency? (Hint: The 
analysis of an export subsidy is similar to the 
analysis of a tariff.)
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at  
www.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.


The Economics of  
the Public Sector
IV
Part


195
10
Externalities
F
irms that make and sell paper also create, as a by-product of the manufac-
turing process, a chemical called dioxin. Scientists believe that once dioxin 
enters the environment, it raises the population’s risk of cancer, birth 
defects, and other health problems.
Is the production and release of dioxin a problem for society? In Chapters 4 
through 9, we examined how markets allocate scarce resources with the forces 
of supply and demand, and we saw that the equilibrium of supply and demand 
is typically an efficient allocation of resources. To use Adam Smith’s famous 
metaphor, the “invisible hand” of the marketplace leads self-interested buyers 
and sellers in a market to maximize the total benefit that society derives from 
that market. This insight is the basis for one of the Ten Principles of Economics in 
Chapter 1: Markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. Should 
we conclude, therefore, that the invisible hand prevents firms in the paper market 
from emitting too much dioxin? 
Markets do many things well, but they do not do everything well. In this chapter, 
we begin our study of another of the Ten Principles of Economics: Government 

196
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
action can sometimes improve upon market outcomes. We examine why mar-
kets sometimes fail to allocate resources efficiently, how government policies can 
potentially improve the market’s allocation, and what kinds of policies are likely 
to work best. 
The market failures examined in this chapter fall under a general category 
called externalities. An externality arises when a person engages in an activity 
that influences the well-being of a bystander but neither pays nor receives any 
compensation for that effect. If the impact on the bystander is adverse, it is called 
a negative externality. If it is beneficial, it is called a positive externality. In the pres-
ence of externalities, society’s interest in a market outcome extends beyond the 
well-being of buyers and sellers who participate in the market to include the 
well-being of bystanders who are affected indirectly. Because buyers and sellers 
neglect the external effects of their actions when deciding how much to demand 
or supply, the market equilibrium is not efficient when there are externalities. That 
is, the equilibrium fails to maximize the total benefit to society as a whole. The 
release of dioxin into the environment, for instance, is a negative externality. Self-
interested paper firms will not consider the full cost of the pollution they create in 
their production process, and consumers of paper will not consider the full cost of 
the pollution they contribute from their purchasing decisions. Therefore, the firms 
will emit too much pollution unless the government prevents or discourages them 
from doing so.
Externalities come in many varieties, as do the policy responses that try to deal 
with the market failure. Here are some examples:
• 	 The exhaust from automobiles is a negative externality because it creates 
smog that other people have to breathe. As a result of this externality, 
drivers tend to pollute too much. The federal government attempts to solve 
this problem by setting emission standards for cars. It also taxes gasoline to 
reduce the amount that people drive.
• 	 Restored historic buildings convey a positive externality because people 
who walk or ride by them can enjoy the beauty and the sense of history 
that these buildings provide. Building owners do not get the full benefit of 
restoration and, therefore, tend to discard older buildings too quickly. Many 
local governments respond to this problem by regulating the destruction of 
historic buildings and by providing tax breaks to owners who restore them.
• 	 Barking dogs create a negative externality because neighbors are disturbed 
by the noise. Dog owners do not bear the full cost of the noise and, 
therefore, tend to take too few precautions to prevent their dogs from 
barking. Local governments address this problem by making it illegal to 
“disturb the peace.”
• 	 Research into new technologies provides a positive externality because it 
creates knowledge that other people can use. Because inventors cannot 
capture the full benefits of their inventions, they tend to devote too few 
resources to research. The federal government addresses this problem 
partially through the patent system, which gives inventors exclusive use of 
their inventions for a limited time.
In each of these cases, some decision maker fails to take account of the external 
effects of his or her behavior. The government responds by trying to influence this 
behavior to protect the interests of bystanders.
externality
the uncompensated 
impact of one person’s 
actions on the well-being 
of a bystander

197
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
Externalities and Market Inefficiency
In this section, we use the tools of welfare economics developed in Chapter 7 to 
examine how externalities affect economic well-being. The analysis shows pre-
cisely why externalities cause markets to allocate resources inefficiently. Later in 
the chapter, we examine various ways in which private individuals and public 
policymakers may remedy this type of market failure.
Welfare Economics: A Recap
We begin by recalling the key lessons of welfare economics from Chapter 7. 
To make our analysis concrete, we consider a specific market—the market  
for aluminum. Figure 1 shows the supply and demand curves in the market for 
aluminum. 
As you should recall from Chapter 7, the supply and demand curves contain 
important information about costs and benefits. The demand curve for aluminum 
reflects the value of aluminum to consumers, as measured by the prices they are 
willing to pay. At any given quantity, the height of the demand curve shows 
the willingness to pay of the marginal buyer. In other words, it shows the value 
to the consumer of the last unit of aluminum bought. Similarly, the supply curve  
reflects the costs of producing aluminum. At any given quantity, the height of 
the supply curve shows the cost to the marginal seller. In other words, it shows 
the cost to the producer of the last unit of aluminum sold.
In the absence of government intervention, the price adjusts to balance the 
supply and demand for aluminum. The quantity produced and consumed in the 
market equilibrium, shown as QMARKET in Figure 1, is efficient in the sense that it 
maximizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. That is, the market allo-
cates resources in a way that maximizes the total value to the consumers who 
buy and use aluminum minus the total costs to the producers who make and sell 
aluminum.
Figure 1
The Market for Aluminum
The demand curve reflects the value  
to buyers, and the supply curve reflects 
the costs of sellers. The equilibrium 
quantity, QMARKET, maximizes the total 
value to buyers minus the total  
costs of sellers. In the absence of 
externalities, therefore, the market 
equilibrium is efficient. 
Equilibrium
Quantity of
Aluminum
0
Price of
Aluminum
QMARKET
Demand
(private value)
Supply
(private cost)

198
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
Negative Externalities
Now let’s suppose that aluminum factories emit pollution: For each unit of alu-
minum produced, a certain amount of smoke enters the atmosphere. Because this 
smoke creates a health risk for those who breathe the air, it is a negative externality. 
How does this externality affect the efficiency of the market outcome?
Because of the externality, the cost to society of producing aluminum is larger 
than the cost to the aluminum producers. For each unit of aluminum produced, 
the social cost includes the private costs of the aluminum producers plus the costs 
to those bystanders affected adversely by the pollution. Figure 2 shows the social 
cost of producing aluminum. The social-cost curve is above the supply curve 
because it takes into account the external costs imposed on society by aluminum 
production. The difference between these two curves reflects the cost of the pollu­
tion emitted.
What quantity of aluminum should be produced? To answer this question, 
we once again consider what a benevolent social planner would do. The plan-
ner wants to maximize the total surplus derived from the market—the value to 
consumers of aluminum minus the cost of producing aluminum. The planner 
understands, however, that the cost of producing aluminum includes the external 
costs of the pollution.
The planner would choose the level of aluminum production at which the 
demand curve crosses the social-cost curve. This intersection determines the opti-
mal amount of aluminum from the standpoint of society as a whole. Below this 
level of production, the value of the aluminum to consumers (as measured by the 
height of the demand curve) exceeds the social cost of producing it (as measured 
by the height of the social-cost curve). The planner does not produce more than 
this level because the social cost of producing additional aluminum exceeds the 
value to consumers.
Note that the equilibrium quantity of aluminum, QMARKET, is larger than the 
socially optimal quantity, QOPTIMUM. This inefficiency occurs because the market 
© J.B. Handelsman/ The New Yorker Collection/ 
www.cartoonbank.com
“All I can say is that if 
being a leading manu­
facturer means being a 
leading polluter, so be it.”
Figure 2
Pollution and the Social 
Optimum
In the presence of a  
negative externality, such as 
pollution, the social cost of 
the good exceeds the private 
cost. The optimal quantity, 
QOPTIMUM, is therefore smaller 
than the equilibrium 
quantity, QMARKET.
Equilibrium
Quantity of
Aluminum
0
Price of
Aluminum
QMARKET
Demand
(private value)
Supply
(private cost)
Social cost (private cost 
and external cost)
QOPTIMUM
Optimum
External
Cost

199
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
equilibrium reflects only the private costs of production. In the market equilib-
rium, the marginal consumer values aluminum at less than the social cost of 
producing it. That is, at QMARKET, the demand curve lies below the social-cost 
curve. Thus, reducing aluminum production and consumption below the market 
equilibrium level raises total economic well-being.
How can the social planner achieve the optimal outcome? One way would be 
to tax aluminum producers for each ton of aluminum sold. The tax would shift 
the supply curve for aluminum upward by the size of the tax. If the tax accu-
rately reflected the external cost of pollutants released into the atmosphere, the 
new supply curve would coincide with the social-cost curve. In the new market 
equilibrium, aluminum producers would produce the socially optimal quantity 
of aluminum. 
The use of such a tax is called internalizing the externality because it 
gives buyers and sellers in the market an incentive to take into account the 
external effects of their actions. Aluminum producers would, in essence, take 
the costs of pollution into account when deciding how much aluminum to 
supply because the tax would make them pay for these external costs. And, 
because the market price would reflect the tax on producers, consumers of 
aluminum would have an incentive to use a smaller quantity. The policy is 
based on one of the Ten Principles of Economics: People respond to incentives. 
Later in this chapter, we consider in more detail how policymakers can deal 
with externalities.
Positive Externalities
Although some activities impose costs on third parties, others yield benefits. For 
example, consider education. To a large extent, the benefit of education is private: 
The consumer of education becomes a more productive worker and thus reaps 
much of the benefit in the form of higher wages. Beyond these private benefits, 
however, education also yields positive externalities. One externality is that a 
more educated population leads to more informed voters, which means better 
government for everyone. Another externality is that a more educated popula-
tion tends to mean lower crime rates. A third externality is that a more educated 
population may encourage the development and dissemination of technological 
advances, leading to higher productivity and wages for everyone. Because of 
these three positive externalities, a person may prefer to have neighbors who are 
well educated. 
The analysis of positive externalities is similar to the analysis of negative exter-
nalities. As Figure 3 shows, the demand curve does not reflect the value to society 
of the good. Because the social value is greater than the private value, the social-
value curve lies above the demand curve. The optimal quantity is found where 
the social-value curve and the supply curve (which represents costs) intersect. 
Hence, the socially optimal quantity is greater than the quantity determined by 
the private market. 
Once again, the government can correct the market failure by inducing market 
participants to internalize the externality. The appropriate response in the case 
of positive externalities is exactly the opposite to the case of negative exter­
nalities. To move the market equilibrium closer to the social optimum, a positive 
externality requires a subsidy. In fact, that is exactly the policy the government 
follows: Education is heavily subsidized through public schools and government 
scholarships.
internalizing the 
externality
altering incentives so that 
people take account of 
the external effects of 
their actions

200
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
The Lorax Was 
Wrong: Skyscrapers 
Are Green
By Edward L. Glaeser
 I
n Dr. Seuss’ environmentalist fable, “The 
Lorax,” the Once-ler, a budding textile mag-
nate, chops down Truffula to knit “Thneeds.” 
	
Over the protests of the environmentally 
sensitive Lorax, the Once-ler builds a great 
industrial town that despoils the environment, 
because he “had to grow bigger.” Even­tually, 
the Once-ler overdoes it, and he chops down 
the last Truffula tree, destroying the source of 
his income. Chastened, Dr. Seuss’s industrialist 
turns green, urging a young listener to take 
the last Truffula seed and plant a new forest. 
	
Some of the lessons told by this story 
are correct. From a purely profit-maximizing 
point of view, the Once-ler is pretty inept, 
because he kills his golden goose. Any good 
management consultant would have told 
him to manage his growth more wisely. 
One aspect of the story’s environmentalist 
message, that bad things happen when we 
overfish a common pool, is also correct. 
	
But the unfortunate aspect of the story 
is that urbanization comes off terribly. The 
forests are good; the factories are bad. Not 
only does the story disparage the remarkable  
benefits that came from the mass pro-
duction of clothing in 19th-century textile 
towns, it sends exactly the wrong message 
on the environment. Contrary to the story’s 
implied message, living in cities is green, 
while living surrounded by forests is brown. 
	
By building taller and taller buildings, 
the Once-ler was proving himself to be the 
real environmentalist. 
	
Matthew Kahn, a U.C.L.A. environ­mental 
economist, and I looked across America’s 
metropolitan areas and calculated the carbon 
emissions associated with a new home in 
different parts of the country. We estimated 
expected energy use from driving and public 
transportation, for a family of fixed size and 
 The Externalities of Country Living
Economist Ed Glaeser says urbanization gets a bum rap.
in the news
Figure 3
Education and the Social 
Optimum
In the presence of a positive 
externality, the social 
value of the good exceeds 
the private value. The 
optimal quantity, QOPTIMUM, 
is therefore larger than the 
equilibrium quantity, QMARKET.
Quantity of
Education
0
Price of
Education
QMARKET
Demand
(private value)
Social value (private value 
and external beneﬁt)
QOPTIMUM
Supply
(private cost)
External
beneﬁt
Optimum
Equilibrium

201
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
Source: New York Times, Economix blog, March 10, 2009.
income. We added in carbon emissions from 
home electricity and home heating. . . .
	
In almost every metropolitan area, we 
found the central city residents emitted less 
carbon than the suburban counterparts. In 
New York and San Francisco, the average 
urban family emits more than two tons less 
carbon annually because it drives less. In 
Nashville, the city-suburb carbon gap due 
to driving is more than three tons. After all, 
density is the defining characteristic of cities. 
All that closeness means that people need to 
travel shorter distances, and that shows up 
clearly in the data. 
	
While public transportation certainly 
uses much less energy, per rider, than 
driving, large carbon reductions are pos-
sible without any switch to buses or rails. 
Higher-density suburban areas, which are 
still entirely car-dependent, still involve a lot 
less travel than the really sprawling places. 
This fact offers some hope for greens eager 
to reduce carbon emissions, since it is a lot 
easier to imagine Americans driving shorter 
distances than giving up their cars. 
	
But cars represent only one-third of 
the gap in carbon emissions between New 
Yorkers and their suburbanites. The gap in 
electricity usage between New York City 
and its suburbs is also about two tons. 
The gap in emissions from home heating 
is almost three tons. All told, we estimate 
a seven-ton difference in carbon emis-
sions between the residents of Manhattan’s 
urban aeries and the good burghers of 
Westchester County. Living surrounded by 
concrete is actually pretty green. Living sur-
rounded by trees is not. 
	
The policy prescription that follows from 
this is that environmentalists should be 
championing the growth of more and taller 
skyscrapers. Every new crane in New York 
City means less low-density development. 
The environmental ideal should be an apart-
ment in downtown San Francisco, not a 
ranch in Marin County.
	
Of course, many environmentalists will 
still prefer to take their cue from Henry David 
Thoreau, who advocated living alone in the 
woods. They would do well to remember 
that Thoreau, in a sloppy chowder-cooking 
moment, burned down 300 acres of prime 
Concord woodland. Few Boston merchants 
did as much environmental harm, which sug-
gests that if you want to take good care of 
the environment, stay away from it and live  
in cities. 
To summarize: Negative externalities lead markets to produce a larger quantity than 
is socially desirable. Positive externalities lead markets to produce a smaller quantity than 
is socially desirable. To remedy the problem, the government can internalize the exter­
nality by taxing goods that have negative externalities and subsidizing goods that have 
positive externalities.
Technology Spillovers, Industrial Policy, and  
Patent Protection
A potentially important type of positive externality is called a technology spillover—
the impact of one firm’s research and production efforts on other firms’ access to 
technological advance. For example, consider the market for industrial robots. 
Robots are at the frontier of a rapidly changing technology. Whenever a firm 
builds a robot, there is some chance that the firm will discover a new and better 
design. This new design may benefit not only this firm but society as a whole 
because the design will enter society’s pool of technological knowledge. That 
is, the new design may have positive externalities for other producers in the 
economy.
© Handout/MCT/Newscom

202
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
In this case, the government can internalize the externality by subsidizing the 
production of robots. If the government paid firms a subsidy for each robot pro-
duced, the supply curve would shift down by the amount of the subsidy, and this 
shift would increase the equilibrium quantity of robots. To ensure that the market 
equilibrium equals the social optimum, the subsidy should equal the value of the 
technology spillover.
How large are technology spillovers, and what do they imply for public policy? 
This is an important question because technological progress is the key to why 
living standards rise over time. Yet it is also a difficult question on which econo-
mists often disagree. 
Some economists believe that technology spillovers are pervasive and that the 
government should encourage those industries that yield the largest spillovers. 
For instance, these economists argue that if making computer chips yields greater 
spillovers than making potato chips, then the government should encourage the 
production of computer chips relative to the production of potato chips. The U.S. 
tax code does this in a limited way by offering special tax breaks for expenditures 
on research and development. Some other nations go farther by subsidizing spe-
cific industries that supposedly offer large technology spillovers. Government 
intervention in the economy that aims to promote technology-enhancing indus-
tries is sometimes called industrial policy. 
Other economists are skeptical about industrial policy. Even if technology 
spillovers are common, the success of an industrial policy requires that the 
govern­ment be able to measure the size of the spillovers from different markets. 
This measurement problem is difficult at best. Moreover, without precise mea-
surements, the political system may end up subsidizing industries with the most 
political clout rather than those that yield the largest positive externalities.
Another way to deal with technology spillovers is patent protection. The ­patent 
laws protect the rights of inventors by giving them exclusive use of their inventions 
for a period of time. When a firm makes a technological breakthrough, it can patent 
the idea and capture much of the economic benefit for itself. The patent internal-
izes the externality by giving the firm a property right over its invention. If other 
firms want to use the new technology, they have to obtain permission from the 
inventing firm and pay it a royalty. Thus, the patent system gives firms a greater 
incentive to engage in research and other activities that advance technology.  ■
Quick Quiz  Give an example of a negative externality and a positive externality. 
Explain why market outcomes are inefficient in the presence of these externalities.
Public Policies toward Externalities 
We have discussed why externalities lead markets to allocate resources ineffi-
ciently but have mentioned only briefly how this inefficiency can be remedied. 
In practice, both public policymakers and private individuals respond to exter­
nalities in various ways. All of the remedies share the goal of moving the alloca-
tion of resources closer to the social optimum. 
This section considers governmental solutions. As a general matter, the govern-
ment can respond to externalities in one of two ways. Command-and-control policies 
regulate behavior directly. Market-based policies provide incentives so that private 
decision makers will choose to solve the problem on their own.

203
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
Command-and-Control Policies: Regulation
The government can remedy an externality by making certain behaviors either 
required or forbidden. For example, it is a crime to dump poisonous chemicals 
into the water supply. In this case, the external costs to society far exceed the 
­benefits to the polluter. The government therefore institutes a command-and-
control policy that prohibits this act altogether. 
In most cases of pollution, however, the situation is not this simple. Despite 
the stated goals of some environmentalists, it would be impossible to prohibit 
all polluting activity. For example, virtually all forms of transportation—even 
the horse—produce some undesirable polluting by-products. But it would 
not be sensible for the government to ban all transportation. Thus, instead of 
­trying to eradicate pollution entirely, society has to weigh the costs and bene­
fits to decide the kinds and quantities of pollution it will allow. In the United 
States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the government agency 
with the task of developing and enforcing regulations aimed at protecting the 
environment. 
Environmental regulations can take many forms. Sometimes the EPA dictates a 
maximum level of pollution that a factory may emit. Other times the EPA requires 
that firms adopt a particular technology to reduce emissions. In all cases, to design 
good rules, the government regulators need to know the details about specific 
industries and about the alternative technologies that those industries could 
adopt. This information is often difficult for government regulators to obtain.
Market-Based Policy 1: Corrective Taxes  
and Subsidies
Instead of regulating behavior in response to an externality, the government can 
use market-based policies to align private incentives with social efficiency. For 
instance, as we saw earlier, the government can internalize the externality by 
taxing activities that have negative externalities and subsidizing activities that 
have positive externalities. Taxes enacted to deal with the effects of negative exter-
nalities are called corrective taxes. They are also called Pigovian taxes after econo-
mist Arthur Pigou (1877–1959), an early advocate of their use. An ideal corrective 
tax would equal the external cost from an activity with negative externalities, and 
an ideal corrective subsidy would equal the external benefit from an activity with 
positive externalities.
Economists usually prefer corrective taxes to regulations as a way to deal with 
pollution because they can reduce pollution at a lower cost to society. To see why, 
let us consider an example. 
Suppose that two factories—a paper mill and a steel mill—are each dumping 
500 tons of glop into a river every year. The EPA decides that it wants to reduce 
the amount of pollution. It considers two solutions:
• 	 Regulation: The EPA could tell each factory to reduce its pollution to  
300 tons of glop per year.
• 	 Corrective tax: The EPA could levy a tax on each factory of $50,000 for  
each ton of glop it emits. 
The regulation would dictate a level of pollution, whereas the tax would give fac-
tory owners an economic incentive to reduce pollution. Which solution do you 
think is better?
corrective tax
a tax designed to induce 
private decision makers to 
take account of the social 
costs that arise from a 
negative externality 
Arthur Pigou
© Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy

204
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
Most economists prefer the tax. To explain this preference, they would first 
point out that a tax is just as effective as a regulation in reducing the overall level 
of pollution. The EPA can achieve whatever level of pollution it wants by setting 
the tax at the appropriate level. The higher the tax, the larger the reduction in 
pollu­tion. If the tax is high enough, the factories will close down altogether, reduc-
ing pollution to zero. 
Although regulation and corrective taxes are both capable of reducing pollution, 
the tax accomplishes this goal more efficiently. The regulation requires each factory 
to reduce pollution by the same amount. An equal reduction, however, is not neces-
sarily the least expensive way to clean up the water. It is possible that the paper mill 
can reduce pollution at lower cost than the steel mill. If so, the paper mill would 
respond to the tax by reducing pollution substantially to avoid the tax, whereas the 
steel mill would respond by reducing pollution less and paying the tax. 
In essence, the corrective tax places a price on the right to pollute. Just as 
markets allocate goods to those buyers who value them most highly, a corrective 
tax allocates pollution to those factories that face the highest cost of reducing it. 
Whatever the level of pollution the EPA chooses, it can achieve this goal at the 
lowest total cost using a tax.
Economists also argue that corrective taxes are better for the environment. 
Under the command-and-control policy of regulation, the factories have no reason 
to reduce emission further once they have reached the target of 300 tons of glop. 
By contrast, the tax gives the factories an incentive to develop cleaner technologies 
because a cleaner technology would reduce the amount of tax the factory has to pay.
Corrective taxes are unlike most other taxes. As we discussed in Chapter 8, 
most taxes distort incentives and move the allocation of resources away from the 
social optimum. The reduction in economic well-being—that is, in consumer and 
producer surplus—exceeds the amount of revenue the government raises, result-
ing in a deadweight loss. By contrast, when externalities are present, society also 
cares about the well-being of the bystanders who are affected. Corrective taxes 
alter incentives to account for the presence of externalities and thereby move the 
allocation of resources closer to the social optimum. Thus, while corrective taxes 
raise revenue for the government, they also enhance economic efficiency.
Why Is Gasoline Taxed So Heavily? 
In many nations, gasoline is among the most heavily taxed goods. The gas tax 
can be viewed as a corrective tax aimed at addressing three negative externalities 
associated with driving:
• 	 Congestion: If you have ever been stuck in bumper-to-bumper traffic, you 
have probably wished that there were fewer cars on the road. A gasoline tax 
keeps congestion down by encouraging people to take public transportation, 
carpool more often, and live closer to work. 
• 	 Accidents: Whenever people buy large cars or sport-utility vehicles, they 
may make themselves safer but they certainly put their neighbors at risk. 
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, a person 
driving a typical car is five times as likely to die if hit by a sport-utility 
vehicle than if hit by another car. The gas tax is an indirect way of making 
people pay when their large, gas-guzzling vehicles impose risk on others. 

205
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
It would induce them to take this risk into account when choosing what 
vehicle to purchase.
• 	 Pollution: Cars cause smog. Moreover, the burning of fossil fuels such as 
gasoline is widely believed to be the primary cause of global warming. 
Experts disagree about how dangerous this threat is, but there is no doubt 
that the gas tax reduces the threat by reducing the use of gasoline.
So the gas tax, rather than causing deadweight losses like most taxes, actually 
makes the economy work better. It means less traffic congestion, safer roads, and 
a cleaner environment.
How high should the tax on gasoline be? Most European countries impose 
gasoline taxes that are much higher than those in the United States. Many observ-
ers have suggested that the United States also should tax gasoline more heavily. A 
2007 study published in the Journal of Economic Literature summarized the research 
on the size of the various externalities associated with driving. It concluded that 
the optimal corrective tax on gasoline was $2.10 per gallon, compared to the actual 
tax in the United States of only 40 cents.
The tax revenue from a gasoline tax could be used to lower taxes that distort 
incentives and cause deadweight losses, such as income taxes. In addition, some 
of the burdensome government regulations that require automakers to produce 
more fuel-efficient cars would prove unnecessary. This idea, however, has never 
proven politically popular.  ■
Market-Based Policy 2: Tradable Pollution Permits
Returning to our example of the paper mill and the steel mill, let us suppose that, 
despite the advice of its economists, the EPA adopts the regulation and requires 
each factory to reduce its pollution to 300 tons of glop per year. Then one day, 
© 2005 John Trever, Albuquerque Journal. Reprinted by 
permission.

206
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
after the regulation is in place and both mills have complied, the two firms go to 
the EPA with a proposal. The steel mill wants to increase its emission of glop by 
100 tons. The paper mill has agreed to reduce its emission by the same amount if 
the steel mill pays it $5 million. Should the EPA allow the two factories to make 
this deal?
From the standpoint of economic efficiency, allowing the deal is good policy. 
The deal must make the owners of the two factories better off because they are 
voluntarily agreeing to it. Moreover, the deal does not have any external effects 
because the total amount of pollution remains the same. Thus, social welfare is 
enhanced by allowing the paper mill to sell its pollution rights to the steel mill.
The same logic applies to any voluntary transfer of the right to pollute from 
one firm to another. If the EPA allows firms to make these deals, it will, in essence, 
have created a new scarce resource: pollution permits. A market to trade these 
permits will eventually develop, and that market will be governed by the forces 
of supply and demand. The invisible hand will ensure that this new market allo-
cates the right to pollute efficiently. That is, the permits will end up in the hands 
of those firms that value them most highly, as judged by their willingness to pay. 
A firm’s willingness to pay for the right to pollute, in turn, will depend on its cost 
of reducing pollution: The more costly it is for a firm to cut back on pollution, the 
more it will be willing to pay for a permit.
An advantage of allowing a market for pollution permits is that the initial allo-
cation of pollution permits among firms does not matter from the standpoint of 
economic efficiency. Those firms that can reduce pollution at a low cost will sell 
whatever permits they get, and firms that can reduce pollution only at a high cost 
will buy whatever permits they need. As long as there is a free market for the pollu­
tion rights, the final allocation will be efficient regardless of the initial allocation.
Reducing pollution using pollution permits may seem very different from 
using corrective taxes, but the two policies have much in common. In both cases, 
firms pay for their pollution. With corrective taxes, polluting firms must pay a tax 
to the government. With pollution permits, polluting firms must pay to buy the 
permit. (Even firms that already own permits must pay to pollute: The opportu-
nity cost of polluting is what they could have received by selling their permits 
on the open market.) Both corrective taxes and pollution permits internalize the 
externality of pollution by making it costly for firms to pollute.
The similarity of the two policies can be seen by considering the market for 
pollution. Both panels in Figure 4 show the demand curve for the right to pollute. 
This curve shows that the lower the price of polluting, the more firms will choose 
to pollute. In panel (a), the EPA uses a corrective tax to set a price for pollution. 
In this case, the supply curve for pollution rights is perfectly elastic (because 
firms can pollute as much as they want by paying the tax), and the position of the 
demand curve determines the quantity of pollution. In panel (b), the EPA sets a 
quantity of pollution by issuing pollution permits. In this case, the supply curve 
for pollution rights is perfectly inelastic (because the quantity of pollution is fixed 
by the number of permits), and the position of the demand curve determines 
the price of pollution. Hence, the EPA can achieve any point on a given demand 
curve either by setting a price with a corrective tax or by setting a quantity with 
pollution permits.
In some circumstances, however, selling pollution permits may be better than 
levying a corrective tax. Suppose the EPA wants no more than 600 tons of glop 
dumped into the river. But because the EPA does not know the demand curve 

207
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
for pollution, it is not sure what size tax would achieve that goal. In this case, it 
can simply auction off 600 pollution permits. The auction price would yield the 
appropriate size of the corrective tax.
The idea of the government auctioning off the right to pollute may at first 
sound like a creature of some economist’s imagination. And in fact, that is how 
the idea began. But increasingly, the EPA has used the system as a way to con-
trol pollution. A notable success story has been the case of sulfur dioxide (SO2), 
a leading cause of acid rain. In 1990, amendments to the Clean Air Act required 
power plants to reduce SO2 emissions substantially. At the same time, the amend-
ments set up a system that allowed plants to trade their SO2 allowances. Initially, 
both industry representatives and environmentalists were skeptical of the pro-
posal, but over time the system has reduced pollution with minimal disruption. 
Pollution permits, like corrective taxes, are now widely viewed as a cost-effective 
way to keep the environment clean.
Objections to the Economic Analysis of Pollution
“We cannot give anyone the option of polluting for a fee.” This comment by the 
late Senator Edmund Muskie reflects the view of some environmentalists. Clean 
air and clean water, they argue, are fundamental human rights that should not 
be debased by considering them in economic terms. How can you put a price on 
In panel (a), the EPA sets a price on pollution by levying a corrective tax, and the 
demand curve determines the quantity of pollution. In panel (b), the EPA limits the 
quantity of pollution by limiting the number of pollution permits, and the demand 
curve determines the price of pollution. The price and quantity of pollution are the 
same in the two cases. 
Figure 4
Quantity of
Pollution
0
Price of
Pollution
P
Q
Demand for
pollution rights
Corrective
tax
(a) Corrective Tax
Quantity of
Pollution
0
Q
Demand for
pollution rights
Supply of
pollution permits
(b) Pollution Permits
Price of
Pollution
P
2. . . . which, together
with the demand curve,
determines the quantity
of pollution.
2. . . . which, together
with the demand curve,
determines the price
of pollution.
1. A corrective
tax sets the
price of
pollution . . .
1. Pollution
permits set
the quantity
of pollution . . .
The Equivalence of 
Corrective Taxes and 
Pollution Permits

208
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
clean air and clean water? The environment is so important, they claim, that we 
should protect it as much as possible, regardless of the cost.
Economists have little sympathy for this type of argument. To economists, good 
environmental policy begins by acknowledging the first of the Ten Principles of 
Economics in Chapter 1: People face trade-offs. Certainly, clean air and clean water 
have value. But their value must be compared to their opportunity cost—that 
is, to what one must give up to obtain them. Eliminating all pollution is impos-
sible. Trying to eliminate all pollution would reverse many of the technological 
advances that allow us to enjoy a high standard of living. Few people would be 
willing to accept poor nutrition, inadequate medical care, or shoddy housing to 
make the environment as clean as possible.
Economists argue that some environmental activists hurt their own cause by not 
thinking in economic terms. A clean environment can be viewed as simply another 
good. Like all normal goods, it has a positive income elasticity: Rich countries can 
afford a cleaner environment than poor ones and, therefore, usually have more 
rigorous environmental protection. In addition, like most other goods, clean air 
A Missed Opportunity 
on Climate Change 
By N. Gregory Mankiw
D
uring the presidential campaign of 2008, 
Barack Obama distinguished himself on 
the economics of climate change, speaking 
far more sensibly about the issue than most 
of his rivals. Unfortunately, now that he is 
president, Mr. Obama may sign a climate bill 
that falls far short of his aspirations. Indeed, 
the legislation making its way to his desk 
could well be worse than nothing at all.
	
Let’s start with the basics. The essential 
problem of climate change, scientists tell us, 
is that humans are emitting too much carbon 
into the atmosphere, which tends to raise 
world temperatures. Emitting carbon is what 
economists call a “negative externality”—an 
adverse side effect of certain market activities 
on bystanders.
	
The textbook solution for dealing with 
negative externalities is to use the tax system 
to align private incentives with social costs and 
benefits. Suppose the government imposed a 
tax on carbon-based products and used the 
proceeds to cut other taxes. People would 
have an incentive to shift their consumption 
toward less carbon-intensive products. A car-
bon tax is the remedy for climate change that 
wins overwhelming support among econo-
mists and policy wonks.
	
When he was still a candidate, Mr. 
Obama did not exactly endorse a carbon tax. 
He wanted to be elected, and embracing any 
tax that hits millions of middle-class voters 
is not a recipe for electoral success. But he 
did come tantalizingly close.
	
What Mr. Obama proposed was a 
­cap-and-trade system for carbon, with all 
the allowances sold at auction. In short, the 
system would put a ceiling on the amount 
of carbon released, and companies would 
bid on the right to emit carbon into the 
atmosphere. 
	
Such a system is tantamount to a carbon 
tax. The auction price of an emission right 
is effectively a tax on carbon. The revenue 
raised by the auction gives the government 
the resources to cut other taxes that distort 
behavior, like income or payroll taxes.
	
So far, so good. The problem occurred 
as this sensible idea made the trip from 
the campaign trail through the legislative 
process. Rather than auctioning the carbon 
 Cap and Trade
President Obama has proposed a policy to deal with the externalities 
from carbon emissions.
in the news

209
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
and clean water obey the law of demand: The lower the price of environmental 
protection, the more the public will want. The economic approach of using pollu-
tion permits and corrective taxes reduces the cost of environmental protection and 
should, therefore, increase the public’s demand for a clean environment.
Quick Quiz  A glue factory and a steel mill emit smoke containing a chemical that is 
harmful if inhaled in large amounts. Describe three ways the town government might 
respond to this externality. What are the pros and cons of each solution?
Private Solutions to Externalities
Although externalities tend to cause markets to be inefficient, government action 
is not always needed to solve the problem. In some circumstances, people can 
develop private solutions.
allowances, the bill that recently passed the 
House would give most of them away to 
powerful special interests. 
	
The numbers involved are not trivial. 
From Congressional Budget Office esti-
mates, one can calculate that if all the 
allowances were auctioned, the government 
could raise $989 billion in proceeds over  
10 years. But in the bill as written, the auc-
tion proceeds are only $276 billion.
	
Mr. Obama understood these risks. When 
asked about a carbon tax in an interview in 
July 2007, he said: “I believe that, depending 
on how it is designed, a carbon tax accom-
plishes much of the same thing that a cap-
and-trade program accomplishes. The danger 
in a cap-and-trade system is that the permits 
to emit greenhouse gases are given away for 
free as opposed to priced at auction. One of 
the mistakes the Europeans made in setting 
up a cap-and-trade system was to give too 
many of those permits away.”
	
Congress is now in the process of 
sending President Obama a bill that makes 
exactly this mistake.
	
How much does it matter? For the pur-
pose of efficiently allocating the carbon 
rights, it doesn’t. Even if these rights are 
handed out on political rather than ­economic 
grounds, the “trade” part of “cap and trade” 
will take care of the rest. Those companies 
with the most need to emit carbon will 
buy carbon allowances on newly formed 
exchanges. Those without such pressing 
needs will sell whatever allowances they are 
given and enjoy the profits that resulted from 
Congress’s largess.
	
The problem arises in how the climate 
policy interacts with the overall tax system. 
As the president pointed out, a cap-and-
trade system is like a carbon tax. The price 
of carbon allowances will eventually be 
passed on to consumers in the form of 
higher prices for carbon-intensive products. 
But if most of those allowances are handed 
out rather than auctioned, the government 
won’t have the resources to cut other taxes 
and offset that price increase. The result is 
an increase in the effective tax rates facing  
most Americans, leading to lower real take-
home wages, reduced work incentives, and 
depressed economic activity.
	
The hard question is whether, on net, 
such a policy is good or bad. Here you can 
find policy wonks on both sides. To those 
who view climate change as an impending 
catastrophe and the distorting effects of 
the tax system as a mere annoyance, an 
imperfect bill is better than none at all. To 
those not fully convinced of the enormity of 
global warming but deeply worried about 
the adverse effects of high current and 
prospective tax rates, the bill is a step in the 
wrong direction.
	
What everyone should agree on is that the 
legislation making its way through Congress 
is a missed opportunity. President Obama 
knows what a good climate bill would look 
like. But despite his immense popularity and 
personal charisma, he appears unable to 
persuade Congress to go along.
Source: New York Times, August 9, 2009.DK
Image not available due to
copyright restrictions
       

210
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
The Types of Private Solutions
Sometimes the problem of externalities is solved with moral codes and social 
sanctions. Consider, for instance, why most people do not litter. Although there 
are laws against littering, these laws are not vigorously enforced. Most people 
do not litter just because it is the wrong thing to do. The Golden Rule taught to 
most children says, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” This 
moral injunction tells us to take account of how our actions affect other people. In 
economic terms, it tells us to internalize externalities.
Another private solution to externalities is charities, many of which are estab-
lished to deal with externalities. For example, the Sierra Club, whose goal is to 
protect the environment, is a nonprofit organization funded with private dona-
tions. As another example, colleges and universities receive gifts from alumni, cor-
porations, and foundations in part because education has positive externalities for 
society. The government encourages this private solution to externalities through 
the tax system by allowing an income tax deduction for charitable donations.
The private market can often solve the problem of externalities by relying on 
the self-interest of the relevant parties. Sometimes the solution takes the form of 
integrating different types of businesses. For example, consider an apple grower 
and a beekeeper who are located next to each other. Each business confers a 
positive externality on the other: By pollinating the flowers on the trees, the bees 
help the orchard produce apples. At the same time, the bees use the nectar they 
get from the apple trees to produce honey. Nonetheless, when the apple grower 
is deciding how many trees to plant and the beekeeper is deciding how many 
bees to keep, they neglect the positive externality. As a result, the apple grower 
plants too few trees and the beekeeper keeps too few bees. These externalities 
could be internalized if the beekeeper bought the apple orchard or if the apple 
grower bought the beehives: Both activities would then take place within the 
same firm, and this single firm could choose the optimal number of trees and bees. 
Internalizing externalities is one reason that some firms are involved in different 
types of businesses.
Another way for the private market to deal with external effects is for the inter-
ested parties to enter into a contract. In the foregoing example, a contract between 
the apple grower and the beekeeper can solve the problem of too few trees and 
too few bees. The contract can specify the number of trees, the number of bees, 
and perhaps a payment from one party to the other. By setting the right number 
of trees and bees, the contract can solve the inefficiency that normally arises from 
these externalities and make both parties better off.
The Coase Theorem
How effective is the private market in dealing with externalities? A famous result, 
called the Coase theorem after economist Ronald Coase, suggests that it can be 
very effective in some circumstances. According to the Coase theorem, if private 
parties can bargain over the allocation of resources at no cost, then the private mar-
ket will always solve the problem of externalities and allocate resources efficiently.
To see how the Coase theorem works, consider an example. Suppose that Dick 
owns a dog named Spot. Spot barks and disturbs Jane, Dick’s neighbor. Dick gets 
a benefit from owning the dog, but the dog confers a negative externality on Jane. 
Should Dick be forced to send Spot to the pound, or should Jane have to suffer 
sleepless nights because of Spot’s barking?
Coase theorem
the proposition that if 
private parties can bargain 
without cost over the 
allocation of resources, 
they can solve the 
problem of externalities 
on their own

211
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
Consider first what outcome is socially efficient. A social planner, considering 
the two alternatives, would compare the benefit that Dick gets from the dog to 
the cost that Jane bears from the barking. If the benefit exceeds the cost, it is effi-
cient for Dick to keep the dog and for Jane to live with the barking. Yet if the cost 
exceeds the benefit, then Dick should get rid of the dog.
According to the Coase theorem, the private market will reach the efficient 
outcome on its own. How? Jane can simply offer to pay Dick to get rid of the dog. 
Dick will accept the deal if the amount of money Jane offers is greater than the 
benefit of keeping the dog.
By bargaining over the price, Dick and Jane can always reach the efficient out-
come. For instance, suppose that Dick gets a $500 benefit from the dog and Jane 
bears an $800 cost from the barking. In this case, Jane can offer Dick $600 to get rid 
of the dog, and Dick will gladly accept. Both parties are better off than they were 
before, and the efficient outcome is reached.
It is possible, of course, that Jane would not be willing to offer any price that 
Dick would accept. For instance, suppose that Dick gets a $1,000 benefit from the 
dog and Jane bears an $800 cost from the barking. In this case, Dick would turn 
down any offer below $1,000, while Jane would not offer any amount above $800. 
Therefore, Dick ends up keeping the dog. Given these costs and benefits, how-
ever, this outcome is efficient.
So far, we have assumed that Dick has the legal right to keep a barking dog. 
In other words, we have assumed that Dick can keep Spot unless Jane pays him 
enough to induce him to give up the dog voluntarily. But how different would the 
outcome be if Jane had the legal right to peace and quiet?
According to the Coase theorem, the initial distribution of rights does not mat-
ter for the market’s ability to reach the efficient outcome. For instance, suppose 
that Jane can legally compel Dick to get rid of the dog. Having this right works to 
Jane’s advantage, but it probably will not change the outcome. In this case, Dick 
can offer to pay Jane to allow him to keep the dog. If the benefit of the dog to Dick 
exceeds the cost of the barking to Jane, then Dick and Jane will strike a bargain in 
which Dick keeps the dog.
Although Dick and Jane can reach the efficient outcome regardless of how 
rights are initially distributed, the distribution of rights is not irrelevant: It deter-
mines the distribution of economic well-being. Whether Dick has the right to a 
barking dog or Jane the right to peace and quiet determines who pays whom in 
the final bargain. But in either case, the two parties can bargain with each other 
and solve the exter­nality problem. Dick will end up keeping the dog only if the 
benefit exceeds the cost.
To sum up: The Coase theorem says that private economic actors can potentially solve 
the problem of externalities among themselves. Whatever the initial distribution of rights, 
the interested parties can reach a bargain in which everyone is better off and the outcome 
is efficient. 
Why Private Solutions Do Not Always Work
Despite the appealing logic of the Coase theorem, private individuals on their 
own often fail to resolve the problems caused by externalities. The Coase theorem 
applies only when the interested parties have no trouble reaching and enforcing 
an agreement. In the real world, however, bargaining does not always work, even 
when a mutually beneficial agreement is possible.

212
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
Sometimes the interested parties fail to solve an externality problem because 
of transaction costs, the costs that parties incur in the process of agreeing to and 
following through on a bargain. In our example, imagine that Dick and Jane speak 
different languages so that, to reach an agreement, they need to hire a translator. 
If the benefit of solving the barking problem is less than the cost of the translator, 
Dick and Jane might choose to leave the problem unsolved. In more realistic exam-
ples, the transaction costs are the expenses not of translators but of the lawyers 
required to draft and enforce contracts.
At other times, bargaining simply breaks down. The recurrence of wars and 
labor strikes shows that reaching agreement can be difficult and that failing to 
reach agreement can be costly. The problem is often that each party tries to hold 
out for a better deal. For example, suppose that Dick gets a $500 benefit from the 
dog, and Jane bears an $800 cost from the barking. Although it is efficient for Jane 
to pay Dick to get rid of the dog, there are many prices that could lead to this out-
come. Dick might demand $750, and Jane might offer only $550. As they haggle 
over the price, the inefficient outcome with the barking dog persists.
Reaching an efficient bargain is especially difficult when the number of inter-
ested parties is large because coordinating everyone is costly. For example, consider 
a factory that pollutes the water of a nearby lake. The pollution confers a negative 
externality on the local fishermen. According to the Coase theorem, if the pollution 
is inefficient, then the factory and the fishermen could reach a bargain in which 
the fishermen pay the factory not to pollute. If there are many fishermen, however, 
trying to coordinate them all to bargain with the factory may be almost impossible.
When private bargaining does not work, the government can sometimes play  
a role. The government is an institution designed for collective action. In this 
example, the government can act on behalf of the fishermen, even when it is 
impractical for the fishermen to act for themselves.
Quick Quiz  Give an example of a private solution to an externality. • What is the 
Coase theorem? • Why are private economic participants sometimes unable to solve 
the problems caused by an externality? 
Conclusion
The invisible hand is powerful but not omnipotent. A market’s equilibrium maxi-
mizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. When the buyers and sellers in 
the market are the only interested parties, this outcome is efficient from the stand-
point of society as a whole. But when there are external effects, such as pollu­tion, 
evaluating a market outcome requires taking into account the well-being of third 
parties as well. In this case, the invisible hand of the marketplace may fail to allo-
cate resources efficiently.
In some cases, people can solve the problem of externalities on their own. The 
Coase theorem suggests that the interested parties can bargain among themselves 
and agree on an efficient solution. Sometimes, however, an efficient outcome can-
not be reached, perhaps because the large number of interested parties makes 
bargaining difficult.
When people cannot solve the problem of externalities privately, the govern-
ment often steps in. Yet even with government intervention, society should not 
abandon market forces entirely. Rather, the government can address the problem 
transaction costs
the costs that parties 
incur in the process of 
agreeing to and following 
through on a bargain

213
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
externality, p. 196
internalizing the externality, p. 199
corrective tax, p. 203
Coase theorem, p. 210
transaction costs, p. 212
by requiring decision makers to bear the full costs of their actions. Corrective taxes 
on emissions and pollution permits, for instance, are designed to internalize the 
externality of pollution. More and more, these are the policies of choice for those 
interested in protecting the environment. Market forces, properly redirected, are 
often the best remedy for market failure.
Summary 
Key Concepts
Questions for Review
	 1.	 Give an example of a negative externality and 
an example of a positive externality.
	 2.	 Draw a supply-and-demand diagram to explain 
the effect of a negative externality that occurs as 
a result of a firm’s production process. 
	 3.	 In what way does the patent system help society 
solve an externality problem?
	 4.	 What are corrective taxes? Why do economists 
prefer them to regulations as a way to protect 
the environment from pollution? 
	 5.	 List some of the ways that the problems 
caused by externalities can be solved without 
government intervention.
	 6.	 Imagine that you are a nonsmoker sharing a 
room with a smoker. According to the Coase 
theorem, what determines whether your 
roommate smokes in the room? Is this outcome 
efficient? How do you and your roommate 
reach this solution?
• When a transaction between a buyer and seller 
directly affects a third party, the effect is called 
an externality. If an activity yields negative exter-
nalities, such as pollution, the socially optimal 
quantity in a market is less than the equilibrium 
quantity. If an activity yields positive externalities, 
such as technology spillovers, the socially optimal 
quantity is greater than the equilibrium quantity.
• Governments pursue various policies to ­remedy 
the inefficiencies caused by externalities. Some­
times the government prevents socially ineffi-
cient activity by regulating behavior. Other times 
it internalizes an externality using ­corrective 
taxes. Another public policy is to issue permits. 
For example, the government could ­protect the 
environment by issuing a limited number of 
pollution permits. The result of this policy is 
largely the same as imposing corrective taxes on 
polluters.
• Those affected by externalities can sometimes 
solve the problem privately. For instance, when 
one business imposes an externality on another 
business, the two businesses can internalize the 
externality by merging. Alternatively, the inter-
ested parties can solve the problem by negotiat-
ing a contract. According to the Coase theorem, 
if people can bargain without cost, then they can 
always reach an agreement in which resources 
are allocated efficiently. In many cases, however, 
reaching a bargain among the many interested 
parties is difficult, so the Coase theorem does 
not apply. 

214
PART Iv	
The Economics of the Public Sector
	 1.	 Consider two ways to protect your car from 
theft. The Club (a steering wheel lock) makes it 
difficult for a car thief to take your car. Lojack 
(a tracking system) makes it easier for the police 
to catch the car thief who has stolen it. Which 
of these types of protection conveys a negative 
externality on other car owners? Which conveys 
a positive externality? Do you think there are 
any policy implications of your analysis?
	 2.	 Do you agree with the following statements? 
Why or why not?
a.	 “The benefits of corrective taxes as a way to 
reduce pollution have to be weighed against 
the deadweight losses that these taxes cause.” 
b.	“When deciding whether to levy a corrective 
tax on consumers or producers, the 
government should be careful to levy the 
tax on the side of the market generating the 
externality.”
	 3.	 Consider the market for fire extinguishers.
a.	 Why might fire extinguishers exhibit positive 
externalities?
b.	Draw a graph of the market for fire 
extinguishers, labeling the demand curve, the 
social-value curve, the supply curve, and the 
social-cost curve.
c.	 Indicate the market equilibrium level of 
output and the efficient level of output. 
Give an intuitive explanation for why these 
quantities differ.
d.	If the external benefit is $10 per extinguisher, 
describe a government policy that would 
yield the efficient outcome.
	 4.	 A local drama company proposes a new 
neighborhood theater in San Francisco. Before 
approving the building permit, the city planner 
completes a study of the theater’s impact on the 
surrounding community.
a.	 One finding of the study is that theaters 
attract traffic, which adversely affects the 
community. The city planner estimates that 
the cost to the community from the extra 
traffic is $5 per ticket. What kind of an 
externality is this? Why?
b.	Graph the market for theater tickets, labeling 
the demand curve, the social-value curve, 
the supply curve, the social-cost curve, the 
market equilibrium level of output, and the 
efficient level of output. Also show the  
per-unit amount of the externality.
c.	 Upon further review, the city planner 
uncovers a second externality. Rehearsals 
for the plays tend to run until late at night, 
with actors, stagehands, and other theater 
members coming and going at various hours. 
The planner has found that the increased 
foot traffic improves the safety of the 
surrounding streets, an estimated benefit to 
the community of $2 per ticket. What kind of 
externality is this? Why?
d.	On a new graph, illustrate the market for 
theater tickets in the case of these two 
externalities. Again, label the demand curve, 
the social-value curve, the supply curve, the 
social-cost curve, the market equilibrium 
level of output, the efficient level of output, 
and the per-unit amount of both externalities.
e.	 Describe a government policy that would 
result in an efficient outcome.
	 5.	 Greater consumption of alcohol leads to more 
motor vehicle accidents and, thus, imposes costs 
on people who do not drink and drive.
a.	 Illustrate the market for alcohol, labeling 
the demand curve, the social-value curve, 
the supply curve, the social-cost curve, the 
market equilibrium level of output, and the 
efficient level of output.
b.	On your graph, shade the area corresponding 
to the deadweight loss of the market 
equilibrium. (Hint: The deadweight loss 
occurs because some units of alcohol are 
consumed for which the social cost exceeds 
the social value.) Explain.
	 6.	 Many observers believe that the levels of 
pollution in our society are too high.
a.	 If society wishes to reduce overall pollution 
by a certain amount, why is it efficient to 
have different amounts of reduction at 
different firms?
b.	Command-and-control approaches often rely 
on uniform reductions among firms. Why 
are these approaches generally unable to 
target the firms that should undertake bigger 
reductions?
c.	 Economists argue that appropriate corrective 
taxes or tradable pollution rights will result 
Problems and Applications

215
CHAPTER 10   Externalities
in efficient pollution reduction. How do 
these approaches target the firms that should 
undertake bigger reductions?
	 7.	 The many identical residents of Whoville love 
drinking Zlurp. Each resident has the following 
willingness to pay for the tasty refreshment:
First bottle 	
$5
Second bottle	
4
Third bottle	
3
Fourth bottle	
2
Fifth bottle 	
1
Further bottles	
0
a.	 The cost of producing Zlurp is $1.50, and 
the competitive suppliers sell it at this price.
(The supply curve is horizontal.) How many 
bottles will each Whovillian consume? What 
is each person’s consumer surplus?
b.	Producing Zlurp creates pollution. Each 
bottle has an external cost of $1. Taking this 
additional cost into account, what is total 
surplus per person in the allocation you 
described in part (a)?
c.	 Cindy Lou Who, one of the residents of 
Whoville, decides on her own to reduce her 
consumption of Zlurp by one bottle. What 
happens to Cindy’s welfare (her consumer 
surplus minus the cost of pollution she 
experiences)? How does Cindy’s decision 
affect total surplus in Whoville?
d.	Mayor Grinch imposes a $1 tax on Zlurp. 
What is consumption per person now? 
Calculate consumer surplus, the external cost, 
government revenue, and total surplus per 
person.
e.	 Based on your calculations, would you 
support the mayor’s policy? Why or why not?
	 8.	 Ringo loves playing rock ‘n’ roll music at  
high volume. Luciano loves opera and hates 
rock ‘n’ roll. Unfortunately, they are next-door 
neighbors in an apartment building with  
paper-thin walls.
a.	 What is the externality here?
b.	What command-and-control policy might the 
landlord impose? Could such a policy lead to 
an inefficient outcome?
c.	 Suppose the landlord lets the tenants do 
whatever they want. According to the Coase 
theorem, how might Ringo and Luciano 
reach an efficient outcome on their own? 
What might prevent them from reaching an 
efficient outcome?
	 9.	 Figure 4 shows that for any given demand 
curve for the right to pollute, the government 
can achieve the same outcome either by setting 
a price with a corrective tax or by setting a 
quantity with pollution permits. Suppose there 
is a sharp improvement in the technology for 
controlling pollution.
a.	 Using graphs similar to those in Figure 4, 
illustrate the effect of this development on 
the demand for pollution rights.
b.	What is the effect on the price and quantity 
of pollution under each regulatory system? 
Explain.
	10.	 Suppose that the government decides to issue 
tradable permits for a certain form of pollution.
a.	 Does it matter for economic efficiency 
whether the government distributes or 
auctions the permits? Why or why not?
b.	If the government chooses to distribute the 
permits, does the allocation of permits among 
firms matter for efficiency? Explain.
	11.	 There are three industrial firms in Happy Valley.
	
Initial	
Cost of Reducing  
Firm	
Pollution Level 	
Pollution by 1 Unit
A	
70 units	
$20
B	
80 units	
$25
C	
50 units	
$10
The government wants to reduce pollution to  
120 units, so it gives each firm 40 tradable 
pollution permits.
a.	 Who sells permits and how many do they 
sell? Who buys permits and how many do 
they buy? Briefly explain why the sellers 
and buyers are each willing to do so. What 
is the total cost of pollution reduction in this 
situation?
b.	How much higher would the costs of 
pollution reduction be if the permits could 
not be traded?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.


217
11
Public Goods and 
    Common Resources 
A
n old song lyric maintains that “the best things in life are free.” A 
moment’s thought reveals a long list of goods that the songwriter could 
have had in mind. Nature provides some of them, such as rivers, moun-
tains, beaches, lakes, and oceans. The government provides others, such 
as playgrounds, parks, and parades. In each case, people do not pay a fee when 
they choose to enjoy the benefit of the good.
Goods without prices provide a special challenge for economic analysis. Most 
goods in our economy are allocated in markets, in which buyers pay for what they 
receive and sellers are paid for what they provide. For these goods, prices are the 
signals that guide the decisions of buyers and sellers, and these decisions lead 
to an efficient allocation of resources. When goods are available free of charge, 
however, the market forces that normally allocate resources in our economy are 
absent.

218
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
In this chapter, we examine the problems that arise for the allocation of 
resources when there are goods without market prices. Our analysis will shed 
light on one of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: Governments can 
sometimes improve market outcomes. When a good does not have a price 
attached to it, private markets cannot ensure that the good is produced and con-
sumed in the proper amounts. In such cases, government policy can potentially 
remedy the market failure and raise economic well-being.
The Different Kinds of Goods
How well do markets work in providing the goods that people want? The answer 
to this question depends on the good being considered. As we discussed in 
Chapter 7, a market can provide the efficient number of ice-cream cones: The price 
of ice-cream cones adjusts to balance supply and demand, and this equilibrium 
maximizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. Yet as we discussed in 
Chapter 10, the market cannot be counted on to prevent aluminum manufactur-
ers from polluting the air we breathe: Buyers and sellers in a market typically do 
not take into account the external effects of their decisions. Thus, markets work 
well when the good is ice cream, but they work badly when the good is clean air. 
In thinking about the various goods in the economy, it is useful to group them 
according to two characteristics:
•  Is the good excludable? That is, can people be prevented from using the good? 
•  Is the good rival in consumption? That is, does one person’s use of the good 
reduce another person’s ability to use it?
Using these two characteristics, Figure 1 divides goods into four categories: 
 1. Private goods are both excludable and rival in consumption. Consider an 
ice-cream cone, for example. An ice-cream cone is excludable because it is 
possible to prevent someone from eating an ice-cream cone—you just don’t 
give it to him. An ice-cream cone is rival in consumption because if one 
 person eats an ice-cream cone, another person cannot eat the same cone. 
Most goods in the economy are private goods like ice-cream cones: You 
don’t get one unless you pay for it, and once you have it, you are the only 
person who benefits. When we analyzed supply and demand in Chapters 4, 
5, and 6 and the efficiency of markets in Chapters 7, 8, and 9, we implicitly 
assumed that goods were both excludable and rival in consumption. 
 2. Public goods are neither excludable nor rival in consumption. That is,  people 
cannot be prevented from using a public good, and one person’s use of a 
public good does not reduce another person’s ability to use it. For  example, 
a tornado siren in a small town is a public good. Once the siren sounds, 
it is impossible to prevent any single person from hearing it (so it is not 
excludable). Moreover, when one person gets the benefit of the warning, she 
does not reduce the benefit to anyone else (so it is not rival in consumption).
 3. Common resources are rival in consumption but not excludable. For 
 example, fish in the ocean are rival in consumption: When one person 
catches fish, there are fewer fish for the next person to catch. Yet these fish 
are not an excludable good because, given the vast size of an ocean, it is 
 difficult to stop fishermen from taking fish out of it.
excludability
the property of a good 
whereby a person can be 
prevented from using it
rivalry in 
consumption
the property of a good 
whereby one person’s 
use diminishes other 
people’s use
private goods
goods that are both 
excludable and rival in 
consumption
public goods
goods that are neither 
excludable nor rival in 
consumption
common resources
goods that are rival in 
consumption but not 
excludable

219
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
 4. Club goods are excludable but not rival in consumption. For instance, 
 consider fire protection in a small town. It is easy to exclude someone from 
using this good: The fire department can just let his house burn down. Yet 
fire protection is not rival in consumption: Once a town has paid for the fire 
department, the additional cost of protecting one more house is small. (We 
discuss club goods again in Chapter 15, where we see that they are one type 
of a natural monopoly.)
Although Figure 1 offers a clean separation of goods into four categories, the 
boundaries between the categories are sometimes fuzzy. Whether goods are 
excludable or rival in consumption is often a matter of degree. Fish in an ocean may 
not be excludable because monitoring fishing is so difficult, but a large enough 
coast guard could make fish at least partly excludable. Similarly, although fish are 
generally rival in consumption, this would be less true if the population of fisher-
men were small relative to the population of fish. (Think of North American fish-
ing waters before the arrival of European settlers.) For purposes of our analysis, 
however, it will be helpful to group goods into these four categories.
In this chapter, we examine goods that are not excludable: public goods and 
common resources. Because people cannot be prevented from using these goods, 
they are available to everyone free of charge. The study of public goods and 
common resources is closely related to the study of externalities. For both of 
these types of goods, externalities arise because something of value has no price 
attached to it. If one person were to provide a public good, such as a tornado 
siren, other people would be better off. They would receive a benefit without 
paying for it—a positive externality. Similarly, when one person uses a common 
resource such as the fish in the ocean, other people are worse off because there are 
fewer fish to catch. They suffer a loss but are not compensated for it—a negative 
externality. Because of these external effects, private decisions about consumption 
and production can lead to an inefficient allocation of resources, and government 
intervention can potentially raise economic well-being.
QUICK QUIZ Define public goods and common resources and give an example of 
each.
club goods
goods that are excludable 
but not rival in 
consumption
Four Types of Goods
Goods can be grouped into four 
categories according to two 
characteristics: (1) A good is 
excludable if people can be prevented 
from using it. (2) A good is rival in 
consumption if one person’s use of 
the good diminishes other people’s 
use of it. This diagram gives examples 
of goods in each category.
Figure 1
Rival in consumption?
Yes
Yes
• Ice-cream cones
• Clothing
• Congested toll roads
• Fire protection
• Cable TV
• Uncongested toll roads
No
Private Goods
Club Goods
No
Excludable?
• Fish in the ocean
• The environment
• Congested nontoll roads
• Tornado siren
• National defense
• Uncongested nontoll roads
Common Resources
Public Goods

220
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Public Goods
To understand how public goods differ from other goods and why they present 
problems for society, let’s consider an example: a fireworks display. This good is 
not excludable because it is impossible to prevent someone from seeing fireworks, 
and it is not rival in consumption because one person’s enjoyment of fireworks 
does not reduce anyone else’s enjoyment of them. 
The Free-Rider Problem
The citizens of Smalltown, U.S.A., like seeing fireworks on the Fourth of July. 
Each of the town’s 500 residents places a $10 value on the experience for a total 
benefit of $5,000. The cost of putting on a fireworks display is $1,000. Because the 
$5,000 benefit exceeds the $1,000 cost, it is efficient for Smalltown to have a fire-
works display on the Fourth of July.
Would the private market produce the efficient outcome? Probably not. 
Imagine that Ellen, a Smalltown entrepreneur, decided to put on a fireworks 
display. Ellen would surely have trouble selling tickets to the event because her 
potential customers would quickly figure out that they could see the fireworks 
even without a ticket. Because fireworks are not excludable, people have an incen-
tive to be free riders. A free rider is a person who receives the benefit of a good 
but does not pay for it. Because people would have an incentive to be free riders 
rather than ticket buyers, the market would fail to provide the efficient outcome.
One way to view this market failure is that it arises because of an externality. 
If Ellen puts on the fireworks display, she confers an external benefit on those 
who see the display without paying for it. When deciding whether to put on the 
display, however, Ellen does not take the external benefits into account. Even 
though the fireworks display is socially desirable, it is not profitable. As a result, 
Ellen makes the privately rational but socially inefficient decision not to put on 
the display.
Although the private market fails to supply the fireworks display demanded 
by Smalltown residents, the solution to Smalltown’s problem is obvious: The 
local government can sponsor a Fourth of July celebration. The town council can 
raise everyone’s taxes by $2 and use the revenue to hire Ellen to produce the 
fireworks. Everyone in Smalltown is better off by $8—the $10 at which residents 
value the fireworks minus the $2 tax bill. Ellen can help Smalltown reach the effi-
cient outcome as a public employee even though she could not do so as a private 
entrepreneur.
The story of Smalltown is simplified but realistic. In fact, many local govern-
ments in the United States pay for fireworks on the Fourth of July. Moreover, 
the story shows a general lesson about public goods: Because public goods are 
not excludable, the free-rider problem prevents the private market from sup-
plying them. The government, however, can potentially remedy the problem. If 
the government decides that the total benefits of a public good exceed its costs, 
it can provide the public good, pay for it with tax revenue, and make everyone 
better off.
Some Important Public Goods
There are many examples of public goods. Here we consider three of the most 
important. 
free rider
a person who receives 
the benefit of a good but 
avoids paying for it

221
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
National Defense The defense of a country from foreign aggressors is a clas-
sic example of a public good. Once the country is defended, it is impossible to 
prevent any single person from enjoying the benefit of this defense. Moreover, 
when one person enjoys the benefit of national defense, he does not reduce the 
benefit to anyone else. Thus, national defense is neither excludable nor rival in 
consumption.
National defense is also one of the most expensive public goods. In 2009, the 
U.S. federal government spent a total of $661 billion on national defense, more 
than $2,150 per person. People disagree about whether this amount is too small or 
too large, but almost no one doubts that some government spending for national 
defense is necessary. Even economists who advocate small government agree that 
the national defense is a public good the government should provide.
Basic Research Knowledge is created through research. In evaluating the 
appropriate public policy toward knowledge creation, it is important to distin-
guish general knowledge from specific technological knowledge. Specific tech-
nological knowledge, such as the invention of a longer-lasting battery, a smaller 
microchip, or a better digital music player, can be patented. The patent gives the 
inventor the exclusive right to the knowledge he or she has created for a period 
of time. Anyone else who wants to use the patented information must pay the 
inventor for the right to do so. In other words, the patent makes the knowledge 
created by the inventor excludable. 
By contrast, general knowledge is a public good. For example, a mathematician 
cannot patent a theorem. Once a theorem is proven, the knowledge is not exclud-
able: The theorem enters society’s general pool of knowledge that anyone can use 
without charge. The theorem is also not rival in consumption: One person’s use of 
the theorem does not prevent any other person from using the theorem.
Profit-seeking firms spend a lot on research trying to develop new products 
that they can patent and sell, but they do not spend much on basic research. Their 
incentive, instead, is to free ride on the general knowledge created by others. As a 
result, in the absence of any public policy, society would devote too few resources 
to creating new knowledge.
The government tries to provide the public good of general knowledge in vari-
ous ways. Government agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health and the 
National Science Foundation, subsidize basic research in medicine, mathematics, 
physics, chemistry, biology, and even economics. Some people justify govern-
ment funding of the space program on the grounds that it adds to society’s pool 
of knowledge (although many scientists are skeptical of the scientific value of 
manned space travel). Determining the appropriate level of government sup-
port for these endeavors is difficult because the benefits are hard to measure. 
Moreover, the members of Congress who appropriate funds for research usually 
have little expertise in science and, therefore, are not in the best position to judge 
what lines of research will produce the largest benefits. So, while basic research is 
surely a public good, we should not be surprised if the public sector fails to pay 
for the right amount and the right kinds.
Fighting Poverty Many government programs are aimed at helping the 
poor. The welfare system (officially called the Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families program) provides a small income for some poor families. Similarly, the 
Food Stamp program subsidizes the purchase of food for those with low incomes, 
“I like the concept if we can 
do it with no new taxes.”
© DANA FRADON/ THE NEW YORKER COLLECTION/ 
WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM

222
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
and various government housing programs make shelter more affordable. These 
antipoverty programs are financed by taxes paid by families that are financially 
more successful.
Economists disagree among themselves about what role the government 
should play in fighting poverty. We discuss this debate more fully in Chapter 20, 
but here we note one important argument: Advocates of antipoverty programs 
claim that fighting poverty is a public good. Even if everyone prefers living in a 
society without poverty, fighting poverty is not a “good” that private actions will 
adequately provide. 
To see why, suppose someone tried to organize a group of wealthy individuals 
to try to eliminate poverty. They would be providing a public good. This good 
would not be rival in consumption: One person’s enjoyment of living in a society 
without poverty would not reduce anyone else’s enjoyment of it. The good would 
not be excludable: Once poverty is eliminated, no one can be prevented from 
taking pleasure in this fact. As a result, there would be a tendency for people to 
free ride on the generosity of others, enjoying the benefits of poverty elimination 
without contributing to the cause.
Because of the free-rider problem, eliminating poverty through private charity 
will probably not work. Yet government action can solve this problem. Taxing the 
wealthy to raise the living standards of the poor can potentially make everyone 
better off. The poor are better off because they now enjoy a higher standard of liv-
ing, and those paying the taxes are better off because they enjoy living in a society 
with less poverty.
Are Lighthouses Public Goods?
Some goods can switch between being public goods and being private goods 
depending on the circumstances. For example, a fireworks display is a public 
good if performed in a town with many residents. Yet if performed at a private 
amusement park, such as Walt Disney World, a fireworks display is more like a 
private good because visitors to the park pay for admission.
 
Another example is a lighthouse. Economists have long used lighthouses as an 
example of a public good. Lighthouses mark specific locations along the coast so 
that passing ships can avoid treacherous waters. The benefit that the lighthouse 
provides to the ship captain is neither excludable nor rival in consumption, so 
each captain has an incentive to free ride by using the lighthouse to navigate 
without paying for the service. Because of this free-rider problem, private markets 
usually fail to provide the lighthouses that ship captains need. As a result, most 
lighthouses today are operated by the government.
 
In some cases, however, lighthouses have been closer to private goods. On 
the coast of England in the 19th century, for example, some lighthouses were 
privately owned and operated. Instead of trying to charge ship captains for the 
service, however, the owner of the lighthouse charged the owner of the nearby 
port. If the port owner did not pay, the lighthouse owner turned off the light, and 
ships avoided that port. 
 
In deciding whether something is a public good, one must determine who the 
beneficiaries are and whether these beneficiaries can be excluded from using the 
good. A free-rider problem arises when the number of beneficiaries is large and 
exclusion of any one of them is impossible. If a lighthouse benefits many ship 
What kind of good is this?
IMAGE COPYRIGHT MATT HART. USED UNDER LICENSE FROM SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

223
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
captains, it is a public good. Yet if it primarily benefits a single port owner, it is 
more like a private good.  ■
The Difficult Job of Cost–Benefit Analysis 
So far we have seen that the government provides public goods because the pri-
vate market on its own will not produce an efficient quantity. Yet deciding that 
the government must play a role is only the first step. The government must then 
determine what kinds of public goods to provide and in what quantities. 
Suppose that the government is considering a public project, such as building a 
new highway. To judge whether to build the highway, it must compare the total 
benefits of all those who would use it to the costs of building and maintaining 
it. To make this decision, the government might hire a team of economists and 
engineers to conduct a study, called a cost–benefit analysis, to estimate the total 
costs and benefits of the project to society as a whole. 
Cost–benefit analysts have a tough job. Because the highway will be avail-
able to everyone free of charge, there is no price with which to judge the 
value of the highway. Simply asking people how much they would value the 
highway is not reliable: Quantifying benefits is difficult using the results from 
a questionnaire, and respondents have little incentive to tell the truth. Those 
who would use the highway have an incentive to exaggerate the benefit they 
receive to get the highway built. Those who would be harmed by the highway 
have an incentive to exaggerate the costs to them to prevent the highway from 
being built.
The efficient provision of public goods is, therefore, intrinsically more difficult 
than the efficient provision of private goods. When buyers of a private good enter 
a market, they reveal the value they place on it through the prices they are willing 
to pay. At the same time, sellers reveal their costs with the prices they are willing 
to accept. The equilibrium is an efficient allocation of resources because it reflects 
all this information. By contrast, cost–benefit analysts do not have any price sig-
nals to observe when evaluating whether the government should provide a public 
good and how much to provide. Their findings on the costs and benefits of public 
projects are rough approximations at best.
How Much Is a Life Worth?
Imagine that you have been elected to serve as a member of your local town 
council. The town engineer comes to you with a proposal: The town can spend 
$10,000 to build and operate a traffic light at a town intersection that now has only 
a stop sign. The benefit of the traffic light is increased safety. The engineer esti-
mates, based on data from similar intersections, that the traffic light would reduce 
the risk of a fatal traffic accident over the lifetime of the traffic light from 1.6 to 
1.1 percent. Should you spend the money for the new light?
 
To answer this question, you turn to cost–benefit analysis. But you quickly 
run into an obstacle: The costs and benefits must be measured in the same units 
if you are to compare them meaningfully. The cost is measured in dollars, but 
the benefit—the possibility of saving a person’s life—is not directly monetary. To 
make your decision, you have to put a dollar value on a human life.
cost–benefit 
analysis
a study that compares 
the costs and benefits 
to society of providing a 
public good

224
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
 
At first, you may be tempted to conclude that a human life is priceless. After all, 
there is probably no amount of money that you could be paid to voluntarily give 
up your life or that of a loved one. This suggests that a human life has an infinite 
dollar value. 
 
For the purposes of cost–benefit analysis, however, this answer leads to non-
sensical results. If we truly placed an infinite value on human life, we should place 
traffic lights on every street corner, and we should all drive large cars loaded with 
all the latest safety features. Yet traffic lights are not at every corner, and people 
sometimes choose to pay less for smaller cars without safety options such as side-
impact air bags or antilock brakes. In both our public and private decisions, we 
are at times willing to risk our lives to save some money. 
 
Once we have accepted the idea that a person’s life has an implicit dollar value, 
how can we determine what that value is? One approach, sometimes used by 
courts to award damages in wrongful-death suits, is to look at the total amount of 
money a person would have earned if he or she had lived. Economists are often 
critical of this approach because it ignores other opportunity costs of losing one’s 
life. It thus has the bizarre implication that the life of a retired or disabled person 
has no value.
 
A better way to value human life is to look at the risks that people are volun-
tarily willing to take and how much they must be paid for taking them. Mortality 
risk varies across jobs, for example. Construction workers in high-rise buildings 
face greater risk of death on the job than office workers do. By comparing wages 
in risky and less risky occupations, controlling for education, experience, and 
other determinants of wages, economists can get some sense about what value 
people put on their own lives. Studies using this approach conclude that the value 
of a human life is about $10 million.
 
We can now return to our original example and respond to the town engineer. 
The traffic light reduces the risk of fatality by 0.5 percentage points. Thus, the 
expected benefit from installing the traffic light is 0.005 × $10 million, or $50,000. 
This estimate of the benefit well exceeds the cost of $10,000, so you should 
approve the project.  ■
QUICK QUIZ What is the free-rider problem? Why does the free-rider problem 
induce the government to provide public goods? • How should the government 
decide whether to provide a public good?
Common Resources
Common resources, like public goods, are not excludable: They are available free 
of charge to anyone who wants to use them. Common resources are, however, 
rival in consumption: One person’s use of the common resource reduces other 
people’s ability to use it. Thus, common resources give rise to a new problem. 
Once the good is provided, policymakers need to be concerned about how much 
it is used. This problem is best understood from the classic parable called the 
Tragedy of the Commons.
The Tragedy of the Commons
Consider life in a small medieval town. Of the many economic activities that take 
place in the town, one of the most important is raising sheep. Many of the town’s 
Tragedy of the 
Commons
a parable that illustrates 
why common resources 
are used more than 
is desirable from the 
standpoint of society as a 
whole

225
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
families own flocks of sheep and support themselves by selling the sheep’s wool, 
which is used to make clothing.
As our story begins, the sheep spend much of their time grazing on the land 
surrounding the town, called the Town Common. No family owns the land. 
Instead, the town residents own the land collectively, and all the residents are 
allowed to graze their sheep on it. Collective ownership works well because land 
is plentiful. As long as everyone can get all the good grazing land they want, the 
Town Common is not rival in consumption, and allowing residents’ sheep to 
graze for free causes no problems. Everyone in the town is happy. 
As the years pass, the population of the town grows, and so does the number 
of sheep grazing on the Town Common. With a growing number of sheep 
and a fixed amount of land, the land starts to lose its ability to replenish itself. 
Eventually, the land is grazed so heavily that it becomes barren. With no grass left 
on the Town Common, raising sheep is impossible, and the town’s once prosper-
ous wool industry disappears. Many families lose their source of livelihood.
What causes the tragedy? Why do the shepherds allow the sheep population 
to grow so large that it destroys the Town Common? The reason is that social and 
private incentives differ. Avoiding the destruction of the grazing land depends on 
the collective action of the shepherds. If the shepherds acted together, they could 
reduce the sheep population to a size that the Town Common can support. Yet 
no single family has an incentive to reduce the size of its own flock because each 
flock represents only a small part of the problem.
In essence, the Tragedy of the Commons arise s because of an externality. When 
one family’s flock grazes on the common land, it reduces the quality of the land 
available for other families. Because people neglect this negative externality when 
deciding how many sheep to own, the result is an excessive number of sheep. 
If the tragedy had been foreseen, the town could have solved the problem in 
various ways. It could have regulated the number of sheep in each family’s flock, 
internalized the externality by taxing sheep, or auctioned off a limited number 
of sheep-grazing permits. That is, the medieval town could have dealt with the 
problem of overgrazing in the way that modern society deals with the problem 
of pollution. 
In the case of land, however, there is a simpler solution. The town can divide 
the land among town families. Each family can enclose its parcel of land with a 
fence and then protect it from excessive grazing. In this way, the land becomes a 
private good rather than a common resource. This outcome in fact occurred dur-
ing the enclosure movement in England in the 17th century. 
The Tragedy of the Commons is a story with a general lesson: When one per-
son uses a common resource, he or she diminishes other people’s enjoyment of 
it. Because of this negative externality, common resources tend to be used exces-
sively. The government can solve the problem by using regulation or taxes to 
reduce consumption of the common resource. Alternatively, the government can 
sometimes turn the common resource into a private good. 
This lesson has been known for thousands of years. The ancient Greek phi-
losopher Aristotle pointed out the problem with common resources: “What is 
common to many is taken least care of, for all men have greater regard for what is 
their own than for what they possess in common with others.” 
Some Important Common Resources
There are many examples of common resources. In almost all cases, the same 
problem arises as in the Tragedy of the Commons: Private decision makers use 

226
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
the common resource too much. Governments often regulate behavior or impose 
fees to mitigate the problem of overuse.
Clean Air and Water As we discussed in Chapter 10, markets do not ade-
quately protect the environment. Pollution is a negative externality that can be 
remedied with regulations or with corrective taxes on polluting activities. One can 
view this market failure as an example of a common-resource problem. Clean air 
and clean water are common resources like open grazing land, and excessive pol-
lution is like excessive grazing. Environmental degradation is a modern Tragedy 
of the Commons.
Why You’ll Love 
Paying for Roads That 
Used to Be Free
BY ERIC A. MORRIS
T
o end the scourge of traffic congestion, 
Julius Caesar banned most carts from 
the streets of Rome during daylight hours. 
It didn’t work—traffic jams just shifted to 
dusk. Two thousand years later, we have 
put a man on the moon and developed 
garments infinitely more practical than the 
toga, but we seem little nearer to solving 
the congestion problem.
 
If you live in a city, particularly a large 
one, you probably need little convincing that 
traffic congestion is frustrating and waste-
ful. According to the Texas Transportation 
Institute, the average American urban trave-
ler lost 38 hours, nearly one full work week, 
to congestion in 2005. And congestion is 
getting worse, not better; urban travelers in 
1982 were delayed only 14 hours that year. 
 
Americans want action, but unfortunately 
there aren’t too many great ideas about what 
that action might be. As Anthony Downs’s 
excellent book Still Stuck in Traffic: Coping 
With Peak-Hour Traffic Congestion chroni-
cles, most of the proposed solutions are too 
difficult to implement, won’t work, or both. 
 
Fortunately, there is one remedy which 
is both doable and largely guaranteed to 
succeed. In the space of a year or two we 
could have you zipping along the 405 or the 
LIE at the height of rush hour at a comfort-
able 55 miles per hour. 
 
There’s just one small problem with this 
silver bullet for congestion: many people 
seem to prefer the werewolf. Despite its 
merits, this policy, which is known as “con-
gestion pricing,” “value pricing,” or “vari-
able tolling,” is not an easy political sell. 
 
For decades, economists and other 
transportation thinkers have advocated 
imposing tolls that vary with congestion 
levels on roadways. Simply put, the more 
congestion, the higher the toll, until the 
congestion goes away. 
 
To many people, this sounds like a 
scheme by mustache-twirling bureaucrats 
and their academic apologists to fleece 
drivers out of their hard-earned cash. Why 
should drivers have to pay to use roads their 
tax dollars have already paid for? Won’t the 
remaining free roads be swamped as drivers 
are forced off the tolled roads? Won’t the 
working-class and poor be the victims here, 
as the tolled routes turn into “Lexus lanes”? 
 
And besides, adopting this policy would 
mean listening to economists, and who 
wants to do that? 
 
There’s a real problem with this logic, 
which is that, on its own terms, it makes 
perfect sense (except for the listening to 
economists part). Opponents of tolls are 
certainly not stupid, and their arguments 
deserve serious consideration. But in the 
end, their concerns are largely overblown, 
and the benefits of tolling swamp the poten-
tial costs. 
 
Unfortunately, it can be hard to convey 
this because the theory behind tolling is 
somewhat complex and counterintuitive. 
 The Case for Toll Roads
Many economists think drivers should be charged more for using roads. 
Here is why.
in the news

227
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
Congested Roads Roads can be either public goods or common resources. If 
a road is not congested, then one person’s use does not affect anyone else. In this 
case, use is not rival in consumption, and the road is a public good. Yet if a road 
is congested, then use of that road yields a negative externality. When one person 
drives on the road, it becomes more crowded, and other people must drive more 
slowly. In this case, the road is a common resource.
One way for the government to address the problem of road congestion is to 
charge drivers a toll. A toll is, in essence, a corrective tax on the externality of con-
gestion. Sometimes, as in the case of local roads, tolls are not a practical solution 
This is too bad, because variable tolling is 
an excellent public policy. Here’s why: the 
basic economic theory is that when you give 
out something valuable—in this case, road 
space—for less than its true value, short-
ages result. 
 
Ultimately, there’s no free lunch; instead 
of paying with money, you pay with the 
effort and time needed to acquire the good. 
Think of Soviet shoppers spending their lives 
in endless queues to purchase artificially low-
priced but exceedingly scarce goods. Then 
think of Americans who can fulfill nearly any 
consumerist fantasy quickly but at a mon-
etary cost. Free but congested roads have 
left us shivering on the streets of Moscow.
 
To consider it another way, delay is 
an externality imposed by drivers on their 
peers. By driving onto a busy road and 
contributing to congestion, drivers slow the 
speeds of others—but they never have to 
pay for it, at least not directly. In the end, 
of course, everybody pays, because as we 
impose congestion on others, others impose 
it on us. This degenerates into a game that 
nobody can win.
 
Markets work best when externalities 
are internalized: i.e., you pay for the hassle 
you inflict on others. … Using tolls to help 
internalize the congestion externality would 
somewhat reduce the number of trips made 
on the most congested roads at the peak 
usage periods; some trips would be moved 
to less congested times and routes, and oth-
ers would be foregone entirely. This way we 
would cut down on the congestion costs we 
impose on each other. 
 
Granted, tolls cannot fully cope with 
accidents and other incidents, which are 
major causes of delay. But pricing can 
largely eliminate chronic, recurring conges-
tion. No matter how high the demand for a 
road, there is a level of toll that will keep it 
flowing freely. 
 
To make tolling truly effective, the price 
must be right. Too high a price drives away 
too many cars and the road does not func-
tion at its capacity. Too low a price and 
congestion isn’t licked. 
 
The best solution is to vary the tolls in 
real time based on an analysis of current 
traffic conditions. Pilot toll projects on roads 
(like the I-394 in Minnesota and the I-15 in 
Southern California) use sensors embedded 
in the pavement to monitor the number and 
speeds of vehicles on the facility. 
 
A simple computer program then deter-
mines the number of cars that should be 
allowed in. The computer then calculates 
the level of toll that will attract that number 
of cars—and no more. Prices are then 
updated every few minutes on electronic 
message signs. Hi-tech transponders and 
antenna arrays make waiting at toll booths 
a thing of the past. 
 
The bottom line is that speeds are kept 
high (over 45 m.p.h.) so that throughput is 
higher than when vehicles are allowed to 
crowd all at once onto roadways at rush 
hour, slowing traffic to a crawl. 
 
To maximize efficiency, economists 
would like to price all travel, starting 
with the freeways. But given that elected 
officials have no burning desire to lose 
their jobs, a more realistic option, for 
now, is to toll just some freeway lanes 
that are either new capacity or underused 
carpool lanes. The other lanes would be 
left free—and congested. Drivers will 
then have a choice: wait or pay. Granted, 
neither is ideal. But right now drivers have 
no choice at all.
 
What’s the bottom line here? The state 
of Washington recently opened congestion-
priced lanes on its State Route 167. The 
peak toll in the first month of operation 
(reached on the evening of Wednesday, 
May 21) was $5.75. I know, I know, you 
would never pay such an exorbitant amount 
when America has taught you that free 
roads are your birthright. But that money 
bought Washington drivers a 27-minute 
time savings. Is a half hour of your time 
worth $6?
 
I think I already know the answer, and it 
is “it depends.” Most people’s value of time 
varies widely depending on their activities 
on any given day. Late for picking the kids 
up from daycare? Paying $6 to save a half 
hour is an incredible bargain. Have to clean 
the house? The longer your trip home takes, 
the better. Tolling will introduce a new level 
of flexibility and freedom into your life, giv-
ing you the power to tailor your travel costs 
to fit your schedule.
Source: Freakonomics blog, January 6, 2009.

228
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
because the cost of collecting them is too high. But several major cities, including 
London and Stockholm, have found increasing tolls to be a very effective way to 
reduce congestion.
Sometimes congestion is a problem only at certain times of day. If a bridge 
is heavily traveled only during rush hour, for instance, the congestion exter-
nality is largest during this time. The efficient way to deal with these exter-
nalities is to charge higher tolls during rush hour. This toll would provide an 
incentive for drivers to alter their schedules, reducing traffic when congestion 
is greatest.
Another policy that responds to the problem of road congestion, discussed in 
a case study in the previous chapter, is the tax on gasoline. Gasoline is a comple-
mentary good to driving: An increase in the price of gasoline tends to reduce the 
quantity of driving demanded. Therefore, a gasoline tax reduces road congestion. 
A gasoline tax, however, is an imperfect solution, because it affects other decisions 
besides the amount of driving on congested roads. For example, the gasoline tax 
discourages driving on uncongested roads, even though there is no congestion 
externality for these roads. 
Fish, Whales, and Other Wildlife Many species of animals are common 
resources. Fish and whales, for instance, have commercial value, and anyone can 
go to the ocean and catch whatever is available. Each person has little incentive 
to maintain the species for the next year. Just as excessive grazing can destroy the 
Town Common, excessive fishing and whaling can destroy commercially valu-
able marine populations. 
Oceans remain one of the least regulated common resources. Two problems 
prevent an easy solution. First, many countries have access to the oceans, so any 
solution would require international cooperation among countries that hold dif-
ferent values. Second, because the oceans are so vast, enforcing any agreement is 
difficult. As a result, fishing rights have been a frequent source of international 
tension among normally friendly countries.
Within the United States, various laws aim to manage the use of fish and other 
wildlife. For example, the government charges for fishing and hunting licenses, 
and it restricts the lengths of the fishing and hunting seasons. Fishermen are often 
required to throw back small fish, and hunters can kill only a limited number of 
animals. All these laws reduce the use of a common resource and help maintain 
animal populations.
Why the Cow Is Not Extinct 
Throughout history, many species of animals have been threatened with extinc-
tion. When Europeans first arrived in North America, more than 60 million buf-
falo roamed the continent. Yet hunting the buffalo was so popular during the 19th 
century that by 1900 the animal’s population had fallen to about 400 before the 
government stepped in to protect the species. In some African countries today, 
the elephant faces a similar challenge, as poachers kill the animals for the ivory 
in their tusks.
 
Yet not all animals with commercial value face this threat. The cow, for exam-
ple, is a valuable source of food, but no one worries that the cow will soon be 

229
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
extinct. Indeed, the great demand for beef seems to ensure that the species will 
continue to thrive.
 
Why does the commercial value of ivory threaten the elephant, while the com-
mercial value of beef protects the cow? The reason is that elephants are a common 
resource, whereas cows are a private good. Elephants roam freely without any 
owners. Each poacher has a strong incentive to kill as many elephants as he can 
find. Because poachers are numerous, each poacher has only a slight incentive to 
preserve the elephant population. By contrast, cattle live on ranches that are pri-
vately owned. Each rancher makes great effort to maintain the cattle population 
on his ranch because he reaps the benefit of these efforts.
 
Governments have tried to solve the elephant’s problem in two ways. Some 
countries, such as Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, have made it illegal to kill 
elephants and sell their ivory. Yet these laws have been hard to enforce, and ele-
phant populations have continued to dwindle. By contrast, other countries, such 
as Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, and Zimbabwe, have made elephants a private 
good by allowing people to kill elephants, but only those on their own property. 
Landowners now have an incentive to preserve the species on their own land, and 
as a result, elephant populations have started to rise. With private ownership and 
the profit motive now on its side, the African elephant might someday be as safe 
from extinction as the cow.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Why do governments try to limit the use of common resources?
Conclusion: The Importance of Property Rights
In this and the previous chapter, we have seen there are some “goods” that 
the market does not provide adequately. Markets do not ensure that the air we 
breathe is clean or that our country is defended from foreign aggressors. Instead, 
societies rely on the government to protect the environment and to provide for 
the national defense.
The problems we considered in these chapters arise in many different markets, 
but they share a common theme. In all cases, the market fails to allocate resources 
efficiently because property rights are not well established. That is, some item of 
value does not have an owner with the legal authority to control it. For example, 
although no one doubts that the “good” of clean air or national defense is valu-
able, no one has the right to attach a price to it and profit from its use. A factory 
pollutes too much because no one charges the factory for the pollution it emits. 
The market does not provide for national defense because no one can charge those 
who are defended for the benefit they receive.
When the absence of property rights causes a market failure, the government 
can potentially solve the problem. Sometimes, as in the sale of pollution permits, 
the solution is for the government to help define property rights and thereby 
unleash market forces. Other times, as in restricted hunting seasons, the solution 
is for the government to regulate private behavior. Still other times, as in the pro-
vision of national defense, the solution is for the government to use tax revenue 
to supply a good that the market fails to supply. In all cases, if the policy is well 
planned and well run, it can make the allocation of resources more efficient and 
thus raise economic well-being.
“Will the market protect me?”
© ROMAOSLO/ISTOCKPHOTO.COM

230
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
KEY CONCEPTS
SUMMARY 
• Goods differ in whether they are excludable and 
whether they are rival in consumption. A good 
is excludable if it is possible to prevent someone 
from using it. A good is rival in consumption 
if one person’s use of the good reduces others’ 
ability to use the same unit of the good. Markets 
work best for private goods, which are both 
excludable and rival in consumption. Markets do 
not work as well for other types of goods.
• Public goods are neither rival in consumption nor 
excludable. Examples of public goods include fire-
works displays, national defense, and the creation 
of fundamental knowledge. Because people are 
not charged for their use of the public good, they 
have an incentive to free ride when the good is 
provided privately. Therefore, governments pro-
vide public goods, making their decision about 
the quantity of each good based on cost–benefit 
analysis.
• Common resources are rival in consumption but 
not excludable. Examples include common graz-
ing land, clean air, and congested roads. Because 
people are not charged for their use of common 
resources, they tend to use them excessively. 
Therefore, governments use various methods to 
limit the use of common resources.
excludability, p. 218
rivalry in consumption, p. 218
private goods, p. 218
public goods, p. 218
common resources, p. 218
club goods, p. 219
free rider, p. 220
cost–benefit analysis, p. 223
Tragedy of the Commons, p. 224
 1. Explain what is meant by a good being 
“excludable.” Explain what is meant by a good 
being “rival in consumption.” Is a slice of pizza 
excludable? Is it rival in consumption?
 2. Define and give an example of a public good. 
Can the private market provide this good on its 
own? Explain.
 3. What is cost–benefit analysis of public goods? 
Why is it important? Why is it hard?
 4. Define and give an example of a common 
resource. Without government intervention, 
will people use this good too much or too little? 
Why? 
 1. Think about the goods and services provided by 
your local government.
a. Using the classification in Figure 1, explain 
which category each of the following goods 
falls into:
• police protection
• snow plowing
• education
• rural roads
• city streets
b. Why do you think the government provides 
items that are not public goods?
 2. Both public goods and common resources 
involve externalities.
a. Are the externalities associated with 
public goods generally positive or negative? 
Use examples in your answer. Is the 
free-market quantity of public goods 
generally greater or less than the efficient 
quantity?
230
PART IV
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
SUMMARY 
SUMMARY
•
Goods differ in whether they are excludable and 
whether they are rival in consumption. A good
is excludable if it is possible to prevent someone
from using it. A good is rival in consumption 
if one person’s use of the good reduces others’
ability to use the same unit of the good. Markets 
work best for private goods, which are both 
excludable and rival in consumption. Markets do 
not work as well for other types of goods.
•
Public goods are neither rival in consumption nor 
excludable. Examples of public goods include fire-
works displays, national defense, and the creation 
of fundamental knowledge. Because people are 
not charged for their use of the public good, they 
have an incentive to free ride when the good is 
provided privately. Therefore, governments pro-
vide public goods, making their decision about 
the quantity of each good based on cost–benefit 
analysis.
•
Common resources are rival in consumption but 
not excludable. Examples include common graz-
ing land, clean air, and congested roads. Because
people are not charged for their use of common
resources, they tend to use them excessively.
Therefore, governments use various methods to 
limit the use of common resources.
excludability, p. 218
rivalry in consumption, p. 218
private goods, p. 218
public goods, p. 218
common resources, p. 218
club goods, p. 219
free rider, p. 220
cost–benefit analysis, p. 223
Tragedy of the Commons, p. 224
 1. Explain what is meant by a good being
“excludable.” Explain what is meant by a good
being “rival in consumption.” Is a slice of pizza
excludable? Is it rival in consumption?
 2. Define and give an example of a public good.
Can the private market provide this good on its
own? Explain.
 3. What is cost–benefit analysis of public goods?
Why is it important? Why is it hard?
 4. Define and give an example of a common 
resource. Without government intervention,
will people use this good too much or too little?
Why? 
 1. Think about the goods and services provided by
your local government.
a. Using the classification in Figure 1, explain 
which category each of the following goods 
falls into:
• police protection
• snow plowing
• education
• rural roads
• city streets
b. Why do you think the government provides
items that are not public goods?
 2. Both public goods and common resources
involve externalities.
a. Are the externalities associated with 
public goods generally positive or negative?
Use examples in your answer. Is the
free-market quantity of public goods
generally greater or less than the efficient
quantity?

231
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
b. Are the externalities associated with common 
resources generally positive or negative? Use 
examples in your answer. Is the free-market 
use of common resources generally greater or 
less than the efficient use?
 3. Charlie loves watching Teletubbies on his local 
public TV station, but he never sends any 
money to support the station during its fund-
raising drives.
a. What name do economists have for people 
like Charlie? 
b. How can the government solve the problem 
caused by people like Charlie?
c. Can you think of ways the private market can 
solve this problem? How does the existence 
of cable TV alter the situation?
 4. Wireless, high-speed Internet is provided for 
free in the airport of the city of Communityville.
a. At first, only a few people use the service. 
What type of a good is this and why?
b. Eventually, as more people find out about 
the service and start using it, the speed of the 
connection begins to fall. Now what type of a 
good is the wireless Internet service? 
c. What problem might result and why? What 
is one possible way to correct this problem?
 5. Four roommates are planning to spend the 
weekend in their dorm room watching old 
movies, and they are debating how many to 
watch. Here is their willingness to pay for each 
film:
 
Judd 
Joel 
Gus 
Tim
First film 
$7 
$5 
$3 
$2
Second film  
6  
4 
2 
1
Third film  
5  
3  
1 
0
Fourth film  
4 
2 
0 
0
Fifth film  
3  
1  
0 
0
a. Within the dorm room, is the showing of a 
movie a public good? Why or why not?
b. If it costs $8 to rent a movie, how many 
movies should the roommates rent to 
maximize total surplus?
c. If they choose the optimal number from 
part (b) and then split the cost of renting the 
movies equally, how much surplus does each 
person obtain from watching the movies?
d. Is there any way to split the cost to ensure 
that everyone benefits? What practical 
problems does this solution raise?
e. Suppose they agree in advance to choose 
the efficient number and to split the cost of 
the movies equally. When Judd is asked his 
willingness to pay, will he have an incentive 
to tell the truth? If so, why? If not, what will 
he be tempted to say?
f. What does this example teach you about the 
optimal provision of public goods?
 6. Some economists argue that private firms will 
not undertake the efficient amount of basic 
scientific research.
a. Explain why this might be so. In your 
answer, classify basic research in one of the 
categories shown in Figure 1.
b. What sort of policy has the United States 
adopted in response to this problem?
c. It is often argued that this policy increases the 
technological capability of American producers 
relative to that of foreign firms. Is this 
argument consistent with your classification 
of basic research in part (a)? (Hint: Can 
excludability apply to some potential 
beneficiaries of a public good and not others?)
 7. There is often litter along highways but 
rarely in people’s yards. Provide an economic 
explanation for this fact.
 8. The town of Wiknam has 5 residents whose 
only activity is producing and consuming fish. 
They produce fish in two ways. Each person 
who works on a fish farm raises 2 fish per 
day. Each person who goes fishing in the town 
lake catches X fish per day. X depends on N, 
the number of residents fishing in the lake. In 
particular,
X = 6 – N.
  Each resident is attracted to the job that pays 
more fish.
a. Why do you suppose that X, the productivity 
of each fisherman, falls as N, the number of 
fishermen, rises? What economic term would 
you use to describe the fish in the town lake? 
Would the same description apply to the fish 
from the farms? Explain.
b. The town’s Freedom Party thinks every 
individual should have the right to choose 
between fishing in the lake and farming 
without government interference. Under its 
policy, how many of the residents would fish 
in the lake and how many would work on 
fish farms? How many fish are produced?
231
CHAPTER 11    PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES
b. Are the externalities associated with common
resources generally positive or negative? Use 
examples in your answer. Is the free-market
use of common resources generally greater or
less than the efficient use?
 3. Charlie loves watching Teletubbies on his local
public TV station, but he never sends any 
money to support the station during its fund-
raising drives.
a. What name do economists have for people
like Charlie?
b. How can the government solve the problem 
caused by people like Charlie?
c. Can you think of ways the private market can 
solve this problem? How does the existence
of cable TV alter the situation?
 4. Wireless, high-speed Internet is provided for 
free in the airport of the city of Communityville.
a. At first, only a few people use the service.
What type of a good is this and why?
b. Eventually, as more people find out about 
the service and start using it, the speed of the
connection begins to fall. Now what type of a
good is the wireless Internet service? 
c. What problem might result and why? What
is one possible way to correct this problem?
 5. Four roommates are planning to spend the 
weekend in their dorm room watching old 
movies, and they are debating how many to
watch. Here is their willingness to pay for each
film:
 
Judd 
Joel 
Gus 
Tim
First film 
$7 
$5 
$3 
$2
Second film  
6  
4 
2 
1
Third film  
5  
3  
1 
0
Fourth film  
4 
2 
0 
0
Fifth film  
3  
1  
0 
0
a. Within the dorm room, is the showing of a
movie a public good? Why or why not?
b. If it costs $8 to rent a movie, how many 
movies should the roommates rent to 
maximize total surplus?
c. If they choose the optimal number from 
part (b) and then split the cost of renting the
movies equally, how much surplus does each
person obtain from watching the movies?
d. Is there any way to split the cost to ensure 
that everyone benefits? What practical
problems does this solution raise?
e. Suppose they agree in advance to choose
the efficient number and to split the cost of 
the movies equally. When Judd is asked his 
willingness to pay, will he have an incentive
to tell the truth? If so, why? If not, what will
he be tempted to say?
f. What does this example teach you about the 
optimal provision of public goods?
 6. Some economists argue that private firms will 
not undertake the efficient amount of basic
scientific research.
a. Explain why this might be so. In your
answer, classify basic research in one of the
categories shown in Figure 1.
b. What sort of policy has the United States 
adopted in response to this problem?
c. It is often argued that this policy increases the
technological capability of American producers 
relative to that of foreign firms. Is this
argument consistent with your classification 
of basic research in part (a)? (Hint: Can 
excludability apply to some potential 
beneficiaries of a public good and not others?)
 7. There is often litter along highways but 
rarely in people’s yards. Provide an economic 
explanation for this fact.
 8. The town of Wiknam has 5 residents whose
only activity is producing and consuming fish.
They produce fish in two ways. Each person
who works on a fish farm raises 2 fish per 
day. Each person who goes fishing in the town 
lake catches X fish per day.
X
X depends on
X
N,
N
the number of residents fishing in the lake. In 
particular,
X = 6 – N.
  Each resident is attracted to the job that pays
more fish.
a. Why do you suppose that X, the productivity
of each fisherman, falls as N, the number of 
N
fishermen, rises? What economic term would
you use to describe the fish in the town lake?
Would the same description apply to the fish
from the farms? Explain.
b. The town’s Freedom Party thinks every
individual should have the right to choose
between fishing in the lake and farming 
without government interference. Under its 
policy, how many of the residents would fish 
in the lake and how many would work on
fish farms? How many fish are produced?

232
PART IV 
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
c. The town’s Efficiency Party thinks Wiknam 
should produce as many fish as it can. To 
achieve this goal, how many of the residents 
should fish in the lake and how many should 
work on the farms? (Hint: Create a table that 
shows the number of fish produced—on 
farms, from the lake, and in total—for each N 
from 0 to 5.)
d. The Efficiency Party proposes achieving its 
goal by taxing each person fishing in the lake 
by an amount equal to T fish per day. It will 
then distribute the proceeds equally among 
all Wiknam residents. (Fish are assumed to 
be divisible, so these rebates need not be 
whole numbers.) Calculate the value of T 
that would yield the outcome you derived in 
part (c).
e. Compared with the Freedom Party’s hands-
off policy, who benefits and who loses from 
the imposition of the Efficiency Party’s 
fishing tax?
 9. Many transportation systems, such as the 
Washington, D.C., Metro (subway), charge 
higher fares during rush hours than during the 
rest of the day. Why might they do this?
 10. The federal government tests the safety of 
car models and provides the test results free 
of charge to the public. Do you think this 
information qualifies as a public good? Why or 
why not?
 11. High-income people are willing to pay more 
than lower-income people to avoid the risk 
of death. For example, they are more likely to 
pay for safety features on cars. Do you think 
cost–benefit analysts should take this fact 
into account when evaluating public projects? 
Consider, for instance, a rich town and a 
poor town, both of which are considering the 
installation of a traffic light. Should the rich 
town use a higher dollar value for a human life 
in making this decision? Why or why not? 
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
232
PART IV
THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
c. The town’s Efficiency Party thinks Wiknam 
should produce as many fish as it can. To
achieve this goal, how many of the residents
should fish in the lake and how many should 
work on the farms? (Hint: Create a table that
shows the number of fish produced—on 
farms, from the lake, and in total—for each N
from 0 to 5.)
d. The Efficiency Party proposes achieving its
goal by taxing each person fishing in the lake
by an amount equal to T fish per day. It will
T
then distribute the proceeds equally among 
all Wiknam residents. (Fish are assumed to 
be divisible, so these rebates need not be
whole numbers.) Calculate the value of T
that would yield the outcome you derived in
part (c).
e. Compared with the Freedom Party’s hands-
off policy, who benefits and who loses from 
the imposition of the Efficiency Party’s 
fishing tax?
 9. Many transportation systems, such as the 
Washington, D.C., Metro (subway), charge 
higher fares during rush hours than during the
rest of the day. Why might they do this?
 10. The federal government tests the safety of 
car models and provides the test results free
of charge to the public. Do you think this 
information qualifies as a public good? Why or 
why not?
 11. High-income people are willing to pay more
than lower-income people to avoid the risk
of death. For example, they are more likely to
pay for safety features on cars. Do you think
cost–benefit analysts should take this fact 
into account when evaluating public projects?
Consider, for instance, a rich town and a 
poor town, both of which are considering the
installation of a traffic light. Should the rich
town use a higher dollar value for a human life 
in making this decision? Why or why not? 
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.

257
Firm Behavior and 
the Organization 
of Industry
PARTV


Th e Costs of 
    Production
T
he economy is made up of thousands of firms that produce the goods 
and services you enjoy every day: General Motors produces automo-
biles, General Electric produces lightbulbs, and General Mills produces 
breakfast cereals. Some firms, such as these three, are large; they employ 
thousands of workers and have thousands of stockholders who share in the firms’ 
profits. Other firms, such as the local barbershop or candy store, are small; they 
employ only a few workers and are owned by a single person or family.
In previous chapters, we used the supply curve to summarize firms’ produc-
tion decisions. According to the law of supply, firms are willing to produce and 
sell a greater quantity of a good when the price of the good is higher, and this 
response leads to a supply curve that slopes upward. For analyzing many ques-
tions, the law of supply is all you need to know about firm behavior.
In this chapter and the ones that follow, we examine firm behavior in more 
detail. This topic will give you a better understanding of the decisions behind 
the supply curve. In addition, it will introduce you to a part of economics called 
12
235

industrial organization—the study of how firms’ decisions about prices and quanti-
ties depend on the market conditions they face. The town in which you live, for 
instance, may have several pizzerias but only one cable television company. This 
raises a key question: How does the number of firms affect the prices in a market 
and the efficiency of the market outcome? The field of industrial organization 
addresses exactly this question.
Before turning to these issues, we need to discuss the costs of production. All 
firms, from Delta Air Lines to your local deli, incur costs as they make the goods 
and services that they sell. As we will see in the coming chapters, a firm’s costs 
are a key determinant of its production and pricing decisions. In this chapter, we 
define some of the variables that economists use to measure a firm’s costs, and we 
consider the relationships among these variables. 
A word of warning: This topic is dry and technical. To be honest, one might 
even call it boring. But this material provides a crucial foundation for the fascinat-
ing topics that follow. 
What Are Costs?
We begin our discussion of costs at Caroline’s Cookie Factory. Caroline, the owner 
of the firm, buys flour, sugar, chocolate chips, and other cookie ingredients. She also 
buys the mixers and ovens and hires workers to run this equipment. She then sells 
the cookies to consumers. By examining some of the issues that Caroline faces in her 
business, we can learn some lessons about costs that apply to all firms in an economy.
Total Revenue, Total Cost, and Profit
We begin with the firm’s objective. To understand the decisions a firm makes, we 
must understand what it is trying to do. It is conceivable that Caroline started her 
firm because of an altruistic desire to provide the world with cookies or, perhaps, 
out of love for the cookie business. More likely, Caroline started her business to 
make money. Economists normally assume that the goal of a firm is to maximize 
profit, and they find that this assumption works well in most cases.
What is a firm’s profit? The amount that the firm receives for the sale of its 
output (cookies) is called its total revenue. The amount that the firm pays to buy 
inputs (flour, sugar, workers, ovens, and so forth) is called its total cost. Caroline 
gets to keep any revenue that is not needed to cover costs. Profit is a firm’s total 
revenue minus its total cost: 
Profit = Total revenue – Total cost.
Caroline’s objective is to make her firm’s profit as large as possible.
To see how a firm goes about maximizing profit, we must consider fully how to 
measure its total revenue and its total cost. Total revenue is the easy part: It equals 
the quantity of output the firm produces times the price at which it sells its output. 
If Caroline produces 10,000 cookies and sells them at $2 a cookie, her total revenue 
is $20,000. By contrast, the measurement of a firm’s total cost is more subtle.
Costs as Opportunity Costs
When measuring costs at Caroline’s Cookie Factory or any other firm, it is impor-
tant to keep in mind one of the Ten Principles of Economics from Chapter 1: The 
cost of something is what you give up to get it. Recall that the opportunity cost of 
total revenue
the amount a firm 
receives for the sale of its 
output
total cost
the market value of the 
inputs a firm uses in 
production
profit
total revenue minus total 
cost
236
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

an item refers to all those things that must be forgone to acquire that item. When 
economists speak of a firm’s cost of production, they include all the opportunity 
costs of making its output of goods and services.
While some of a firm’s opportunity costs of production are obvious, others 
are less so. When Caroline pays $1,000 for flour, that $1,000 is an opportunity 
cost because Caroline can no longer use that $1,000 to buy something else. 
Similarly, when Caroline hires workers to make the cookies, the wages she pays 
are part of the firm’s costs. Because these opportunity costs require the firm to 
pay out some money, they are called explicit costs. By contrast, some of a firm’s 
opportunity costs, called implicit costs, do not require a cash outlay. Imagine 
that Caroline is skilled with computers and could earn $100 per hour working 
as a programmer. For every hour that Caroline works at her cookie factory, she 
gives up $100 in income, and this forgone income is also part of her costs. The 
total cost of Caroline’s business is the sum of the explicit costs and the implicit 
costs.
The distinction between explicit and implicit costs highlights an important dif-
ference between how economists and accountants analyze a business. Economists 
are interested in studying how firms make production and pricing decisions. 
Because these decisions are based on both explicit and implicit costs, economists 
include both when measuring a firm’s costs. By contrast, accountants have the job 
of keeping track of the money that flows into and out of firms. As a result, they 
measure the explicit costs but usually ignore the implicit costs.
The difference between economists and accountants is easy to see in the case 
of Caroline’s Cookie Factory. When Caroline gives up the opportunity to earn 
money as a computer programmer, her accountant will not count this as a cost of 
her cookie business. Because no money flows out of the business to pay for this 
cost, it never shows up on the accountant’s financial statements. An economist, 
however, will count the forgone income as a cost because it will affect the deci-
sions that Caroline makes in her cookie business. For example, if Caroline’s wage 
as a computer programmer rises from $100 to $500 per hour, she might decide that 
running her cookie business is too costly and choose to shut down the factory to 
become a full-time computer programmer. 
The Cost of Capital as an Opportunity Cost
An important implicit cost of almost every business is the opportunity cost of the 
financial capital that has been invested in the business. Suppose, for instance, that 
Caroline used $300,000 of her savings to buy her cookie factory from its previous 
owner. If Caroline had instead left this money deposited in a savings account that 
pays an interest rate of 5 percent, she would have earned $15,000 per year. To 
own her cookie factory, therefore, Caroline has given up $15,000 a year in interest 
income. This forgone $15,000 is one of the implicit opportunity costs of Caroline’s 
business.
As we have already noted, economists and accountants treat costs differently, 
and this is especially true in their treatment of the cost of capital. An economist 
views the $15,000 in interest income that Caroline gives up every year as a cost of 
her business, even though it is an implicit cost. Caroline’s accountant, however, 
will not show this $15,000 as a cost because no money flows out of the business 
to pay for it.
To further explore the difference between economists and accountants, let’s change 
the example slightly. Suppose now that Caroline did not have the entire $300,000 to 
buy the factory but, instead, used $100,000 of her own savings and borrowed $200,000 
explicit costs
input costs that require 
an outlay of money by 
the firm
implicit costs
input costs that do not 
require an outlay of 
money by the firm
237
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

from a bank at an interest rate of 5 percent. Caroline’s accountant, who only measures 
explicit costs, will now count the $10,000 interest paid on the bank loan every year as 
a cost because this amount of money now flows out of the firm. By contrast, accord-
ing to an economist, the opportunity cost of owning the business is still $15,000. The 
opportunity cost equals the interest on the bank loan (an explicit cost of $10,000) plus 
the forgone interest on savings (an implicit cost of $5,000). 
Economic Profit versus Accounting Profit
Now let’s return to the firm’s objective: profit. Because economists and accoun-
tants measure costs differently, they also measure profit differently. An econo-
mist measures a firm’s economic profit as the firm’s total revenue minus all the 
opportunity costs (explicit and implicit) of producing the goods and services sold. 
An accountant measures the firm’s accounting profit as the firm’s total revenue 
minus only the firm’s explicit costs. 
Figure 1 summarizes this difference. Notice that because the accountant 
ignores the implicit costs, accounting profit is usually larger than economic profit. 
For a business to be profitable from an economist’s standpoint, total revenue must 
cover all the opportunity costs, both explicit and implicit. 
Economic profit is an important concept because it is what motivates the firms 
that supply goods and services. As we will see, a firm making positive economic 
profit will stay in business. It is covering all its opportunity costs and has some rev-
enue left to reward the firm owners. When a firm is making economic losses (that 
is, when economic profits are negative), the business owners are failing to earn 
enough revenue to cover all the costs of production. Unless conditions change, 
the firm owners will eventually close down the business and exit the industry. To 
understand business decisions, we need to keep an eye on economic profit.
QUICK QUIZ Farmer McDonald gives banjo lessons for $20 an hour. One day, he 
spends 10 hours planting $100 worth of seeds on his farm. What opportunity cost has 
he incurred? What cost would his accountant measure? If these seeds yield $200 worth 
of crops, does McDonald earn an accounting profit? Does he earn an economic profit? 
accounting profit
total revenue minus total 
explicit cost
economic profit
total revenue minus total 
cost, including both 
explicit and implicit costs
Figure 1
Economists versus Accountants
Economists include all opportunity 
costs when analyzing a firm, 
whereas accountants measure only 
explicit costs. Therefore, economic 
profit is smaller than accounting 
profit. 
Revenue
Total
opportunity
costs
How an Economist
Views a Firm
Economic
proﬁt
Implicit
costs
Explicit
costs
Explicit
costs
Accounting
proﬁt
How an Accountant
Views a Firm
Revenue
238
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Production and Costs
Firms incur costs when they buy inputs to produce the goods and services that 
they plan to sell. In this section, we examine the link between a firm’s pro-
duction process and its total cost. Once again, we consider Caroline’s Cookie 
Factory.
In the analysis that follows, we make an important simplifying assumption: 
We assume that the size of Caroline’s factory is fixed and that Caroline can vary 
the quantity of cookies produced only by changing the number of workers she 
employs. This assumption is realistic in the short run but not in the long run. That 
is, Caroline cannot build a larger factory overnight, but she can do so over the 
next year or two. This analysis, therefore, describes the production decisions that 
Caroline faces in the short run. We examine the relationship between costs and 
time horizon more fully later in the chapter.
The Production Function
Table 1 shows how the quantity of cookies produced per hour at Caroline’s fac-
tory depends on the number of workers. As you can see in the first two columns, 
if there are no workers in the factory, Caroline produces no cookies. When there 
is 1 worker, she produces 50 cookies. When there are 2 workers, she produces 90 
cookies and so on. Panel (a) of Figure 2 presents a graph of these two columns 
of numbers. The number of workers is on the horizontal axis, and the number of 
cookies produced is on the vertical axis. This relationship between the quantity 
of inputs (workers) and quantity of output (cookies) is called the production 
function.
production function
the relationship between 
quantity of inputs used 
to make a good and the 
quantity of output of that 
good
A Production 
Function and 
Total Cost: 
Caroline’s Cookie 
Factory
Table 1
 
 
Output 
 
 
 
Total Cost
 
 
(quantity of 
 
 
 
of Inputs
 
 
cookies 
Marginal 
 
 
(cost of 
 Number of 
produced 
Product 
Cost of 
Cost of 
factory + cost
 Workers 
per hour) 
of Labor 
Factory 
Workers 
of workers)
 
0  
 0 
 
$30 
  $0 
$30
 
 
 
50
 
1 
50 
 
 30 
10 
 40
 
 
 
40
 
2 
90 
 
 30 
20 
 50
 
 
 
30
 
3 
120 
 
 30 
30 
 60
 
 
 
20 
 
4 
140 
 
 30 
40 
 70
 
 
 
10
 
5 
150 
 
 30 
50 
 80
 
 
 
 5
 
6 
155 
 
 30 
60 
 90
239
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

One of the Ten Principles of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that rational 
people think at the margin. As we will see in future chapters, this idea is the key 
to understanding the decisions a firm makes about how many workers to hire 
and how much output to produce. To take a step toward understanding these 
decisions, the third column in the table gives the marginal product of a worker. 
The marginal product of any input in the production process is the increase in 
the quantity of output obtained from one additional unit of that input. When the 
number of workers goes from 1 to 2, cookie production increases from 50 to 90, so 
the marginal product of the second worker is 40 cookies. And when the number of 
workers goes from 2 to 3, cookie production increases from 90 to 120, so the mar-
ginal product of the third worker is 30 cookies. In the table, the marginal product 
is shown halfway between two rows because it represents the change in output as 
the number of workers increases from one level to another.
Notice that as the number of workers increases, the marginal product declines. 
The second worker has a marginal product of 40 cookies, the third worker has a 
marginal product
the increase in output 
that arises from an 
additional unit of input
Figure 2
The production function in panel (a) shows the relationship between the number of 
workers hired and the quantity of output produced. Here the number of workers 
hired (on the horizontal axis) is from the first column in Table 1, and the quantity 
of output produced (on the vertical axis) is from the second column. The production 
function gets flatter as the number of workers increases, which reflects diminishing 
marginal product. The total-cost curve in panel (b) shows the relationship between the 
quantity of output produced and total cost of production. Here the quantity of output 
produced (on the horizontal axis) is from the second column in Table 1, and the total 
cost (on the vertical axis) is from the sixth column. The total-cost curve gets steeper as 
the quantity of output increases because of diminishing marginal product.
Caroline’s Production 
Function and Total-Cost 
Curve
Quantity
of Output
(cookies
per hour)
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
160
Number of
Workers Hired
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Production
function
(a) Production function
Total
Cost
80
$90
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Quantity
of Output
(cookies per hour)
0
20
160
40
140
120
100
80
60
(b) Total-cost curve
Total-cost
curve
240
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

marginal product of 30 cookies, and the fourth worker has a marginal product 
of 20 cookies. This property is called diminishing marginal product. At first, 
when only a few workers are hired, they have easy access to Caroline’s kitchen 
equipment. As the number of workers increases, additional workers have to share 
equipment and work in more crowded conditions. Eventually, the kitchen is so 
crowded that the workers start getting in each other’s way. Hence, as more and 
more workers are hired, each additional worker contributes fewer additional 
cookies to total production. 
Diminishing marginal product is also apparent in Figure 2. The production 
function’s slope (“rise over run”) tells us the change in Caroline’s output of cook-
ies (“rise”) for each additional input of labor (“run”). That is, the slope of the 
production function measures the marginal product of a worker. As the number 
of workers increases, the marginal product declines, and the production function 
becomes flatter.
From the Production Function to the Total-Cost Curve
The last three columns of Table 1 show Caroline’s cost of producing cookies. 
In this example, the cost of Caroline’s factory is $30 per hour, and the cost of a 
worker is $10 per hour. If she hires 1 worker, her total cost is $40 per hour. If she 
hires 2 workers, her total cost is $50 per hour, and so on. With this information, 
the table now shows how the number of workers Caroline hires is related to the 
quantity of cookies she produces and to her total cost of production.
Our goal in the next several chapters is to study firms’ production and pricing 
decisions. For this purpose, the most important relationship in Table 1 is between 
quantity produced (in the second column) and total costs (in the sixth column). 
Panel (b) of Figure 2 graphs these two columns of data with the quantity pro-
duced on the horizontal axis and total cost on the vertical axis. This graph is called 
the total-cost curve.
Now compare the total-cost curve in panel (b) with the production function in 
panel (a). These two curves are opposite sides of the same coin. The total-cost curve 
gets steeper as the amount produced rises, whereas the production function gets 
flatter as production rises. These changes in slope occur for the same reason. High 
production of cookies means that Caroline’s kitchen is crowded with many work-
ers. Because the kitchen is crowded, each additional worker adds less to production, 
reflecting diminishing marginal product. Therefore, the production function is rela-
tively flat. But now turn this logic around: When the kitchen is crowded, produc-
ing an additional cookie requires a lot of additional labor and is thus very costly. 
Therefore, when the quantity produced is large, the total-cost curve is relatively steep.
QUICK QUIZ If Farmer Jones plants no seeds on his farm, he gets no harvest. If he 
plants 1 bag of seeds, he gets 3 bushels of wheat. If he plants 2 bags, he gets 5 bushels. 
If he plants 3 bags, he gets 6 bushels. A bag of seeds costs $100, and seeds are his only 
cost. Use these data to graph the farmer’s production function and total-cost curve. 
Explain their shapes. 
The Various Measures of Cost
Our analysis of Caroline’s Cookie Factory demonstrated how a firm’s total cost 
reflects its production function. From data on a firm’s total cost, we can derive 
several related measures of cost, which will turn out to be useful when we  analyze 
diminishing 
marginal product
the property whereby 
the marginal product of 
an input declines as the 
quantity of the input 
increases
241
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

production and pricing decisions in future chapters. To see how these related 
measures are derived, we consider the example in Table 2. This table presents cost 
data on Caroline’s neighbor—Conrad’s Coffee Shop.
The first column of the table shows the number of cups of coffee that Conrad 
might produce, ranging from 0 to 10 cups per hour. The second column shows 
Conrad’s total cost of producing coffee. Figure 3 plots Conrad’s total-cost curve. 
The quantity of coffee (from the first column) is on the horizontal axis, and total 
cost (from the second column) is on the vertical axis. Conrad’s total-cost curve has 
a shape similar to Caroline’s. In particular, it becomes steeper as the quantity pro-
duced rises, which (as we have discussed) reflects diminishing marginal product.
Fixed and Variable Costs
Conrad’s total cost can be divided into two types. Some costs, called fixed costs, do 
not vary with the quantity of output produced. They are incurred even if the firm 
produces nothing at all. Conrad’s fixed costs include any rent he pays because this 
cost is the same regardless of how much coffee he produces. Similarly, if Conrad 
needs to hire a full-time bookkeeper to pay bills, regardless of the quantity of cof-
fee produced, the bookkeeper’s salary is a fixed cost. The third column in Table 2 
shows Conrad’s fixed cost, which in this example is $3.00.
Some of the firm’s costs, called variable costs, change as the firm alters the 
quantity of output produced. Conrad’s variable costs include the cost of coffee 
fixed costs
costs that do not vary 
with the quantity of 
output produced
variable costs
costs that vary with 
the quantity of output 
produced
 Quantity 
 of Coffee 
 
 
 
Average 
Average 
Average
 (cups per  
Total 
Fixed 
Variable 
Fixed 
Variable 
Total 
Marginal
 
hour) 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost
 
 0 
$ 3.00 
$3.00 
$ 0.00 
— 
— 
— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$0.30
 
 1 
  3.30 
 3.00 
  0.30 
$3.00 
$0.30 
$3.30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0.50
 
 2 
  3.80 
 3.00 
  0.80 
 1.50 
 0.40 
 1.90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0.70
 
 3 
  4.50 
 3.00 
  1.50 
 1.00 
 0.50 
 1.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0.90
 
 4 
  5.40 
 3.00 
  2.40 
 0.75 
 0.60 
 1.35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.10
 
 5 
  6.50 
 3.00 
  3.50 
 0.60 
 0.70 
 1.30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.30
 
 6 
  7.80 
 3.00 
  4.80 
 0.50 
 0.80 
 1.30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.50
 
 7 
  9.30 
 3.00 
  6.30 
 0.43 
 0.90 
 1.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.70
 
 8 
 11.00 
 3.00 
  8.00 
 0.38 
 1.00 
 1.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.90
 
 9 
 12.90 
 3.00 
  9.90 
 0.33 
 1.10 
 1.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.10
 
10 
 15.00 
 3.00 
 12.00 
 0.30 
 1.20 
 1.50 
The Various Measures 
of Cost: Conrad’s Coffee 
Shop
Table 2
242
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Figure 3
Conrad’s Total-Cost Curve
Here the quantity of output produced 
(on the horizontal axis) is from the first 
column in Table 2, and the total cost 
(on the vertical axis) is from the second 
column. As in Figure 2, the total-cost 
curve gets steeper as the quantity of 
output increases because of diminishing 
marginal product.
Total Cost
$15.00
14.00
13.00
12.00
11.00
10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
Quantity
of Output
(cups of coffee per hour)
0
1
4
3
2
7
6
5
9
8
10
Total-cost curve
beans, milk, sugar, and paper cups: The more cups of coffee Conrad makes, the 
more of these items he needs to buy. Similarly, if Conrad has to hire more workers 
to make more cups of coffee, the salaries of these workers are variable costs. The 
fourth column of the table shows Conrad’s variable cost. The variable cost is 0 if 
he produces nothing, $0.30 if he produces 1 cup of coffee, $0.80 if he produces 2 
cups, and so on.
A firm’s total cost is the sum of fixed and variable costs. In Table 2, total cost 
in the second column equals fixed cost in the third column plus variable cost in 
the fourth column.
Average and Marginal Cost
As the owner of his firm, Conrad has to decide how much to produce. A key part 
of this decision is how his costs will vary as he changes the level of production. In 
making this decision, Conrad might ask his production supervisor the following 
two questions about the cost of producing coffee:
•  How much does it cost to make the typical cup of coffee?
•  How much does it cost to increase production of coffee by 1 cup?
Although at first these two questions might seem to have the same answer, they 
do not. Both answers will turn out to be important for understanding how firms 
make production decisions.
To find the cost of the typical unit produced, we would divide the firm’s costs 
by the quantity of output it produces. For example, if the firm produces 2 cups 
of coffee per hour, its total cost is $3.80, and the cost of the typical cup is $3.80/2, 
or $1.90. Total cost divided by the quantity of output is called average total cost.
Because total cost is the sum of fixed and variable costs, average total cost can be 
average total cost
total cost divided by the 
quantity of output
243
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

expressed as the sum of average fixed cost and average variable cost. Average 
fixed cost is the fixed cost divided by the quantity of output, and average variable 
cost is the variable cost divided by the quantity of output.
Average total cost tells us the cost of the typical unit, but it does not tell us 
how much total cost will change as the firm alters its level of production. The last 
column in Table 2 shows the amount that total cost rises when the firm increases 
production by 1 unit of output. This number is called marginal cost. For example, 
if Conrad increases production from 2 to 3 cups, total cost rises from $3.80 to $4.50, 
so the marginal cost of the third cup of coffee is $4.50 minus $3.80, or $0.70. In the 
table, the marginal cost appears halfway between two rows because it represents 
the change in total cost as quantity of output increases from one level to another.
It may be helpful to express these definitions mathematically:
Average total cost = Total cost/Quantity
ATC = TC/Q
and
Marginal cost = Change in total cost/Change in quantity
MC = ∆TC/∆Q.
Here Δ, the Greek letter delta, represents the change in a variable. These equa-
tions show how average total cost and marginal cost are derived from total cost. 
Average total cost tells us the cost of a typical unit of output if total cost is divided evenly 
over all the units produced. Marginal cost tells us the increase in total cost that arises from 
producing an additional unit of output. As we will see more fully in the next chapter, 
business managers like Conrad need to keep in mind the concepts of average total 
cost and marginal cost when deciding how much of their product to supply to the 
market. 
Cost Curves and Their Shapes
Just as in previous chapters we found graphs of supply and demand useful when 
analyzing the behavior of markets, we will find graphs of average and marginal 
cost useful when analyzing the behavior of firms. Figure 4 graphs Conrad’s costs 
using the data from Table 2. The horizontal axis measures the quantity the firm 
produces, and the vertical axis measures marginal and average costs. The graph 
shows four curves: average total cost (ATC), average fixed cost (AFC), average 
variable cost (AVC), and marginal cost (MC). 
The cost curves shown here for Conrad’s Coffee Shop have some features 
that are common to the cost curves of many firms in the economy. Let’s examine 
three features in particular: the shape of the marginal-cost curve, the shape of the 
average-total-cost curve, and the relationship between marginal and average total 
cost. 
Rising Marginal Cost Conrad’s marginal cost rises with the quantity of out-
put produced. This reflects the property of diminishing marginal product. When 
Conrad produces a small quantity of coffee, he has few workers, and much of his 
equipment is not used. Because he can easily put these idle resources to use, the 
marginal product of an extra worker is large, and the marginal cost of an extra cup 
of coffee is small. By contrast, when Conrad produces a large quantity of coffee, 
average fixed cost
fixed cost divided by the 
quantity of output
average variable 
cost
variable cost divided by 
the quantity of output
marginal cost
the increase in total cost 
that arises from an extra 
unit of production
244
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Figure 4
Conrad’s Average-Cost and 
Marginal-Cost Curves
This figure shows the average 
total cost (ATC ), average fixed 
cost (AFC ), average variable cost 
(AVC ), and marginal cost (MC ) 
for Conrad’s Coffee Shop. All 
of these curves are obtained by 
graphing the data in Table 2. 
These cost curves show three 
features that are typical of many 
firms: (1) Marginal cost rises 
with the quantity of output. (2) 
The average-total-cost curve is 
U-shaped. (3) The marginal-cost 
curve crosses the average-total-
cost curve at the minimum of 
average total cost. 
Costs
$3.50
3.25
3.00
2.75
2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
Quantity
of Output
(cups of coffee per hour)
0
1
4
3
2
7
6
5
9
8
10
MC
ATC
AVC
AFC
his shop is crowded with workers, and most of his equipment is fully utilized. 
Conrad can produce more coffee by adding workers, but these new workers 
have to work in crowded conditions and may have to wait to use the equipment. 
Therefore, when the quantity of coffee produced is already high, the marginal 
product of an extra worker is low, and the marginal cost of an extra cup of coffee 
is large.
U-Shaped Average Total Cost Conrad’s average-total-cost curve is U-shaped, 
as shown in Figure 4. To understand why, remember that average total cost is the 
sum of average fixed cost and average variable cost. Average fixed cost always 
declines as output rises because the fixed cost is spread over a larger number of 
units. Average variable cost typically rises as output increases because of dimin-
ishing marginal product. 
Average total cost reflects the shapes of both average fixed cost and average 
variable cost. At very low levels of output, such as 1 or 2 cups per hour, average 
total cost is very high. Even though average variable cost is low, average fixed cost 
is high because the fixed cost is spread over only a few units. As output increases, 
the fixed cost is spread more widely. Average fixed cost declines, rapidly at first 
and then more slowly. As a result, average total cost also declines until the firm’s 
output reaches 5 cups of coffee per hour, when average total cost is $1.30 per cup. 
When the firm produces more than 6 cups per hour, however, the increase in aver-
age variable cost becomes the dominant force, and average total cost starts rising. 
The tug of war between average fixed cost and average variable cost generates the 
U-shape in average total cost.
245
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

The bottom of the U-shape occurs at the quantity that minimizes average total 
cost. This quantity is sometimes called the efficient scale of the firm. For Conrad, 
the efficient scale is 5 or 6 cups of coffee per hour. If he produces more or less than 
this amount, his average total cost rises above the minimum of $1.30. At lower 
levels of output, average total cost is higher than $1.30 because the fixed cost is 
spread over so few units. At higher levels of output, average total cost is higher 
than $1.30 because the marginal product of inputs has diminished significantly. 
At the efficient scale, these two forces are balanced to yield the lowest average 
total cost.
The Relationship between Marginal Cost and Average Total Cost If 
you look at Figure 4 (or back at Table 2), you will see something that may be sur-
prising at first. Whenever marginal cost is less than average total cost, average total cost 
is falling. Whenever marginal cost is greater than average total cost, average total cost is 
rising. This feature of Conrad’s cost curves is not a coincidence from the particular 
numbers used in the example: It is true for all firms.
To see why, consider an analogy. Average total cost is like your cumulative 
grade point average. Marginal cost is like the grade in the next course you will 
take. If your grade in your next course is less than your grade point average, your 
grade point average will fall. If your grade in your next course is higher than 
your grade point average, your grade point average will rise. The mathematics 
of average and marginal costs is exactly the same as the mathematics of average 
and marginal grades.
This relationship between average total cost and marginal cost has an impor-
tant corollary: The marginal-cost curve crosses the average-total-cost curve at its mini-
mum. Why? At low levels of output, marginal cost is below average total cost, so 
average total cost is falling. But after the two curves cross, marginal cost rises 
above average total cost. For the reason we have just discussed, average total 
cost must start to rise at this level of output. Hence, this point of intersection is 
the minimum of average total cost. As you will see in the next chapter, minimum 
average total cost plays a key role in the analysis of competitive firms.
Typical Cost Curves
In the examples we have studied so far, the firms exhibit diminishing marginal 
product and, therefore, rising marginal cost at all levels of output. This simplify-
ing assumption was useful because it allowed us to focus on the key features of 
cost curves that will prove useful in analyzing firm behavior. Yet actual firms 
are usually more complicated than this. In many firms, marginal product does 
not start to fall immediately after the first worker is hired. Depending on the 
production process, the second or third worker might have a higher marginal 
product than the first because a team of workers can divide tasks and work 
more productively than a single worker. Firms exhibiting this pattern would 
experience increasing marginal product for a while before diminishing marginal 
product set in. 
Figure 5 shows the cost curves for such a firm, including average total cost 
(ATC), average fixed cost (AFC), average variable cost (AVC), and marginal cost 
(MC). At low levels of output, the firm experiences increasing marginal prod-
uct, and the marginal-cost curve falls. Eventually, the firm starts to experience 
diminishing marginal product, and the marginal-cost curve starts to rise. This 
combination of increasing then diminishing marginal product also makes the 
average-variable-cost curve U-shaped. 
efficient scale
the quantity of output 
that minimizes average 
total cost
246
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Figure 5
Cost Curves for a Typical 
Firm
Many firms experience 
increasing marginal product 
before diminishing marginal 
product. As a result, they 
have cost curves shaped like 
those in this figure. Notice 
that marginal cost and 
average variable cost fall for 
a while before starting to 
rise.
Quantity of Output
Costs
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
4
2
6
8
14
12
10
MC
ATC
AVC
AFC
Despite these differences from our previous example, the cost curves shown 
here share the three properties that are most important to remember:
•  Marginal cost eventually rises with the quantity of output. 
•  The average-total-cost curve is U-shaped.
•  The marginal-cost curve crosses the average-total-cost curve at the minimum 
of average total cost. 
QUICK QUIZ Suppose Honda’s total cost of producing 4 cars is $225,000 and its total 
cost of producing 5 cars is $250,000. What is the average total cost of producing 5 cars? 
What is the marginal cost of the fifth car? • Draw the marginal-cost curve and the aver-
age-total-cost curve for a typical firm, and explain why these curves cross where they do.
Costs in the Short Run and in the Long Run
We noted earlier in this chapter that a firm’s costs might depend on the time hori-
zon under consideration. Let’s examine more precisely why this might be the case.
The Relationship between Short-Run and 
Long-Run Average Total Cost 
For many firms, the division of total costs between fixed and variable costs 
depends on the time horizon. Consider, for instance, a car manufacturer such as 
Ford Motor Company. Over a period of only a few months, Ford cannot adjust the 
number or size of its car factories. The only way it can produce additional cars is 
to hire more workers at the factories it already has. The cost of these factories is, 
therefore, a fixed cost in the short run. By contrast, over a period of several years, 
Ford can expand the size of its factories, build new factories, or close old ones. 
Thus, the cost of its factories is a variable cost in the long run.
247
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

Because many decisions are fixed in the short run but variable in the long run, 
a firm’s long-run cost curves differ from its short-run cost curves. Figure 6 shows 
an example. The figure presents three short-run average-total-cost curves—for a 
small, medium, and large factory. It also presents the long-run average-total-cost 
curve. As the firm moves along the long-run curve, it is adjusting the size of the 
factory to the quantity of production.
This graph shows how short-run and long-run costs are related. The long-run 
average-total-cost curve is a much flatter U-shape than the short-run average-total-
cost curve. In addition, all the short-run curves lie on or above the long-run curve. 
These properties arise because firms have greater flexibility in the long run. In 
essence, in the long run, the firm gets to choose which short-run curve it wants to use. 
But in the short run, it has to use whatever short-run curve it has chosen in the past.
The figure shows an example of how a change in production alters costs over dif-
ferent time horizons. When Ford wants to increase production from 1,000 to 1,200 
cars per day, it has no choice in the short run but to hire more workers at its existing 
medium-sized factory. Because of diminishing marginal product, average total cost 
rises from $10,000 to $12,000 per car. In the long run, however, Ford can expand both 
the size of the factory and its workforce, and average total cost returns to $10,000. 
How long does it take a firm to get to the long run? The answer depends on 
the firm. It can take a year or more for a major manufacturing firm, such as a car 
company, to build a larger factory. By contrast, a person running a coffee shop can 
buy another coffee maker within a few days. There is, therefore, no single answer 
to how long it takes a firm to adjust its production facilities.
Economies and Diseconomies of Scale
The shape of the long-run average-total-cost curve conveys important informa-
tion about the production processes that a firm has available for manufacturing a 
good. In particular, it tells us how costs vary with the scale—that is, the size—of a 
firm’s operations. When long-run average total cost declines as output increases, 
there are said to be economies of scale. When long-run average total cost rises 
as output increases, there are said to be diseconomies of scale. When long-run 
diseconomies of 
scale
the property whereby 
long-run average total 
cost rises as the quantity 
of output increases
economies of scale
the property whereby 
long-run average total 
cost falls as the quantity 
of output increases
Figure 6
Average Total Cost in the Short 
and Long Runs
Because fixed costs are variable in 
the long run, the average-total-cost 
curve in the short run differs from 
the average-total-cost curve in the 
long run.
Quantity of
Cars per Day
0
1,200
1,000
Average
Total
Cost
$12,000
10,000
Economies
of
scale
ATC in short
run with
small factory
ATC in short
run with
medium factory
ATC in short
run with
large factory
ATC in long run
Diseconomies
of
scale
Constant
returns to
scale
248
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

 average total cost does not vary with the level of output, there are said to be 
constant returns to scale. In this example, Ford has economies of scale at low 
levels of output, constant returns to scale at intermediate levels of output, and 
diseconomies of scale at high levels of output. 
What might cause economies or diseconomies of scale? Economies of scale 
often arise because higher production levels allow specialization among workers, 
which permits each worker to become better at a specific task. For instance, if 
Ford hires a large number of workers and produces a large number of cars, it can 
reduce costs with modern assembly-line production. Diseconomies of scale can 
arise because of coordination problems that are inherent in any large organization. 
The more cars Ford produces, the more stretched the management team becomes, 
and the less effective the managers become at keeping costs down. 
This analysis shows why long-run average-total-cost curves are often U-shaped. 
At low levels of production, the firm benefits from increased size because it can 
take advantage of greater specialization. Coordination problems, meanwhile, are 
not yet acute. By contrast, at high levels of production, the benefits of specializa-
tion have already been realized, and coordination problems become more severe 
as the firm grows larger. Thus, long-run average total cost is falling at low levels 
of production because of increasing specialization and rising at high levels of pro-
duction because of increasing coordination problems.
QUICK QUIZ If Boeing produces 9 jets per month, its long-run total cost is $9.0 mil-
lion per month. If it produces 10 jets per month, its long-run total cost is $9.5 million 
per month. Does Boeing exhibit economies or diseconomies of scale?
constant returns to 
scale
the property whereby 
long-run average total 
cost stays the same as 
the quantity of output 
changes
FYI
 Lessons from a Pin Factory
“Jack of all trades, master of none.” This well-known adage helps 
explain why firms sometimes experience economies of scale. A per-
son who tries to do everything usually ends up doing nothing very 
well. If a firm wants its workers to be as productive as they can be, 
it is often best to give each worker a limited task that he or she can 
master. But this is possible only if a firm employs many workers and 
produces a large quantity of output.
 
In his celebrated book An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of 
the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith described a visit he made to a 
pin factory. Smith was impressed by the specialization among the 
workers and the resulting economies of scale. He wrote,
One man draws out the wire, another straightens it, a third 
cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiv-
ing the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct 
operations; to put it on is a peculiar business; to whiten it is 
another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into paper.
 
Smith reported that because of this specialization, the pin factory 
produced thousands of pins per worker every day. He conjectured 
that if the workers had chosen to work separately, rather than as 
a team of specialists, “they certainly could not each of them make 
twenty, perhaps not one pin a day.” In other words, because of 
specialization, a large pin factory could achieve higher output per 
worker and lower average cost per pin than a small pin factory.
 
The specialization that Smith observed in the pin factory is 
prevalent in the modern economy. If you want to build a house, for 
instance, you could try to do all the work yourself. But most people 
turn to a builder, who in turn hires carpenters, plumbers, electri-
cians, painters, and many other types of workers. These workers 
specialize in particular jobs, and this allows them to become better 
at their jobs than if they were generalists. Indeed, the use of special-
ization to achieve economies of scale is one reason modern societies 
are as prosperous as they are.
249
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION

Conclusion
The purpose of this chapter has been to develop some tools to study how firms 
make production and pricing decisions. You should now understand what econo-
mists mean by the term costs and how costs vary with the quantity of output a 
firm produces. To refresh your memory, Table 3 summarizes some of the defini-
tions we have encountered. 
By themselves, a firm’s cost curves do not tell us what decisions the firm will 
make. But they are a key component of that decision, as we will see in the next 
chapter.
 
 
Mathematical
Term 
Definition 
Description
Explicit costs 
Costs that require
 
an outlay of money by the firm
Implicit costs 
Costs that do not require
 
an outlay of money by the firm
Fixed costs 
Costs that do not vary with the 
FC
 
quantity of output produced
Variable costs 
Costs that vary with the 
VC
 
quantity of output produced
Total cost 
The market value of all the inputs 
TC = FC + VC
 
that a firm uses in production 
Average fixed cost 
Fixed cost divided by 
AFC = FC / Q
 
the quantity of output 
Average variable cost 
Variable cost divided by 
AVC = VC / Q
 
the quantity of output
Average total cost 
Total cost divided by 
ATC = TC / Q
 
the quantity of output
Marginal cost 
The increase in total cost that arises 
MC = ∆TC / ∆Q
 
from an extra unit of production
The Many Types of Cost: 
A Summary
Table 3
• The goal of firms is to maximize profit, which 
equals total revenue minus total cost. 
• When analyzing a firm’s behavior, it is impor-
tant to include all the opportunity costs of pro-
duction. Some of the opportunity costs, such as 
the wages a firm pays its workers, are explicit. 
Other opportunity costs, such as the wages the 
firm owner gives up by working in the firm 
rather than taking another job, are implicit. 
Economic profit takes both explicit and implicit 
costs into account, whereas accounting profits 
considers only explicit costs.
• A firm’s costs reflect its production process. A 
typical firm’s production function gets flatter 
as the quantity of an input increases, displaying 
the property of diminishing marginal product. 
As a result, a firm’s total-cost curve gets steeper 
as the quantity produced rises.
SU
 
SUMMARY
250
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
KEY CONCEPTS
 1. What is the relationship between a firm’s total 
revenue, profit, and total cost?
 2. Give an example of an opportunity cost that 
an accountant might not count as a cost. Why 
would the accountant ignore this cost?
 3. What is marginal product, and what does it 
mean if it is diminishing?
 4. Draw a production function that exhibits 
diminishing marginal product of labor. Draw 
the associated total-cost curve. (In both cases, be 
sure to label the axes.) Explain the shapes of the 
two curves you have drawn.
 5. Define total cost, average total cost, and marginal 
cost. How are they related?
 6. Draw the marginal-cost and average-total-cost 
curves for a typical firm. Explain why the 
curves have the shapes that they do and why 
they cross where they do.
 7. How and why does a firm’s average-total-cost 
curve differ in the short run and in the long 
run? 
 8. Define economies of scale and explain why they 
might arise. Define diseconomies of scale and 
explain why they might arise. 
 1. This chapter discusses many types of costs: 
opportunity cost, total cost, fixed cost, variable 
cost, average total cost, and marginal cost. Fill in 
the type of cost that best completes each sentence:
a. What you give up for taking some action is 
called the ______.
b. _____ is falling when marginal cost is below 
it and rising when marginal cost is above it.
c. A cost that does not depend on the quantity 
produced is a(n) ______.
d. In the ice-cream industry in the short run, 
______ includes the cost of cream and sugar 
but not the cost of the factory.
e. Profits equal total revenue less ______.
f. The cost of producing an extra unit of output 
is the ______.
• A firm’s total costs can be divided between fixed 
costs and variable costs. Fixed costs are costs that 
do not change when the firm alters the quantity 
of output produced. Variable costs are costs that 
change when the firm alters the quantity of out-
put produced. 
• From a firm’s total cost, two related measures of 
cost are derived. Average total cost is total cost 
divided by the quantity of output. Marginal cost 
is the amount by which total cost rises if output 
increases by 1 unit.
• When analyzing firm behavior, it is often useful 
to graph average total cost and marginal cost. For 
a typical firm, marginal cost rises with the quan-
tity of output. Average total cost first falls as out-
put increases and then rises as output increases 
further. The marginal-cost curve always crosses 
the average-total-cost curve at the minimum of 
average total cost. 
• A firm’s costs often depend on the time horizon 
considered. In particular, many costs are fixed in 
the short run but variable in the long run. As a 
result, when the firm changes its level of produc-
tion, average total cost may rise more in the short 
run than in the long run.
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
KEY CONCEPTS
KEY CONCEPTS
 1. What is the relationship between a firm’s total 
revenue, profit, and total cost?
 2. Give an example of an opportunity cost that 
an accountant might not count as a cost. Why
would the accountant ignore this cost?
 3. What is marginal product, and what does it 
mean if it is diminishing?
 4. Draw a production function that exhibits 
diminishing marginal product of labor. Draw 
the associated total-cost curve. (In both cases, be 
sure to label the axes.) Explain the shapes of the
two curves you have drawn.
 5. Define total cost, average total cost, and marginal 
cost. How are they related?
 6. Draw the marginal-cost and average-total-cost
curves for a typical firm. Explain why the 
curves have the shapes that they do and why 
they cross where they do.
 7. How and why does a firm’s average-total-cost 
curve differ in the short run and in the long
run?
 8. Define economies of scale and explain why they 
might arise. Define diseconomies of scale and 
explain why they might arise. 
 1. This chapter discusses many types of costs: 
opportunity cost, total cost, fixed cost, variable
cost, average total cost, and marginal cost. Fill in
the type of cost that best completes each sentence:
a. What you give up for taking some action is
called the ______.
b. _____ is falling when marginal cost is below
it and rising when marginal cost is above it.
c. A cost that does not depend on the quantity 
produced is a(n) ______.
d. In the ice-cream industry in the short run,
______ includes the cost of cream and sugar
but not the cost of the factory.
e. Profits equal total revenue less ______.
f. The cost of producing an extra unit of output 
is the ______.
•
A firm’s total costs can be divided between fixed 
costs and variable costs. Fixed costs are costs that 
do not change when the firm alters the quantity
of output produced. Variable costs are costs that 
change when the firm alters the quantity of out-
put produced.
•
From a firm’s total cost, two related measures of 
cost are derived. Average total cost is total cost 
divided by the quantity of output. Marginal cost 
is the amount by which total cost rises if output 
increases by 1 unit.
•
When analyzing firm behavior, it is often useful 
to graph average total cost and marginal cost. For 
a typical firm, marginal cost rises with the quan-
tity of output. Average total cost first falls as out-
put increases and then rises as output increases
further. The marginal-cost curve always crosses
the average-total-cost curve at the minimum of 
average total cost.
•
A firm’s costs often depend on the time horizon 
considered. In particular, many costs are fixed in 
the short run but variable in the long run. As a 
result, when the firm changes its level of produc-
tion, average total cost may rise more in the short
run than in the long run.
251
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
total revenue, p. 236
total cost, p. 236
profit, p. 236
explicit costs, p. 237
implicit costs, p. 237
economic profit, p. 238
accounting profit, p. 238
production function, p. 239
marginal product, p. 240
diminishing marginal 
product, p. 241
fixed costs, p. 242
variable costs, p. 242
average total cost, p. 243
average fixed cost, p. 244
average variable cost, p. 244
marginal cost, p. 244
efficient scale, p. 246
economies of scale, p. 248
diseconomies of scale, p. 248
constant returns to scale, p. 249

 2. Your aunt is thinking about opening a 
hardware store. She estimates that it would 
cost $500,000 per year to rent the location and 
buy the stock. In addition, she would have to 
quit her $50,000 per year job as an accountant.
a. Define opportunity cost.
b. What is your aunt’s opportunity cost of 
running a hardware store for a year? If your 
aunt thought she could sell $510,000 worth 
of merchandise in a year, should she open 
the store? Explain.
 3. A commercial fisherman notices the following 
relationship between hours spent fishing and 
the quantity of fish caught:
 
 
Quantity of Fish 
 
Hours 
(in pounds)
 
0 hours 
    0 lb.
 
1 
10
 
2 
18
 
3 
24
 
4 
28
 
5 
30
a. What is the marginal product of each hour 
spent fishing?
b. Use these data to graph the fisherman’s 
production function. Explain its shape.
c. The fisherman has a fixed cost of $10 (his 
pole). The opportunity cost of his time is $5 
per hour. Graph the fisherman’s total-cost 
curve. Explain its shape.
 4. Nimbus, Inc., makes brooms and then sells 
them door-to-door. Here is the relationship 
between the number of workers and Nimbus’s 
output in a given day:
 
 
 
 
 
Average 
 
 
 
Marginal 
Total 
Total 
Marginal
 
Workers 
Output 
Product 
Cost 
Cost 
Cost
 
0 
0 
 
___ 
___ 
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
1 
20 
 
___ 
___
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
2 
50 
 
___ 
___
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
3 
90 
 
___ 
___
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
4 
120 
 
___ 
___
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
5 
140 
 
___ 
___
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
6 
150 
 
___ 
___ 
 
 
 
___ 
 
 
___
 
7 
155 
 
___ 
___ 
a. Fill in the column of marginal products. 
What pattern do you see? How might you 
explain it?
b. A worker costs $100 a day, and the firm has 
fixed costs of $200. Use this information to 
fill in the column for total cost.
c. Fill in the column for average total cost. 
(Recall that ATC = TC/Q.) What pattern do 
you see? 
d. Now fill in the column for marginal cost. 
(Recall that MC = ΔTC/ΔQ.) What pattern do 
you see? 
e. Compare the column for marginal product 
and the column for marginal cost. Explain 
the relationship.
f. Compare the column for average total cost 
and the column for marginal cost. Explain 
the relationship.
 5. You are the chief financial officer for a firm that 
sells digital music players. Your firm has the 
following average-total-cost schedule:
Quantity 
Average Total Cost
600 players 
$300 
601 
 301
  Your current level of production is 600 devices, 
all of which have been sold. Someone calls, 
desperate to buy one of your music players. 
The caller offers you $550 for it. Should you 
accept the offer? Why or why not? 
 6. Consider the following cost information for a 
pizzeria:
Quantity 
Total Cost 
Variable Cost
0 dozen pizzas 
$300 
$  0
1 
350 
50
2 
390 
90
3 
420 
120
4 
450 
150
5 
490 
190
6 
540 
240
a. What is the pizzeria’s fixed cost?
b. Construct a table in which you calculate 
the marginal cost per dozen pizzas 
using the information on total cost. Also, 
calculate the marginal cost per dozen 
pizzas using the information on variable 
cost. What is the relationship between 
these sets of numbers? Comment.
252
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

 7. You are thinking about setting up a lemonade 
stand. The stand itself costs $200. The
ingredients for each cup of lemonade cost $0.50.
a. What is your fixed cost of doing business?
What is your variable cost per cup?
b. Construct a table showing your total cost, 
average total cost, and marginal cost for 
output levels varying from 0 to 10 gallons. 
(Hint: There are 16 cups in a gallon.) Draw 
the three cost curves.
 8. Your cousin Vinnie owns a painting company
with fixed costs of $200 and the following
schedule for variable costs:
Quantity of  
Houses Painted  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7
per Month
Variable Costs 
$10 $20 $40 $80 $160 $320 $640
  Calculate average fixed cost, average variable cost,
and average total cost for each quantity. What is 
the efficient scale of the painting company?
 9. A firm uses two inputs in production: capital and 
labor. In the short run, the firm cannot adjust the
amount of capital it is using, but it can adjust the 
size of its workforce. What happens to the firm’s
average total cost curve, the average variable cost 
curve, and the marginal cost curve when
a. the cost of renting capital increases?
b. the cost of hiring labor increases?
 10. The city government is considering two tax 
proposals: 
• A lump-sum tax of $300 on each producer of 
hamburgers. 
• A tax of $1 per burger, paid by producers of 
hamburgers. 
a. Which of the following curves—average
fixed cost, average variable cost, average total
cost, and marginal cost—would shift as a 
result of the lump-sum tax? Why? Show this
in a graph. Label the graph as precisely as
possible.
b. Which of these same four curves would
shift as a result of the per-burger tax? Why? 
Show this in a new graph. Label the graph as 
precisely as possible.
 11. Jane’s Juice Bar has the following cost schedules:
Quantity 
Variable Cost 
Total Cost
0 vats of juice 
$  0 
$ 30
1 
10 
40
2 
25 
55
3 
45 
75
4 
70 
100
5 
100 
130
6 
135 
165
a. Calculate average variable cost, average total 
cost, and marginal cost for each quantity.
b. Graph all three curves. What is the
relationship between the marginal-cost
curve and the average-total-cost curve? 
Between the marginal-cost curve and the
average-variable-cost curve? Explain.
 12. Consider the following table of long-run total 
costs for three different firms:
Quantity 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7
Firm A 
$60 
$70 
$80 
$90 
$100 
$110 $120
Firm B 
 11 
 24 
 39 
 56 
  75   96  119
Firm C 
 21 
 34 
 49 
 66 
  85 
 106  129
  Does each of these firms experience economies
of scale or diseconomies of scale?
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.
253
CHAPTER 12    THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION


Firms in Competitive
    Markets
I
f your local gas station raised its price for gasoline by 20 percent, it would see 
a large drop in the amount of gasoline it sold. Its customers would quickly 
switch to buying their gasoline at other gas stations. By contrast, if your local 
water company raised the price of water by 20 percent, it would see only a 
small decrease in the amount of water it sold. People might water their lawns less 
often and buy more water-efficient showerheads, but they would be hard-pressed 
to reduce water consumption greatly and would be unlikely to find another sup-
plier. The difference between the gasoline market and the water market is obvi-
ous: Many firms supply gasoline to the local market, but only one firm supplies 
water. As you might expect, this difference in market structure shapes the pricing 
and production decisions of the firms that operate in these markets.
In this chapter, we examine the behavior of competitive firms, such as your 
local gas station. You may recall that a market is competitive if each buyer and 
seller is small compared to the size of the market and, therefore, has little ability 
13
255

to influence market prices. By contrast, if a firm can influence the market price of 
the good it sells, it is said to have market power. Later in the book, we examine the 
behavior of firms with market power, such as your local water company.
Our analysis of competitive firms in this chapter sheds light on the decisions 
that lie behind the supply curve in a competitive market. Not surprisingly, we will 
find that a market supply curve is tightly linked to firms’ costs of production. Less 
obvious, however, is the question of which among a firm’s many types of cost—
fixed, variable, average, and marginal—are most relevant for its supply decisions. 
We will see that all these measures of cost play important and interrelated roles.
What Is a Competitive Market?
Our goal in this chapter is to examine how firms make production decisions in 
competitive markets. As a background for this analysis, we begin by reviewing 
what a competitive market is.
The Meaning of Competition
A competitive market, sometimes called a perfectly competitive market, has two 
characteristics:
•  There are many buyers and many sellers in the market.
•  The goods offered by the various sellers are largely the same.
As a result of these conditions, the actions of any single buyer or seller in the 
market have a negligible impact on the market price. Each buyer and seller takes 
the market price as given.
As an example, consider the market for milk. No single consumer of milk can 
influence the price of milk because each buyer purchases a small amount relative to 
the size of the market. Similarly, each dairy farmer has limited control over the price 
because many other sellers are offering milk that is essentially identical. Because each 
seller can sell all he wants at the going price, he has little reason to charge less, and if 
he charges more, buyers will go elsewhere. Buyers and sellers in competitive markets 
must accept the price the market determines and, therefore, are said to be price takers.
In addition to the foregoing two conditions for competition, there is a third 
condition sometimes thought to characterize perfectly competitive markets:
•  Firms can freely enter or exit the market.
If, for instance, anyone can decide to start a dairy farm, and if any existing dairy 
farmer can decide to leave the dairy business, then the dairy industry would satisfy 
this condition. Much of the analysis of competitive firms does not need the assump-
tion of free entry and exit because this condition is not necessary for firms to be 
price takers. Yet, as we will see later in this chapter, if there is free entry and exit 
in a competitive market, it is a powerful force shaping the long-run equilibrium.
The Revenue of a Competitive Firm
A firm in a competitive market, like most other firms in the economy, tries to 
maximize profit (total revenue minus total cost). To see how it does this, we first 
consider the revenue of a competitive firm. To keep matters concrete, let’s con-
sider a specific firm: the Vaca Family Dairy Farm.
competitive market
a market with m any 
buyers and sellers trading 
identical products so that 
each buyer and seller is a 
price taker
256
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

The Vaca Farm produces a quantity of milk, Q, and sells each unit at the market 
price, P. The farm’s total revenue is P × Q. For example, if a gallon of milk sells 
for $6 and the farm sells 1,000 gallons, its total revenue is $6,000.
Because the Vaca Farm is small compared to the world market for milk, it takes 
the price as given by market conditions. This means, in particular, that the price 
of milk does not depend on the number of gallons that the Vaca Farm produces 
and sells. If the Vacas double the amount of milk they produce to 2,000 gallons, 
the price of milk remains the same, and their total revenue doubles to $12,000. As 
a result, total revenue is proportional to the amount of output.
Table 1 shows the revenue for the Vaca Family Dairy Farm. The first two 
columns show the amount of output the farm produces and the price at which it 
sells its output. The third column is the farm’s total revenue. The table assumes that 
the price of milk is $6 a gallon, so total revenue is $6 times the number of gallons.
Just as the concepts of average and marginal were useful in the preceding 
chapter when analyzing costs, they are also useful when analyzing revenue. To 
see what these concepts tell us, consider these two questions:
•  How much revenue does the farm receive for the typical gallon of milk?
•  How much additional revenue does the farm receive if it increases production 
of milk by 1 gallon?
The last two columns in Table 1 answer these questions. 
The fourth column in the table shows average revenue, which is total revenue 
(from the third column) divided by the amount of output (from the first column). 
Average revenue tells us how much revenue a firm receives for the typical unit 
sold. In Table 1, you can see that average revenue equals $6, the price of a gallon 
of milk. This illustrates a general lesson that applies not only to competitive firms 
but to other firms as well. Average revenue is total revenue (P × Q) divided by 
the quantity (Q). Therefore, for all firms, average revenue equals the price of the good.
average revenue
total revenue divided by 
the quantity sold
Total, Average, and 
Marginal Revenue for 
a Competitive Firm 
Table 1
Quantity
Price
Total Revenue
Average Revenue
Marginal Revenue 
(Q )
(P)
(TR = P × Q )
(AR = TR / Q )
(MR = ∆TR / ∆Q )
1 gallon
$6
$  6
$6
$6
2
6
12
 6
6
3
6
18
 6
6
4
6
24
 6
6
5
6
30
 6
6
6
6
36
 6
6
7
6
42
 6
6
8
6
48
 6
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
257

The fifth column shows marginal revenue, which is the change in total reve-
nue from the sale of each additional unit of output. In Table 1, marginal revenue 
equals $6, the price of a gallon of milk. This result illustrates a lesson that applies 
only to competitive firms. Total revenue is P × Q, and P is fixed for a competi-
tive firm. Therefore, when Q rises by 1 unit, total revenue rises by P dollars. For 
competitive firms, marginal revenue equals the price of the good. 
QUICK QUIZ When a competitive firm doubles the amount it sells, what happens to 
the price of its output and its total revenue?
Profit Maximization and the Competitive Firm’s Supply Curve
The goal of a competitive firm is to maximize profit, which equals total revenue 
minus total cost. We have just discussed the firm’s revenue, and in the preceding 
chapter, we discussed the firm’s costs. We are now ready to examine how a com-
petitive firm maximizes profit and how that decision determines its supply curve.
A Simple Example of Profit Maximization
Let’s begin our analysis of the firm’s supply decision with the example in Table 2. 
In the first column of the table is the number of gallons of milk the Vaca Family 
Dairy Farm produces. The second column shows the farm’s total revenue, which 
is $6 times the number of gallons. The third column shows the farm’s total cost. 
Total cost includes fixed costs, which are $3 in this example, and variable costs, 
which depend on the quantity produced.
The fourth column shows the farm’s profit, which is computed by subtracting total 
cost from total revenue. If the farm produces nothing, it has a loss of $3 (its fixed cost). 
If it produces 1 gallon, it has a profit of $1. If it produces 2 gallons, it has a profit of $4 
and so on. Because the Vaca family’s goal is to maximize profit, it chooses to produce 
the quantity of milk that makes profit as large as possible. In this example, profit is 
maximized when the farm produces either 4 or 5 gallons of milk, for a profit of $7.
There is another way to look at the Vaca Farm’s decision: The Vacas can find 
the profit-maximizing quantity by comparing the marginal revenue and marginal 
cost from each unit produced. The fifth and sixth columns in Table 2 compute 
marginal revenue and marginal cost from the changes in total revenue and total 
cost, and the last column shows the change in profit for each additional gallon 
produced. The first gallon of milk the farm produces has a marginal revenue of 
$6 and a marginal cost of $2; hence, producing that gallon increases profit by $4 
(from –$3 to $1). The second gallon produced has a marginal revenue of $6 and a 
marginal cost of $3, so that gallon increases profit by $3 (from $1 to $4). As long as 
marginal revenue exceeds marginal cost, increasing the quantity produced raises 
profit. Once the Vaca Farm has reached 5 gallons of milk, however, the situation 
changes. The sixth gallon would have a marginal revenue of $6 and a marginal 
cost of $7, so producing it would reduce profit by $1 (from $7 to $6). As a result, 
the Vacas would not produce beyond 5 gallons.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that rational people think 
at the margin. We now see how the Vaca Family Dairy Farm can apply this 
principle. If marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost—as it is at 1, 2, or 
3 gallons—the Vacas should increase the production of milk because it will put 
more money in their pockets (marginal revenue) than it takes out (marginal cost). 
marginal revenue
the change in total 
revenue from an 
additional unit sold
258
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

If marginal revenue is less than marginal cost—as it is at 6, 7, or 8 gallons—the 
Vacas should decrease production. If the Vacas think at the margin and make 
incremental adjustments to the level of production, they are naturally led to pro-
duce the profit-maximizing quantity.
The Marginal-Cost Curve and 
the Firm’s Supply Decision
To extend this analysis of profit maximization, consider the cost curves in Figure 1. 
These cost curves have the three features that, as we discussed in the  previous 
chapter, are thought to describe most firms: The marginal-cost curve (MC) 
is upward sloping. The average-total-cost curve (ATC) is U-shaped. And the 
 marginal-cost curve crosses the average-total-cost curve at the minimum of average 
total cost. The figure also shows a horizontal line at the market price (P). The price 
line is horizontal because the firm is a price taker: The price of the firm’s output is 
the same regardless of the quantity that the firm decides to produce. Keep in mind 
that, for a competitive firm, the firm’s price equals both its average revenue (AR) 
and its marginal revenue (MR). 
We can use Figure 1 to find the quantity of output that maximizes profit. 
Imagine that the firm is producing at Q1. At this level of output, marginal revenue 
is greater than marginal cost. That is, if the firm raised its level of production and 
sales by 1 unit, the additional revenue (MR1) would exceed the additional cost 
(MC1). Profit, which equals total revenue minus total cost, would increase. Hence, 
if marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, as it is at Q1, the firm can increase 
profit by increasing production.
Profit Maximization: 
A Numerical Example
Table 2
Total
Total
Marginal
Marginal
Change
Quantity
Revenue
Cost
Profit
Revenue
Cost
in Profit
(Q )
(TR )
(TC)
(TR – TC)
(MR = ∆TR / ∆Q)
(MC = ∆TC / ∆Q) 
(MR – MC)
0 gallons
$  0
$  3
–$3
$6
$2
$4
1
6
5
1
 6
3
3
2
12
8
4
 6
4
2
3
18
12
6
 6
5
1
4
24
17
7
 6
6
0
5
30
23 
7
 6
7
–1
6
36
30
6
 6
8
–2
7
42
38
4 
 
 6
9
–3
8
48
47
1
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
259

A similar argument applies when output is at Q2. In this case, marginal cost is 
greater than marginal revenue. If the firm reduced production by 1 unit, the costs 
saved (MC2) would exceed the revenue lost (MR2). Therefore, if marginal revenue 
is less than marginal cost, as it is at Q2, the firm can increase profit by reducing 
production.
Where do these marginal adjustments to production end? Regardless of whether 
the firm begins with production at a low level (such as Q1) or at a high level (such 
as Q2), the firm will eventually adjust production until the quantity produced 
reaches QMAX. This analysis yields three general rules for profit maximization: 
•  If marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, the firm should increase 
its output.
•  If marginal cost is greater than marginal revenue, the firm should decrease 
its output.
•  At the profit-maximizing level of output, marginal revenue and marginal 
cost are exactly equal.
These rules are the key to rational decision making by a profit-maximizing firm. 
They apply not only to competitive firms but, as we will see in the next chapter, 
to other types of firms as well.
We can now see how the competitive firm decides the quantity of its good to 
supply to the market. Because a competitive firm is a price taker, its marginal 
reve nue equals the market price. For any given price, the competitive firm’s 
profit-maximizing quantity of output is found by looking at the intersection of 
the price with the marginal-cost curve. In Figure 1, that quantity of output is QMAX.
Figure 1
Profit Maximization for 
a Competitive Firm
Quantity
0
Costs
and
Revenue
MC
ATC
AVC
MC2
MC1
Q1
Q2
QMAX
 P = MR1 = MR2
 P = AR = MR
The ﬁrm maximizes proﬁt
by producing the quantity
at which marginal cost
equals marginal revenue.
This figure shows the marginal-cost curve (MC ), the average-total-cost curve (ATC ), 
and the average-variable-cost curve (AVC ). It also shows the market price (P), 
which equals marginal revenue (MR) and average revenue (AR). At the quantity Q1, 
marginal revenue MR1 exceeds marginal cost MC1, so raising production increases 
profit. At the quantity Q2, marginal cost MC2 is above marginal revenue MR2, so 
reducing production increases profit. The profit-maximizing quantity QMAX is found 
where the horizontal price line intersects the marginal-cost curve.
260
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Suppose that the price prevailing in this market rises, perhaps because of an 
increase in market demand. Figure 2 shows how a competitive firm responds to 
the price increase. When the price is P1, the firm produces quantity Q1, the quantity 
that equates marginal cost to the price. When the price rises to P2, the firm finds 
that marginal revenue is now higher than marginal cost at the previous level of 
output, so the firm increases production. The new profit-maximizing quantity is 
Q2, at which marginal cost equals the new higher price. In essence, because the firm’s 
marginal-cost curve determines the quantity of the good the firm is willing to supply at 
any price, the marginal-cost curve is also the competitive firm’s supply curve. There are, 
however, some caveats to that conclusion, which we examine next.
The Firm’s Short-Run Decision to Shut Down
So far, we have been analyzing the question of how much a competitive firm will 
produce. In certain circumstances, however, the firm will decide to shut down 
and not produce anything at all.
Here we need to distinguish between a temporary shutdown of a firm and the 
permanent exit of a firm from the market. A shutdown refers to a short-run deci-
sion not to produce anything during a specific period of time because of current 
market conditions. Exit refers to a long-run decision to leave the market. The 
short-run and long-run decisions differ because most firms cannot avoid their 
fixed costs in the short run but can do so in the long run. That is, a firm that shuts 
down temporarily still has to pay its fixed costs, whereas a firm that exits the 
market does not have to pay any costs at all, fixed or variable. 
For example, consider the production decision that a farmer faces. The cost of 
the land is one of the farmer’s fixed costs. If the farmer decides not to produce 
any crops one season, the land lies fallow, and he cannot recover this cost. When 
making the short-run decision whether to shut down for a season, the fixed cost of 
land is said to be a sunk cost. By contrast, if the farmer decides to leave farming alto-
gether, he can sell the land. When making the long-run decision whether to exit the 
market, the cost of land is not sunk. (We return to the issue of sunk costs shortly.)
Now let’s consider what determines a firm’s shutdown decision. If the firm 
shuts down, it loses all revenue from the sale of its product. At the same time, it 
Figure 2
Marginal Cost as the Competitive 
Firm’s Supply Curve
An increase in the price from P1 to P2 
leads to an increase in the firm’s profit-
maximizing quantity from Q1 to Q2. 
Because the marginal-cost curve shows 
the quantity supplied by the firm at any 
given price, it is the firm’s supply curve.
Quantity
0
Price
MC
ATC
AVC
P2
P1
Q1
Q2
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
261

saves the variable costs of making its product (but must still pay the fixed costs). 
Thus, the firm shuts down if the revenue that it would earn from producing is less than 
its variable costs of production.
A bit of mathematics can make this shutdown criterion more useful. If TR 
stands for total revenue and VC stands for variable costs, then the firm’s decision 
can be written as
Shut down if TR < VC.
The firm shuts down if total revenue is less than variable cost. By dividing both 
sides of this inequality by the quantity Q, we can write it as 
Shut down if TR/Q < VC/Q.
The left side of the inequality, TR/Q, is total revenue P × Q divided by quantity 
Q, which is average revenue, most simply expressed as the good’s price, P. The 
right side of the inequality, VC/Q, is average variable cost, AVC. Therefore, the 
firm’s shutdown criterion can be restated as
 Shut down if P < AVC.
That is, a firm chooses to shut down if the price of the good is less than the average 
variable cost of production. This criterion is intuitive: When choosing to produce, 
the firm compares the price it receives for the typical unit to the average variable 
cost that it must incur to produce the typical unit. If the price doesn’t cover the 
average variable cost, the firm is better off stopping production altogether. The 
firm still loses money (because it has to pay fixed costs), but it would lose even 
more money by staying open. The firm can reopen in the future if conditions 
change so that price exceeds average variable cost.
We now have a full description of a competitive firm’s profit-maximizing strat-
egy. If the firm produces anything, it produces the quantity at which marginal 
cost equals the price of the good. Yet if the price is less than average variable cost 
at that quantity, the firm is better off shutting down and not producing anything. 
These results are illustrated in Figure 3. The competitive firm’s short-run supply curve 
is the portion of its marginal-cost curve that lies above average variable cost. 
Spilt Milk and Other Sunk Costs
Sometime in your life you may have been told, “Don’t cry over spilt milk,” or 
“Let bygones be bygones.” These adages hold a deep truth about rational deci-
sion making. Economists say that a cost is a sunk cost when it has already been 
committed and cannot be recovered. Because nothing can be done about sunk 
costs, you can ignore them when making decisions about various aspects of life, 
including business strategy.
Our analysis of the firm’s shutdown decision is one example of the irrelevance 
of sunk costs. We assume that the firm cannot recover its fixed costs by tempo-
rarily stopping production. That is, regardless of the quantity of output supplied 
(even if it is zero), the firm still has to pay its fixed costs. As a result, the fixed 
costs are sunk in the short run, and the firm can ignore them when deciding how 
much to produce. The firm’s short-run supply curve is the part of the marginal-
cost curve that lies above average variable cost, and the size of the fixed cost does 
not matter for this supply decision.
sunk cost
a cost that has already 
been committed and 
cannot be recovered
262
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

The irrelevance of sunk costs is also important when making personal deci-
sions. Imagine, for instance, that you place a $15 value on seeing a newly released 
movie. You buy a ticket for $10, but before entering the theater, you lose the ticket. 
Should you buy another ticket? Or should you now go home and refuse to pay a 
total of $20 to see the movie? The answer is that you should buy another ticket. 
The benefit of seeing the movie ($15) still exceeds the opportunity cost (the $10 for 
the second ticket). The $10 you paid for the lost ticket is a sunk cost. As with spilt 
milk, there is no point in crying about it.
Near-Empty Restaurants and Off-Season 
Miniature Golf
Have you ever walked into a restaurant for lunch and found it almost empty? 
Why, you might have asked, does the restaurant even bother to stay open? It 
might seem that the revenue from so few customers could not possibly cover the 
cost of running the restaurant.
 
In making the decision whether to open for lunch, a restaurant owner must 
keep in mind the distinction between fixed and variable costs. Many of a 
 restaurant’s costs—the rent, kitchen equipment, tables, plates, silverware, and so 
on—are fixed. Shutting down during lunch would not reduce these costs. In other 
words, these costs are sunk in the short run. When the owner is deciding whether 
to serve lunch, only the variable costs—the price of the additional food and the 
wages of the extra staff—are relevant. The owner shuts down the restaurant at 
lunchtime only if the revenue from the few lunchtime customers fails to cover the 
restaurant’s variable costs.
 
An operator of a miniature-golf course in a summer resort community faces a 
similar decision. Because revenue varies substantially from season to season, the 
firm must decide when to open and when to close. Once again, the fixed costs—
the costs of buying the land and building the course—are irrelevant in making this 
decision. The miniature-golf course should be open for business only during those 
times of year when its revenue exceeds its variable costs.  ■
Figure 3
The Competitive Firm’s Short-Run 
Supply Curve
In the short run, the competitive firm’s 
supply curve is its marginal-cost curve 
(MC ) above average variable cost (AVC ). 
If the price falls below average variable 
cost, the firm is better off shutting down.
Quantity
MC
ATC
0
Costs
AVC
1. In the short run, the ﬁrm 
produces on the MC curve 
if P  AVC,...
2. ...but shuts 
down if
P  AVC.
Staying open can be 
 profi table, even with 
many tables empty.
© ANDERSEN ROSS/BRAND X PICTURES/JUPITERIMAGES
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
263

The Firm’s Long-Run Decision 
to Exit or Enter a Market
A firm’s long-run decision to exit a market is similar to its shutdown decision. 
If the firm exits, it will again lose all revenue from the sale of its product, but 
now it will save not only its variable costs of production but also its fixed costs. 
Thus, the firm exits the market if the revenue it would get from producing is less than 
its total costs.
We can again make this criterion more useful by writing it mathematically. 
If TR stands for total revenue, and TC stands for total cost, then the firm’s exit 
 criterion can be written as
Exit if TR < TC.
The firm exits if total revenue is less than total cost. By dividing both sides of this 
inequality by quantity Q, we can write it as 
Exit if TR/Q < TC/Q.
We can simplify this further by noting that TR/Q is average revenue, which 
equals the price P, and that TC/Q is average total cost, ATC. Therefore, the firm’s 
exit criterion is
Exit if P < ATC.
That is, a firm chooses to exit if the price of its good is less than the average total 
cost of production. 
A parallel analysis applies to an entrepreneur who is considering starting a 
firm. The firm will enter the market if such an action would be profitable, which 
occurs if the price of the good exceeds the average total cost of production. The 
entry criterion is
Enter if P > ATC.
The criterion for entry is exactly the opposite of the criterion for exit. 
We can now describe a competitive firm’s long-run profit-maximizing strat-
egy. If the firm is in the market, it produces the quantity at which marginal cost 
equals the price of the good. Yet if the price is less than the average total cost at 
that quantity, the firm chooses to exit (or not enter) the market. These results are 
illustrated in Figure 4. The competitive firm’s long-run supply curve is the portion of its 
marginal-cost curve that lies above average total cost. 
Measuring Profit in Our Graph 
for the Competitive Firm
As we study exit and entry, it is useful to analyze the firm’s profit in more detail. 
Recall that profit equals total revenue (TR) minus total cost (TC):
Profit  TR – TC.
We can rewrite this definition by multiplying and dividing the right side by Q:
Profit  (TR/Q – TC/Q) × Q.
264
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

But note that TR/Q is average revenue, which is the price, P, and TC/Q is average 
total cost, ATC. Therefore,
Profit  (P – ATC) × Q.
This way of expressing the firm’s profit allows us to measure profit in our graphs. 
Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows a firm earning positive profit. As we have already 
discussed, the firm maximizes profit by producing the quantity at which price 
equals marginal cost. Now look at the shaded rectangle. The height of the 
 rectangle is P – ATC, the difference between price and average total cost. The 
width of the rectangle is Q, the quantity produced. Therefore, the area of the rect-
angle is (P – ATC) × Q, which is the firm’s profit. 
Similarly, panel (b) of this figure shows a firm with losses (negative profit). In 
this case, maximizing profit means minimizing losses, a task accomplished once 
again by producing the quantity at which price equals marginal cost. Now con-
sider the shaded rectangle. The height of the rectangle is ATC – P, and the width 
is Q. The area is (ATC – P) × Q, which is the firm’s loss. Because a firm in this 
situation is not making enough revenue to cover its average total cost, the firm 
would choose in the long run to exit the market.
Quick Quiz How does a competitive firm determine its profit-maximizing level of 
output? Explain • When does a profit-maximizing competitive firm decide to shut 
down? When does it decide to exit a market? 
The Supply Curve in a Competitive Market
Now that we have examined the supply decision of a single firm, we can discuss 
the supply curve for a market. There are two cases to consider. First, we examine 
a market with a fixed number of firms. Second, we examine a market in which 
the number of firms can change as old firms exit the market and new firms enter. 
Figure 4
The Competitive Firm’s Long-Run 
Supply Curve
In the long run, the competitive firm’s 
supply curve is its marginal-cost curve 
(MC) above average total cost (ATC). 
If the price falls below average total 
cost, the firm is better off exiting the 
market.
Quantity
MC
ATC
0
Costs
1. In the long run, the ﬁrm 
produces on the MC curve 
if P  ATC,...
2. ...but 
exits if 
P  ATC.
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
265

Both cases are important, for each applies over a specific time horizon. Over short 
periods of time, it is often difficult for firms to enter and exit, so the assumption of 
a fixed number of firms is appropriate. But over long periods of time, the number 
of firms can adjust to changing market conditions.
The Short Run: Market Supply with 
a Fixed Number of Firms
Consider first a market with 1,000 identical firms. For any given price, each firm 
supplies a quantity of output so that its marginal cost equals the price, as shown 
in panel (a) of Figure 6. That is, as long as price is above average variable cost, 
each firm’s marginal-cost curve is its supply curve. The quantity of output sup-
plied to the market equals the sum of the quantities supplied by each of the 1,000 
individual firms. Thus, to derive the market supply curve, we add the quantity 
supplied by each firm in the market. As panel (b) of Figure 6 shows, because the 
firms are identical, the quantity supplied to the market is 1,000 times the quantity 
supplied by each firm. 
The Long Run: Market Supply with Entry and Exit
Now consider what happens if firms are able to enter or exit the market. Let’s 
suppose that everyone has access to the same technology for producing the good 
and access to the same markets to buy the inputs into production. Therefore, all 
current and potential firms have the same cost curves. 
Decisions about entry and exit in a market of this type depend on the incentives 
facing the owners of existing firms and the entrepreneurs who could start new 
firms. If firms already in the market are profitable, then new firms will have an 
incentive to enter the market. This entry will expand the number of firms, increase 
Figure 5
Profit as the Area between 
Price and Average Total 
Cost
(a) A Firm with Proﬁts
(b) A Firm with Losses
Quantity
0
Price
Quantity
0
Price
P = AR = MR
Proﬁt
ATC
MC
P
ATC
ATC
Q
(proﬁt-maximizing quantity)
P = AR = MR
Loss
ATC
MC
Q
(loss-minimizing quantity)
P
The area of the shaded box between price and average total cost represents the 
firm’s profit. The height of this box is price minus average total cost (P – ATC), 
and the width of the box is the quantity of output (Q). In panel (a), price is above 
average total cost, so the firm has positive profit. In panel (b), price is less than 
average total cost, so the firm has losses.
266
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

the quantity of the good supplied, and drive down prices and profits. Conversely, 
if firms in the market are making losses, then some existing firms will exit the 
market. Their exit will reduce the number of firms, decrease the quantity of the 
good supplied, and drive up prices and profits. At the end of this process of entry and 
exit, firms that remain in the market must be making zero economic profit. 
Recall that we can write a firm’s profit as 
Profit  (P – ATC) × Q.
This equation shows that an operating firm has zero profit if and only if the price of 
the good equals the average total cost of producing that good. If price is above aver-
age total cost, profit is positive, which encourages new firms to enter. If price is less 
than average total cost, profit is negative, which encourages some firms to exit. The 
process of entry and exit ends only when price and average total cost are driven to equality.
This analysis has a surprising implication. We noted earlier in the chapter that 
competitive firms maximize profits by choosing a quantity at which price equals 
marginal cost. We just noted that free entry and exit force price to equal average 
total cost. But if price is to equal both marginal cost and average total cost, these 
two measures of cost must equal each other. Marginal cost and average total cost 
are equal, however, only when the firm is operating at the minimum of average 
total cost. Recall from the preceding chapter that the level of production with 
lowest average total cost is called the firm’s efficient scale. Therefore, in the long-run 
equilibrium of a competitive market with free entry and exit, firms must be operating at 
their efficient scale.
Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows a firm in such a long-run equilibrium. In this  figure, 
price P equals marginal cost MC, so the firm is maximizing profits. Price also 
equals average total cost ATC, so profits are zero. New firms have no incentive to 
enter the market, and existing firms have no incentive to leave the market. 
Figure 6
Short-Run Market 
Supply
(a) Individual Firm Supply
Quantity (ﬁrm)
0
Price
MC
$2.00
1.00
100
200
(b) Market Supply
Quantity (market)
0
Price
Supply
$2.00
1.00
100,000
200,000
In the short run, the number of firms in the market is fixed. As a result, the market 
supply curve, shown in panel (b), reflects the individual firms’ marginal-cost curves, 
shown in panel (a). Here, in a market of 1,000 firms, the quantity of output supplied 
to the market is 1,000 times the quantity supplied by each firm.
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
267

From this analysis of firm behavior, we can determine the long-run supply 
curve for the market. In a market with free entry and exit, there is only one price 
consistent with zero profit—the minimum of average total cost. As a result, the 
long-run market supply curve must be horizontal at this price, as illustrated by 
the perfectly elastic supply curve in panel (b) of Figure 7. Any price above this 
level would generate profit, leading to entry and an increase in the total quantity 
supplied. Any price below this level would generate losses, leading to exit and 
a decrease in the total quantity supplied. Eventually, the number of firms in the 
market adjusts so that price equals the minimum of average total cost, and there 
are enough firms to satisfy all the demand at this price.
Why Do Competitive Firms Stay in Business 
If They Make Zero Profit?
At first, it might seem odd that competitive firms earn zero profit in the long run. 
After all, people start businesses to make a profit. If entry eventually drives profit 
to zero, there might seem to be little reason to stay in business.
To understand the zero-profit condition more fully, recall that profit equals 
total revenue minus total cost and that total cost includes all the opportunity costs 
of the firm. In particular, total cost includes the time and money that the firm 
 owners devote to the business. In the zero-profit equilibrium, the firm’s revenue 
must compensate the owners for these opportunity costs.
Consider an example. Suppose that, to start his farm, a farmer had to invest $1 
 million, which otherwise he could have deposited in a bank and earned $50,000 a 
year in interest. In addition, he had to give up another job that would have paid him 
$30,000 a year. Then the farmer’s opportunity cost of farming includes both the  interest 
Figure 7
Long-Run Market Supply
In the long run, firms will enter or exit the market until profit is driven to zero. 
As a result, price equals the minimum of average total cost, as shown in panel (a). 
The number of firms adjusts to ensure that all demand is satisfied at this price. The 
long-run market supply curve is horizontal at this price, as shown in panel (b).
(a) Firm’s Zero-Proﬁt Condition
Quantity (ﬁrm)
0
Price
P = minimum ATC
(b) Market Supply
Quantity (market)
Price
0
Supply
MC
ATC
268
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

he could have earned and the forgone wages—a total of $80,000. Even if his profit is 
driven to zero, his revenue from farming compensates him for these opportunity costs.
Keep in mind that accountants and economists measure costs differently. As 
we discussed in the previous chapter, accountants keep track of explicit costs but 
not implicit costs. That is, they measure costs that require an outflow of money 
from the firm, but they do not include the opportunity costs of production that do 
not involve an outflow of money. As a result, in the zero-profit equilibrium, eco-
nomic profit is zero, but accounting profit is positive. Our farmer’s accountant, for 
instance, would conclude that the farmer earned an accounting profit of $80,000, 
which is enough to keep the farmer in business.
A Shift in Demand in the Short Run and Long Run 
Now that we have a more complete understanding of how firms make supply 
decisions, we can better explain how markets respond to changes in demand. 
Because firms can enter and exit in the long run but not in the short run, the 
response of a market to a change in demand depends on the time horizon. To see 
this, let’s trace the effects of a shift in demand over time. 
Suppose the market for milk begins in a long-run equilibrium. Firms are earn-
ing zero profit, so price equals the minimum of average total cost. Panel (a) of 
Figure 8 shows this situation. The long-run equilibrium is point A, the quantity 
sold in the market is Q1, and the price is P1. 
Now suppose scientists discover that milk has miraculous health benefits. As a 
result, the demand curve for milk shifts outward from D1 to D2, as in panel (b). The 
short-run equilibrium moves from point A to point B; as a result, the quantity rises 
from Q1 to Q2, and the price rises from P1 to P2. All of the existing firms respond 
to the higher price by raising the amount produced. Because each firm’s supply 
curve reflects its marginal-cost curve, how much they each increase production 
is determined by the marginal-cost curve. In the new short-run equilibrium, the 
price of milk exceeds average total cost, so the firms are making positive profit.
Over time, the profit generated in this market encourages new firms to enter. 
Some farmers may switch to milk from other farm products, for example. As the 
number of firms grows, the short-run supply curve shifts to the right from S1 to S2, 
as in panel (c), and this shift causes the price of milk to fall. Eventually, the price is 
driven back down to the minimum of average total cost, profits are zero, and firms 
stop entering. Thus, the market reaches a new long-run equilibrium, point C. The 
price of milk has returned to P1, but the quantity produced has risen to Q3. Each 
firm is again producing at its efficient scale, but because more firms are in the dairy 
business, the quantity of milk produced and sold is higher.
Why the Long-Run Supply Curve 
Might Slope Upward
So far, we have seen that entry and exit can cause the long-run market supply curve 
to be perfectly elastic. The essence of our analysis is that there are a large number 
of potential entrants, each of which faces the same costs. As a result, the long-run 
market supply curve is horizontal at the minimum of average total cost. When the 
demand for the good increases, the long-run result is an increase in the number of 
firms and in the total quantity supplied, without any change in the price.
There are, however, two reasons that the long-run market supply curve might 
slope upward. The first is that some resources used in production may be avail-
able only in limited quantities. For example, consider the market for farm products. 
“We’re a nonprofit 
organization—we don’t 
intend to be, but we are!”
© GRIN & BEAT IT @ NORTH AMERICA SYNDICATE
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
269

Figure 8
An Increase in Demand 
in the Short Run and 
Long Run
The market starts in a long-run equilibrium, shown as point A in panel (a). In this 
equilibrium, each firm makes zero profit, and the price equals the minimum average 
total cost. Panel (b) shows what happens in the short run when demand rises from 
D1 to D2. The equilibrium goes from point A to point B, price rises from P1 to P2, and 
the quantity sold in the market rises from Q1 to Q2. Because price now exceeds average 
total cost, firms make profits, which over time encourage new firms to enter the 
market. This entry shifts the short-run supply curve to the right from S1 to S2, as shown 
in panel (c). In the new long-run equilibrium, point C, price has returned to P1 but the 
quantity sold has increased to Q3. Profits are again zero, price is back to the minimum 
of average total cost, but the market has more firms to satisfy the greater demand. 
(a) Initial Condition
(b) Short-Run Response
(c) Long-Run Response
Firm
Quantity (ﬁrm)
0
Price
Firm
Quantity (ﬁrm)
0
Price
P1
MC
ATC
MC
ATC
P1
P1
P2
Firm
Quantity (ﬁrm)
0
Price
MC
ATC
Market
Market
Quantity (market)
Long-run
supply
Price
0
Demand, D1
Short-run supply, S1
P1
A
Quantity (market)
Long-run
supply
Price
0
D1
D2
P1
Q1
Q1
Q2
P2
A
B
Market
Quantity (market)
Price
0
P1
P2
Q1
Q2
Long-run
supply
Q3
C
B
D1
D2
S1
S1
A
S2
1. A market begins in 
long-run equilibrium…
2. …with the ﬁrm 
earning zero proﬁt.
3. But then an increase 
in demand raises the 
price…
4. …leading to 
short-run proﬁts.
6. …restoring long-
run equilibrium.
5. When proﬁts induce 
entry, supply increases and 
the price falls,…
270
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Anyone can choose to buy land and start a farm, but the quantity of land is 
limited. As more people become farmers, the price of farmland is bid up, which 
raises the costs of all farmers in the market. Thus, an increase in demand for farm 
products cannot induce an increase in quantity supplied without also inducing a 
rise in farmers’ costs, which in turn means a rise in price. The result is a long-run 
market supply curve that is upward sloping, even with free entry into farming.
A second reason for an upward-sloping supply curve is that firms may have 
different costs. For example, consider the market for painters. Anyone can enter 
the market for painting services, but not everyone has the same costs. Costs vary in 
part because some people work faster than others and in part because some people 
have better alternative uses of their time than others. For any given price, those 
with lower costs are more likely to enter than those with higher costs. To increase 
the quantity of painting services supplied, additional entrants must be encouraged 
to enter the market. Because these new entrants have higher costs, the price must 
rise to make entry profitable for them. Thus, the long-run market supply curve for 
painting services slopes upward even with free entry into the market.
Notice that if firms have different costs, some firms earn profit even in the 
long run. In this case, the price in the market reflects the average total cost of the 
marginal firm—the firm that would exit the market if the price were any lower. 
This firm earns zero profit, but firms with lower costs earn positive profit. Entry 
does not eliminate this profit because would-be entrants have higher costs than 
firms already in the market. Higher-cost firms will enter only if the price rises, 
making the market profitable for them.
Thus, for these two reasons, a higher price may be necessary to induce a larger 
quantity supplied, in which case the long-run supply curve is upward sloping 
rather than horizontal. Nonetheless, the basic lesson about entry and exit remains 
true. Because firms can enter and exit more easily in the long run than in the short run, 
the long-run supply curve is typically more elastic than the short-run supply curve.
Quick Quiz In the long run with free entry and exit, is the price in a market equal to 
marginal cost, average total cost, both, or neither? Explain with a diagram.
Conclusion: Behind the Supply Curve
We have been discussing the behavior of profit-maximizing firms that supply 
goods in perfectly competitive markets. You may recall from Chapter 1 that one 
of the Ten Principles of Economics is that rational people think at the margin. This 
chapter has applied this idea to the competitive firm. Marginal analysis has given 
us a theory of the supply curve in a competitive market and, as a result, a deeper 
understanding of market outcomes. 
We have learned that when you buy a good from a firm in a competitive market, 
you can be assured that the price you pay is close to the cost of producing that good. In 
particular, if firms are competitive and profit maximizing, the price of a good equals 
the marginal cost of making that good. In addition, if firms can freely enter and exit 
the market, the price also equals the lowest possible average total cost of production.
Although we have assumed throughout this chapter that firms are price takers, 
many of the tools developed here are also useful for studying firms in less 
competitive markets. We now turn to an examination of the behavior of firms 
with market power. Marginal analysis will again be useful, but it will have 
quite different implications. 
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
271

SUMMARY
• Because a competitive firm is a price taker, its 
revenue is proportional to the amount of output 
it produces. The price of the good equals both the 
firm’s average revenue and its marginal revenue.
• To maximize profit, a firm chooses a quantity of 
output such that marginal revenue equals mar-
ginal cost. Because marginal revenue for a com-
petitive firm equals the market price, the firm 
chooses quantity so that price equals marginal 
cost. Thus, the firm’s marginal-cost curve is its 
supply curve.
• In the short run when a firm cannot recover its 
fixed costs, the firm will choose to shut down 
temporarily if the price of the good is less than 
average variable cost. In the long run when the 
firm can recover both fixed and variable costs, it 
will choose to exit if the price is less than average 
total cost.
• In a market with free entry and exit, profits are 
driven to zero in the long run. In this long-run 
equilibrium, all firms produce at the efficient 
scale, price equals the minimum of average total 
cost, and the number of firms adjusts to satisfy 
the quantity demanded at this price. 
• Changes in demand have different effects over 
different time horizons. In the short run, an 
increase in demand raises prices and leads to 
profits, and a decrease in demand lowers prices 
and leads to losses. But if firms can freely enter 
and exit the market, then in the long run, the 
number of firms adjusts to drive the market back 
to the zero-profit equilibrium.
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTION FOR REVIEW
 1. What is meant by a competitive firm? 
 2. Explain the difference between a firm’s revenue 
and its profit. Which do firms maximize?
 3. Draw the cost curves for a typical firm. For a 
given price, explain how the firm chooses the 
level of output that maximizes profit. At that 
level of output, show on your graph the firm’s 
total revenue and total costs.
 4. Under what conditions will a firm shut down 
temporarily? Explain.
 5. Under what conditions will a firm exit a 
market? Explain.
 6. Does a firm’s price equal marginal cost in the 
short run, in the long run, or both? Explain.
 7. Does a firm’s price equal the minimum of 
average total cost in the short run, in the long 
run, or both? Explain.
 8. Are market supply curves typically more 
elastic in the short run or in the long run? 
Explain.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. Many small boats are made of fiberglass, which 
is derived from crude oil. Suppose that the price 
of oil rises.
a. Using diagrams, show what happens to the 
cost curves of an individual boat-making 
firm and to the market supply curve.
b. What happens to the profits of boat makers 
in the short run? What happens to the 
number of boat makers in the long run? 
 2. You go out to the best restaurant in town and 
order a lobster dinner for $40. After eating half 
of the lobster, you realize that you are quite full. 
Your date wants you to finish your dinner because 
you can’t take it home and because “you’ve 
already paid for it.” What should you do? Relate 
your answer to the material in this chapter.
 3. Bob’s lawn-mowing service is a profit-maximizing, 
competitive firm. Bob mows lawns for $27 each. 
His total cost each day is $280, of which $30 is a 
fixed cost. He mows 10 lawns a day. What can you 
say about Bob’s short-run decision regarding 
shutdown and his long-run decision regarding exit?
SU
SUMMARY
•
Because a competitive firm is a price taker, its 
revenue is proportional to the amount of output 
it produces. The price of the good equals both the
firm’s average revenue and its marginal revenue.
•
To maximize profit, a firm chooses a quantity of 
output such that marginal revenue equals mar-
ginal cost. Because marginal revenue for a com-
petitive firm equals the market price, the firm
chooses quantity so that price equals marginal 
cost. Thus, the firm’s marginal-cost curve is its
supply curve.
•
In the short run when a firm cannot recover its 
fixed costs, the firm will choose to shut down
temporarily if the price of the good is less than
average variable cost. In the long run when the
firm can recover both fixed and variable costs, it
will choose to exit if the price is less than average 
total cost.
•
In a market with free entry and exit, profits are 
driven to zero in the long run. In this long-run
equilibrium, all firms produce at the efficient
scale, price equals the minimum of average total 
cost, and the number of firms adjusts to satisfy 
the quantity demanded at this price. 
•
Changes in demand have different effects over 
different time horizons. In the short run, an 
increase in demand raises prices and leads to 
profits, and a decrease in demand lowers prices
and leads to losses. But if firms can freely enter
and exit the market, then in the long run, the 
number of firms adjusts to drive the market back 
to the zero-profit equilibrium.
CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
 O
 
QUESTION FOR REVIEW
 1. What is meant by a competitive firm? 
 2. Explain the difference between a firm’s revenue 
and its profit. Which do firms maximize?
 3. Draw the cost curves for a typical firm. For a 
given price, explain how the firm chooses the
level of output that maximizes profit. At that 
level of output, show on your graph the firm’s 
total revenue and total costs.
 4. Under what conditions will a firm shut down
temporarily? Explain.
 5. Under what conditions will a firm exit a
market? Explain.
 6. Does a firm’s price equal marginal cost in the 
short run, in the long run, or both? Explain.
 7. Does a firm’s price equal the minimum of 
average total cost in the short run, in the long
run, or both? Explain.
 8. Are market supply curves typically more 
elastic in the short run or in the long run? 
Explain.
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
1. Many small boats are made of fiberglass, which 
is derived from crude oil. Suppose that the price
of oil rises.
a. Using diagrams, show what happens to the
cost curves of an individual boat-making
firm and to the market supply curve.
b. What happens to the profits of boat makers
in the short run? What happens to the 
number of boat makers in the long run?
2. You go out to the best restaurant in town and 
order a lobster dinner for $40. After eating half 
of the lobster, you realize that you are quite full. 
Your date wants you to finish your dinner because 
you can’t take it home and because “you’ve
already paid for it.” What should you do? Relate 
your answer to the material in this chapter.
3. Bob’s lawn-mowing service is a profit-maximizing, 
competitive firm. Bob mows lawns for $27 each. 
His total cost each day is $280, of which $30 is a 
fixed cost. He mows 10 lawns a day. What can you 
say about Bob’s short-run decision regarding 
shutdown and his long-run decision regarding exit?
competitive market, p. 256
average revenue, p. 257
marginal revenue, p. 258
sunk cost, p. 262
272
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

 4. Consider total cost and total revenue given in 
the following table: 
Quantity 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7
Total cost 
$8 
9 10 
11 
13 
19 
27 
37
Total revenue 
$0 
8 16 
24 
32 
40 
48 
56
a. Calculate profit for each quantity. How much 
should the firm produce to maximize profit?
b. Calculate marginal revenue and marginal 
cost for each quantity. Graph them. (Hint: 
Put the points between whole numbers. For 
example, the marginal cost between 2 and 3 
should be graphed at 21⁄2.) At what quantity 
do these curves cross? How does this relate 
to your answer to part (a)?
c. Can you tell whether this firm is in a 
competitive industry? If so, can you tell 
whether the industry is in a long-run 
equilibrium?
 5. Ball Bearings, Inc. faces costs of production as 
follows: 
  
Total 
Total
  
Fixed 
Variable
Quantity 
Costs 
Costs
 
0 
$100 
 $   0
 
1 
100 
50 
 
2 
100 
70 
 
3 
100 
90 
 
4 
100 
140 
 
5 
100 
200 
 
6 
100 
360 
a. Calculate the company’s average fixed costs, 
average variable costs, average total costs, and 
marginal costs at each level of production. 
b. The price of a case of ball bearings is $50. 
Seeing that she can’t make a profit, the Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO) decides to shut 
down operations. What are the firm’s profits/
losses? Was this a wise decision? Explain. 
c. Vaguely remembering his introductory 
economics course, the Chief Financial Officer 
tells the CEO it is better to produce 1 case 
of ball bearings, because marginal revenue 
equals marginal cost at that quantity. What 
are the firm’s profits/losses at that level 
of production? Was this the best decision? 
Explain.
 6. Suppose the book-printing industry is competitive 
and begins in a long-run equilibrium. 
a. Draw a diagram describing the typical firm 
in the industry.
b. Hi-Tech Printing Company invents a new 
process that sharply reduces the cost of 
printing books. What happens to Hi-Tech’s 
profits and the price of books in the short run 
when Hi-Tech’s patent prevents other firms 
from using the new technology?
c. What happens in the long run when the 
patent expires and other firms are free to use 
the technology?
 7. A firm in a competitive market receives $500 in 
total revenue and has marginal revenue of $10. 
What is the average revenue, and how many 
units were sold? 
 8. A profit-maximizing firm in a competitive 
market is currently producing 100 units of 
output. It has average revenue of $10, average 
total cost of $8, and fixed costs of $200. 
a. What is its profit?
b. What is its marginal cost?
c. What is its average variable cost?
d. Is the efficient scale of the firm more than, 
less than, or exactly 100 units?
 9. The market for fertilizer is perfectly competitive. 
Firms in the market are producing output, but 
are currently making economic losses. 
a. How does the price of fertilizer compare to 
the average total cost, the average variable 
cost, and the marginal cost of producing 
fertilizer? 
b. Draw two graphs, side by side, illustrating 
the present situation for the typical firm and 
in the market. 
c. Assuming there is no change in either 
demand or the firms’ cost curves, explain 
what will happen in the long run to the price 
of fertilizer, marginal cost, average total cost, 
the quantity supplied by each firm, and the 
total quantity supplied to the market. 
 10. The market for apple pies in the city of Ectenia 
is competitive and has the following demand 
schedule:
Price 
Quantity Demanded
 
$  1 
1,200 pies
 2 
1,100
 3 
1,000
 4 
900
 5 
800
 6 
700
 7 
600
 8 
500
 9 
400
 10 
300
 11 
200
 12 
100
 13 
0
CHAPTER 13    FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
273

  Each producer in the market has fixed costs of 
$9 and the following marginal cost:
Quantity 
Marginal Cost
 
1 pie 
$ 2
 
2 
4
 
3 
6
 
4 
8
 
5 
10
 
6 
12
a. Compute each producer’s total cost and 
average total cost for 1 to 6 pies.
b. The price of a pie is now $11. How many pies 
are sold? How many pies does each producer 
make? How many producers are there? How 
much profit does each producer earn?
c. Is the situation described in part (b) a 
long-run equilibrium? Why or why not?
d. Suppose that in the long run there is free 
entry and exit. How much profit does each 
producer earn in the long-run equilibrium? 
What is the market price and number of 
pies each producer makes? How many pies 
are sold? How many pie producers are 
operating?
 11. Suppose that the U.S. textile industry is 
competitive, and there is no international trade 
in textiles. In long-run equilibrium, the price 
per unit of cloth is $30.
a. Describe the equilibrium using graphs for the 
entire market and for an individual producer.
  Now suppose that textile producers in other 
countries are willing to sell large quantities of 
cloth in the United States for only $25 per unit.
b. Assuming that U.S. textile producers have 
large fixed costs, what is the short-run effect 
of these imports on the quantity produced by 
an individual producer? What is the short-run 
effect on profits? Illustrate your answer with 
a graph.
c. What is the long-run effect on the number of 
U.S. firms in the industry?
 12. An industry currently has 100 firms, all of 
which have fixed costs of $16 and average 
variable cost as follows:
Quantity 
Average Variable Cost
 
1 
$1
 
2 
2
 
3 
3
 
4 
4
 
5 
5
 
6 
6
a. Compute marginal cost and average total 
cost.
b. The price is currently $10. What is the total 
quantity supplied in the market?
c. As this market makes the transition to its 
long-run equilibrium, will the price rise or 
fall? Will the quantity demanded rise or fall? 
Will the quantity supplied by each firm rise 
or fall? 
d. Graph the long-run supply curve for this 
market.
 13. Suppose there are 1,000 hot pretzel stands 
operating in New York City. Each stand has the 
usual U-shaped average-total-cost curve. The 
market demand curve for pretzels slopes 
downward, and the market for pretzels is in 
long-run competitive equilibrium.
a. Draw the current equilibrium, using graphs 
for the entire market and for an individual 
pretzel stand.
b. The city decides to restrict the number of 
pretzel-stand licenses, reducing the number 
of stands to only 800. What effect will this 
action have on the market and on an 
individual stand that is still operating? Draw 
graphs to illustrate your answer.
c. Suppose that the city decides to charge a fee 
for the 800 licenses, all of which are quickly 
sold. How will the size of the fee affect the 
number of pretzels sold by an individual 
stand? How will it affect the price of pretzels 
in the city?
d. The city wants to raise as much revenue as 
possible, while ensuring that all 800 licenses 
are sold. How high should the city set the 
license fee? Show the answer on your 
graph.
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
  Each producer in the market has fixed costs of 
$9 and the following marginal cost:
Quantity 
Marginal Cost
 
1 pie 
$ 2
 
2 
4
 
3 
6
 
4 
8
 
5 
10
 
6 
12
a. Compute each producer’s total cost and
average total cost for 1 to 6 pies.
b. The price of a pie is now $11. How many pies
are sold? How many pies does each producer
make? How many producers are there? How
much profit does each producer earn?
c. Is the situation described in part (b) a
long-run equilibrium? Why or why not?
d. Suppose that in the long run there is free 
entry and exit. How much profit does each 
producer earn in the long-run equilibrium? 
What is the market price and number of 
pies each producer makes? How many pies
are sold? How many pie producers are
operating?
 11. Suppose that the U.S. textile industry is 
competitive, and there is no international trade 
in textiles. In long-run equilibrium, the price 
per unit of cloth is $30.
a. Describe the equilibrium using graphs for the
entire market and for an individual producer.
  Now suppose that textile producers in other 
countries are willing to sell large quantities of 
cloth in the United States for only $25 per unit.
b. Assuming that U.S. textile producers have
large fixed costs, what is the short-run effect
of these imports on the quantity produced by
an individual producer? What is the short-run 
effect on profits? Illustrate your answer with
a graph.
c. What is the long-run effect on the number of 
U.S. firms in the industry?
 12. An industry currently has 100 firms, all of 
which have fixed costs of $16 and average
variable cost as follows:
Quantity 
Average Variable Cost
 
1 
$1
2
2
 
3 
3
 
4 
4
 
5 
5
 
6 
6
a. Compute marginal cost and average total
cost.
b. The price is currently $10. What is the total
quantity supplied in the market?
c. As this market makes the transition to its 
long-run equilibrium, will the price rise or 
fall? Will the quantity demanded rise or fall?
Will the quantity supplied by each firm rise 
or fall?
d. Graph the long-run supply curve for this 
market.
 13. Suppose there are 1,000 hot pretzel stands
operating in New York City. Each stand has the 
usual U-shaped average-total-cost curve. The 
market demand curve for pretzels slopes
downward, and the market for pretzels is in 
long-run competitive equilibrium.
a. Draw the current equilibrium, using graphs 
for the entire market and for an individual
pretzel stand.
b. The city decides to restrict the number of 
pretzel-stand licenses, reducing the number
of stands to only 800. What effect will this 
action have on the market and on an 
individual stand that is still operating? Draw
graphs to illustrate your answer.
c. Suppose that the city decides to charge a fee 
for the 800 licenses, all of which are quickly 
sold. How will the size of the fee affect the
number of pretzels sold by an individual
stand? How will it affect the price of pretzels
in the city?
d. The city wants to raise as much revenue as 
possible, while ensuring that all 800 licenses
are sold. How high should the city set the 
license fee? Show the answer on your
graph.
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.
274
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

Monopoly
I
f you own a personal computer, it probably uses some version of Windows, 
the operating system sold by the Microsoft Corporation. When Microsoft first 
designed Windows many years ago, it applied for and received a copyright 
from the government. The copyright gives Microsoft the exclusive right to 
make and sell copies of the Windows operating system. If a person wants to buy 
a copy of Windows, he or she has little choice but to give Microsoft the approxi-
mately $100 that the firm has decided to charge for its product. Microsoft is said 
to have a monopoly in the market for Windows.
Microsoft’s business decisions are not well described by the model of firm 
behavior we developed in the previous chapter. In that chapter, we analyzed 
competitive markets, in which there are many firms offering essentially identical 
products, so each firm has little influence over the price it receives. By contrast, 
a monopoly such as Microsoft has no close competitors and, therefore, has the 
power to influence the market price of its product. While a competitive firm is a 
price taker, a monopoly firm is a price maker.
14
275

In this chapter, we examine the implications of this market power. We will see 
that market power alters the relationship between a firm’s costs and the price at 
which it sells its product. A competitive firm takes the price of its output as given 
by the market and then chooses the quantity it will supply so that price equals 
marginal cost. By contrast, a monopoly charges a price that exceeds marginal cost. 
This result is clearly true in the case of Microsoft’s Windows. The marginal cost of 
Windows—the extra cost that Microsoft incurs by printing one more copy of the 
program onto a CD—is only a few dollars. The market price of Windows is many 
times its marginal cost.
It is not surprising that monopolies charge high prices for their products. 
Customers of monopolies might seem to have little choice but to pay whatever 
the monopoly charges. But if so, why does a copy of Windows not cost $1,000? 
Or $10,000? The reason is that if Microsoft sets the price that high, fewer people 
would buy the product. People would buy fewer computers, switch to other oper-
ating systems, or make illegal copies. A monopoly firm can control the price of the 
good it sells, but because a high price reduces the quantity that its customers buy, 
the monopoly’s profits are not unlimited.
As we examine the production and pricing decisions of monopolies, we also 
consider the implications of monopoly for society as a whole. Monopoly firms, 
like competitive firms, aim to maximize profit. But this goal has very different 
ramifications for competitive and monopoly firms. In competitive markets, self-
interested consumers and producers behave as if they are guided by an invisible 
hand to promote general economic well-being. By contrast, because monopoly 
firms are unchecked by competition, the outcome in a market with a monopoly is 
often not in the best interest of society.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that governments can 
sometimes improve market outcomes. The analysis in this chapter sheds more 
light on this principle. As we examine the problems that monopolies raise for 
society, we discuss the various ways in which government policymakers might 
respond to these problems. The U.S. government, for example, keeps a close 
eye on Microsoft’s business decisions. In 1994, it blocked Microsoft from buying 
Intuit, a leading seller of personal finance software, on the grounds that combin-
ing the two firms would concentrate too much market power. Similarly, in 1998, 
the U.S. Department of Justice objected when Microsoft started integrating its 
Internet browser into its Windows operating system, claiming that this addition 
would extend the firm’s market power into new areas. To this day, Microsoft 
continues to wrangle with antitrust regulators in the United States and abroad.
Why Monopolies Arise
A firm is a monopoly if it is the sole seller of its product and if its product does 
not have close substitutes. The fundamental cause of monopoly is barriers to entry: 
A monopoly remains the only seller in its market because other firms cannot 
enter the market and compete with it. Barriers to entry, in turn, have three main 
sources:
•  Monopoly resources: A key resource required for production is owned by a 
single firm.
•  Government regulation: The government gives a single firm the exclusive 
right to produce some good or service.
monopoly
a firm that is the sole 
seller of a product 
without close substitutes
276
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

•  The production process: A single firm can produce output at a lower cost than 
can a larger number of producers.
Let’s briefly discuss each of these.
Monopoly Resources
The simplest way for a monopoly to arise is for a single firm to own a key 
resource. For example, consider the market for water in a small town in the Old 
West. If dozens of town residents have working wells, the competitive model 
discussed in the preceding chapter describes the behavior of sellers. As a result of 
the competition among water suppliers, the price of a gallon is driven to equal the 
marginal cost of pumping an extra gallon. But if there is only one well in town and 
it is impossible to get water from anywhere else, then the owner of the well has 
a monopoly on water. Not surprisingly, the monopolist has much greater market 
power than any single firm in a competitive market. In the case of a necessity like 
water, the monopolist could command quite a high price, even if the marginal cost 
of pumping an extra gallon is low.
A classic example of market power arising from the ownership of a key 
resource is DeBeers, the South African diamond company. Founded in 1888 by 
Cecil Rhodes, an English businessman (and benefactor for the Rhodes scholar-
ship), DeBeers has at times controlled up to 80 percent of the production from the 
world’s diamond mines. Because its market share is less than 100 percent, DeBeers 
is not exactly a monopoly, but the company has nonetheless exerted substantial 
influence over the market price of diamonds.
Although exclusive ownership of a key resource is a potential cause of mono-
poly, in practice monopolies rarely arise for this reason. Economies are large, and 
resources are owned by many people. Indeed, because many goods are traded 
internationally, the natural scope of their markets is often worldwide. There are, 
therefore, few examples of firms that own a resource for which there are no close 
substitutes.
Government-Created Monopolies
In many cases, monopolies arise because the government has given one person 
or firm the exclusive right to sell some good or service. Sometimes the monopoly 
arises from the sheer political clout of the would-be monopolist. Kings, for exam-
ple, once granted exclusive business licenses to their friends and allies. At other 
times, the government grants a monopoly because doing so is viewed to be in the 
public interest.
The patent and copyright laws are two important examples. When a pharmaceu-
tical company discovers a new drug, it can apply to the government for a  patent. If 
the government deems the drug to be truly original, it approves the patent, which 
gives the company the exclusive right to manufacture and sell the drug for twenty 
years. Similarly, when a novelist finishes a book, she can copyright it. The copy-
right is a government guarantee that no one can print and sell the work without 
the author’s permission. The copyright makes the novelist a monopolist in the sale 
of her novel.
The effects of patent and copyright laws are easy to see. Because these laws 
give one producer a monopoly, they lead to higher prices than would occur 
under competition. But by allowing these monopoly producers to charge higher 
prices and earn higher profits, the laws also encourage some desirable behavior. 
“Rather than a monopoly,
we like to consider
ourselves ‘the only game
in town.’ ”
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL—
PERMISSION, CARTOON FEATURES SYNDICATE
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
277

Drug companies are allowed to be monopolists in the drugs they discover to 
encourage research. Authors are allowed to be monopolists in the sale of their 
books to encourage them to write more and better books.
Thus, the laws governing patents and copyrights have benefits and costs. The 
benefits of the patent and copyright laws are the increased incentives for creative 
activity. These benefits are offset, to some extent, by the costs of monopoly pric-
ing, which we examine fully later in this chapter. 
Natural Monopolies
An industry is a natural monopoly when a single firm can supply a good or ser-
vice to an entire market at a lower cost than could two or more firms. A natural 
monopoly arises when there are economies of scale over the relevant range of 
output. Figure 1 shows the average total costs of a firm with economies of scale. 
In this case, a single firm can produce any amount of output at least cost. That is, 
for any given amount of output, a larger number of firms leads to less output per 
firm and higher average total cost.
An example of a natural monopoly is the distribution of water. To provide 
water to residents of a town, a firm must build a network of pipes throughout the 
town. If two or more firms were to compete in the provision of this service, each 
firm would have to pay the fixed cost of building a network. Thus, the average 
total cost of water is lowest if a single firm serves the entire market. 
We saw other examples of natural monopolies when we discussed public 
goods and common resources in Chapter 11. We noted that club goods are exclud-
able but not rival in consumption. An example is a bridge used so infrequently 
that it is never congested. The bridge is excludable because a toll collector can 
prevent someone from using it. The bridge is not rival in consumption because 
use of the bridge by one person does not diminish the ability of others to use it. 
Because there is a fixed cost of building the bridge and a negligible marginal cost 
of additional users, the average total cost of a trip across the bridge (the total 
cost divided by the number of trips) falls as the number of trips rises. Hence, the 
bridge is a natural monopoly.
When a firm is a natural monopoly, it is less concerned about new entrants erod-
ing its monopoly power. Normally, a firm has trouble maintaining a monopoly 
natural monopoly
a monopoly that arises 
because a single firm can 
supply a good or service 
to an entire market at a 
smaller cost than could 
two or more firms
Figure 1
Economies of Scale as a Cause of Monopoly
When a firm’s average-total-cost curve continually 
declines, the firm has what is called a natural monopoly. 
In this case, when production is divided among more 
firms, each firm produces less, and average total cost rises. 
As a result, a single firm can produce any given amount at 
the smallest cost.
Quantity of Output
Average
total
cost
0
Cost
278
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

position without ownership of a key resource or protection from the government. 
The monopolist’s profit attracts entrants into the market, and these entrants make 
the market more competitive. By contrast, entering a market in which another firm 
has a natural monopoly is unattractive. Would-be entrants know that they cannot 
achieve the same low costs that the monopolist enjoys because, after entry, each 
firm would have a smaller piece of the market. 
In some cases, the size of the market is one determinant of whether an industry 
is a natural monopoly. Again, consider a bridge across a river. When the popula-
tion is small, the bridge may be a natural monopoly. A single bridge can satisfy 
the entire demand for trips across the river at lowest cost. Yet as the population 
grows and the bridge becomes congested, satisfying the entire demand may 
require two or more bridges across the same river. Thus, as a market expands, a 
natural monopoly can evolve into a more competitive market.
QUICK QUIZ What are the three reasons that a market might have a monopoly? 
• Give two examples of monopolies and explain the reason for each.
How Monopolies Make Production and Pricing Decisions
Now that we know how monopolies arise, we can consider how a monopoly firm 
decides how much of its product to make and what price to charge for it. The 
analysis of monopoly behavior in this section is the starting point for evaluating 
whether monopolies are desirable and what policies the government might pur-
sue in monopoly markets. 
Monopoly versus Competition
The key difference between a competitive firm and a monopoly is the monopoly’s 
ability to influence the price of its output. A competitive firm is small relative to 
the market in which it operates and, therefore, has no power to influence the price 
of its output. It takes the price as given by market conditions. By contrast, because 
a monopoly is the sole producer in its market, it can alter the price of its good by 
adjusting the quantity it supplies to the market.
One way to view this difference between a competitive firm and a monopoly 
is to consider the demand curve that each firm faces. When we analyzed profit 
maximization by competitive firms in the preceding chapter, we drew the market 
price as a horizontal line. Because a competitive firm can sell as much or as little 
as it wants at this price, the competitive firm faces a horizontal demand curve, 
as in panel (a) of Figure 2. In effect, because the competitive firm sells a product 
with many perfect substitutes (the products of all the other firms in its market), 
the demand curve that any one firm faces is perfectly elastic.
By contrast, because a monopoly is the sole producer in its market, its demand 
curve is the market demand curve. Thus, the monopolist’s demand curve slopes 
downward for all the usual reasons, as in panel (b) of Figure 2. If the monopolist 
raises the price of its good, consumers buy less of it. Looked at another way, if 
the monopolist reduces the quantity of output it produces and sells, the price of 
its output increases.
The market demand curve provides a constraint on a monopoly’s ability to 
profit from its market power. A monopolist would prefer, if it were possible, 
to charge a high price and sell a large quantity at that high price. The market 
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
279

demand curve makes that outcome impossible. In particular, the market demand 
curve describes the combinations of price and quantity that are available to a 
monopoly firm. By adjusting the quantity produced (or equivalently, the price 
charged), the monopolist can choose any point on the demand curve, but it cannot 
choose a point off the demand curve. 
What price and quantity of output will the monopolist choose? As with com-
petitive firms, we assume that the monopolist’s goal is to maximize profit. Because 
the firm’s profit is total revenue minus total costs, our next task in explaining 
monopoly behavior is to examine a monopolist’s revenue.
A Monopoly’s Revenue
Consider a town with a single producer of water. Table 1 shows how the mono-
poly’s revenue might depend on the amount of water produced. 
The first two columns show the monopolist’s demand schedule. If the mono-
polist produces 1 gallon of water, it can sell that gallon for $10. If it produces 2 
gallons, it must lower the price to $9 to sell both gallons. If it produces 3 gallons, 
it must lower the price to $8. And so on. If you graphed these two columns of 
numbers, you would get a typical downward-sloping demand curve.
The third column of the table presents the monopolist’s total revenue. It equals the 
quantity sold (from the first column) times the price (from the second column). The 
fourth column computes the firm’s average revenue, the amount of revenue the firm 
receives per unit sold. We compute average revenue by taking the number for total 
revenue in the third column and dividing it by the quantity of output in the first 
column. As we discussed in the previous chapter, average revenue always equals 
the price of the good. This is true for monopolists as well as for competitive firms.
The last column of Table 1 computes the firm’s marginal revenue, the amount 
of revenue that the firm receives for each additional unit of output. We compute 
Figure 2
Demand Curves for 
Competitive and Monopoly 
Firms
Because competitive firms are price takers, they in effect face horizontal demand 
curves, as in panel (a). Because a monopoly firm is the sole producer in its market, it 
faces the downward-sloping market demand curve, as in panel (b). As a result, the 
monopoly has to accept a lower price if it wants to sell more output.
Quantity of Output
Demand
(a) A Competitive Firm’s Demand Curve
(b) A Monopolist’s Demand Curve
0
Price
Quantity of Output
0
Price
Demand
280
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

marginal revenue by taking the change in total revenue when output increases 
by 1 unit. For example, when the firm is producing 3 gallons of water, it receives 
total revenue of $24. Raising production to 4 gallons increases total revenue to $28. 
Thus, marginal revenue from the sale of the fourth gallon is $28 minus $24, or $4.
Table 1 shows a result that is important for understanding monopoly behavior: 
A monopolist’s marginal revenue is always less than the price of its good. For example, 
if the firm raises production of water from 3 to 4 gallons, it will increase total 
revenue by only $4, even though it will be able to sell each gallon for $7. For 
a monopoly, marginal revenue is lower than price because a monopoly faces a 
downward-sloping demand curve. To increase the amount sold, a monopoly firm 
must lower the price it charges to all customers. Hence, to sell the fourth gallon of 
water, the monopolist will get $1 less revenue for each of the first three gallons. 
This $3 loss accounts for the difference between the price of the fourth gallon ($7) 
and the marginal revenue of that fourth gallon ($4).
Marginal revenue for monopolies is very different from marginal revenue for 
competitive firms. When a monopoly increases the amount it sells, this action has 
two effects on total revenue (P × Q):
•  The output effect: More output is sold, so Q is higher, which tends to increase 
total revenue.
•  The price effect: The price falls, so P is lower, which tends to decrease total 
revenue.
Because a competitive firm can sell all it wants at the market price, there is no 
price effect. When it increases production by 1 unit, it receives the market price for 
that unit, and it does not receive any less for the units it was already selling. That 
is, because the competitive firm is a price taker, its marginal revenue equals the 
price of its good. By contrast, when a monopoly increases production by 1 unit, it 
A Monopoly’s 
Total, Average, 
and Marginal 
Revenue
Table 1
 Quantity
 of Water 
Price 
Total Revenue 
Average Revenue 
Marginal Revenue
 
(Q ) 
(P ) 
(TR = P × Q ) 
(AR = TR / Q ) 
(MR = ∆TR / ∆Q )
0 gallons 
$11 
$  0 
— 
 
 
 
 
$10
1 
10 
10 
$10
 
 
 
 
8
2 
9 
18 
9
 
 
 
 
6
3 
8 
24 
8
 
 
 
 
4
4 
7 
28 
7
 
 
 
 
2
5 
6 
30 
6
 
 
 
 
0
6 
5 
30 
5
 
 
 
 
–2
7 
4 
28 
4
 
 
 
 
–4
8 
3 
24 
3
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
281

must reduce the price it charges for every unit it sells, and this cut in price reduces 
revenue on the units it was already selling. As a result, a monopoly’s marginal 
revenue is less than its price. 
Figure 3 graphs the demand curve and the marginal-revenue curve for 
a monopoly firm. (Because the firm’s price equals its average revenue, the 
demand curve is also the average-revenue curve.) These two curves always 
start at the same point on the vertical axis because the marginal revenue of the 
first unit sold equals the price of the good. But for the reason we just discussed, 
the monopolist’s marginal revenue on all units after the first is less than the 
price of the good. Thus, a monopoly’s marginal-revenue curve lies below its 
demand curve. 
You can see in the figure (as well as in Table 1) that marginal revenue can even 
become negative. Marginal revenue is negative when the price effect on revenue is 
greater than the output effect. In this case, when the firm produces an extra unit of 
output, the price falls by enough to cause the firm’s total revenue to decline, even 
though the firm is selling more units.
Profit Maximization
Now that we have considered the revenue of a monopoly firm, we are ready to 
examine how such a firm maximizes profit. Recall from Chapter 1 that one of 
the Ten Principles of Economics is that rational people think at the margin. This 
lesson is as true for monopolists as it is for competitive firms. Here we apply 
the logic of marginal analysis to the monopolist’s decision about how much to 
produce. 
Fi gure 4 graphs the demand curve, the marginal-revenue curve, and the cost 
curves for a monopoly firm. All these curves should seem familiar: The demand 
and marginal-revenue curves are like those in Figure 3, and the cost curves are 
like those we encountered in the last two chapters. These curves contain all the 
Figure 3
Demand and Marginal-Revenue 
Curves for a Monopoly
The demand curve shows how the 
quantity affects the price of the good. 
The marginal-revenue curve shows how 
the firm’s revenue changes when the 
quantity increases by 1 unit. Because 
the price on all units sold must fall if 
the monopoly increases production, 
marginal revenue is always less than the 
price.
Quantity of Water
Price
$11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
Demand
(average
revenue)
Marginal
revenue
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
282
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

information we need to determine the level of output that a profit-maximizing 
monopolist will choose.
Suppose, first, that the firm is producing at a low level of output, such as Q1. 
In this case, marginal cost is less than marginal revenue. If the firm increased 
production by 1 unit, the additional revenue would exceed the additional costs, 
and profit would rise. Thus, when marginal cost is less than marginal revenue, the 
firm can increase profit by producing more units.
A similar argument applies at high levels of output, such as Q2. In this case, 
marginal cost is greater than marginal revenue. If the firm reduced production 
by 1 unit, the costs saved would exceed the revenue lost. Thus, if marginal cost is 
greater than marginal revenue, the firm can raise profit by reducing production.
In the end, the firm adjusts its level of production until the quantity reaches 
QMAX, at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Thus, the monopolist’s profit-
maximizing quantity of output is determined by the intersection of the marginal-revenue 
curve and the marginal-cost curve. In Figure 4, this intersection occurs at point A.
You might recall from the previous chapter that competitive firms also choose 
the quantity of output at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. In follow-
ing this rule for profit maximization, competitive firms and monopolies are alike. 
But there is also an important difference between these types of firms: The mar-
ginal revenue of a competitive firm equals its price, whereas the marginal revenue 
of a monopoly is less than its price. That is,
For a competitive firm: P = MR = MC.
 
For a monopoly firm: 
P > MR = MC.
The equality of marginal revenue and marginal cost determines the profit- 
maximizing quantity for both types of firm. What differs is how the price is related 
to marginal revenue and marginal cost.
Figure 4
Profit Maximization for a 
Monopoly
A monopoly maximizes profit by 
choosing the quantity at which 
marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost (point A). It then uses the 
demand curve to find the price that 
will induce consumers to buy that 
quantity (point B).
Monopoly
price
Quantity
Q1
Q2
QMAX
0
Costs and
Revenue
Demand
Average total cost
Marginal revenue
Marginal
cost
B
1. The intersection of the
marginal-revenue curve
and the marginal-cost
curve determines the
proﬁt-maximizing
quantity . . .
A
2. . . . and then the demand
curve shows the price
consistent with this quantity.
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
283

How does the monopoly find the profit-maximizing price for its product? 
The demand curve answers this question because the demand curve relates the 
amount that customers are willing to pay to the quantity sold. Thus, after the 
monopoly firm chooses the quantity of output that equates marginal revenue and 
marginal cost, it uses the demand curve to find the highest price it can charge for 
that quantity. In Figure 4, the profit-maximizing price is found at point B.
We can now see a key difference between markets with competitive firms and 
markets with a monopoly firm: In competitive markets, price equals marginal cost. In 
monopolized markets, price exceeds marginal cost. As we will see in a moment, this 
finding is crucial to understanding the social cost of monopoly.
A Monopoly’s Profit
How much profit does a monopoly make? To see a monopoly firm’s profit in a 
graph, recall that profit equals total revenue (TR) minus total costs (TC):
Profit = TR – TC.
We can rewrite this as
Profit = (TR/Q – TC/Q) × Q.
TR/Q is average revenue, which equals the price, P, and TC/Q is average total 
cost, ATC. Therefore,
Profit = (P –  ATC) × Q.
FYI
 Why a Monopoly Does Not Have a 
Supply Curve
Y
ou may have noticed that we have analyzed the price in a 
monopoly market using the market demand curve and the firm’s 
cost curves. We have not made any mention of the market supply 
curve. By contrast, when we analyzed prices in competitive markets 
beginning in Chapter 4, the two most important words were always 
supply and demand. 
 
What happened to the supply curve? Although monopoly 
firms make decisions about what quantity to supply (in the way 
described in this chapter), a monopoly does not have a supply 
curve. A supply curve tells us the quantity that firms choose to 
supply at any given price. This concept makes sense when we are 
analyzing competitive firms, which are price takers. But a monopoly 
firm is a price maker, not a price taker. It is not meaningful to ask 
what amount such a firm would produce at any price because the 
firm sets the price at the same time as it chooses the quantity to 
supply. 
 
Indeed, the monopolist’s decision about how much to supply is 
impossible to separate from the demand curve it faces. The shape 
of the demand curve determines the shape of the marginal-revenue 
curve, which in turn determines the monopolist’s profit-maximizing 
quantity. In a competitive market, supply decisions can be ana-
lyzed without knowing the demand curve, but that is not true in 
a monopoly market. Therefore, we never talk about a monopoly’s 
supply curve.
284
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

This equation for profit (which also holds for competitive firms) allows us to 
measure the monopolist’s profit in our graph. 
Consider the shaded box in Figure 5. The height of the box (the segment BC) 
is price minus average total cost, P – ATC, which is the profit on the typical unit 
sold. The width of the box (the segment DC) is the quantity sold, QMAX. Therefore, 
the area of this box is the monopoly firm’s total profit.
Monopoly Drugs versus Generic Drugs
According to our analysis, prices are determined differently in monopolized markets 
and competitive markets. A natural place to test this theory is the market for pharma-
ceutical drugs because this market takes on both market structures. When a firm dis-
covers a new drug, patent laws give the firm a monopoly on the sale of that drug. But 
eventually, the firm’s patent runs out, and any company can make and sell the drug. 
At that time, the market switches from being monopolistic to being competitive.
 
What should happen to the price of a drug when the patent runs out? Figure 6 
shows the market for a typical drug. In this figure, the marginal cost of produc-
ing the drug is constant. (This is approximately true for many drugs.) During the 
life of the patent, the monopoly firm maximizes profit by producing the quantity 
at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost and charging a price well above 
marginal cost. But when the patent runs out, the profit from making the drug 
should encourage new firms to enter the market. As the market becomes more 
competitive, the price should fall to equal marginal cost.
 
Experience is, in fact, consistent with our theory. When the patent on a drug 
expires, other companies quickly enter and begin selling so-called generic prod-
ucts that are chemically identical to the former monopolist’s brand-name product. 
And just as our analysis predicts, the price of the competitively produced generic 
drug is well below the price that the monopolist was charging.
Figure 5
The Monopolist’s Profit
The area of the box BCDE equals the 
profit of the monopoly firm. The 
height of the box (BC) is price minus 
average total cost, which equals 
profit per unit sold. The width of the 
box (DC) is the number of units sold.
Monopoly
price
Average
total
cost
Quantity
QMAX
0
Costs and
Revenue
Demand
Marginal cost
Marginal revenue
B
C
E
D
Monopoly
proﬁt
Average total cost
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
285

 
The expiration of a patent, however, does not cause the monopolist to lose all 
its market power. Some consumers remain loyal to the brand-name drug, perhaps 
out of fear that the new generic drugs are not actually the same as the drug they 
have been using for years. As a result, the former monopolist can continue to 
charge a price above the price charged by its new competitors. 
 
For example, one of the most widely used antidepressants is the drug 
 fluoxetine, which is taken by millions of Americans. Because the patent on this 
drug expired in 2001, a consumer today has the choice between the original drug, 
sold under the brand name Prozac, and a generic version of the same medicine. 
Prozac sells for about three times the price of generic fluoxetine. This price dif-
ferential can persist because some consumers are not convinced that the two pills 
are perfect substitutes.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Explain how a monopolist chooses the quantity of output to produce 
and the price to charge.
The Welfare Cost of Monopolies
Is monopoly a good way to organize a market? We have seen that a monopoly, 
in contrast to a competitive firm, charges a price above marginal cost. From the 
standpoint of consumers, this high price makes monopoly undesirable. At the 
same time, however, the monopoly is earning profit from charging this high price. 
From the standpoint of the owners of the firm, the high price makes monopoly 
very desirable. Is it possible that the benefits to the firm’s owners exceed the costs 
imposed on consumers, making monopoly desirable from the standpoint of society 
as a whole?
We can answer this question using the tools of welfare economics. Recall from 
Chapter 7 that total surplus measures the economic well-being of buyers and 
sellers in a market. Total surplus is the sum of consumer surplus and producer 
Figure 6
The Market for Drugs
When a patent gives a firm a 
monopoly over the sale of a drug, 
the firm charges the monopoly 
price, which is well above the 
marginal cost of making the drug. 
When the patent on a drug runs 
out, new firms enter the market, 
making it more competitive. As 
a result, the price falls from the 
monopoly price to marginal cost.
Price
during
patent life
Price after
patent
expires
Quantity
Monopoly
quantity
Competitive
quantity
0
Costs and
Revenue
Demand
Marginal
cost
Marginal
revenue
286
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

surplus. Consumer surplus is consumers’ willingness to pay for a good minus 
the amount they actually pay for it. Producer surplus is the amount producers 
receive for a good minus their costs of producing it. In this case, there is a single 
producer—the monopolist. 
You can probably guess the result of this analysis. In Chapter 7, we concluded 
that the equilibrium of supply and demand in a competitive market is not only a 
natural outcome but also a desirable one. The invisible hand of the market leads to 
an allocation of resources that makes total surplus as large as it can be. Because a 
monopoly leads to an allocation of resources different from that in a competitive 
market, the outcome must, in some way, fail to maximize total economic well-being.
The Deadweight Loss
We begin by considering what the monopoly firm would do if it were run by 
a benevolent social planner. The social planner cares not only about the profit 
earned by the firm’s owners but also about the benefits received by the firm’s 
consumers. The planner tries to maximize total surplus, which equals producer 
surplus (profit) plus consumer surplus. Keep in mind that total surplus equals the 
value of the good to consumers minus the costs of making the good incurred by 
the monopoly producer. 
Figure 7 analyzes how a benevolent social planner would choose the mono-
poly’s level of output. The demand curve reflects the value of the good to consum-
ers, as measured by their willingness to pay for it. The marginal-cost curve reflects 
the costs of the monopolist. Thus, the socially efficient quantity is found where the 
demand curve and the marginal-cost curve intersect. Below this quantity, the value of 
Figure 7
The Efficient Level of Output
A benevolent social planner who 
wanted to maximize total surplus in the 
market would choose the level of output 
where the demand curve and marginal-
cost curve intersect. Below this level, 
the value of the good to the marginal 
buyer (as reflected in the demand curve) 
exceeds the marginal cost of making the 
good. Above this level, the value to the 
marginal buyer is less than marginal cost.
Quantity
0
Price
Demand
(value to buyers)
Efﬁcient
quantity
Marginal cost
Value to buyers
is greater than
cost to seller.
Value to buyers
is less than
cost to seller.
Cost
to
monopolist
Cost
to
monopolist
Value
to
buyers
Value
to
buyers
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
287

an extra unit to consumers exceeds the cost of providing it, so increasing output 
would raise total surplus. Above this quantity, the cost of producing an extra unit 
exceeds the value of that unit to consumers, so decreasing output would raise 
total surplus. At the optimal quantity, the value of an extra unit to consumers 
exactly equals the marginal cost of production.
If the social planner were running the monopoly, the firm could achieve this 
efficient outcome by charging the price found at the intersection of the demand 
and marginal-cost curves. Thus, like a competitive firm and unlike a profit-
maximizing monopoly, a social planner would charge a price equal to marginal 
cost. Because this price would give consumers an accurate signal about the cost of 
producing the good, consumers would buy the efficient quantity.
We can evaluate the welfare effects of monopoly by comparing the level of out-
put that the monopolist chooses to the level of output that a social planner would 
choose. As we have seen, the monopolist chooses to produce and sell the quantity 
of output at which the marginal-revenue and marginal-cost curves intersect; the 
social planner would choose the quantity at which the demand and marginal-cost 
curves intersect. Figure 8 shows the comparison. The monopolist produces less than 
the socially efficient quantity of output. 
We can also view the inefficiency of monopoly in terms of the monopolist’s 
price. Because the market demand curve describes a negative relationship between 
the price and quantity of the good, a quantity that is inefficiently low is equiva-
lent to a price that is inefficiently high. When a monopolist charges a price above 
marginal cost, some potential consumers value the good at more than its marginal 
cost but less than the monopolist’s price. These consumers do not buy the good. 
Because the value these consumers place on the good is greater than the cost of 
providing it to them, this result is inefficient. Thus, monopoly pricing prevents 
some mutually beneficial trades from taking place. 
The inefficiency of monopoly can be measured with a deadweight loss triangle, 
as illustrated in Figure 8. Because the demand curve reflects the value to con-
sumers and the marginal-cost curve reflects the costs to the monopoly producer, 
Figure 8
The Inefficiency of Monopoly
Because a monopoly charges a 
price above marginal cost, not all 
consumers who value the good 
at more than its cost buy it. Thus, 
the quantity produced and sold by 
a monopoly is below the socially 
efficient level. The deadweight 
loss is represented by the area of 
the triangle between the demand 
curve (which reflects the value 
of the good to consumers) and 
the marginal-cost curve (which 
reflects the costs of the monopoly 
producer).
Quantity
0
Price
Efﬁcient
quantity
Monopoly
price
Monopoly
quantity
Deadweight
loss
Demand
Marginal
revenue
Marginal cost
288
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

the area of the deadweight loss triangle between the demand curve and the 
marginal-cost curve equals the total surplus lost because of monopoly pricing. It 
is the reduction in economic well-being that results from the monopoly’s use of 
its market power.
The deadweight loss caused by monopoly is similar to the deadweight loss 
caused by a tax. Indeed, a monopolist is like a private tax collector. As we saw 
in Chapter 8, a tax on a good places a wedge between consumers’ willingness to 
pay (as reflected by the demand curve) and producers’ costs (as reflected by the 
supply curve). Because a monopoly exerts its market power by charging a price 
above marginal cost, it creates a similar wedge. In both cases, the wedge causes 
the quantity sold to fall short of the social optimum. The difference between the 
two cases is that the government gets the revenue from a tax, whereas a private 
firm gets the monopoly profit.
The Monopoly’s Profit: A Social Cost?
It is tempting to decry monopolies for “profiteering” at the expense of the public. 
And indeed, a monopoly firm does earn a higher profit by virtue of its market 
power. According to the economic analysis of monopoly, however, the firm’s 
profit is not in itself necessarily a problem for society.
Welfare in a monopolized market, like all markets, includes the welfare of 
both consumers and producers. Whenever a consumer pays an extra dollar to a 
producer because of a monopoly price, the consumer is worse off by a dollar, and 
the producer is better off by the same amount. This transfer from the consumers 
of the good to the owners of the monopoly does not affect the market’s total 
surplus—the sum of consumer and producer surplus. In other words, the mono-
poly profit itself represents not a reduction in the size of the economic pie but 
merely a bigger slice for producers and a smaller slice for consumers. Unless 
consumers are for some reason more deserving than producers—a normative 
judgment about equity that goes beyond the realm of economic efficiency—the 
monopoly profit is not a social problem.
The problem in a monopolized market arises because the firm produces and 
sells a quantity of output below the level that maximizes total surplus. The dead-
weight loss measures how much the economic pie shrinks as a result. This inef-
ficiency is connected to the monopoly’s high price: Consumers buy fewer units 
when the firm raises its price above marginal cost. But keep in mind that the profit 
earned on the units that continue to be sold is not the problem. The problem stems 
from the inefficiently low quantity of output. Put differently, if the high monopoly 
price did not discourage some consumers from buying the good, it would raise 
producer surplus by exactly the amount it reduced consumer surplus, leaving 
total surplus the same as could be achieved by a benevolent social planner.
There is, however, a possible exception to this conclusion. Suppose that a 
monopoly firm has to incur additional costs to maintain its monopoly position. For 
example, a firm with a government-created monopoly might need to hire lobby ists 
to convince lawmakers to continue its monopoly. In this case, the monopoly may 
use up some of its monopoly profits paying for these additional costs. If so, the 
social loss from monopoly includes both these costs and the deadweight loss 
resulting from a price above marginal cost. 
QUICK QUIZ How does a monopolist’s quantity of output compare to the quantity 
of output that maximizes total surplus? How does this difference relate to the concept 
of deadweight loss?
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
289

Price Discrimination
So far, we have been assuming that the monopoly firm charges the same price to 
all customers. Yet in many cases, firms sell the same good to different customers 
for different prices, even though the costs of producing for the two customers are 
the same. This practice is called price discrimination.
Before discussing the behavior of a price-discriminating monopolist, we should 
note that price discrimination is not possible when a good is sold in a competi-
tive market. In a competitive market, many firms are selling the same good at the 
market price. No firm is willing to charge a lower price to any customer because 
the firm can sell all it wants at the market price. And if any firm tried to charge a 
higher price to a customer, that customer would buy from another firm. For a firm 
to price discriminate, it must have some market power.
A Parable about Pricing
To understand why a monopolist would price discriminate, let’s consider an 
example. Imagine that you are the president of Readalot Publishing Company. 
Readalot’s best-selling author has just written a new novel. To keep things 
simple, let’s imagine that you pay the author a flat $2 million for the exclusive 
rights to publish the book. Let’s also assume that the cost of printing the book is 
zero. Readalot’s profit, therefore, is the revenue from selling the book minus the 
$2 million it has paid to the author. Given these assumptions, how would you, as 
Readalot’s president, decide the book’s price?
Your first step is to estimate the demand for the book. Readalot’s marketing 
department tells you that the book will attract two types of readers. The book will 
appeal to the author’s 100,000 die-hard fans who are willing to pay as much as 
$30. In addition, the book will appeal to about 400,000 less enthusiastic readers 
who will pay up to $5.
If Readalot charges a single price to all customers, what price maximizes 
profit? There are two natural prices to consider: $30 is the highest price Readalot 
can charge and still get the 100,000 die-hard fans, and $5 is the highest price it 
can charge and still get the entire market of 500,000 potential readers. Solving 
Readalot’s problem is a matter of simple arithmetic. At a price of $30, Readalot 
sells 100,000 copies, has revenue of $3 million, and makes profit of $1 million. At 
a price of $5, it sells 500,000 copies, has revenue of $2.5 million, and makes profit 
of $500,000. Thus, Readalot maximizes profit by charging $30 and forgoing the 
opportunity to sell to the 400,000 less enthusiastic readers.
Notice that Readalot’s decision causes a deadweight loss. There are 400,000 
readers willing to pay $5 for the book, and the marginal cost of providing it 
to them is zero. Thus, $2 million of total surplus is lost when Readalot charges 
the higher price. This deadweight loss is the inefficiency that arises whenever a 
monopolist charges a price above marginal cost.
Now suppose that Readalot’s marketing department makes a discovery: These 
two groups of readers are in separate markets. The die-hard fans live in Australia, 
and the other readers live in the United States. Moreover, it is hard for readers in 
one country to buy books in the other. 
In response to this discovery, Readalot can change its marketing strategy and 
increase profits. To the 100,000 Australian readers, it can charge $30 for the book. 
To the 400,000 American readers, it can charge $5 for the book. In this case, reve-
nue is $3 million in Australia and $2 million in the United States, for a total of 
price discrimination
the business practice of 
selling the same good 
at different prices to 
different customers
290
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

$5 million. Profit is then $3 million, which is substantially greater than the $1 
million the company could earn charging the same $30 price to all customers. 
Not surprisingly, Readalot chooses to follow this strategy of price discrimination.
The story of Readalot Publishing is hypothetical, but it describes accurately 
the business practice of many publishing companies. Textbooks, for example, are 
often sold at a lower price in Europe than in the United States. Even more impor-
tant is the price differential between hardcover books and paperbacks. When a 
publisher has a new novel, it initially releases an expensive hardcover edition and 
later releases a cheaper paperback edition. The difference in price between these 
two editions far exceeds the difference in printing costs. The publisher’s goal is 
just as in our example. By selling the hardcover to die-hard fans and the paperback 
to less enthusiastic readers, the publisher price discriminates and raises its profit. 
The Moral of the Story
Like any parable, the story of Readalot Publishing is stylized. Yet also like any 
parable, it teaches some general lessons. In this case, three lessons can be learned 
about price discrimination.
The first and most obvious lesson is that price discrimination is a rational 
strategy for a profit-maximizing monopolist. That is, by charging different prices 
to different customers, a monopolist can increase its profit. In essence, a price-
discriminating monopolist charges each customer a price closer to his or her will-
ingness to pay than is possible with a single price.
The second lesson is that price discrimination requires the ability to separate 
customers according to their willingness to pay. In our example, customers were 
separated geographically. But sometimes monopolists choose other differences, 
such as age or income, to distinguish among customers.
A corollary to this second lesson is that certain market forces can prevent firms 
from price discriminating. In particular, one such force is arbitrage, the process 
of buying a good in one market at a low price and selling it in another market at 
a higher price to profit from the price difference. In our example, if Australian 
bookstores could buy the book in the United States and resell it to Australian 
readers, the arbitrage would prevent Readalot from price discriminating, because 
no Australian would buy the book at the higher price.
The third lesson from our parable is the most surprising: Price discrimination 
can raise economic welfare. Recall that a deadweight loss arises when Readalot 
charges a single $30 price because the 400,000 less enthusiastic readers do not 
end up with the book, even though they value it at more than its marginal cost 
of production. By contrast, when Readalot price discriminates, all readers get the 
book, and the outcome is efficient. Thus, price discrimination can eliminate the 
inefficiency inherent in monopoly pricing.
Note that in this example the increase in welfare from price discrimination 
shows up as higher producer surplus rather than higher consumer surplus. 
Consumers are no better off for having bought the book: The price they pay 
exactly equals the value they place on the book, so they receive no consumer 
surplus. The entire increase in total surplus from price discrimination accrues to 
Readalot Publishing in the form of higher profit. 
The Analytics of Price Discrimination
Let’s consider a bit more formally how price discrimination affects economic 
welfare. We begin by assuming that the monopolist can price discriminate per-
fectly. Perfect price discrimination describes a situation in which the monopolist 
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
291

knows exactly each customer’s willingness to pay and can charge each customer 
a different price. In this case, the monopolist charges each customer exactly his 
or her willingness to pay, and the monopolist gets the entire surplus in every 
transaction.
Figure 9 illustrates producer and consumer surplus with and without price 
discrimination. To keep things simple, this figure is drawn assuming constant per 
unit costs—that is, marginal cost and average total cost are constant and equal. 
Without price discrimination, the firm charges a single price above marginal cost, 
as shown in panel (a). Because some potential customers who value the good at 
more than marginal cost do not buy it at this high price, the monopoly causes a 
deadweight loss. Yet when a firm can perfectly price discriminate, as shown in 
panel (b), each customer who values the good at more than marginal cost buys the 
good and is charged his or her willingness to pay. All mutually beneficial trades 
take place, no deadweight loss occurs, and the entire surplus derived from the 
market goes to the monopoly producer in the form of profit.
In reality, of course, price discrimination is not perfect. Customers do not 
walk into stores with signs displaying their willingness to pay. Instead, firms 
price discriminate by dividing customers into groups: young versus old, week-
day versus weekend shoppers, Americans versus Australians, and so on. Unlike 
those in our parable of Readalot Publishing, customers within each group differ 
in their willingness to pay for the product, making perfect price discrimination 
impossible.
Figure 9
Welfare with and without 
Price Discrimination
Panel (a) shows a monopolist that charges the same price to all customers. 
Total surplus in this market equals the sum of profit (producer surplus) and 
consumer surplus. Panel (b) shows a monopolist that can perfectly price 
discriminate. Because consumer surplus equals zero, total surplus now equals 
the firm’s profit. Comparing these two panels, you can see that perfect price 
discrimination raises profit, raises total surplus, and lowers consumer surplus.
(a) Monopolist with Single Price
Price
0
Quantity
Quantity sold
Quantity sold
(b) Monopolist with Perfect Price Discrimination
Price
0
Quantity
Monopoly
price
Proﬁt
Proﬁt
Deadweight
loss
Demand
Demand
Marginal cost
Marginal
revenue
Consumer
surplus
Marginal cost
292
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

How does this imperfect price discrimination affect welfare? The analysis of 
these pricing schemes is quite complicated, and it turns out that there is no gen-
eral answer to this question. Compared to the monopoly outcome with a single 
price, imperfect price discrimination can raise, lower, or leave unchanged total 
surplus in a market. The only certain conclusion is that price discrimination raises 
the monopoly’s profit; otherwise, the firm would choose to charge all customers 
the same price.
Examples of Price Discrimination
Firms in our economy use various business strategies aimed at charging different 
prices to different customers. Now that we understand the economics of price 
discrimination, let’s consider some examples.
Movie Tickets Many movie theaters charge a lower price for children and 
senior citizens than for other patrons. This fact is hard to explain in a competitive 
market. In a competitive market, price equals marginal cost, and the marginal cost 
of providing a seat for a child or senior citizen is the same as the marginal cost 
of providing a seat for anyone else. Yet the differential pricing is easily explained 
if movie theaters have some local monopoly power and if children and senior 
citizens have a lower willingness to pay for a ticket. In this case, movie theaters 
raise their profit by price discriminating.
Airline Prices Seats on airplanes are sold at many different prices. Most airlines 
charge a lower price for a round-trip ticket between two cities if the traveler stays 
over a Saturday night. At first, this seems odd. Why should it matter to the airline 
whether a passenger stays over a Saturday night? The reason is that this rule pro-
vides a way to separate business travelers and leisure travelers. A passenger on a 
business trip has a high willingness to pay and, most likely, does not want to stay 
over a Saturday night. By contrast, a passenger traveling for personal reasons has 
a lower willingness to pay and is more likely to be willing to stay over a Saturday 
night. Thus, the airlines can successfully price discriminate by charging a lower 
price for passengers who stay over a Saturday night.
Discount Coupons Many companies offer discount coupons to the public in 
newspapers, magazines, or online. A buyer simply has to clip the coupon to get 
$0.50 off his or her next purchase. Why do companies offer these coupons? Why 
don’t they just cut the price of the product by $0.50?
The answer is that coupons allow companies to price discriminate. Companies 
know that not all customers are willing to spend time clipping coupons. Moreover, 
the willingness to clip coupons is related to the customer’s willingness to pay for 
the good. A rich and busy executive is unlikely to spend her time clipping dis-
count coupons out of the newspaper, and she is probably willing to pay a higher 
price for many goods. A person who is unemployed is more likely to clip coupons 
and to have a lower willingness to pay. Thus, by charging a lower price only to 
those customers who clip coupons, firms can successfully price discriminate.
Financial Aid Many colleges and universities give financial aid to needy stu-
dents. One can view this policy as a type of price discrimination. Wealthy students 
have greater financial resources and, therefore, a higher willingness to pay than 
needy students. By charging high tuition and selectively offering financial aid, 
schools in effect charge prices to customers based on the value they place on going to 
that school. This behavior is similar to that of any price-discriminating monopolist. 
“Would it bother you to 
hear how little I paid for 
this flight?”
HAMILTON © REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION OF UNIVERSAL 
UCLCK. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
293

Quantity Discounts So far in our examples of price discrimination, the 
monopolist charges different prices to different customers. Sometimes, however, 
monopolists price discriminate by charging different prices to the same customer 
for different units that the customer buys. For example, many firms offer lower 
prices to customers who buy large quantities. A bakery might charge $0.50 for 
each donut but $5 for a dozen. This is a form of price discrimination because 
the customer pays a higher price for the first unit bought than for the twelfth. 
Quantity discounts are often a successful way of price discriminating because a 
customer’s willingness to pay for an additional unit declines as the customer buys 
more units. 
QUICK QUIZ Give two examples of price discrimination. • How does perfect price 
discrimination affect consumer surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus?
Public Policy toward Monopolies
We have seen that monopolies, in contrast to competitive markets, fail to allocate 
resources efficiently. Monopolies produce less than the socially desirable quantity 
The Dynamics of 
Pricing Tickets for 
Broadway Shows
BY HAL R. VARIAN
E
very night in New York, about 25,000 
people, on average, attend Broadway 
shows.
 
As avid theatergoers know, ticket prices 
have been rising inexorably. The top ticket 
price for Broadway shows has risen 31 
percent since 1998. But the actual price paid 
has gone up by only 24 percent.
 
The difference is a result of discounting. 
Savvy fans know that there are deals avail-
able for even the most popular shows, with 
the most popular discounts being offered 
through coupons, two-for-one deals, special 
prices for students, and through the TKTS 
booth in Times Square.
 
Why so much discounting? The value of 
a seat in a theater, like a seat on an airplane, 
is highly perishable. Once the show starts or 
the plane takes off, a seat is worth next to 
nothing. 
 
In both industries, sellers use a variety 
of strategies to try to ensure that the seats 
are sold to those who are willing to pay the 
most.
 
This phenomenon was examined recently 
by a Stanford economist, Phillip Leslie, in an 
article, “Price Discrimination in Broadway 
 TKTS and Other Schemes
Economist Hal Varian discusses a dramatic example of price 
discrimination.
in the news
Bargain hunters
BRUCE GLIKAS/GETTY IMAGES
294
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

of output and, as a result, charge prices above marginal cost. Policymakers in the 
government can respond to the problem of monopoly in one of four ways:
•  By trying to make monopolized industries more competitive.
•  By regulating the behavior of the monopolies.
•  By turning some private monopolies into public enterprises.
•  By doing nothing at all.
Increasing Competition with Antitrust Laws
If Coca-Cola and PepsiCo wanted to merge, the deal would be closely examined by 
the federal government before it went into effect. The lawyers and economists in the 
Department of Justice might well decide that a merger between these two large soft 
drink companies would make the U.S. soft drink market substantially less competi-
tive and, as a result, would reduce the economic well-being of the country as a whole. 
If so, the Department of Justice would challenge the merger in court, and if the judge 
agreed, the two companies would not be allowed to merge. It is precisely this kind of 
challenge that prevented software giant Microsoft from buying Intuit in 1994.
The government derives this power over private industry from the antitrust 
laws, a collection of statutes aimed at curbing monopoly power. The first and 
most important of these laws was the Sherman Antitrust Act, which Congress 
passed in 1890 to reduce the market power of the large and powerful “trusts” that 
Theater,” published in the autumn 2004 
issue of the RAND Journal of Economics.
 
Mr. Leslie was able to collect detailed data 
on a 1996 Broadway play, “Seven Guitars.” 
Over 140,000 people saw this play, and they 
bought tickets in 17 price categories. Some 
price variation was due to the quality of the 
seats—orchestra, mezzanine, balcony and 
so on—while other price differences were a 
result of various forms of discounting.
 
The combination of quality variation and 
discounts led to widely varying ticket prices. 
The average difference of two tickets chosen 
at random on a given night was about 40 
percent of the average price. This is compa-
rable to the price variation in airline tickets. . . .
 
The ticket promotions also varied over 
the 199 performances of the show. Targeted 
direct mail was used early on, while two-for-
one tickets were not introduced until about 
halfway through the run.
 
The tickets offered for sale at the TKTS 
booth in Times Square are typically orchestra 
seats, the best category of seats available. 
But the discounted tickets at TKTS tend to 
be the lower-quality orchestra seats. They 
sell at a fixed discount of 50 percent, but are 
offered only for performances that day.
 
Mr. Leslie’s goal was primarily to model 
the behavior of the theatergoer. The audi-
ence for Broadway shows is highly diverse. 
About 10 percent, according to a 1991 sur-
vey conducted by Broadway producers, had 
household incomes of $25,000 or $35,000 
while an equal number had incomes over 
$150,000 (in 1990 dollars).
 
The prices and discounting policy set by 
the producers of Broadway shows try to use 
this heterogeneity to get people to sort them-
selves by their willingness to pay for tickets.
 
You probably will not see Donald Trump 
waiting in line at TKTS; presumably, those 
in his income class do not mind paying full 
price. But a lot of students, unemployed 
actors and tourists do use TKTS.
 
Yes, it is inconvenient to wait in line 
at TKTS. But that is the point. If it weren’t 
inconvenient, everyone would do it, and this 
would result in substantially lower revenues 
for Broadway shows.
 
Mr. Leslie uses some advanced econo-
metric techniques to estimate the values 
that different income groups put on the 
various categories of tickets. He finds that 
Broadway producers do a pretty good job, 
in general, at maximizing revenue. . . . 
 
We are likely to see more and more 
goods and services sold using the same sort 
of differential pricing. As more and more 
transactions become computer-mediated, it 
becomes easier for sellers to collect data, to 
experiment with pricing and to analyze the 
results of those experiments.
 
This, of course, makes life more complicated 
for us consumers. The flip side is that pricing 
variations make those good deals more likely.
 
Last time I was in New York, I was 
pleased that I managed to get a ticket to 
“The Producers” for half price. It almost 
made up for the fact that I had to book my 
airline ticket two weeks in advance and stay 
over a Saturday night.
Source: New York Times, January 13, 2005.
“But if we do merge with
Amalgamated, we’ll have
enough resources to fight
the anti-trust violation
caused by the merger.”
SCIENCECARTOONSPLUS.COM
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
295

were viewed as dominating the economy at the time. The Clayton Antitrust Act, 
passed in 1914, strengthened the government’s powers and authorized private 
lawsuits. As the U.S. Supreme Court once put it, the antitrust laws are “a com-
prehensive charter of economic liberty aimed at preserving free and unfettered 
competition as the rule of trade.”
The antitrust laws give the government various ways to promote competition. 
They allow the government to prevent mergers, such as our hypothetical merger 
between Coca-Cola and PepsiCo. They also allow the government to break up 
companies. For example, in 1984, the government split up AT&T, the large tele-
communications company, into eight smaller companies. Finally, the antitrust 
laws prevent companies from coordinating their activities in ways that make 
markets less competitive.
Antitrust laws have costs as well as benefits. Sometimes companies merge not 
to reduce competition but to lower costs through more efficient joint production. 
These benefits from mergers are sometimes called synergies. For example, many 
 President Obama’s Antitrust Policy
When President Obama was elected, he promised a more vigorous 
application of the laws aimed at firms with monopoly power.
in the news
Trustbusters Try to 
Reclaim Decades of 
Lost Ground
BY THOMAS CATAN 
W
ASHINGTON—If populism is emerg-
ing as a potent new force in American 
politics, then government trustbusters and 
sympathetic Democrats in Congress stand 
ready to offer a new outlet. But first, they’ll 
have to overcome a major hurdle: the judges.
 
Over the past three decades, U.S. 
courts have sharply limited the scope of the 
120-year-old Sherman Antitrust Act, which 
has been used to target companies from 
Standard Oil to Microsoft Corp. In so doing, 
judges have clipped the wings of two agencies 
charged with policing anticompetitive behav-
ior: the Justice Department and the Federal 
Trade Commission.
 
Now Democrats on Capitol Hill are 
joining forces with antitrust cops to push 
back against the judicial tide. Congress is 
preparing measures to reverse the effect of 
court rulings that have made it harder for 
the government to win antitrust cases and 
break up monopolies, while the FTC and 
Justice Department are trying out new legal 
tactics to reclaim lost powers
 
If successful, the efforts could pres-
age an upswing in antitrust cases against 
America’s leading companies and reverse 
the legal trends of recent years.
 
Sensing a shift in the political land-
scape, big business is girding for a fight. 
“Voters are demanding jobs and growth, 
but Washington is moving in the opposite 
direction by advancing an agenda focused on 
increased litigation against business,” said 
Lisa Rickard, president of the U.S. Chamber 
Institute for Legal Reform, an offshoot of the 
Chamber of Commerce that seeks to ease 
the burden of civil litigation for businesses.
 
Antitrust enforcers since the 1980s have 
had an increasingly hard time winning cases 
against accused monopolists. Judges have 
largely agreed with the reasoning of the 
so-called Chicago School of economists, 
which holds that big companies aren’t 
necessarily bad and that the market—not 
government—is best placed to promote 
competition.
 
The administration of George W. Bush 
largely agreed. Its Justice Department didn’t 
accuse a single company of improperly 
296
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

acquiring or maintaining a monopoly in a 
case not involving a merger. In 2008, it 
enshrined its thinking in official guidelines 
that significantly raised the bar for bringing 
such a monopolization case.
 
The new administration is taking a 
different tack. President Barack Obama 
vowed to “reinvigorate” antitrust enforce-
ment, and his antitrust chief, Christine 
Varney, ripped up the Bush-era guidelines 
last spring. 
 
So far, the talk hasn’t been matched 
by action. The Justice Department in the 
Obama administration has yet to bring a 
monopolization case. And the only FTC case 
brought so far—against microchip giant 
Intel Corp.—was already being built when 
it came to power.
 
In part, that’s because the Supreme 
Court has embraced many antitrust prin-
ciples that the Bush administration advo-
cated, said Joseph Angland, an antitrust 
lawyer at White & Case. “Those changes are 
now law of the land and they do constrain 
the ability of the Obama administration to 
bring certain types of actions,” he said.
 
Congressional Democrats want to show 
they can protect consumers. They say they 
want to aid family farmers squeezed by 
giant seed manufacturers and distributors. 
They want to free up Internet retailers to 
discount products below manufacturers’ 
minimum price. And they want to stop 
pharmaceutical companies from paying 
generic-drug makers to delay cheap copies 
of medicines. But in each of these areas they 
are blocked by recent Supreme Court deci-
sions, so Congress is considering a series of 
legislative fixes. One would be in response to a 
2007 Supreme Court decision, Leegin Creative 
Leather Products v. PSKS.
 
In that 5-4 ruling, the court overturned 
nearly a century of jurisprudence that had 
declared a practice known as retail price 
maintenance to be an automatic crime. 
That might involve, for instance, a jeans 
manufacturer that forbids a department 
store from selling its pants below its desired 
level. A bill sponsored by Sen. Herb Kohl (D., 
Wisc.) would restore the absolute ban.
 
Another bill sponsored by Sen. Arlen 
Specter (D., Pa.), with a matching version 
pending in the House, would try to counter 
a different 2007 Supreme Court decision—
Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly—that made 
it easier for defendants to get antitrust 
claims dismissed.
 
Trial lawyers, who as a group are 
among the top financial donors to the 
Democratic Party, have declared passing 
the bill among their top legislative priorities. 
AT&T Inc., Procter & Gamble Co., Verizon 
Communications Inc. and other big com-
panies oppose the bills, saying they would 
trigger a flood of frivolous and costly cases.
 
“Every business group I’ve spoken to 
regards this as a very serious issue, espe-
cially given the economy and the expense of 
dealing with frivolous litigation,” said John 
Thorne, Verizon’s deputy general counsel.
 
Antitrust enforcers are taking parallel 
action. The Justice Department is looking for 
test cases to expand its antitrust authority. 
And the FTC wants to circumvent the courts’ 
narrow interpretation of the Sherman Act by 
reclaiming a legal tool it has hardly used in 
more than two decades—Section 5 of the 
1914 law that created the agency.
 
Invoked in the FTC’s Intel suit, that law 
allows the FTC to act against a company 
that engages in “unfair methods of compe-
tition.” The law largely fell into disuse after 
courts repeatedly slapped down the FTC for 
using it too broadly.
 
“Antitrust law is far more restrictive 
than it was 30 years ago and if we want to 
accomplish our mission of protecting con-
sumers in an age of judicial conservatism, 
we need to use every tool in our arsenal,” 
FTC Chairman Jon Leibowitz said last fall.
Source: The Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2010.
U.S. banks have merged in recent years and, by combining operations, have been 
able to reduce administrative staff. If antitrust laws are to raise social welfare, the 
government must be able to determine which mergers are desirable and which 
are not. That is, it must be able to measure and compare the social benefit from 
synergies with the social costs of reduced competition. Critics of the antitrust laws 
are skeptical that the government can perform the necessary cost–benefit analysis 
with sufficient accuracy.
Regulation
Another way the government deals with the problem of monopoly is by regulat-
ing the behavior of monopolists. This solution is common in the case of natural 
monopolies, such as water and electric companies. These companies are not 
allowed to charge any price they want. Instead, government agencies regulate 
their prices. 
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
297

What price should the government set for a natural monopoly? This question 
is not as easy as it might at first appear. One might conclude that the price should 
equal the monopolist’s marginal cost. If price equals marginal cost, customers will 
buy the quantity of the monopolist’s output that maximizes total surplus, and the 
allocation of resources will be efficient.
There are, however, two practical problems with marginal-cost pricing as a reg-
ulatory system. The first arises from the logic of cost curves. By definition, natural 
monopolies have declining average total cost. As we first discussed in Chapter   , 
when average total cost is declining, marginal cost is less than average total cost. 
This situation is illustrated in Figure 10, which shows a firm with a large fixed cost 
and then constant marginal cost thereafter. If regulators were to set price equal to 
marginal cost, that price must be less than the firm’s average total cost, and the 
firm would lose money. Instead of charging such a low price, the monopoly firm 
would just exit the industry.
Regulators can respond to this problem in various ways, none of which is perfect. 
One way is to subsidize the monopolist. In essence, the government picks up the 
losses inherent in marginal-cost pricing. Yet to pay for the subsidy, the government 
needs to raise money through taxation, which involves its own deadweight losses. 
Alternatively, the regulators can allow the monopolist to charge a price higher than 
marginal cost. If the regulated price equals average total cost, the monopolist earns 
exactly zero economic profit. Yet average-cost pricing leads to deadweight losses 
because the monopolist’s price no longer reflects the marginal cost of producing the 
good. In essence, average-cost pricing is like a tax on the good the monopolist is selling.
The second problem with marginal-cost pricing as a regulatory system (and 
with average-cost pricing as well) is that it gives the monopolist no incentive to 
reduce costs. Each firm in a competitive market tries to reduce its costs because 
lower costs mean higher profits. But if a regulated monopolist knows that regula-
tors will reduce prices whenever costs fall, the monopolist will not benefit from 
lower costs. In practice, regulators deal with this problem by allowing mono-
polists to keep some of the benefits from lower costs in the form of higher profit, 
a practice that requires some departure from marginal-cost pricing.
Figure 10
Marginal-Cost Pricing for a 
Natural Monopoly
Because a natural monopoly 
has declining average total 
cost, marginal cost is less 
than average total cost. 
Therefore, if regulators 
require a natural monopoly 
to charge a price equal to 
marginal cost, price will be 
below average total cost, 
and the monopoly will lose 
money.
Average total
cost
Regulated
price
Quantity
0
Loss
Price
Demand
Marginal cost
Average total cost
298
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
12

Public Ownership
The third policy used by the government to deal with monopoly is public owner-
ship. That is, rather than regulating a natural monopoly that is run by a private 
firm, the government can run the monopoly itself. This solution is common in 
many European countries, where the government owns and operates utilities 
such as telephone, water, and electric companies. In the United States, the govern-
ment runs the Postal Service. The delivery of ordinary first-class mail is often 
thought to be a natural monopoly. 
Economists usually prefer private to public ownership of natural monopolies. The 
key issue is how the ownership of the firm affects the costs of production. Private 
owners have an incentive to minimize costs as long as they reap part of the benefit in 
the form of higher profit. If the firm’s managers are doing a bad job of keeping costs 
down, the firm’s owners will fire them. By contrast, if the government bureaucrats 
who run a monopoly do a bad job, the losers are the customers and taxpayers, whose 
only recourse is the political system. The bureaucrats may become a special-interest 
group and attempt to block cost-reducing reforms. Put simply, as a way of ensuring 
that firms are well run, the voting booth is less reliable than the profit motive.
Doing Nothing
Each of the foregoing policies aimed at reducing the problem of monopoly has draw-
backs. As a result, some economists argue that it is often best for the govern ment not to 
try to remedy the inefficiencies of monopoly pricing. Here is the assessment of econo-
mist George Stigler, who won the Nobel Prize for his work in industrial organization:
A famous theorem in economics states that a competitive enterprise economy 
will produce the largest possible income from a given stock of resources. No 
real economy meets the exact conditions of the theorem, and all real economies 
will fall short of the ideal economy—a difference called “market failure.” In 
my view, however, the degree of “market failure” for the American economy 
is much smaller than the “political failure” arising from the imperfections of 
economic policies found in real political systems.
As this quotation makes clear, determining the proper role of the government in 
the economy requires judgments about politics as well as economics. 
QUICK QUIZ Describe the ways policymakers can respond to the inefficiencies 
caused by monopolies. List a potential problem with each of these policy responses.
Conclusion: The Prevalence of Monopolies
This chapter has discussed the behavior of firms that have control over the prices 
they charge. We have seen that these firms behave very differently from the com-
petitive firms studied in the previous chapter. Table 2 summarizes some of the 
key similarities and differences between competitive and monopoly markets.
From the standpoint of public policy, a crucial result is that a monopolist pro-
duces less than the socially efficient quantity and charges a price above marginal 
cost. As a result, a monopoly causes deadweight losses. In some cases, these inef-
ficiencies can be mitigated through price discrimination by the monopolist, but 
other times, they call for policymakers to take an active role.
How prevalent are the problems of monopoly? There are two answers to this 
question.
In one sense, monopolies are common. Most firms have some control over the 
prices they charge. They are not forced to charge the market price for their goods 
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
299

SUMMARY
SUMMARY
SUMMARY
because their goods are not exactly the same as those offered by other firms. A 
Ford Taurus is not the same as a Toyota Camry. Ben and Jerry’s ice cream is not 
the same as Breyer’s. Each of these goods has a downward-sloping demand curve, 
which gives each producer some degree of monopoly power.
Yet firms with substantial monopoly power are rare. Few goods are truly 
unique. Most have substitutes that, even if not exactly the same, are similar. Ben 
and Jerry can raise the price of their ice cream a little without losing all their sales, 
but if they raise it a lot, sales will fall substantially as their customers switch to 
another brand. 
In the end, monopoly power is a matter of degree. It is true that many firms 
have some monopoly power. It is also true that their monopoly power is usually 
limited. In such a situation, we will not go far wrong assuming that firms operate 
in competitive markets, even if that is not precisely the case.
 
 
Competition 
Monopoly
Similarities
Goal of firms 
Maximize profits 
Maximize profits
Rule for maximizing 
MR = MC 
MR = MC
Can earn economic profits in the
 short run? 
Yes 
Yes
Differences
Number of firms 
Many 
One
Marginal revenue 
MR = P 
MR < P
Price 
P = MC 
P > MC
Produces welfare-maximizing level
 of output? 
Yes 
No
Entry in long run? 
Yes 
No
Can earn economic profits in
 long run? 
No 
Yes
Price discrimination possible? 
No 
Yes
Competition versus 
Monopoly: A Summary 
Comparison
Table 2
• A monopoly is a firm that is the sole seller in its 
market. A monopoly arises when a single firm 
owns a key resource, when the government gives 
a firm the exclusive right to produce a good, or 
when a single firm can supply the entire market 
at a lower cost than many firms could.
• Because a monopoly is the sole producer in its 
market, it faces a downward-sloping demand 
curve for its product. When a monopoly increases 
production by 1 unit, it causes the price of its 
good to fall, which reduces the amount of reve-
nue earned on all units produced. As a result, a 
monopoly’s marginal revenue is always below 
the price of its good.
• Like a competitive firm, a monopoly firm maxi-
mizes profit by producing the quantity at which 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The 
monopoly then chooses the price at which that 
quantity is demanded. Unlike a competitive firm, 
a monopoly firm’s price exceeds its marginal 
reve nue, so its price exceeds marginal cost.
• 
A monopolist’s profit-maximizing level of output is 
below the level that maximizes the sum of consumer 
and producer surplus. That is, when the monopoly 
charges a price above marginal cost, some consum-
ers who value the good more than its cost of pro-
duction do not buy it. As a result, monopoly causes 
deadweight losses similar to those caused by taxes.
300
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

• A monopolist often can raise its profits by charg-
ing different prices for the same good based on 
a buyer’s willingness to pay. This practice of 
price discrimination can raise economic welfare 
by getting the good to some consumers who 
otherwise would not buy it. In the extreme case 
of perfect price discrimination, the deadweight 
loss of monopoly is completely eliminated, and 
the entire surplus in the market goes to the 
monopoly producer. More generally, when price 
discrimination is imperfect, it can either raise or 
lower welfare compared to the outcome with a 
single monopoly price.
• Policymakers can respond to the inefficiency of 
monopoly behavior in four ways. They can use 
the antitrust laws to try to make the industry more 
competitive. They can regulate the prices that the 
monopoly charges. They can turn the monopolist 
into a government-run enterprise. Or if the market 
failure is deemed small compared to the inevitable 
imperfections of policies, they can do nothing at all.
KEY CONCEPTS
monopoly, p. 276
natural monopoly, p. 278
price discrimination, p. 290
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Give an example of a government-created 
monopoly. Is creating this monopoly necessarily 
bad public policy? Explain.
 2. Define natural monopoly. What does the size of a 
market have to do with whether an industry is a 
natural monopoly?
 3. Why is a monopolist’s marginal revenue less 
than the price of its good? Can marginal 
revenue ever be negative? Explain.
 4. Draw the demand, marginal-revenue, average-
total-cost, and marginal-cost curves for a 
monopolist. Show the profit-maximizing level 
of output, the profit-maximizing price, and the 
amount of profit. 
 5. In your diagram from the previous question, 
show the level of output that maximizes total 
surplus. Show the deadweight loss from the 
monopoly. Explain your answer.
 6. Give two examples of price discrimination. In 
each case, explain why the monopolist chooses 
to follow this business strategy.
 7. What gives the government the power to regulate 
mergers between firms? From the standpoint of 
the welfare of society, give a good reason and a 
bad reason that two firms might want to merge.
 8. Describe the two problems that arise when 
regulators tell a natural monopoly that it must 
set a price equal to marginal cost.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. A publisher faces the following demand schedule 
for the next novel from one of its popular authors:
 
Price 
Quantity Demanded
 
$100 
             0 novels
 
 90 
  100,000
 
 80 
  200,000
 
 70 
  300,000
 
 60 
  400,000
 
 50 
  500,000
 
 40 
  600,000
 
 30 
  700,000
 
 20 
  800,000
 
 10 
  900,000
 
  0 
1,000,000
  The author is paid $2 million to write the book, 
and the marginal cost of publishing the book 
is a constant $10 per book.
a. Compute total revenue, total cost, and profit 
at each quantity. What quantity would a 
profit-maximizing publisher choose? What 
price would it charge?
b. Compute marginal revenue. (Recall that 
MR = ∆TR/∆Q.) How does marginal 
revenue compare to the price? Explain.
c. Graph the marginal-revenue, marginal-cost, 
and demand curves. At what quantity do the 
marginal-revenue and marginal-cost curves 
cross? What does this signify?
•
A monopolist often can raise its profits by charg-
ing different prices for the same good based on 
a buyer’s willingness to pay. This practice of 
price discrimination can raise economic welfare
by getting the good to some consumers who 
otherwise would not buy it. In the extreme case 
of perfect price discrimination, the deadweight
loss of monopoly is completely eliminated, and 
the entire surplus in the market goes to the 
monopoly producer. More generally, when price
discrimination is imperfect, it can either raise or 
lower welfare compared to the outcome with a 
single monopoly price.
•
Policymakers can respond to the inefficiency of 
monopoly behavior in four ways. They can use 
the antitrust laws to try to make the industry more 
competitive. They can regulate the prices that the 
monopoly charges. They can turn the monopolist 
into a government-run enterprise. Or if the market 
failure is deemed small compared to the inevitable 
imperfections of policies, they can do nothing at all.
KEY CONCEPTS
KEY CONCEPTS
monopoly, p. 276
natural monopoly, p. 278
price discrimination, p. 290
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Give an example of a government-created 
monopoly. Is creating this monopoly necessarily
bad public policy? Explain.
 2. Define natural monopoly. What does the size of a 
market have to do with whether an industry is a
natural monopoly?
 3. Why is a monopolist’s marginal revenue less 
than the price of its good? Can marginal
revenue ever be negative? Explain.
 4. Draw the demand, marginal-revenue, average-
total-cost, and marginal-cost curves for a
monopolist. Show the profit-maximizing level
of output, the profit-maximizing price, and the
amount of profit. 
 5. In your diagram from the previous question,
show the level of output that maximizes total
surplus. Show the deadweight loss from the 
monopoly. Explain your answer.
 6. Give two examples of price discrimination. In
each case, explain why the monopolist chooses
to follow this business strategy.
 7. What gives the government the power to regulate 
mergers between firms? From the standpoint of 
the welfare of society, give a good reason and a 
bad reason that two firms might want to merge.
 8. Describe the two problems that arise when 
regulators tell a natural monopoly that it must
set a price equal to marginal cost.
O
S 
 
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. A publisher faces the following demand schedule 
for the next novel from one of its popular authors:
 
Price 
Quantity Demanded
 
$100 
             0 novels
 
 90 
  100,000
 
 80 
  200,000
 
 70 
  300,000
 
 60 
  400,000
 
 50 
  500,000
 
 40 
  600,000
 
 30 
  700,000
 
 20 
  800,000
 
 10 
  900,000
 
  0 
1,000,000
  The author is paid $2 million to write the book, 
and the marginal cost of publishing the book
is a constant $10 per book.
a. Compute total revenue, total cost, and profit 
at each quantity. What quantity would a
profit-maximizing publisher choose? What 
price would it charge?
b. Compute marginal revenue. (Recall that
MR = ∆TR/∆Q.) How does marginal
revenue compare to the price? Explain.
c. Graph the marginal-revenue, marginal-cost,
and demand curves. At what quantity do the
marginal-revenue and marginal-cost curves 
cross? What does this signify?
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
301

d. In your graph, shade in the deadweight loss. 
Explain in words what this means.
e. If the author were paid $3 million instead of 
$2 million to write the book, how would this 
affect the publisher’s decision regarding what 
price to charge? Explain.
f. Suppose the publisher was not profit- 
maximizing but was concerned with maxi-
mizing economic efficiency. What price 
would it charge for the book? How much 
profit would it make at this price?
 2. A small town is served by many competing 
supermarkets, which have the same constant 
marginal cost. 
a. Using a diagram of the market for groceries, 
show the consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and total surplus.
b. Now suppose that the independent super-
markets combine into one chain. Using a new 
diagram, show the new consumer surplus, 
producer surplus, and total surplus. Relative 
to the competitive market, what is the transfer 
from consumers to producers? What is the 
deadweight loss?
 3. Johnny Rockabilly has just finished recording 
his latest CD. His record company’s marketing 
department determines that the demand for the 
CD is as follows:
 
Price 
Number of CDs
 
$24 
10,000
 
22 
20,000
 
20 
30,000
 
18 
40,000
 
16 
50,000
 
14 
60,000
  The company can produce the CD with no fixed 
cost and a variable cost of $5 per CD.
a. Find total revenue for quantity equal to 
10,000, 20,000, and so on. What is the 
marginal revenue for each 10,000 increase in 
the quantity sold?
b. What quantity of CDs would maximize profit? 
What would the price be? What would the 
profit be?
c. If you were Johnny’s agent, what recording 
fee would you advise Johnny to demand 
from the record company? Why?
 4. A company is considering building a bridge 
across a river. The bridge would cost $2 million 
to build and nothing to maintain. The following 
table shows the company’s anticipated demand 
over the lifetime of the bridge:
 
 
Number of Crossings, 
 
Price per Crossing 
in Thousands
 
$8 
0
 
7 
100
 
6 
200
 
5 
300
 
4 
400
 
3 
500
 
2 
600
 
1 
700
 
0 
800
a. If the company were to build the bridge, 
what would be its profit-maximizing price? 
Would that be the efficient level of output? 
Why or why not?
b. If the company is interested in maximizing 
profit, should it build the bridge? What 
would be its profit or loss?
c. If the government were to build the bridge, 
what price should it charge?
d. Should the government build the bridge? 
Explain.
 5. Larry, Curly, and Moe run the only saloon in town. 
Larry wants to sell as many drinks as possible 
without losing money. Curly wants the saloon to 
bring in as much revenue as possible. Moe wants 
to make the largest possible profits. Using a single 
diagram of the saloon’s demand curve and its cost 
curves, show the price and quantity combinations 
favored by each of the three partners. Explain.
 6. The residents of the town Ectenia all love 
economics, and the mayor proposes building an 
economics museum. The museum has a fixed 
cost of $2,400,000 and no variable costs. There 
are 100,000 town residents, and each has the 
same demand for museum visits: QD = 10 – P, 
where P is the price of admission.
a. Graph the museum’s average-total-cost curve 
and its marginal-cost curve. What kind of 
market would describe the museum?
b. The mayor proposes financing the museum 
with a lump-sum tax of $24 and then opening 
the museum free to the public. How many 
times would each person visit? Calculate 
the benefit each person would get from the 
museum, measured as consumer surplus 
minus the new tax.
c. The mayor’s anti-tax opponent says the 
museum should finance itself by charging an 
admission fee. What is the lowest price the 
museum can charge without incurring losses? 
(Hint: Find the number of visits and museum 
profits for prices of $2, $3, $4, and $5.)
302
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

d. For the break-even price you found in part 
(c), calculate each resident’s consumer surplus. 
Compared with the mayor’s plan, who is 
better off with this admission fee, and who is 
worse off? Explain.
e. What real-world considerations absent in the 
above problem might argue in favor of an 
admission fee?
 7.  For many years, AT&T was a regulated 
monopoly, providing both local and long-distance 
telephone service.
a. Explain why long-distance phone service 
was originally a natural monopoly.
b. Over the past two decades, many companies 
have launched communication satellites, each 
of which can transmit a limited number of 
calls. How did the growing role of satellites 
change the cost structure of long-distance 
phone service?
  After a lengthy legal battle with the government, 
AT&T agreed to compete with other companies 
in the long-distance market. It also agreed to 
spin off its local phone service into the “Baby 
Bells,” which remain highly regulated.
c. Why might it be efficient to have competition 
in long-distance phone service and regulated 
monopolies in local phone service?
 8. Consider the relationship between monopoly 
pricing and price elasticity of demand:
a. Explain why a monopolist will never produce 
a quantity at which the demand curve is 
inelastic. (Hint: If demand is inelastic and the 
firm raises its price, what happens to total 
revenue and total costs?) 
b. Draw a diagram for a monopolist, precisely 
labeling the portion of the demand curve that 
is inelastic. (Hint: The answer is related to the 
marginal-revenue curve.)
c. On your diagram, show the quantity and 
price that maximizes total revenue.
 9. If the government wanted to encourage a monopoly 
to produce the socially efficient quantity, should 
it use a per-unit tax or a per-unit subsidy? Explain 
how this tax or subsidy would achieve the socially 
efficient level of output. Among the various inter-
ested parties—the monopoly firm, the monopoly’s 
consumers, and other taxpayers—who would 
support the policy and who would oppose it?
 10. You live in a town with 300 adults and 200 
children, and you are thinking about putting 
on a play to entertain your neighbors and make 
some money. A play has a fixed cost of $2,000, 
but selling an extra ticket has zero marginal 
cost. Here are the demand schedules for your 
two types of customer:
 
Price 
Adults 
Children
 
$10 
0 
0
 
9 
100 
0
 
8 
200 
0
 
7 
300 
0
 
6 
300 
0
 
5 
300 
100
 
4 
300 
200
 
3 
300 
200
 
2 
300 
200
 
1 
300 
200
 
0 
300 
200
a. To maximize profit, what price would you 
charge for an adult ticket? For a child’s 
ticket? How much profit do you make?
b. The city council passes a law prohibiting you 
from charging different prices to different 
customers. What price do you set for a ticket 
now? How much profit do you make? 
c. Who is worse off because of the law prohib-
iting price discrimination? Who is better off? 
(If you can, quantify the changes in welfare.)
d. If the fixed cost of the play were $2,500 rather 
than $2,000, how would your answers to 
parts (a), (b), and (c) change?
 11. Only one firm produces and sells soccer balls in 
the country of Wiknam, and as the story begins, 
international trade in soccer balls is prohibited. 
The following equations describe the monopolist’s 
demand, marginal revenue, total cost, and 
marginal cost:
 
Demand: P = 10 – Q
Marginal Revenue: MR = 10 – 2Q
 
Total Cost: TC = 3 + Q + 0.5Q2
 
 Marginal Cost: MC = 1 + Q
  where Q is quantity and P is the price measured 
in Wiknamian dollars. 
a. How many soccer balls does the monopolist 
produce? At what price are they sold? What 
is the monopolist’s profit?
b. One day, the King of Wiknam decrees that 
henceforth there will be free trade—either 
imports or exports— of soccer balls at the 
world price of $6. The firm is now a price 
taker in a competitive market. What happens 
to domestic production of soccer balls? To 
domestic consumption? Does Wiknam export 
or import soccer balls?
CHAPTER 14    MONOPOLY
303

c. In our analysis of international trade in 
Chapter 9, a country becomes an exporter 
when the price without trade is below the 
world price and an importer when the price 
without trade is above the world price. Does 
that conclusion hold in your answers to parts 
(a) and (b)? Explain.
d. Suppose that the world price was not $6 but, 
instead, happened to be exactly the same 
as the domestic price without trade as 
determined in part (a). Would allowing trade 
have changed anything in the Wiknamian 
economy? Explain. How does the result here 
compare with the analysis in Chapter 9?
 12. Based on market research, a film production 
company in Ectenia obtains the following 
information about the demand and production 
costs of its new DVD: 
 
Demand: P = 1,000 – 10Q
Total Revenue: TR = 1,000Q – 10Q2
 Marginal Revenue: MR = 1,000 – 20Q 
 
Marginal Cost: MC = 100 + 10Q 
where Q indicates the number of copies sold 
and P is the price in Ectenian dollars.
a. Find the price and quantity that maximizes 
the company’s profit.
b. Find the price and quantity that would 
maximize social welfare.
c. Calculate the deadweight loss from monopoly.
d. Suppose, in addition to the costs above, the 
director of the film has to be paid. The 
company is considering four options:
  i. 
A flat fee of 2,000 Ectenian dollars 
  ii. 50 percent of the profits
  iii. 150 Ectenian dollars per unit sold 
  iv. 50 percent of the revenue
  For each option, calculate the profit-
maximizing price and quantity. Which, if any, 
of these compensation schemes would alter 
the deadweight loss from monopoly? Explain.
 13. Many schemes for price discriminating involve 
some cost. For example, discount coupons take up 
the time and resources of both the buyer and the 
seller. This question considers the implications of 
costly price discrimination. To keep things simple, 
let’s assume that our monopolist’s production 
costs are simply proportional to output so that 
average total cost and marginal cost are constant 
and equal to each other.
a. Draw the cost, demand, and marginal-
revenue curves for the monopolist. Show the 
price the monopolist would charge without 
price discrimination. 
b. In your diagram, mark the area equal to the 
monopolist’s profit and call it X. Mark the 
area equal to consumer surplus and call it Y. 
Mark the area equal to the deadweight loss 
and call it Z.
c. Now suppose that the monopolist can 
perfectly price discriminate. What is the 
monopolist’s profit? (Give your answer in 
terms of X, Y, and Z.)
d. What is the change in the monopolist’s profit 
from price discrimination? What is the change 
in total surplus from price discrimination? 
Which change is larger? Explain. (Give your 
answer in terms of X, Y, and Z.)
e. Now suppose that there is some cost of 
price discrimination. To model this cost, let’s 
assume that the monopolist has to pay a fixed 
cost C to price discriminate. How would a 
monopolist make the decision whether to pay 
this fixed cost? (Give your answer in terms of 
X, Y, Z, and C.)
f. How would a benevolent social planner, who 
cares about total surplus, decide whether the 
monopolist should price discriminate? (Give 
your answer in terms of X, Y, Z, and C.)
g. Compare your answers to parts (e) and 
(f). How does the monopolist’s incentive 
to price discriminate differ from the social 
planner’s? Is it possible that the monopolist 
will price discriminate even though it is not 
socially desirable?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
304
PART V 
FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY

VI
PART
Th e Data of 
Macroeconomics


Measuring a 
    Nation’s Income 
W
hen you finish school and start looking for a full-time job, your 
experience will, to a large extent, be shaped by prevailing eco-
nomic conditions. In some years, firms throughout the economy 
are expanding their production of goods and services, employment 
is rising, and jobs are easy to find. In other years, firms are cutting back produc-
tion, employment is declining, and finding a good job takes a long time. Not 
surprisingly, any college graduate would rather enter the labor force in a year of 
economic expansion than in a year of economic contraction.
Because the health of the overall economy profoundly affects all of us, changes 
in economic conditions are widely reported by the media. Indeed, it is hard to 
pick up a newspaper, check an online news service, or turn on the TV without 
seeing some newly reported statistic about the economy. The statistic might 
measure the total income of everyone in the economy (gross domestic product, or 
GDP), the rate at which average prices are rising or falling (inflation/deflation), the 
307
15

percentage of the labor force that is out of work (unemployment), total spending 
at stores (retail sales), or the imbalance of trade between the United States and the 
rest of the world (the trade deficit). All these statistics are macroeconomic. Rather 
than telling us about a particular household, firm, or market, they tell us some-
thing about the entire economy. 
As you may recall from Chapter 2, economics is divided into two branches: 
microeconomics and macroeconomics. Microeconomics is the study of how 
individual households and firms make decisions and how they interact with one 
another in markets. Macroeconomics is the study of the economy as a whole. 
The goal of macroeconomics is to explain the economic changes that affect many 
households, firms, and markets simultaneously. Macroeconomists address 
diverse questions: Why is average income high in some countries while it is low 
in others? Why do prices sometimes rise rapidly while at other times they are 
more stable? Why do production and employment expand in some years and 
contract in others? What, if anything, can the government do to promote rapid 
growth in incomes, low inflation, and stable employment? These questions are 
all macroeconomic in nature because they concern the workings of the entire 
economy.
Because the economy as a whole is a collection of many households and many 
firms interacting in many markets, microeconomics and macroeconomics are 
closely linked. The basic tools of supply and demand, for instance, are as central 
to macroeconomic analysis as they are to microeconomic analysis. Yet studying 
the economy in its entirety raises some new and intriguing challenges.
In this and the next chapter, we discuss some of the data that economists and 
policymakers use to monitor the performance of the overall economy. These data 
reflect the economic changes that macroeconomists try to explain. This chapter 
considers gross domestic product, which measures the total income of a nation. GDP 
is the most closely watched economic statistic because it is thought to be the best 
single measure of a society’s economic well-being.
The Economy’s Income and Expenditure
If you were to judge how a person is doing economically, you might first look at 
his or her income. A person with a high income can more easily afford life’s neces-
sities and luxuries. It is no surprise that people with higher incomes enjoy higher 
standards of living—better housing, better healthcare, fancier cars, more opulent 
vacations, and so on. 
The same logic applies to a nation’s overall economy. When judging whether 
the economy is doing well or poorly, it is natural to look at the total income that 
everyone in the economy is earning. That is the task of gross domestic product.
GDP measures two things at once: the total income of everyone in the economy 
and the total expenditure on the economy’s output of goods and services. GDP 
can perform the trick of measuring both total income and total expenditure 
because these two things are really the same. For an economy as a whole, income 
must equal expenditure.
Why is this true? An economy’s income is the same as its expenditure because 
every transaction has two parties: a buyer and a seller. Every dollar of spending by 
some buyer is a dollar of income for some seller. Suppose, for instance, that Karen 
pays Doug $100 to mow her lawn. In this case, Doug is a seller of a service, and 
Karen is a buyer. Doug earns $100, and Karen spends $100. Thus, the transaction 
microeconomics
the study of how 
households and firms 
make decisions and how 
they interact in markets
macroeconomics
the study of economy-
wide phenomena, 
including inflation, 
unemployment, and 
economic growth
308
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

contributes equally to the economy’s income and to its expenditure. GDP, whether 
measured as total income or total expenditure, rises by $100.
Another way to see the equality of income and expenditure is with the 
circular-flow diagram in Figure 1. As you may recall from Chapter 2, this dia-
gram describes all the transactions between households and firms in a simple 
economy. It simplifies matters by assuming that all goods and services are 
bought by households and that households spend all of their income. In this 
economy, when households buy goods and services from firms, these expendi-
tures flow through the markets for goods and services. When the firms in turn 
use the money they receive from sales to pay workers’ wages, landowners’ rent, 
and firm owners’ profit, this income flows through the markets for the factors of 
production. Money continuously flows from households to firms and then back 
to households.
GDP measures this flow of money. We can compute it for this economy in one 
of two ways: by adding up the total expenditure by households or by adding up 
the total income (wages, rent, and profit) paid by firms. Because all expenditure 
in the economy ends up as someone’s income, GDP is the same regardless of how 
we compute it.
The actual economy is, of course, more complicated than the one illustrated in 
Figure 1. Households do not spend all of their income; they pay some of it to the 
government in taxes, and they save some for use in the future. In addition, house-
holds do not buy all goods and services produced in the economy; some goods 
and services are bought by governments, and some are bought by firms that 
The Circular-Flow Diagram
Households buy goods and 
services from firms, and 
firms use their revenue 
from sales to pay wages 
to workers, rent to 
landowners, and profit to 
firm owners. GDP equals 
the total amount spent by 
households in the market 
for goods and services. It 
also equals the total wages, 
rent, and profit paid by 
firms in the markets for the 
factors of production.
Figure1
Spending
(= GDP)
Goods and
services
bought
Revenue
(= GDP)
Goods
and services
sold
Labor, land,
and capital
Income (= GDP)
 Flow of inputs
 
and outputs
 Flow of dollars
Factors of
production
Wages, rent,
and proﬁt
(= GDP)
FIRMS
HOUSEHOLDS
MARKETS FOR
FACTORS OF
PRODUCTION
MARKETS FOR
GOODS AND
SERVICES
309
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

plan to use them in the future to produce their own output. Yet the basic lesson 
remains the same: Regardless of whether a household, government, or firm buys 
a good or service, the transaction has a buyer and seller. Thus, for the economy as 
a whole, expenditure and income are always the same. 
Quick Quiz What two things does gross domestic product measure? How can it 
measure two things at once?
The Measurement of Gross Domestic Product
Having discussed the meaning of gross domestic product in general terms, let’s 
be more precise about how this statistic is measured. Here is a definition of GDP 
that focuses on GDP as a measure of total expenditure: 
•  Gross domestic product (GDP) is the market value of all final goods and 
services produced within a country in a given period of time.
This definition might seem simple enough. But in fact, many subtle issues arise 
when computing an economy’s GDP. Let’s therefore consider each phrase in this 
definition with some care.
“GDP Is the Market Value . . .”
You have probably heard the adage, “You can’t compare apples and oranges.” Yet 
GDP does exactly that. GDP adds together many different kinds of products into a 
single measure of the value of economic activity. To do this, it uses market prices. 
Because market prices measure the amount people are willing to pay for different 
goods, they reflect the value of those goods. If the price of an apple is twice the 
price of an orange, then an apple contributes twice as much to GDP as does an 
orange. 
“. . . of All . . .”
GDP tries to be comprehensive. It includes all items produced in the economy and 
sold legally in markets. GDP measures the market value of not just apples and 
oranges but also pears and grapefruit, books and movies, haircuts and healthcare, 
and on and on. 
GDP also includes the market value of the housing services provided by the 
economy’s stock of housing. For rental housing, this value is easy to calculate—
the rent equals both the tenant’s expenditure and the landlord’s income. Yet many 
people own the place where they live and, therefore, do not pay rent. The govern-
ment includes this owner-occupied housing in GDP by estimating its rental value. 
In effect, GDP is based on the assumption that the owner is renting the house to 
himself. The imputed rent is included both in the homeowner’s expenditure and 
in his income, so it adds to GDP.
There are some products, however, that GDP excludes because measuring 
them is so difficult. GDP excludes most items produced and sold illicitly, such 
as illegal drugs. It also excludes most items that are produced and consumed at 
home and, therefore, never enter the marketplace. Vegetables you buy at the gro-
cery store are part of GDP; vegetables you grow in your garden are not.
These exclusions from GDP can at times lead to paradoxical results. For exam-
ple, when Karen pays Doug to mow her lawn, that transaction is part of GDP. If 
gross domestic 
product (GDP)
the market value of all 
final goods and services 
produced within a country 
in a given period of time
310
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

Karen were to marry Doug, the situation would change. Even though Doug may 
continue to mow Karen’s lawn, the value of the mowing is now left out of GDP 
because Doug’s service is no longer sold in a market. Thus, when Karen and Doug 
marry, GDP falls.
“. . . Final . . .”
When International Paper makes paper, which Hallmark then uses to make a 
greeting card, the paper is called an intermediate good, and the card is called a final 
good. GDP includes only the value of final goods. This is done because the value 
of intermediate goods is already included in the prices of the final goods. Adding 
the market value of the paper to the market value of the card would be double 
counting. That is, it would (incorrectly) count the paper twice. 
An important exception to this principle arises when an intermediate good is 
produced and, rather than being used, is added to a firm’s inventory of goods for 
use or sale at a later date. In this case, the intermediate good is taken to be “final” 
for the moment, and its value as inventory investment is included as part of GDP. 
Thus, additions to inventory add to GDP, and when the goods in inventory are 
later used or sold, the reductions in inventory subtract from GDP. 
“. . . Goods and Services . . .”
GDP includes both tangible goods (food, clothing, cars) and intangible services 
(haircuts, housecleaning, doctor visits). When you buy a CD by your favorite 
band, you are buying a good, and the purchase price is part of GDP. When you 
pay to hear a concert by the same band, you are buying a service, and the ticket 
price is also part of GDP.
“. . . Produced . . .”
GDP includes goods and services currently produced. It does not include transac-
tions involving items produced in the past. When Ford produces and sells a new 
car, the value of the car is included in GDP. When one person sells a used car to 
another person, the value of the used car is not included in GDP.
“. . . Within a Country . . .”
GDP measures the value of production within the geographic confines of a coun-
try. When a Canadian citizen works temporarily in the United States, her produc-
tion is part of U.S. GDP. When an American citizen owns a factory in Haiti, the 
production at his factory is not part of U.S. GDP. (It is part of Haiti’s GDP.) Thus, 
items are included in a nation’s GDP if they are produced domestically, regardless 
of the nationality of the producer.
“. . . In a Given Period of Time.”
GDP measures the value of production that takes place within a specific interval 
of time. Usually, that interval is a year or a quarter (three months). GDP measures 
the economy’s flow of income and expenditure during that interval.
When the government reports the GDP for a quarter, it usually presents GDP 
“at an annual rate.” This means that the figure reported for quarterly GDP is the 
amount of income and expenditure during the quarter multiplied by 4. The gov-
ernment uses this convention so that quarterly and annual figures on GDP can be 
compared more easily.
311
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

In addition, when the government reports quarterly GDP, it presents the data 
after they have been modified by a statistical procedure called seasonal adjust-
ment. The unadjusted data show clearly that the economy produces more goods 
and services during some times of year than during others. (As you might guess, 
December’s holiday shopping season is a high point.) When monitoring the con-
dition of the economy, economists and policymakers often want to look beyond 
these regular seasonal changes. Therefore, government statisticians adjust the 
quarterly data to take out the seasonal cycle. The GDP data reported in the news 
are always seasonally adjusted. 
Now let’s repeat the definition of GDP:
•  Gross domestic product (GDP) is the market value of all final goods and 
services produced within a country in a given period of time.
This definition focuses on GDP as total expenditure in the economy. But don’t 
forget that every dollar spent by a buyer of a good or service becomes a dollar 
of income to the seller of that good or service. Therefore, in addition to applying 
this definition, the government adds up total income in the economy. The two 
ways of calculating GDP give almost exactly the same answer. (Why “almost”? 
Although the two measures should be precisely the same, data sources are not 
perfect. The difference between the two calculations of GDP is called the statistical 
discrepancy.) 
It should be apparent that GDP is a sophisticated measure of the value of 
economic activity. In advanced courses in macroeconomics, you will learn more 
about the subtleties that arise in its calculation. But even now you can see that 
each phrase in this definition is packed with meaning. 
QUICK QUIZ Which contributes more to GDP—the production of a pound of 
hamburger or the production of a pound of caviar? Why?
The Components of GDP
Spending in the economy takes many forms. At any moment, the Smith family 
may be having lunch at Burger King; Ford may be building a car factory; the Navy 
may be procuring a submarine; and British Airways may be buying an airplane 
from Boeing. GDP includes all of these various forms of spending on domestically 
produced goods and services.
To understand how the economy is using its scarce resources, economists 
study the composition of GDP among various types of spending. To do this, GDP 
(which we denote as Y) is divided into four components: consumption (C), invest-
ment (I), government purchases (G), and net exports (NX):
Y = C + I + G + NX.
This equation is an identity—an equation that must be true because of how the 
variables in the equation are defined. In this case, because each dollar of expendi-
ture included in GDP is placed into one of the four components of GDP, the total 
of the four components must be equal to GDP. Let’s look at each of these four 
components more closely.
312
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

FYI
 Other Measures of Income
W
hen the U.S. Department of Commerce computes the nation’s 
GDP every three months, it also computes various other 
measures of income to get a more complete picture of what’s hap-
pening in the economy. These other measures differ from GDP by 
excluding or including certain categories of income. What follows is 
a brief description of five of these income measures, ordered from 
largest to smallest.
• 
Gross national product (GNP) is the total income earned by a 
nation’s permanent residents (called nationals). It differs from 
GDP by including income that our citizens earn abroad and 
excluding income that foreigners earn here. For example, when 
a Canadian citizen works temporarily in the United States, her 
production is part of U.S. GDP, but it is not part of U.S. GNP. (It is 
part of Canada’s GNP.) For most countries, including the United 
States, domestic residents are responsible for most domestic 
production, so GDP and GNP are quite close.
• 
Net national product (NNP) is the total income of a nation’s resi-
dents (GNP) minus losses from depreciation. Depreciation is the 
wear and tear on the economy’s stock of equipment and struc-
tures, such as trucks rusting and computers becoming obsolete. 
In the national income accounts prepared by the Department 
of Commerce, depreciation is called the “consumption of fixed 
capital.”
• 
National income is the total income earned by a nation’s residents 
in the production of goods and services. It is almost  identical 
to net national product. These two measures differ because 
of the statistical discrepancy that arises from problems in data 
collection.
• 
Personal income is the income that households and noncorporate 
businesses receive. Unlike national income, it excludes retained 
earnings, which is income that corporations have earned but 
have not paid out to their owners. It also subtracts indirect busi-
ness taxes (such as sales taxes), corporate income taxes, and 
contributions for social insurance (mostly Social Security taxes). 
In addition, personal income includes the interest income that 
households receive from their holdings of government debt and 
the income that households receive from government transfer 
programs, such as welfare and Social Security.
• 
Disposable personal income is the income that households 
and noncorporate businesses have left after satisfying all their 
obligations to the government. It equals personal income minus 
personal taxes and certain nontax payments (such as traffic 
tickets).
Although the various measures of income differ in detail, they 
almost always tell the same story about economic conditions. 
When GDP is growing rapidly, these other measures of income 
are usually growing rapidly. And when GDP is falling, these other 
measures are usually falling as well. For monitoring fluctuations in 
the overall economy, it does not matter much which measure of 
income we use.
Consumption
Consumption is spending by households on goods and services, with the excep-
tion of purchases of new housing. Goods include household spending on durable 
goods, such as automobiles and appliances, and nondurable goods, such as food 
and clothing. Services include such intangible items as haircuts and medical care. 
Household spending on education is also included in consumption of services 
(although one might argue that it would fit better in the next component). 
Investment
Investment is the purchase of goods that will be used in the future to produce more 
goods and services. It is the sum of purchases of capital equipment, inventories, 
consumption
spending by households 
on goods and services, 
with the exception of 
purchases of new housing
investment
spending on capital 
equipment, inventories, 
and structures, including 
household purchases of 
new housing
313
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

and structures. Investment in structures includes expenditure on new housing. By 
convention, the purchase of a new house is the one form of household spending 
categorized as investment rather than consumption.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the treatment of inventory accumula-
tion is noteworthy. When Dell produces a computer and adds it to its inventory 
instead of selling it, Dell is assumed to have “purchased” the computer for itself. 
That is, the national income accountants treat the computer as part of Dell’s 
investment spending. (If Dell later sells the computer out of inventory, Dell’s 
inventory investment will then be negative, offsetting the positive expenditure of 
the buyer.) Inventories are treated this way because one aim of GDP is to measure 
the value of the economy’s production, and goods added to inventory are part of 
that period’s production.
Notice that GDP accounting uses the word investment differently from how 
you might hear the term in everyday conversation. When you hear the word 
investment, you might think of financial investments, such as stocks, bonds, and 
mutual funds—topics that we study later in this book. By contrast, because GDP 
measures expenditure on goods and services, here the word investment means 
purchases of goods (such as capital equipment, structures, and inventories) used 
to produce other goods. 
Government Purchases
Government purchases include spending on goods and services by local, state, 
and federal governments. It includes the salaries of government workers as well 
as expenditures on public works. Recently, the U.S. national income accounts 
have switched to the longer label government consumption expenditure and gross 
investment, but in this book, we will use the traditional and shorter term govern-
ment purchases.
The meaning of government purchases requires a bit of clarification. When the 
government pays the salary of an Army general or a schoolteacher, that salary is 
part of government purchases. But when the government pays a Social Security 
benefit to a person who is elderly or an unemployment insurance benefit to a 
worker who was recently laid off, the story is very different: These are called 
transfer payments because they are not made in exchange for a currently produced 
good or service. Transfer payments alter household income, but they do not 
reflect the economy’s production. (From a macroeconomic standpoint, transfer 
payments are like negative taxes.) Because GDP is intended to measure income 
from, and expenditure on, the production of goods and services, transfer pay-
ments are not counted as part of government purchases.
Net Exports
Net exports equal the foreign purchases of domestically produced goods 
(exports) minus the domestic purchases of foreign goods (imports). A domestic 
firm’s sale to a buyer in another country, such as Boeing’s sale of an airplane to 
British Airways, increases net exports.
The net in net exports refers to the fact that imports are subtracted from exports. 
This subtraction is made because other components of GDP include imports of 
goods and services. For example, suppose that a household buys a $30,000 car 
from Volvo, the Swedish carmaker. That transaction increases consumption by 
$30,000 because car purchases are part of consumer spending. It also reduces 
net exports by $30,000 because the car is an import. In other words, net exports 
government 
purchases
spending on goods and 
services by local, state, 
and federal governments
net exports
spending on domesti-
cally produced goods by 
foreigners (exports) minus 
spending on foreign 
goods by domestic 
residents (imports)
314
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

include goods and services produced abroad (with a minus sign) because these 
goods and services are included in consumption, investment, and government 
purchases (with a plus sign). Thus, when a domestic household, firm, or govern-
ment buys a good or service from abroad, the purchase reduces net exports, but 
because it also raises consumption, investment, or government purchases, it does 
not affect GDP.
The Components of U.S. GDP
Table 1 shows the composition of U.S. GDP in 2009. In this year, the GDP of the 
United States was over $14 trillion. Dividing this number by the 2009 U.S. popula-
tion of 307 million yields GDP per person (sometimes called GDP per capita). In 
2009 the income and expenditure of the average American was $46,372.
 
Consumption made up 71 percent of GDP, or $32,823 per person. Investment 
was $5,278 per person. Government purchases were $9,540 per person. Net 
exports were –$1,269 per person. This number is negative because Americans 
spent more on foreign goods than foreigners spent on American goods.
 
These data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the part of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce that produces the national income accounts. You can 
find more recent data on GDP at its website, ht tp://www.bea.gov.  ■
QUICK QUIZ List the four components of expenditure. Which is the largest?
Real versus Nominal GDP
As we have seen, GDP measures the total spending on goods and services in all 
markets in the economy. If total spending rises from one year to the next, at least 
one of two things must be true: (1) the economy is producing a larger output 
of goods and services, or (2) goods and services are being sold at higher prices. 
When studying changes in the economy over time, economists want to separate 
these two effects. In particular, they want a measure of the total quantity of goods 
and services the economy is producing that is not affected by changes in the prices 
of those goods and services. 
GDP and Its 
Components
This table shows total GDP for 
the U.S. economy in 2009 and 
the breakdown of GDP among its 
four components. When reading 
this table, recall the identity 
Y = C + I + G + NX.
Table 1
Total
(in billions of dollars)
Per Person
(in dollars)
Percent 
of Total
Gross domestic product, Y
$14,259
$46,372
100% 
Consumption, C
10,093
32,823
71
Investment, I
1,623
5,278
11
Government purchases, G
2,933
9,540
21
Net exports, NX
–390
–1,269
–3
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce. Parts may not sum to totals due to rounding.
315
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

To do this, economists use a measure called real GDP. Real GDP answers a 
hypothetical question: What would be the value of the goods and services pro-
duced this year if we valued these goods and services at the prices that prevailed 
in some specific year in the past? By evaluating current production using prices 
that are fixed at past levels, real GDP shows how the economy’s overall produc-
tion of goods and services changes over time.
To see more precisely how real GDP is constructed, let’s consider an example.
A Numerical Example
Table 2 shows some data for an economy that produces only two goods: hot dogs 
and hamburgers. The table shows the prices and quantities produced of the two 
goods in the years 2010, 2011, and 2012.
To compute total spending in this economy, we would multiply the quantities 
of hot dogs and hamburgers by their prices. In the year 2010, 100 hot dogs are sold 
at a price of $1 per hot dog, so expenditure on hot dogs equals $100. In the same 
year, 50 hamburgers are sold for $2 per hamburger, so expenditure on hamburg-
ers also equals $100. Total expenditure in the economy—the sum of expenditure 
on hot dogs and expenditure on hamburgers—is $200. This amount, the produc-
tion of goods and services valued at current prices, is called nominal GDP.
The table shows the calculation of nominal GDP for these three years. Total 
spending rises from $200 in 2010 to $600 in 2011 and then to $1,200 in 2012. 
Part of this rise is attributable to the increase in the quantities of hot dogs and 
hamburgers, and part is attributable to the increase in the prices of hot dogs and 
hamburgers.
nominal GDP
the production of goods 
and services valued at 
current prices
Prices and Quantities
 
Price of 
Quantity of 
Price of 
Quantity of
Year 
Hot Dogs 
Hot Dogs 
Hamburgers 
Hamburgers
2010 
$1 
100 
$2 
  50
2011 
$2 
150 
$3 
100
2012 
$3 
200 
$4 
150
Calculating Nominal GDP
2010 
($1 per hot dog × 100 hot dogs) + ($2 per hamburger × 50 hamburgers) = $200
2011 
($2 per hot dog × 150 hot dogs) + ($3 per hamburger × 100 hamburgers) = $600
2012 
($3 per hot dog × 200 hot dogs) + ($4 per hamburger × 150 hamburgers) = $1,200
Calculating Real GDP (base year 2010)
2010 
($1 per hot dog × 100 hot dogs) + ($2 per hamburger × 50 hamburgers) = $200
2011 
($1 per hot dog × 150 hot dogs) + ($2 per hamburger × 100 hamburgers) = $350
2012 
($1 per hot dog × 200 hot dogs) + ($2 per hamburger × 150 hamburgers) = $500
Calculating the GDP Deflator
2010 
($200 / $200) × 100 = 100
2011 
($600 / $350) × 100 = 171
2012 
($1,200 / $500) × 100 = 240
Real and Nominal GDP
This table shows how to calculate 
real GDP, nominal GDP, and the GDP 
deflator for a hypothetical economy 
that produces only hot dogs and 
hamburgers.
Table 2
316
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

To obtain a measure of the amount produced that is not affected by changes in 
prices, we use real GDP, which is the production of goods and services valued at 
constant prices. We calculate real GDP by first designating one year as a base year. 
We then use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in the base year to compute 
the value of goods and services in all the years. In other words, the prices in the 
base year provide the basis for comparing quantities in different years.
Suppose that we choose 2010 to be the base year in our example. We can then 
use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in 2010 to compute the value of goods 
and services produced in 2010, 2011, and 2012. Table 2 shows these calculations. 
To compute real GDP for 2010, we use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers 
in 2010 (the base year) and the quantities of hot dogs and hamburgers produced 
in 2010. (Thus, for the base year, real GDP always equals nominal GDP.) To 
compute real GDP for 2011, we use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in 
2010 (the base year) and the quantities of hot dogs and hamburgers produced in 
2011. Similarly, to compute real GDP for 2012, we use the prices in 2010 and the 
quantities in 2012. When we find that real GDP has risen from $200 in 2010 to 
$350 in 2011 and then to $500 in 2012, we know that the increase is attributable 
to an increase in the quantities produced because the prices are being held fixed 
at base-year levels.
To sum up: Nominal GDP uses current prices to place a value on the economy’s pro-
duction of goods and services. Real GDP uses constant base-year prices to place a value 
on the economy’s production of goods and services. Because real GDP is not affected by 
changes in prices, changes in real GDP reflect only changes in the amounts being 
produced. Thus, real GDP is a measure of the economy’s production of goods and 
services. 
Our goal in computing GDP is to gauge how well the overall economy is per-
forming. Because real GDP measures the economy’s production of goods and 
services, it reflects the economy’s ability to satisfy people’s needs and desires. 
Thus, real GDP is a better gauge of economic well-being than is nominal GDP. 
When economists talk about the economy’s GDP, they usually mean real GDP 
rather than nominal GDP. And when they talk about growth in the economy, 
they measure that growth as the percentage change in real GDP from one period 
to another.
The GDP Deflator
As we have just seen, nominal GDP reflects both the quantities of goods and 
services the economy is producing and the prices of those goods and services. By 
contrast, by holding prices constant at base-year levels, real GDP reflects only the 
quantities produced. From these two statistics, we can compute a third, called the 
GDP deflator, which reflects only the prices of goods and services.
The GDP deflator is calculated as follows:
GDP deflator = Nominal GDP × 100.
Real GDP
Because nominal GDP and real GDP must be the same in the base year, the GDP 
deflator for the base year always equals 100. The GDP deflator for subsequent 
years measures the change in nominal GDP from the base year that cannot be 
attributable to a change in real GDP.
The GDP deflator measures the current level of prices relative to the level 
of prices in the base year. To see why this is true, consider a couple of simple 
real GDP
the production of goods 
and services valued at 
constant prices
GDP deflator
a measure of the price 
level calculated as the 
ratio of nominal GDP to 
real GDP times 100
317
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

examples. First, imagine that the quantities produced in the economy rise over 
time but prices remain the same. In this case, both nominal and real GDP rise 
together, so the GDP deflator is constant. Now suppose, instead, that prices rise 
over time but the quantities produced stay the same. In this second case, nomi-
nal GDP rises but real GDP remains the same, so the GDP deflator rises as well. 
Notice that, in both cases, the GDP deflator reflects what’s happening to prices, 
not quantities. 
Let’s now return to our numerical example in Table 2. The GDP deflator is 
computed at the bottom of the table. For year 2010, nominal GDP is $200, and real 
GDP is $200, so the GDP deflator is 100. (The deflator is always 100 in the base 
year.) For the year 2011, nominal GDP is $600, and real GDP is $350, so the GDP 
deflator is 171. 
Economists use the term inflation to describe a situation in which the economy’s 
overall price level is rising. The inflation rate is the percentage change in some 
measure of the price level from one period to the next. Using the GDP deflator, the 
inflation rate between two consecutive years is computed as follows:
Inflation rate in year 2 = GDP deflator in year 2 – GDP deflator in year 1 × 100.
GDP deflator in year 1
Because the GDP deflator rose in year 2011 from 100 to 171, the inflation rate 
is 100 × (171 – 100)/100, or 71 percent. In 2012, the GDP deflator rose to 240 
from 171 the previous year, so the inflation rate is 100 × (240 – 171)/171, or 
40 percent. 
The GDP deflator is one measure that economists use to monitor the average 
level of prices in the economy and thus the rate of inflation. The GDP deflator 
gets its name because it can be used to take inflation out of nominal GDP—that 
is, to “deflate” nominal GDP for the rise that is due to increases in prices. We 
examine another measure of the economy’s price level, called the consumer price 
index, in the next chapter, where we also describe the differences between the 
two measures.
Real GDP over Recent History
Now that we know how real GDP is defined and measured, let’s look at what 
this macroeconomic variable tells us about the recent history of the United States. 
Figure 2 shows quarterly data on real GDP for the U.S. economy since 1965. 
 
The most obvious feature of these data is that real GDP grows over time. The 
real GDP of the U.S. economy in 2009 was almost four times its 1965 level. Put 
differently, the output of goods and services produced in the United States has 
grown on average about 3 percent per year. This continued growth in real GDP 
enables the typical American to enjoy greater economic prosperity than his or her 
parents and grandparents did.
 
A second feature of the GDP data is that growth is not steady. The upward 
climb of real GDP is occasionally interrupted by periods during which GDP 
declines, called recessions. Figure 2 marks recessions with shaded vertical bars. 
(There is no ironclad rule for when the official business cycle dating committee 
will declare that a recession has occurred, but an old rule of thumb is two consecu-
tive quarters of falling real GDP.) Recessions are associated not only with lower 
318
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

incomes but also with other forms of economic distress: rising unemployment, 
falling profits, increased bankruptcies, and so on.
 
Much of macroeconomics is aimed at explaining the long-run growth and 
short-run fluctuations in real GDP. As we will see in the coming chapters, we 
need different models for these two purposes. Because the short-run fluctuations 
represent deviations from the long-run trend, we first examine the behavior of 
key macroeconomic variables, including real GDP, in the long run. Then in later 
chapters, we build on this analysis to explain short-run fluctuations.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Define real GDP and nominal GDP. Which is a better measure of 
economic well-being? Why?
Is GDP a Good Measure of Economic Well-Being?
Earlier in this chapter, GDP was called the best single measure of the economic 
well-being of a society. Now that we know what GDP is, we can evaluate this claim.
As we have seen, GDP measures both the economy’s total income and the econ-
omy’s total expenditure on goods and services. Thus, GDP per person tells us the 
income and expenditure of the average person in the economy. Because most people 
would prefer to receive higher income and enjoy higher expenditure, GDP per per-
son seems a natural measure of the economic well-being of the average individual. 
Yet some people dispute the validity of GDP as a measure of well-being. When 
Senator Robert Kennedy was running for president in 1968, he gave a moving 
critique of such economic measures:
[Gross domestic product] does not allow for the health of our children, the 
quality of their education, or the joy of their play. It does not include the beauty 
Real GDP in the United 
States
This figure shows quarterly 
data on real GDP for the 
U.S. economy since 1965. 
Recessions—periods of 
falling real GDP—are 
marked with the shaded 
vertical bars.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Figure2
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Year
Billions of
2005 dollars
Real GDP
319
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

of our poetry or the strength of our marriages, the intelligence of our public 
debate or the integrity of our public officials. It measures neither our courage, 
nor our wisdom, nor our devotion to our country. It measures everything, in 
short, except that which makes life worthwhile, and it can tell us everything 
about America except why we are proud that we are Americans.
Much of what Robert Kennedy said is correct. Why, then, do we care about GDP?
The answer is that a large GDP does in fact help us to lead a good life. GDP 
does not measure the health of our children, but nations with larger GDP can 
afford better healthcare for their children. GDP does not measure the quality 
of their education, but nations with larger GDP can afford better educational 
systems. GDP does not measure the beauty of our poetry, but nations with 
larger GDP can afford to teach more of their citizens to read and enjoy poetry. 
GDP does not take account of our intelligence, integrity, courage, wisdom, 
Searching for the 
Hidden Economy
BY DOUG CAMPBELL
H
ere is the brief, unremarkable story of 
how I recently came to participate in the 
underground economy:
 
Midafternoon on the iciest day this past 
winter, a man knocked at my front door. 
“Shovel your walk?” he asked. “Only $5.”
 
Outside, it was a bone-chilling 15 
degrees. “Sold,” I said. A half-hour later I 
handed over a five-dollar bill and thanked 
him for saving me the trouble.
 
Officially, this was an unofficial trans-
action—off the books, with no taxes 
paid or safety regulations followed. (At 
least, I assume this hired hand didn’t 
bother to report that income or register 
with the proper authorities.) As such, it 
was technically illegal. And, of course, 
it’s the sort of thing that happens all the 
time.
 
The size of the official U.S. economy, 
as measured by Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), was almost $12 trillion in 2004. 
Measurements of the unofficial economy—
not including illegal activities like drug 
dealing and prostitution—differ substan-
tially. But it’s generally agreed to be signifi-
cant, somewhere between 6 percent and 20 
percent of GDP. At the midpoint, this would 
be about $1.5 trillion a year.
 
Broadly defined, the underground, gray, 
informal, or shadow economy involves oth-
erwise legal transactions that go unreported 
or unrecorded. That’s a wide net, capturing 
everything from babysitting fees, to barter-
ing home repairs with a neighbor, to fail-
ing to report pay from moonlighting gigs. 
The “underground” label tends to make it 
sound much more sinister than it really is.
 The Underground Economy
The gross domestic product misses many transactions that take place in 
the underground economy.
in the news
International Differences in the 
Underground Economy
 
Underground 
 
Economy as a 
Country 
Percentage of GDP
Bolivia 
68 percent
Zimbabwe 
63
Peru 
61 
Thailand 
54
Mexico 
33
Argentina 
29
Sweden 
18
Australia 
13
United Kingdom 
12
Japan 
11
Switzerland 
9
United States 
8
Source: Friedrich Schneider. Figures are for 2002.
320
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

or devotion to country, but all of these laudable attributes are easier to foster 
when people are less concerned about being able to afford the material neces-
sities of life. In short, GDP does not directly measure those things that make 
life worthwhile, but it does measure our ability to obtain many of the inputs 
into a worthwhile life. 
GDP is not, however, a perfect measure of well-being. Some things that con-
tribute to a good life are left out of GDP. One is leisure. Suppose, for instance, 
that everyone in the economy suddenly started working every day of the week, 
rather than enjoying leisure on weekends. More goods and services would be 
produced, and GDP would rise. Yet despite the increase in GDP, we should not 
conclude that everyone would be better off. The loss from reduced leisure would 
offset the gain from producing and consuming a greater quantity of goods and 
services.
 
Criminal activities make up a large 
portion of what could be termed the total 
underground economy. Many studies have 
been done on the economics of drug 
dealing, prostitution, and gambling. But 
because money from crime is almost never 
recovered, many policymakers are more 
interested in portions of the underground 
economy that otherwise would be legal 
if not hidden from authorities. Things like 
shoveling walks.
 
Despite its intrigue, the informal econo-
my’s importance and consequences remain 
in debate. The reason: “You’re trying to 
measure a phenomenon whose entire pur-
pose is to hide itself from observation,” says 
Ed Feige, an economist at the University of 
Wisconsin.
 
This uncertainty poses problems for 
policymakers. Without knowing the precise 
size, scope, and causes of the underground 
economy, how can they decide what—if 
anything—to do about it? 
 
Was the man who shoveled my walk 
engaging in a socially positive or negative 
activity? Was I? Suffice it to say, some 
economists have dedicated their entire 
careers to answering questions about the 
underground economy—and still there is 
nothing close to a consensus about its size 
or description. . . .
 
Economists generally agree that the 
shadow economy is worse in developing 
nations, whose webs of bureaucratic red 
tape and corruption are notorious. For 
instance, [economist Friedrich] Schneider 
in 2003 published “shadow economy” esti-
mates (defined broadly as all market-based, 
legal production of goods and services 
deliberately concealed from the authorities) 
for countries including: Zimbabwe, esti-
mated at a whopping 63.2 percent of GDP, 
Thailand’s at 54.1 percent, and Bolivia’s at 
68.3 percent. Among former Soviet bloc 
nations, Georgia led the way with a 68 per-
cent of GDP shadow economy, and together 
those nations had an average 40.1 percent 
of GDP underground. This contrasts with an 
average of 16.7 percent among Western 
nations. . . .
 
In his 2003 book, Reefer Madness: Sex, 
Drugs and Cheap Labor in the American 
Black Market, investigative writer Eric 
Schlosser invokes Adam Smith’s “invis-
ible hand” theory that men pursuing their 
own self-interest will generate benefits 
for society as a whole. This invisible hand 
has produced a fairly sizable underground 
economy, and we cannot understand our 
entire economic system without under-
standing how the hidden underbelly func-
tions, too. “The underground is a good 
measure of the progress and the health of 
nations,” Schlosser writes. “When much 
is wrong, much needs to be hidden.” 
Schlosser’s implication was that much is 
wrong in the United States. If he had taken 
a more global view, he might have decided 
relatively little is hidden here.
Source: “Region Focus,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Spring 2005.
A Shadowy Enterprise?
© KEN CHERNUS/TAXI/GETTY IMAGES
321
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

Because GDP uses market prices to value goods and services, it excludes the 
value of almost all activity that takes place outside markets. In particular, GDP 
omits the value of goods and services produced at home. When a chef prepares a 
delicious meal and sells it at his restaurant, the value of that meal is part of GDP. 
But if the chef prepares the same meal for his family, the value he has added to 
the raw ingredients is left out of GDP. Similarly, child care provided in day-care 
centers is part of GDP, whereas child care by parents at home is not. Volunteer 
work also contributes to the well-being of those in society, but GDP does not 
reflect these contributions. 
Another thing that GDP excludes is the quality of the environment. Imagine 
that the government eliminated all environmental regulations. Firms could then 
produce goods and services without considering the pollution they create, and 
GDP might rise. Yet well-being would most likely fall. The deterioration in the 
quality of air and water would more than offset the gains from greater production.
GDP also says nothing about the distribution of income. A society in which 
100 people have annual incomes of $50,000 has GDP of $5 million and, not 
surprisingly, GDP per person of $50,000. So does a society in which 10 people 
GDP reflects the factory’s 
production, but not the 
harm that it inflicts on 
the environment.
© VISIONS OF AMERICA/JOE SOHM/GETTY IMAGES
GDP Seen as 
Inadequate Measure 
of Economic Health 
BY DAVID JOLLY
P
ARIS—President Nicolas Sarkozy told 
the French national statistics agency 
Monday to take greater account of factors 
like quality of life and the environment when 
measuring the country’s economic health. 
 
Mr. Sarkozy made the request after 
accepting a report from a panel of top 
economists he had charged with reviewing 
the adequacy of the current standard of fis-
cal well-being: gross domestic product. 
 
The panel, chaired by two Nobel econ-
omists, Joseph E. Stiglitz of Columbia 
University and Amartya Sen of Harvard 
University, concluded that GDP was insuf-
ficient and that measures of sustain-
ability and human well-being should be 
included. 
 
An “excessive focus on GDP metrics” 
also contributed to the onset of the current 
financial crisis, according to the report. Policy 
makers cheered rising economic growth 
while other data, like those that showed the 
increasing and unsustainable indebtedness of 
households and businesses, were overlooked, 
the report found. 
 
“The main message is to get away 
from GDP fetishism and to understand the 
limits to it,” Mr. Stiglitz said in an interview. 
“There are many aspects of our society that 
are not covered by GDP.”… 
 
GDP is the measure of the market value 
of all the goods and services produced in the 
economy. Its development in the 1930s, when 
the U.S. government was looking for new tools 
to measure national income and output more 
accurately, has been described as one of the 
most important advances in macroeconomics. 
 
However, there has long been criticism 
that, while it accurately captures the growth 
or contraction of the overall economy, it is 
a crude tool for describing social health. 
 
The United States, for example, with 
the world’s largest economy, naturally tops 
GDP rankings, but it ranks lower by other 
 Beyond Gross Domestic Product
With the encouragement of the French president, some economists 
wonder whether we need better measures of economic well-being.
in the news
322
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

earn $500,000 and 90 suffer with nothing at all. Few people would look at those 
two situations and call them equivalent. GDP per person tells us what happens 
to the average person, but behind the average lies a large variety of personal 
experiences.
In the end, we can conclude that GDP is a good measure of economic well-
being for most—but not all—purposes. It is important to keep in mind what GDP 
includes and what it leaves out.
International Differences in GDP and 
the Quality of Life
One way to gauge the usefulness of GDP as a measure of economic well-being is 
to examine international data. Rich and poor countries have vastly different levels 
of GDP per person. If a large GDP leads to a higher standard of living, then we 
should observe GDP to be strongly correlated with various measures of the qual-
ity of life. And, in fact, we do. 
measures. The United Nations Development 
Program’s human development index, which 
incorporates GDP as only one of a number 
of criteria, ranked Iceland, Norway and 
Canada the top three spots in 2008, with 
the United States a distant 15th. The human 
development indexes also seek to incorpo-
rate the value of a long and healthy life, 
access to knowledge and a decent standard 
of living. 
 
As an alternative to the developed 
world’s pursuit of GDP, the Himalayan 
kingdom of Bhutan has chosen to focus on 
“gross national happiness,” complete with 
the 4 pillars, the 9 domains and the 72 
indicators of happiness…. 
 
The Stiglitz commission report, known 
formally as “The Measurement of Economic 
Performance and Social Progress Revisited,” 
said that one of the most glaring problems with 
using economic growth as a proxy for well-
being was the fact that it excluded the damage 
to society and ultimately to the economy of 
environmentally non-sustainable activities. 
 
For instance, “developing countries 
may be encouraged to allow a foreign 
mining company to develop a mine, even 
though the country receives low royalties, 
even though the environment may be 
degraded, and even though miners may 
be exposed to health hazards,” the report 
says, “because by doing so GDP will be 
increased.” 
 
They also identify another problem with 
the reliance on GDP and other “standard” 
measures: the gap between what the 
numbers say and what people are actually 
experiencing. Over the course of recent 
decades, they note, GDP was rising in most 
of the world, even as the median disposable 
income—the income of the “representative 
individual”—was falling in many countries, 
meaning that a large share of the gains 
from economic growth ended up in the 
hands of the wealthy at the expense of 
the rest. 
 
The specific recommendations include 
ensuring that GDP itself is measured the 
same in every country, as statistical agen-
cies calculate it differently from one country 
to the next, leading in some cases, to large 
variations in the way government services 
are valued. That has the potential to lead to 
policy mistakes, they warned. 
 
“What we measure affects what we do; 
and if our measurements are flawed, deci-
sions may be distorted,” they wrote. “Policies 
should be aimed at increasing societal wel-
fare, not GDP.”
Source: New York Times, September 15, 2009.
Economist Joe Stiglitz
© ALBERT OLIVE/EPA/LANDOV
323
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME

 
Table 3 shows twelve of the world’s most populous countries ranked in order 
of GDP per person. The table also shows life expectancy (the expected life span at 
birth), literacy (the percentage of the adult population who can read), and Internet 
usage (the percentage of the population that regularly uses the Internet). These 
data show a clear pattern. In rich countries, such as the United States, Japan, and 
Germany, people can expect to live to about 80, almost all of the population can 
read, and a half to two-thirds of the population uses the Internet. In poor countries, 
such as Nigeria, Bangladesh, and Pakistan, people typically die 10 to 20 years earlier, 
a substantial share of the population is illiterate, and Internet usage is rare. 
 
Data on other aspects of the quality of life tell a similar story. Countries with 
low GDP per person tend to have more infants with low birth weight, higher 
rates of infant mortality, higher rates of maternal mortality, higher rates of child 
malnutrition, and less common access to safe drinking water. In countries with 
low GDP per person, fewer school-age children are actually in school, and those 
who are in school must learn with fewer teachers per student. These countries also 
tend to have fewer televisions, fewer telephones, fewer paved roads, and fewer 
households with electricity. International data leave no doubt that a nation’s GDP 
per person is closely associated with its citizens’ standard of living.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Why should policymakers care about GDP?
Conclusion
This chapter has discussed how economists measure the total income of a nation. 
Measurement is, of course, only a starting point. Much of macroeconomics is 
aimed at revealing the long-run and short-run determinants of a nation’s gross 
GDP and the Quality 
of Life
The table shows GDP per person 
and three other measures of the 
quality of life for twelve major 
countries.
Table 3
 
 
 
Adult 
Internet
 
Real GDP per 
Life 
Literacy 
Usage
Country 
Person (2007) 
Expectancy 
(% of population) 
(% of population)
United States 
$45,592 
79 years 
99% 
63%
Germany 
34,401 
80 
99 
45
Japan 
 33,632 
83  
99 
67
Russia 
14, 690 
66 
99 
15
Mexico 
14,104 
76 
93 
18
Brazil 
9,567 
72 
90 
19
China 
5,383 
73 
93 
9
Indonesia 
3,843 
71 
92 
7
India 
2,753 
63 
66 
3
Pakistan 
2,496 
66 
54 
7
Nigeria 
1,969 
48 
72 
4
Bangladesh 
1,241 
66 
54 
0.3
Source: Human Development Report 2009, United Nations. Data on real GDP, life expectancy, and literacy are for 2007. Data on 
Internet use is for 2005.
324
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

domestic product. Why, for example, is GDP higher in the United States and 
Japan than in India and Nigeria? What can the governments of the poorest coun-
tries do to promote more rapid GDP growth? Why does GDP in the United States 
rise rapidly in some years and fall in others? What can U.S. policymakers do to 
reduce the severity of these fluctuations in GDP? These are the questions we will 
take up shortly. 
At this point, it is important to acknowledge the significance of just measur-
ing GDP. We all get some sense of how the economy is doing as we go about our 
lives. But the economists who study changes in the economy and the policymak-
ers who formulate economic policies need more than this vague sense—they need 
concrete data on which to base their judgments. Quantifying the behavior of the 
economy with statistics such as GDP is, therefore, the first step to developing a 
science of macroeconomics.
• Because every transaction has a buyer and a 
seller, the total expenditure in the economy must 
equal the total income in the economy. 
• Gross domestic product (GDP) measures an 
economy’s total expenditure on newly produced 
goods and services and the total income earned 
from the production of these goods and services. 
More precisely, GDP is the market value of all 
final goods and services produced within a 
country in a given period of time.
• GDP is divided among four components of expen-
diture: consumption, investment, government 
purchases, and net exports. Consumption includes 
spending on goods and services by households, 
with the exception of purchases of new housing. 
Investment includes spending on new equipment 
and structures, including households’ purchases 
of new housing. Government purchases include 
spending on goods and services by local, state, and 
federal governments. Net exports equal the value 
of goods and services produced domestically and 
sold abroad (exports) minus the value of goods 
and services produced abroad and sold domesti-
cally (imports).
• Nominal GDP uses current prices to value the 
economy’s production of goods and services. 
Real GDP uses constant base-year prices to value 
the economy’s production of goods and services. 
The GDP deflator—calculated from the ratio 
of nominal to real GDP—measures the level of 
prices in the economy.
• GDP is a good measure of economic well-being 
because people prefer higher to lower incomes. 
But it is not a perfect measure of well-being. For 
example, GDP excludes the value of leisure and 
the value of a clean environment.
SUMMARY
KEY CONCEPTS
• Because every transaction has a buyer and a 
seller, the total expenditure in the economy must 
equal the total income in the economy. 
•
Gross domestic product (GDP) measures an 
economy’s total expenditure on newly produced 
goods and services and the total income earned 
from the production of these goods and services. 
More precisely, GDP is the market value of all 
final goods and services produced within a 
country in a given period of time.
•
GDP is divided among four components of expen-
diture: consumption, investment, government 
purchases, and net exports. Consumption includes 
spending on goods and services by households, 
with the exception of purchases of new housing. 
Investment includes spending on new equipment 
and structures, including households’ purchases 
of new housing. Government purchases include 
spending on goods and services by local, state, and
federal governments. Net exports equal the value
of goods and services produced domestically and
sold abroad (exports) minus the value of goods
and services produced abroad and sold domesti-
cally (imports).
•
Nominal GDP uses current prices to value the 
economy’s production of goods and services.
Real GDP uses constant base-year prices to value 
the economy’s production of goods and services.
The GDP deflator—calculated from the ratio
of nominal to real GDP—measures the level of 
prices in the economy.
•
GDP is a good measure of economic well-being
because people prefer higher to lower incomes.
But it is not a perfect measure of well-being. For 
example, GDP excludes the value of leisure and 
the value of a clean environment.
SU
SUMMARY
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
325
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME
microeconomics, p. 308
macroeconomics, p. 308
gross domestic product 
 (GDP), p. 310
consumption, p. 313
investment, p. 313
government purchases, p. 314
net exports, p. 314
nominal GDP, p. 316
real GDP, p. 317
GDP deflator, p. 317

PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
 1. What components of GDP (if any) would each 
of the following transactions affect? Explain.
a. A family buys a new refrigerator.
b. Aunt Jane buys a new house.
c. Ford sells a Mustang from its inventory.
d. You buy a pizza.
e. California repaves Highway 101.
f. Your parents buy a bottle of French wine.
g. Honda expands its factory in Marysville, 
Ohio.
 2. The government purchases component of GDP 
does not include spending on transfer payments 
such as Social Security. Thinking about the 
definition of GDP, explain why transfer 
payments are excluded. 
 3. As the chapter states, GDP does not include 
the value of used goods that are resold. 
Why would including such transactions make 
GDP a less informative measure of economic 
well-being?
 4. Below are some data from the land of milk and 
honey. 
 
Price of 
Quantity of 
Price of 
Quantity of
Year 
Milk 
Milk  
Honey 
Honey 
2010 
$1 
100 quarts 
$2 
50 quarts
2011 
$1 
200 
$2 
100
2012 
$2 
200 
$4 
100
a. Compute nominal GDP, real GDP, and the 
GDP deflator for each year, using 2010 as the 
base year.
b. Compute the percentage change in nominal 
GDP, real GDP, and the GDP deflator in 
2011 and 2012 from the preceding year. For 
each year, identify the variable that does not 
change. Explain in words why your answer 
makes sense.
c.  Did economic well-being rise more in 2011 or 
2012? Explain.
 5. Consider an economy that produces only 
chocolate bars. In year 1, the quantity produced 
is 3 bars and the price is $4. In year 2, the 
quantity produced is 4 bars and the price is $5. 
In year 3, the quantity produced is 5 bars and 
the price is $6. Year 1 is the base year.
a. What is nominal GDP for each of these three 
years?
b. What is real GDP for each of these years?
c. What is the GDP deflator for each of these years?
d. What is the percentage growth rate of real 
GDP from year 2 to year 3?
e. What is the inflation rate as measured by the 
GDP deflator from year 2 to year 3?
f. In this one-good economy, how might you 
have answered parts (d) and (e) without first 
answering parts (b) and (c)?
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Explain why an economy’s income must equal 
its expenditure.
 2. Which contributes more to GDP—the production 
of an economy car or the production of a luxury 
car? Why?
 3. A farmer sells wheat to a baker for $2. The 
baker uses the wheat to make bread, which is 
sold for $3. What is the total contribution of 
these transactions to GDP?
 4. Many years ago, Peggy paid $500 to put 
together a record collection. Today, she sold her 
albums at a garage sale for $100. How does this 
sale affect current GDP?
 5. List the four components of GDP. Give an 
example of each.
 6. Why do economists use real GDP rather 
than nominal GDP to gauge economic 
well-being?
 7. In the year 2010, the economy produces 100 
loaves of bread that sell for $2 each. In the year 
2011, the economy produces 200 loaves of bread 
that sell for $3 each. Calculate nominal GDP, 
real GDP, and the GDP deflator for each year. 
(Use 2010 as the base year.) By what percentage 
does each of these three statistics rise from one 
year to the next?
 8. Why is it desirable for a country to have a large 
GDP? Give an example of something that would 
raise GDP and yet be undesirable.
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
 1. What components of GDP (if any) would each 
of the following transactions affect? Explain.
a. A family buys a new refrigerator.
b. Aunt Jane buys a new house.
c. Ford sells a Mustang from its inventory.
d. You buy a pizza.
e. California repaves Highway 101.
f. Your parents buy a bottle of French wine.
g. Honda expands its factory in Marysville,
Ohio.
 2. The government purchases component of GDP
does not include spending on transfer payments
such as Social Security. Thinking about the
definition of GDP, explain why transfer 
payments are excluded. 
 3. As the chapter states, GDP does not include
the value of used goods that are resold.
Why would including such transactions make
GDP a less informative measure of economic
well-being?
 4. Below are some data from the land of milk and
honey. 
Price of 
Quantity of 
Price of 
Quantity of
Year 
Milk 
Milk  
Honey 
Honey
2010 
$1 
100 quarts 
$2 
50 quarts
2011 
$1 
200 
$2 
100
2012 
$2 
200 
$4 
100
a. Compute nominal GDP, real GDP, and the 
GDP deflator for each year, using 2010 as the
base year.
b. Compute the percentage change in nominal 
GDP, real GDP, and the GDP deflator in
2011 and 2012 from the preceding year. For
each year, identify the variable that does not
change. Explain in words why your answer
makes sense.
c.  Did economic well-being rise more in 2011 or
2012? Explain.
 5. Consider an economy that produces only 
chocolate bars. In year 1, the quantity produced 
is 3 bars and the price is $4. In year 2, the
quantity produced is 4 bars and the price is $5.
In year 3, the quantity produced is 5 bars and
the price is $6. Year 1 is the base year.
a. What is nominal GDP for each of these three
years?
b. What is real GDP for each of these years?
c. What is the GDP deflator for each of these years?
d. What is the percentage growth rate of real 
GDP from year 2 to year 3?
e. What is the inflation rate as measured by the 
GDP deflator from year 2 to year 3?
f. In this one-good economy, how might you 
have answered parts (d) and (e) without first 
answering parts (b) and (c)?
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Explain why an economy’s income must equal 
its expenditure.
 2. Which contributes more to GDP—the production
of an economy car or the production of a luxury 
car? Why?
 3. A farmer sells wheat to a baker for $2. The 
baker uses the wheat to make bread, which is 
sold for $3. What is the total contribution of 
these transactions to GDP?
 4. Many years ago, Peggy paid $500 to put
together a record collection. Today, she sold her 
albums at a garage sale for $100. How does this
sale affect current GDP?
 5. List the four components of GDP. Give an 
example of each.
 6. Why do economists use real GDP rather 
than nominal GDP to gauge economic 
well-being?
 7. In the year 2010, the economy produces 100 
loaves of bread that sell for $2 each. In the year 
2011, the economy produces 200 loaves of bread 
that sell for $3 each. Calculate nominal GDP,
real GDP, and the GDP deflator for each year. 
(Use 2010 as the base year.) By what percentage 
does each of these three statistics rise from one
year to the next?
 8. Why is it desirable for a country to have a large 
GDP? Give an example of something that would 
raise GDP and yet be undesirable.
326
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

 6.  Consider the following data on U.S. GDP:
 
Nominal GDP 
GDP Deflator
Year 
(in billions of dollars) 
(base year 2005)
2009 
14,256 
109.8
1999 
9,353 
86.8
a. What was the growth rate of nominal GDP 
between 1999 and 2009? (Hint: The growth 
rate of a variable X over a N-year period is 
calculated as 100 × [(Xfinal/Xinitial)1/N – 1].)
b. What was the growth rate of the GDP 
deflator between 1999 and 2009? 
c. What was real GDP in 1999 measured in 2005 
prices?
d. What was real GDP in 2009 measured in 2005 
prices?
e. What was the growth rate of real GDP 
between 1999 and 2009?
f. Was the growth rate of nominal GDP higher 
or lower than the growth rate of real GDP? 
Explain.
 7. Revised estimates of U.S. GDP are usually 
released by the government near the end of 
each month. Find a newspaper article that 
reports on the most recent release, or read the 
news release yourself at http://www.bea.gov, 
the website of the U.S. Bureau of Economic 
Analysis. Discuss the recent changes in real and 
nominal GDP and in the components of GDP. 
 8. A farmer grows wheat, which he sells to a 
miller for $100. The miller turns the wheat into 
flour, which he sells to a baker for $150. The 
baker turns the wheat into bread, which he 
sells to consumers for $180. Consumers eat the 
bread. 
a. What is GDP in this economy? Explain.
b. Value added is defined as the value of a 
producer’s output minus the value of the 
intermediate goods that the producer buys 
to make the output. Assuming there are no 
intermediate goods beyond those described 
above, calculate the value added of each of 
the three producers.
c. What is total value added of the three producers 
in this economy? How does it compare to the 
economy’s GDP? Does this example suggest 
another way of calculating GDP?
 9. Goods and services that are not sold in markets, 
such as food produced and consumed at home, 
are generally not included in GDP. Can you 
think of how this might cause the numbers in 
the second column of Table 3 to be misleading 
in a comparison of the economic well-being of 
the United States and India? Explain.
10. The participation of women in the U.S. labor 
force has risen dramatically since 1970.
a. How do you think this rise affected GDP?
b. Now imagine a measure of well-being that 
includes time spent working in the home and 
taking leisure. How would the change in this 
measure of well-being compare to the change 
in GDP?
c. Can you think of other aspects of well-being 
that are associated with the rise in women’s 
labor-force participation? Would it be 
practical to construct a measure of well-being 
that includes these aspects?
11.  One day, Barry the Barber, Inc., collects $400 
for haircuts. Over this day, his equipment 
depreciates in value by $50. Of the remaining 
$350, Barry sends $30 to the government in sales 
taxes, takes home $220 in wages, and retains 
$100 in his business to add new equipment in 
the future. From the $220 that Barry takes home, 
he pays $70 in income taxes. Based on this 
information, compute Barry’s contribution to 
the following measures of income.
a. gross domestic product
b. net national product
c. national income
d. personal income
e. disposable personal income
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
327
CHAPTER 15    MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME


Measuring the 
    Cost of Living
I
n 1931, as the U.S. economy was suffering through the Great Depression, the 
New York Yankees paid famed baseball player Babe Ruth a salary of $80,000. 
At the time, this pay was extraordinary, even among the stars of baseball. 
According to one story, a reporter asked Ruth whether he thought it was 
right that he made more than President Herbert Hoover, who had a salary of only 
$75,000. Ruth replied, “I had a better year.”
In 2010, the median salary earned by a player on the New York Yankees was 
$5.5 million, and shortstop Alex Rodriguez was paid $33 million. At first, this fact 
might lead you to think that baseball has become vastly more lucrative over the 
past eight decades. But as everyone knows, the prices of goods and services have 
also risen. In 1931, a nickel would buy an ice-cream cone, and a quarter would 
buy a ticket at the local movie theater. Because prices were so much lower in Babe 
Ruth’s day than they are today, it is not clear whether Ruth enjoyed a higher or 
lower standard of living than today’s players. 
16
329

In the preceding chapter, we looked at how economists use gross domestic 
product (GDP) to measure the quantity of goods and services that the economy 
is producing. This chapter examines how economists measure the overall cost of 
living. To compare Babe Ruth’s salary of $80,000 to salaries from today, we need 
to find some way of turning dollar figures into meaningful measures of purchas-
ing power. That is exactly the job of a statistic called the consumer price index. After 
seeing how the consumer price index is constructed, we discuss how we can use 
such a price index to compare dollar figures from different points in time.
The consumer price index is used to monitor changes in the cost of living over 
time. When the consumer price index rises, the typical family has to spend more 
money to maintain the same standard of living. Economists use the term inflation to 
describe a situation in which the economy’s overall price level is rising. The inflation 
rate is the percentage change in the price level from the previous period. The pre-
ceding chapter showed how economists can measure inflation using the GDP defla-
tor. The inflation rate you are likely to hear on the nightly news, however, is not 
calculated from this statistic. Because the consumer price index better reflects the 
goods and services bought by consumers, it is the more common gauge of inflation.
As we will see in the coming chapters, inflation is a closely watched aspect 
of macroeconomic performance and is a key variable guiding macroeconomic 
policy. This chapter provides the background for that analysis by showing how 
economists measure the inflation rate using the consumer price index and how 
this statistic can be used to compare dollar figures from different times.
The Consumer Price Index
The consumer price index (CPI) is a measure of the overall cost of the goods and 
services bought by a typical consumer. Each month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(BLS), which is part of the Department of Labor, computes and reports the con-
sumer price index. In this section, we discuss how the consumer price index is 
calculated and what problems arise in its measurement. We also consider how 
this index compares to the GDP deflator, another measure of the overall level of 
prices, which we examined in the preceding chapter.
How the Consumer Price Index Is Calculated
When the BLS calculates the consumer price index and the inflation rate, it uses 
data on the prices of thousands of goods and services. To see exactly how these 
statistics are constructed, let’s consider a simple economy in which consumers 
buy only two goods: hot dogs and hamburgers. Table 1 shows the five steps that 
the BLS follows.
 1.  Fix the basket. Determine which prices are most important to the typical con-
sumer. If the typical consumer buys more hot dogs than hamburgers, then 
the price of hot dogs is more important than the price of hamburgers and, 
therefore, should be given greater weight in measuring the cost of living. 
The BLS sets these weights by surveying consumers to find the basket of 
goods and services bought by the typical consumer. In the example in the 
table, the typical consumer buys a basket of 4 hot dogs and 2 hamburgers.
 2.  Find the prices. Find the prices of each of the goods and services in the basket 
at each point in time. The table shows the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers 
for three different years.
consumer price 
index (CPI)
a measure of the overall 
cost of the goods and 
services bought by a 
typical consumer
330
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

 3. Compute the basket’s cost. Use the data on prices to calculate the cost of the 
basket of goods and services at different times. The table shows this calcula-
tion for each of the three years. Notice that only the prices in this calculation 
change. By keeping the basket of goods the same (4 hot dogs and 2 ham-
burgers), we are isolating the effects of price changes from the effect of any 
quantity changes that might be occurring at the same time.
 4. Choose a base year and compute the index. Designate one year as the base year, 
the benchmark against which other years are compared. (The choice of base 
year is arbitrary, as the index is used to measure changes in the cost of 
living.) Once the base year is chosen, the index is calculated as follows:
Price of basket of goods and services in current year
Consumer price index =  
 × 100.
Price of basket in base year
  That is, the price of the basket of goods and services in each year is divided 
by the price of the basket in the base year, and this ratio is then multiplied 
by 100. The resulting number is the consumer price index.
In the example in the table, 2010 is the base year. In this year, the basket 
of hot dogs and hamburgers costs $8. Therefore, the price of the basket in all 
years is divided by $8 and multiplied by 100. The consumer price index is 
Calculating the 
Consumer Price Index 
and the Inflation Rate: 
An Example 
This table shows how to 
calculate the consumer price 
index and the inflation rate 
for a hypothetical economy in 
which consumers buy only hot 
dogs and hamburgers.
Table 1
Step 1: Survey Consumers to Determine a Fixed Basket of Goods
Basket = 4 hot dogs, 2 hamburgers
Step 2: Find the Price of Each Good in Each Year
Year 
Price of Hot Dogs 
Price of Hamburgers
2010 
$1 
$2
2011 
2 
3
2012 
3 
4
Step 3: Compute the Cost of the Basket of Goods in Each Year
2010 
($1 per hot dog × 4 hot dogs) + ($2 per hamburger × 2 hamburgers) = $8 per basket
2011 
($2 per hot dog × 4 hot dogs) + ($3 per hamburger × 2 hamburgers) = $14 per basket
2012 
($3 per hot dog × 4 hot dogs) + ($4 per hamburger × 2 hamburgers) = $20 per basket
Step 4:  Choose One Year as a Base Year (2010) and Compute the Consumer Price Index 
in Each Year
2010 
  ($8 / $8) × 100 = 100
2011 
($14 / $8) × 100 = 175
2012 
($20 / $8) × 100 = 250
Step 5: Use the Consumer Price Index to Compute the Inflation Rate from Previous Year
2011 
(175 – 100) / 100 × 100 = 75%
2012 
(250 – 175) / 175 × 100 = 43%
331
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

100 in 2010. (The index is always 100 in the base year.) The consumer price 
index is 175 in 2011. This means that the price of the basket in 2011 is 175 
percent of its price in the base year. Put differently, a basket of goods that 
costs $100 in the base year costs $175 in 2011. Similarly, the consumer price 
index is 250 in 2012, indicating that the price level in 2012 is 250 percent of 
the price level in the base year.
 5. Compute the inflation rate. Use the consumer price index to calculate the 
inflation rate, which is the percentage change in the price index from the 
preceding period. That is, the inflation rate between two consecutive years 
is computed as follows:
CPI in year 2 – CPI in year 1
Inflation rate in year 2 =  
 × 100.
 
CPI in year 1
  As shown at the bottom of Table 1, the inflation rate in our example is 75 
percent in 2011 and 43 percent in 2012.
inflation rate
the percentage change in 
the price index from the 
preceding period
FYI
W
hen constructing the consumer price index, the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics tries to include all the goods and services that 
the typical consumer buys. Moreover, it tries to weight these goods 
and services according to how much consumers buy of each item. 
 
Figure 1 shows the breakdown of consumer spending into the 
major categories of goods and services. By far the largest category 
is housing, which makes up 42 percent of the typical consumer’s 
budget. This category includes the cost of shelter (32 percent), 
fuel and other utilities (5 percent), and household furnishings and 
operation (5 percent). The next largest category, at 17 percent, is 
transportation, which includes spending on cars, gasoline, buses, 
subways, and so on. The next category, at 15 percent, is food and 
beverages; this includes food at home (8 percent), food away from 
home (6 percent), and alcoholic beverages (1 percent). Next are 
medical care, recreation, and education and communication, each 
at about 6 percent. This last category includes, for example, college 
tuition and personal computers. Apparel, which includes clothing, 
footwear, and jewelry, makes up 4 percent of the typical consumer’s 
budget.
 
Also included in the figure, at 3 percent of spending, is a cate-
gory for other goods and services. This is a catchall for consumer 
purchases (such as cigarettes, haircuts, and funeral expenses) that 
do not naturally fit into the other categories.
Figure 1
The Typical Basket of Goods and Services
This figure shows how the typical consumer divides 
spending among various categories of goods and 
services. The Bureau of Labor Statistics calls each 
percentage the “relative importance” of the category.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 What Is in the CPI’s Basket?
15%
Food and
beverages
17%
Transportation
Other goods
and services
Medical care
Apparel
Recreation
7%
6%
4% 3%
6%
42%
Housing
Education and 
communication
332
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

Although this example simplifies the real world by including only two 
goods, it shows how the BLS computes the consumer price index and the infla-
tion rate. The BLS collects and processes data on the prices of thousands of 
goods and services every month and, by following the five foregoing steps, 
determines how quickly the cost of living for the typical consumer is rising. 
When the BLS makes its monthly announcement of the consumer price index, 
you can usually hear the number on the evening television news or see it in the 
next day’s newspaper.
In addition to the consumer price index for the overall economy, the BLS 
calculates several other price indexes. It reports the index for specific metropoli-
tan areas within the country (such as Boston, New York,  and Los Angeles) and 
for some narrow categories of goods and services (such as food, clothing, and 
energy). It also calculates the producer price index (PPI), which measures the cost 
of a basket of goods and services bought by firms rather than consumers. Because 
firms eventually pass on their costs to consumers in the form of higher consumer 
prices, changes in the producer price index are often thought to be useful in pre-
dicting changes in the consumer price index.
Problems in Measuring the Cost of Living
The goal of the consumer price index is to measure changes in the cost of living. 
In other words, the consumer price index tries to gauge how much incomes must 
rise to maintain a constant standard of living. The consumer price index, however, 
is not a perfect measure of the cost of living. Three problems with the index are 
widely acknowledged but difficult to solve.
The first problem is called substitution bias. When prices change from one year 
to the next, they do not all change proportionately: Some prices rise more than 
others. Consumers respond to these differing price changes by buying less of the 
goods whose prices have risen by relatively large amounts and by buying more 
of the goods whose prices have risen less or perhaps even have fallen. That is, 
consumers substitute toward goods that have become relatively less expensive. 
If a price index is computed assuming a fixed basket of goods, it ignores the pos-
sibility of consumer substitution and, therefore, overstates the increase in the cost 
of living from one year to the next.
Let’s consider a simple example. Imagine that in the base year, apples are 
cheaper than pears, so consumers buy more apples than pears. When the BLS 
constructs the basket of goods, it will include more apples than pears. Suppose 
that next year pears are cheaper than apples. Consumers will naturally respond to 
the price changes by buying more pears and fewer apples. Yet when computing 
the consumer price index, the BLS uses a fixed basket, which in essence assumes 
that consumers continue buying the now expensive apples in the same quantities 
as before. For this reason, the index will measure a much larger increase in the cost 
of living than consumers actually experience.
The second problem with the consumer price index is the introduction of new 
goods. When a new good is introduced, consumers have more variety from which 
to choose, and this in turn reduces the cost of maintaining the same level of eco-
nomic well-being. To see why, consider a hypothetical situation: Suppose you 
could choose between a $100 gift certificate at a large store that offered a wide 
array of goods and a $100 gift certificate at a small store with the same prices but 
a more limited selection. Which would you prefer? Most people would pick the 
producer price 
index
a measure of the cost of 
a basket of goods and 
services bought by firms
333
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

store with greater variety. In essence, the increased set of possible choices makes 
each dollar more valuable. The same is true with the evolution of the economy 
over time: As new goods are introduced, consumers have more choices, and each 
dollar is worth more. Yet because the consumer price index is based on a fixed 
basket of goods and services, it does not reflect the increase in the value of the 
dollar that arises from the introduction of new goods.
Again, let’s consider an example. When video cassette recorders (VCRs) were 
introduced in the late 1970s, consumers were able to watch their favorite movies 
at home. Although not a perfect substitute for a first-run movie on a large screen, 
an old movie in the comfort of your family room was a new option that increased 
consumers’ set of opportunities. For any given number of dollars, the introduc-
tion of the VCR made people better off; conversely, achieving the same level of 
economic well-being required a smaller number of dollars. A perfect cost-of-living 
In the Field with the 
Price Indexers
BY ROBERT D. HERSHEY, JR. 
W
ILMINGTON, Del.—Her thick blue 
binder in hand, Diane Balaguer strides 
purposefully through the department store 
in the Concord Mall north of town. She 
checks the price of a women’s pullover 
(short sleeve, solid color, no design), eyes 
a Hastings & Smith polo shirt, notes the 
seasonal absence of men’s turtlenecks and 
then confronts the day’s first challenge to 
statistical perfection. 
 
Ms. Balaguer shakes her head slightly 
as she regards a rack of Towne raincoats, 
a style in the London Fog line (tagged at 
the same $99.90 as the month before). She 
considers Towne to be of slightly, almost 
imperceptibly, lesser quality than the Severn 
line (costing about twice as much) that they 
replaced this year. It’s a matter of things like 
stitching and buttons. 
 
Earlier this spring she had informed spe-
cialists in Washington of this not uncommon 
situation but they overruled her suggestion 
that she substitute another product. Thus do 
tiny imprecisions creep unavoidably into the 
Consumer Price Index, the most widely used 
inflation measure, one directly affecting the 
incomes of more than 70 million Americans, 
Federal income-tax brackets and the cost of 
school lunches. 
 
“It’s not a black-and-white sort of deter-
mination,” Ms. Balaguer said. “Even though 
we ask very specific questions to try to get 
very specific answers, it takes a great deal of 
judgment.” 
 
When the price index is announced 
monthly by the Labor Department, the 
figure has the Olympian air common to 
Government statistics. But a day spent with 
Ms. Balaguer gives a vivid illustration of the 
messiness inherent in the immense task of 
monitoring changes in a $7 trillion econ-
omy. In any given month, she and several 
hundred counterparts around the country 
check the cost of 90,000 items—ranging 
from catfish fillets to time spent in a hospital 
recovery room. . . . 
 
A trained economist who both super-
vises data collection and often goes on the 
road herself, Ms. Balaguer expresses no 
opinion about the debate over the price 
index. 
 
The system takes account of the pos-
sibility of human error or subversion—
cross-checks of other data collectors’ work is 
standard procedure. “We’re taking our best 
shot,” said Patrick C. Jackman, the index’s 
chief day-to-day overseer in Washington. 
“I don’t think we’re picking up many bad 
quotes.” 
 
Drawing on an annual Government sur-
vey of what people are buying, and at what 
 Shopping for the CPI
Behind every macroeconomic statistic are thousands of individual 
pieces of data on the economy. This classic article follows one of the 
economists who collect these data.
in the news
334
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

kinds of outlets, headquarters tells the field 
staff what items to price. The findings are 
shipped by courier to Washington, where 
they are run through the mill to be sure they 
make sense. Because the bureau promises 
its respondents confidentiality, it insists that 
none of the 10 outlets Ms. Balaguer visits 
be identified by name. But she did disclose 
not only how prices in May compared with 
April’s, but also explained in detail how 
to handle such vexations as discontinued 
products, clearance sales and what to do in 
those rare cases when she suspects some-
body of giving wrong prices. 
 
One of the day’s most complicated 
readings came at a garden shop just across 
the state line in Pennsylvania where, after 
finding 3 1/2-inch barrel cactus and 16-inch 
Boston ferns unchanged in price (at $4 
and $25, respectively) Ms. Balaguer found 
that the requisite flower seeds, black-eyed 
susans, were no longer being stocked. 
 
After being told this was not just a 
temporary situation, Ms. Balaguer’s solution 
was to find a substitute seed in the same 
product line to enter into the system on the 
spot. With the aid of a table in her binder 
that produces random numbers and with 
some rapid-fire pointing at rows of seed 
packets, the answer emerged in less than a 
minute. From now on, she declared, “we’ll 
use pampas grass” in the index. 
 
Not every hurdle was so quickly over-
come. She spent a sizable chunk of her 
20-minute session with a hospital admin-
istrator to figure out how to adjust for a 
confusing reconfiguration of recovery-room 
charges that effectively halved the price. 
 
“You have to be able to ask ques-
tions, to be a sort of Sherlock Holmes,” 
Ms. Balaguer said. 
 
Ms. Balaguer’s stop at a beer distributor 
to check one-liter bottles of Canada Dry selt-
zer caused some embarrassment when she 
questioned the assertion of Richard Gropper, 
a proprietor, that the price was 84 cents. After 
she observed that this would mean a 9-cent 
rise from April he realized his mistake, adding 
that he was glad to help with the index since 
he periodically used it to adjust the rent of 
tenants in the doughnut shop next door. 
 
The hardest items to price, Ms. Balaguer 
said, are electricity and natural gas, infor-
mation the bureau gets directly from utilities 
in statistically awkward form. Children’s 
meals and meals in Chinese restaurants also 
pose problems, even with menus to work 
from, because they tend to include bever-
ages for which separate prices are required, 
Ms. Balaguer said. 
 
Housing, which accounts for 41 percent 
of the urban consumer index, is surveyed by 
periodically questioning homeowners and 
renters. For both groups, the question is 
the same: What is the monthly rental value 
of the property? When necessary, such as 
when a house is vacant, she and her staff 
ask real estate brokers and neighbors to get 
housing data, Ms. Balaguer said. 
 
Some surveyers might be bothered by 
one potentially onerous job restriction. But 
not Ms. Balaguer. 
 
“We never carry purses because we’re 
not allowed to shop while we work,” she 
said. “Actually,” she added, noting that she 
had originally worked in retailing, “I hate to 
shop.” 
Source: New York Times, June 20, 1995.
index would have reflected the introduction of the VCR with a decrease in the cost 
of living. The consumer price index, however, did not decrease in response to the 
introduction of the VCR. Eventually, the BLS did revise the basket of goods to 
include VCRs, and subsequently, the index reflected changes in VCR prices. But 
the reduction in the cost of living associated with the initial introduction of the 
VCR never showed up in the index. 
The third problem with the consumer price index is unmeasured quality change. 
If the quality of a good deteriorates from one year to the next while its price 
remains the same, the value of a dollar falls, because you are getting a lesser good 
for the same amount of money. Similarly, if the quality rises from one year to 
the next, the value of a dollar rises. The BLS does its best to account for quality 
change. When the quality of a good in the basket changes—for example, when a 
car model has more horsepower or gets better gas mileage from one year to the 
© ALEXANDER WALTER/STONE/GETTY IMAGES 
335
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

next—the Bureau adjusts the price of the good to account for the quality change. 
It is, in essence, trying to compute the price of a basket of goods of constant qual-
ity. Despite these efforts, changes in quality remain a problem because quality is 
so hard to measure.
There is still much debate among economists about how severe these measure-
ment problems are and what should be done about them. Several studies written 
during the 1990s concluded that the consumer price index overstated inflation by 
about 1 percentage point per year. In response to this criticism, the BLS adopted 
several technical changes to improve the CPI, and many economists believe the 
bias is now only about half as large as it once was. The issue is important because 
many government programs use the consumer price index to adjust for changes 
in the overall level of prices. Recipients of Social Security, for instance, get annual 
increases in benefits that are tied to the consumer price index. Some economists 
have suggested modifying these programs to correct for the measurement prob-
lems by, for instance, reducing the magnitude of the automatic benefit increases.
The GDP Deflator versus the Consumer Price Index
In the preceding chapter, we examined another measure of the overall level of 
prices in the economy—the GDP deflator. The GDP deflator is the ratio of nomi-
nal GDP to real GDP. Because nominal GDP is current output valued at current 
prices and real GDP is current output valued at base-year prices, the GDP deflator 
reflects the current level of prices relative to the level of prices in the base year.
Economists and policymakers monitor both the GDP deflator and the con-
sumer price index to gauge how quickly prices are rising. Usually, these two sta-
tistics tell a similar story. Yet two important differences can cause them to diverge.
The first difference is that the GDP deflator reflects the prices of all goods and 
services produced domestically, whereas the consumer price index reflects the prices 
of all goods and services bought by consumers. For example, suppose that the price 
of an airplane produced by Boeing and sold to the Air Force rises. Even though 
the plane is part of GDP, it is not part of the basket of goods and services bought 
by a typical consumer. Thus, the price increase shows up in the GDP deflator but 
not in the consumer price index. 
As another example, suppose that Volvo raises the price of its cars. Because 
Volvos are made in Sweden, the car is not part of U.S. GDP. But U.S. consumers 
buy Volvos, so the car is part of the typical consumer’s basket of goods. Hence, 
a price increase in an imported consumption good, such as a Volvo, shows up in 
the consumer price index but not in the GDP deflator.
This first difference between the consumer price index and the GDP deflator is 
particularly important when the price of oil changes. Although the United States 
does produce some oil, much of the oil we use is imported. As a result, oil and 
oil products such as gasoline and heating oil are a much larger share of consumer 
spending than of GDP. When the price of oil rises, the consumer price index rises 
by much more than does the GDP deflator.
The second and subtler difference between the GDP deflator and the consumer 
price index concerns how various prices are weighted to yield a single number 
for the overall level of prices. The consumer price index compares the price of a 
fixed basket of goods and services to the price of the basket in the base year. Only 
occasionally does the Bureau of Labor Statistics change the basket of goods. By 
contrast, the GDP deflator compares the price of currently produced goods and 
services to the price of the same goods and services in the base year. Thus, the 
“The price may seem a little 
high, but you have to remember 
that’s in today’s dollars.”
© FROM THE WALL STREET JOURNAL—PERMISSION, 
CARTOON FEATURES SYNDICATE.
336
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

group of goods and services used to compute the GDP deflator changes auto-
matically over time. This difference is not important when all prices are changing 
proportionately. But if the prices of different goods and services are changing by 
varying amounts, the way we weight the various prices matters for the overall 
inflation rate. 
Figure 2 shows the inflation rate as measured by both the GDP deflator and 
the consumer price index for each year since 1965. You can see that sometimes 
the two measures diverge. When they do diverge, it is possible to go behind these 
numbers and explain the divergence with the two differences we have discussed. 
For example, in 1979 and 1980, CPI inflation spiked up more than the GDP defla-
tor largely because oil prices more than doubled during these two years. Yet 
divergence between these two measures is the exception rather than the rule. In 
the 1970s, both the GDP deflator and the consumer price index show high rates of 
inflation. In the late 1980s, 1990s, and the first decade of the 2000s, both measures 
show low rates of inflation. 
QUICK QUIZ Explain briefly what the consumer price index measures and how it is 
constructed. • Identify one reason why the CPI is an imperfect measure of the cost of 
living.
Correcting Economic Variables for the Effects of Inflation
The purpose of measuring the overall level of prices in the economy is to allow 
us to compare dollar figures from different times. Now that we know how price 
indexes are calculated, let’s see how we might use such an index to compare a 
dollar figure from the past to a dollar figure in the present.
Two Measures of 
Inflation
This figure shows the 
inflation rate—the 
percentage change in 
the level of prices—
as measured by the 
GDP deflator and the 
consumer price index 
using annual data since 
1965. Notice that the two 
measures of inflation 
generally move together. 
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; 
U.S. Department of Commerce.
Figure 2
Inﬂation Rate
(percent per year)
15%
CPI
GDP deﬂator
10
5
1
0
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
337
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

Dollar Figures from Different Times
We first return to the issue of Babe Ruth’s salary. Was his salary of $80,000 in 1931 
high or low compared to the salaries of today’s players?
To answer this question, we need to know the level of prices in 1931 and the 
level of prices today. Part of the increase in baseball salaries compensates players 
for higher prices today. To compare Ruth’s salary to those of today’s players, we 
need to inflate Ruth’s salary to turn 1931 dollars into today’s dollars.
The formula for turning dollar figures from year T into today’s dollars is the 
following:
 
Price level today
Amount in today’s dollars = Amount in year T dollars ×  
.
 
Price level in year T
A price index such as the consumer price index measures the price level and thus 
determines the size of the inflation correction.
Let’s apply this formula to Ruth’s salary. Government statistics show a con-
sumer price index of 15.2 for 1931 and 214.5 for 2009. Thus, the overall level of 
prices has risen by a factor of 14.1 (which equals 214.5/15.2). We can use these 
numbers to measure Ruth’s salary in 2009 dollars, as follows:
 
Price level in 2009
Salary in 2009 dollars = Salary in 1931 dollars × 
 
Price level in 1931
 
214.5
 
= $80,000 × 
 
15.2
 
= $1,128,947
We find that Babe Ruth’s 1931 salary is equivalent to a salary today of over $1 
million. That is a good income, but it is less than a quarter of the median Yankee 
salary today and only 3 percent of what the Yankees pay A-Rod. Various forces, 
including overall economic growth and the increasing income shares earned by 
superstars, have substantially raised the living standards of the best athletes.
Let’s also examine President Hoover’s 1931 salary of $75,000. To translate that 
figure into 2009 dollars, we again multiply the ratio of the price levels in the two 
years. We find that Hoover’s salary is equivalent to $75,000 × (214.5/15.2), or 
$1,058,388, in 2009 dollars. This is well above President Barack Obama’s salary 
of $400,000. It seems that President Hoover did have a pretty good year after all.
Indexation
As we have just seen, price indexes are used to correct for the effects of inflation 
when comparing dollar figures from different times. This type of correction shows 
up in many places in the economy. When some dollar amount is automatically 
corrected for changes in the price level by law or contract, the amount is said to 
be indexed for inflation.
For example, many long-term contracts between firms and unions include par-
tial or complete indexation of the wage to the consumer price index. Such a provi-
sion is called a cost-of-living allowance, or COLA. A COLA automatically raises the 
wage when the consumer price index rises.
Indexation is also a feature of many laws. Social Security benefits, for example, are 
adjusted every year to compensate the elderly for increases in prices. The brackets 
indexation
the automatic correction 
by law or contract of a 
dollar amount for the 
effects of inflation
338
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

of the federal income tax—the income levels at which the tax rates change—are also 
indexed for inflation. There are, however, many ways in which the tax system is not 
indexed for inflation, even when perhaps it should be. We discuss these issues more 
fully when we discuss the costs of inflation later in this book.
Real and Nominal Interest Rates
Correcting economic variables for the effects of inflation is particularly important, 
and somewhat tricky, when we look at data on interest rates. The very concept 
of an interest rate necessarily involves comparing amounts of money at different 
points in time. When you deposit your savings in a bank account, you give the 
bank some money now, and the bank returns your deposit with interest in the 
future. Similarly, when you borrow from a bank, you get some money now, but 
you will have to repay the loan with interest in the future. In both cases, to fully 
understand the deal between you and the bank, it is crucial to acknowledge that 
future dollars could have a different value than today’s dollars. That is, you have 
to correct for the effects of inflation.
Let’s consider an example. Suppose Sally Saver deposits $1,000 in a bank 
account that pays an annual interest rate of 10 percent. A year later, after Sally has 
accumulated $100 in interest, she withdraws her $1,100. Is Sally $100 richer than 
she was when she made the deposit a year earlier?
The answer depends on what we mean by “richer.” Sally does have $100 more 
than she had before. In other words, the number of dollars in her possession has 
FYI
W
hat is the most popular movie of all 
time? The answer might surprise you.
 
Movie popularity is usually gauged by 
box office receipts. By that measure, Avatar
is the number 1 movie of all time with 
domestic receipts of $749 million, followed 
by Titanic ($601 million) and The Dark 
Knight ($533 million). But this ranking 
ignores an obvious but important fact: 
Prices, including those of movie tickets, 
have been rising over time. Inflation gives 
an advantage to newer films.
 
When we correct box office receipts 
for the effects of inflation, the story is very 
different. The number 1 movie is now Gone 
with the Wind ($1,606 million), followed by 
Star Wars ($1,416 million) and The Sound 
of Music ($1,132 million). Avatar falls to 
number 14. 
  Gone with the Wind was released in 
1939, before everyone had televisions in 
their homes. In the 1930s, about 90 million 
Americans went to the cinema each week, 
compared to about 25 million today. But the 
movies from that era don’t show up in con-
ventional popularity rankings because ticket 
prices were only a quarter. And indeed, in the 
ranking based on nominal box office receipts, 
Gone with the Wind does not make the top 
50 films. Scarlett and Rhett fare a lot better 
once we correct for the effects of inflation.
 Mr. Index Goes to Hollywood
© ARCHIVES DU 7ÈME ART/PHOTOS 12/ALAMY
“I see you don’t like the effects of 
inflation.”
339
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

risen by 10 percent. But Sally does not care about the amount of money itself: 
She cares about what she can buy with it. If prices have risen while her money 
was in the bank, each dollar now buys less than it did a year ago. In this case, her 
purchasing power—the amount of goods and services she can buy—has not risen 
by 10 percent. 
To keep things simple, let’s suppose that Sally is a movie fan and buys 
only DVDs. When Sally made her deposit, a DVD at her local movie store 
cost $10. Her deposit of $1,000 was equivalent to 100 DVDs. A year later, after 
getting her 10 percent interest, she has $1,100. How many DVDs can she buy 
now? It depends on what has happened to the price of a DVD. Here are some 
examples:
•  Zero inflation: If the price of a DVD remains at $10, the amount she can buy 
has risen from 100 to 110 DVDs. The 10 percent increase in the number of 
dollars means a 10 percent increase in her purchasing power.
•  Six percent inflation: If the price of a DVD rises from $10 to $10.60, then the 
number of DVDs she can buy has risen from 100 to approximately 104. Her 
purchasing power has increased by about 4 percent. 
•  Ten percent inflation: If the price of a DVD rises from $10 to $11, she can 
still buy only 100 DVDs. Even though Sally’s dollar wealth has risen, her 
purchasing power is the same as it was a year earlier. 
•  Twelve percent inflation: If the price of a DVD increases from $10 to $11.20, 
the number of DVDs she can buy has fallen from 100 to approximately 
98. Even with her greater number of dollars, her purchasing power has 
decreased by about 2 percent.
And if Sally were living in an economy with deflation—falling prices—another 
possibility could arise:
•  Two percent deflation: If the price of a DVD falls from $10 to $9.80, then the 
number of DVDs she can buy rises from 100 to approximately 112. Her pur-
chasing power increases by about 12 percent.
These examples show that the higher the rate of inflation, the smaller the increase 
in Sally’s purchasing power. If the rate of inflation exceeds the rate of interest, her 
purchasing power actually falls. And if there is deflation (that is, a negative rate 
of inflation), her purchasing power rises by more than the rate of interest.
To understand how much a person earns in a savings account, we need to 
consider both the interest rate and the change in the prices. The interest rate that 
measures the change in dollar amounts is called the nominal interest rate, and 
the interest rate corrected for inflation is called the real interest rate. The nomi-
nal interest rate, the real interest rate, and inflation are related approximately as 
follows:
Real interest rate = Nominal interest rate – Inflation rate.
The real interest rate is the difference between the nominal interest rate and the 
rate of inflation. The nominal interest rate tells you how fast the number of dollars 
in your bank account rises over time, while the real interest rate tells you how fast 
the purchasing power of your bank account rises over time. 
nominal interest 
rate
the interest rate as usually 
reported without a 
correction for the effects 
of inflation
real interest rate
the interest rate corrected 
for the effects of inflation
340
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

Interest Rates in the U.S. Economy
Figure 3 shows real and nominal interest rates in the U.S. economy since 1965. The 
nominal interest rate in this figure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills (although 
data on other interest rates would be similar). The real interest rate is computed 
by subtracting the rate of inflation from this nominal interest rate. Here the infla-
tion rate is measured as the percentage change in the consumer price index.
 
One feature of this figure is that the nominal interest rate almost always exceeds 
the real interest rate. This reflects the fact that the U.S. economy has experienced 
rising consumer prices in almost every year during this period. By contrast, if you 
look at data for the U.S. economy during the late 19th century or for the Japanese 
economy in some recent years, you will find periods of deflation. During defla-
tion, the real interest rate exceeds the nominal interest rate. 
 
The figure also shows that because inflation is variable, real and nominal inter-
est rates do not always move together. For example, in the late 1970s, nominal 
interest rates were high. But because inflation was very high, real interest rates 
were low. Indeed, during much of the 1970s, real interest rates were negative, for 
inflation eroded people’s savings more quickly than nominal interest payments 
increased them. By contrast, in the late 1990s, nominal interest rates were lower 
than they had been two decades earlier. But because inflation was much lower, 
real interest rates were higher. In the coming chapters, we will examine the eco-
nomic forces that determine both real and nominal interest rates.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Henry Ford paid his workers $5 a day in 1914. If the consumer price 
index was 10 in 1914 and 218 in 2010, how much is the Ford paycheck worth in 2010 
dollars? 
Real and Nominal 
Interest Rates
This figure shows nominal 
and real interest rates 
using annual data since 
1965. The nominal 
interest rate is the rate 
on a 3-month Treasury 
bill. The real interest rate 
is the nominal interest 
rate minus the inflation 
rate as measured by the 
consumer price index. 
Notice that nominal and 
real interest rates often 
do not move together.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; 
U.S. Department of Treasury.
Figure 3
1965
Interest Rates
(percent
per year)
15%
Real interest rate
10
5
0
5
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Nominal interest rate
341
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING

Conclusion
“A nickel ain’t worth a dime anymore,” baseball player Yogi Berra once observed. 
Indeed, throughout recent history, the real values behind the nickel, the dime, and 
the dollar have not been stable. Persistent increases in the overall level of prices 
have been the norm. Such inflation reduces the purchasing power of each unit of 
money over time. When comparing dollar figures from different times, it is impor-
tant to keep in mind that a dollar today is not the same as a dollar twenty years 
ago or, most likely, twenty years from now.
This chapter has discussed how economists measure the overall level of prices 
in the economy and how they use price indexes to correct economic variables 
for the effects of inflation. Price indexes allow us to compare dollar figures from 
different points in time and, therefore, get a better sense of how the economy is 
changing. 
The discussion of price indexes in this chapter, together with the preceding 
chapter’s discussion of GDP, is only a first step in the study of macroeconomics. 
We have not yet examined what determines a nation’s GDP or the causes and 
effects of inflation. To do that, we need to go beyond issues of measurement. 
Indeed, that is our next task. Having explained how economists measure mac-
roeconomic quantities and prices in the past two chapters, we are now ready to 
develop the models that explain movements in these variables.
Here is our strategy in the upcoming chapters. First, we look at the long-run 
determinants of real GDP and related variables, such as saving, investment, real 
interest rates, and unemployment. Second, we look at the long-run determinants 
of the price level and related variables, such as the money supply, inflation, and 
nominal interest rates. Last of all, having seen how these variables are determined 
in the long run, we examine the more complex question of what causes short-run 
fluctuations in real GDP and the price level. In all of these chapters, the measure-
ment issues we have just discussed will provide the foundation for the analysis.
SUMMARY
• The consumer price index shows the cost of a 
basket of goods and services relative to the cost 
of the same basket in the base year. The index 
is used to measure the overall level of prices 
in the economy. The percentage change in the 
consumer price index measures the inflation rate.
• The consumer price index is an imperfect 
measure of the cost of living for three reasons. 
First, it does not take into account consumers’ 
ability to substitute toward goods that become 
relatively cheaper over time. Second, it does not 
take into account increases in the purchasing 
power of the dollar due to the introduction of 
new goods. Third, it is distorted by unmeasured 
changes in the quality of goods and services. 
Because of these measurement problems, the CPI 
overstates true inflation.
• Like the consumer price index, the GDP deflator 
measures the overall level of prices in the 
economy. The two price indexes usually move 
together, but there are important differences. 
The GDP deflator differs from the CPI because 
it includes goods and services produced rather 
than goods and services consumed. As a result, 
imported goods affect the consumer price index 
but not the GDP deflator. In addition, while 
the consumer price index uses a fixed basket of 
goods, the GDP deflator automatically changes 
the group of goods and services over time as the 
composition of GDP changes. 
SU
SUMMARY
•
The consumer price index shows the cost of a
basket of goods and services relative to the cost 
of the same basket in the base year. The index
is used to measure the overall level of prices
in the economy. The percentage change in the 
consumer price index measures the inflation rate.
•
The consumer price index is an imperfect
measure of the cost of living for three reasons.
First, it does not take into account consumers’
ability to substitute toward goods that become
relatively cheaper over time. Second, it does not 
take into account increases in the purchasing
power of the dollar due to the introduction of 
new goods. Third, it is distorted by unmeasured
changes in the quality of goods and services.
Because of these measurement problems, the CPI 
overstates true inflation.
•
Like the consumer price index, the GDP deflator
measures the overall level of prices in the 
economy. The two price indexes usually move 
together, but there are important differences.
The GDP deflator differs from the CPI because
it includes goods and services produced rather
than goods and services consumed. As a result,
imported goods affect the consumer price index
but not the GDP deflator. In addition, while
the consumer price index uses a fixed basket of 
goods, the GDP deflator automatically changes
the group of goods and services over time as the 
composition of GDP changes. 
342
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

• Dollar figures from different times do not 
represent a valid comparison of purchasing 
power. To compare a dollar figure from the past 
to a dollar figure today, the older figure should 
be inflated using a price index. 
• Various laws and private contracts use price 
indexes to correct for the effects of inflation. The 
tax laws, however, are only partially indexed for 
inflation.
• A correction for inflation is especially important 
when looking at data on interest rates. The 
nominal interest rate is the interest rate usually 
reported; it is the rate at which the number 
of dollars in a savings account increases over 
time. By contrast, the real interest rate takes into 
account changes in the value of the dollar over 
time. The real interest rate equals the nominal 
interest rate minus the rate of inflation. 
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1.  Which do you think has a greater effect on the 
consumer price index: a 10 percent increase in 
the price of chicken or a 10 percent increase in 
the price of caviar? Why?
 2.  Describe the three problems that make the 
consumer price index an imperfect measure of 
the cost of living.
 3.  If the price of a Navy submarine rises, is the 
consumer price index or the GDP deflator 
affected more? Why?
 4.  Over a long period of time, the price of a candy 
bar rose from $0.10 to $0.60. Over the same 
period, the consumer price index rose from 150 
to 300. Adjusted for overall inflation, how much 
did the price of the candy bar change? 
 5.  Explain the meaning of nominal interest rate and 
real interest rate. How are they related?
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
  1.  Suppose that the year you were born someone 
bought $100 of goods and services for your 
baby shower. How much would you guess 
it would cost today to buy a similar amount 
of goods and services? Now find data on the 
consumer price index and compute the answer 
based on it. (You can find the BLS’s inflation 
calculator here: http://www.bls.gov/data/
inflation_calculator.htm)
 2.  The residents of Vegopia spend all of 
their income on cauliflower, broccoli, and 
carrots. In 2010, they buy 100 heads of 
cauliflower for $200, 50 bunches of broccoli 
for $75, and 500 carrots for $50. In 2011, 
they buy 75 heads of cauliflower for $225, 
80 bunches of broccoli for $120, and 500 carrots 
for $100. 
a. Calculate the price of each vegetable in each 
year.
b. Using 2010 as the base year, calculate the CPI 
for each year. 
c. What is the inflation rate in 2011?
 3.  Suppose that people consume only three goods, 
as shown in this table:
 
 
 
Bottles of 
 
Tennis Balls 
Golf Balls 
Gatorade
2011 price 
$2 
$4 
$1
2011 quantity 
100 
100 
200
2012 price 
$2 
$6 
$2
2012 quantity 
100 
100 
200
•
Dollar figures from different times do not 
represent a valid comparison of purchasing 
power. To compare a dollar figure from the past
to a dollar figure today, the older figure should 
be inflated using a price index.
•
Various laws and private contracts use price
indexes to correct for the effects of inflation. The 
tax laws, however, are only partially indexed for 
inflation.
•
A correction for inflation is especially important 
when looking at data on interest rates. The 
nominal interest rate is the interest rate usually 
reported; it is the rate at which the number 
of dollars in a savings account increases over 
time. By contrast, the real interest rate takes into 
account changes in the value of the dollar over 
time. The real interest rate equals the nominal
interest rate minus the rate of inflation.
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S O
 
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1.  Which do you think has a greater effect on the 
consumer price index: a 10 percent increase in 
the price of chicken or a 10 percent increase in
the price of caviar? Why?
 2.  Describe the three problems that make the
consumer price index an imperfect measure of 
the cost of living.
 3.  If the price of a Navy submarine rises, is the
consumer price index or the GDP deflator 
affected more? Why?
 4.  Over a long period of time, the price of a candy
bar rose from $0.10 to $0.60. Over the same 
period, the consumer price index rose from 150
to 300. Adjusted for overall inflation, how much
did the price of the candy bar change?
 5.  Explain the meaning of nominal interest rate and 
real interest rate. How are they related?
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
  1.  Suppose that the year you were born someone
bought $100 of goods and services for your
baby shower. How much would you guess 
it would cost today to buy a similar amount 
of goods and services? Now find data on the 
consumer price index and compute the answer 
based on it. (You can find the BLS’s inflation 
calculator here: http://www.bls.gov/data/
inflation_calculator.htm)
 2.  The residents of Vegopia spend all of 
their income on cauliflower, broccoli, and 
carrots. In 2010, they buy 100 heads of 
cauliflower for $200, 50 bunches of broccoli
for $75, and 500 carrots for $50. In 2011, 
they buy 75 heads of cauliflower for $225,
80 bunches of broccoli for $120, and 500 carrots 
for $100.
a. Calculate the price of each vegetable in each
year.
b. Using 2010 as the base year, calculate the CPI
for each year. 
c. What is the inflation rate in 2011?
 3.  Suppose that people consume only three goods, 
as shown in this table:
 
 
 
Bottles of 
 
Tennis Balls 
Golf Balls 
Gatorade
2011 price 
$2 
$4 
$1
2011 quantity 
100 
100 
200
2012 price 
$2 
$6 
$2
2012 quantity 
100 
100 
200
343
CHAPTER 16    MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
consumer price index (CPI), p. 330
inflation rate, p. 332
producer price index, p. 333
indexation, p. 338
nominal interest rate, p. 340
real interest rate, p. 340

a. What is the percentage change in the price of 
each of the three goods? 
b. Using a method similar to the consumer price 
index, compute the percentage change in the 
overall price level.
c. If you were to learn that a bottle of Gatorade 
increased in size from 2011 to 2012, should 
that information affect your calculation of the 
inflation rate? If so, how?
d. If you were to learn that Gatorade introduced 
new flavors in 2012, should that information 
affect your calculation of the inflation rate? If 
so, how?
 4.  Go to the website of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (http://www.bls.gov) and find data 
on the consumer price index. By how much 
has the index including all items risen over the 
past year? For which categories of spending 
have prices risen the most? The least? Have any 
categories experienced price declines? Can you 
explain any of these facts?
 5.  A small nation of ten people idolizes the TV 
show American Idol. All they produce and 
consume are karaoke machines and CDs, in the 
following amounts:
 
Karaoke Machines 
CDs
 
Quantity 
Price 
Quantity 
Price
2011 
10 
$40 
30 
$10
2012 
12 
 60 
50 
 12
a.  Using a method similar to the consumer price 
index, compute the percentage change in the 
overall price level. Use 2011 as the base year, 
and fix the basket at 1 karaoke machine and 
3 CDs.
b. Using a method similar to the GDP deflator, 
compute the percentage change of the overall 
price level. Also use 2011 as the base year.
c.  Is the inflation rate in 2012 the same using 
the two methods? Explain why or why not.
 6.  Which of the problems in the construction of 
the CPI might be illustrated by each of the 
following situations? Explain.
a. the invention of the iPod
b. the introduction of air bags in cars
c. increased personal computer purchases in 
response to a decline in their price
d. more scoops of raisins in each package of 
Raisin Bran
e. greater use of fuel-efficient cars after gasoline 
prices increase
 7. The New York Times cost $0.15 in 1970 
and $2.00 in 2009. The average wage in 
manufacturing was $3.23 per hour in 1970 and 
$20.42 in 2009.
a. By what percentage did the price of a 
newspaper rise?
b. By what percentage did the wage rise?
c. In each year, how many minutes does a 
worker have to work to earn enough to buy a 
newspaper?
d. Did workers’ purchasing power in terms of 
newspapers rise or fall?
 8. The chapter explains that Social Security 
benefits are increased each year in proportion 
to the increase in the CPI, even though most 
economists believe that the CPI overstates 
actual inflation.
a. If the elderly consume the same market 
basket as other people, does Social Security 
provide the elderly with an improvement in 
their standard of living each year? Explain.
b. In fact, the elderly consume more healthcare 
compared to younger people, and healthcare 
costs have risen faster than overall inflation. 
What would you do to determine whether 
the elderly are actually better off from year to 
year?
 9. When deciding how much of their income to 
save for retirement, should workers consider 
the real or the nominal interest rate that their 
savings will earn? Explain.
 10. Suppose that a borrower and a lender agree on 
the nominal interest rate to be paid on a loan. 
Then inflation turns out to be higher than they 
both expected.
a. Is the real interest rate on this loan higher or 
lower than expected?
b. Does the lender gain or lose from this 
unexpectedly high inflation? Does the 
borrower gain or lose?
c. Inflation during the 1970s was much 
higher than most people had expected 
when the decade began. How did this 
affect homeowners who obtained fixed-rate 
mortgages during the 1960s? How did it 
affect the banks that lent the money?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
344
PART VI 
THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS

VII
PART
Th e Real Economy 
in the Long Run


Production and Growth
W
hen you travel around the world, you see tremendous variation in 
the standard of living. The average income in a rich country, such 
as the United States, Japan, or Germany, is more than ten times 
the average income in a poor country, such as India, Indonesia, or 
Nigeria. These large differences in income are reflected in large differences in 
the quality of life. People in richer countries have better nutrition, safer housing, 
better healthcare, and longer life expectancy as well as more automobiles, more 
telephones, and more televisions.
Even within a country, there are large changes in the standard of living over 
time. In the United States over the past century, average income as measured by real 
GDP per person has grown by about 2 percent per year. Although 2 percent might 
seem small, this rate of growth implies that average income doubles every 35 years. 
Because of this growth, average income today is about eight times the average income 
a century ago. As a result, the typical American enjoys much greater economic pros-
perity than did his or her parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents.
17
347

Growth rates vary substantially from country to country. In recent history, some 
East Asian countries, such as Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan, have experienced 
economic growth of about 7 percent per year; at this rate, average income doubles 
every 10 years. Over the past two decades, China has enjoyed an even higher rate of 
growth—about 12 percent per year, according to some estimates. A country experi-
encing such rapid growth can, in one generation, go from being among the poorest 
in the world to being among the richest. By contrast, in some African countries, such 
as Chad, Gabon, and Senegal, average income has been stagnant for many years.
What explains these diverse experiences? How can rich countries maintain their 
high standard of living? What policies should poor countries pursue to promote more 
rapid growth and join the developed world? These are among the most important 
questions in macroeconomics. As the Nobel-Prize-winning economist Robert Lucas 
put it, “The consequences for human welfare in questions like these are simply stag-
gering: Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else.”
In the previous two chapters, we discussed how economists measure macro-
economic quantities and prices. We can now begin to study the forces that deter-
mine these variables. As we have seen, an economy’s gross domestic product 
(GDP) measures both the total income earned in the economy and the total expen-
diture on the economy’s output of goods and services. The level of real GDP is a 
good gauge of economic prosperity, and the growth of real GDP is a good gauge 
of economic progress. In this chapter we focus on the long-run determinants of 
the level and growth of real GDP. Later in this book, we study the short-run fluc-
tuations of real GDP around its long-run trend.
We proceed here in three steps. First, we examine international data on real 
GDP per person. These data will give you some sense of how much the level and 
growth of living standards vary around the world. Second, we examine the role 
of productivity—the amount of goods and services produced for each hour of a 
worker’s time. In particular, we see that a nation’s standard of living is determined 
by the productivity of its workers, and we consider the factors that determine a 
nation’s productivity. Third, we consider the link between productivity and the 
economic policies that a nation pursues.
Economic Growth around the World
As a starting point for our study of long-run growth, let’s look at the experiences 
of some of the world’s economies. Table 1 shows data on real GDP per person for 
thirteen countries. For each country, the data cover more than a century of history. 
The first and second columns of the table present the countries and time periods. 
(The time periods differ somewhat from country to country because of differences 
in data availability.) The third and fourth columns show estimates of real GDP per 
person about a century ago and for a recent year.
The data on real GDP per person show that living standards vary widely from 
country to country. Income per person in the United States, for instance, is about 
eight times that in China and about sixteen times that in India. The poorest coun-
tries have average levels of income not seen in the developed world for many 
decades. The typical citizen of India in 2008 had less real income than the typical 
resident of England in 1870. The typical person in Bangladesh in 2008 had about 
two-thirds the real income of a typical American a century ago.
The last column of the table shows each country’s growth rate. The growth rate 
measures how rapidly real GDP per person grew in the typical year. In the United 
States, for example, where real GDP per person was $4,007 in 1870 and $46,970 in 
348
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

2008, the growth rate was 1.80 percent per year. This means that if real GDP per 
person, beginning at $4,007, were to increase by 1.80 percent for each of 138 years, 
it would end up at $46,970. Of course, real GDP per person did not actually rise 
exactly 1.80 percent every year: Some years it rose by more, other years it rose by 
less, and in still other years it fell. The growth rate of 1.80 percent per year ignores 
short-run fluctuations around the long-run trend and represents an average rate 
of growth for real GDP per person over many years. 
The countries in Table 1 are ordered by their growth rate from the most to 
the least rapid. Japan tops the list, with a growth rate of 2.71 percent per year. 
A hundred years ago, Japan was not a rich country. Japan’s average income was 
only somewhat higher than Mexico’s, and it was well behind Argentina’s. The 
standard of living in Japan in 1890 was less than half of that in India today. But 
because of its spectacular growth, Japan is now an economic superpower, with 
average income more than twice that of Mexico and Argentina and similar to 
Germany, Canada, and the United Kingdom. At the bottom of the list of countries 
are Pakistan and Bangladesh, which have experienced growth of less than 1.3 
percent per year over the past century. As a result, the typical resident of these 
countries continues to live in abject poverty.
Because of differences in growth rates, the ranking of countries by income 
changes substantially over time. As we have seen, Japan is a country that has 
risen relative to others. One country that has fallen behind is the United Kingdom. 
In 1870, the United Kingdom was the richest country in the world, with average 
income about 20 percent higher than that of the United States and more than twice 
Canada’s. Today, average income in the United Kingdom is 20 percent below that 
of the United States and similar to Canada’s. 
These data show that the world’s richest countries have no guarantee they will stay 
the richest and that the world’s poorest countries are not doomed forever to remain 
in poverty. But what explains these changes over time? Why do some countries zoom 
ahead while others lag behind? These are precisely the questions that we take up next.
The Variety of Growth 
Experiences
Table 1
Real GDP per
Real GDP per
Person at Beginning
Person at End
Growth Rate
Country
Period
of Period*
of Period*
(per year)
Japan
1890–2008
$1,504
$35,220
2.71%
Brazil
1900–2008
  779
  10,070
2.40
Mexico
1900–2008
 1,159
 14,270
2.35
Germany
1870–2008
 2,184
 35,940
2.05 
Canada
1870–2008
 2,375
 36,220
1.99
China
1900–2008
  716
  6,020
1.99
United States
1870–2008
 4,007
 46,970
1.80
Argentina
1900–2008
 2,293
 14,020
1.69
United Kingdom
1870–2008
 4,808
 36,130
1.47
India
1900–2008
  675
 2,960
1.38
Indonesia
1900–2008
  891
 3,830
1.36 
Pakistan
1900–2008
  737
 2,700
1.21
Bangladesh
1900–2008
  623
 1,440
0.78
*Real GDP is measured in 2008 dollars.
Source: Robert J. Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995), tables 10.2 and 10.3; 
World Development Report 2010, Table 1; and author’s calculations.
349
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

FYI
 A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Statistics
G
eorge Bernard Shaw once said, “The sign of a truly educated 
man is to be deeply moved by statistics.” Most of us, however, 
have trouble being deeply moved by data on GDP—until we see 
what these statistics represent. 
 
The three photos on these pages show a typical family from each 
of three countries—the United Kingdom, Mexico, and Mali. Each 
family was photographed outside their home, together with all their 
material possessions. 
 
These nations have very different standards of living, as judged 
by these photos, GDP, or other statistics. 
•  The United Kingdom is an advanced economy. In 2008, its GDP 
per person was $36,130. A negligible share of the population 
lives in extreme poverty, defined here as less than $2 a day. 
Educational attainment is high: Among children of high school 
age, 91 percent are in school. Residents of the United Kingdom 
can expect to enjoy a long life: The probability of a person 
surviving to age 65 is 85 percent for men and 91 percent for 
women.
•  Mexico is a middle-income country. In 2008, its GDP per 
 person was $14,270. About 5 percent of the population lives 
on less than $2 a day. Among children of high school age, 
71 percent are in school. The probability of a person surviving to 
age 65 is 78 percent for men and 86 percent for women.
•  Mali is a poor country. In 2008, its GDP per person was only 
$1,090. Extreme poverty is the norm: More than three-quarters 
of the population lives on less than $2 per day. Educational 
attainment in Mali is low: Among children of high school age, 
only 29 percent are in school. And life is often cut short: The 
probability of a person surviving to age 65 is only 38 percent for 
men and 42 percent for women.
Economists who study economic growth try to understand what 
causes such large differences in the standard of living.
© DAVID REED – FROM MATERIAL WORLD
 A Typical Family in the United Kingdom
350
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

A Typical Family in Mali
© 2005 PETER MENZEL/MENZELPHOTO.COM
© 2005 PETER MENZEL/MENZELPHOTO.COM
A Typical Family in Mexico
351
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

QUICK QUIZ What is the approximate growth rate of real GDP per person in the 
United States? Name a country that has had faster growth and a country that has had 
slower growth.
Productivity: Its Role and Determinants 
Explaining the large variation in living standards around the world is, in one 
sense, very easy. As we will see, the explanation can be summarized in a single 
word—productivity. But in another sense, the international variation is deeply 
puzzling. To explain why incomes are so much higher in some countries than in 
others, we must look at the many factors that determine a nation’s productivity.
Why Productivity Is So Important
Let’s begin our study of productivity and economic growth by developing a 
simple model based loosely on Daniel Defoe’s famous novel Robinson Crusoe
about a sailor stranded on a desert island. Because Crusoe lives alone, he catches 
his own fish, grows his own vegetables, and makes his own clothes. We can think 
of Crusoe’s activities—his production and consumption of fish, vegetables, and 
clothing—as a simple economy. By examining Crusoe’s economy, we can learn 
some lessons that also apply to more complex and realistic economies.
FYI
 Are You Richer Than the Richest 
American?
A
merican Heritage magazine once published a list of the richest 
 Americans of all time. The number 1 spot went to John D. 
Rockefeller, the oil entrepreneur who lived from 1839 to 1937. 
According to the magazine’s calculations, his wealth would today be 
the equivalent of about $200 billion, almost four times that of Bill 
Gates, the software entrepreneur who is today’s richest American.
 
Despite his great wealth, Rockefeller did not enjoy many of the 
conveniences that we now take for granted. He 
couldn’t watch television, play video games, surf 
the Internet, or send e-mail. During the heat of 
summer, he couldn’t cool his home with air condi-
tioning. For much of his life, he couldn’t travel by 
car or plane, and he couldn’t use a telephone to 
call friends or family. If he became ill, he couldn’t 
take advantage of many medicines, such as anti-
biotics, that doctors today routinely use to prolong 
and enhance life.
 
Now consider: How much money would someone have to pay 
you to give up for the rest of your life all the modern conveniences 
that Rockefeller lived without? Would you do it for $200 billion? 
Perhaps not. And if you wouldn’t, is it fair to say that you are better 
off than John D. Rockefeller, allegedly the richest American ever?
 
The preceding chapter discussed how standard price indexes, 
which are used to compare sums of money from different points 
in time, fail to fully reflect the introduction of new 
goods in the economy. As a result, the rate of infla-
tion is overestimated. The flip side of this observa-
tion is that the rate of real economic growth is 
underestimated. Pondering Rockefeller’s life shows 
how significant this problem might be. Because of 
tremendous technological advances, the average 
American today is arguably “richer” than the richest 
American a century ago, even if that fact is lost in 
standard economic statistics.
John D. Rockefeller 
© AP PHOTOS
352
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

What determines Crusoe’s standard of living? In a word, productivity, the 
quantity of goods and services produced from each unit of labor input. If Crusoe 
is good at catching fish, growing vegetables, and making clothes, he lives well. If 
he is bad at doing these things, he lives poorly. Because Crusoe gets to consume 
only what he produces, his living standard is tied to his productivity.
In the case of Crusoe’s economy, it is easy to see that productivity is the key deter-
minant of living standards and that growth in productivity is the key determinant 
of growth in living standards. The more fish Crusoe can catch per hour, the more 
he eats at dinner. If Crusoe finds a better place to catch fish, his productivity rises. 
This increase in productivity makes Crusoe better off: He can eat the extra fish, or he 
can spend less time fishing and devote more time to making other goods he enjoys.
Productivity’s key role in determining living standards is as true for nations as 
it is for stranded sailors. Recall that an economy’s gross domestic product (GDP) 
measures two things at once: the total income earned by everyone in the economy 
and the total expenditure on the economy’s output of goods and services. GDP can 
measure these two things simultaneously because, for the economy as a whole, 
they must be equal. Put simply, an economy’s income is the economy’s output. 
Like Crusoe, a nation can enjoy a high standard of living only if it can produce 
a large quantity of goods and services. Americans live better than Nigerians 
because American workers are more productive than Nigerian workers. The 
Japanese have enjoyed more rapid growth in living standards than Argentineans 
because Japanese workers have experienced more rapid growth in productivity. 
Indeed, one of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that a country’s stan-
dard of living depends on its ability to produce goods and services.
Hence, to understand the large differences in living standards we observe 
across countries or over time, we must focus on the production of goods and 
services. But seeing the link between living standards and productivity is only 
the first step. It leads naturally to the next question: Why are some economies so 
much better at producing goods and services than others?
How Productivity Is Determined
Although productivity is uniquely important in determining Robinson Crusoe’s 
standard of living, many factors determine Crusoe’s productivity. Crusoe will 
be better at catching fish, for instance, if he has more fishing poles, if he has 
been trained in the best fishing techniques, if his island has a plentiful fish sup-
ply, or if he invents a better fishing lure. Each of these determinants of Crusoe’s 
productivity—which we can call physical capital, human capital, natural resources, 
and technological knowledge—has a counterpart in more complex and realistic 
economies. Let’s consider each factor in turn. 
Physical Capital per Worker Workers are more productive if they have 
tools with which to work. The stock of equipment and structures used to produce 
goods and services is called physical capital, or just capital. For example, when 
woodworkers make furniture, they use saws, lathes, and drill presses. More tools 
allow the woodworkers to produce their output more quickly and more accurately: 
A worker with only basic hand tools can make less furniture each week than a 
worker with sophisticated and specialized woodworking equipment. 
As you may recall, the inputs used to produce goods and services—labor, capi-
tal, and so on—are called the factors of production. An important feature of capital 
is that it is a produced factor of production. That is, capital is an input into the pro-
duction process that in the past was an output from the production process. The 
productivity
the quantity of goods and 
services produced from 
each unit of labor input
physical capital
the stock of equipment 
and structures that are 
used to produce goods 
and services
353
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

woodworker uses a lathe to make the leg of a table. Earlier, the lathe itself was the 
output of a firm that manufactures lathes. The lathe manufacturer in turn used 
other equipment to make its product. Thus, capital is a factor of production used 
to produce all kinds of goods and services, including more capital.
Human Capital per Worker A second determinant of productivity is human 
capital. Human capital is the economist’s term for the knowledge and skills that 
workers acquire through education, training, and experience. Human capital 
includes the skills accumulated in early childhood programs, grade school, high 
school, college, and on-the-job training for adults in the labor force. 
Education, training, and experience are less tangible than lathes, bulldozers, and 
buildings, but human capital is like physical capital in many ways. Like physical 
capital, human capital raises a nation’s ability to produce goods and services. Also 
like physical capital, human capital is a produced factor of production. Producing 
human capital requires inputs in the form of teachers, libraries, and student time. 
Indeed, students can be viewed as “workers” who have the important job of pro-
ducing the human capital that will be used in future production.
Natural Resources per Worker A third determinant of productivity is 
natural resources. Natural resources are inputs into production that are provided 
by nature, such as land, rivers, and mineral deposits. Natural resources take 
two forms: renewable and nonrenewable. A forest is an example of a renewable 
resource. When one tree is cut down, a seedling can be planted in its place to be 
harvested in the future. Oil is an example of a nonrenewable resource. Because oil 
is produced by nature over many millions of years, there is only a limited supply. 
Once the supply of oil is depleted, it is impossible to create more.
Differences in natural resources are responsible for some of the differences in 
standards of living around the world. The historical success of the United States was 
driven in part by the large supply of land well suited for agriculture. Today, some 
countries in the Middle East, such as Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, are rich simply 
because they happen to be on top of some of the largest pools of oil in the world. 
Although natural resources can be important, they are not necessary for an 
economy to be highly productive in producing goods and services. Japan, for 
instance, is one of the richest countries in the world, despite having few natural 
resources. International trade makes Japan’s success possible. Japan imports 
many of the natural resources it needs, such as oil, and exports its manufactured 
goods to economies rich in natural resources.
Technological Knowledge A fourth determinant of productivity is 
technological knowledge—the understanding of the best ways to produce goods 
and services. A hundred years ago, most Americans worked on farms because 
farm technology required a high input of labor to feed the entire population. 
Today, thanks to advances in farming technology, a small fraction of the popu-
lation can produce enough food to feed the entire country. This technological 
change made labor available to produce other goods and services.
Technological knowledge takes many forms. Some technology is common 
knowledge—after one person uses it, everyone becomes aware of it. For example, 
once Henry Ford successfully introduced production in assembly lines, other 
carmakers quickly followed suit. Other technology is proprietary—it is known 
only by the company that discovers it. Only the Coca-Cola Company, for instance, 
knows the secret recipe for making its famous soft drink. Still other technology 
is proprietary for a short time. When a pharmaceutical company discovers a new 
human capital
the knowledge and skills 
that workers acquire 
through education, 
training, and experience
natural resources
the inputs into the 
production of goods and 
services that are provided 
by nature, such as land, 
rivers, and mineral 
deposits
technological 
knowledge
society’s understanding of 
the best ways to produce 
goods and services
354
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

drug, the patent system gives that company a temporary right to be its exclusive 
manufacturer. When the patent expires, however, other companies are allowed to 
make the drug. All these forms of technological knowledge are important for the 
economy’s production of goods and services.
It is worthwhile to distinguish between technological knowledge and human 
capital. Although they are closely related, there is an important difference. 
Technological knowledge refers to society’s understanding about how the world 
works. Human capital refers to the resources expended transmitting this under-
standing to the labor force. To use a relevant metaphor, knowledge is the qual-
ity of society’s textbooks, whereas human capital is the amount of time that the 
population has devoted to reading them. Workers’ productivity depends on both.
Are Natural Resources a Limit to Growth?
Today, the world’s population is almost 7 billion, more than four times what it 
was a century ago. At the same time, many people are enjoying a much higher 
standard of living than did their great-grandparents. A perennial debate concerns 
whether this growth in population and living standards can continue in the future.
FYI
 The Production Function
E
conomists often use a production function to describe the rela-
tionship between the quantity of inputs used in production and 
the quantity of output from production. For example, suppose Y 
denotes the quantity of output, L the quantity of labor, K the quan-
tity of physical capital, H the quantity of human capital, and N the 
quantity of natural resources. Then we might write
Y = A F(L, K, H, N),
where F ( ) is a function that shows how the inputs are combined to 
produce output. A is a variable that reflects the available production 
technology. As technology improves, A rises, so the economy pro-
duces more output from any given combination of inputs.
 
Many production functions have a property called constant 
returns to scale. If a production function has constant returns to 
scale, then doubling all inputs causes the amount of output to 
double as well. Mathematically, we write that a production function 
has constant returns to scale if, for any positive number x,
xY = A F(xL, xK, xH, xN). 
A doubling of all inputs would be represented in this equation by 
x = 2. The right side shows the inputs doubling, and the left side 
shows output doubling.
 
Production functions with constant returns to scale have an 
interesting and useful implication. To see this implication, it will 
prove instructive to set x = 1/L. Then the preceding equation 
becomes
Y/L = A F(1, K/L, H/L, N/L).
Notice that Y/L is output per worker, which is a measure of produc-
tivity. This equation says that labor productivity depends on physical 
capital per worker (K/L), human capital per worker (H/L), and natural 
resources per worker (N/L). Productivity also depends on the state 
of technology, as reflected by the variable A. Thus, this equation 
provides a mathematical summary of the four determinants of pro-
ductivity we have just discussed.
355
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

 
Many commentators have argued that natural resources will eventually limit 
how much the world’s economies can grow. At first, this argument might seem 
hard to ignore. If the world has only a fixed supply of nonrenewable natural 
resources, how can population, production, and living standards continue to 
grow over time? Eventually, won’t supplies of oil and minerals start to run out? 
When these shortages start to occur, won’t they stop economic growth and, per-
haps, even force living standards to fall? 
 
Despite the apparent appeal of such arguments, most economists are less con-
cerned about such limits to growth than one might guess. They argue that techno-
logical progress often yields ways to avoid these limits. If we compare the economy 
today to the economy of the past, we see various ways in which the use of natural 
resources has improved. Modern cars have better gas mileage. New houses have 
better insulation and require less energy to heat and cool them. More efficient oil 
rigs waste less oil in the process of extraction. Recycling allows some nonrenewable 
resources to be reused. The development of alternative fuels, such as ethanol instead 
of gasoline, allows us to substitute renewable for nonrenewable resources.
 
Sixty years ago, some conservationists were concerned about the excessive use 
of tin and copper. At the time, these were crucial commodities: Tin was used to 
make many food containers, and copper was used to make telephone wire. Some 
people advocated mandatory recycling and rationing of tin and copper so that 
supplies would be available for future generations. Today, however, plastic has 
replaced tin as a material for making many food containers, and phone calls often 
travel over fiber-optic cables, which are made from sand. Technological progress 
has made once crucial natural resources less necessar y.
 
But are all these efforts enough to permit continued economic growth? One 
way to answer this question is to look at the prices of natural resources. In a 
market economy, scarcity is reflected in market prices. If the world were running 
out of natural resources, then the prices of those resources would be rising over 
time. But in fact, the opposite is more often true. Natural resource prices exhibit 
substantial short-run fluctuations, but over long spans of time, the prices of most 
natural resources (adjusted for overall inflation) are stable or falling. It appears 
that our ability to conserve these resources is growing more rapidly than their 
supplies are dwindling. Market prices give no reason to believe that natural 
resources are a limit to economic growth.  ■
QUICK QUIZ List and describe four determinants of a country’s productivity.
Economic Growth and Public Policy
So far, we have determined that a society’s standard of living depends on its 
ability to produce goods and services and that its productivity in turn depends 
on physical capital per worker, human capital per worker, natural resources per 
worker, and technological knowledge. Let’s now turn to the question faced by 
policymakers around the world: What can government policy do to raise produc-
tivity and living standards?
Saving and Investment
Because capital is a produced factor of production, a society can change the 
amount of capital it has. If today the economy produces a large quantity of new 
356
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

capital goods, then tomorrow it will have a larger stock of capital and be able to 
produce more goods and services. Thus, one way to raise future productivity is to 
invest more current resources in the production of capital.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics presented in Chapter 1 is that people face 
trade-offs. This principle is especially important when considering the accumula-
tion of capital. Because resources are scarce, devoting more resources to produc-
ing capital requires devoting fewer resources to producing goods and services for 
current consumption. That is, for society to invest more in capital, it must con-
sume less and save more of its current income. The growth that arises from capital 
accumulation is not a free lunch: It requires that society sacrifice consumption of 
goods and services in the present to enjoy higher consumption in the future. 
The next chapter examines in more detail how the economy’s financial markets 
coordinate saving and investment. It also examines how government policies 
influence the amount of saving and investment that takes place. At this point, 
it is important to note that encouraging saving and investment is one way that 
a government can encourage growth and, in the long run, raise the economy’s 
standard of living. 
Diminishing Returns and the Catch-Up Effect
Suppose that a government pursues policies that raise the nation’s saving 
rate—the percentage of GDP devoted to saving rather than consumption. What 
happens? With the nation saving more, fewer resources are needed to make con-
sumption goods, and more resources are available to make capital goods. As a 
result, the capital stock increases, leading to rising productivity and more rapid 
growth in GDP. But how long does this higher rate of growth last? Assuming that 
the saving rate remains at its new higher level, does the growth rate of GDP stay 
high indefinitely or only for a period of time?
The traditional view of the production process is that capital is subject to 
diminishing returns: As the stock of capital rises, the extra output produced from 
an additional unit of capital falls. In other words, when workers already have a 
large quantity of capital to use in producing goods and services, giving them an 
additional unit of capital increases their productivity only slightly. This is illus-
trated in Figure 1, which shows how the amount of capital per worker determines 
the amount of output per worker, holding constant all the other determinants of 
output. 
Because of diminishing returns, an increase in the saving rate leads to higher 
growth only for a while. As the higher saving rate allows more capital to be accu-
mulated, the benefits from additional capital become smaller over time, and so 
growth slows down. In the long run, the higher saving rate leads to a higher level of 
productivity and income but not to higher growth in these variables. Reaching this long 
run, however, can take quite a while. According to studies of international data 
on economic growth, increasing the saving rate can lead to substantially higher 
growth for a period of several decades.
The diminishing returns to capital has another important implication: Other 
things equal, it is easier for a country to grow fast if it starts out relatively poor. 
This effect of initial conditions on subsequent growth is sometimes called the 
catch-up effect. In poor countries, workers lack even the most rudimentary tools 
and, as a result, have low productivity. Small amounts of capital investment 
would substantially raise these workers’ productivity. By contrast, workers in 
rich countries have large amounts of capital with which to work, and this partly 
diminishing returns
the property whereby the 
benefit from an extra unit 
of an input declines as 
the quantity of the input 
increases
catch-up effect
the property whereby 
countries that start off 
poor tend to grow more 
rapidly than countries that 
start off rich
357
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

explains their high productivity. Yet with the amount of capital per worker 
already so high, additional capital investment has a relatively small effect on pro-
ductivity. Studies of international data on economic growth confirm this catch-up 
effect: Controlling for other variables, such as the percentage of GDP devoted to 
investment, poor countries tend to grow at faster rates than rich countries.
This catch-up effect can help explain some otherwise puzzling facts. Here’s an 
example: From 1960 to 1990, the United States and South Korea devoted a similar 
share of GDP to investment. Yet over this time, the United States experienced 
only mediocre growth of about 2 percent, while South Korea experienced spec-
tacular growth of more than 6 percent. The explanation is the catch-up effect. In 
1960, South Korea had GDP per person less than one-tenth the U.S. level, in part 
because previous investment had been so low. With a small initial capital stock, 
the benefits to capital accumulation were much greater in South Korea, and this 
gave South Korea a higher subsequent growth rate.
This catch-up effect shows up in other aspects of life. When a school gives an 
end-of-year award to the “Most Improved” student, that student is usually one 
who began the year with relatively poor performance. Students who began the 
year not studying find improvement easier than students who always worked 
hard. Note that it is good to be “Most Improved,” given the starting point, but it is 
even better to be “Best Student.” Similarly, economic growth over the last several 
decades has been much more rapid in South Korea than in the United States, but 
GDP per person is still higher in the United States.
Investment from Abroad
So far, we have discussed how policies aimed at increasing a country’s saving rate 
can increase investment and, thereby, long-term economic growth. Yet saving by 
Figure 1
Illustrating the Production 
Function
This figure shows how 
the amount of capital 
per worker influences the 
amount of output per 
worker. Other determinants 
of output, including human 
capital, natural resources, 
and technology, are held 
constant. The curve becomes 
flatter as the amount of 
capital increases because 
of diminishing returns to 
capital. 
Output
per Worker
1
1
Capital per
Worker
1. When the economy has a low level of capital, an extra unit
of capital leads to a large increase in output.
2. When the economy has a high 
level of capital, an extra unit of 
capital leads to a small increase 
in output.
358
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

domestic residents is not the only way for a country to invest in new capital. The 
other way is investment by foreigners. 
Investment from abroad takes several forms. Ford Motor Company might 
build a car factory in Mexico. A capital investment that is owned and operated 
by a foreign entity is called foreign direct investment. Alternatively, an American 
might buy stock in a Mexican corporation (that is, buy a share in the ownership 
of the corporation); the Mexican corporation can use the proceeds from the stock 
sale to build a new factory. An investment that is financed with foreign money 
but operated by domestic residents is called foreign portfolio investment. In both 
cases, Americans provide the resources necessary to increase the stock of capital 
in Mexico. That is, American saving is being used to finance Mexican investment.
When foreigners invest in a country, they do so because they expect to earn a 
return on their investment. Ford’s car factory increases the Mexican capital stock 
and, therefore, increases Mexican productivity and Mexican GDP. Yet Ford takes 
some of this additional income back to the United States in the form of profit. 
Similarly, when an American investor buys Mexican stock, the investor has a right 
to a portion of the profit that the Mexican corporation earns.
Investment from abroad, therefore, does not have the same effect on all mea-
sures of economic prosperity. Recall that gross domestic product (GDP) is the 
income earned within a country by both residents and nonresidents, whereas 
gross national product (GNP) is the income earned by residents of a country both 
at home and abroad. When Ford opens its car factory in Mexico, some of the 
income the factory generates accrues to people who do not live in Mexico. As a 
result, foreign investment in Mexico raises the income of Mexicans (measured by 
GNP) by less than it raises the production in Mexico (measured by GDP).
Nonetheless, investment from abroad is one way for a country to grow. Even 
though some of the benefits from this investment flow back to the foreign owners, 
this investment does increase the economy’s stock of capital, leading to higher 
productivity and higher wages. Moreover, investment from abroad is one way 
for poor countries to learn the state-of-the-art technologies developed and used 
in richer countries. For these reasons, many economists who advise governments 
in less developed economies advocate policies that encourage investment from 
abroad. Often, this means removing restrictions that governments have imposed 
on foreign ownership of domestic capital.
An organization that tries to encourage the flow of capital to poor countries is 
the World Bank. This international organization obtains funds from the world’s 
advanced countries, such as the United States, and uses these resources to make 
loans to less developed countries so that they can invest in roads, sewer systems, 
schools, and other types of capital. It also offers the countries advice about how 
the funds might best be used. The World Bank, together with its sister organi-
zation, the International Monetary Fund, was set up after World War II. One 
lesson from the war was that economic distress often leads to political turmoil, 
international tensions, and military conflict. Thus, every country has an interest 
in promoting economic prosperity around the world. The World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund were established to achieve that common goal.
Education
Education—investment in human capital—is at least as important as investment 
in physical capital for a country’s long-run economic success. In the United States, 
each year of schooling has historically raised a person’s wage by an average of 
about 10 percent. In less developed countries, where human capital is especially 
359
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

scarce, the gap between the wages of educated and uneducated workers is even 
larger. Thus, one way government policy can enhance the standard of living is to 
provide good schools and to encourage the population to take advantage of them.
Investment in human capital, like investment in physical capital, has an oppor-
tunity cost. When students are in school, they forgo the wages they could have 
earned as members of the labor force. In less developed countries, children often 
drop out of school at an early age, even though the benefit of additional school-
ing is very high, simply because their labor is needed to help support the family.
Some economists have argued that human capital is particularly important 
for economic growth because human capital conveys positive externalities. An 
externality is the effect of one person’s actions on the well-being of a bystander. 
An educated person, for instance, might generate new ideas about how best to 
produce goods and services. If these ideas enter society’s pool of knowledge so 
that everyone can use them, then the ideas are an external benefit of education. 
In this case, the return to schooling for society is even greater than the return for 
the individual. This argument would justify the large subsidies to human-capital 
investment that we observe in the form of public education. 
One problem facing some poor countries is the brain drain—the emigration of 
many of the most highly educated workers to rich countries, where these work-
ers can enjoy a higher standard of living. If human capital does have positive 
externalities, then this brain drain makes those people left behind poorer than 
they otherwise would be. This problem offers policymakers a dilemma. On the 
one hand, the United States and other rich countries have the best systems of 
higher education, and it would seem natural for poor countries to send their best 
students abroad to earn higher degrees. On the other hand, those students who 
have spent time abroad may choose not to return home, and this brain drain will 
reduce the poor nation’s stock of human capital even further.
Health and Nutrition
The term human capital usually refers to education, but it can also be used to 
describe another type of investment in people: expenditures that lead to a health-
ier population. Other things equal, healthier workers are more productive. The 
right investments in the health of the population provide one way for a nation to 
increase productivity and raise living standards.
Economic historian Robert Fogel has suggested that a significant factor in 
long-run economic growth is improved health from better nutrition. He estimates 
that in Great Britain in 1780, about one in five people were so malnourished that 
they were incapable of manual labor. Among those who could work, insufficient 
caloric intake substantially reduced the work effort they could put forth. As nutri-
tion improved, so did workers’ productivity.
Fogel studies these historical trends in part by looking at the height of the 
population. Short stature can be an indicator of malnutrition, especially during 
gestation and the early years of life. Fogel finds that as nations develop eco-
nomically, people eat more, and the population gets taller. From 1775 to 1975, 
the average caloric intake in Great Britain rose by 26 percent, and the height of 
the average man rose by 3.6 inches. Similarly, during the spectacular economic 
growth in South Korea from 1962 to 1995, caloric consumption rose by 44 percent, 
and average male height rose by 2 inches. Of course, a person’s height is deter-
mined by a combination of genetic predisposition and environment. But because 
the genetic makeup of a population is slow to change, such increases in average 
360
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

height are most likely due to changes in the environment—nutrition being the 
obvious explanation.
Moreover, studies have found that height is an indicator of productivity. 
Looking at data on a large number of workers at a point in time, researchers have 
found that taller workers tend to earn more. Because wages reflect a worker’s 
productivity, this finding suggests that taller workers tend to be more productive. 
The effect of height on wages is especially pronounced in poorer countries, where 
malnutrition is a bigger risk. 
 Promoting Human Capital
Because human capital is a key to economic growth, some developing 
countries give parents an immediate financial incentive to keep their 
children in school.
in the news
Brazil Pays Parents to 
Help Poor Be Pupils, 
Not Wage Earners
BY CELIA W. DUGGER
V
andelson Andrade, 13, often used to 
skip school to work 12-hour days on the 
small, graceful fishing boats that sail from 
the picturesque harbor here. His meager 
earnings helped pay for rice and beans for 
his desperately poor family.
 
But this year he qualified for a small 
monthly cash payment from the government 
that his mother receives on the condition 
that he shows up in the classroom.
 
“I can’t skip school anymore,” said 
Vandelson, whose hand-me-down pants 
were so big that the crotch ended at his 
knees and the legs bunched up around his 
ankles. “If I miss one more day, my mother 
won’t get the money.”
 
This year, Vandelson will finally pass the 
fourth grade on his third try—a small victory 
in a new breed of social program that is 
spreading swiftly across Latin America. It is a 
developing-country version of American wel-
fare reform: to break the cycle of poverty, the 
government gives the poor small cash pay-
ments in exchange for keeping their children 
in school and taking them for regular medical 
checkups.
 
“I think these programs are as close as you 
can come to a magic bullet in development,” 
said Nancy Birdsall, president of the Center 
for Global Development, a nonprofit research 
group in Washington. “They’re creating an 
incentive for families to invest in their own 
children’s futures. Every decade or so, we see 
something that can really make a difference, 
and this is one of those things.” . . .
 
Antônio Souza, 48, and Maria Torres, 
37, are raising seven children in a mud hut 
a couple of hills away from Ms. Andrade. 
Every member of the family is sinewy and 
lean. The parents cannot remember the last 
time the family ate meat or vegetables. But 
their grant of $27 a month makes it possible 
to buy rice, sugar, pasta and oil.
 
Mr. Souza and Ms. Torres, illiterate 
believers in the power of education, have 
always sent their children to school. “If they 
don’t study, they’ll turn into dummies like 
me,” said their father, whose weathered, 
deeply creased face broke into a wide smile 
as he surveyed his bright-eyed daughters, 
Ana Paula, 11, and Daniele, 8, among them. 
“All I can do is work in the fields.”
 
His wife said proudly: “There are fathers 
who don’t want their children to go to 
school. But this man here has done every-
thing he could to send his children to school.”
Source: New York Times, January 3, 2004.
Vandelson Andrade, student
© JOHN MAIER, JR./THE IMAGE WORKS
361
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

Fogel won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1993 for his work in economic 
history, which includes not only his studies of nutrition but also his studies of 
American slavery and the role of railroads in the development of the American 
economy. In the lecture he gave when he was awarded the prize, he surveyed the 
evidence on health and economic growth. He concluded that “improved gross 
nutrition accounts for roughly 30 percent of the growth of per capita income in 
Britain between 1790 and 1980.”
Today, malnutrition is fortunately rare in developed nations such as Great 
Britain and the United States. (Obesity is a more widespread problem.) But for peo-
ple in developing nations, poor health and inadequate nutrition remain obstacles to 
higher productivity and improved living standards. The United Nations estimates 
that almost a third of the population in sub-Saharan Africa is undernourished.
The causal link between health and wealth runs in both directions. Poor coun-
tries are poor in part because their populations are not healthy, and their popula-
tions are not healthy in part because they are poor and cannot afford adequate 
healthcare and nutrition. It is a vicious circle. But this fact opens the possibility of a 
virtuous circle: Policies that lead to more rapid economic growth would naturally 
improve health outcomes, which in turn would further promote economic growth.
Property Rights and Political Stability
Another way policymakers can foster economic growth is by protecting property 
rights and promoting political stability. This issue goes to the very heart of how 
market economies work.
Production in market economies arises from the interactions of millions of 
individuals and firms. When you buy a car, for instance, you are buying the 
output of a car dealer, a car manufacturer, a steel company, an iron ore mining 
company, and so on. This division of production among many firms allows the 
economy’s factors of production to be used as effectively as possible. To achieve 
this outcome, the economy has to coordinate transactions among these firms, as 
well as between firms and consumers. Market economies achieve this coordina-
tion through market prices. That is, market prices are the instrument with which 
the invisible hand of the marketplace brings supply and demand into balance in 
each of the many thousands of markets that make up the economy.
An important prerequisite for the price system to work is an economy-wide 
respect for property rights. Property rights refer to the ability of people to exercise 
authority over the resources they own. A mining company will not make the effort 
to mine iron ore if it expects the ore to be stolen. The company mines the ore only 
if it is confident that it will benefit from the ore’s subsequent sale. For this reason, 
courts serve an important role in a market economy: They enforce property rights. 
Through the criminal justice system, the courts discourage direct theft. In addi-
tion, through the civil justice system, the courts ensure that buyers and sellers live 
up to their contracts.
Those of us in developed countries tend to take property rights for granted, but 
those living in less developed countries understand that a lack of property rights 
can be a major problem. In many countries, the system of justice does not work 
well. Contracts are hard to enforce, and fraud often goes unpunished. In more 
extreme cases, the government not only fails to enforce property rights but actu-
ally infringes upon them. To do business in some countries, firms are expected to 
bribe government officials. Such corruption impedes the coordinating power of 
markets. It also discourages domestic saving and investment from abroad. 
362
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

One threat to property rights is political instability. When revolutions and 
coups are common, there is doubt about whether property rights will be respected 
in the future. If a revolutionary government might confiscate the capital of some 
businesses, as was often true after communist revolutions, domestic residents 
have less incentive to save, invest, and start new businesses. At the same time, 
foreigners have less incentive to invest in the country. Even the threat of revolu-
tion can act to depress a nation’s standard of living.
Thus, economic prosperity depends in part on political prosperity. A country 
with an efficient court system, honest government officials, and a stable constitu-
tion will enjoy a higher economic standard of living than a country with a poor 
court system, corrupt officials, and frequent revolutions and coups.
Free Trade
Some of the world’s poorest countries have tried to achieve more rapid economic 
growth by pursuing inward-oriented policies. These policies attempt to increase 
productivity and living standards within the country by avoiding interaction 
with the rest of the world. Domestic firms often advance the infant-industry argu-
ment, claiming they need protection from foreign competition to thrive and grow. 
Together with a general distrust of foreigners, this argument has at times led policy-
makers in less developed countries to impose tariffs and other trade restrictions.
Most economists today believe that poor countries are better off pursuing 
outward-oriented policies that integrate these countries into the world economy. 
International trade in goods and services can improve the economic well-being of 
a country’s citizens. Trade is, in some ways, a type of technology. When a country 
exports wheat and imports textiles, the country benefits as if it had invented a 
technology for turning wheat into textiles. A country that eliminates trade restric-
tions will, therefore, experience the same kind of economic growth that would 
occur after a major technological advance. 
The adverse impact of inward orientation becomes clear when one considers 
the small size of many less developed economies. The total GDP of Argentina, 
for instance, is about that of Philadelphia. Imagine what would happen if the 
Philadelphia city council were to prohibit city residents from trading with people 
living outside the city limits. Without being able to take advantage of the gains 
from trade, Philadelphia would need to produce all the goods it consumes. It 
would also have to produce all its own capital goods, rather than importing 
state-of-the-art equipment from other cities. Living standards in Philadelphia 
would fall immediately, and the problem would likely only get worse over time. 
This is precisely what happened when Argentina pursued inward-oriented 
policies throughout much of the 20th century. In contrast, countries that pursued 
outward-oriented policies, such as South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, enjoyed 
high rates of economic growth.
The amount that a nation trades with others is determined not only by govern-
ment policy but also by geography. Countries with natural seaports find trade easier 
than countries without this resource. It is not a coincidence that many of the world’s 
major cities, such as New York, San Francisco, and Hong Kong, are located next to 
oceans. Similarly, because landlocked countries find international trade more dif-
ficult, they tend to have lower levels of income than countries with easy access to 
the world’s waterways. For example, countries with more than 80 percent of their 
population living within 100 kilometers of a coast have an average GDP per person 
about four times as large as countries with less than 20 percent of their population 
363
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

living near a coast. The critical importance of access to the sea helps explain why the 
African continent, which contains many landlocked countries, is so poor.
Research and Development
The primary reason that living standards are higher today than they were a cen-
tury ago is that technological knowledge has advanced. The telephone, the transis-
tor, the computer, and the internal combustion engine are among the thousands of 
innovations that have improved the ability to produce goods and services. 
Most technological advances come from private research by firms and indi-
vidual inventors, but there is also a public interest in promoting these efforts. To a 
large extent, knowledge is a public good: That is, once one person discovers an idea, 
the idea enters society’s pool of knowledge, and other people can freely use it. Just 
as government has a role in providing a public good such as national defense, it 
also has a role in encouraging the research and development of new technologies.
The U.S. government has long played a role in the creation and dissemination 
of technological knowledge. A century ago, the government sponsored research 
about farming methods and advised farmers how best to use their land. More 
recently, the U.S. government, through the Air Force and NASA, has supported 
aerospace research; as a result, the United States is a leading maker of rockets 
and planes. The government continues to encourage advances in knowledge with 
research grants from the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes 
of Health and with tax breaks for firms engaging in research and development.
Yet another way in which government policy encourages research is through the 
patent system. When a person or firm invents a new product, such as a new drug, the 
inventor can apply for a patent. If the product is deemed truly original, the government 
awards the patent, which gives the inventor the exclusive right to make the product 
for a specified number of years. In essence, the patent gives the inventor a property 
right over his invention, turning his new idea from a public good into a private good. 
By allowing inventors to profit from their inventions—even if only temporarily—the 
patent system enhances the incentive for individuals and firms to engage in research.
Population Growth
Economists and other social scientists have long debated how population affects a soci-
ety. The most direct effect is on the size of the labor force: A large population means 
more workers to produce goods and services. The tremendous size of the Chinese 
population is one reason China is such an important player in the world economy.
At the same time, however, a large population means more people to consume 
those goods and services. So while a large population means a larger total output of 
goods and services, it need not mean a higher standard of living for a typical citizen. 
Indeed, both large and small nations are found at all levels of economic development.
Beyond these obvious effects of population size, population growth interacts 
with the other factors of production in ways that are more subtle and open to debate.
Stretching Natural Resources Thomas Robert Malthus (1766–1834), an 
English minister and early economic thinker, is famous for his book called An 
Essay on the Principle of Population as It Affects the Future Improvement of Society. In 
it, he offered what may be history’s most chilling forecast. Malthus argued that an 
ever-increasing population would continually strain society’s ability to provide 
for itself. As a result, mankind was doomed to forever live in poverty.
Malthus’s logic was simple. He began by noting that “food is necessary to the 
existence of man” and that “the passion between the sexes is necessary and will 
364
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

remain nearly in its present state.” He concluded that “the power of population 
is infinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man.” 
According to Malthus, the only check on population growth was “misery and 
vice.” Attempts by charities or governments to alleviate poverty were counter-
productive, he argued, because they merely allowed the poor to have more 
children, placing even greater strains on society’s productive capabilities. 
Malthus may have correctly described the world at the time when he lived, 
but fortunately, his dire forecast was far off the mark. The world population has 
increased about sixfold over the past two centuries, but living standards around the 
world are on average much higher. As a result of economic growth, chronic hunger 
and malnutrition are less common now than they were in Malthus’s day. Modern 
famines occur from time to time but are more often the result of an unequal income 
distribution or political instability than inadequate food production.
Where did Malthus go wrong? As we discussed in a case study earlier in this 
chapter, growth in human ingenuity has offset the effects of a larger population. 
Pesticides, fertilizers, mechanized farm equipment, new crop varieties, and other 
technological advances that Malthus never imagined have allowed each farmer to 
feed ever greater numbers of people. Even with more mouths to feed, fewer farmers 
are necessary because each farmer is much more productive.
Diluting the Capital Stock Whereas Malthus worried about the effects of popu-
lation on the use of natural resources, some modern theories of economic growth 
emphasize its effects on capital accumulation. According to these theories, high 
population growth reduces GDP per worker because rapid growth in the number of 
workers forces the capital stock to be spread more thinly. In other words, when popu-
lation growth is rapid, each worker is equipped with less capital. A smaller quantity 
of capital per worker leads to lower productivity and lower GDP per worker. 
This problem is most apparent in the case of human capital. Countries with 
high population growth have large numbers of school-age children. This places 
a larger burden on the educational system. It is not surprising, therefore, that 
educational attainment tends to be low in countries with high population growth.
The differences in population growth around the world are large. In developed 
countries, such as the United States and those in Western Europe, the popula-
tion has risen only about 1 percent per year in recent decades and is expected to 
rise even more slowly in the future. By contrast, in many poor African countries, 
population grows at about 3 percent per year. At this rate, the population doubles 
every 23 years. This rapid population growth makes it harder to provide workers 
with the tools and skills they need to achieve high levels of productivity.
Rapid population growth is not the main reason that less developed countries 
are poor, but some analysts believe that reducing the rate of population growth 
would help these countries raise their standards of living. In some countries, this 
goal is accomplished directly with laws that regulate the number of children fami-
lies may have. China, for instance, allows only one child per family; couples who 
violate this rule are subject to substantial fines. In countries with greater freedom, 
the goal of reduced population growth is accomplished less directly by increasing 
awareness of birth control techniques. 
Another way in which a country can influence population growth is to apply 
one of the Ten Principles of Economics: People respond to incentives. Bearing a 
child, like any decision, has an opportunity cost. When the opportunity cost rises, 
people will choose to have smaller families. In particular, women with the oppor-
tunity to receive a good education and desirable employment tend to want fewer 
Thomas Robert Malthus
© ARP/TOPHAM/THE IMAGEWORKS
365
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

children than those with fewer opportunities outside the home. Hence, policies 
that foster equal treatment of women may be one way for less developed econo-
mies to reduce the rate of population growth and, perhaps, raise their standards 
of living.
 One Economist’s Answer
MIT economist Daron Acemoglu considers why some nations thrive 
while others do not.
in the news
What Makes 
a Nation Rich?
BY DARON ACEMOGLU
W
e are the rich, the haves, the devel-
oped. And most of the rest—in 
Africa, South Asia, and South America, the 
Somalias and Bolivias and Bangladeshes of 
the world—are the nots. It’s always been 
this way, a globe divided by wealth and 
poverty, health and sickness, food and fam-
ine, though the extent of inequality across 
nations today is unprecedented: The aver-
age citizen of the United States is ten times 
as prosperous as the average Guatemalan, 
more than twenty times as prosperous as 
the average North Korean, and more than 
forty times as prosperous as those living in 
Mali, Ethiopia, Congo, or Sierra Leone. 
 
The question social scientists have 
unsuccessfully wrestled with for centuries 
is, Why? But the question they should 
have been asking is, How? Because 
inequality is not predetermined. Nations 
are not like children—they are not born 
rich or poor. Their governments make 
them that way.
 
You can chart the search for a the-
ory of inequality to the French political 
philosopher Montesquieu, who in the 
mid-eighteenth century came up with a 
very simple explanation: People in hot 
places are inherently lazy. Other no less 
sweeping explanations soon followed: 
Could it be that Max Weber’s Protestant 
work ethic is the true driver of economic 
success? Or perhaps the richest countries 
are those that were former British colo-
nies? Or maybe it’s as simple as tracing 
which nations have the largest popula-
tions of European descent? The problem 
with all of these theories is that while 
they superficially fit some specific cases, 
others radically disprove them. 
 
It’s the same with the theories put forth 
today. Economist Jeffrey Sachs, director 
of Columbia University’s Earth Institute, 
attributes the relative success of nations 
to geography and weather: In the poorest 
parts of the world, he argues, nutrient-
starved tropical soil makes agriculture a 
challenge, and tropical climates foment 
disease, particularly malaria. Perhaps if 
we were to fix these problems, teach the 
citizens of these nations better farming 
techniques, eliminate malaria, or at the 
very least equip them with artemisinin to 
fight this deadly disease, we could elimi-
nate poverty. Or better yet, perhaps we just 
move these people and abandon their 
inhospitable land altogether.
 
Jared Diamond, the famous ecologist 
and best-selling author, has a different 
theory: The origin of world inequality stems 
from the historical endowment of plant and 
animal species and the advancement of 
technology. In Diamond’s telling, the cul-
tures that first learned to plant crops were 
the first to learn how to use a plow, and thus 
were first to adopt other technologies, the 
engine of every successful economy. Perhaps 
then the solution to world inequality rests in 
technology—wiring the developing world 
with Internet and cell phones.
 
And yet while Sachs and Diamond offer 
good insight into certain aspects of poverty, 
they share something in common with 
Montesquieu and others who followed: 
They ignore incentives. People need incen-
tives to invest and prosper; they need to 
know that if they work hard, they can make 
money and actually keep that money. And 
the key to ensuring those incentives is 
sound institutions—the rule of law and 
security and a governing system that offers 
opportunities to achieve and innovate. 
That’s what determines the haves from the 
have-nots—not geography or weather or 
technology or disease or ethnicity.
 
Put simply: Fix incentives and you will fix 
poverty. And if you wish to fix institutions, 
you have to fix governments.
 
How do we know that institutions are 
so central to the wealth and poverty of 
nations? Start in Nogales, a city cut in half 
366
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Source: Esquire, November 18, 2009.
Promoting Technological Progress Rapid population growth may depress 
economic prosperity by reducing the amount of capital each worker has, but 
it may also have some benefits. Some economists have suggested that world 
population growth has been an engine of technological progress and economic 
by the Mexican-American border fence. 
There is no difference in geography between 
the two halves of Nogales. The weather 
is the same. The winds are the same, as are 
the soils. The types of diseases prevalent in 
the area given its geography and climate 
are the same, as is the ethnic, cultural, and 
linguistic background of the residents. By 
logic, both sides of the city should be identi-
cal economically. 
 
And yet they are far from the same. 
 
On one side of the border fence, in 
Santa Cruz County, Arizona, the median 
household income is $30,000. A few feet 
away, it’s $10,000. On one side, most of 
the teenagers are in public high school, 
and the majority of the adults are high 
school graduates. On the other side, few of 
the residents have gone to high school, let 
alone college. Those in Arizona enjoy rela-
tively good health and Medicare for those 
over sixty-five, not to mention an effi-
cient road network, electricity, telephone 
service, and a dependable sewage and 
public-health system. None of those things 
are a given across the border. There, the 
roads are bad, the infant-mortality rate 
high, electricity and phone service expen-
sive and spotty. 
 
The key difference is that those on the 
north side of the border enjoy law and order 
and dependable government services—they 
can go about their daily activities and jobs 
without fear for their life or safety or property 
rights. On the other side, the inhabitants 
have institutions that perpetuate crime, graft, 
and insecurity.
 
Nogales may be the most obvious ex-
ample, but it’s far from the only one. Take 
Singapore, a once-impoverished tropical 
island that became the richest nation in Asia 
after British colonialists enshrined property 
rights and encouraged trade. Or China, 
where decades of stagnation and famine 
were reversed only after Deng Xiaoping 
began introducing private-property rights 
in agriculture, and later in industry. Or 
Botswana, whose economy has flourished 
over the past forty years while the rest of 
Africa has withered, thanks to strong tribal 
institutions and farsighted nation building 
by its early elected leaders.
 
Now look at the economic and political 
failures. You can begin in Sierra Leone, 
where a lack of functioning institutions 
and an overabundance of diamonds have 
fueled decades of civil war and strife and 
corruption that continue unchecked today. 
Or take communist North Korea, a geo-
graphical, ethnic, and cultural mirror of its 
capitalist neighbor to the south, yet ten 
times poorer. Or Egypt, cradle of one of 
the world’s great civilizations yet stagnant 
economically ever since its colonization 
by the Ottomans and then the Europeans, 
only made worse by its post-independence 
governments, which have restricted all 
economic activities and markets. In fact, 
the theory can be used to shed light on 
the patterns of inequality for much of the 
world. 
 
If we know why nations are poor, the 
resulting question is what can we do to 
help them. Our ability to impose institutions 
from the outside is limited, as the recent 
U.S. experiences in Afghanistan and Iraq 
demonstrate. But we are not helpless, and 
in many instances, there is a lot to be done. 
Even the most repressed citizens of the 
world will stand up to tyrants when given 
the opportunity. We saw this recently in Iran 
and a few years ago in Ukraine during the 
Orange Revolution.
 
The U.S. must not take a passive role 
in encouraging these types of movements. 
Our foreign policy should encourage them 
by punishing repressive regimes through 
trade embargoes and diplomacy…. At the 
microlevel, we can help foreign citizens 
by educating them and arming them with 
the modern tools of activism, most notably 
the Internet, and perhaps even encryption 
technology and cell-phone platforms that 
can evade firewalls and censorship put in 
place by repressive governments, such as 
those in China or Iran, that fear the power 
of information. 
 
There’s no doubt that erasing global 
inequality, which has been with us for 
millennia and has expanded to unprec-
edented levels over the past century and a 
half, won’t be easy. But by accepting the 
role of failed governments and institutions 
in causing poverty, we have a fighting 
chance of reversing it.
Daron Acemoglu 
© COURTESY, DARON ACEMOGLU
367
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH

prosperity. The mechanism is simple: If there are more people, then there are 
more scientists, inventors, and engineers to contribute to technological advance, 
which benefits everyone.
Economist Michael Kremer has provided some support for this hypothesis in 
an article titled “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million b.c. 
to 1990,” which was published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics in 1993. 
Kremer begins by noting that over the broad span of human history, world 
growth rates have increased with world population. For example, world growth 
was more rapid when the world population was 1 billion (which occurred around 
the year 1800) than when the population was only 100 million (around 500 b.c.). 
This fact is consistent with the hypothesis that a larger population induces more 
technological progress.
Kremer’s second piece of evidence comes from comparing regions of the world. 
The melting of the polar icecaps at the end of the Ice Age around 10,000 b.c. 
flooded the land bridges and separated the world into several distinct regions that 
could not communicate with one another for thousands of years. If technological 
progress is more rapid when there are more people to discover things, then larger 
regions should have experienced more rapid growth.
According to Kremer, that is exactly what happened. The most successful 
region of the world in 1500 (when Columbus reestablished technological contact) 
comprised the “Old World” civilizations of the large Eurasia-Africa region. Next 
in technological development were the Aztec and Mayan civilizations in the 
Americas, followed by the hunter-gatherers of Australia, and then the primitive 
people of Tasmania, who lacked even fire-making and most stone and bone tools. 
The smallest isolated region was Flinders Island, a tiny island between Tasmania 
and Australia. With the smallest population, Flinders Island had the fewest oppor-
tunities for technological advance and, indeed, seemed to regress. Around 3000 
b.c., human society on Flinders Island died out completely. A large population, 
Kremer concludes, is a prerequisite for technological advance.
QUICK QUIZ Describe three ways a government policymaker can try to raise the 
growth in living standards in a society. Are there any drawbacks to these policies?
Conclusion: The Importance of Long-Run Growth
In this chapter, we have discussed what determines the standard of living in 
a nation and how policymakers can endeavor to raise the standard of living 
through policies that promote economic growth. Most of this chapter is sum-
marized in one of the Ten Principles of Economics: A country’s standard of living 
depends on its ability to produce goods and services. Policymakers who want to 
encourage growth in living standards must aim to increase their nation’s produc-
tive ability by encouraging rapid accumulation of the factors of production and 
ensuring that these factors are employed as effectively as possible.
Economists differ in their views of the role of government in promoting eco-
nomic growth. At the very least, government can lend support to the invisible 
hand by maintaining property rights and political stability. More controversial is 
whether government should target and subsidize specific industries that might 
be especially important for technological progress. There is no doubt that these 
issues are among the most important in economics. The success of one genera-
tion’s policymakers in learning and heeding the fundamental lessons about eco-
nomic growth determines what kind of world the next generation will inherit. 
368
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

SUMMARY
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What does the level of a nation’s GDP measure? 
What does the growth rate of GDP measure? 
Would you rather live in a nation with a high 
level of GDP and a low growth rate or in a nation 
with a low level of GDP and a high growth rate?
 2. List and describe four determinants of 
productivity.
 3. In what way is a college degree a form of capital?
 4. Explain how higher saving leads to a higher 
standard of living. What might deter a 
policymaker from trying to raise the rate of 
saving?
 5. Does a higher rate of saving lead to higher 
growth temporarily or indefinitely?
 6. Why would removing a trade restriction, 
such as a tariff, lead to more rapid economic 
growth?
 7. How does the rate of population growth 
influence the level of GDP per person?
 8. Describe two ways the U.S. government 
tries to encourage advances in technological 
knowledge.
SU
SUMMARY
•
Economic prosperity, as measured by GDP per 
person, varies substantially around the world. 
The average income in the world’s richest coun-
tries is more than ten times that in the world’s 
poorest countries. Because growth rates of real 
GDP also vary substantially, the relative positions 
of countries can change dramatically over time. 
• The standard of living in an economy depends on 
the economy’s ability to produce goods and ser-
vices. Productivity, in turn, depends on the phys-
ical capital, human capital, natural resources, and
technological knowledge available to workers.
•
Government policies can try to influence the 
economy’s growth rate in many ways: by encour-
aging saving and investment, encouraging 
investment from abroad, fostering education, 
promoting good health, maintaining property 
rights and political stability, allowing free trade, 
and promoting the research and development of 
new technologies.
•
The accumulation of capital is subject to dimin-
ishing returns: The more capital an economy has, 
the less additional output the economy gets from 
an extra unit of capital. As a result, while higher
saving leads to higher growth for a period of 
time, growth eventually slows down as capital,
productivity, and income rise. Also because of 
diminishing returns, the return to capital is espe-
cially high in poor countries. Other things equal, 
these countries can grow faster because of the 
catch-up effect. 
•
Population growth has a variety of effects on 
economic growth. On the one hand, more rapid 
population growth may lower productivity by 
stretching the supply of natural resources and 
by reducing the amount of capital available for 
each worker. On the other hand, a larger popu-
lation may enhance the rate of technological 
progress because there are more scientists and 
engineers.
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S O
 
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What does the level of a nation’s GDP measure? 
What does the growth rate of GDP measure? 
Would you rather live in a nation with a high 
level of GDP and a low growth rate or in a nation
with a low level of GDP and a high growth rate?
2. List and describe four determinants of 
productivity.
3. In what way is a college degree a form of capital?
4. Explain how higher saving leads to a higher
standard of living. What might deter a 
policymaker from trying to raise the rate of 
saving?
5. Does a higher rate of saving lead to higher
growth temporarily or indefinitely?
6. Why would removing a trade restriction,
such as a tariff, lead to more rapid economic
growth?
7. How does the rate of population growth
influence the level of GDP per person?
8. Describe two ways the U.S. government 
tries to encourage advances in technological 
knowledge.
369
CHAPTER 17    PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
productivity, p. 353
physical capital, p. 353
human capital, p. 354
natural resources, p. 354
technological 
 knowledge, p. 354
diminishing returns, p. 357
catch-up effect, p. 357

O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. Most countries, including the United States, 
import substantial amounts of goods and 
services from other countries. Yet the chapter 
says that a nation can enjoy a high standard of 
living only if it can produce a large quantity 
of goods and services itself. Can you reconcile 
these two facts?
 2. Suppose that society decided to reduce 
consumption and increase investment.
 a. How would this change affect economic 
growth?
 b. What groups in society would benefit from 
this change? What groups might be hurt?
 3. Societies choose what share of their resources 
to devote to consumption and what share to 
devote to investment. Some of these decisions 
involve private spending; others involve 
government spending.
 a. Describe some forms of private spending that 
represent consumption and some forms that 
represent investment. The national income 
accounts include tuition as a part of consumer 
spending. In your opinion, are the resources 
you devote to your education a form of 
consumption or a form of investment? 
 b. Describe some forms of government 
spending that represent consumption and 
some forms that represent investment. In 
your opinion, should we view government 
spending on health programs as a form of 
consumption or investment? Would you 
distinguish between health programs for the 
young and health programs for the elderly?
 4. What is the opportunity cost of investing 
in capital? Do you think a country can 
“overinvest” in capital? What is the 
opportunity cost of investing in human 
capital? Do you think a country can 
“overinvest” in human capital? Explain.
 5. Suppose that an auto company owned entirely 
by German citizens opens a new factory in 
South Carolina.
 a. What sort of foreign investment would this 
represent?
 b. What would be the effect of this investment 
on U.S. GDP? Would the effect on U.S. GNP 
be larger or smaller?
 6. In the 1990s and the first decade of the 2000s, 
investors from the Asian economies of Japan 
and China made significant direct and 
portfolio investments in the United States. At 
the time, many Americans were unhappy that 
this investment was occurring.
 a. In what way was it better for the United 
States to receive this foreign investment than 
not to receive it?
 b. In what way would it have been better 
still for Americans to have made this 
investment?
 7. In many developing nations, young women 
have lower enrollment rates in secondary school 
than do young men. Describe several ways in 
which greater educational opportunities for 
young women could lead to faster economic 
growth in these countries.
 8. International data show a positive correlation 
between income per person and the health of 
the population.
 a. Explain how higher income might cause 
better health outcomes.
 b. Explain how better health outcomes might 
cause higher income.
 c. How might the relative importance of your 
two hypotheses be relevant for public policy?
 9. International data show a positive correlation 
between political stability and economic 
growth.
 a. Through what mechanism could political 
stability lead to strong economic growth?
 b. Through what mechanism could strong 
economic growth lead to political stability?
 10. From 1950 to 2000, manufacturing employment 
as a percentage of total employment in the U.S. 
economy fell from 28 percent to 13 percent. 
At the same time, manufacturing output 
experienced slightly more rapid growth than 
the overall economy.
 a. What do these facts say about growth in 
labor productivity (defined as output per 
worker) in manufacturing?
 b. In your opinion, should policymakers be 
concerned about the decline in the share of 
manufacturing employment? Explain.
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
370
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Saving, Investment, and 
    the Financial System 
I
magine that you have just graduated from college (with a degree in econom-
ics, of course) and you decide to start your own business—an economic fore-
casting firm. Before you make any money selling your forecasts, you have to 
incur substantial costs to set up your business. You have to buy computers 
with which to make your forecasts, as well as desks, chairs, and filing cabinets to 
furnish your new office. Each of these items is a type of capital that your firm will 
use to produce and sell its services. 
How do you obtain the funds to invest in these capital goods? Perhaps you 
are able to pay for them out of your past savings. More likely, however, like most 
entrepreneurs, you do not have enough money of your own to finance the start 
of your business. As a result, you have to get the money you need from other 
sources. 
There are various ways to finance these capital investments. You could bor-
row the money, perhaps from a bank or from a friend or relative. In this case, 
18
371

you would promise not only to return the money at a later date but also to pay 
interest for the use of the money. Alternatively, you could convince someone to 
provide the money you need for your business in exchange for a share of your 
future profits, whatever they might happen to be. In either case, your investment 
in computers and office equipment is being financed by someone else’s saving.
The financial system consists of the institutions that help to match one per-
son’s saving with another person’s investment. As we discussed in the previous 
chapter, saving and investment are key ingredients to long-run economic growth: 
When a country saves a large portion of its GDP, more resources are available for 
investment in capital, and higher capital raises a country’s productivity and liv-
ing standard. The previous chapter, however, did not explain how the economy 
coordinates saving and investment. At any time, some people want to save some 
of their income for the future, and others want to borrow to finance investments in 
new and growing businesses. What brings these two groups of people together? 
What ensures that the supply of funds from those who want to save balances the 
demand for funds from those who want to invest? 
This chapter examines how the financial system works. First, we discuss the 
large variety of institutions that make up the financial system in our economy. 
Second, we discuss the relationship between the financial system and some key 
macroeconomic variables—notably saving and investment. Third, we develop a 
model of the supply and demand for funds in financial markets. In the model, the 
interest rate is the price that adjusts to balance supply and demand. The model 
shows how various government policies affect the interest rate and, thereby, soci-
ety’s allocation of scarce resources.
Financial Institutions in the U.S. Economy
At the broadest level, the financial system moves the economy’s scarce resources 
from savers (people who spend less than they earn) to borrowers (people who 
spend more than they earn). Savers save for various reasons—to put a child 
through college in several years or to retire comfortably in several decades. 
Similarly, borrowers borrow for various reasons—to buy a house in which to live 
or to start a business with which to make a living. Savers supply their money to 
the financial system with the expectation that they will get it back with interest at 
a later date. Borrowers demand money from the financial system with the knowl-
edge that they will be required to pay it back with interest at a later date. 
The financial system is made up of various financial institutions that help coor-
dinate savers and borrowers. As a prelude to analyzing the economic forces that 
drive the financial system, let’s discuss the most important of these institutions. 
Financial institutions can be grouped into two categories: financial markets and 
financial intermediaries. We consider each category in turn.
Financial Markets
Financial markets are the institutions through which a person who wants to save 
can directly supply funds to a person who wants to borrow. The two most impor-
tant financial markets in our economy are the bond market and the stock market.
The Bond Market When Intel, the giant maker of computer chips, wants to 
borrow to finance construction of a new factory, it can borrow directly from the 
public. It does this by selling bonds. A bond is a certificate of indebtedness that 
financial system
the group of institutions 
in the economy that help 
to match one person’s 
saving with another 
person’s investment
financial markets
financial institutions 
through which savers can 
directly provide funds to 
borrowers
bond
a certificate of 
indebtedness
372
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

specifies the obligations of the borrower to the holder of the bond. Put simply, a 
bond is an IOU. It identifies the time at which the loan will be repaid, called the 
date of maturity, and the rate of interest that will be paid periodically until the loan 
matures. The buyer of a bond gives his or her money to Intel in exchange for this 
promise of interest and eventual repayment of the amount borrowed (called the 
principal). The buyer can hold the bond until maturity or can sell the bond at an 
earlier date to someone else.
There are literally millions of different bonds in the U.S. economy. When large 
corporations, the federal government, or state and local governments need to bor-
row to finance the purchase of a new factory, a new jet fighter, or a new school, 
they usually do so by issuing bonds. If you look at The Wall Street Journal or the 
business section of your local newspaper, you will find a listing of the prices and 
interest rates on some of the most important bond issues. These bonds differ 
according to three significant characteristics. 
The first characteristic is a bond’s term—the length of time until the bond 
matures. Some bonds have short terms, such as a few months, while others have 
terms as long as thirty years. (The British government has even issued a bond 
that never matures, called a perpetuity. This bond pays interest forever, but the 
principal is never repaid.) The interest rate on a bond depends, in part, on its 
term. Long-term bonds are riskier than short-term bonds because holders of 
long-term bonds have to wait longer for repayment of principal. If a holder of 
a long-term bond needs his money earlier than the distant date of maturity, he 
has no choice but to sell the bond to someone else, perhaps at a reduced price. 
To compensate for this risk, long-term bonds usually pay higher interest rates 
than short-term bonds.
The second important characteristic of a bond is its credit risk—the probability 
that the borrower will fail to pay some of the interest or principal. Such a failure to 
pay is called a default. Borrowers can (and sometimes do) default on their loans by 
declaring bankruptcy. When bond buyers perceive that the probability of default 
is high, they demand a higher interest rate to compensate them for this risk. 
Because the U.S. government is considered a safe credit risk, government bonds 
tend to pay low interest rates. By contrast, financially shaky corporations raise 
money by issuing junk bonds, which pay very high interest rates. Buyers of bonds 
can judge credit risk by checking with various private agencies, such as Standard & 
Poor’s, which rate the credit risk of different bonds.
The third important ch aracteristic of a bond is its tax treatment—the way the 
tax laws treat the interest earned on the bond. The interest on most bonds is tax-
able income; that is, the bond owner has to pay a portion of the interest in income 
taxes. By contrast, when state and local governments issue bonds, called municipal 
bonds, the bond owners are not required to pay federal income tax on the interest 
income. Because of this tax advantage, bonds issued by state and local govern-
ments typically pay a lower interest rate than bonds issued by corporations or the 
federal government.
The Stock Market Another way for Intel to raise funds to build a new semi-
conductor factory is to sell stock in the company. Stock represents ownership in 
a firm and is, therefore, a claim to the profits that the firm makes. For example, if 
Intel sells a total of 1,000,000 shares of stock, then each share represents ownership 
of 1/1,000,000 of the business. 
The sale of stock to raise money is called equity finance, whereas the sale of 
bonds is called debt finance. Although corporations use both equity and debt 
stock
a claim to partial 
ownership in a firm
373
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

finance to raise money for new investments, stocks and bonds are very different. 
The owner of shares of Intel stock is a part owner of Intel, while the owner of an 
Intel bond is a creditor of the corporation. If Intel is very profitable, the stock-
holders enjoy the benefits of these profits, whereas the bondholders get only the 
interest on their bonds. And if Intel runs into financial difficulty, the bondholders 
are paid what they are due before stockholders receive anything at all. Compared 
to bonds, stocks offer the holder both higher risk and potentially higher return.
After a corporation issues stock by selling shares to the public, these shares 
trade among stockholders on organized stock exchanges. In these transactions, 
the corporation itself receives no money when its stock changes hands. The 
most important stock exchanges in the U.S. economy are the New York Stock 
Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, and the NASDAQ (National Association 
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system). Most of the world’s countries 
have their own stock exchanges on which the shares of local companies trade. 
The prices at which shares trade on stock exchanges are determined by the 
supply of and demand for the stock in these companies. Because stock represents 
ownership in a corporation, the demand for a stock (and thus its price) reflects 
people’s perception of the corporation’s future profitability. When people become 
optimistic about a company’s future, they raise their demand for its stock and 
thereby bid up the price of a share of stock. Conversely, when people come to 
expect a company to have little profit or even losses, the price of a share falls.
Various stock indexes are available to monitor the overall level of stock 
prices. A stock index is computed as an average of a group of stock prices. The 
most famous stock index is the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which has been 
computed regularly since 1896. It is now based on the prices of the stocks of 
thirty major U.S. companies, such as General Electric, Microsoft, Coca-Cola, 
Walt Disney Company, AT&T, and IBM. Another well-known stock index is the 
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, which is based on the prices of the stocks of 500 
major companies. Because stock prices reflect expected profitability, these stock 
indexes are watched closely as possible indicators of future economic conditions. 
Financial Intermediaries
Financial intermediaries are financial institutions through which savers can indi-
rectly provide funds to borrowers. The term intermediary reflects the role of these 
institutions in standing between savers and borrowers. Here we consider two of 
the most important financial intermediaries: banks and mutual funds.
Banks If the owner of a small grocery store wants to finance an expansion of 
his business, he probably takes a strategy quite different from that of Intel. Unlike 
Intel, a small grocer would find it difficult to raise funds in the bond and stock 
markets. Most buyers of stocks and bonds prefer to buy those issued by larger, 
more familiar companies. The small grocer, therefore, most likely finances his 
business expansion with a loan from a local bank.
Banks are the financial intermediaries with which people are most familiar. A 
primary job of banks is to take in deposits from people who want to save and use 
these deposits to make loans to people who want to borrow. Banks pay depositors 
interest on their deposits and charge borrowers slightly higher interest on their 
loans. The difference between these rates of interest covers the banks’ costs and 
returns some profit to the owners of the banks.
Besides being financial intermediaries, banks play a second important role in 
the economy: They facilitate purchases of goods and services by allowing people 
to write checks against their deposits and to access those deposits with debit cards. 
financial 
intermediaries
financial institutions 
through which savers can 
indirectly provide funds to 
borrowers
374
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

In other words, banks help create a special asset that people can use as a medium 
of exchange. A medium of exchange is an item that people can easily use to engage 
in transactions. A bank’s role in providing a medium of exchange distinguishes it 
from many other financial institutions. Stocks and bonds, like bank deposits, are 
a possible store of value for the wealth that people have accumulated in past sav-
ing, but access to this wealth is not as easy, cheap, and immediate as just writing a 
check or using a debit card. For now, we ignore this second role of banks, but we 
will return to it when we discuss the monetary system later in the book.
Mutual Funds A financial intermediary of increasing importance in the U.S. 
economy is the mutual fund. A mutual fund is an institution that sells shares to 
the public and uses the proceeds to buy a selection, or portfolio, of various types 
of stocks, bonds, or both stocks and bonds. The shareholder of the mutual fund 
accepts all the risk and return associated with the portfolio. If the value of the 
portfolio rises, the shareholder benefits; if the value of the portfolio falls, the 
shareholder suffers the loss. 
The primary advantage of mutual funds is that they allow people with small 
amounts of money to diversify their holdings. Buyers of stocks and bonds are 
mutual fund
an institution that sells 
shares to the public and 
uses the proceeds to buy 
a portfolio of stocks and 
bonds
FYI
 Key Numbers for Stock Watchers
W
hen following the stock of any company, you should keep an 
eye on three key numbers. These numbers are reported on the 
financial pages of some newspapers, and you can easily obtain them 
from online news services:
• Price. The single most important piece of information about 
a stock is the price of a share. News services usually present 
several prices. The “last” or “closing” price is the price of the 
last transaction that occurred before the stock exchange closed 
in its most recent day of trading. A news service may also give 
the “high” and “low” prices over the past day of trading and, 
sometimes, over the past year as well. It may also report the 
change from the previous day’s closing price.
• Dividend. Corporations pay out some of their profits to their 
stockholders; this amount is called the dividend. (Profits not paid 
out are called retained earnings and are used by the corpora-
tion for additional investment.) News services often report the 
dividend paid over the previous year for each share of stock. 
They sometimes report the dividend yield, which is the dividend 
expressed as a percentage of the stock’s price. 
• Price-earnings ratio. A corporation’s earnings, or 
accounting profit, is the amount of revenue it receives for the 
sale of its products minus its costs of production as measured 
by its accountants. Earnings per share is the company’s total 
earnings divided by the number of shares of stock outstanding. 
The price-earnings ratio, often called the P/E, is the price of 
a corporation’s stock divided by the amount the corporation 
earned per share over the past year. Historically, the typical 
price-earnings ratio is about 15. A higher P/E indicates that a 
corporation’s stock is expensive relative to its recent earnings; 
this might indicate either that people expect earnings to rise in 
the future or that the stock is overvalued. Conversely, a lower 
P/E indicates that a corporation’s stock is cheap relative to its 
recent earnings; this might indicate either that people expect 
earnings to fall or that the stock is undervalued.
 
Why do news services report all these data? Many people who 
invest their savings in stock follow these numbers closely when 
deciding which stocks to buy and sell. By contrast, other stockhold-
ers follow a buy-and-hold strategy: They buy the stock of well-run 
companies, hold it for long periods of time, and do not respond to 
the daily fluctuations.
375
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

well advised to heed the adage: Don’t put all your eggs in one basket. Because the 
value of any single stock or bond is tied to the fortunes of one company, holding a 
single kind of stock or bond is very risky. By contrast, people who hold a diverse 
portfolio of stocks and bonds face less risk because they have only a small stake in 
each company. Mutual funds make this diversification easy. With only a few hun-
dred dollars, a person can buy shares in a mutual fund and, indirectly, become 
the part owner or creditor of hundreds of major companies. For this service, the 
company operating the mutual fund charges shareholders a fee, usually between 
0.5 and 2.0 percent of assets each year.
A second advantage claimed by mutual fund companies is that mutual funds 
give ordinary people access to the skills of professional money managers. The 
managers of most mutual funds pay close attention to the developments and pros-
pects of the companies in which they buy stock. These managers buy the stock of 
companies they view as having a profitable future and sell the stock of companies 
with less promising prospects. This professional management, it is argued, should 
increase the return that mutual fund depositors earn on their savings.
Financial economists, however, are often skeptical of this second argument. 
With thousands of money managers paying close attention to each company’s 
prospects, the price of a company’s stock is usually a good reflection of the com-
pany’s true value. As a result, it is hard to “beat the market” by buying good 
stocks and selling bad ones. In fact, mutual funds called index funds, which buy 
all the stocks in a given stock index, perform somewhat better on average than 
mutual funds that take advantage of active trading by professional money manag-
ers. The explanation for the superior performance of index funds is that they keep 
costs low by buying and selling very rarely and by not having to pay the salaries 
of the professional money managers.
Summing Up
The U.S. economy contains a large variety of financial institutions. In addition to 
the bond market, the stock market, banks, and mutual funds, there are also pen-
sion funds, credit unions, insurance companies, and even the local loan shark. 
These institutions differ in many ways. When analyzing the macroeconomic role 
of the financial system, however, it is more important to keep in mind the similar-
ity of these institutions than the differences. These financial institutions all serve 
the same goal: directing the resources of savers into the hands of borrowers. 
QUICK QUIZ What is stock? What is a bond? How are they different? How are they 
similar?
© ARLO & JANIS REPRINTED BY PERMISSION 
OF UNITED FEATURE SYNDICATE, INC.
376
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

FYI
 Financial Crises
I
n 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy and many other major econo-
mies around the world experienced a financial crisis, which in turn 
led to a deep downturn in economic activity. We will examine these 
events in detail later in this book, but here we can outline the key 
elements of financial crises.
 
The first element of a financial crisis is a large decline in some 
asset prices. In 2008 and 2009, that asset was real estate. The price 
of housing, after experiencing a boom earlier in the decade, fell 
by about 30 percent over just a few years. Such a large decline in 
real estate prices had not been seen in the United States since the 
1930s.
 
The second element of a financial crisis is insolvencies at finan-
cial institutions. In 2008 and 2009, many banks and other financial 
firms had in effect placed bets on real estate prices by holding 
mortgages backed by that real estate. When house prices fell, 
large numbers of homeowners stopped repaying their loans. These 
defaults pushed several financial institutions toward bankruptcy.
 
The third element of a financial crisis is a decline in confidence 
in financial institutions. While some deposits in banks are insured 
by government policies, not all are. As insolvencies mounted, 
every financial institution became a possible candidate for the next 
bankruptcy. Individuals and firms with uninsured deposits in those 
institutions pulled out their money. Facing a rash of withdrawals, 
banks started selling off assets (sometimes at reduced “fire-sale” 
prices), and they cut back on new lending.
 
The fourth element of a financial crisis is a credit crunch. With 
many financial institutions facing difficulties, would-be borrowers 
had trouble getting loans, even if they had profitable investment 
projects. In essence, the financial system had trouble performing its 
normal function of directing the resources of savers into the hands 
of borrowers with the best investment opportunities.
 
The fifth element of a financial crisis is an economic downturn. 
With people unable to obtain financing for new investment projects, 
the overall demand for goods and services declined. As a result, for 
reasons we discuss more fully later in the book, national income fell 
and unemployment rose.
 
The sixth and final element of a financial crisis is a vicious circle. 
The economic downturn reduced the profitability of many companies 
and the value of many assets. Thus, we returned to step one, and 
the problems in the financial system and the economic downturn 
reinforced each other.
 
Financial crises, such as that of 2008 and 2009, can have severe 
consequences. Fortunately, they do end. Financial institutions even-
tually get back on their feet, perhaps with some help from govern-
ment policy, and they return to their normal function of financial 
intermediation.
Saving and Investment in the National Income Accounts
Events that occur within the financial system are central to understanding devel-
opments in the overall economy. As we have just seen, the institutions that make 
up this system—the bond market, the stock market, banks, and mutual funds—
have the role of coordinating the economy’s saving and investment. And as we 
saw in the previous chapter, saving and investment are important determinants of 
long-run growth in GDP and living standards. As a result, macroeconomists need 
to understand how financial markets work and how various events and policies 
affect them.
As a starting point for an analysis of financial markets, we discuss in this sec-
tion the key macroeconomic variables that measure activity in these markets. Our 
emphasis here is not on behavior but on accounting. Accounting refers to how 
377
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

various numbers are defined and added up. A personal accountant might help an 
individual add up her income and expenses. A national income accountant does 
the same thing for the economy as a whole. The national income accounts include, 
in particular, GDP and the many related statistics.
The rules of national income accounting include several important identities. 
Recall that an identity is an equation that must be true because of the way the 
variables in the equation are defined. Identities are useful to keep in mind, for 
they clarify how different variables are related to one another. Here we consider 
some accounting identities that shed light on the macroeconomic role of financial 
markets.
Some Important Identities
Recall that gross domestic product (GDP) is both total income in an economy 
and the total expenditure on the economy’s output of goods and services. GDP 
(denoted as Y) is divided into four components of expenditure: consumption (C), 
investment (I), government purchases (G), and net exports (NX). We write
Y = C + I + G + NX.
This equation is an identity because every dollar of expenditure that shows up 
on the left side also shows up in one of the four components on the right side. 
Because of the way each of the variables is defined and measured, this equation 
must always hold.
In this chapter, we simplify our analysis by assuming that the economy we 
are examining is closed. A closed economy is one that does not interact with other 
economies. In particular, a closed economy does not engage in international trade 
in goods and services, nor does it engage in international borrowing and lending. 
Actual economies are open economies—that is, they interact with other economies 
around the world. Nonetheless, assuming a closed economy is a useful simplifica-
tion with which we can learn some lessons that apply to all economies. Moreover, 
this assumption applies perfectly to the world economy (for interplanetary trade 
is not yet common).
Because a closed economy does not engage in international trade, imports and 
exports are exactly zero. Therefore, net exports (NX) are also zero. In this case, we 
can write
Y = C + I + G.
This equation states that GDP is the sum of consumption, investment, and gov-
ernment purchases. Each unit of output sold in a closed economy is consumed, 
invested, or bought by the government.
To see what this identity can tell us about financial markets, subtract C and G 
from both sides of this equation. We obtain
Y – C – G = I.
The left side of this equation (Y – C – G) is the total income in the economy that 
remains after paying for consumption and government purchases: This amount is 
called national saving, or just saving, and is denoted S. Substituting S for Y – C – G, 
we can write the last equation as 
S = I.
This equation states that saving equals investment.
national saving 
(saving)
the total income in 
the economy that 
remains after paying 
for consumption and 
government purchases
378
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

To understand the meaning of national saving, it is helpful to manipulate the 
definition a bit more. Let T denote the amount that the government collects from 
households in taxes minus the amount it pays back to households in the form 
of transfer payments (such as Social Security and welfare). We can then write 
national saving in either of two ways:
S = Y – C – G
or
S = (Y – T – C) + (T – G).
These equations are the same because the two Ts in the second equation cancel 
each other, but each reveals a different way of thinking about national saving. In 
particular, the second equation separates national saving into two pieces: private 
saving (Y – T – C) and public saving (T – G). 
Consider each of these two pieces. Private saving is the amount of income that 
households have left after paying their taxes and paying for their consumption. 
In particular, because households receive income of Y, pay taxes of T, and spend 
C on consumption, private saving is Y – T – C. Public saving is the amount of tax 
revenue that the government has left after paying for its spending. The govern-
ment receives T in tax revenue and spends G on goods and services. If T exceeds 
G, the government runs a budget surplus because it receives more money than it 
spends. This surplus of T – G represents public saving. If the government spends 
more than it receives in tax revenue, then G is larger than T. In this case, the 
government runs a budget deficit, and public saving T – G is a negative number.
Now consider how these accounting identities are related to financial markets. 
The equation S = I reveals an important fact: For the economy as a whole, saving must 
be equal to investment. Yet this fact raises some important questions: What mecha-
nisms lie behind this identity? What coordinates those people who are deciding 
how much to save and those people who are deciding how much to invest? The 
answer is the financial system. The bond market, the stock market, banks, mutual 
funds, and other financial markets and intermediaries stand between the two 
sides of the S = I equation. They take in the nation’s saving and direct it to the 
nation’s investment. 
The Meaning of Saving and Investment
The terms saving and investment can sometimes be confusing. Most people use 
these terms casually and sometimes interchangeably. By contrast, the macroecon-
omists who put together the national income accounts use these terms carefully 
and distinctly.
Consider an example. Suppose that Larry earns more than he spends and 
deposits his unspent income in a bank or uses it to buy some stock or a bond 
from a corporation. Because Larry’s income exceeds his consumption, he adds to 
the nation’s saving. Larry might think of himself as “investing” his money, but a 
macroeconomist would call Larry’s act saving rather than investment.
In the language of macroeconomics, investment refers to the purchase of new 
capital, such as equipment or buildings. When Moe borrows from the bank to 
build himself a new house, he adds to the nation’s investment. (Remember, the 
purchase of a new house is the one form of household spending that is invest-
ment rather than consumption.) Similarly, when the Curly Corporation sells some 
stock and uses the proceeds to build a new factory, it also adds to the nation’s 
investment.
private saving
the income that 
households have left 
after paying for taxes and 
consumption
public saving
the tax revenue that the 
government has left after 
paying for its spending
budget surplus
an excess of tax revenue 
over government 
spending
budget deficit
a shortfall of tax revenue 
from government 
spending
379
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

Although the accounting identity S = I shows that saving and investment are 
equal for the economy as a whole, this does not have to be true for every indi-
vidual household or firm. Larry’s saving can be greater than his investment, and 
he can deposit the excess in a bank. Moe’s saving can be less than his investment, 
and he can borrow the shortfall from a bank. Banks and other financial institu-
tions make these individual differences between saving and investment possible 
by allowing one person’s saving to finance another person’s investment.
QUICK QUIZ Define private saving, public saving, national saving, and investment. 
How are they related? 
The Market for Loanable Funds
Having discussed some of the important financial institutions in our economy and 
the macroeconomic role of these institutions, we are ready to build a model of 
financial markets. Our purpose in building this model is to explain how financial 
markets coordinate the economy’s saving and investment. The model also gives 
us a tool with which we can analyze various government policies that influence 
saving and investment.
To keep things simple, we assume that the economy has only one financial 
market, called the market for loanable funds. All savers go to this market to 
deposit their saving, and all borrowers go to this market to take out their loans. 
Thus, the term loanable funds refers to all income that people have chosen to save 
and lend out, rather than use for their own consumption, and to the amount that 
investors have chosen to borrow to fund new investment projects. In the market 
for loanable funds, there is one interest rate, which is both the return to saving 
and the cost of borrowing.
The assumption of a single financial market, of course, is not literally true. As 
we have seen, the economy has many types of financial institutions. But as we 
discussed in Chapter 2, the art in building an economic model is simplifying the 
world in order to explain it. For our purposes here, we can ignore the diversity of 
financial institutions and assume that the economy has a single financial market.
Supply and Demand for Loanable Funds
The economy’s market for loanable funds, like other markets in the economy, is 
governed by supply and demand. To understand how the market for loanable 
funds operates, therefore, we first look at the sources of supply and demand in 
that market.
The supply of loanable funds comes from people who have some extra income 
they want to save and lend out. This lending can occur directly, such as when a 
household buys a bond from a firm, or it can occur indirectly, such as when a 
household makes a deposit in a bank, which in turn uses the funds to make loans. 
In both cases, saving is the source of the supply of loanable funds.
The demand for loanable funds comes from households and firms who wish to 
borrow to make investments. This demand includes families taking out mortgages 
to buy new homes. It also includes firms borrowing to buy new equipment or 
build factories. In both cases, investment is the source of the demand for loanable funds.
The interest rate is the price of a loan. It represents the amount that borrowers 
pay for loans and the amount that lenders receive on their saving. Because a high 
market for loanable 
funds
the market in which those 
who want to save supply 
funds and those who 
want to borrow to invest 
demand funds 
380
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

interest rate makes borrowing more expensive, the quantity of loanable funds 
demanded falls as the interest rate rises. Similarly, because a high interest rate 
makes saving more attractive, the quantity of loanable funds supplied rises as the 
interest rate rises. In other words, the demand curve for loanable funds slopes 
downward, and the supply curve for loanable funds slopes upward.
Figure 1 shows the interest rate that balances the supply and demand for loana-
ble funds. In the equilibrium shown, the interest rate is 5 percent, and the quantity 
of loanable funds demanded and the quantity of loanable funds supplied both 
equal $1,200 billion. 
The adjustment of the interest rate to the equilibrium level occurs for the usual 
reasons. If the interest rate were lower than the equilibrium level, the quantity 
of loanable funds supplied would be less than the quantity of loanable funds 
demanded. The resulting shortage of loanable funds would encourage lenders 
to raise the interest rate they charge. A higher interest rate would encourage sav-
ing (thereby increasing the quantity of loanable funds supplied) and discourage 
borrowing for investment (thereby decreasing the quantity of loanable funds 
demanded). Conversely, if the interest rate were higher than the equilibrium 
level, the quantity of loanable funds supplied would exceed the quantity of loana-
ble funds demanded. As lenders competed for the scarce borrowers, interest rates 
would be driven down. In this way, the interest rate approaches the equilibrium 
level at which the supply and demand for loanable funds exactly balance. 
Recall that economists distinguish between the real interest rate and the 
nominal interest rate. The nominal interest rate is the interest rate as usually 
reported—the monetary return to saving and the monetary cost of borrowing. The 
real interest rate is the nominal interest rate corrected for inflation; it equals the 
nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate. Because inflation erodes the value 
of money over time, the real interest rate more accurately reflects the real return 
to saving and the real cost of borrowing. Therefore, the supply and demand for 
loanable funds depend on the real (rather than nominal) interest rate, and the 
equilibrium in Figure 1 should be interpreted as determining the real interest rate 
The Market for Loanable Funds
The interest rate in the economy 
adjusts to balance the supply and 
demand for loanable funds. The 
supply of loanable funds comes 
from national saving, including 
both private saving and public 
saving. The demand for loanable 
funds comes from firms and 
households that want to borrow 
for purposes of investment. Here 
the equilibrium interest rate is 
5 percent, and $1,200 billion of 
loanable funds are supplied and 
demanded.
Figure 1
Loanable Funds
(in billions of dollars)
0
Interest
Rate
5%
Supply
Demand
$1,200
381
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

in the economy. For the rest of this chapter, when you see the term interest rate, 
you should remember that we are talking about the real interest rate.
This model of the supply and demand for loanable funds shows that financial 
markets work much like other markets in the economy. In the market for milk, 
for instance, the price of milk adjusts so that the quantity of milk supplied bal-
ances the quantity of milk demanded. In this way, the invisible hand coordinates 
the behavior of dairy farmers and the behavior of milk drinkers. Once we realize 
that saving represents the supply of loanable funds and investment represents the 
demand, we can see how the invisible hand coordinates saving and investment. 
When the interest rate adjusts to balance supply and demand in the market for 
loanable funds, it coordinates the behavior of people who want to save (the sup-
pliers of loanable funds) and the behavior of people who want to invest (the 
demanders of loanable funds).
We can now use this analysis of the market for loanable funds to examine 
various government policies that affect the economy’s saving and investment. 
Because this model is just supply and demand in a particular market, we analyze 
any policy using the three steps discussed in Chapter 4. First, we decide whether 
the policy shifts the supply curve or the demand curve. Second, we determine the 
direction of the shift. Third, we use the supply-and-demand diagram to see how 
the equilibrium changes.
Policy 1: Saving Incentives
American families save a smaller fraction of their incomes than their counterparts 
in many other countries, such as Japan and Germany. Although the reasons for 
these international differences are unclear, many U.S. policymakers view the low 
level of U.S. saving as a major problem. One of the Ten Principles of Economics in 
Chapter 1 is that a country’s standard of living depends on its ability to produce 
goods and services. And as we discussed in the preceding chapter, saving is an 
important long-run determinant of a nation’s productivity. If the United States 
could somehow raise its saving rate to the level that prevails in other countries, 
the growth rate of GDP would increase, and over time, U.S. citizens would enjoy 
a higher standard of living.
Another of the Ten Principles of Economics is that people respond to incentives. 
Many economists have used this principle to suggest that the low saving rate in 
the United States is at least partly attributable to tax laws that discourage saving. 
The U.S. federal government, as well as many state governments, collects revenue 
by taxing income, including interest and dividend income. To see the effects of 
this policy, consider a 25-year-old who saves $1,000 and buys a 30-year bond 
that pays an interest rate of 9 percent. In the absence of taxes, the $1,000 grows to 
$13,268 when the individual reaches age 55. Yet if that interest is taxed at a rate 
of, say, 33 percent, then the after-tax interest rate is only 6 percent. In this case, the 
$1,000 grows to only $5,743 after 30 years. The tax on interest income substantially 
reduces the future payoff from current saving and, as a result, reduces the incen-
tive for people to save. 
In response to this problem, many economists and lawmakers have proposed 
reforming the tax code to encourage greater saving. For example, one proposal is 
to expand eligibility for special accounts, such as Individual Retirement Accounts, 
that allow people to shelter some of their saving from taxation. Let’s consider the 
effect of such a saving incentive on the market for loanable funds, as illustrated in 
Figure 2. We analyze this policy following our three steps.
382
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

First, which curve would this policy affect? Because the tax change would 
alter the incentive for households to save at any given interest rate, it would affect 
the quantity of loanable funds supplied at each interest rate. Thus, the supply of 
loanable funds would shift. The demand for loanable funds would remain the 
same because the tax change would not directly affect the amount that borrowers 
want to borrow at any given interest rate. 
Second, which way would the supply curve shift? Because saving would be 
taxed less heavily than under current law, households would increase their saving 
by consuming a smaller fraction of their income. Households would use this addi-
tional saving to increase their deposits in banks or to buy more bonds. The supply 
of loanable funds would increase, and the supply curve would shift to the right 
from S1 to S2, as shown in Figure 2.
Finally, we can compare the old and new equilibria. In the figure, the increased 
supply of loanable funds reduces the interest rate from 5 percent to 4 percent. The 
lower interest rate raises the quantity of loanable funds demanded from $1,200 
billion to $1,600 billion. That is, the shift in the supply curve moves the market 
equilibrium along the demand curve. With a lower cost of borrowing, households 
and firms are motivated to borrow more to finance greater investment. Thus, if a 
reform of the tax laws encouraged greater saving, the result would be lower interest rates 
and greater investment. 
This analysis of the effects of increased saving is widely accepted among 
economists, but there is less consensus about what kinds of tax changes should 
be enacted. Many economists endorse tax reform aimed at increasing saving to 
stimulate investment and growth. Yet others are skeptical that these tax changes 
would have much effect on national saving. These skeptics also doubt the equity 
of the proposed reforms. They argue that, in many cases, the benefits of the tax 
changes would accrue primarily to the wealthy, who are least in need of tax relief. 
Saving Incentives Increase the 
Supply of Loanable Funds
A change in the tax laws to 
encourage Americans to save 
more would shift the supply 
of loanable funds to the right 
from S1 to S2. As a result, the 
equilibrium interest rate would 
fall, and the lower interest rate 
would stimulate investment. 
Here the equilibrium interest rate 
falls from 5 percent to 4 percent, 
and the equilibrium quantity 
of loanable funds saved and 
invested rises from $1,200 billion 
to $1,600 billion.
Figure 2
Loanable Funds
(in billions of dollars)
0
Interest
Rate
4%
5%
Supply, S1
S2
$1,200
$1,600
2. . . . which
reduces the
equilibrium
interest rate . . .
3. . . . and raises the equilibrium
quantity of loanable funds.
Demand
1. Tax incentives for
saving increase the
supply of loanable
funds . . .
383
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

Policy 2: Investment Incentives
Suppose that Congress passed a tax reform aimed at making investment more 
attractive. In essence, this is what Congress does when it institutes an investment 
tax credit, which it does from time to time. An investment tax credit gives a tax 
advantage to any firm building a new factory or buying a new piece of equipment. 
Let’s consider the effect of such a tax reform on the market for loanable funds, as 
illustrated in Figure 3.
First, would the law affect supply or demand? Because the tax credit would 
reward firms that borrow and invest in new capital, it would alter investment at 
any given interest rate and, thereby, change the demand for loanable funds. By 
contrast, because the tax credit would not affect the amount that households save 
at any given interest rate, it would not affect the supply of loanable funds.
Second, which way would the demand curve shift? Because firms would have 
an incentive to increase investment at any interest rate, the quantity of loanable 
funds demanded would be higher at any given interest rate. Thus, the demand 
curve for loanable funds would move to the right, as shown by the shift from D1
to D2 in the figure.
Third, consider how the equilibrium would change. In Figure 3, the increased 
demand for loanable funds raises the interest rate from 5 percent to 6 percent, 
and the higher interest rate in turn increases the quantity of loanable funds sup-
plied from $1,200 billion to $1,400 billion, as households respond by increasing 
the amount they save. This change in household behavior is represented here as a 
movement along the supply curve. Thus, if a reform of the tax laws encouraged greater 
investment, the result would be higher interest rates and greater saving.
Policy 3: Government Budget Deficits and Surpluses
A perpetual topic of political debate is the status of the government budget. 
Recall that a budget deficit is an excess of government spending over tax revenue. 
Figure 3
Investment Incentives Increase 
the Demand for Loanable 
Funds
If the passage of an investment 
tax credit encouraged firms to 
invest more, the demand for 
loanable funds would increase. 
As a result, the equilibrium 
interest rate would rise, and 
the higher interest rate would 
stimulate saving. Here, when the 
demand curve shifts from D1 to 
D2, the equilibrium interest rate 
rises from 5 percent to 6 percent, 
and the equilibrium quantity 
of loanable funds saved and 
invested rises from $1,200 billion 
to $1,400 billion.
Loanable Funds
(in billions of dollars)
0
Interest
Rate
5%
6%
$1,200
$1,400
1. An investment
tax credit
increases the
demand for 
loanable funds . . .
2. . . . which
raises the
equilibrium
interest rate . . .
3. . . . and raises the equilibrium
quantity of loanable funds.
Supply
Demand, D1 
D2
384
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Governments finance budget deficits by borrowing in the bond market, and the 
accumulation of past government borrowing is called the government debt. A bud-
get surplus, an excess of tax revenue over government spending, can be used to 
repay some of the government debt. If government spending exactly equals tax 
revenue, the government is said to have a balanced budget.
Imagine that the government starts with a balanced budget and then, because 
of a tax cut or a spending increase, starts running a budget deficit. We can ana-
lyze the effects of the budget deficit by following our three steps in the market for 
loanable funds, as illustrated in Figure 4. 
First, which curve shifts when the government starts running a budget defi-
cit? Recall that national saving—the source of the supply of loanable funds—is 
composed of private saving and public saving. A change in the government 
budget balance represents a change in public saving and, thereby, in the supply 
of loanable funds. Because the budget deficit does not influence the amount that 
households and firms want to borrow to finance investment at any given interest 
rate, it does not alter the demand for loanable funds.
Second, which way does the supply curve shift? When the government runs a 
budget deficit, public saving is negative, and this reduces national saving. In other 
words, when the government borrows to finance its budget deficit, it reduces 
the supply of loanable funds available to finance investment by households and 
firms. Thus, a budget deficit shifts the supply curve for loanable funds to the left 
from S1 to S2, as shown in Figure 4.
The Effect of a 
Government Budget 
Deficit
Figure 4
When the government spends more than it receives in tax revenue, the resulting 
budget deficit lowers national saving. The supply of loanable funds decreases, and 
the equilibrium interest rate rises. Thus, when the government borrows to finance 
its budget deficit, it crowds out households and firms that otherwise would borrow 
to finance investment. Here, when the supply shifts from S1 to S2, the equilibrium 
interest rate rises from 5 percent to 6 percent, and the equilibrium quantity of 
loanable funds saved and invested falls from $1,200 billion to $800 billion.
Loanable Funds
(in billions of dollars)
0
Interest
Rate
$800
$1,200
3. . . . and reduces the equilibrium
quantity of loanable funds.
S2
2. . . . which
raises the
equilibrium
interest rate . . .
Supply, S1
Demand
5%
6%
1. A budget deﬁcit
decreases the supply
of loanable funds . . .
385
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

Third, we can compare the old and new equilibria. In the figure, when the 
budget deficit reduces the supply of loanable funds, the interest rate rises from 
5 percent to 6 percent. This higher interest rate then alters the behavior of the 
households and firms that participate in the loan market. In particular, many 
demanders of loanable funds are discouraged by the higher interest rate. Fewer 
families buy new homes, and fewer firms choose to build new factories. The fall in 
investment because of government borrowing is called crowding out and is rep-
resented in the figure by the movement along the demand curve from a quantity 
of $1,200 billion in loanable funds to a quantity of $800 billion. That is, when the 
government borrows to finance its budget deficit, it crowds out private borrowers 
who are trying to finance investment.
Thus, the most basic lesson about budget deficits follows directly from their 
effects on the supply and demand for loanable funds: When the government reduces 
national saving by running a budget deficit, the interest rate rises, and investment falls. 
Because investment is important for long-run economic growth, government 
budget deficits reduce the economy’s growth rate.
Why, you might ask, does a budget deficit affect the supply of loanable funds, 
rather than the demand for them? After all, the government finances a budget 
deficit by selling bonds, thereby borrowing from the private sector. Why does 
increased borrowing from the government shift the supply curve, while increased 
borrowing by private investors shifts the demand curve? To answer this question, 
we need to examine more precisely the meaning of “loanable funds.” The model 
as presented here takes this term to mean the flow of resources available to fund pri-
vate investment; thus, a government budget deficit reduces the supply of loanable 
funds. If, instead, we had defined the term “loanable funds” to mean the flow of 
resources available from private saving, then the government budget deficit would 
increase demand rather than reduce supply. Changing the interpretation of the 
term would cause a semantic change in how we described the model, but the 
bottom line from the analysis would be the same: In either case, a budget deficit 
increases the interest rate, thereby crowding out private borrowers who are rely-
ing on financial markets to fund private investment projects.
Now that we understand the impact of budget deficits, we can turn the analy-
sis around and see that government budget surpluses have the opposite effects. 
When government collects more in tax revenue than it spends, it saves the differ-
ence by retiring some of the outstanding government debt. This budget surplus, 
or public saving, contributes to national saving. Thus, a budget surplus increases the 
supply of loanable funds, reduces the interest rate, and stimulates investment. Higher 
investment, in turn, means greater capital accumulation and more rapid economic 
growth.
The History of U.S. Government Debt
How indebted is the U.S. government? The answer to this question varies sub-
stantially over time. Figure 5 shows the debt of the U.S. federal government 
expressed as a percentage of U.S. GDP. It shows that the government debt has 
fluctuated from zero in 1836 to 107 percent of GDP in 1945.
 
The behavior of the debt-GDP ratio is one gauge of what’s happening with the 
government’s finances. Because GDP is a rough measure of the government’s tax 
base, a declining debt-GDP ratio indicates that the government indebtedness is 
crowding out
a decrease in investment 
that results from 
government borrowing
386
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

shrinking relative to its ability to raise tax revenue. This suggests that the govern-
ment is, in some sense, living within its means. By contrast, a rising debt-GDP 
ratio means that the government indebtedness is increasing relative to its ability to 
raise tax revenue. It is often interpreted as meaning that fiscal policy—government 
spending and taxes—cannot be sustained forever at current levels.
 
Throughout history, the primary cause of fluctuations in government debt is 
war. When wars occur, government spending on national defense rises substan-
tially to pay for soldiers and military equipment. Taxes sometimes rise as well but 
typically by much less than the increase in spending. The result is a budget deficit 
and increasing government debt. When the war is over, government spending 
declines, and the debt-GDP ratio starts declining as well.
 
There are two reasons to believe that debt financing of war is an appropriate 
policy. First, it allows the government to keep tax rates smooth over time. Without 
debt financing, tax rates would have to rise sharply during wars, and this would 
cause a substantial decline in economic efficiency. Second, debt financing of wars 
shifts part of the cost of wars to future generations, who will have to pay off the 
government debt. This is arguably a fair distribution of the burden, for future 
The U.S. 
Government Debt
Figure 5
The debt of the U.S. federal government, expressed here as a percentage of GDP, has 
varied throughout history. Wartime spending is typically associated with substantial 
increases in government debt. 
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury; U.S. Department of Commerce; and T. S. Berry, “Production and Population since 1789,” 
Bostwick Paper No. 6, Richmond, 1988.
Percent
of GDP
2010
1990
1790
1810
1830
1850
1870
1890
1910
1930
Revolutionary
War
Civil
War
World War I
World War II
Iraq War
0
20
40
60
80
100
120%
1950
1970
387
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

generations get some of the benefit when one generation fights a war to defend 
the nation against foreign aggressors. 
 
One large increase in government debt that cannot be explained by war is the 
increase that occurred beginning around 1980. When President Ronald Reagan took 
office in 1981, he was committed to smaller government and lower taxes. Yet he 
found cutting government spending to be more difficult politically than cutting taxes. 
The result was the beginning of a period of large budget deficits that continued not 
only through Reagan’s time in office but also for many years thereafter. As a result, 
government debt rose from 26 percent of GDP in 1980 to 50 percent of GDP in 1993. 
 
As we discussed earlier, government budget deficits reduce national saving, 
investment, and long-run economic growth, and this is precisely why the rise in 
government debt during the 1980s troubled many economists and policymakers. 
When Bill Clinton moved into the Oval Office in 1993, deficit reduction was his 
first major goal. Similarly, when the Republicans took control of Congress in 1995, 
deficit reduction was high on their legislative agenda. Both of these efforts substan-
tially reduced the size of the government budget deficit, and it eventually turned 
into a surplus. As a result, by the late 1990s, the debt-GDP ratio was declining.
 
The debt-GDP ratio started rising again during the first few years of the George 
W. Bush presidency, as the budget surplus turned into a budget deficit. There 
were three reasons for this change. First, President Bush signed into law several 
major tax cuts, which he had promised during the 2000 presidential campaign. 
Second, in 2001, the economy experienced a recession (a reduction in economic 
activity), which automatically decreased tax revenue and increased government 
spending. Third, spending on homeland security following the September 11, 
2001 attacks and the subsequent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan led to increases in 
government spending.
 
Truly dramatic increase in the debt-GDP ratio started occurring in 2008, as 
the economy experienced a financial crisis and a deep recession (a topic we 
will be addressing more fully in coming chapters). The recession automatically 
increased the budget deficit, and several policy measures passed by the Bush and 
Obama administrations aimed at combating the recession reduced tax revenue 
and increased government spending even more. In 2009 and 2010, the federal 
government’s budget deficit was about 10 percent of GDP, the largest deficits 
since World War II. The borrowing to finance these deficits led to the substantial 
increase in the debt-GDP ratio shown in the figure. Putting the federal budget 
back on a sustainable path with a stable or declining debt-GDP ratio is one of the 
great policy challenges facing future generations of policymakers.  ■
QUICK QUIZ If more Americans adopted a “live for today” approach to life, how 
would this affect saving, investment, and the interest rate?
Conclusion
“Neither a borrower nor a lender be,” Polonius advises his son in Shakespeare’s 
Hamlet. If everyone followed this advice, this chapter would have been unnecessary. 
Few economists would agree with Polonius. In our economy, people borrow 
and lend often, and usually for good reason. You may borrow one day to start 
your own business or to buy a home. And people may lend to you in the hope that 
the interest you pay will allow them to enjoy a more prosperous retirement. The 
financial system has the job of coordinating all this borrowing and lending activity.
388
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

SUMMARY
• The U.S. financial system is made up of many 
types of financial institutions, such as the bond 
market, the stock market, banks, and mutual 
funds. All these institutions act to direct the 
resources of households that want to save some 
of their income into the hands of households and 
firms that want to borrow.
• National income accounting identities reveal 
some important relationships among macroeco-
nomic variables. In particular, for a closed econ-
omy, national saving must equal investment. 
Financial institutions are the mechanism through 
which the economy matches one person’s saving 
with another person’s investment.
• The interest rate is determined by the supply 
and demand for loanable funds. The supply 
of loanable funds comes from households that 
want to save some of their income and lend it 
out. The demand for loanable funds comes from 
households and firms that want to borrow for 
investment. To analyze how any policy or event 
affects the interest rate, one must consider how 
it affects the supply and demand for loanable 
funds.
• National saving equals private saving plus 
public saving. A government budget deficit 
represents negative public saving and, therefore, 
reduces national saving and the supply of 
loanable funds available to finance investment. 
When a government budget deficit crowds out 
investment, it reduces the growth of productivity 
and GDP.
KEY CONCEPTS
In many ways, financial markets are like other markets in the economy. The 
price of loanable funds—the interest rate—is governed by the forces of supply 
and demand, just as other prices in the economy are. And we can analyze shifts 
in supply or demand in financial markets as we do in other markets. One of the 
Ten Principles of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that markets are usually a 
good way to organize economic activity. This principle applies to financial mar-
kets as well. When financial markets bring the supply and demand for loanable 
funds into balance, they help allocate the economy’s scarce resources to their most 
efficient use.
In one way, however, financial markets are special. Financial markets, unlike 
most other markets, serve the important role of linking the present and the 
future. Those who supply loanable funds—savers—do so because they want to 
convert some of their current income into future purchasing power. Those who 
demand loanable funds—borrowers—do so because they want to invest today 
in order to have additional capital in the future to produce goods and services. 
Thus, well-functioning financial markets are important not only for current gen-
erations but also for future generations who will inherit many of the resulting 
benefits. 
SU
SUMMARY
• The U.S. financial system is made up of many 
types of financial institutions, such as the bond 
market, the stock market, banks, and mutual 
funds. All these institutions act to direct the 
resources of households that want to save some 
of their income into the hands of households and 
firms that want to borrow.
• National income accounting identities reveal
some important relationships among macroeco-
nomic variables. In particular, for a closed econ-
omy, national saving must equal investment.
Financial institutions are the mechanism through 
which the economy matches one person’s saving 
with another person’s investment.
• The interest rate is determined by the supply 
and demand for loanable funds. The supply 
of loanable funds comes from households that 
want to save some of their income and lend it 
out. The demand for loanable funds comes from 
households and firms that want to borrow for 
investment. To analyze how any policy or event
affects the interest rate, one must consider how 
it affects the supply and demand for loanable
funds.
• National saving equals private saving plus
public saving. A government budget deficit
represents negative public saving and, therefore,
reduces national saving and the supply of 
loanable funds available to finance investment.
When a government budget deficit crowds out
investment, it reduces the growth of productivity
and GDP.
KEY CONCEPTS
KEY CONCEPTS
389
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
financial system, p. 372
financial markets, p. 372
bond, p. 372
stock, p. 373
financial intermediaries, p. 374
mutual fund, p. 375
national saving (saving), p. 378
private saving, p. 379
public saving, p. 379
budget surplus, p. 379
budget deficit, p. 379
market for loanable funds, p. 380
crowding out, p. 386

QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What is the role of the financial system? Name 
and describe two markets that are part of the 
financial system in the U.S. economy. Name and 
describe two financial intermediaries.
 2. Why is it important for people who own 
stocks and bonds to diversify their holdings? 
What type of financial institution makes 
diversification easier?
 3. What is national saving? What is private 
saving? What is public saving? How are these 
three variables related?
 4. What is investment? How is it related to 
national saving?
 5. Describe a change in the tax code that might 
increase private saving. If this policy were 
implemented, how would it affect the market 
for loanable funds?
 6. What is a government budget deficit? How does 
it affect interest rates, investment, and economic 
growth?
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. For each of the following pairs, which bond 
would you expect to pay a higher interest rate? 
Explain.
a. a bond of the U.S. government or a bond of 
an East European government
b. a bond that repays the principal in year 2015 
or a bond that repays the principal in year 
2040
c. a bond from Coca-Cola or a bond from a 
software company you run in your garage
d. a bond issued by the federal government or a 
bond issued by New York State
 2. Many workers hold large amounts of stock 
issued by the firms at which they work. Why 
do you suppose companies encourage this 
behavior? Why might a person not want to hold 
stock in the company where he works? 
 3. Explain the difference between saving and 
investment as defined by a macroeconomist. 
Which of the following situations represent 
investment? Saving? Explain.
a. Your family takes out a mortgage and buys a 
new house.
b. You use your $200 paycheck to buy stock in 
AT&T.
c. Your roommate earns $100 and deposits it in 
her account at a bank.
d. You borrow $1,000 from a bank to buy a car 
to use in your pizza delivery business.
 4. Suppose GDP is $8 trillion, taxes are $1.5 
trillion, private saving is $0.5 trillion, and public 
saving is $0.2 trillion. Assuming this economy 
is closed, calculate consumption, government 
purchases, national saving, and investment. 
 5. Economists in Funlandia, a closed economy, 
have collected the following information about 
the economy for a particular year: 
Y = 10,000 
C = 6,000 
T = 1,500 
G = 1,700 
The economists also estimate that the 
investment function is: 
I = 3,300 – 100 r, 
where r is the country’s real interest rate, 
expressed as a percentage. Calculate private 
saving, public saving, national saving, 
investment, and the equilibrium real interest 
rate. 
 6. Suppose that Intel is considering building a new 
chip-making factory. 
a. Assuming that Intel needs to borrow money 
in the bond market, why would an increase 
in interest rates affect Intel’s decision about 
whether to build the factory?
b. If Intel has enough of its own funds to 
finance the new factory without borrowing, 
would an increase in interest rates still affect 
Intel’s decision about whether to build the 
factory? Explain.
 7. Three students have each saved $1,000. Each 
has an investment opportunity in which he or 
QU S
O
S O
 
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is the role of the financial system? Name
and describe two markets that are part of the 
financial system in the U.S. economy. Name and 
describe two financial intermediaries.
2. Why is it important for people who own
stocks and bonds to diversify their holdings?
What type of financial institution makes 
diversification easier?
3. What is national saving? What is private
saving? What is public saving? How are these
three variables related?
 4. What is investment? How is it related to
national saving?
 5. Describe a change in the tax code that might
increase private saving. If this policy were
implemented, how would it affect the market 
for loanable funds?
 6. What is a government budget deficit? How does 
it affect interest rates, investment, and economic
growth?
O
S 
 
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. For each of the following pairs, which bond 
would you expect to pay a higher interest rate?
Explain.
a. a bond of the U.S. government or a bond of 
an East European government
b. a bond that repays the principal in year 2015
or a bond that repays the principal in year
2040
c. a bond from Coca-Cola or a bond from a
software company you run in your garage
d. a bond issued by the federal government or a 
bond issued by New York State
 2. Many workers hold large amounts of stock
issued by the firms at which they work. Why 
do you suppose companies encourage this
behavior? Why might a person not want to hold 
stock in the company where he works?
 3. Explain the difference between saving and 
investment as defined by a macroeconomist.
Which of the following situations represent
investment? Saving? Explain.
a. Your family takes out a mortgage and buys a
new house.
b. You use your $200 paycheck to buy stock in
AT&T.
c. Your roommate earns $100 and deposits it in
her account at a bank.
d. You borrow $1,000 from a bank to buy a car
to use in your pizza delivery business.
 4. Suppose GDP is $8 trillion, taxes are $1.5
trillion, private saving is $0.5 trillion, and public 
saving is $0.2 trillion. Assuming this economy 
is closed, calculate consumption, government
purchases, national saving, and investment.
 5. Economists in Funlandia, a closed economy, 
have collected the following information about 
the economy for a particular year:
Y = 10,000 
C = 6,000 
T = 1,500 
G = 1,700 
The economists also estimate that the 
investment function is: 
I = 3,300 – 100 r,
where r is the country’s real interest rate, 
expressed as a percentage. Calculate private 
saving, public saving, national saving,
investment, and the equilibrium real interest
rate. 
 6. Suppose that Intel is considering building a new 
chip-making factory. 
a. Assuming that Intel needs to borrow money 
in the bond market, why would an increase
in interest rates affect Intel’s decision about 
whether to build the factory?
b. If Intel has enough of its own funds to 
finance the new factory without borrowing, 
would an increase in interest rates still affect
Intel’s decision about whether to build the
factory? Explain.
 7. Three students have each saved $1,000. Each 
has an investment opportunity in which he or 
390
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

she can invest up to $2,000. Here are the rates of 
return on the students’ investment projects:
 
Harry 
5  percent
 
Ron 
8  percent
 
Hermione 
20 percent
a. If borrowing and lending is prohibited, so 
each student uses only his or her saving to 
finance his or her own investment project, 
how much will each student have a year later 
when the project pays its return?
b. Now suppose their school opens up a 
market for loanable funds in which students 
can borrow and lend among themselves at 
an interest rate r. What would determine 
whether a student would choose to be a 
borrower or lender in this market?
c. Among these three students, what would be 
the quantity of loanable funds supplied and 
quantity demanded at an interest rate of 
7 percent? At 10 percent?
d. At what interest rate would the loanable 
funds market among these three students 
be in equilibrium? At this interest rate, 
which student(s) would borrow, and which 
student(s) would lend?
e. At the equilibrium interest rate, how much 
does each student have a year later after 
the investment projects pay their return 
and loans have been repaid? Compare your 
answers to those you gave in part (a). Who 
benefits from the existence of the loanable 
funds market—the borrowers or the lenders? 
Is anyone worse off?
 8. Suppose the government borrows $20 billion 
more next year than this year.
a. Use a supply-and-demand diagram to 
analyze this policy. Does the interest rate rise 
or fall? 
b. What happens to investment? To private 
saving? To public saving? To national 
saving? Compare the size of the changes 
to the $20 billion of extra government 
borrowing.
c. How does the elasticity of supply of loanable 
funds affect the size of these changes? 
d. How does the elasticity of demand for 
loanable funds affect the size of these 
changes?
e. Suppose households believe that greater 
government borrowing today implies higher 
taxes to pay off the government debt in the 
future. What does this belief do to private 
saving and the supply of loanable funds 
today? Does it increase or decrease the effects 
you discussed in parts (a) and (b)?
 9. In the summer of 2010, Congress passed a far-
reaching financial reform to prevent another 
financial crisis like the one experienced in 
2008–2009. Consider the following possibilities:
a. Suppose that, by requiring firms to comply 
with strict regulations, the bill increases the 
costs of investment. On a well-labeled graph, 
show the consequences of the bill on the 
market for loanable funds. Be sure to specify 
changes in the equilibrium interest rate and 
level of saving and investment. What are the 
effects of the bill on long-run economic growth?
b. Suppose, on the other hand, that by 
effectively regulating the financial system, 
the bill increases savers’ confidence in the 
financial system. Show the consequences of 
the policy in this situation on a new graph, 
again noting changes in the equilibrium 
interest rate and level of saving and 
investment. Again evaluate the effects on 
long-run growth.
 10. This chapter explains that investment can be 
increased both by reducing taxes on private 
saving and by reducing the government budget 
deficit.
a. Why is it difficult to implement both of these 
policies at the same time?
b. What would you need to know about private 
saving to judge which of these two policies 
would be a more effective way to raise 
investment?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
she can invest up to $2,000. Here are the rates of 
return on the students’ investment projects:
 
Harry 
5  percent
 
Ron 
8  percent
 
Hermione 
20 percent
a. If borrowing and lending is prohibited, so
each student uses only his or her saving to
finance his or her own investment project,
how much will each student have a year later
when the project pays its return?
b. Now suppose their school opens up a
market for loanable funds in which students 
can borrow and lend among themselves at 
an interest rate r. What would determine
whether a student would choose to be a 
borrower or lender in this market?
c. Among these three students, what would be 
the quantity of loanable funds supplied and 
quantity demanded at an interest rate of 
7 percent? At 10 percent?
d. At what interest rate would the loanable
funds market among these three students
be in equilibrium? At this interest rate,
which student(s) would borrow, and which
student(s) would lend?
e. At the equilibrium interest rate, how much
does each student have a year later after 
the investment projects pay their return
and loans have been repaid? Compare your
answers to those you gave in part (a). Who
benefits from the existence of the loanable
funds market—the borrowers or the lenders?
Is anyone worse off?
 8. Suppose the government borrows $20 billion 
more next year than this year.
a. Use a supply-and-demand diagram to
analyze this policy. Does the interest rate rise
or fall?
b. What happens to investment? To private
saving? To public saving? To national
saving? Compare the size of the changes
to the $20 billion of extra government
borrowing.
c. How does the elasticity of supply of loanable 
funds affect the size of these changes?
d. How does the elasticity of demand for 
loanable funds affect the size of these
changes?
e. Suppose households believe that greater 
government borrowing today implies higher 
taxes to pay off the government debt in the
future. What does this belief do to private 
saving and the supply of loanable funds
today? Does it increase or decrease the effects
you discussed in parts (a) and (b)?
 9. In the summer of 2010, Congress passed a far-
reaching financial reform to prevent another
financial crisis like the one experienced in
2008–2009. Consider the following possibilities:
a. Suppose that, by requiring firms to comply 
with strict regulations, the bill increases the 
costs of investment. On a well-labeled graph, 
show the consequences of the bill on the 
market for loanable funds. Be sure to specify
changes in the equilibrium interest rate and 
level of saving and investment. What are the 
effects of the bill on long-run economic growth?
b. Suppose, on the other hand, that by
effectively regulating the financial system,
the bill increases savers’ confidence in the 
financial system. Show the consequences of 
the policy in this situation on a new graph, 
again noting changes in the equilibrium
interest rate and level of saving and 
investment. Again evaluate the effects on
long-run growth.
 10. This chapter explains that investment can be
increased both by reducing taxes on private 
saving and by reducing the government budget 
deficit.
a. Why is it difficult to implement both of these
policies at the same time?
b. What would you need to know about private
saving to judge which of these two policies
would be a more effective way to raise 
investment?
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.
391
CHAPTER 18    SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM


Th e Basic Tools of 
    Finance 
S
ometime in your life, you will have to deal with the economy’s financial sys-
tem. You will deposit your savings in a bank account, or you will take out a 
mortgage to buy a house. After you have a job, you will decide whether to 
invest the funds in your retirement account in stocks, bonds, or other finan-
cial instruments. If you try to put together your own portfolio, you will have to 
decide between buying stocks in established companies such as General Electric 
or newer ones such as Google. And whenever you watch the evening news, you 
will hear reports about whether the stock market is up or down, together with the 
often feeble attempts to explain why the market behaves as it does.
If you reflect for a moment on the many financial decisions you will make dur-
ing your life, you will see two related elements in almost all of them: time and 
risk. As we saw in the preceding two chapters, the financial system coordinates 
the economy’s saving and investment, which in turn are crucial determinants of 
economic growth. Most fundamentally, the financial system concerns decisions 
and actions we undertake today that will affect our lives in the future. But the 
393
19

future is unknown. When a person decides to allocate some saving, or a firm 
decides to undertake an investment, the decision is based on a guess about the 
likely result. The actual result, however, could end up being very different from 
what was expected.
This chapter introduces some tools that help us understand the decisions that 
people make as they participate in financial markets. The field of finance devel-
ops these tools in great detail, and you may choose to take courses that focus on 
this topic. But because the financial system is so important to the functioning of 
the economy, many of the basic insights of finance are central to understanding 
how the economy works. The tools of finance may also help you think through 
some of the decisions that you will make in your own life.
This chapter takes up three topics. First, we discuss how to compare sums of 
money at different points in time. Second, we discuss how to manage risk. Third, 
we build on our analysis of time and risk to examine what determines the value 
of an asset, such as a share of stock.
Present Value: Measuring the Time Value of Money 
Imagine that someone offers to give you $100 today or $100 in 10 years. Which 
would you choose? This is an easy question. Getting $100 today is better because 
you can always deposit the money in a bank, still have it in 10 years, and earn 
interest on the $100 along the way. The lesson: Money today is more valuable than 
the same amount of money in the future.
Now consider a harder question: Imagine that someone offers you $100 today 
or $200 in 10 years. Which would you choose? To answer this question, you need 
some way to compare sums of money from different points in time. Economists 
do this with a concept called present value. The present value of any future sum 
of money is the amount today that would be needed, at current interest rates, to 
produce that future sum.
To learn how to use the concept of present value, let’s work through a couple 
of simple examples: 
Question: If you put $100 in a bank account today, how much will it be worth 
in N years? That is, what will be the future value of this $100?
Answer: Let’s use r to denote the interest rate expressed in decimal form (so an 
interest rate of 5 percent means r = 0.05). Suppose that interest is paid annually 
and that the interest paid remains in the bank account to earn more interest—a 
process called compounding. Then the $100 will become 
 
(1 + r) × $100 
after 1 year,
 
(1 + r) × (1 + r) × $100 = (1 + r)2 × $100 
after 2 years,
 
(1 + r) × (1 + r) × (1 + r) × $100 = (1 + r)3 × $100 
after 3 years, . . .
 
(1 + r)N × $100 
after N years.
For example, if we are investing at an interest rate of 5 percent for 10 years, then 
the future value of the $100 will be (1.05)10 × $100, which is $163.
Question: Now suppose you are going to be paid $200 in N years. What is 
the present value of this future payment? That is, how much would you have to 
deposit in a bank right now to yield $200 in N years?
finance
the field that studies how 
people make decisions 
regarding the allocation 
of resources over time 
and the handling of risk
present value
the amount of money 
today that would be 
needed, using prevailing 
interest rates, to produce 
a given future amount of 
money 
future value
the amount of money in 
the future that an amount 
of money today will yield, 
given prevailing interest 
rates
compounding
the accumulation of a 
sum of money in, say, a 
bank account, where the 
interest earned remains 
in the account to earn 
additional interest in the 
future
394
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Answer: To answer this question, just turn the previous answer on its head. In 
the last question, we computed a future value from a present value by multiplying 
by the factor (1 + r)N. To compute a present value from a future value, we divide 
by the factor (1 + r)N. Thus, the present value of $200 in N years is $200/(1 + r)N. 
If that amount is deposited in a bank today, after N years it would become 
(1 + r)N × [$200/(1 + r)N], which is $200. For instance, if the interest rate is 5 per-
cent, the present value of $200 in 10 years is $200/(1.05)10, which is $123. This 
means that $123 deposited today in a bank account that earned 5 percent would 
produce $200 after 10 years.
This illustrates the general formula: 
•  If r is the interest rate, then an amount X to be received in N years has a 
present value of X/(1 + r)N. 
Because the possibility of earning interest reduces the present value below the 
amount X, the process of finding a present value of a future sum of money is 
called discounting. This formula shows precisely how much future sums should 
be discounted.
Let’s now return to our earlier question: Should you choose $100 today or $200 
in 10 years? We can infer from our calculation of present value that if the inter-
est rate is 5 percent, you should prefer the $200 in 10 years. The future $200 has 
a present value of $123, which is greater than $100. You are better off waiting for 
the future sum.
Notice that the answer to our question depends on the interest rate. If the inter-
est rate were 8 percent, then the $200 in 10 years would have a present value of 
$200/(1.08)10, which is only $93. In this case, you should take the $100 today. Why 
should the interest rate matter for your choice? The answer is that the higher the 
interest rate, the more you can earn by depositing your money in a bank, so the 
more attractive getting $100 today becomes.
The concept of present value is useful in many applications, including the deci-
sions that companies face when evaluating investment projects. For instance, imag-
ine that General Motors is thinking about building a new factory. Suppose that the 
factory will cost $100 million today and will yield the company $200 million in 10 
years. Should General Motors undertake the project? You can see that this decision 
is exactly like the one we have been studying. To make its decision, the company 
will compare the present value of the $200 million return to the $100 million cost. 
The company’s decision, therefore, will depend on the interest rate. If the inter-
est rate is 5 percent, then the present value of the $200 million return from the 
factory is $123 million, and the company will choose to pay the $100 million cost. 
By contrast, if the interest rate is 8 percent, then the present value of the return 
is only $93 million, and the company will decide to forgo the project. Thus, the 
concept of present value helps explain why investment—and thus the quantity of 
loanable funds demanded—declines when the interest rate rises.
Here is another application of present value: Suppose you win a million-
dollar lottery and are given a choice between $20,000 a year for 50 years (totaling 
$1,000,000) or an immediate payment of $400,000. Which would you choose? To 
make the right choice, you need to calculate the present value of the stream of 
payments. Let’s suppose the interest rate is 7 percent. After performing 50 calcu-
lations similar to those above (one calculation for each payment) and adding up 
the results, you would learn that the present value of this million-dollar prize at 
a 7 percent interest rate is only $276,000. You are better off picking the  immediate 
395
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

FYI
 The Magic of Compounding and 
the Rule of 70
S
uppose you observe that one country has an average growth rate 
of 1 percent per year, while another has an average growth rate 
of 3 percent per year. At first, this might not seem like a big deal. 
What difference can 2 percent make? 
 
The answer is: a big difference. Growth rates that seem small 
when written in percentage terms are large after they are com-
pounded for many years. 
 
Consider an example. Suppose that two college graduates—
Finn and Quinn—both take their first jobs at the age of 22 earning 
$30,000 a year. Finn lives in an economy where all incomes grow 
at 1 percent per year, while Quinn lives in one where incomes grow 
at 3 percent per year. Straightforward calculations show what 
happens. Forty years later, when both are 62 years old, Finn earns 
$45,000 a year, while Quinn earns $98,000. Because of that dif-
ference of 2 percentage points in the growth rate, Quinn’s salary is 
more than twice Finn’s.
 
An old rule of thumb, called the rule of 70, is helpful in under-
standing growth rates and the effects of compounding. According to the 
rule of 70, if some variable grows at a rate of x percent per year, then 
that variable doubles in approximately 70/x years. In Finn’s economy, 
incomes grow at 1 percent per year, so it takes about 70 years for 
incomes to double. In Quinn’s economy, incomes grow at 3 percent per 
year, so it takes about 70/3, or 23, years for incomes to double.
 
The rule of 70 applies not only to a growing economy but also 
to a growing savings account. Here is an example: In 1791, Ben 
Franklin died and left $5,000 to be invested for a period of 200 
years to benefit medical students and scientific research. If this 
money had earned 7 percent per year (which would, in fact, have 
been possible to do), the investment would have doubled in value 
every 10 years. Over 200 years, it would have doubled 20 times. 
At the end of 200 years of compounding, the investment would 
have been worth 220  $5,000, which is about $5 billion. (In fact, 
Franklin’s $5,000 grew to only $2 million over 200 years because 
some of the money was spent along the way.)
 
As these examples show, growth rates and interest rates com-
pounded over many years can lead to some spectacular results. 
That is probably why Albert Einstein once called compounding “the 
greatest mathematical discovery of all time.” 
payment of $400,000. The million dollars may seem like more money, but the 
future cash flows, once discounted to the present, are worth far less.
QUICK QUIZ The interest rate is 7 percent. What is the present value of $150 to be 
received in 10 years?
Managing Risk
Life is full of gambles. When you go skiing, you risk breaking your leg in a fall. 
When you drive to work, you risk a car accident. When you put some of your sav-
ings in the stock market, you risk a fall in stock prices. The rational response to 
this risk is not necessarily to avoid it at any cost but to take it into account in your 
decision making. Let’s consider how a person might do that.
Risk Aversion
Most people are risk averse. This means more than that people dislike bad things 
happening to them. It means that they dislike bad things more than they like 
comparable good things.
For example, suppose a friend offers you the following opportunity. He will 
toss a coin. If it comes up heads, he will pay you $1,000. But if it comes up tails, 
risk aversion
a dislike of uncertainty
396
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

you will have to pay him $1,000. Would you accept the bargain? You wouldn’t if 
you were risk averse. For a risk-averse person, the pain of losing the $1,000 would 
exceed the pleasure from winning $1,000.
Economists have developed models of risk aversion using the concept of utility,
which is a person’s subjective measure of well-being or satisfaction. Every level 
of wealth provides a certain amount of utility, as shown by the utility function in 
Figure 1. But the function exhibits the property of diminishing marginal utility: 
The more wealth a person has, the less utility he gets from an additional dollar. 
Thus, in the figure, the utility function gets flatter as wealth increases. Because 
of diminishing marginal utility, the utility lost from losing the $1,000 bet is more 
than the utility gained from winning it. As a result, people are risk averse.
Risk aversion provides the starting point for explaining various things we 
observe in the economy. Let’s consider three of them: insurance, diversification, 
and the risk-return trade-off.
The Markets for Insurance
One way to deal with risk is to buy insurance. The general feature of insurance 
contracts is that a person facing a risk pays a fee to an insurance company, which 
in return agrees to accept all or part of the risk. There are many types of insurance. 
Car insurance covers the risk of your being in an auto accident, fire insurance 
covers the risk that your house will burn down, health insurance covers the risk 
that you might need expensive medical treatment, and life insurance covers the 
risk that you will die and leave your family without your income. There is also 
insurance against the risk of living too long: For a fee paid today, an insurance 
company will pay you an annuity—a regular income every year until you die.
In a sense, every insurance contract is a gamble. It is possible that you will not 
be in an auto accident, that your house will not burn down, and that you will not 
need expensive medical treatment. In most years, you will pay the insurance com-
pany the premium and get nothing in return except peace of mind. Indeed, the 
insurance company is counting on the fact that most people will not make claims 
on their policies; otherwise, it couldn’t pay out the large claims to the unlucky few 
and still stay in business.
From the standpoint of the economy as a whole, the role of insurance is not 
to eliminate the risks inherent in life but to spread them around more efficiently. 
The Utility Function
This utility function shows how 
utility, a subjective measure 
of satisfaction, depends on 
wealth. As wealth rises, the 
utility function becomes flatter, 
reflecting the property of 
diminishing marginal utility. 
Because of diminishing marginal 
utility, a $1,000 loss decreases 
utility by more than a $1,000 gain 
increases it.
Figure 1
Wealth
0
Utility
Current
wealth
$1,000
gain
Utility gain
from winning
$1,000
Utility loss
from losing
$1,000
$1,000
loss
397
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

Consider fire insurance, for instance. Owning fire insurance does not reduce the 
risk of losing your home in a fire. But if that unlucky event occurs, the insurance 
company compensates you. The risk, rather than being borne by you alone, is 
shared among the thousands of insurance-company shareholders. Because people 
are risk averse, it is easier for 10,000 people to bear 1/10,000 of the risk than for 
one person to bear the entire risk himself.
The markets for insurance suffer from two types of problems that impede their 
ability to spread risk. One problem is adverse selection: A high-risk person is more 
likely to apply for insurance than a low-risk person because a high-risk person 
would benefit more from insurance protection. A second problem is moral hazard: 
After people buy insurance, they have less incentive to be careful about their 
risky behavior because the insurance company will cover much of the resulting 
losses. Insurance companies are aware of these problems, but they cannot fully 
guard against them. An insurance company cannot perfectly distinguish between 
high-risk and low-risk customers, and it cannot monitor all of its customers’ risky 
behavior. The price of insurance reflects the actual risks that the insurance com-
pany will face after the insurance is bought. The high price of insurance is why 
some people, especially those who know themselves to be low-risk, decide against 
buying it and, instead, endure some of life’s uncertainty on their own.
Diversification of Firm-Specific Risk
In 2002, Enron, a large and once widely respected company, went bankrupt amid 
accusations of fraud and accounting irregularities. Several of the company’s top 
executives were prosecuted and ended up going to prison. The saddest part of the 
story, however, involved thousands of lower-level employees. Not only did they 
lose their jobs, but many lost their life savings as well. The employees had about 
two-thirds of their retirement funds in Enron stock, which became worthless.
If there is one piece of practical advice that finance offers to risk-averse peo-
ple, it is this: “Don’t put all your eggs in one basket.” You may have heard this 
before, but finance has turned this folk wisdom into a science. It goes by the name 
diversification.
The market for insurance is one example of diversification. Imagine a town 
with 10,000 homeowners, each facing the risk of a house fire. If someone starts 
an insurance company and each person in town becomes both a shareholder and 
a policyholder of the company, they all reduce their risk through diversification. 
Each person now faces 1/10,000 of the risk of 10,000 possible fires, rather than the 
entire risk of a single fire in his own home. Unless the entire town catches fire at 
the same time, the downside that each person faces is much smaller.
When people use their savings to buy financial assets, they can also reduce risk 
through diversification. A person who buys stock in a company is placing a bet 
on the future profitability of that company. That bet is often quite risky because 
companies’ fortunes are hard to predict. Microsoft evolved from a start-up by 
some geeky teenagers to one of the world’s most valuable companies in only a 
few years; Enron went from one of the world’s most respected companies to an 
almost worthless one in only a few months. Fortunately, a shareholder need not 
tie his own fortune to that of any single company. Risk can be reduced by placing 
a large number of small bets, rather than a small number of large ones.
Figure 2 shows how the risk of a portfolio of stocks depends on the number of 
stocks in the portfolio. Risk is measured here with a statistic called the standard 
deviation, which you may have learned about in a math or statistics class. The 
standard deviation measures the volatility of a variable—that is, how much the 
variable is likely to fluctuate. The higher the standard deviation of a portfolio’s 
diversification
the reduction of risk 
achieved by replacing a 
single risk with a large 
number of smaller, 
unrelated risks
398
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

return, the more volatile its return is likely to be, and the riskier it is that someone 
holding the portfolio will fail to get the return that he or she expected. 
The figure shows that the risk of a stock portfolio falls substantially as the 
number of stocks increases. For a portfolio with a single stock, the standard devia-
tion is 49 percent. Going from 1 stock to 10 stocks eliminates about half the risk. 
Going from 10 to 20 stocks reduces the risk by another 13 percent. As the number 
of stocks continues to increase, risk continues to fall, although the reductions in 
risk after 20 or 30 stocks are small.
Notice that it is impossible to eliminate all risk by increasing the number 
of stocks in the portfolio. Diversification can eliminate firm-specific risk—the 
uncertainty associated with the specific companies. But diversification cannot 
eliminate market risk—the uncertainty associated with the entire economy, 
which affects all companies traded on the stock market. For example, when the 
economy goes into a recession, most companies experience falling sales, reduced 
profit, and low stock returns. Diversification reduces the risk of holding stocks, 
but it does not eliminate it.
The Trade-off between Risk and Return
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that people face trade-offs. 
The trade-off that is most relevant for understanding financial decisions is the 
trade-off between risk and return. 
As we have seen, there are risks inherent in holding stocks, even in a diversi-
fied portfolio. But risk-averse people are willing to accept this uncertainty because 
they are compensated for doing so. Historically, stocks have offered much higher 
rates of return than alternative financial assets, such as bonds and bank savings 
accounts. Over the past two centuries, stocks offered an average real return of 
about 8 percent per year, while short-term government bonds paid a real return 
of only 3 percent per year.
When deciding how to allocate their savings, people have to decide how much 
risk they are willing to undertake to earn a higher return. For example, consider a 
person choosing how to allocate his portfolio between two asset classes: 
firm-specific risk
risk that affects only a 
single company
market risk
risk that affects all 
companies in the stock 
market
Diversification Reduces Risk
This figure shows how the risk of 
a portfolio, measured here with 
a statistic called the standard 
deviation, depends on the 
number of stocks in the portfolio. 
The investor is assumed to put an 
equal percentage of his portfolio 
in each of the stocks. Increasing 
the number of stocks reduces, but 
does not eliminate, the amount 
of risk in a stock portfolio.
Source: Adapted from Meir Statman, “How Many 
Stocks Make a Diversified Portfolio?” Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22 (September 
1987): 353–364.
Figure 2
Number of
Stocks in
Portfolio
49
(More risk)
(Less risk)
20
0
1
4
2
6 8 10
20
40
Risk (standard
deviation of
portfolio return)
30
1. Increasing the number of stocks in a
portfolio reduces ﬁrm-speciﬁc risk through
diversiﬁcation . . .
2. . . . but 
market risk 
remains.
399
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

•  The first asset class is a diversified group of risky stocks, with an average 
return of 8 percent and a standard deviation of 20 percent. (You may recall 
from a math or statistics class that a normal random variable stays within 
two standard deviations of its average about 95 percent of the time. Thus, 
while actual returns are centered around 8 percent, they typically vary from 
a gain of 48 percent to a loss of 32 percent.) 
•  The second asset class is a safe alternative, with a return of 3 percent and a 
standard deviation of zero. The safe alternative can be either a bank savings 
account or a government bond.
Figure 3 illustrates the trade-off between risk and return. Each point in this figure 
represents a particular allocation of a portfolio between risky stocks and the safe 
asset. The figure shows that the more the individual puts into stocks, the greater 
is both the risk and the return.
Acknowledging the risk-return trade-off does not, by itself, tell us what a per-
son should do. The choice of a particular combination of risk and return depends 
on a person’s risk aversion, which reflects a person’s own preferences. But it is 
important for stockholders to recognize that the higher average return that they 
enjoy comes at the price of higher risk.
QUICK QUIZ Describe three ways that a risk-averse person might reduce the risk he 
faces.
Asset Valuation 
Now that we have developed a basic understanding of the two building blocks of 
finance—time and risk—let’s apply this knowledge. This section considers a sim-
ple question: What determines the price of a share of stock? Like most prices, the 
answer is supply and demand. But that is not the end of the story. To understand 
stock prices, we need to think more deeply about what determines a person’s 
willingness to pay for a share of stock. 
Figure 3
The Trade-off between 
Risk and Return
When people increase the 
percentage of their savings 
that they have invested in 
stocks, they increase the 
average return they can 
expect to earn, but they also 
increase the risks they face.
Risk
(standard
deviation)
0
5
10
15
20
8
3
Return
(percent
per year)
75%
stocks
50%
stocks
25%
stocks
No
stocks
100%
stocks
400
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Fundamental Analysis
Let’s imagine that you have decided to put 60 percent of your savings into stock, 
and to achieve diversification, you have decided to buy twenty different stocks. If 
you open up the newspaper, you will find thousands of stocks listed. How should 
you pick the twenty for your portfolio? 
When you buy stock, you are buying shares in a business. To decide which 
businesses you want to own, it is natural to consider two things: the value of that 
share of the business and the price at which the shares are being sold. If the price 
is less than the value, the stock is said to be undervalued. If the price is more than 
the value, the stock is said to be overvalued. If the price and the value are equal, the 
stock is said to be fairly valued. When choosing twenty stocks for your portfolio, 
you should prefer undervalued stocks. In these cases, you are getting a bargain by 
paying less than the business is worth.
This is easier said than done. Learning the price is easy: You can just look it up 
in the newspaper. Determining the value of the business is the hard part. The term 
fundamental analysis refers to the detailed analysis of a company to estimate its 
value. Many Wall Street firms hire stock analysts to conduct such fundamental 
analysis and offer advice about which stocks to buy.
The value of a stock to a stockholder is what he gets out of owning it, which 
includes the present value of the stream of dividend payments and the final sale 
price. Recall that dividends are the cash payments that a company makes to its 
shareholders. A company’s ability to pay dividends, as well as the value of the 
stock when the stockholder sells his shares, depends on the company’s ability to 
earn profits. Its profitability, in turn, depends on a large number of factors: the 
demand for its product, how much competition it faces, how much capital it has in 
place, whether its workers are unionized, how loyal its customers are, what kinds 
of government regulations and taxes it faces, and so on. The goal of fundamental 
analysis is to take all these factors into account to determine how much a share of 
stock in the company is worth.
If you want to rely on fundamental analysis to pick a stock portfolio, there are 
three ways to do it. One way is to do all the necessary research yourself, such as by 
reading through companies’ annual reports. A second way is to rely on the advice 
of Wall Street analysts. A third way is to buy a mutual fund, which has a manager 
who conducts fundamental analysis and makes the decision for you.
The Efficient Markets Hypothesis
There is another way to choose twenty stocks for your portfolio: Pick them ran-
domly by, for instance, putting the stock pages on your bulletin board and throwing 
darts at the page. This may sound crazy, but there is reason to believe that it won’t 
lead you too far astray. That reason is called the efficient markets hypothesis.
To understand this theory, the starting point is to acknowledge that each com-
pany listed on a major stock exchange is followed closely by many money man-
agers, such as the individuals who run mutual funds. Every day, these managers 
monitor news stories and conduct fundamental analysis to try to determine the 
stock’s value. Their job is to buy a stock when its price falls below its fundamental 
value and to sell it when its price rises above its fundamental value.
The second piece to the efficient markets hypothesis is that the equilibrium of 
supply and demand sets the market price. This means that, at the market price, 
the number of shares being offered for sale exactly equals the number of shares 
that people want to buy. In other words, at the market price, the number of peo-
ple who think the stock is overvalued exactly balances the number of people who 
fundamental 
analysis
the study of a company’s 
accounting statements 
and future prospects to 
determine its value
efficient markets 
hypothesis
the theory that asset 
prices reflect all publicly 
available information 
about the value of an 
asset
401
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

Betting on the 
Bad Guys 
BY SCOTT ADAMS
W
hen I heard that B P was destroying a 
big portion of Earth, with no serious 
discussion of cutting their dividend, I had 
two thoughts: 1) I hate them, and 2) This 
would be an excellent time to buy their 
stock. And so I did. Although I should have 
waited a week.
 
People ask me how it feels to take the 
side of moral bankruptcy. Answer: Pretty 
good! Thanks for asking. How’s it feel to be 
a disgruntled victim?
 
I have a theory that you should invest in 
the companies that you hate the most. The 
usual reason for hating a company is that 
the company is so powerful it can make you 
balance your wallet on your nose while you 
beg for their product. Oil companies such 
as BP don’t actually make you beg for oil, 
but I think we all realize that they could. It’s 
implied in the price of gas.
 
I hate BP, but I admire them too, in the 
same way I respect the work ethic of serial 
killers. I remember the day I learned that 
BP was using a submarine . . . with a web 
cam . . . a mile under the sea . . . to feed live 
video of their disaster to the world. My mind 
screamed “STOP TRYING TO MAKE ME 
LOVE YOU! MUST . . . THINK . . . OF DEAD 
BIRDS TO MAINTAIN ANGER!” The geeky 
side of me has a bit of a crush on them, but 
I still hate them for turning Florida into a 
dip stick. . . .
 
Perhaps you think it’s absurd to invest in 
companies just because you hate them. But 
let’s compare my method to all of the other 
ways you could decide where to invest.
Te chnical Analysis
Technical analysis involves studying graphs 
of stock movement over time as a way to 
predict future moves. It’s a widely used 
method on Wall Street, and it has exactly 
the same scientific validity as pretending 
 A Cartoonist’s Guide to Stock Picking
The creator of the comic strip Dilbert (who was an economics major in 
college) offers some financial advice. 
in the news
think it’s undervalued. As judged by the typical person in the market, all stocks 
are fairly valued all the time.
According to this theory, the stock market exhibits informational efficiency:
It reflects all available information about the value of the asset. Stock prices change 
when information changes. When good news about the company’s prospects 
becomes public, the value and the stock price both rise. When the company’s pros-
pects deteriorate, the value and price both fall. But at any moment in time, the mar-
ket price is the best guess of the company’s value based on available information.
One implication of the efficient markets hypothesis is that stock prices should 
follow a random walk. This means that the changes in stock prices are impossible 
to predict from available information. If, based on publicly available information, 
a person could predict that a stock price would rise by 10 percent tomorrow, then 
the stock market must be failing to incorporate that information today. According 
to this theory, the only thing that can move stock prices is news that changes the 
market’s perception of the company’s value. But news must be unpredictable—
otherwise, it wouldn’t really be news. For the same reason, changes in stock prices 
should be unpredictable. 
If the efficient markets hypothesis is correct, then there is little point in spend-
ing many hours studying the business page to decide which twenty stocks to add 
to your portfolio. If prices reflect all available information, no stock is a better buy 
than any other. The best you can do is buy a diversified portfolio.
informational 
efficiency
the description of asset 
prices that rationally 
reflect all available 
information
random walk
the path of a variable 
whose changes are 
impossible to predict
402
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

you are a witch and forecasting market 
moves from chicken droppings.
Investing in Well-Managed 
Companies
When companies make money, we assume 
they are well-managed. That perception 
is reinforced by the CEOs of those com-
panies who are happy to tell you all the 
clever things they did to make it happen. 
The problem with relying on this source of 
information is that CEOs are highly skilled 
in a special form of lying called leadership. 
Leadership involves convincing employees 
and investors that the CEO has something 
called a vision, a type of optimistic hal-
lucination that can come true only in an 
environment in which the CEO is massively 
overcompensated and the employees have 
learned to be less selfish.
Track Record
Perhaps you can safely invest in companies 
that have a long track record of being prof-
itable. That sounds safe and reasonable, 
right? The problem is that every investment 
expert knows two truths about investing: 
1)  Past performance is no indication of 
future performance. 2) You need to consider 
a company’s track record.
 
Right, yes, those are opposites. And it’s 
pretty much all that anyone knows about 
investing. An investment professional can 
argue for any sort of investment decision by 
selectively ignoring either point 1 or 2. And 
for that you will pay the investment profes-
sional 1% to 2% of your portfolio value 
annually, no matter the performance.
Invest in Companies You Love
Instead of investing in  companies you hate, 
as I have suggested, perhaps you could 
invest in companies you love. I once hired 
professional money managers at Wells 
Fargo to do essentially that for me. As part 
of their service they promised to listen to the 
dopey-happy hallucinations of professional 
liars (CEOs) and be gullible on my behalf. 
The pros at Wells Fargo bought for my 
portfolio Enron, WorldCom, and a number 
of other much-loved companies that soon 
went out of business. For that, I hate Wells 
Fargo. But I sure wish I had bought stock 
in Wells Fargo at the time I hated them the 
most, because Wells Fargo itself performed 
great. See how this works?
Do Your Own Research
I didn’t let Wells Fargo manage my entire 
portfolio, thanks to my native distrust of all 
humanity. For the other half of my portfolio 
I did my own research. (Imagine a field of 
red flags, all wildly waving. I didn’t notice 
them.) My favorite investment was in a 
company I absolutely loved. I loved their 
business model. I loved their mission. I loved 
how they planned to make our daily lives 
easier. They were simply adorable as they 
struggled to change an entrenched industry. 
Their leaders reported that the company had 
finally turned cash positive in one key area, 
thus validating their business model, and 
proving that the future was rosy. I doubled 
down. The company was Webvan, may it 
rest in peace.
 
(This would be a good time to remind 
you not to make investment decisions based 
on the wisdom of cartoonists.)
Source: The Wall Street Journal, June 5, 2010.
Random Walks and Index Funds
The efficient markets hypothesis is a theo ry about how financial markets work. 
The theory is probably not completely true: As we discuss in the next section, 
there is reason to doubt that stockholders are always rational and that stock prices 
are informationally efficient at every moment. Nonetheless, the efficient markets 
hypothesis does much better as a description of the world than you might think.
 
There is much evidence that stock prices, even if not exactly a random walk, 
are very close to it. For example, you might be tempted to buy stocks that have 
recently risen and avoid stocks that have recently fallen (or perhaps just the 
 opposite). But statistical studies have shown that following such trends (or buck-
ing them) fails to outperform the market. The correlation between how well a 
stock does one year and how well it does the following year is almost exactly zero.
 
Some of the best evidence in favor of the efficient markets hypothesis comes 
from the performance of index funds. An index fund is a mutual fund that buys 
all the stocks in a given stock index. The performance of these funds can be com-
pared with that of actively managed mutual funds, where a professional port-
folio manager picks stocks based on extensive research and alleged expertise. In 
403
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

essence, an index fund buys all stocks, whereas active funds are supposed to buy 
only the best stocks.
 
In practice, active managers usually fail to beat index funds. For example, in 
the fifteen years ending June 2010, 75 percent of stock mutual funds performed 
worse than a broadly based index fund holding all stocks traded on U.S. stock 
exchanges. Over this period, the average annual return on stock funds fell short 
of the return on the index fund by 1.25 percentage points. Most active portfolio 
managers failed to beat the market because they trade more frequently, incurring 
Efficient Market 
Theory and the Crisis 
BY JEREMY SIEGEL
F
inancial journalist and best-selling author 
Roger Lowenstein didn’t mince words in 
a piece for the Washington Post this summer: 
“The upside of the current Great Recession is 
that it could drive a stake through the heart 
of the academic nostrum known as the effi-
cient-market hypothesis.” In a similar vein, 
the highly respected money manager and 
financial analyst Jeremy Grantham wrote 
in his quarterly letter last January: “The 
incredibly inaccurate efficient market theory 
[caused] a lethally dangerous combination of 
asset bubbles, lax controls, pernicious incen-
tives and wickedly complicated instruments 
[that] led to our current plight.”
 
But is the Efficient Market Hypothesis 
(EMH) really responsible for the current 
crisis? The answer is no. The EMH, originally 
put forth by Eugene Fama of the University 
of Chicago in the 1960s, states that the 
prices of securities reflect all known infor-
mation that impacts their value. The hypoth-
esis does not claim that the market price is 
always right. On the contrary, it implies that 
the prices in the market are mostly wrong, 
but at any given moment it is not at all easy 
to say whether they are too high or too low. 
The fact that the best and brightest on Wall 
Street made so many mistakes shows how 
hard it is to beat the market.
 
This does not mean the EMH can be 
used as an ex cuse by the CEOs of the failed 
financial firms or by the regulators who did 
not see the risks that subprime mortgage-
backed securities posed to the financial 
stability of the economy. Regulators wrongly 
believed that financial firms were offsetting 
their credit risks, while the banks and credit 
rating agencies were fooled by faulty models 
that underestimated the risk in real estate. 
 
After the 1982 recession, the U.S. and 
world economies entered into a long period 
where the fluctuations in variables such as 
gross domestic product, industrial produc-
tion, and employment were significantly 
 Is the Efficient Markets Hypothesis Kaput?
In 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy experienced a financial crisis that 
started with a substantial decline in house prices and widespread defaults 
on mortgages. Some observers say the crisis should cause us to reject the 
efficient market hypothesis. Economist Jeremy Siegel is not convinced.
in the news
© SCOTT ADAMS/DIST. BY UNITED FEATURE 
SYNDICATE, INC.
404
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

more trading costs, and because they charge greater fees as compensation for their 
alleged expertise.
 
What about the 25 percent of managers who did beat the market? Perhaps they 
are smarter than average, or perhaps they were luckier. If you have 5,000 people 
flipping coins ten times, on average about five will flip ten heads; these five might 
claim an exceptional coin-flipping skill, but they would have trouble replicating 
the feat. Similarly, studies have shown that mutual fund managers with a history 
of superior performance usually fail to maintain it in subsequent periods.
The Wall Street Journal published an example of this phenomenon on January 
3, 2008. The paper reported that of the many thousands of mutual funds sold 
to the public, only thirty-one beat the Standard & Poor’s 500 index in each of 
the eight years from 1999 to 2006. A skeptic of the efficient markets hypothesis 
might think that, subsequently, these highly performing funds would offer a 
better- than-average place to invest. In 2007, however, only fourteen of these thirty-
one outperformed the index—about what would be expected from sheer chance. 
Exceptional past performance appears to give little reason to expect future success.
 
The efficient markets hypothesis says that it is impossible to beat the market. 
The accumulation of many studies in financial markets confirms that beating the 
market is, at best, extremely difficult. Even if the efficient markets hypothesis is 
not an exact description of the world, it contains a large element of truth.  ■
lower than they had been since World War 
II. Economists called this period the “Great 
Moderation” and attributed the increased 
stability to better monetary policy, a larger 
service sector and better inventory control, 
among other factors.
 
The e conomic response to the Great 
Moderation was predictable: risk premiums 
shrank and individuals and firms took on 
more leverage. Housing prices were boosted 
by historically low nominal and real interest 
rates and the development of the securitized 
subprime lending market. 
 
Accor ding to data collected by Prof. 
Robert Shiller of Yale University, in the 
61 years from 1945 through 2006 the 
maximum cumulative decline in the average 
price of homes was 2.84% in 1991. If this 
low volatility of home prices persisted into 
the future, a mortgage security composed 
of a nationally diversified portfolio of loans 
comprising the first 80% of a home’s value 
would have never come close to default-
ing. The credit quality of home buyers was 
secondary because it was thought that 
underlying collateral—the home—could 
always cover the principal in the event 
the  homeowner defaulted. These models 
led credit agencies to rate these subprime 
mortgages as “investment grade.”
 
But this assessment was faulty. From 
2000 through 2006, national home prices 
rose by 88.7%, far more than the 17.5% 
gain in the consumer price index or the 
paltry 1% rise in median household income. 
Never before have home prices jumped that 
far ahead of prices and incomes. 
 
This should have sent up red flags and 
cast doubts on using models that looked only 
at historical declines to judge future risk. But 
these flags were ignored as Wall Street was 
reaping large profits bundling and selling the 
securities while Congress was happy that 
more Americans could enjoy the “American 
Dream” of home ownership. Indeed, through 
government-sponsored enterprises such as 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, Washington 
helped fuel the subprime boom.
 
Neither  the rating agencies’ mistakes 
nor the overleveraging by the financial firms 
in the subprime securities is the fault of 
the Efficient Market Hypothesis. The fact 
that the yields on these mortgages were 
high despite their investment-grade rating 
indicated that the market was rightly suspi-
cious of the quality of the securities, and this 
should have served as a warning to prospec-
tive buyers. 
 
With few exceptions (Goldman Sachs 
being one), financial firms ignored these warn-
ings. CEOs failed to exercise their authority to 
monitor overall risk of the firm and instead 
put their faith in technicians whose narrow 
models could not capture the big picture. . . . 
 
Our crisis wasn’t due to blind faith in the 
Efficient Market Hypothesis. The fact that 
risk premiums were low does not mean they 
were nonexistent and that market prices 
were right. Despite the recent recession, the 
Great Moderation is real and our economy 
is inherently more stable. 
 
But this does not mean that risks have 
disappeared. To use an analogy, the fact that 
automobiles today are safer than they were 
years ago does not mean that you can drive 
at 120 mph. A small bump on the road, per-
haps insignificant at lower speeds, will easily 
flip the best-engineered car. Our financial 
firms drove too fast, our central bank failed 
to stop them, and the housing deflation 
crashed the banks and the economy. 
Source: The Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2009.
405
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE

Market Irrationality 
The efficient markets hypothesis assumes that people buying and selling stock 
rationally process the information they have about the stock’s underlying value. 
But is the stock market really that rational? Or do stock prices sometimes deviate 
from reasonable expectations of their true value?
There is a long tradition suggesting that fluctuations in stock prices are partly 
psychological. In the 1930s, economist John Maynard Keynes suggested that asset 
markets are driven by the “animal spirits” of investors—irrational waves of opti-
mism and pessimism. In the 1990s, as the stock market soared to new heights, 
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan questioned whether the boom reflected “irrational 
exuberance.” Stock prices did subsequently fall, but whether the exuberance of 
the 1990s was irrational given the information available at the time remains debat-
able. Whenever the price of an asset rises above what appears to be its fundamen-
tal value, the market is said to be experiencing a speculative bubble.
The possibility of speculative bubbles in the stock market arises in part because 
the value of the stock to a stockholder depends not only on the stream of dividend 
payments but also on the final sale price. Thus, a person might be willing to pay 
more than a stock is worth today if she expects another person to pay even more for 
it tomorrow. When you evaluate a stock, you have to estimate not only the value of 
the business but also what other people will think the business is worth in the future.
There is much debate among economists about the frequency and importance 
of departures from rational pricing. Believers in market irrationality point out 
(correctly) that the stock market often moves in ways that are hard to explain on 
the basis of news that might alter a rational valuation. Believers in the efficient 
markets hypothesis point out (correctly) that it is impossible to know the correct, 
rational valuation of a company, so one should not quickly jump to the conclusion 
that any particular valuation is irrational. Moreover, if the market were irrational, 
a rational person should be able to take advantage of this fact; yet as the previous 
case study discussed, beating the market is nearly impossible.
QUICK QUIZ Fortune magazine regularly publishes a list of the “most respected” 
companies. According to the efficient markets hypothesis, if you restrict your stock 
portfolio to these companies, will you earn a better than average return? Explain.
Conclusion
This chapter has developed some of the basic tools that people should (and often 
do) use as they make financial decisions. The concept of present value reminds us 
that a dollar in the future is less valuable than a dollar today, and it gives us a way 
to compare sums of money at different points in time. The theory of risk manage-
ment reminds us that the future is uncertain and that risk-averse people can take 
precautions to guard against this uncertainty. The study of asset valuation tells us 
that the stock price of any company should reflect its expected future profitability.
Although most of the tools of finance are well established, there is more con-
troversy about the validity of the efficient markets hypothesis and whether stock 
prices are, in practice, rational estimates of a company’s true worth. Rational or 
not, the large movements in stock prices that we observe have important macro-
economic implications. Stock market fluctuations often go hand in hand with 
fluctuations in the economy more broadly. We revisit the stock market when we 
study economic fluctuations later in the book.
406
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

QUEST IONS FOR REVIEW
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
KEY CONCEPTS
SUMMARY
QU S
O
S
O
QUEST IONS FOR REVIEW
O
S 
 
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
SU
SUMMARY
• Because savings can earn interest, a sum of 
money today is more valuable than the same 
sum of money in the future. A person can 
compare sums from different times using the 
concept of present value. The present value of 
any future sum is the amount that would be 
needed today, given prevailing interest rates, to 
produce that future sum.
• Because of diminishing marginal utility, most 
people are risk averse. Risk-averse people can 
reduce risk by buying insurance, diversifying 
their holdings, and choosing a portfolio with 
lower risk and lower return. 
• The value of an asset equals the present value 
of the cash flows the owner will receive. For 
a share of stock, these cash flows include the 
stream of dividends and the final sale price. 
According to the efficient markets hypothesis, 
financial markets process available information 
rationally, so a stock price always equals the 
best estimate of the value of the underlying 
business. Some economists question the efficient 
markets hypothesis, however, and believe that 
irrational psychological factors also influence 
asset prices.
 1. According to an old myth, Native Americans 
sold the island of Manhattan about 400 years 
ago for $24. If they had invested this amount at 
an interest rate of 7 percent per year, how much 
would they have today?
 2.  A company has an investment project that 
would cost $10 million today and yield a payoff 
of $15 million in 4 years.
a. Should the firm undertake the project if 
the interest rate is 11 percent? 10 percent? 
9 percent? 8 percent? 
b. Can you figure out the exact cutoff for 
the interest rate between profitability and 
nonprofitability?
 3.  Bond A pays $8,000 in 20 years. Bond B pays 
$8,000 in 40 years. (To keep things simple, 
 1.  The interest rate is 7 percent. Use the concept 
of present value to compare $200 to be 
received in 10 years and $300 to be received in 
20 years.
 2. What benefit do people get from the market 
for insurance? What two problems impede the 
insurance company from working perfectly?
 3. What is diversification? Does a stockholder get 
more diversification going from 1 to 10 stocks or 
going from 100 to 120 stocks?
 4. Comparing stocks and government bonds, 
which has more risk? Which pays a higher 
average return?
 5. What factors should a stock analyst think about 
in determining the value of a share of stock?
 6. Describe the efficient markets hypothesis and 
give a piece of evidence consistent with this 
hypothesis.
 7. Explain the view of those economists who are 
skeptical of the efficient markets hypothesis.
407
CHAPTER 19    THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
finance, p. 394
present value, p. 394
future value, p. 394
compounding, p. 394
risk aversion, p. 396
diversification, p. 398
firm-specific risk, p. 399
market risk, p. 399
fundamental analysis, p. 401
efficient markets hypothesis, p. 401
informational efficiency, p. 402
random walk, p. 402

assume these are zero-coupon bonds, which 
means the $8,000 is the only payment the bond 
holder receives.)
a. If the interest rate is 3.5 percent, what is 
the value of each bond today? Which bond 
is worth more? Why? (Hint: You can use a 
calculator, but the rule of 70 should make the 
calculation easy.)
b. If the interest rate increases to 7 percent, 
what is the value of each bond? Which 
bond has a larger percentage change in 
value?
c. Based on the example above, complete the 
two blanks in this sentence: “The value of 
a bond [rises/falls] when the interest rate 
increases, and bonds with a longer time to 
maturity are [more/less] sensitive to changes 
in the interest rate.”
 4.  Your bank account pays an interest rate of 8 
percent. You are considering buying a share of 
stock in XYZ Corporation for $110. After 1, 2, 
and 3 years, it will pay a dividend of $5. You 
expect to sell the stock after 3 years for $120. Is 
XYZ a good investment? Support your answer 
with calculations.
 5. For each of the following kinds of insurance, 
give an example of behavior that can be 
called moral hazard and another example 
of behavior that can be called adverse 
selection.
a. health insurance
b. car insurance
 6.  Which kind of stock would you expect to 
pay the higher average return: stock in an 
industry that is very sensitive to economic 
conditions (such as an automaker) or stock 
in an industry that is relatively insensitive 
to economic conditions (such as a water 
company)? Why?
 7.  A company faces two kinds of risk. A firm-
specific risk is that a competitor might enter 
its market and take some of its customers. 
A market risk is that the economy might 
enter a recession, reducing sales. Which of 
these two risks would more likely cause the 
company’s shareholders to demand a higher 
return? Why?
 8.  You have two roommates who invest in the 
stock market.
a. One roommate says that he buys stock 
only in companies that everyone believes 
will experience big increases in profits 
in the future. How do you suppose the 
price-earnings ratio of these companies 
compares to the price-earnings ratio of 
other companies? What might be the 
disadvantage of buying stock in these 
companies?
b. Another roommate says he only buys stock 
in companies that are cheap, which he 
measures by a low price-earnings ratio. How 
do you suppose the earnings prospects of 
these companies compare to those of other 
companies? What might be the disadvantage 
of buying stock in these companies?
 9.  When company executives buy and sell stock 
based on private information they obtain as part 
of their jobs, they are engaged in insider trading.
a. Give an example of inside information that 
might be useful for buying or selling stock.
b. Those who trade stocks based on inside 
information usually earn very high rates of 
return. Does this fact violate the efficient 
markets hypothesis?
c. Insider trading is illegal. Why do you 
suppose that is?
 10. Jamal has a utility function U = W1/2, where 
W is his wealth in millions of dollars (which 
determines how much he gets to buy and 
consume over his lifetime) and U is the utility 
he obtains.
a. Graph Jamal’s utility function. Is he risk 
averse? Explain.
b. In the final stage of a game show, the host 
offers Jamal a choice between (A) $4 million 
for sure, or (B) a gamble that pays $1 million 
with probability 0.6 and $9 million with 
probability 0.4. Should Jamal pick A or B? 
Explain you reasoning with appropriate 
calculations. (Hint: The expected value of a 
random variable is the weighted average of 
the possible outcomes, where the probabilities 
are the weights.)
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
408
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Unemployment
L
osing a job can be the most distressing economic event in a person’s life. 
Most people rely on their labor earnings to maintain their standard of liv-
ing, and many people also get a sense of personal accomplishment from 
working. A job loss means a lower living standard in the present, anxiety 
about the future, and reduced self-esteem. It is not surprising, therefore, that poli-
ticians campaigning for office often speak about how their proposed policies will 
help create jobs.
In previous chapters, we have seen some of the forces that determine the level 
and growth of a country’s standard of living. A country that saves and invests a 
high fraction of its income, for instance, enjoys more rapid growth in its capital 
stock and GDP than a similar country that saves and invests less. An even more 
obvious determinant of a country’s standard of living is the amount of unemploy-
ment it typically experiences. People who would like to work but cannot find 
a job are not contributing to the economy’s production of goods and services. 
Although some degree of unemployment is inevitable in a complex economy with 
409
20

thousands of firms and millions of workers, the amount of unemployment varies 
substantially over time and across countries. When a country keeps its workers 
as fully employed as possible, it achieves a higher level of GDP than it would if it 
left many of its workers standing idle.
This chapter begins our study of unemployment. The problem of unemployment 
is usefully divided into two categories: the long-run problem and the short-run 
problem. The economy’s natural rate of unemployment refers to the amount of unem-
ployment that the economy normally experiences. Cyclical unemployment refers to 
the year-to-year fluctuations in unemployment around its natural rate, and it is 
closely associated with the short-run ups and downs of economic activity. Cyclical 
unemployment has its own explanation, which we defer until we study short-run 
economic fluctuations later in this book. In this chapter, we discuss the determi-
nants of an economy’s natural rate of unemployment. As we will see, the designa-
tion natural does not imply that this rate of unemployment is desirable. Nor does 
it imply that it is constant over time or impervious to economic policy. It merely 
means that this unemployment does not go away on its own even in the long run.
We begin the chapter by looking at some of the relevant facts that describe 
unemployment. In particular, we examine three questions: How does the gov-
ernment measure the economy’s rate of unemployment? What problems arise in 
interpreting the unemployment data? How long are the unemployed typically 
without work?
We then turn to the reasons economies always experience some unemploy-
ment and the ways in which policymakers can help the unemployed. We discuss 
four explanations for the economy’s natural rate of unemployment: job search, 
minimum-wage laws, unions, and efficiency wages. As we will see, long-run 
unemployment does not arise from a single problem that has a single solution. 
Instead, it reflects a variety of related problems. As a result, there is no easy way 
for policymakers to reduce the economy’s natural rate of unemployment and, at 
the same time, to alleviate the hardships experienced by the unemployed.
Identifying Unemployment
Let’s start by examining more precisely what the term unemployment means. 
How Is Unemployment Measured?
Measuring unemployment is the job of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which 
is part of the Department of Labor. Every month, the BLS produces data on unem-
ployment and on other aspects of the labor market, including types of employ-
ment, length of the average workweek, and the duration of unemployment. These 
data come from a regular survey of about 60,000 households, called the Current 
Population Survey.
Based on the answers to survey questions, the BLS places each adult (age 16 
and older) of each surveyed household into one of three categories: 
•  Employed: This category includes those who worked as paid employees, 
worked in their own business, or worked as unpaid workers in a family 
member’s business. Both full-time and part-time workers are counted. 
This category also includes those who were not working but who had jobs 
from which they were temporarily absent because of, for example, vacation, 
illness, or bad weather.
410
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

• 
Unemployed: This category includes those who were not employed, were 
available for work, and had tried to find employment during the previous 
four weeks. It also includes those waiting to be recalled to a job from which 
they had been laid off.
• 
Not in the labor force: This category includes those who fit neither of the first 
two categories, such as a full-time student, homemaker, or retiree.
Figure 1 shows the breakdown into these categories for 2009.
Once the BLS has placed all the individuals covered by the survey in a cat-
egory, it computes various statistics to summarize the state of the labor market. 
The BLS defines the labor force as the sum of the employed and the unemployed: 
Labor force = Number of employed + Number of unemployed.
The BLS defines the unemployment rate as the percentage of the labor force that 
is unemployed:
 
Number of unemployed
Unemployment rate =  
 × 100.
 
Labor force
The BLS computes unemployment rates for the entire adult population and for 
more narrowly defined groups such as blacks, whites, men, women, and so on.
The BLS uses the same survey to produce data on labor-force participation. The 
labor-force participation rate measures the percentage of the total adult popula-
tion of the United States that is in the labor force:
 
Labor force
Labor-force participation rate =  
 × 100.
 
Adult population
labor force
the total number of 
workers, including both 
the employed and the 
unemployed
unemployment rate
the percentage of 
the labor force that is 
unemployed
labor-force 
participation rate
the percentage of the 
adult population that is in 
the labor force
The Breakdown of the 
Population in 2009
The Bureau of Labor 
Statistics divides the adult 
population into three 
categories: employed, 
unemployed, and not in the 
labor force.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Figure 1
Adult
Population
(235.9 million)
Labor Force
(154.2 million)
Employed
(139.9 million)
Not in labor force
(81.7 million)
Unemployed (14.3 million)
411
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

This statistic tells us the fraction of the population that has chosen to participate in 
the labor market. The labor-force participation rate, like the unemployment rate, 
is computed for both the entire adult population and more specific groups.
To see how these data are computed, consider the figures for 2009. In that year, 
139.9 million people were employed, and 14.3 million people were unemployed. 
The labor force was
Labor force = 139.9 + 14.3 = 154.2 million.
The unemployment rate was
Unemployment rate = (14.3 / 154.2) × 100 = 9.3 percent.
Because the adult population was 235.9 million, the labor-force participation rate 
was
Labor-force participation rate = (154.2 / 235.9) × 100 = 65.4 percent.
Hence, in 2009, almost two-thirds of the U.S. adult population were participat-
ing in the labor market, and 9.3 percent of those labor-market participants were 
without work.
Table 1 shows the statistics on unemployment and labor-force participation for 
various groups within the U.S. population. Three comparisons are most appar-
ent. First, women ages 20 and older have lower rates of labor-force participation 
than men, but once in the labor force, women have somewhat lower rates of 
unemployment. Second, blacks ages 20 and older have similar rates of labor-force 
participation as whites, but they have much higher rates of unemployment. Third, 
teenagers have lower rates of labor-force participation and much higher rates of 
unemployment than older workers. More generally, these data show that labor-
market experiences vary widely among groups within the economy.
The BLS data on the labor market also allow economists and policymakers to 
monitor changes in the economy over time. Figure 2 shows the unemployment rate 
in the United States since 1960. The figure shows that the economy always has some 
unemployment and that the amount changes from year to year. The normal rate 
of unemployment around which the unemployment rate fluctuates is called the 
natural rate of unemployment, and the deviation of unemployment from its natural 
natural rate of 
unemployment
the normal rate of 
unemployment around 
which the unemployment 
rate fluctuates
The Labor-Market 
Experiences of Various 
Demographic Groups
This table shows the unemployment 
rate and the labor-force participation 
rate of various groups in the U.S. 
population for 2009.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Table 1
 
 
Labor-Force
Demographic Group 
Unemployment Rate 
Participation Rate
Adults (ages 20 and older)
White, male 
8.8% 
75.3%
White, female 
6.8 
60.4
Black, male 
16.3 
69.6
Black, female 
11.5 
63.4
Teenagers (ages 16–19)
White, male 
25.2 
40.3
White, female 
18.4 
40.9
Black, male 
46.0 
26.4
Black, female 
33.4 
27.9
412
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

rate is called cyclical unemployment. The natural rate of unemployment shown in 
the figure is a series estimated by economists at the Congressional Budget Office. 
For 2009, they estimated a natural rate of 5.0 percent, far below the actual unem-
ployment rate of 9.3 percent. Later in this book, we discuss short-run economic 
fluctuations, including the year-to-year fluctuations in unemployment around its 
natural rate. In the rest of this chapter, however, we ignore the short-run fluctua-
tions and examine why there is always some unemployment in market economies.
Labor-Force Participation of Men and 
Women in the U.S. Economy
Women’s role in American society has changed dramatically over the past 
century. Social commentators have pointed to many causes for this change. In 
part, it is attributable to new technologies, such as the washing machine, clothes 
dryer, refrigerator, freezer, and dishwasher, which have reduced the amount of 
time required to complete routine household tasks. In part, it is attributable to 
improved birth control, which has reduced the number of children born to the 
typical family. This change in women’s role is also partly attributable to chang-
ing political and social attitudes, which in turn may have been facilitated by the 
advances in technology and birth control. Together these developments have had 
a profound impact on society in general and on the economy in particular.
 
Nowhere is that impact more obvious than in data on labor-force participa-
tion. Figure 3 shows the labor-force participation rates of men and women in the 
cyclical 
unemployment
the deviation of 
unemployment from its 
natural rate
Unemployment Rate 
since 1960
Figure 2
This graph uses annual data on the U.S. unemployment rate to show the percentage 
of the labor force without a job. The natural rate of unemployment is the normal 
level of unemployment around which the unemployment rate fluctuates.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Congressional Budget Office.
Unemployment rate
10%
8
6
4
2
0
1970
1975
1960
1965
1980
1985
1990
2005
2010
Percent of
Labor Force
1995
2000
Natural rate of
unemployment
413
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

United States since 1950. Just after World War II, men and women had very differ-
ent roles in society. Only 33 percent of women were working or looking for work, 
in contrast to 87 percent of men. Over the past several decades, the difference 
between the participation rates of men and women has gradually diminished, as 
growing numbers of women have entered the labor force and some men have left 
it. Data for 2009 show that 59 percent of women were in the labor force, in contrast 
to 72 percent of men. As measured by labor-force participation, men and women 
are now playing a more equal role in the economy.
 
The increase in women’s labor-force participation is easy to understand, but 
the fall in men’s may seem puzzling. There are several reasons for this decline. 
First, young men now stay in school longer than their fathers and grandfathers 
did. Second, older men now retire earlier and live longer. Third, with more 
women employed, more fathers now stay at home to raise their children. Full-
time students, retirees, and stay-at-home dads are all counted as being out of the 
labor force.  ■
Does the Unemployment Rate Measure 
What We Want It To?
Measuring the amount of unemployment in the economy might seem a straightfor-
ward task, but it is not. While it is easy to distinguish between a person with a full-
time job and a person who is not working at all, it is much harder to distinguish 
between a person who is unemployed and a person who is not in the labor force.
Figure 3
Labor-Force Participation 
Rates for Men and Women 
since 1950
This figure shows the percentage of adult men and women who are members of the 
labor force. It shows that over the past several decades, women have entered the 
labor force, and men have left it.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor.
100
80
60
40
20
0
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
2000
2005
2010
Labor-Force
Participation
Rate (in percent)
Women
Men
1995
414
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Movements into and out of the labor force are, in fact, common. More than 
one-third of the unemployed are recent entrants into the labor force. These 
entrants include young workers looking for their first jobs. They also include, in 
greater numbers, older workers who had previously left the labor force but have 
now returned to look for work. Moreover, not all unemployment ends with the 
job seeker finding a job. Almost half of all spells of unemployment end when the 
unemployed person leaves the labor force.
Because people move into and out of the labor force so often, statistics on 
unemployment are difficult to interpret. On the one hand, some of those who 
report being unemployed may not, in fact, be trying hard to find a job. They may 
be calling themselves unemployed because they want to qualify for a government 
program that financially assists the unemployed or because they are actually 
working but paid “under the table” to avoid taxes on their earnings. It may be 
more realistic to view these individuals as out of the labor force or, in some cases, 
employed. On the other hand, some of those who report being out of the labor 
force may want to work. These individuals may have tried to find a job and may 
have given up after an unsuccessful search. Such individuals, called discouraged 
workers, do not show up in unemployment statistics, even though they are truly 
workers without jobs. 
Because of these and other problems, the BLS calculates several other 
measures of labor underutilization, in addition to the official unemployment 
rate. These alternative measures are presented in Table 2. In the end, it is best 
to view the official unemployment rate as a useful but imperfect measure of 
joblessness.
discouraged 
workers
individuals who would 
like to work but have 
given up looking for a job
Alternative Measures of 
Labor Underutilization
The table shows various measures 
of joblessness for the U.S. 
economy. The data are for 
April 2010.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor.
Table 2
Measure and Description 
Rate
U-1 
Persons unemployed fifteen weeks or longer, as a percent of the civilian 
5.8%
 
labor force (includes only very long-term unemployed)
U-2 
Job losers and persons who have completed temporary jobs, as a percent 
6.0
 
of the civilian labor force (excludes job leavers)
U-3 
Total unemployed, as a percent of the civilian labor force (official 
9.9
 
unemployment rate)
U-4 
Total unemployed, plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the civilian 
10.6
 
labor force plus discouraged workers
U-5 
Total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers, as a percent 
11.3
 
of the civilian labor force plus all marginally attached workers
U-6 
Total unemployed, plus all marginally attached workers, plus total 
17.1
 
employed part-time for economic reasons, as a percent of the civilian
 
labor force plus all marginally attached workers
Note: The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines terms as follows: 
•  Marginally attached workers are persons who currently are neither working nor looking for 
work but indicate that they want and are available for a job and have looked for work some-
time in the recent past. 
•  Discouraged workers are marginally attached workers who have given a job-market-related 
reason for not currently looking for a job. 
•  Persons employed part-time for economic reasons are those who want and are 
available for full-time work but have had to settle for a part-time schedule.
415
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

How Long Are the Unemployed without Work?
In judging how serious the problem of unemployment is, one question to con-
sider is whether unemployment is typically a short-term or long-term condition. 
If unemployment is short term, one might conclude that it is not a big problem. 
Workers may require a few weeks between jobs to find the openings that best suit 
their tastes and skills. Yet if unemployment is long term, one might conclude that 
it is a serious problem. Workers unemployed for many months are more likely to 
suffer economic and psychological hardship. 
Because the duration of unemployment can affect our view about how big a 
problem unemployment is, economists have devoted much energy to studying 
data on the duration of unemployment spells. In this work, they have uncov-
ered a result that is important, subtle, and seemingly contradictory: Most spells 
of unemployment are short, and most unemployment observed at any given time is 
long-term.
To see how this statement can be true, consider an example. Suppose that you 
visited the government’s unemployment office every week for a year to survey 
the unemployed. Each week you find that there are four unemployed workers. 
Three of these workers are the same individuals for the whole year, while the 
fourth person changes every week. Based on this experience, would you say that 
unemployment is typically short-term or long-term?
Some simple calculations help answer this question. In this example, you 
meet a total of 55 unemployed people over the course of a year; 52 of them are 
unemployed for one week, and 3 are unemployed for the full year. This means 
that 52/55, or 95 percent, of unemployment spells end in one week. Yet whenever 
you walk into the unemployment office, three of the four people you meet will 
be unemployed for the entire year. So, even though 95 percent of unemployment 
spells end in one week, 75 percent of the unemployment observed at any moment 
is attributable to those individuals who are unemployed for a full year. In this 
example, as in the world, most spells of unemployment are short, and most unem-
ployment observed at any given time is long-term.
This subtle conclusion implies that economists and policymakers must be care-
ful when interpreting data on unemployment and when designing policies to help 
the unemployed. Most people who become unemployed will soon find jobs. Yet 
most of the economy’s unemployment problem is attributable to the relatively 
few workers who are jobless for long periods of time.
Why Are There Always Some People Unemployed?
We have discussed how the government measures the amount of unemployment, 
the problems that arise in interpreting unemployment statistics, and the findings 
of labor economists on the duration of unemployment. You should now have a 
good idea about what unemployment is.
This discussion, however, has not explained why economies experience 
unemployment. In most markets in the economy, prices adjust to bring quantity 
supplied and quantity demanded into balance. In an ideal labor market, wages 
would adjust to balance the quantity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor 
demanded. This adjustment of wages would ensure that all workers are always 
fully employed.
Of course, reality does not resemble this ideal. There are always some workers 
without jobs, even when the overall economy is doing well. In other words, the 
416
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

 The Rise of Long-Term Unemployment
During the economic downturn of 2008 and 2009, the number of long-
term unemployed reached historic highs.
in the news
Chronic 
Joblessness 
Bites Deep 
BY SARA MURRAY
R
ichard Moran, sitting in his garage in 
Ortonville, Mich., Tuesday, has been 
unemployed for two-and-a-half years after 
losing his job with Chrysler.
 
The job market is improving, but one 
statistic presents a stark reminder of the 
challenges that remain: Nearly half of the 
unemployed—45.9%—have been out of 
work longer than six months, more than at 
any time since the Labor Department began 
keeping track in 1948.
 
Even in the worst months of the early 
1980s, when the jobless rate topped 10% 
for months on end, only about one in four 
of the unemployed was out of work for more 
than six months.
 
Overall, seven million Americans have 
been looking for work for 27 weeks or more, 
and most of them—4.7 million—have been 
out of work for a year or more. 
 
Long-term unemployment has reached 
nearly every segment of the population, but 
some have been particularly hard-hit. The 
typical long-term unemployed worker is a 
white man with a high-school education or 
less. Older unemployed workers also tend to 
be out of work longer. Those between ages 
65 and 69 who still wish to work have typi-
cally been jobless for 49.8 weeks. 
 
The effects of long-term unemployment 
are likely to linger when the overall job-
less rate falls toward normal, threatening 
to create a pool of nearly permanently 
unemployed workers, a condition once more 
common in Europe than in the U.S. 
 
“The consequences are worse for those 
who can’t find a job quickly,” said Till 
Marco von Wachter, a Columbia University 
economist. They extend from atrophying 
skills to a higher likelihood of unhappi-
ness and anxiety. Workers out of work for 
a long time tend to find it more difficult 
to find a job, and “the longer people are 
unemployed the more likely they are to 
eventually give up searching and thereby 
drop out of the labor force,” Mr. von 
Wachter said.
Source: The Wall Street Journal, June 2, 2010.
unemployment rate never falls to zero; instead, it fluctuates around the natural 
rate of unemployment. To understand this natural rate, the remaining sections of 
this chapter examine the reasons actual labor markets depart from the ideal of full 
employment.
To preview our conclusions, we will find that there are four ways to explain 
unemployment in the long run. The first explanation is that it takes time for 
workers to search for the jobs that are best suited for them. The unemployment 
that results from the process of matching workers and jobs is sometimes called 
frictional unemployment, and it is often thought to explain relatively short spells 
of unemployment.
The next three explanations for unemployment suggest that the number 
of jobs available in some labor markets may be insufficient to give a job to 
everyone who wants one. This occurs when the quantity of labor supplied 
exceeds the quantity demanded. Unemployment of this sort is sometimes called 
frictional 
unemployment
unemployment that 
results because it takes 
time for workers to search 
for the jobs that best suit 
their tastes and skills
417
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

structural unemployment, and it is often thought to explain longer spells of 
unemployment. As we will see, this kind of unemployment results when wages 
are, for some reason, set above the level that brings supply and demand into 
equilibrium. We will examine three possible reasons for an above-equilibrium 
wage: minimum-wage laws, unions, and efficiency wages. 
QUICK QUIZ How is the unemployment rate measured? • How might the unemploy-
ment rate overstate the amount of joblessness? How might it understate the amount 
of joblessness?
Job Search
One reason economies always experience some unemployment is job search. Job 
search is the process of matching workers with appropriate jobs. If all workers 
and all jobs were the same, so that all workers were equally well suited for all 
jobs, job search would not be a problem. Laid-off workers would quickly find new 
jobs that were well suited for them. But in fact, workers differ in their tastes and 
skills, jobs differ in their attributes, and information about job candidates and job 
vacancies is disseminated slowly among the many firms and households in the 
economy. 
structural 
unemployment
unemployment that 
results because the 
number of jobs available 
in some labor markets 
is insufficient to provide 
a job for everyone who 
wants one
job search
the process by which 
workers find appropriate 
jobs given their tastes and 
skills
FYI
 The Jobs Number
W
hen the Bureau of Labor Statistics announces the unemploy-
ment rate at the beginning of every month, it also announces 
the number of jobs the economy has gained or lost. As an indicator 
of short-run economic trends, the jobs number gets as much atten-
tion as the unemployment rate.
 
Where does the jobs number come from? You might guess that 
it comes from the same survey of 60,000 households that yields the 
unemployment rate. And indeed the household survey does produce 
data on total employment. The jobs number that gets the most 
attention, however, comes from a separate survey of 160,000 busi-
ness establishments, which have over 40 million workers on their 
payrolls. The results from the establishment survey are announced 
at the same time as the results from the household survey.
 
Both surveys yield information about total employment, but 
the results are not always the same. One reason is that the 
establishment survey has a larger sample, which makes it more 
reliable. Another reason is that the surveys are not measuring 
exactly the same thing. For example, a person who has two 
part-time jobs in different companies would be counted as one 
employed person in the household survey but as two jobs in the 
establishment survey. As another example, a person running his 
own small business would be counted as employed in the house-
hold survey but would not show up at all in the establishment 
survey, because the establishment survey counts only employees 
on a business payroll.
 
The establishment survey is closely watched for its data on jobs, 
but it says nothing about unemployment. To measure the number of 
unemployed, we need to know how many people without jobs are 
trying to find them. The household survey is the only source of that 
information.
418
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Why Some Frictional Unemployment Is Inevitable
Frictional unemployment is often the result of changes in the demand for labor 
among different firms. When consumers decide that they prefer Dell to Apple 
computers, Dell increases employment, and Apple lays off workers. The former 
Apple workers must now search for new jobs, and Dell must decide which new 
workers to hire for the various jobs that have opened up. The result of this transi-
tion is a period of unemployment.
Similarly, because different regions of the country produce different goods, 
employment can rise in one region while falling in another. Consider, for instance, 
what happens when the world price of oil falls. Oil-producing firms in Alaska 
respond to the lower price by cutting back on production and employment. At 
the same time, cheaper gasoline stimulates car sales, so auto-producing firms in 
Michigan raise production and employment. Just the opposite happens when the 
world price of oil rises. Changes in the composition of demand among industries 
or regions are called sectoral shifts. Because it takes time for workers to search for 
jobs in the new sectors, sectoral shifts temporarily cause unemployment.
Frictional unemployment is inevitable simply because the economy is always 
changing. A century ago, the four industries with the largest employment in the 
United States were cotton goods, woolen goods, men’s clothing, and lumber. 
Today, the four largest industries are autos, aircraft, communications, and electri-
cal components. As this transition took place, jobs were created in some firms and 
destroyed in others. The result of this process has been higher productivity and 
higher living standards. But along the way, workers in declining industries found 
themselves out of work and searching for new jobs. 
Data show that at least 10 percent of U.S. manufacturing jobs are destroyed every 
year. In addition, more than 3 percent of workers leave their jobs in a typical month, 
sometimes because they realize that the jobs are not a good match for their tastes 
and skills. Many of these workers, especially younger ones, find new jobs at higher 
wages. This churning of the labor force is normal in a well-functioning and dynamic 
market economy, but the result is some amount of frictional unemployment.
Public Policy and Job Search
Even if some frictional unemployment is inevitable, the precise amount is not. The 
faster information spreads about job openings and worker availability, the more 
rapidly the economy can match workers and firms. The Internet, for instance, may 
help facilitate job search and reduce frictional unemployment. In addition, public 
policy may play a role. If policy can reduce the time it takes unemployed workers 
to find new jobs, it can reduce the economy’s natural rate of unemployment.
Government programs try to facilitate job search in various ways. One way 
is through government-run employment agencies, which give out information 
about job vacancies. Another way is through public training programs, which 
aim to ease workers’ transition from declining to growing industries and to help 
disadvantaged groups escape poverty. Advocates of these programs believe that 
they make the economy operate more efficiently by keeping the labor force more 
fully employed and that they reduce the inequities inherent in a constantly chang-
ing market economy.
Critics of these programs question whether the government should get 
involved with the process of job search. They argue that it is better to let the pri-
vate market match workers and jobs. In fact, most job search in our economy takes 
place without intervention by the government. Newspaper ads, Internet job sites, 
419
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

college placement offices, headhunters, and word of mouth all help spread infor-
mation about job openings and job candidates. Similarly, much worker education 
is done privately, either through schools or through on-the-job training. These 
critics contend that the government is no better—and most likely worse—at dis-
seminating the right information to the right workers and deciding what kinds of 
worker training would be most valuable. They claim that these decisions are best 
made privately by workers and employers. 
Unemployment Insurance
One government program that increases the amount of frictional unemploy-
ment, without intending to do so, is unemployment insurance. This program 
is designed to offer workers partial protection against job loss. The unemployed 
unemployment 
insurance
a government program 
that partially protects 
workers’ incomes when 
they become unemployed
Long Recession 
Ignites Debate on 
Jobless Benefits 
BY SARA MURRAY 
M
anagement Recruiters of Sacramento, 
Calif., says it recently had a tough time 
filling six engineering positions at an Oregon 
manufacturer paying $60,000 a year—
and suspects long-term jobless benefits 
were part of the hitch.
 
“We called several engineers that were 
unemployed,” says Karl Dinse, a managing 
partner at the recruiting firm. “They said, 
nah, you know, if it were paying $80,000 I’d 
think about it.” Some candidates suggested 
he call them back when their benefits were 
scheduled to run out, he says.
 
Rick Jewell has a different take on 
extended jobless benefits: He didn’t want 
to be on the dole, but had no alternative. 
He has been out of work since he lost his 
$12-an-hour job driving a forklift for a 
cosmetics company in Greenwood, Ind., in 
December 2008. He collected $315 a week 
in benefits until early June—when Congress 
declined to renew the law that gave workers 
in Indiana and some other states up to 99 
weeks of assistance. 
 
“I am tired of sitting at home. I am 
tired  of not being the breadwinner,” says 
Mr. Jewell, who says he looks for work every 
day. He and his wife now rely on her $480 a 
week job as a distribution supervisor at the 
same cosmetics company. 
 
In the long recession and the lackluster 
recovery, the government expanded unem-
ployment payments more than at any time 
since the benefits were rolled out in the 
1930s. And workers have gone jobless for 
longer than any time since official tallies 
began in 1967.
 
Politicians and economists are now in 
a fierce debate that could have big conse-
quences for the jobless: Did more-generous 
unemployment benefits prompt jobless 
workers to be pickier in their searches? Or 
was the program a prudent response to the 
worst recession in generations? . . . 
 
Economists have argued for years about 
the extent to which government benefits 
prolong unemployment—and possibly aug-
ment the overall jobless rate. Most believe 
that expanding benefits does discourage 
some unemployed people from looking for 
work or taking available jobs. But they 
disagree on how acute that effect is, par-
ticularly at a time when jobs are scarce. 
 How Much Do the Unemployed 
Respond to Incentives?
During the economic downturn of 2008 and 2009, economists and 
policymakers wrestled with the question of how much the unemployment-
insurance system was affecting the behavior of unemployed workers.
in the news
420
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

 
“Given the current economic situation I 
doubt that effect is very large,” says Harvard 
University economist Raj Chetty. “I think 
people will take whatever job they can get.”
 
Economists on the right see a danger 
to prolonging benefits. “I don’t think any-
body’s getting rich off of unemployment, 
and I’m not saying people are lazy,” says 
Michael Tanner of the Cato Institute, a 
libertarian think tank in Washington, D.C. 
“The fact is, when you have a check coming 
in, even if it’s a fairly low check, you’re less 
motivated to either look for work or accept 
less optimal jobs.” 
 
The recent recession was unusual in 
almost every respect. Compared to other 
post-World War II recessions, it was deeper, 
longer and put more people out of work. 
A year after the economy began growing, 
unemployment is still a very high 9.5%. 
Nearly half the jobless—6.8 million total—
have been out of work for more than six 
months, and 4.3 million of those have been 
without work for more than a year. The typi-
cal unemployed person has been out of the 
job market for a median of 25.5 weeks. 
 
The government response was also 
unusual, and not just in the big bank bail-
out. In normal times, the unemployed are 
offered up to 26 weeks of benefits, largely 
financed by a tax on employers. In reces-
sions, state and federal governments often 
jointly finance up to an additional 20 weeks 
in hard-hit states. In this recession, Congress 
added up to another 53 weeks of federally 
funded benefits; in the deep crisis of the 
1980s, the maximum total never exceeded 
55 weeks. 
 
The unemployment compensation sys-
tem, created in 1935, was designed to tide 
workers over during periods of temporary 
unemployment. Benefits are based on a 
worker’s prior wages; the average is $310 
a week. Only workers who have lost a job 
through no fault of their own are eligible. 
Those who quit or who are new to the 
work force don’t qualify. They must reapply 
weekly or biweekly, depending on the state, 
and indicate that they are looking for work. 
 
In the 1980s, only half of all unemployed 
received benefits. In the first quarter of 
2010, 69% of the unemployed did. That’s 
partly because the benefits lasted so much 
longer, economists say. It’s also because 
Washington gave states incentives to extend 
benefits to workers looking for part-time jobs 
and those who enrolled in training programs.
 
A variety of studies suggest that add-
ing another 53 weeks of benefits increases 
the time the average worker is jobless by 
between 4.2 and 10.6 weeks. The higher 
estimates are based on studies conducted 
decades ago when layoffs were often tem-
porary; in this recession, many unemployed 
workers will never return to their old posi-
tions. . . . In a recession such as this one—
with five unemployed workers for every job 
opening—it’s not clear whether the old 
academic findings apply.
 
In his scholarly past, Lawrence Summers, 
now Mr. Obama’s economic guru, wrote in 
1993 that “government assistance pro-
grams contribute to long-term unemploy-
ment . . . by providing an incentive, and 
the means, not to work.” When an April 
Wall Street Journal editorial described his 
position, Mr. Summers fired back in a letter 
to the editor: “In the wake of the worst eco-
nomic crisis in eight decades . . . there can 
be no doubt that the overwhelming cause of 
unemployment is economic distress, not the 
existence of unemployment insurance.”
Source: The Wall Street Journal, July 7, 2010.
who quit their jobs, were fired for cause, or just entered the labor force are not 
eligible. Benefits are paid only to the unemployed who were laid off because 
their previous employers no longer needed their skills. The terms of the program 
vary over time and across states, but a typical worker covered by unemployment 
insurance in the United States receives 50 percent of his or her former wages for 
twenty-six weeks. 
While unemployment insurance reduces the hardship of unemployment, it 
also increases the amount of unemployment. The explanation is based on one of 
the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: People respond to incentives. Because 
unemployment benefits stop when a worker takes a new job, the unemployed 
devote less effort to job search and are more likely to turn down unattractive 
job offers. In addition, because unemployment insurance makes unemployment 
1970s
20
30
40
50
60%
Broader Coverage
Percent of all unemployed
collecting jobless beneﬁts
Recessions
1980s
1990s
2000s
Source: Labor Dept.
421
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

less onerous, workers are less likely to seek guarantees of job security when they 
negotiate with employers over the terms of employment.
Many studies by labor economists have examined the incentive effects of 
unemployment insurance. One study examined an experiment run by the state 
of Illinois in 1985. When unemployed workers applied to collect unemployment 
insurance benefits, the state randomly selected some of them and offered each 
a $500 bonus if they found new jobs within eleven weeks. This group was then 
compared to a control group not offered the incentive. The average spell of unem-
ployment for the group offered the bonus was 7 percent shorter than the average 
spell for the control group. This experiment shows that the design of the unem-
ployment insurance system influences the effort that the unemployed devote to 
job search.
Several other studies examined search effort by following a group of workers 
over time. Unemployment insurance benefits, rather than lasting forever, usually 
run out after six months or one year. These studies found that when the unem-
ployed become ineligible for benefits, the probability of their finding a new job 
rises markedly. Thus, receiving unemployment insurance benefits does reduce 
the search effort of the unemployed.
Even though unemployment insurance reduces search effort and raises unem-
ployment, we should not necessarily conclude that the policy is bad. The program 
does achieve its primary goal of reducing the income uncertainty that workers 
face. In addition, when workers turn down unattractive job offers, they have the 
opportunity to look for jobs that better suit their tastes and skills. Some econo-
mists argue that unemployment insurance improves the ability of the economy to 
match each worker with the most appropriate job.
The study of unemployment insurance shows that the unemployment rate is an 
imperfect measure of a nation’s overall level of economic well-being. Most econo-
mists agree that eliminating unemployment insurance would reduce the amount 
of unemployment in the economy. Yet economists disagree on whether economic 
well-being would be enhanced or diminished by this change in policy.
QUICK QUIZ How would an increase in the world price of oil affect the amount of 
frictional unemployment? Is this unemployment undesirable? What public policies 
might affect the amount of unemployment caused by this price change?
Minimum-Wage Laws
Having seen how frictional unemployment results from the process of matching 
workers and jobs, let’s now examine how structural unemployment results when 
the number of jobs is insufficient for the number of workers. 
To understand structural unemployment, we begin by reviewing how minimum-
wage laws can cause unemployment. Although minimum wages are not the pre-
dominant reason for unemployment in our economy, they have an important effect 
on certain groups with particularly high unemployment rates. Moreover, the analysis 
of minimum wages is a natural place to start because, as we will see, it can be used 
to understand some of the other reasons for structural unemployment.
Figure 4 reviews the basic economics of a minimum wage. When a minimum-wage 
law forces the wage to remain above the level that balances supply and demand, it 
raises the quantity of labor supplied and reduces the quantity of labor demanded 
422
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

compared to the equilibrium level. There is a surplus of labor. Because there are more 
workers willing to work than there are jobs, some workers are unemployed.
While minimum-wage laws are one reason unemployment exists in the U.S. 
economy, they do not affect everyone. The vast majority of workers have wages 
well above the legal minimum, so the law does not prevent most wages from 
adjusting to balance supply and demand. Minimum-wage laws matter most for 
the least skilled and least experienced members of the labor force, such as teen-
agers. Their equilibrium wages tend to be low and, therefore, are more likely to 
fall below the legal minimum. It is only among these workers that minimum-
wage laws explain the existence of unemployment.
Figure 4 is drawn to show the effects of a minimum-wage law, but it also 
illustrates a more general lesson: If the wage is kept above the equilibrium level for any 
reason, the result is unemployment. Minimum-wage laws are just one reason wages 
may be “too high.” In the remaining two sections of this chapter, we consider 
two other reasons wages may be kept above the equilibrium level: unions and 
efficiency wages. The basic economics of unemployment in these cases is the same 
as that shown in Figure 4, but these explanations of unemployment can apply to 
many more of the economy’s workers.
At this point, however, we should stop and notice that the structural unem-
ployment that arises from an above-equilibrium wage is, in an important sense, 
different from the frictional unemployment that arises from the process of job 
search. The need for job search is not due to the failure of wages to balance labor 
supply and labor demand. When job search is the explanation for unemployment, 
workers are searching for the jobs that best suit their tastes and skills. By contrast, 
when the wage is above the equilibrium level, the quantity of labor supplied 
exceeds the quantity of labor demanded, and workers are unemployed because 
they are waiting for jobs to open up. 
Unemployment from a Wage 
above the Equilibrium Level
In this labor market, the 
wage at which supply and 
demand balance is WE. At this 
equilibrium wage, the quantity 
of labor supplied and the 
quantity of labor demanded 
both equal LE. By contrast, if 
the wage is forced to remain 
above the equilibrium level, 
perhaps because of a minimum-
wage law, the quantity of labor 
supplied rises to LS, and the 
quantity of labor demanded 
falls to LD. The resulting surplus 
of labor, LS – LD, represents 
unemployment.
Figure 4
WE
Quantity of
Labor
LE
0
Surplus of labor  
Unemployment
Labor
supply
Labor
demand
Wage
Minimum
wage
LD
LS
423
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

QUICK QUIZ Draw the supply curve and the demand curve for a labor market in 
which the wage is fixed above the equilibrium level. Show the quantity of labor sup-
plied, the quantity demanded, and the amount of unemployment.
Unions and Collective Bargaining
A union is a worker association that bargains with employers over wages, ben-
efits, and working conditions. Only 12 percent of U.S. workers now belong to 
unions, but unions played a much larger role in the U.S. labor market in the past. 
In the 1940s and 1950s, when union membership was at its peak, about a third of 
the U.S. labor force was unionized.
Moreover, for a variety of historical reasons, unions continue to play a large 
role in many European countries. In Belgium, Norway, and Sweden, for instance, 
more than half of workers belong to unions. In France and Germany, a majority 
of workers have wages set by collective bargaining by law, even though only 
some of these workers are themselves union members. In these cases, wages are 
not determined by the equilibrium of supply and demand in competitive labor 
markets.
union
a worker association that 
bargains with employers 
over wages, benefits, and 
working conditions
FYI
 Who Earns the Minimum Wage?
I
n 2010, the Department of Labor released a study of which work-
ers reported earnings at or below the minimum wage in 2009, 
when, in July, the minimum wage was raised from $6.55 to $7.25 
per hour. (A reported wage below the minimum is possible because 
some workers are exempt from the statute, because enforcement is 
imperfect, and because some workers round down when reporting 
their wages on surveys.) Here is a summary of the findings:
•  Of those workers paid an hourly rate, about 4 percent of men 
and 6 percent of women reported wages at or below the prevail-
ing federal minimum.
•  Minimum-wage workers tend to be young. About half of all 
hourly paid workers earning the minimum wage or less were 
under age 25, and about one-fourth were age 16–19. Among 
employed teenagers, 19 percent earned the minimum wage or 
less, compared with 3 percent of workers age 25 and older.
•  Minimum-wage workers tend to be less educated. Among hourly 
paid workers age 16 and older, about 10 percent of those without 
a high school diploma earned the minimum wage or less, com-
pared with about 4 percent of those who earned a high school 
diploma (but did not attend college) and about 3 percent for 
those who had obtained a college degree.
•  Minimum-wage workers are more likely to be working part time. 
Among part-time workers (those who usually work less than 35 
hours per week), 11 percent were paid the minimum wage or 
less, compared to 2 percent of full-time workers.
•  The industry with the highest proportion of workers with reported 
hourly wages at or below the minimum wage was leisure and 
hospitality (21 percent). About one-half of all workers paid at 
or below the minimum wage were employed in this industry, 
primarily in food services and drinking establishments. For many 
of these workers, tips supplement the hourly wages received.
•  The proportion of hourly paid workers earning the prevailing fed-
eral minimum wage or less has trended downward since 1979, 
when data collection first began on a regular basis.
424
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

The Economics of Unions
A union is a type of cartel. Like any cartel, a union is a group of sellers acting 
together in the hope of exerting their joint market power. Most workers in the 
U.S. economy discuss their wages, benefits, and working conditions with their 
employers as individuals. By contrast, workers in a union do so as a group. The 
process by which unions and firms agree on the terms of employment is called 
collective bargaining. 
When a union bargains with a firm, it asks for higher wages, better benefits, 
and better working conditions than the firm would offer in the absence of a union. 
If the union and the firm do not reach agreement, the union can organize a with-
drawal of labor from the firm, called a strike. Because a strike reduces production, 
sales, and profit, a firm facing a strike threat is likely to agree to pay higher wages 
than it otherwise would. Economists who study the effects of unions typically find 
that union workers earn about 10 to 20 percent more than similar workers who do 
not belong to unions.
When a union raises the wage above the equilibrium level, it raises the quan-
tity of labor supplied and reduces the quantity of labor demanded, resulting in 
unemployment. Workers who remain employed at the higher wage are better off, 
but those who were previously employed and are now unemployed are worse 
off. Indeed, unions are often thought to cause conflict between different groups of 
workers—between the insiders who benefit from high union wages and the outsid-
ers who do not get the union jobs.
The outsiders can respond to their status in one of two ways. Some of them 
remain unemployed and wait for the chance to become insiders and earn the 
high union wage. Others take jobs in firms that are not unionized. Thus, when 
unions raise wages in one part of the economy, the supply of labor increases in 
other parts of the economy. This increase in labor supply, in turn, reduces wages 
in industries that are not unionized. In other words, workers in unions reap the 
benefit of collective bargaining, while workers not in unions bear some of the cost. 
The role of unions in the economy depends in part on the laws that govern 
union organization and collective bargaining. Normally, explicit agreements 
among members of a cartel are illegal. When firms selling similar products agree 
to set high prices, the agreement is considered a “conspiracy in restraint of trade,” 
and the government prosecutes the firms in civil and criminal court for violating 
the antitrust laws. By contrast, unions are exempt from these laws. The policy-
makers who wrote the antitrust laws believed that workers needed greater market 
power as they bargained with employers. Indeed, various laws are designed to 
encourage the formation of unions. In particular, the Wagner Act of 1935 prevents 
employers from interfering when workers try to organize unions and requires 
employers to bargain with unions in good faith. The National Labor Relations 
Board (NLRB) is the government agency that enforces workers’ right to unionize.
Legislation affecting the market power of unions is a perennial topic of political 
debate. State lawmakers sometimes debate right-to-work laws, which give workers 
in a unionized firm the right to choose whether to join the union. In the absence 
of such laws, unions can insist during collective bargaining that firms make union 
membership a requirement for employment. At times, lawmakers in Washington 
have debated a proposed law that would prevent firms from hiring permanent 
replacements for workers who are on strike. This law would make strikes more 
costly for firms, thereby increasing the market power of unions. These and similar 
policy decisions will help determine the future of the union movement.
collective 
bargaining
the process by which 
unions and firms agree on 
the terms of employment 
strike
the organized withdrawal 
of labor from a firm by a 
union
“Gentlemen, nothing 
stands in the way of a 
final accord except that 
management wants 
profit maximization and 
the union wants more 
moola.”
© ALAN DUNN. THE NEW YORKER COLLECTION/
WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM.
425
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

Are Unions Good or Bad for the Economy?
Economists disagree about whether unions are good or bad for the economy as a 
whole. Let’s consider both sides of the debate.
Critics argue that unions are merely a type of cartel. When unions raise wages 
above the level that would prevail in competitive markets, they reduce the quan-
tity of labor demanded, cause some workers to be unemployed, and reduce the 
wages in the rest of the economy. The resulting allocation of labor is, critics argue, 
both inefficient and inequitable. It is inefficient because high union wages reduce 
employment in unionized firms below the efficient, competitive level. It is inequi-
table because some workers benefit at the expense of other workers.
Advocates contend that unions are a necessary antidote to the market power 
of the firms that hire workers. The extreme case of this market power is the 
“company town,” where a single firm does most of the hiring in a geographical 
region. In a company town, if workers do not accept the wages and working con-
ditions that the firm offers, they have little choice but to move or stop working. 
In the absence of a union, therefore, the firm could use its market power to pay 
lower wages and offer worse working conditions than would prevail if it had to 
compete with other firms for the same workers. In this case, a union may balance 
the firm’s market power and protect the workers from being at the mercy of the 
firm’s owners.
Advocates of unions also claim that unions are important for helping firms 
respond efficiently to workers’ concerns. Whenever a worker takes a job, the 
worker and the firm must agree on many attributes of the job in addition to the 
wage: hours of work, overtime, vacations, sick leave, health benefits, promotion 
schedules, job security, and so on. By representing workers’ views on these issues, 
unions allow firms to provide the right mix of job attributes. Even if unions have 
the adverse effect of pushing wages above the equilibrium level and causing 
unemployment, they have the benefit of helping firms keep a happy and produc-
tive workforce. 
In the end, there is no consensus among economists about whether unions are 
good or bad for the economy. Like many institutions, their influence is probably 
beneficial in some circumstances and adverse in others. 
QUICK QUIZ How does a union in the auto industry affect wages and employment 
at General Motors and Ford? How does it affect wages and employment in other 
industries?
The Theory of Efficiency Wages
A fourth reason economies always experience some unemployment—in addition 
to job search, minimum-wage laws, and unions—is suggested by the theory of 
efficiency wages. According to this theory, firms operate more efficiently if wages 
are above the equilibrium level. Therefore, it may be profitable for firms to keep 
wages high even in the presence of a surplus of labor.
In some ways, the unemployment that arises from efficiency wages is similar 
to the unemployment that arises from minimum-wage laws and unions. In all 
three cases, unemployment is the result of wages above the level that balances 
the quantity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor demanded. Yet there is 
also an important difference. Minimum-wage laws and unions prevent firms from 
lowering wages in the presence of a surplus of workers. Efficiency-wage theory 
efficiency wages
above-equilibrium wages 
paid by firms to increase 
worker productivity
426
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

states that such a constraint on firms is unnecessary in many cases because firms 
may be better off keeping wages above the equilibrium level.
Why should firms want to keep wages high? This decision may seem odd 
at first, for wages are a large part of firms’ costs. Normally, we expect profit-
maximizing firms to want to keep costs—and therefore wages—as low as possi-
ble. The novel insight of efficiency-wage theory is that paying high wages might 
be profitable because they might raise the efficiency of a firm’s workers.
There are several types of efficiency-wage theory. Each type suggests a differ-
ent explanation for why firms may want to pay high wages. Let’s now consider 
four of these types.
Worker Health
The first and simplest type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between 
wages and worker health. Better paid workers eat a more nutritious diet, and 
workers who eat a better diet are healthier and more productive. A firm may find 
it more profitable to pay high wages and have healthy, productive workers than 
to pay lower wages and have less healthy, less productive workers.
This type of efficiency-wage theory can be relevant for explaining unemploy-
ment in less developed countries where inadequate nutrition can be a problem. In 
these countries, firms may fear that cutting wages would, in fact, adversely influ-
ence their workers’ health and productivity. In other words, nutrition concerns 
may explain why firms may maintain above-equilibrium wages despite a surplus 
of labor. Worker health concerns are far less relevant for firms in rich countries 
such as the United States, where the equilibrium wages for most workers are well 
above the level needed for an adequate diet.
Worker Turnover
A second type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between wages and 
worker turnover. Workers quit jobs for many reasons: to take jobs in other firms, 
to move to other parts of the country, to leave the labor force, and so on. The 
frequency with which they quit depends on the entire set of incentives they face, 
including the benefits of leaving and the benefits of staying. The more a firm pays 
its workers, the less often its workers will choose to leave. Thus, a firm can reduce 
turnover among its workers by paying them a high wage.
Why do firms care about turnover? The reason is that it is costly for firms to 
hire and train new workers. Moreover, even after they are trained, newly hired 
workers are not as productive as experienced workers. Firms with higher turn-
over, therefore, will tend to have higher production costs. Firms may find it profit-
able to pay wages above the equilibrium level to reduce worker turnover. 
Worker Quality
A third type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between wages and 
worker quality. All firms want workers who are talented, and they try to pick the best 
applicants to fill job openings. But because firms cannot perfectly gauge the quality 
of applicants, hiring has a degree of randomness to it. When a firm pays a high wage, 
it attracts a better pool of workers to apply for its jobs and thereby increases the 
quality of its workforce. If the firm responded to a surplus of labor by reducing the 
wage, the most competent applicants—who are more likely to have better alternative 
opportunities than less competent applicants—may choose not to apply. If this influ-
ence of the wage on worker quality is strong enough, it may be profitable for the firm 
to pay a wage above the level that balances supply and demand.
427
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

Worker Effort
A fourth and final type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between 
wages and worker effort. In many jobs, workers have some discretion over how 
hard to work. As a result, firms monitor the efforts of their workers, and work-
ers caught shirking their responsibilities are fired. But not all shirkers are caught 
immediately because monitoring workers is costly and imperfect. A firm in such 
a circumstance is always looking for ways to deter shirking.
One solution is paying wages above the equilibrium level. High wages make 
workers more eager to keep their jobs and, thereby, give workers an incentive to 
put forward their best effort. If the wage were at the level that balanced supply 
and demand, workers would have less reason to work hard because if they were 
fired, they could quickly find new jobs at the same wage. Therefore, firms raise 
wages above the equilibrium level, providing an incentive for workers not to 
shirk their responsibilities. 
Henry Ford and the Very Generous $5-a-Day Wage
Henry Ford was an industrial visionary. As founder of the Ford Motor Company, 
he was responsible for introducing modern techniques of production. Rather than 
building cars with small teams of skilled craftsmen, Ford built cars on assembly 
lines in which unskilled workers were taught to perform the same simple tasks 
over and over again. The output of this assembly process was the Model T Ford, 
one of the most famous early automobiles.
 
In 1914, Ford introduced another innovation: the $5 workday. This might not 
seem like much today, but back then $5 was about twice the going wage. It was 
also far above the wage that balanced supply and demand. When the new $5-a-
day wage was announced, long lines of job seekers formed outside the Ford facto-
ries. The number of workers willing to work at this wage far exceeded the number 
of workers Ford needed.
 
Ford’s high-wage policy had many of the effects predicted by efficiency-wage 
theory. Turnover fell, absenteeism fell, and productivity rose. Workers were 
so much more efficient that Ford’s production costs were lower despite higher 
wages. Thus, paying a wage above the equilibrium level was profitable for the 
firm. An historian of the early Ford Motor Company wrote, “Ford and his associ-
ates freely declared on many occasions that the high-wage policy turned out to 
be good business. By this they meant that it had improved the discipline of the 
workers, given them a more loyal interest in the institution, and raised their 
© SCOTT ADAMS / DIST. BY UNITED FEATURE 
SYNDICATE, INC.
428
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

personal efficiency.” Henry Ford himself called the $5-a-day wage “one of the 
finest cost-cutting moves we ever made.”
 
Why did it take Henry Ford to introduce this efficiency wage? Why were other 
firms not already taking advantage of this seemingly profitable business strategy? 
According to some analysts, Ford’s decision was closely linked to his use of the 
assembly line. Workers organized in an assembly line are highly interdependent. 
If one worker is absent or works slowly, other workers are less able to complete 
their own tasks. Thus, while assembly lines made production more efficient, they 
also raised the importance of low worker turnover, high worker effort, and high 
worker quality. As a result, paying efficiency wages may have been a better strat-
egy for the Ford Motor Company than for other businesses at the time.  ■
QUICK QUIZ Give four explanations for why firms might find it profitable to pay 
wages above the level that balances quantity of labor supplied and quantity of labor 
demanded.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we discussed the measurement of unemployment and the reasons 
economies always experience some degree of unemployment. We have seen how job 
search, minimum-wage laws, unions, and efficiency wages can all help explain why 
some workers do not have jobs. Which of these four explanations for the natural rate 
of unemployment are the most important for the U.S. economy and other economies 
around the world? Unfortunately, there is no easy way to tell. Economists differ in 
which of these explanations of unemployment they consider most important.
The analysis of this chapter yields an important lesson: Although the economy 
will always have some unemployment, its natural rate does change over time. Many 
events and policies can alter the amount of unemployment the economy typically 
experiences. As the information revolution changes the process of job search, as 
Congress adjusts the minimum wage, as workers form or quit unions, and as firms 
change their reliance on efficiency wages, the natural rate of unemployment evolves. 
Unemployment is not a simple problem with a simple solution. But how we choose 
to organize our society can profoundly influence how prevalent a problem it is.
SUMMARY
SU
SUMMARY
• 
The unemployment rate is the percentage of 
those who would like to work who do not have 
jobs. The Bureau of Labor Statistics calculates 
this statistic monthly based on a survey of 
thousands of households.
• 
The unemployment rate is an imperfect measure 
of joblessness. Some people who call themselves 
unemployed may actually not want to work, and 
some people who would like to work have left 
the labor force after an unsuccessful search and 
therefore are not counted as unemployed.
• 
In the U.S. economy, most people who become 
unemployed find work within a short period of 
time. Nonetheless, most unemployment observed 
at any given time is attributable to the few people 
who are unemployed for long periods of time.
• 
One reason for unemployment is the time it takes 
workers to search for jobs that best suit their 
tastes and skills. This frictional unemployment is 
increased as a result of unemployment insurance, 
a government policy designed to protect workers’ 
incomes.
429
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What are the three categories into which the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics divides everyone? 
How does the BLS compute the labor force, 
the unemployment rate, and the labor-force 
participation rate?
 2. Is unemployment typically short term or long 
term? Explain.
 3. Why is frictional unemployment inevitable? 
How might the government reduce the amount 
of frictional unemployment?
 4. Are minimum-wage laws a better explanation 
for structural unemployment among teenagers 
or among college graduates? Why?
 5. How do unions affect the natural rate of 
unemployment?
 6. What claims do advocates of unions make to 
argue that unions are good for the economy?
 7. Explain four ways in which a firm might 
increase its profits by raising the wages 
it pays.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
 1. The Bureau of Labor Statistics announced 
that in April 2010, of all adult Americans, 
139,455,000 were employed, 15,260,000 were 
unemployed, and 82,614,000 were not in the 
labor force. Use this information to calculate:
a. the adult population 
b. the labor force
c. the labor-force participation rate
d. the unemployment rate
 2. Go to the website of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (http://www.bls.gov). What is the 
national unemployment  rate right now? Find 
the unemployment rate for the demographic 
group that best fits a description of you 
(for example, based on age, sex, and race). 
Is it higher or lower than the national average? 
Why do you think this is so?
• 
A second reason our economy always has some 
unemployment is minimum-wage laws. By 
raising the wage of unskilled and inexperienced 
workers above the equilibrium level, minimum-
wage laws raise the quantity of labor supplied 
and reduce the quantity demanded. The resulting 
surplus of labor represents unemployment.
• 
A third reason for unemployment is the market 
power of unions. When unions push the wages 
in unionized industries above the equilibrium 
level, they create a surplus of labor. 
• 
A fourth reason for unemployment is suggested 
by the theory of efficiency wages. According 
to this theory, firms find it profitable to pay 
wages above the equilibrium level. High wages 
can improve worker health, lower worker 
turnover, raise worker quality, and increase 
worker effort.
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S O
 
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What are the three categories into which the
Bureau of Labor Statistics divides everyone? 
How does the BLS compute the labor force, 
the unemployment rate, and the labor-force
participation rate?
 2. Is unemployment typically short term or long 
term? Explain.
 3. Why is frictional unemployment inevitable? 
How might the government reduce the amount
of frictional unemployment?
 4. Are minimum-wage laws a better explanation 
for structural unemployment among teenagers
or among college graduates? Why?
 5. How do unions affect the natural rate of 
unemployment?
 6. What claims do advocates of unions make to
argue that unions are good for the economy?
 7. Explain four ways in which a firm might 
increase its profits by raising the wages 
it pays.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. The Bureau of Labor Statistics announced
that in April 2010, of all adult Americans, 
139,455,000 were employed, 15,260,000 were 
unemployed, and 82,614,000 were not in the
labor force. Use this information to calculate:
a. the adult population 
b. the labor force
c. the labor-force participation rate
d. the unemployment rate
 2. Go to the website of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (http://www.bls.gov). What is the 
national unemployment rate right now? Find 
the unemployment rate for the demographic
group that best fits a description of you
(for example, based on age, sex, and race).
Is it higher or lower than the national average?
Why do you think this is so?
•
A second reason our economy always has some 
unemployment is minimum-wage laws. By 
raising the wage of unskilled and inexperienced 
workers above the equilibrium level, minimum-
wage laws raise the quantity of labor supplied
and reduce the quantity demanded. The resulting 
surplus of labor represents unemployment.
•
A third reason for unemployment is the market 
power of unions. When unions push the wages 
in unionized industries above the equilibrium
level, they create a surplus of labor. 
•
A fourth reason for unemployment is suggested 
by the theory of efficiency wages. According 
to this theory, firms find it profitable to pay 
wages above the equilibrium level. High wages 
can improve worker health, lower worker 
turnover, raise worker quality, and increase 
worker effort.
430
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
labor force, p. 411
unemployment rate, p. 411
labor-force participation 
 rate, p. 411
natural rate of unemployment, p. 412
cyclical unemployment, p. 413
discouraged workers, p. 415
frictional unemployment, p. 417
structural unemployment, p. 418
job search, p. 418
unemployment insurance, p. 420
union, p. 424
collective bargaining, p. 425
strike, p. 425
efficiency wages, p. 426

 3. Between 2004 and 2007, total U.S. employment 
increased by 6.8 million workers, but the 
number of unemployed workers declined 
by only 1.1 million. How are these numbers 
consistent with each other? Why might one 
expect a reduction in the number of people 
counted as unemployed to be smaller than the 
increase in the number of people employed?
 4. Economists use labor-market data to evaluate 
how well an economy is using its most valuable 
resource—its people. Two closely watched 
statistics are the unemployment rate and the 
employment-population ratio. Explain what 
happens to each of these in the following 
scenarios. In your opinion, which statistic is 
the more meaningful gauge of how well the 
economy is doing?
a. An auto company goes bankrupt and lays off 
its workers, who immediately start looking 
for new jobs.
b. After an unsuccessful search, some of the 
laid-off workers quit looking for new jobs.
c. Numerous students graduate from college 
but cannot find work.
d. Numerous students graduate from college 
and immediately begin new jobs.
e. A stock market boom induces newly 
enriched 60-year-old workers to take early 
retirement.
f. Advances in healthcare prolong the life of 
many retirees.
 5. Are the following workers more likely 
to experience short-term or long-term 
unemployment? Explain.
a. A construction worker laid off because of bad 
weather
b. A manufacturing worker who loses her job at 
a plant in an isolated area
c. A stagecoach-industry worker laid off 
because of competition from railroads
d. A short-order cook who loses his job when a 
new restaurant opens across the street
e. An expert welder with little formal education 
who loses her job when the company installs 
automatic welding machinery
 6. Using a diagram of the labor market, show 
the effect of an increase in the minimum 
wage on the wage paid to workers, the 
number of workers supplied, the number 
of workers demanded, and the amount of 
unemployment.
 7. Consider an economy with two labor markets—
one for manufacturing workers and one for 
service workers. Suppose initially that neither is 
unionized. 
a. If manufacturing workers formed a union, 
what impact on the wages and employment 
in manufacturing would you predict? 
b. How would these changes in the 
manufacturing labor market affect the 
supply of labor in the market for service 
workers? What would happen to the 
equilibrium wage and employment in this 
labor market?
 8. Structural unemployment is sometimes said 
to result from a mismatch between the job 
skills that employers want and the job skills 
that workers have. To explore this idea, 
consider an economy with two industries: auto 
manufacturing and aircraft manufacturing.
a. If workers in these two industries require 
similar amounts of training, and if workers 
at the beginning of their careers could choose 
which industry to train for, what would you 
expect to happen to the wages in these two 
industries? How long would this process 
take? Explain.
b. Suppose that one day the economy opens 
itself to international trade and, as a result, 
starts importing autos and exporting aircraft. 
What would happen to demand for labor in 
these two industries?
c. Suppose that workers in one industry 
cannot be quickly retrained for the other. 
How would these shifts in demand affect 
equilibrium wages both in the short run and 
in the long run?
d. If for some reason wages fail to adjust 
to the new equilibrium levels, what would 
occur? 
 9. Suppose that Congress passes a law requiring 
employers to provide employees some benefit 
(such as healthcare) that raises the cost of an 
employee by $4 per hour. 
a. What effect does this employer mandate have 
on the demand for labor? (In answering this 
and the following questions, be quantitative 
when you can.)
b. If employees place a value on this benefit 
exactly equal to its cost, what effect does this 
employer mandate have on the supply of 
labor? 
 3. Between 2004 and 2007, total U.S. employment
increased by 6.8 million workers, but the 
number of unemployed workers declined
by only 1.1 million. How are these numbers
consistent with each other? Why might one
expect a reduction in the number of people 
counted as unemployed to be smaller than the
increase in the number of people employed?
 4. Economists use labor-market data to evaluate 
how well an economy is using its most valuable 
resource—its people. Two closely watched
statistics are the unemployment rate and the
employment-population ratio. Explain what 
happens to each of these in the following
scenarios. In your opinion, which statistic is 
the more meaningful gauge of how well the 
economy is doing?
a. An auto company goes bankrupt and lays off 
its workers, who immediately start looking
for new jobs.
b. After an unsuccessful search, some of the 
laid-off workers quit looking for new jobs.
c. Numerous students graduate from college
but cannot find work.
d. Numerous students graduate from college
and immediately begin new jobs.
e. A stock market boom induces newly
enriched 60-year-old workers to take early 
retirement.
f. Advances in healthcare prolong the life of 
many retirees.
 5. Are the following workers more likely 
to experience short-term or long-term 
unemployment? Explain.
a. A construction worker laid off because of bad 
weather
b. A manufacturing worker who loses her job at 
a plant in an isolated area
c. A stagecoach-industry worker laid off 
because of competition from railroads
d. A short-order cook who loses his job when a 
new restaurant opens across the street
e. An expert welder with little formal education
who loses her job when the company installs 
automatic welding machinery
 6. Using a diagram of the labor market, show 
the effect of an increase in the minimum
wage on the wage paid to workers, the 
number of workers supplied, the number 
of workers demanded, and the amount of 
unemployment.
 7. Consider an economy with two labor markets—
one for manufacturing workers and one for 
service workers. Suppose initially that neither is
unionized.
a. If manufacturing workers formed a union,
what impact on the wages and employment 
in manufacturing would you predict?
b. How would these changes in the
manufacturing labor market affect the
supply of labor in the market for service
workers? What would happen to the
equilibrium wage and employment in this
labor market?
 8. Structural unemployment is sometimes said
to result from a mismatch between the job
skills that employers want and the job skills 
that workers have. To explore this idea,
consider an economy with two industries: auto
manufacturing and aircraft manufacturing.
a. If workers in these two industries require 
similar amounts of training, and if workers 
at the beginning of their careers could choose
which industry to train for, what would you 
expect to happen to the wages in these two 
industries? How long would this process 
take? Explain.
b. Suppose that one day the economy opens
itself to international trade and, as a result, 
starts importing autos and exporting aircraft. 
What would happen to demand for labor in
these two industries?
c. Suppose that workers in one industry
cannot be quickly retrained for the other.
How would these shifts in demand affect
equilibrium wages both in the short run and
in the long run?
d. If for some reason wages fail to adjust
to the new equilibrium levels, what would 
occur?
 9. Suppose that Congress passes a law requiring 
employers to provide employees some benefit 
(such as healthcare) that raises the cost of an
employee by $4 per hour.
a. What effect does this employer mandate have 
on the demand for labor? (In answering this
and the following questions, be quantitative
when you can.)
b. If employees place a value on this benefit
exactly equal to its cost, what effect does this
employer mandate have on the supply of 
labor?
431
CHAPTER 20    UNEMPLOYMENT

c. If the wage is free to balance supply and 
demand, how does this law affect the wage 
and the level of employment? Are employers 
better or worse off? Are employees better or 
worse off?
d. Suppose that, before the mandate, the 
wage in this market was $3 above the 
minimum wage. In this case, how does 
the employer mandate affect the wage, 
the level of employment, and the level of 
unemployment? 
e. Now suppose that workers do not value 
the mandated benefit at all. How does this 
alternative assumption change your answers 
to parts (b) and (c)?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
c. If the wage is free to balance supply and
demand, how does this law affect the wage 
and the level of employment? Are employers 
better or worse off? Are employees better or
worse off?
d. Suppose that, before the mandate, the
wage in this market was $3 above the 
minimum wage. In this case, how does
the employer mandate affect the wage,
the level of employment, and the level of 
unemployment?
e. Now suppose that workers do not value 
the mandated benefit at all. How does this 
alternative assumption change your answers 
to parts (b) and (c)?
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.
432
PART VII 
THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN

Money and Prices in 
the Long Run
VIII
PART


Th e Monetary System
W
hen you walk into a restaurant to buy a meal, you get something of 
value—a full stomach. To pay for this service, you might hand the 
restaurateur several worn-out pieces of greenish paper decorated 
with strange symbols, government buildings, and the portraits of 
famous dead Americans. Or you might hand him a single piece of paper with the 
name of a bank and your signature. Whether you pay by cash or check, the restau-
rateur is happy to work hard to satisfy your gastronomical desires in exchange for 
these pieces of paper which, in and of themselves, are worthless.
To anyone who has lived in a modern economy, this social custom is not at all 
odd. Even though paper money has no intrinsic value, the restaurateur is confi-
dent that, in the future, some third person will accept it in exchange for something 
that the restaurateur does value. And that third person is confident that some 
fourth person will accept the money, with the knowledge that yet a fifth person 
21
435

will accept the money . . . and so on. To the restaurateur and to other people in our 
society, your cash or check represents a claim to goods and services in the future.
The social custom of using money for transactions is extraordinarily useful in 
a large, complex society. Imagine, for a moment, that there was no item in the 
economy widely accepted in exchange for goods and services. People would have 
to rely on barter—the exchange of one good or service for another—to obtain the 
things they need. To get your restaurant meal, for instance, you would have to 
offer the restaurateur something of immediate value. You could offer to wash 
some dishes, clean his car, or give him your family’s secret recipe for meat loaf. 
An economy that relies on barter will have trouble allocating its scarce resources 
efficiently. In such an economy, trade is said to require the double coincidence of 
wants—the unlikely occurrence that two people each have a good or service that 
the other wants.
The existence of money makes trade easier. The restaurateur does not care 
whether you can produce a valuable good or service for him. He is happy to 
accept your money, knowing that other people will do the same for him. Such a 
convention allows trade to be roundabout. The restaurateur accepts your money 
and uses it to pay his chef; the chef uses her paycheck to send her child to day 
care; the day care center uses this tuition to pay a teacher; and the teacher hires 
you to mow his lawn. As money flows from person to person in the economy, 
it facilitates production and trade, thereby allowing each person to specialize in 
what he or she does best and raising everyone’s standard of living.
In this chapter, we begin to examine the role of money in the economy. We 
discuss what money is, the various forms that money takes, how the banking sys-
tem helps create money, and how the government controls the quantity of money 
in circulation. Because money is so important in the economy, we devote much 
effort in the rest of this book to learning how changes in the quantity of money 
affect various economic variables, including inflation, interest rates, production, 
and employment. Consistent with our long-run focus in the previous four chap-
ters, in the next chapter we examine the long-run effects of changes in the quantity 
of money. The short-run effects of monetary changes are a more complex topic, 
which we take up later in the book. This chapter provides the background for all 
of this further analysis.
The Meaning of Money
What is money? This might seem like an odd question. When you read that bil-
lionaire Bill Gates has a lot of money, you know what that means: He is so rich 
that he can buy almost anything he wants. In this sense, the term money is used 
to mean wealth.
Economists, however, use the word in a more specific sense: Money is the set 
of assets in the economy that people regularly use to buy goods and services from 
each other. The cash in your wallet is money because you can use it to buy a meal 
at a restaurant or a shirt at a clothing store. By contrast, if you happened to own 
a large share of Microsoft Corporation, as Bill Gates does, you would be wealthy, 
but this asset is not considered a form of money. You could not buy a meal or a 
shirt with this wealth without first obtaining some cash. According to the econo-
mist’s definition, money includes only those few types of wealth that are regularly 
accepted by sellers in exchange for goods and services.
money
the set of assets in an 
economy that people 
regularly use to buy 
goods and services from 
other people
436
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

The Functions of Money
Money has three functions in the economy: It is a medium of exchange, a unit of 
account, and a store of value. These three functions together distinguish money 
from other assets in the economy, such as stocks, bonds, real estate, art, and even 
baseball cards. Let’s examine each of these functions of money in turn.
A medium of exchange is an item that buyers give to sellers when they pur-
chase goods and services. When you buy a shirt at a clothing store, the store gives 
you the shirt, and you give the store your money. This transfer of money from 
buyer to seller allows the transaction to take place. When you walk into a store, 
you are confident that the store will accept your money for the items it is selling 
because money is the commonly accepted medium of exchange. 
A unit of account is the yardstick people use to post prices and record debts. 
When you go shopping, you might observe that a shirt costs $30 and a hamburger 
costs $3. Even though it would be accurate to say that the price of a shirt is 10 
hamburgers and the price of a hamburger is 1⁄10 of a shirt, prices are never quoted 
in this way. Similarly, if you take out a loan from a bank, the size of your future 
loan repayments will be measured in dollars, not in a quantity of goods and ser-
vices. When we want to measure and record economic value, we use money as 
the unit of account. 
A store of value is an item that people can use to transfer purchasing power 
from the present to the future. When a seller accepts money today in exchange for a 
good or service, that seller can hold the money and become a buyer of another good 
or service at another time. Money is not the only store of value in the economy: A 
person can also transfer purchasing power from the present to the future by hold-
ing nonmonetary assets such as stocks and bonds. The term wealth is used to refer 
to the total of all stores of value, including both money and nonmonetary assets.
Economists use the term liquidity to describe the ease with which an asset 
can be converted into the economy’s medium of exchange. Because money is the 
economy’s medium of exchange, it is the most liquid asset available. Other assets 
vary widely in their liquidity. Most stocks and bonds can be sold easily with small 
cost, so they are relatively liquid assets. By contrast, selling a house, a Rembrandt 
painting, or a 1948 Joe DiMaggio baseball card requires more time and effort, so 
these assets are less liquid.
When people decide in what form to hold their wealth, they have to balance the 
liquidity of each possible asset against the asset’s usefulness as a store of value. 
Money is the most liquid asset, but it is far from perfect as a store of value. When 
prices rise, the value of money falls. In other words, when goods and services 
become more expensive, each dollar in your wallet can buy less. This link between 
the price level and the value of money is key to understanding how money affects 
the economy, a topic we start to explore in the next chapter.
The Kinds of Money
When money takes the form of a commodity with intrinsic value, it is called 
commodity money. The term intrinsic value means that the item would have value 
even if it were not used as money. One example of commodity money is gold. 
Gold has intrinsic value because it is used in industry and in the making of jew-
elry. Although today we no longer use gold as money, historically gold has been a 
common form of money because it is relatively easy to carry, measure, and verify 
for impurities. When an economy uses gold as money (or uses paper money that is 
convertible into gold on demand), it is said to be operating under a gold standard. 
medium of exchange
an item that buyers give 
to sellers when they want 
to purchase goods and 
services
unit of account
the yardstick people use 
to post prices and record 
debts
store of value
an item that people can 
use to transfer purchasing 
power from the present 
to the future
liquidity
the ease with which an 
asset can be converted 
into the economy’s 
medium of exchange
commodity money
money that takes the 
form of a commodity with 
intrinsic value
437
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

Another example of commodity money is cigarettes. In prisoner-of-war camps 
during World War II, prisoners traded goods and services with one another 
using cigarettes as the store of value, unit of account, and medium of exchange. 
Similarly, as the Soviet Union was breaking up in the late 1980s, cigarettes started 
replacing the ruble as the preferred currency in Moscow. In both cases, even non-
smokers were happy to accept cigarettes in an exchange, knowing that they could 
use the cigarettes to buy other goods and services.
Money without intrinsic value is called fiat money. A fiat is an order or decree, 
and fiat money is established as money by government decree. For example, 
compare the paper dollars in your wallet (printed by the U.S. government) and 
the paper dollars from a game of Monopoly (printed by the Parker Brothers game 
company). Why can you use the first to pay your bill at a restaurant but not the 
second? The answer is that the U.S. government has decreed its dollars to be valid 
money. Each paper dollar in your wallet reads: “This note is legal tender for all 
debts, public and private.”
Although the government is central to establishing and regulating a system 
of fiat money (by prosecuting counterfeiters, for example), other factors are also 
required for the success of such a monetary system. To a large extent, the accept-
ance of fiat money depends as much on expectations and social convention as 
on government decree. The Soviet government in the 1980s never abandoned 
the ruble as the official currency. Yet the people of Moscow preferred to accept 
 cigarettes (or even American dollars) in exchange for goods and services because 
they were more confident that these alternative monies would be accepted by 
others in the future. 
fiat money
money without intrinsic 
value that is used as 
money because of 
government decree
Packs of Fish Catch 
on as Currency
BY JUSTIN SCHECK 
W
hen Larry Levine helped prepare 
divorce papers for a client a few years 
ago, he got paid in mackerel. Once the case 
ended, he says, “I had a stack of macks.”
 
Mr. Levine and his client were prisoners 
in California’s Lompoc Federal Correctional 
Complex. Like other federal inmates around 
the country, they found a can of  mackerel—
the “mack” in prison lingo—was the  standard 
currency.
 
“It’s the coin of the realm,” says Mark 
Bailey, who paid Mr. Levine in fish. Mr. Bailey 
was serving a two-year tax-fraud sentence 
in connection with a chain of strip clubs he 
owned. Mr. Levine was serving a nine-year 
term for drug dealing. Mr. Levine says he 
used his macks to get his beard trimmed, his 
clothes pressed and his shoes shined by other 
prisoners. “A haircut is two macks,” he says, 
as an expected tip for inmates who work in 
the prison barber shop.
 
There’s been a mackerel economy in 
federal prisons since about 2004, former 
inmates and some prison consultants say. 
That’s when federal prisons prohibited 
smoking and, by default, the cigarette pack, 
which was the earlier gold standard.
 
Prisoners need a proxy for the dollar 
because they’re not allowed to possess 
cash. Money they get from prison jobs 
(which pay a maximum of 40 cents an hour, 
 Mackereleconomics
Money evolves naturally to facilitate exchange, even in prisons.
in the news
438
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

Source: The Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2008.
according to the Federal Bureau of Prisons) 
or family members goes into commissary 
accounts that let them buy things such as 
food and toiletries. After the smokes disap-
peared, inmates turned to other items on 
the commissary menu to use as currency.
 
Books of stamps were one easy alterna-
tive. “It was like half a book for a piece of 
fruit,” says Tony Serra, a well-known San 
Francisco criminal-defense attorney who last 
year finished nine months in Lompoc on 
tax charges. Elsewhere in the West, prison-
ers use PowerBars or cans of tuna, says 
Ed Bales, a consultant who advises people 
who are headed to prison. But in much of 
the federal prison system, he says, mackerel 
has become the currency of choice.
 
Mackerel supplier Global Source Mar-
keting Inc. says demand from prisons has 
grown since 2004. In recent years, demand 
has switched from cans—which wardens 
don’t like because inmates can turn them into 
makeshift knives—to plastic-and-foil pouches 
of mackerel fillets, says Jon Linder, a vice 
president at supplier Power Commissary Inc., 
in Bohemia, N.Y.
 
Mackerel is hot in prisons in the U.S., 
but not so much anywhere else, says Mark 
Muntz, president of Global Source, which 
imports fillets of the oily, dark-fleshed fish 
from Asian canneries. Mr. Muntz says he’s 
tried marketing mackerel to discount retail-
ers. “We’ve even tried 99-cent stores,” he 
says. “It never has done very well at all, 
regardless of the retailer, but it’s very popu-
lar in the prisons.”
 
Mr. Muntz says he sold more than 
$1  million of mackerel for federal prison 
commissaries last year. It accounted for 
about half his commissary sales, he says, 
outstripping the canned tuna, crab, chicken 
and oysters he offers.
 
Unlike those more expensive delicacies, 
former prisoners say, the mack is a good 
stand-in for the greenback because each 
can (or pouch) costs about $1 and few—
other than weight-lifters craving protein—
want to eat it.
 
So inmates stash macks in lockers provided 
by the prison and use them to buy goods, 
including illicit ones such as stolen food and 
home-brewed “prison hooch,” as well as ser-
vices, such as shoeshines and cell cleaning. 
“When I grow up, I am going to
be a medium of exchange, unit of
account, and store of value.”
© STEFANIE MOHR PHOTOGRAPHY/SHUTTERSTOCK
Money in the U.S. Economy
As we will see, the quantity of money circulating in the economy, called the money 
stock, has a powerful influence on many economic variables. But before we con-
sider why that is true, we need to ask a preliminary question: What is the quantity 
of money? In particular, suppose you were given the task of measuring how much 
money there is in the U.S. economy. What would you include in your measure?
The most obvious asset to include is currency—the paper bills and coins in 
the hands of the public. Currency is clearly the most widely accepted medium 
of exchange in our economy. There is no doubt that it is part of the money stock.
Yet currency is not the only asset that you can use to buy goods and services. 
Many stores also accept personal checks. Wealth held in your checking account is 
almost as convenient for buying things as wealth held in your wallet. To  measure 
the money stock, therefore, you might want to include demand deposits— 
balances in bank accounts that depositors can access on demand simply by writ-
ing a check or swiping a debit card at a store.
Once you start to consider balances in checking accounts as part of the money 
stock, you are led to consider the large variety of other accounts that people hold 
at banks and other financial institutions. Bank depositors usually cannot write 
checks against the balances in their savings accounts, but they can easily transfer 
funds from savings into checking accounts. In addition, depositors in money mar-
ket mutual funds can often write checks against their balances. Thus, these other 
accounts should plausibly be part of the U.S. money stock.
currency
the paper bills and coins 
in the hands of the public
demand deposits
balances in bank accounts 
that depositors can access 
on demand by writing a 
check
439
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

In a complex economy such as ours, it is not easy to draw a line between assets 
that can be called “money” and assets that cannot. The coins in your pocket 
clearly are part of the money stock, and the Empire State Building clearly is not, 
but there are many assets in between these extremes for which the choice is less 
clear. Because different analysts can reasonably disagree about where to draw the 
dividing line between monetary and nonmonetary assets, various measures of 
the money stock are available for the U.S. economy. Figure 1 shows the two most 
commonly used, designated M1 and M2. M2 includes more assets in its measure 
of money than does M1.
For our purposes in this book, we need not dwell on the differences between 
the various measures of money. None of our discussion will hinge on the distinc-
tion between M1 and M2. The important point is that the money stock for the U.S. 
economy includes not just currency but also deposits in banks and other financial 
institutions that can be readily accessed and used to buy goods and services.
Where Is All the Currency?
One puzzle about the money stock of the U.S. economy concerns the amount of 
currency. At the end of 2009, there was $862 billion of currency outstanding. To 
put this number in perspective, we can divide it by 236 million, the number of 
FYI
 Why Credit Cards Aren’t Money
I
t might seem natural to include credit cards as part of the econ-
omy’s stock of money. After all, people use credit cards to make 
many of their purchases. Aren’t credit cards, therefore, a medium 
of exchange?
 
At first this argument may seem persuasive, but credit cards are 
excluded from all measures of the quantity of money. The reason is 
that credit cards are not really a method of payment but a method 
of deferring payment. When you buy a meal with a credit card, the 
bank that issued the card pays the restaurant what it is due. At a 
later date, you will have to repay the bank (perhaps with interest). 
When the time comes to pay your credit card bill, you will probably 
do so by writing a check against your checking account. The balance 
in this checking account is part of the economy’s stock of money.
 
Notice that credit cards are very different from debit cards, 
which automatically withdraw funds from a bank account to pay 
for items bought. Rather than allowing the user to postpone pay-
ment for a purchase, a debit card allows the user immediate access 
to deposits in a bank account. In this sense, a debit card is more 
similar to a check than to a credit card. The account balances that 
lie behind debit cards are included in measures of the quantity of 
money.
 
Even though credit cards are not considered a form of money, 
they are nonetheless important for analyzing the monetary sys-
tem. People who have credit cards can pay many of their bills 
together at the end of the month, rather than sporadically as they 
make purchases. As a result, people who have credit cards prob-
ably hold less money on average than people who do not have 
credit cards. Thus, the introduction and increased popularity of 
credit cards may reduce the amount of money that people choose 
to hold. 
440
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

adults (age 16 and older) in the United States. This calculation implies that the 
average adult holds about $3,653 of currency. Most people are surprised to learn 
that our economy has so much currency because they carry far less than this in 
their wallets. 
 
Who is holding all this currency? No one knows for sure, but there are two 
plausible explanations. 
 
The first explanation is that much of the currency is held abroad. In foreign 
countries without a stable monetary system, people often prefer U.S. dollars to 
domestic assets. It is, in fact, not unusual to see U.S. dollars used overseas as the 
medium of exchange, unit of account, and store of value.
 
The second explanation is that much of the currency is held by drug dealers, tax 
evaders, and other criminals. For most people in the U.S. economy, currency is not 
a particularly good way to hold wealth. Not only can currency be lost or stolen, 
but it also does not earn interest, whereas a bank deposit does. Thus, most people 
hold only small amounts of currency. By contrast, criminals may avoid putting their 
wealth in banks because a bank deposit gives police a paper trail they can use to trace 
illegal activities. For criminals, currency may be the best store of value available.  ■
QUICK QUIZ List and describe the three functions of money.
The Federal Reserve System
Whenever an economy uses a system of fiat money, as the U.S. economy does, 
some agency must be responsible for regulating the system. In the United States, 
that agency is the Federal Reserve, often simply called the Fed. If you look at the 
top of a dollar bill, you will see that it is called a “Federal Reserve Note.” The Fed 
is an example of a central bank—an institution designed to oversee the banking 
system and regulate the quantity of money in the economy. Other major central 
banks around the world include the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the 
European Central Bank. 
Federal Reserve 
(Fed)
the central bank of the 
United States
central bank
an institution designed 
to oversee the banking 
system and regulate the 
quantity of money in the 
economy
Figure 1
Two Measures of 
the Money Stock for 
the U.S. Economy
The two most widely 
followed measures of the 
money stock are M1 and M2. 
This figure shows the size of 
each measure in 2009. 
Source: Federal Reserve.
Billions
of Dollars
M1
M2
• Everything in M1
 ($1,696 billion)
• Savings deposits
• Small time deposits
• Money market
 mutual funds
• A few minor categories
   ($6,848 billion)
• Demand deposits
• Traveler’s checks
• Other checkable deposits
 ($834 billion)
• Currency
 ($862 billion)
$1,696
$8,544
441
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

The Fed’s Organization
The Federal Reserve was created in 1913 after a series of bank failures in 1907 
convinced Congress that the United States needed a central bank to ensure the 
health of the nation’s banking system. Today, the Fed is run by its board of gover-
nors, which has seven members appointed by the president and confirmed by the 
Senate. The governors have fourteen-year terms. Just as federal judges are given 
lifetime appointments to insulate them from politics, Fed governors are given long 
terms to give them independence from short-term political pressures when they 
formulate monetary policy.
Among the seven members of the board of governors, the most important is 
the chairman. The chairman directs the Fed staff, presides over board meetings, 
and testifies regularly about Fed policy in front of congressional committees. The 
president appoints the chairman to a four-year term. As this book was going to 
press, the chairman of the Fed was Ben Bernanke, a former economics professor 
who was appointed to the Fed job by President George W. Bush in 2005 and reap-
pointed by President Barack Obama in 2009.
The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Federal Reserve Board in 
Washington, D.C., and twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks located in major 
cities around the country. The presidents of the regional banks are chosen by each 
bank’s board of directors, whose members are typically drawn from the region’s 
banking and business community. 
The Fed has two related jobs. The first is to regulate banks and ensure the 
health of the banking system. This task is largely the responsibility of the regional 
Federal Reserve Banks. In particular, the Fed monitors each bank’s financial con-
dition and facilitates bank transactions by clearing checks. It also acts as a bank’s 
bank. That is, the Fed makes loans to banks when banks themselves want to bor-
row. When financially troubled banks find themselves short of cash, the Fed acts 
as a lender of last resort—a lender to those who cannot borrow anywhere else—to 
maintain stability in the overall banking system. 
The Fed’s second and more important job is to control the quantity of money 
that is made available in the economy, called the money supply. Decisions by 
policymakers concerning the money supply constitute monetary policy. At the 
Federal Reserve, monetary policy is made by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC). The FOMC meets about every six weeks in Washington, D.C., to discuss 
the condition of the economy and consider changes in monetary policy.
The Federal Open Market Committee
The Federal Open Market Committee is made up of the seven members of 
the board of governors and five of the twelve regional bank presidents. All 
twelve regional presidents attend each FOMC meeting, but only five get to 
vote. The five with voting rights rotate among the twelve regional presidents 
over time. The president of the New York Fed always gets a vote, however, 
because New York is the traditional financial center of the U.S. economy and 
because all Fed purchases and sales of government bonds are conducted at the 
New York Fed’s trading desk.
Through the decisions of the FOMC, the Fed has the power to increase or 
decrease the number of dollars in the economy. In simple metaphorical terms, 
you can imagine the Fed printing dollar bills and dropping them around the 
country by helicopter. Similarly, you can imagine the Fed using a giant vacuum 
cleaner to suck dollar bills out of people’s wallets. Although in practice the Fed’s 
money supply
the quantity of money 
available in the economy
monetary policy
the setting of the money 
supply by policymakers in 
the central bank
442
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

methods for changing the money supply are more complex and subtle than this, 
the helicopter-vacuum metaphor is a good first step to understanding the mean-
ing of monetary policy.
Later in this chapter, we discuss how the Fed actually changes the money 
supply, but it is worth noting here that the Fed’s primary tool is the open-market 
operation—the purchase and sale of U.S. government bonds. (Recall that a U.S. 
government bond is a certificate of indebtedness of the federal government.) If 
the FOMC decides to increase the money supply, the Fed creates dollars and uses 
them to buy government bonds from the public in the nation’s bond markets. 
After the purchase, these dollars are in the hands of the public. Thus, an open-
market purchase of bonds by the Fed increases the money supply. Conversely, if 
the FOMC decides to decrease the money supply, the Fed sells government bonds 
from its portfolio to the public in the nation’s bond markets. After the sale, the 
dollars it receives for the bonds are out of the hands of the public. Thus, an open-
market sale of bonds by the Fed decreases the money supply.
Central banks are important institutions because changes in the money sup-
ply can profoundly affect the economy. One of the Ten Principles of Economics 
in Chapter 1 is that prices rise when the government prints too much money. 
Another of the Ten Principles of Economics is that society faces a short-run trade-off 
between inflation and unemployment. The power of the Fed rests on these prin-
ciples. For reasons we discuss more fully in the coming chapters, the Fed’s policy 
decisions have an important influence on the economy’s rate of inflation in the 
long run and the economy’s employment and production in the short run. Indeed, 
the chairman of the Federal Reserve has been called the second most powerful 
person in the United States. 
QUICK QUIZ What are the primary responsibilities of the Federal Reserve? If the Fed 
wants to increase the supply of money, how does it usually do so?
Banks and the Money Supply
So far, we have introduced the concept of “money” and discussed how the 
Federal Reserve controls the supply of money by buying and selling government 
bonds in open-market operations. Although this explanation of the money supply 
is correct, it is not complete. In particular, it omits the central role that banks play 
in the monetary system. 
Recall that the amount of money you hold includes both currency (the bills in 
your wallet and coins in your pocket) and demand deposits (the balance in your 
checking account). Because demand deposits are held in banks, the behavior of 
banks can influence the quantity of demand deposits in the economy and, therefore, 
the money supply. This section examines how banks affect the money supply and, 
in doing so, how they complicate the Fed’s job of controlling the money supply.
The Simple Case of 100-Percent-Reserve Banking
To see how banks influence the money supply, let’s first imagine a world without 
any banks at all. In this simple world, currency is the only form of money. To be 
concrete, let’s suppose that the total quantity of currency is $100. The supply of 
money is, therefore, $100.
© MICK STEVENS. THE NEW YORKER 
COLLECTION/ WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM
"I've heard a lot about 
money, and now I'd like 
to try some."
443
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

Now suppose that someone opens a bank, appropriately called First National 
Bank. First National Bank is only a depository institution—that is, it accepts 
deposits but does not make loans. The purpose of the bank is to give depositors 
a safe place to keep their money. Whenever a person deposits some money, the 
bank keeps the money in its vault until the depositor withdraws it, writes a 
check, or uses a debit card to access his or her balance. Deposits that banks have 
received but have not loaned out are called reserves. In this imaginary econ-
omy, all deposits are held as reserves, so this system is called 100-percent-reserve 
banking. 
We can express the financial position of First National Bank with a T-account, 
which is a simplified accounting statement that shows changes in a bank’s assets 
and liabilities. Here is the T-account for First National Bank if the economy’s 
entire $100 of money is deposited in the bank: 
First National Bank
Assets
Liabilities
Reserves
$100.00
Deposits
$100.00
On the left side of the T-account are the bank’s assets of $100 (the reserves it holds 
in its vaults). On the right side are the bank’s liabilities of $100 (the amount it owes 
to its depositors). Because the assets and liabilities of First National Bank exactly 
balance, this accounting statement is sometimes called a balance sheet. 
Now consider the money supply in this imaginary economy. Before First 
National Bank opens, the money supply is the $100 of currency that people are 
holding. After the bank opens and people deposit their currency, the money sup-
ply is the $100 of demand deposits. (There is no longer any currency outstand-
ing, for it is all in the bank vault.) Each deposit in the bank reduces currency and 
raises demand deposits by exactly the same amount, leaving the money supply 
unchanged. Thus, if banks hold all deposits in reserve, banks do not influence the supply 
of money.
Money Creation with Fractional-Reserve Banking
Eventually, the bankers at First National Bank may start to reconsider their policy 
of 100-percent-reserve banking. Leaving all that money idle in their vaults seems 
unnecessary. Why not lend some of it out and earn a profit by charging interest 
on the loans? Families buying houses, firms building new factories, and students 
paying for college would all be happy to pay interest to borrow some of that 
money for a while. First National Bank has to keep some reserves so that cur-
rency is available if depositors want to make withdrawals. But if the flow of new 
deposits is roughly the same as the flow of withdrawals, First National needs to 
keep only a fraction of its deposits in reserve. Thus, First National adopts a system 
called fractional-reserve banking.
The fraction of total deposits that a bank holds as reserves is called the reserve 
ratio. This ratio is determined by a combination of government regulation and 
bank policy. As we discuss more fully later in the chapter, the Fed sets a minimum 
amount of reserves that banks must hold, called a reserve requirement. In addition, 
banks may hold reserves above the legal minimum, called excess reserves, so they 
can be more confident that they will not run short of cash. For our purpose here, 
we take the reserve ratio as given to examine how fractional-reserve banking 
influences the money supply.
reserves
deposits that banks have 
received but have not 
loaned out
fractional-reserve 
banking
a banking system in 
which banks hold only 
a fraction of deposits as 
reserves
reserve ratio
the fraction of deposits 
that banks hold as 
reserves
444
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

Let’s suppose that First National has a reserve ratio of 1/10, or 10 percent. This 
means that it keeps 10 percent of its deposits in reserve and loans out the rest. 
Now let’s look again at the bank’s T-account:
First National Bank
Assets
Liabilities
Reserves
$10.00
Deposits
$100.00
Loans
 90.00
First National still has $100 in liabilities because making the loans did not alter the 
bank’s obligation to its depositors. But now the bank has two kinds of assets: It has 
$10 of reserves in its vault, and it has loans of $90. (These loans are liabilities of 
the people taking out the loans, but they are assets of the bank making the loans 
because the borrowers will later repay the bank.) In total, First National’s assets 
still equal its liabilities.
Once again consider the supply of money in the economy. Before First 
National makes any loans, the money supply is the $100 of deposits in the bank. 
Yet when First National makes these loans, the money supply increases. The 
depositors still have demand deposits totaling $100, but now the borrowers 
hold $90 in currency. The money supply (which equals currency plus demand 
deposits) equals $190. Thus, when banks hold only a fraction of deposits in reserve, 
banks create money.
At first, this creation of money by fractional-reserve banking may seem too good 
to be true: It appears that the bank has created money out of thin air. To make this 
creation of money seem less miraculous, note that when First National Bank loans 
out some of its reserves and creates money, it does not create any wealth. Loans from 
First National give the borrowers some currency and thus the ability to buy goods 
and services. Yet the borrowers are also taking on debts, so the loans do not make 
them any richer. In other words, as a bank creates the asset of money, it also creates 
a corresponding liability for those who borrowed the created money. At the end of 
this process of money creation, the economy is more liquid in the sense that there 
is more of the medium of exchange, but the economy is no wealthier than before.
The Money Multiplier 
The creation of money does not stop with First National Bank. Suppose the bor-
rower from First National uses the $90 to buy something from someone who then 
deposits the currency in Second National Bank. Here is the T-account for Second 
National Bank:
Second National Bank
Assets
Liabilities
Reserves
$ 9.00
Deposits
$90.00
Loans
81.00
After the deposit, this bank has liabilities of $90. If Second National also has a 
reserve ratio of 10 percent, it keeps assets of $9 in reserve and makes $81 in loans. 
In this way, Second National Bank creates an additional $81 of money. If this $81 
445
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

is eventually deposited in Third National Bank, which also has a reserve ratio of 
10 percent, this bank keeps $8.10 in reserve and makes $72.90 in loans. Here is the 
T-account for Third National Bank: 
Third National Bank
Assets
Liabilities
Reserves
$ 8.10
Deposits
$81.00
Loans
72.90
The process goes on and on. Each time that money is deposited and a bank loan 
is made, more money is created.
How much money is eventually created in this economy? Let’s add it up:
 
Original deposit 
= $100.00
 
First National lending 
= $ 90.00 [= .9 × $100.00]
 
Second National lending = $ 81.00 [= .9 × $90.00]
 
Third National lending 
= $ 72.90 [= .9 × $81.00]
 
• 
•
 
• 
•
 
• 
•
 
Total money supply 
= $1,000.00
It turns out that even though this process of money creation can continue forever, 
it does not create an infinite amount of money. If you laboriously add the infinite 
sequence of numbers in the preceding example, you find the $100 of reserves 
generates $1,000 of money. The amount of money the banking system generates 
with each dollar of reserves is called the money multiplier. In this imaginary 
economy, where the $100 of reserves generates $1,000 of money, the money 
multiplier is 10.
What determines the size of the money multiplier? It turns out that the 
answer is simple: The money multiplier is the reciprocal of the reserve ratio. If R 
is the reserve ratio for all banks in the economy, then each dollar of reserves 
generates 1/R dollars of money. In our example, R = 1/10, so the money mul-
tiplier is 10.
This reciprocal formula for the money multiplier makes sense. If a bank holds 
$1,000 in deposits, then a reserve ratio of 1/10 (10 percent) means that the bank 
must hold $100 in reserves. The money multiplier just turns this idea around: If 
the banking system as a whole holds a total of $100 in reserves, it can have only 
$1,000 in deposits. In other words, if R is the ratio of reserves to deposits at each 
bank (that is, the reserve ratio), then the ratio of deposits to reserves in the bank-
ing system (that is, the money multiplier) must be 1/R.
This formula shows how the amount of money banks create depends on the 
reserve ratio. If the reserve ratio were only 1/20 (5 percent), then the banking sys-
tem would have 20 times as much in deposits as in reserves, implying a money 
multiplier of 20. Each dollar of reserves would generate $20 of money. Similarly, 
if the reserve ratio were 1/4 (25 percent), deposits would be 4 times reserves, the 
money multiplier would be 4, and each dollar of reserves would generate $4 of 
money. Thus, the higher the reserve ratio, the less of each deposit banks loan out, and 
the smaller the money multiplier. In the special case of 100-percent-reserve banking, 
money multiplier
the amount of money the 
banking system generates 
with each dollar of 
reserves
446
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

the reserve ratio is 1, the money multiplier is 1, and banks do not make loans or 
create money.
Bank Capital, Leverage, and the Financial 
Crisis of 2008–2009
In the previous sections, we have seen a very simplified explanation of how banks 
work. The reality of modern banking, however, is a bit more complicated, and this 
complex reality played a leading role in the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. Before 
looking at that crisis, we need to learn a bit more about how banks actually function.
In the bank balance sheets you have seen so far, a bank accepts deposits and 
uses those deposits either to make loans or to hold reserves. More realistically, a 
bank gets financial resources not only from accepting deposits but also, like other 
companies, from issuing equity and debt. The resources that a bank obtains from 
issuing equity to its owners are called bank capital. A bank uses these financial 
resources in various ways to generate profit for its owners. It not only makes loans 
and holds reserves but also buys financial securities, such as stocks and bonds. 
Here is a more realistic example of a bank’s balance sheet:
More Realistic National Bank
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Reserves
$200
Deposits
$800
Loans
700
Debt
150
Securities
100
Capital (owners’ equity)
 50
On the right side of this balance sheet are the bank’s liabilities and capital (also 
known as owners’ equity). This bank obtained $50 of resources from its owners. It 
also took in $800 of deposits and issued $150 of debt. The total of $1,000 was put 
to use in three ways; these are listed on the left side of the balance sheet, which 
shows the bank’s assets. This bank held $200 in reserves, made $700 in bank loans, 
and used $100 to buy financial securities, such as government or corporate bonds. 
The bank decides how to allocate its resources among asset classes based on their 
risk and return, as well as on any regulations (such as reserve requirements) that 
restrict the bank’s choices. 
By the rules of accounting, the reserves, loans, and securities on the left side 
of the balance sheet must always equal, in total, the deposits, debt, and capital 
on the right side of the balance sheet. There is no magic in this equality. It occurs 
because the value of the owners’ equity is, by definition, the value of the bank’s 
assets (reserves, loans, and securities) minus the value of its liabilities (deposits 
and debt). Therefore, the left and right hand sides of the balance sheet always sum 
to the same total.
Many businesses in the economy rely on leverage, the use of borrowed money 
to supplement existing funds for investment purposes. Indeed, whenever anyone 
uses debt to finance an investment project, he is applying leverage. Leverage is 
particularly important for banks, however, because borrowing and lending are at 
the heart of what they do. To fully understand banking, therefore, it is crucial to 
understand how leverage works. 
The leverage ratio is the ratio of the bank’s total assets to bank capital. In this 
example, the leverage ratio is $1,000/$50, or 20. A leverage ratio of 20 means that 
bank capital
the resources a bank’s 
owners have put into the 
institution
leverage
the use of borrowed 
money to supplement 
existing funds for 
purposes of investment
leverage ratio
the ratio of assets to bank 
capital
447
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

for every dollar of capital that the bank owners have contributed, the bank has $20 
of assets. Of the $20 of assets, $19 are financed with borrowed money—either by 
taking in deposits or issuing debt.
You may have learned in a science class that a lever can amplify a force: A boul-
der that you cannot move with your arms alone will move more easily if you use 
a lever. A similar result occurs with bank leverage. To see how this works, let’s 
continue with this numerical example. Suppose that the bank’s assets were to rise 
in value by 5 percent because, say, some of the securities the bank was holding 
rose in price. Then the $1,000 of assets would now be worth $1,050. Because the 
depositors and debt holders are still owed $950, the bank capital rises from $50 to 
$100. Thus, when the leverage rate is 20, a 5-percent increase in the value of assets 
increases the owners’ equity by 100 percent.
The same principle works on the downside, but with troubling consequences. 
Suppose that some people who borrowed from the bank default on their loans, 
reducing the value of the bank’s assets by 5 percent, to $950. Because the deposi-
tors and debt holders have the legal right to be paid before the bank owners, the 
value of the owners’ equity falls to zero. Thus, when the leverage ratio is 20, a 
5-percent fall in the value of the bank assets leads to a 100-percent fall in bank 
capital. If the value of assets were to fall by more than 5 percent, the bank’s assets 
would fall below its liabilities. In this case, the bank would be insolvent, and it 
would be unable to pay off its debt holders and depositors in full.
Bank regulators require banks to hold a certain amount of capital. The goal of 
such a capital requirement is to ensure that banks will be able to pay off their 
depositors (without having to resort to government-provided deposit insurance 
funds). The amount of capital required depends on the kind of assets a bank 
holds. If the bank holds safe assets such as government bonds, regulators require 
less capital than if the bank holds risky assets such as loans to borrowers whose 
credit is of dubious quality.
In 2008 and 2009, many banks found themselves with too little capital after 
they had incurred losses on some of their assets—specifically, mortgage loans 
and securities backed by mortgage loans. The shortage of capital induced the 
banks to reduce their lending, a phenomenon sometimes called a credit crunch, 
which in turn contributed to a severe downturn in economic activity. (This event 
is discussed more fully in Chapter   .) To address this problem, the U.S. Treasury, 
working together with the Federal Reserve, put many billions of dollars of public 
funds into the banking system to increase the amount of bank capital. As a result, 
it temporarily made the U.S. taxpayer a part owner of many banks. The goal of 
this unusual policy was to recapitalize the banking system so that bank lending 
could return to a more normal level, which in fact occurred by late 2009.
The Fed’s Tools of Monetary Control
As we have already discussed, the Federal Reserve is responsible for controlling 
the supply of money in the economy. Now that we understand how banking 
works, we are in a better position to understand how the Fed carries out this job. 
Because banks create money in a system of fractional-reserve banking, the Fed’s 
control of the money supply is indirect. When the Fed decides to change the 
money supply, it must consider how its actions will work through the banking 
system.
capital requirement
a government regulation 
specifying a minimum 
amount of bank capital
448
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
23

The Fed has a variety of tools in its monetary toolbox. We can group those tools 
into two groups: those that influence the quantity of reserves and those that influ-
ence the reserve ratio and thereby the money multiplier.
How the Fed Influences the Quantity of Reserves
The first way the Fed can change the money supply is by changing the quantity of 
reserves. The Fed alters the quantity of reserves in the economy either by buying 
or selling bonds in open-market operations or by making loans to banks (or by 
some combination of the two). Let’s consider each of these in turn.
Open-Market Operations As we noted earlier, the Fed conducts open-market 
operations when it buys or sells government bonds. To increase the money sup-
ply, the Fed instructs its bond traders at the New York Fed to buy bonds from 
the public in the nation’s bond markets. The dollars the Fed pays for the bonds 
increase the number of dollars in the economy. Some of these new dollars are held 
as currency, and some are deposited in banks. Each new dollar held as currency 
increases the money supply by exactly $1. Each new dollar deposited in a bank 
increases the money supply by more than a dollar because it increases reserves 
and, thereby, the amount of money that the banking system can create.
To reduce the money supply, the Fed does just the opposite: It sells government 
bonds to the public in the nation’s bond markets. The public pays for these bonds 
with its holdings of currency and bank deposits, directly reducing the amount 
of money in circulation. In addition, as people make withdrawals from banks to 
buy these bonds from the Fed, banks find themselves with a smaller quantity of 
reserves. In response, banks reduce the amount of lending, and the process of 
money creation reverses itself.
Open-market operations are easy to conduct. In fact, the Fed’s purchases and 
sales of government bonds in the nation’s bond markets are similar to the trans-
actions that any individual might undertake for his own portfolio. (Of course, 
when an individual buys or sells a bond, money changes hands, but the amount 
of money in circulation remains the same.) In addition, the Fed can use open-
market operations to change the money supply by a small or large amount on 
any day without major changes in laws or bank regulations. Therefore, open-
market operations are the tool of monetary policy that the Fed uses most often. 
Fed Lending to Banks The Fed can also increase the quantity of reserves 
in the economy by lending reserves to banks. Banks borrow from the Fed when 
they feel they do not have enough reserves on hand, either to satisfy bank 
regulators, meet depositor withdrawals, make new loans, or for some other 
business reason. 
There are various ways banks can borrow from the Fed. Traditionally, banks 
borrow from the Fed’s discount window and pay an interest rate on that loan called 
the discount rate. When the Fed makes such a loan to a bank, the banking system 
has more reserves than it otherwise would, and these additional reserves allow 
the banking system to create more money.
The Fed can alter the money supply by changing the discount rate. A higher 
discount rate discourages banks from borrowing reserves from the Fed. Thus, an 
increase in the discount rate reduces the quantity of reserves in the banking sys-
tem, which in turn reduces the money supply. Conversely, a lower discount rate 
encourages banks to borrow from the Fed, increasing the quantity of reserves and 
the money supply.
open-market 
operations
the purchase and sale of 
U.S. government bonds 
by the Fed
discount rate
the interest rate on the 
loans that the Fed makes 
to banks
449
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

In recent years, the Federal Reserve has set up new mechanisms for banks 
to borrow from the Fed. For example, under the Term Auction Facility, the Fed 
sets a quantity of funds it wants to lend to banks, and eligible banks then bid to 
borrow those funds. The loans go to the highest eligible bidders—that is, to the 
banks that have acceptable collateral and are offering to pay the highest interest 
rate. Unlike at the discount window, where the Fed sets the price of a loan and 
the banks determine the quantity of borrowing, at the Term Auction Facility 
the Fed sets the quantity of borrowing and competitive bidding among banks 
determines the price. The more funds the Fed makes available through this and 
similar facilities, the greater the quantity of reserves and the larger the money 
supply.
The Fed uses such lending not only to control the money supply but also to 
help financial institutions when they are in trouble. For example, when the stock 
market crashed by 22 percent on October 19, 1987, many Wall Street brokerage 
firms found themselves temporarily in need of funds to finance the high vol-
ume of stock trading. The next morning, before the stock market opened, Fed 
Chairman Alan Greenspan announced the Fed’s “readiness to serve as a source of 
liquidity to support the economic and financial system.” Many economists believe 
that Greenspan’s reaction to the stock crash was an important reason it had few 
repercussions.
Similarly, in 2008 and 2009, a fall in housing prices throughout the United 
States led to a sharp rise in the number of homeowners defaulting on their mort-
gage loans, and many financial institutions holding those mortgages ran into 
trouble. In an attempt to prevent these events from having broader economic 
ramifications, the Fed provided many billions of dollars of loans to financial insti-
tutions in distress.
How the Fed Influences the Reserve Ratio
In addition to influencing the quantity of reserves, the Fed changes the money 
supply by influencing the reserve ratio and thereby the money multiplier. 
The Fed can influence the reserve ratio either through regulating the quantity 
of reserves banks must hold or through the interest rate that the Fed pays 
banks on their reserves. Again, we consider each of these monetary policy tools 
in turn.
Reserve Requirements One way the Fed can influence the reserve ratio is by 
altering reserve requirements, the regulations that set the minimum amount of 
reserves that banks must hold against their deposits. Reserve requirements influ-
ence how much money the banking system can create with each dollar of reserves. 
An increase in reserve requirements means that banks must hold more reserves 
and, therefore, can loan out less of each dollar that is deposited. As a result, 
an increase in reserve requirements raises the reserve ratio, lowers the money 
multiplier, and decreases the money supply. Conversely, a decrease in reserve 
requirements lowers the reserve ratio, raises the money multiplier, and increases 
the money supply.
The Fed uses changes in reserve requirements only rarely because these 
changes disrupt the business of banking. When the Fed increases reserve 
requirements, for instance, some banks find themselves short of reserves, 
even though they have seen no change in deposits. As a result, they have to 
reserve 
requirements
regulations on the 
minimum amount of 
reserves that banks must 
hold against deposits
450
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

curtail lending until they build their level of reserves to the new required 
level. Moreover, in recent years, this particular tool has become less effec-
tive because many banks hold excess reserves (that is, more reserves than are 
required).
Paying Interest on Reserves Traditionally, banks did not earn any interest 
on the reserves they held. In October 2008, however, the Fed began paying inter-
est on reserves. That is, when a bank holds reserves on deposit at the Fed, the Fed 
now pays the bank interest on those deposits. This change gives the Fed another 
tool with which to influence the economy. The higher the interest rate on reserves, 
the more reserves banks will choose to hold. Thus, an increase in the interest rate 
on reserves will tend to increase the reserve ratio, lower the money multiplier, 
and lower the money supply. Because the Fed has paid interest on reserves for a 
relatively short time, it is not yet clear how important this new instrument will be 
in the conduct of monetary policy.
Problems in Controlling the Money Supply
The Fed’s various tools—open-market operations, bank lending, reserve require-
ments, and interest on reserves—have powerful effects on the money supply. Yet 
the Fed’s control of the money supply is not precise. The Fed must wrestle with 
two problems, each of which arises because much of the money supply is created 
by our system of fractional-reserve banking. 
The first problem is that the Fed does not control the amount of money that 
households choose to hold as deposits in banks. The more money households 
deposit, the more reserves banks have, and the more money the banking system 
can create. The less money households deposit, the less reserves banks have, and 
the less money the banking system can create. To see why this is a problem, sup-
pose that one day people begin to lose confidence in the banking system and, 
therefore, decide to withdraw deposits and hold more currency. When this hap-
pens, the banking system loses reserves and creates less money. The money sup-
ply falls, even without any Fed action.
The second problem of monetary control is that the Fed does not control 
the amount that bankers choose to lend. When money is deposited in a bank, 
it creates more money only when the bank loans it out. Because banks can 
choose to hold excess reserves instead, the Fed cannot be sure how much 
money the banking system will create. For instance, suppose that one day 
bankers become more cautious about economic conditions and decide to make 
fewer loans and hold greater reserves. In this case, the banking system cre-
ates less money than it otherwise would. Because of the bankers’ decision, the 
money supply falls.
Hence, in a system of fractional-reserve banking, the amount of money in the 
economy depends in part on the behavior of depositors and bankers. Because the 
Fed cannot control or perfectly predict this behavior, it cannot perfectly control 
the money supply. Yet if the Fed is vigilant, these problems need not be large. 
The Fed collects data on deposits and reserves from banks every week, so it is 
quickly aware of any changes in depositor or banker behavior. It can, therefore, 
respond to these changes and keep the money supply close to whatever level it 
chooses.
451
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

Bank Runs and the Money Supply
Most likely you have never witnessed a bank run in real life, but you may have 
seen one depicted in movies such as Mary Poppins or It’s a Wonderful Life. A bank 
run occurs when depositors suspect that a bank may go bankrupt and, therefore, 
“run” to the bank to withdraw their deposits. The United States has not seen 
a major bank run in recent history, but in the United Kingdom, a bank called 
Northern Rock experienced a run in 2007 and, as a result, was eventually taken 
over by the government.
 
Bank runs are a problem for banks under fractional-reserve banking. Because a 
bank holds only a fraction of its deposits in reserve, it cannot satisfy withdrawal 
requests from all depositors. Even if the bank is in fact solvent (meaning that its 
assets exceed its liabilities), it will not have enough cash on hand to allow all 
depositors immediate access to all of their money. When a run occurs, the bank 
is forced to close its doors until some bank loans are repaid or until some lender 
of last resort (such as the Fed) provides it with the currency it needs to satisfy 
depositors.
 
Bank runs complicate the control of the money supply. An important exam-
ple of this problem occurred during the Great Depression in the early 1930s. 
After a wave of bank runs and bank closings, households and bankers became 
more cautious. Households withdrew their deposits from banks, preferring to 
hold their money in the form of currency. This decision reversed the process 
of money creation, as bankers responded to falling reserves by reducing bank 
loans. At the same time, bankers increased their reserve ratios so that they 
would have enough cash on hand to meet their depositors’ demands in any 
future bank runs. The higher reserve ratio reduced the money multiplier, which 
further reduced the money supply. From 1929 to 1933, the money supply fell 
by 28 percent, without the Federal Reserve taking any deliberate contraction-
ary action. Many economists point to this massive fall in the money supply to 
explain the high unemployment and falling prices that prevailed during this 
period. (In future chapters, we examine the mechanisms by which changes in 
the money supply affect unemployment and prices.)
 
Today, bank runs are not a major problem for the U.S. banking system or the 
Fed. The federal government now guarantees the safety of deposits at most banks, 
primarily through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Depositors 
do not run on their banks because they are confident that, even if their bank goes 
bankrupt, the FDIC will make good on the deposits. The policy of government 
deposit insurance has costs: Bankers whose deposits are guaranteed may have too 
little incentive to avoid bad risks when making loans. But one benefit of deposit 
insurance is a more stable banking system. As a result, most people see bank runs 
only in the movies.  ■
The Federal Funds Rate
If you read about U.S. monetary policy in the newspaper, you will find much 
discussion of the federal funds rate. This raises several questions:
Q: What is the federal funds rate?
A:  The federal funds rate is the short-term interest rate that banks charge one 
another for loans. If one bank finds itself short of reserves while another 
federal funds rate
the interest rate at which 
banks make overnight 
loans to one another
A not-so-wonderful bank 
run
© RKO/THE KOBAL COLLECTION/PICTURE DESK
452
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

bank has excess reserves, the second bank can lend some reserves to the 
first. The loans are temporary—typically overnight. The price of the loan is 
the federal funds rate.
Q: How is the federal funds rate different from the discount rate?
A:  The discount rate is the interest rate banks pay to borrow directly from the 
Federal Reserve through the discount window. Borrowing reserves from 
another bank in the federal funds market is an alternative to borrowing 
reserves from the Fed, and a bank short of reserves will typically do which-
ever is cheaper. In practice, the discount rate and the federal funds rate 
move closely together.
Q: Does the federal funds rate matter only for banks?
A:  Not at all. While only banks borrow directly in the federal funds market, 
the economic impact of this market is much broader. Because different 
parts of the financial system are highly interconnected, interest rates on 
different kinds of loans are strongly correlated with one another. So when 
the federal funds rate rises or falls, other interest rates often move in the 
same direction.
Q: What does the Federal Reserve have to do with the federal funds rate?
A:  In recent years, the Federal Reserve has set a target goal for the federal 
funds rate. When the Federal Open Market Committee meets approximately 
every six weeks, it decides whether to raise or lower that target. 
Q: How can the Fed make the federal funds rate hit the target it sets?
A:  Although the actual federal funds rate is set by supply and demand in 
the market for loans among banks, the Fed can use open-market opera-
tions to influence that market. For example, when the Fed buys bonds in 
 open-market operations, it injects reserves into the banking system. With 
more reserves in the system, fewer banks find themselves in need of bor-
rowing reserves to meet reserve requirements. The fall in demand for bor-
rowing reserves decreases the price of such borrowing, which is the federal 
funds rate. Conversely, when the Fed sells bonds and withdraws reserves 
from the banking system, more banks find themselves short of reserves, 
and they bid up the price of borrowing reserves. Thus, open-market pur-
chases lower the federal funds rate, and open-market sales raise the federal 
funds rate.
Q: But don’t these open-market operations affect the money supply?
A:  Yes, absolutely. When the Fed announces a change in the federal funds 
rate, it is committing itself to the open-market operations necessary to 
make that change happen, and these open-market operations will alter 
the supply of money. Decisions by the FOMC to change the target for the 
federal funds rate are also decisions to change the money supply. They are 
two sides of the same coin. Other things equal, a decrease in the target for 
the federal funds rate means an expansion in the money supply, and an 
increase in the target for the federal funds rate means a contraction in the 
money supply.
QUICK QUIZ Describe how banks create money. • If the Fed wanted to use all three 
of its policy tools to decrease the money supply, what would it do?
453
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM

 Bernanke on the Fed’s Toolbox
During the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009, the Federal Reserve helped 
rescue a variety of banks and other financial institutions and, in the 
process, substantially expanded the quantity of bank reserves. Most of 
these newly created reserves were held as excess reserves by the banking 
system. In this article, the chairman of the Federal Reserve explains the 
Fed’s plans to unwind the process in the aftermath of these events.
in the news
454
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
Text not available due to copyright restrictions
                                                

455
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM
Text not available due to copyright restrictions
                                                                

SUMMARY
Conclusion
Some years ago, a book made the best-seller list with the title Secrets of the 
Temple: How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country. Although no doubt an exag-
geration, this title did highlight the important role of the monetary system 
in our daily lives. Whenever we buy or sell anything, we are relying on the 
extraordinarily useful social convention called “money.” Now that we know 
what money is and what determines its supply, we can discuss how changes 
in the quantity of money affect the economy. We begin to address that topic in 
the next chapter.
SUMMARY
SUMMARY
• The term money refers to assets that people regu-
larly use to buy goods and services.
• Money serves three functions. As a medium 
of exchange, it provides the item used to make 
transactions. As a unit of account, it provides the 
way in which prices and other economic values 
are recorded. As a store of value, it provides a 
way of transferring purchasing power from the 
present to the future.
• Commodity money, such as gold, is money that 
has intrinsic value: It would be valued even if 
it were not used as money. Fiat money, such as 
paper dollars, is money without intrinsic value: It 
would be worthless if it were not used as money.
• In the U.S. economy, money takes the form of 
currency and various types of bank deposits, 
such as checking accounts. 
• The Federal Reserve, the central bank of the 
United States, is responsible for regulating the 
U.S. monetary system. The Fed chairman is 
appointed by the president and confirmed by 
Congress every four years. The chairman is 
the lead member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee, which meets about every six weeks 
to consider changes in monetary policy.
• Bank depositors provide resources to banks 
by depositing their funds into bank accounts. 
These deposits are part of a bank’s liabilities. 
Bank owners also provide resources (called 
bank capital) for the bank. Because of leverage 
(the use of borrowed funds for investment), a 
small change in the value of a bank’s assets can 
lead to a large change in the value of the bank’s 
capital. To protect depositors, bank regula-
tors require banks to hold a certain minimum 
amount of capital. 
• The Fed controls the money supply primarily 
through open-market operations: The purchase 
of government bonds increases the money sup-
ply, and the sale of government bonds decreases 
the money supply. The Fed also uses other tools 
to control the money supply. It can expand the 
money supply by decreasing the discount rate, 
increasing its lending to banks, lowering reserve 
requirements, or decreasing the interest rate on 
reserves. It can contract the money supply by 
increasing the discount rate, decreasing its lend-
ing to banks, raising reserve requirements, or 
increasing the interest rate on reserves.
• When individuals deposit money in banks and 
banks loan out some of these deposits, the quan-
tity of money in the economy increases. Because 
the banking system influences the money supply 
in this way, the Fed’s control of the money sup-
ply is imperfect.
• The Federal Reserve has in recent years set 
monetary policy by choosing a target for the 
federal funds rate, a short-term interest rate 
at which banks make loans to one another. As 
the Fed achieves its target, it adjusts the money 
supply.
456
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. What distinguishes money from other assets in 
the economy?
 2. What is commodity money? What is fiat 
money? Which kind do we use?
 3. What are demand deposits and why should 
they be included in the stock of money?
 4. Who is responsible for setting monetary policy 
in the United States? How is this group chosen?
 5. If the Fed wants to increase the money supply 
with open-market operations, what does it do?
 6. Why don’t banks hold 100 percent reserves? 
How is the amount of reserves banks hold 
related to the amount of money the banking 
system creates?
 7. Bank A has a leverage ratio of 10, while Bank B 
has a leverage ratio of 20. Similar losses on bank 
loans at the two banks cause the value of their 
assets to fall by 7 percent. Which bank shows a 
larger change in bank capital? Does either bank 
remain solvent? Explain.
 8. What is the discount rate? What happens to the 
money supply when the Fed raises the discount 
rate?
 9. What are reserve requirements? What happens 
to the money supply when the Fed raises 
reserve requirements?
 10. Why can’t the Fed control the money supply 
perfectly?
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
O
S 
 
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. What distinguishes money from other assets in
the economy?
 2. What is commodity money? What is fiat 
money? Which kind do we use?
 3. What are demand deposits and why should 
they be included in the stock of money?
 4. Who is responsible for setting monetary policy 
in the United States? How is this group chosen?
 5. If the Fed wants to increase the money supply 
with open-market operations, what does it do?
 6. Why don’t banks hold 100 percent reserves? 
How is the amount of reserves banks hold
related to the amount of money the banking 
system creates?
 7. Bank A has a leverage ratio of 10, while Bank B 
has a leverage ratio of 20. Similar losses on bank
loans at the two banks cause the value of their
assets to fall by 7 percent. Which bank shows a
larger change in bank capital? Does either bank
remain solvent? Explain.
 8. What is the discount rate? What happens to the
money supply when the Fed raises the discount
rate?
 9. What are reserve requirements? What happens 
to the money supply when the Fed raises
reserve requirements?
 10. Why can’t the Fed control the money supply
perfectly?
 CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Which of the following are money in the U.S. 
economy? Which are not? Explain your answers 
by discussing each of the three functions of money. 
a. a U.S. penny
b. a Mexican peso
c. a Picasso painting
d. a plastic credit card
 2. Your uncle repays a $100 loan from Tenth 
National Bank (TNB) by writing a $100 check 
from his TNB checking account. Use T-accounts 
to show the effect of this transaction on your 
uncle and on TNB. Has your uncle’s wealth 
changed? Explain.
 3. Beleaguered State Bank (BSB) holds $250 million 
in deposits and maintains a reserve ratio of 
10 percent.
a. Show a T-account for BSB.
b. Now suppose that BSB’s largest depositor 
withdraws $10 million in cash from her 
account. If BSB decides to restore its reserve 
ratio by reducing the amount of loans 
outstanding, show its new T-account.
c. Explain what effect BSB’s action will have on 
other banks.
d. Why might it be difficult for BSB to take the 
action described in part (b)? Discuss another 
way for BSB to return to its original reserve 
ratio.
 4. You take $100 you had kept under your 
mattress and deposit it in your bank account. If 
this $100 stays in the banking system as reserves 
and if banks hold reserves equal to 10 percent 
457
CHAPTER 21    THE MONETARY SYSTEM
money, p. 436
medium of exchange, p. 437
unit of account, p. 437
store of value, p. 437
liquidity, p. 437
commodity money, p. 437
fiat money, p. 438
currency, p. 439
demand deposits, p. 439
Federal Reserve (Fed), p. 441
central bank, p. 441
money supply, p. 442
monetary policy, p. 442
reserves, p. 444
fractional-reserve banking, p. 444
reserve ratio, p. 444
money multiplier, p. 446
bank capital, p. 447
leverage, p. 447
leverage ratio, p. 447
capital requirement, p. 448
open-market operations, p. 449
discount rate, p. 449
reserve requirements, p. 450
federal funds rate, p. 452

of deposits, by how much does the total amount 
of deposits in the banking system increase? By 
how much does the money supply increase? 
 5. Happy Bank starts with $200 in bank capital. 
It then takes in $800 in deposits. It keeps 
12.5 percent (1/8th) of deposits in reserve. It 
uses the rest of its assets to make bank loans.
a. Show the balance sheet of Happy Bank.
b. What is Happy Bank’s leverage ratio?
c. Suppose that 10 percent of the borrowers 
from Happy Bank default and these bank 
loans become worthless. Show the bank’s 
new balance sheet.
d. By what percentage do the bank’s total assets 
decline? By what percentage does the bank’s 
capital decline? Which change is larger? 
Why?
 6. The Federal Reserve conducts a $10 million 
open-market purchase of government bonds. 
If the required reserve ratio is 10 percent, what 
is the largest possible increase in the money 
supply that could result? Explain. What is the 
smallest possible increase? Explain.
 7. Assume that the reserve requirement is 
5 percent. All other things equal, will the money 
supply expand more if the Federal Reserve buys 
$2,000 worth of bonds or if someone deposits 
in a bank $2,000 that he had been hiding in his 
cookie jar? If one creates more, how much more 
does it create? Support your thinking.
 8. Suppose that the T-account for First National 
Bank is as follows:
Assets
Liabilities
Reserves
$100,000
Deposits 
$500,000
Loans
 400,000
a. If the Fed requires banks to hold 5 percent 
of deposits as reserves, how much in excess 
reserves does First National now hold?
b. Assume that all other banks hold only the 
required amount of reserves. If First National 
decides to reduce its reserves to only the 
required amount, by how much would the 
economy’s money supply increase?
 9. Suppose that the reserve requirement for 
checking deposits is 10 percent and that banks 
do not hold any excess reserves.
a. If the Fed sells $1 million of government 
bonds, what is the effect on the economy’s 
reserves and money supply?
b. Now suppose the Fed lowers the reserve 
requirement to 5 percent, but banks choose to 
hold another 5 percent of deposits as excess 
reserves. Why might banks do so? What is 
the overall change in the money multiplier 
and the money supply as a result of these 
actions?
 10. Assume that the banking system has total 
reserves of $100 billion. Assume also that 
required reserves are 10 percent of checking 
deposits and that banks hold no excess reserves 
and households hold no currency.
a. What is the money multiplier? What is the 
money supply?
b. If the Fed now raises required reserves to 
20 percent of deposits, what are the changes 
in reserves and in the money supply?
 11. Assume that the reserve requirement is 
20 percent. Also assume that banks do not 
hold excess reserves and there is no cash held 
by the public. The Federal Reserve decides 
that it wants to expand the money supply by 
$40 million dollars. 
a. If the Fed is using open-market operations, 
will it buy or sell bonds?
b. What quantity of bonds does the Fed need to 
buy or sell to accomplish the goal? Explain 
your reasoning.
 12. The economy of Elmendyn contains 2,000 
$1 bills.
a. If people hold all money as currency, what is 
the quantity of money?
b. If people hold all money as demand deposits 
and banks maintain 100 percent reserves, 
what is the quantity of money?
c. If people hold equal amounts of currency 
and demand deposits and banks maintain 
100 percent reserves, what is the quantity of 
money?
d. If people hold all money as demand deposits 
and banks maintain a reserve ratio of 10 
percent, what is the quantity of money?
e. If people hold equal amounts of currency 
and demand deposits and banks maintain 
a reserve ratio of 10 percent, what is the 
quantity of money?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
458
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

T
oday, if you want to buy an ice-cream cone, you need at least a couple 
of dollars, but that has not always been the case. In the 1930s, my grand-
mother ran a sweet shop in Trenton, New Jersey, where she sold ice-
cream cones in two sizes. A cone with a small scoop of ice cream cost 
three cents. Hungry customers could buy a large scoop for a nickel.
You may not be surprised at the increase in the price of ice cream. In our 
econo my, most prices tend to rise over time. This increase in the overall level 
of prices is called inflation. Earlier in the book, we examined how economists 
measure the inflation rate as the percentage change in the consumer price index 
(CPI), the GDP deflator, or some other index of the overall price level. These price 
indexes show that, over the past 70 years, prices have risen on average about 4 
percent per year. Accumulated over so many years, a 4 percent annual inflation 
rate leads to a sixteenfold increase in the price level. 
Money Growth 
    and Infl ation
22
459

Inflation may seem natural and inevitable to a person who grew up in the 
United States during recent decades, but in fact, it is not inevitable at all. There 
were long periods in the 19th century during which most prices fell—a phenome-
non called deflation. The average level of prices in the U.S. economy was 23 percent 
lower in 1896 than in 1880, and this deflation was a major issue in the presidential 
election of 1896. Farmers, who had accumulated large debts, suffered when the 
fall in crop prices reduced their incomes and thus their ability to pay off their 
debts. They advocated government policies to reverse the deflation.
Although inflation has been the norm in more recent history, there has been 
substantial variation in the rate at which prices rise. During the 1990s, prices rose 
at an average rate of about 2 percent per year. By contrast, in the 1970s, prices rose 
by 7 percent per year, which meant a doubling of the price level over the decade. 
The public often views such high rates of inflation as a major economic problem. 
In fact, when President Jimmy Carter ran for reelection in 1980, challenger Ronald 
Reagan pointed to high inflation as one of the failures of Carter’s economic policy. 
International data show an even broader range of inflation experiences. In 2009, 
while the U.S. inflation rate was about 2 percent, inflation was –1.7 percent in 
Japan, 9 percent in Russia, and 25 percent in Venezuela. And even the high infla-
tion rates in Russia and Venezuela are moderate by some standards. In February 
2008, the central bank of Zimbabwe announced the inflation rate in its economy 
had reached 24,000 percent; some independent estimates put the figure even 
higher. An extraordinarily high rate of inflation such as this is called hyperinflation. 
What determines whether an economy experiences inflation and, if so, how 
much? This chapter answers this question by developing the quantity theory of 
money. Chapter 1 summarized this theory as one of the Ten Principles of Economics: 
Prices rise when the government prints too much money. This insight has a long 
and venerable tradition among economists. The quantity theory was discussed by 
the famous 18th-century philosopher and economist David Hume and was advo-
cated more recently by the prominent economist Milton Friedman. This theory 
can explain moderate inflations, such as those we have experienced in the United 
States, as well as hyperinflations. 
After developing a theory of inflation, we turn to a related question: Why is 
inflation a problem? At first glance, the answer to this question may seem obvi-
ous: Inflation is a problem because people don’t like it. In the 1970s, when the 
United States experienced a relatively high rate of inflation, opinion polls placed 
inflation as the most important issue facing the nation. President Ford echoed 
this sentiment in 1974 when he called inflation “public enemy number one.” Ford 
wore a “WIN” button on his lapel—for Whip Inflation Now.
But what, exactly, are the costs that inflation imposes on a society? The answer 
may surprise you. Identifying the various costs of inflation is not as straight-
forward as it first appears. As a result, although all economists decry hyperinfla-
tion, some economists argue that the costs of moderate inflation are not nearly as 
large as the public believes.
The Classical Theory of Inflation
We begin our study of inflation by developing the quantity theory of money. This 
theory is often called “classical” because it was developed by some of the earliest 
economic thinkers. Most economists today rely on this theory to explain the long-
run determinants of the price level and the inflation rate.
460
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

The Level of Prices and the Value of Money
Suppose we observe over some period of time the price of an ice-cream cone ris-
ing from a nickel to a dollar. What conclusion should we draw from the fact that 
people are willing to give up so much more money in exchange for a cone? It is 
possible that people have come to enjoy ice cream more (perhaps because some 
chemist has developed a miraculous new flavor). Yet that is probably not the case. 
It is more likely that people’s enjoyment of ice cream has stayed roughly the same 
and that, over time, the money used to buy ice cream has become less valuable. 
Indeed, the first insight about inflation is that it is more about the value of money 
than about the value of goods. 
This insight helps point the way toward a theory of inflation. When the con-
sumer price index and other measures of the price level rise, commentators are 
often tempted to look at the many individual prices that make up these price 
indexes: “The CPI rose by 3 percent last month, led by a 20 percent rise in the 
price of coffee and a 30 percent rise in the price of heating oil.” Although this 
approach does contain some interesting information about what’s happening in 
the economy, it also misses a key point: Inflation is an economy-wide phenome-
non that concerns, first and foremost, the value of the economy’s medium of 
exchange. 
The economy’s overall price level can be viewed in two ways. So far, we have 
viewed the price level as the price of a basket of goods and services. When the 
price level rises, people have to pay more for the goods and services they buy. 
Alternatively, we can view the price level as a measure of the value of money. A 
rise in the price level means a lower value of money because each dollar in your 
wallet now buys a smaller quantity of goods and services.
It may help to express these ideas mathematically. Suppose P is the price level 
as measured, for instance, by the consumer price index or the GDP deflator. Then 
P measures the number of dollars needed to buy a basket of goods and services. 
Now turn this idea around: The quantity of goods and services that can be bought 
with $1 equals 1/P. In other words, if P is the price of goods and services mea-
sured in terms of money, 1/P is the value of money measured in terms of goods 
and services. 
This mathematics is simplest to understand in an economy that produces only 
a single good, say, ice-cream cones. In that case, P would be the price of a cone. 
When the price of a cone (P) is $2, then the value of a dollar (1/P) is half a cone. 
When the price (P) rises to $3, the value of a dollar (1/P) falls to a third of a 
cone. The actual economy produces thousands of goods and services, so we use a 
price index rather than the price of a single good. But the logic remains the same: 
When the overall price level rises, the value of money falls.
Money Supply, Money Demand, and 
Monetary Equilibrium
What determines the value of money? The answer to this question, like many 
in economics, is supply and demand. Just as the supply and demand for 
bananas determines the price of bananas, the supply and demand for money 
determines the value of money. Thus, our next step in developing the quantity 
theory of money is to consider the determinants of money supply and money 
demand.
First consider money supply. In the preceding chapter, we discussed how the 
Federal Reserve, together with the banking system, determines the supply of 
money. When the Fed sells bonds in open-market operations, it receives dollars 
“So what’s it going to 
be? The same size as last 
year or the same price as 
last year?”
© FRANK MODELL. THE NEW YORKER 
COLLECTION/WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM. 
461
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

in exchange and contracts the money supply. When the Fed buys government 
bonds, it pays out dollars and expands the money supply. In addition, if any of 
these dollars are deposited in banks which hold some as reserves and loan out the 
rest, the money multiplier swings into action, and these open-market operations 
can have an even greater effect on the money supply. For our purposes in this 
chapter, we ignore the complications introduced by the banking system and sim-
ply take the quantity of money supplied as a policy variable that the Fed controls.
Now consider money demand. Most fundamentally, the demand for money 
reflects how much wealth people want to hold in liquid form. Many factors influ-
ence the quantity of money demanded. The amount of currency that people hold 
in their wallets, for instance, depends on how much they rely on credit cards and 
on whether an automatic teller machine is easy to find. And as we will emphasize 
in Chapter   , the quantity of money demanded depends on the interest rate that 
a person could earn by using the money to buy an interest-bearing bond rather 
than leaving it in a wallet or low-interest checking account.
Although many variables affect the demand for money, one variable stands 
out in importance: the average level of prices in the economy. People hold money 
because it is the medium of exchange. Unlike other assets, such as bonds or stocks, 
people can use money to buy the goods and services on their shopping lists. How 
much money they choose to hold for this purpose depends on the prices of those 
goods and services. The higher prices are, the more money the typical transaction 
requires, and the more money people will choose to hold in their wallets and 
checking accounts. That is, a higher price level (a lower value of money) increases 
the quantity of money demanded.
What ensures that the quantity of money the Fed supplies balances the quantity 
of money people demand? The answer, it turns out, depends on the time horizon 
being considered. Later in this book, we examine the short-run answer and learn 
that interest rates play a key role. In the long run, however, the answer is differ-
ent and much simpler. In the long run, the overall level of prices adjusts to the level at 
which the demand for money equals the supply. If the price level is above the equilib-
rium level, people will want to hold more money than the Fed has created, so the 
price level must fall to balance supply and demand. If the price level is below the 
equilibrium level, people will want to hold less money than the Fed has created, 
and the price level must rise to balance supply and demand. At the equilibrium 
price level, the quantity of money that people want to hold exactly balances the 
quantity of money supplied by the Fed.
Figure 1 illustrates these ideas. The horizontal axis of this graph shows the 
quantity of money. The left vertical axis shows the value of money 1/P, and the 
right vertical axis shows the price level P. Notice that the price-level axis on 
the right is inverted: A low price level is shown near the top of this axis, and a 
high price level is shown near the bottom. This inverted axis illustrates that when 
the value of money is high (as shown near the top of the left axis), the price level 
is low (as shown near the top of the right axis).
The two curves in this figure are the supply and demand curves for money. The 
supply curve is vertical because the Fed has fixed the quantity of money avail-
able. The demand curve for money is downward sloping, indicating that when 
the value of money is low (and the price level is high), people demand a larger 
quantity of it to buy goods and services. At the equilibrium, shown in the figure 
as point A, the quantity of money demanded balances the quantity of money 
supplied. This equilibrium of money supply and money demand determines the 
value of money and the price level. 
24
462
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

How the Supply and 
Demand for Money 
Determine the 
Equilibrium Price Level
Figure 1
The horizontal axis shows the quantity of money. The left vertical axis shows the value 
of money, and the right vertical axis shows the price level. The supply curve for money 
is vertical because the quantity of money supplied is fixed by the Fed. The demand 
curve for money is downward sloping because people want to hold a larger quantity 
of money when each dollar buys less. At the equilibrium, point A, the value of money 
(on the left axis) and the price level (on the right axis) have adjusted to bring the 
quantity of money supplied and the quantity of money demanded into balance.
The Effects of a Monetary Injection
Let’s now consider the effects of a change in monetary policy. To do so, imagine 
that the economy is in equilibrium and then, suddenly, the Fed doubles the sup-
ply of money by printing some dollar bills and dropping them around the country 
from helicopters. (Or less dramatically and more realistically, the Fed could inject 
money into the economy by buying some government bonds from the public in 
open-market operations.) What happens after such a monetary injection? How 
does the new equilibrium compare to the old one?
Figure 2 shows what happens. The monetary injection shifts the supply 
curve to the right from MS1 to MS2, and the equilibrium moves from point A to 
point B. As a result, the value of money (shown on the left axis) decreases from 
½ to ¼, and the equilibrium price level (shown on the right axis) increases from 
2 to 4. In other words, when an increase in the money supply makes dollars 
more plentiful, the result is an increase in the price level that makes each dollar 
less valuable.
This explanation of how the price level is determined and why it might change 
over time is called the quantity theory of money. According to the quantity 
theory, the quantity of money available in an economy determines the value of 
money, and growth in the quantity of money is the primary cause of inflation. As 
quantity theory of 
money
a theory asserting that 
the quantity of money 
available determines 
the price level and that 
the growth rate in the 
quantity of money 
available determines the 
inflation rate
Quantity ﬁxed
by the Fed
Quantity of
Money
Value of
Money, 1/P
Price 
Level, P
A
Money supply
0
1
(Low)
(High)
(High)
(Low)
1/2
1/4
3/4
1
1.33
2
4
Equilibrium
value of
money
Equilibrium
price level
Money
demand
463
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

Figure 2
An Increase in the Money 
Supply
When the Fed increases the supply of money, the money supply curve shifts from MS1 
to MS2. The value of money (on the left axis) and the price level (on the right axis) 
adjust to bring supply and demand back into balance. The equilibrium moves from 
point A to point B. Thus, when an increase in the money supply makes dollars more 
plentiful, the price level increases, making each dollar less valuable.
Quantity of
Money
Value of
Money, 1/
Price 
Level,
A
B
Money
demand
0
1
(Low)
(High)
(High)
(Low)
1/2
1/4
3/4
1
1.33
2
4
M1
MS1
M2
MS2
2. . . . decreases the
value of money . . .
3. . . . and
increases the
price level.
1. An increase
in the money
supply . . .
P
P
economist Milton Friedman once put it, “Inflation is always and everywhere a 
monetary phenomenon.” 
A Brief Look at the Adjustment Process
So far, we have compared the old equilibrium and the new equilibrium after an 
injection of money. How does the economy move from the old to the new equi-
librium? A complete answer to this question requires an understanding of short-
run fluctuations in the economy, which we examine later in this book. Here, we 
briefly consider the adjustment process that occurs after a change in the money 
supply.
The immediate effect of a monetary injection is to create an excess supply of 
money. Before the injection, the economy was in equilibrium (point A in Figure 2). 
At the prevailing price level, people had exactly as much money as they wanted. 
But after the helicopters drop the new money and people pick it up off the streets, 
people have more dollars in their wallets than they want. At the prevailing price 
level, the quantity of money supplied now exceeds the quantity demanded.
People try to get rid of this excess supply of money in various ways. They 
might use it to buy goods and services. Or they might use this excess money to 
make loans to others by buying bonds or by depositing the money in a bank sav-
ings account. These loans allow other people to buy goods and services. In either 
case, the injection of money increases the demand for goods and services.
The economy’s ability to supply goods and services, however, has not changed. 
As we saw in the chapter on production and growth, the economy’s output of 
goods and services is determined by the available labor, physical capital, human 
464
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

capital, natural resources, and technological knowledge. None of these is altered 
by the injection of money.
Thus, the greater demand for goods and services causes the prices of goods and 
services to increase. The increase in the price level, in turn, increases the quantity 
of money demanded because people are using more dollars for every transaction. 
Eventually, the economy reaches a new equilibrium (point B in Figure 2) at which 
the quantity of money demanded again equals the quantity of money supplied. 
In this way, the overall price level for goods and services adjusts to bring money 
supply and money demand into balance.
The Classical Dichotomy and Monetary Neutrality
We have seen how changes in the money supply lead to changes in the average 
level of prices of goods and services. How do monetary changes affect other eco-
nomic variables, such as production, employment, real wages, and real interest 
rates? This question has long intrigued economists, including David Hume in the 
18th century. 
Hume and his contemporaries suggested that economic variables should be 
divided into two groups. The first group consists of nominal variables—variables 
measured in monetary units. The second group consists of real variables—
variables measured in physical units. For example, the income of corn farmers 
is a nominal variable because it is measured in dollars, whereas the quantity of 
corn they produce is a real variable because it is measured in bushels. Nominal 
GDP is a nominal variable because it measures the dollar value of the economy’s 
output of goods and services; real GDP is a real variable because it measures the 
total quantity of goods and services produced and is not influenced by the current 
prices of those goods and services. The separation of real and nominal variables 
is now called the classical dichotomy. (A dichotomy is a division into two groups, 
and classical refers to the earlier economic thinkers.)
Applying the classical dichotomy is tricky when we turn to prices. Most prices 
are quoted in units of money and, therefore, are nominal variables. When we 
say that the price of corn is $2 a bushel or that the price of wheat is $1 a bushel, 
both prices are nominal variables. But what about a relative price—the price of 
one thing compared to another? In our example, we could say that the price of a 
bushel of corn is 2 bushels of wheat. This relative price is not measured in terms 
of money. When comparing the prices of any two goods, the dollar signs cancel, 
and the resulting number is measured in physical units. Thus, while dollar prices 
are nominal variables, relative prices are real variables.
This lesson has many applications. For instance, the real wage (the dollar wage 
adjusted for inflation) is a real variable because it measures the rate at which 
people exchange goods and services for a unit of labor. Similarly, the real interest 
rate (the nominal interest rate adjusted for inflation) is a real variable because it 
measures the rate at which people exchange goods and services today for goods 
and services in the future.
Why separate variables into these groups? The classical dichotomy is use-
ful because different forces influence real and nominal variables. According 
to classical analysis, nominal variables are influenced by developments in the 
economy’s monetary system, whereas money is largely irrelevant for explaining 
real variables.
This idea was implicit in our discussion of the real economy in the long run. In 
previous chapters, we examined how real GDP, saving, investment, real interest 
rates, and unemployment are determined without mentioning the existence of 
money. In that analysis, the economy’s production of goods and services depends 
nominal variables
variables measured in 
monetary units
real variables
variables measured in 
physical units
classical dichotomy
the theoretical separation 
of nominal and real 
variables
465
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

on productivity and factor supplies, the real interest rate balances the supply and 
demand for loanable funds, the real wage balances the supply and demand for 
labor, and unemployment results when the real wage is for some reason kept 
above its equilibrium level. These conclusions have nothing to do with the quan-
tity of money supplied.
Changes in the supply of money, according to classical analysis, affect nominal 
variables but not real ones. When the central bank doubles the money supply, the 
price level doubles, the dollar wage doubles, and all other dollar values double. 
Real variables, such as production, employment, real wages, and real interest 
rates, are unchanged. The irrelevance of monetary changes for real variables is 
called monetary neutrality. 
An analogy helps explain monetary neutrality. As the unit of account, money 
is the yardstick we use to measure economic transactions. When a central bank 
doubles the money supply, all prices double, and the value of the unit of account 
falls by half. A similar change would occur if the government were to reduce 
the length of the yard from 36 to 18 inches: With the new unit of measurement, 
all measured distances (nominal variables) would double, but the actual distances 
(real variables) would remain the same. The dollar, like the yard, is merely a unit 
of measurement, so a change in its value should not have real effects.
Is monetary neutrality realistic? Not completely. A change in the length of the 
yard from 36 to 18 inches would not matter in the long run, but in the short run, it 
would lead to confusion and mistakes. Similarly, most economists today believe that 
over short periods of time—within the span of a year or two—monetary changes 
affect real variables. Hume himself also doubted that monetary neutrality would 
apply in the short run. (We will study short-run nonneutrality later in the book, 
and this topic will help explain why the Fed changes the money supply over time.)
Yet classical analysis is right about the economy in the long run. Over the 
course of a decade, monetary changes have significant effects on nominal vari-
ables (such as the price level) but only negligible effects on real variables (such 
as real GDP). When studying long-run changes in the economy, the neutrality of 
money offers a good description of how the world works.
Velocity and the Quantity Equation
We can obtain another perspective on the quantity theory of money by consider-
ing the following question: How many times per year is the typical dollar bill used 
to pay for a newly produced good or service? The answer to this question is given 
by a variable called the velocity of money. In physics, the term velocity refers to 
the speed at which an object travels. In economics, the velocity of money refers to 
the speed at which the typical dollar bill travels around the economy from wallet 
to wallet.
To calculate the velocity of money, we divide the nominal value of output 
(nominal GDP) by the quantity of money. If P is the price level (the GDP deflator), 
Y the quantity of output (real GDP), and M the quantity of money, then velocity is 
V = (P × Y) / M.
To see why this makes sense, imagine a simple economy that produces only pizza. 
Suppose that the economy produces 100 pizzas in a year, that a pizza sells for 
$10, and that the quantity of money in the economy is $50. Then the velocity of 
money is 
V = ($10 × 100) / $50
 
= 20.
monetary neutrality
the proposition that 
changes in the money 
supply do not affect real 
variables
velocity of money
the rate at which money 
changes hands
466
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

In this economy, people spend a total of $1,000 per year on pizza. For this $1,000 
of spending to take place with only $50 of money, each dollar bill must change 
hands on average 20 times per year.
With slight algebraic rearrangement, this equation can be rewritten as
M × V = P × Y.
This equation states that the quantity of money (M) times the velocity of money 
(V) equals the price of output (P) times the amount of output (Y). It is called the 
quantity equation because it relates the quantity of money (M) to the nominal 
value of output (P × Y). The quantity equation shows that an increase in the 
quantity of money in an economy must be reflected in one of the other three vari-
ables: The price level must rise, the quantity of output must rise, or the velocity 
of money must fall.
In many cases, it turns out that the velocity of money is relatively stable. For 
example, Figure 3 shows nominal GDP, the quantity of money (as measured 
by M2), and the velocity of money for the U.S. economy since 1960. During the 
period, the money supply and nominal GDP both increased more than twenty-
fold. By contrast, the velocity of money, although not exactly constant, has not 
changed dramatically. Thus, for some purposes, the assumption of constant velocity 
may be a good approximation.
quantity equation
the equation M × V = 
P × Y, which relates the 
quantity of money, the 
velocity of money, and 
the dollar value of the 
economy’s output of 
goods and services
Nominal GDP, the 
Quantity of Money, and 
the Velocity of Money
Figure 3
This figure shows the nominal value of output as measured by nominal GDP, the 
quantity of money as measured by M2, and the velocity of money as measured by 
their ratio. For comparability, all three series have been scaled to equal 100 in 1960. 
Notice that nominal GDP and the quantity of money have grown dramatically over 
this period, while velocity has been relatively stable.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce; Federal Reserve Board.
Indexes
(1960 = 100)
2,000
1,000
500
0
1,500
2,500
3,000
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Velocity
M2
Nominal GDP
2010
467
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

We now have all the elements necessary to explain the equilibrium price level 
and inflation rate. Here they are:
 1. The velocity of money is relatively stable over time.
 2. Because velocity is stable, when the central bank changes the quantity of 
money (M), it causes proportionate changes in the nominal value of output 
(P × Y). 
 3. The economy’s output of goods and services (Y) is primarily determined 
by factor supplies (labor, physical capital, human capital, and natural 
resources) and the available production technology. In particular, because 
money is neutral, money does not affect output.
 4. With output (Y) determined by factor supplies and technology, when the 
central bank alters the money supply (M) and induces proportional changes 
in the nominal value of output (P × Y), these changes are reflected in 
changes in the price level (P). 
 5. Therefore, when the central bank increases the money supply rapidly, the 
result is a high rate of inflation.
These five steps are the essence of the quantity theory of money. 
Money and Prices during Four Hyperinflations
Although earthquakes can wreak havoc on a society, they have the beneficial 
by-product of providing much useful data for seismologists. These data can shed 
light on alternative theories and, thereby, help society predict and deal with 
future threats. Similarly, hyperinflations offer monetary economists a natural 
experiment they can use to study the effects of money on the economy. 
 
Hyperinflations are interesting in part because the changes in the money 
supply and price level are so large. Indeed, hyperinflation is generally defined 
as inflation that exceeds 50 percent per month. This means that the price level 
increases more than a hundredfold over the course of a year.
 
The data on hyperinflation show a clear link between the quantity of money 
and the price level. Figure 4 graphs data from four classic hyperinflations that 
occurred during the 1920s in Austria, Hungary, Germany, and Poland. Each 
graph shows the quantity of money in the economy and an index of the price 
level. The slope of the money line represents the rate at which the quantity of 
money was growing, and the slope of the price line represents the inflation rate. 
The steeper the lines, the higher the rates of money growth or inflation.
 
Notice that in each graph the quantity of money and the price level are almost 
parallel. In each instance, growth in the quantity of money is moderate at first and 
so is inflation. But over time, the quantity of money in the economy starts grow-
ing faster and faster. At about the same time, inflation also takes off. Then when 
the quantity of money stabilizes, the price level stabilizes as well. These episodes 
illustrate well one of the Ten Principles of Economics: Prices rise when the govern-
ment prints too much money.  ■
The Inflation Tax
If inflation is so easy to explain, why do countries experience hyperinflation? That 
is, why do the central banks of these countries choose to print so much money that 
its value is certain to fall rapidly over time?
468
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

Money and Prices 
during Four 
Hyperinflations
Figure 4
This figure shows the quantity of money and the price level during four 
hyperinflations. (Note that these variables are graphed on logarithmic scales. This 
means that equal vertical distances on the graph represent equal percentage changes 
in the variable.) In each case, the quantity of money and the price level move closely 
together. The strong association between these two variables is consistent with 
the quantity theory of money, which states that growth in the money supply is the 
primary cause of inflation. 
Source: Adapted from Thomas J. Sargent, “The End of Four Big Inflations,” in Robert Hall, ed., Inflation (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1983), pp. 41–93.
(a) Austria
(b) Hungary
Money supply
Price level
Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)
Index
(July 1921 = 100)
(c) Germany
Price level
1
Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)
(d) Poland
100,000,000,000,000
1,000,000
10,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000
100,000,000
10,000
100
100,000
10,000
1,000
100
1925
1924
1923
1922
1921
Money supply
Money
supply
Price level
100,000
10,000
1,000
100
1925
1924
1923
1922
1921
1925
1924
1923
1922
1921
Price level
Money
supply
Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)
100
10,000,000
100,000
1,000,000
10,000
1,000
1925
1924
1923
1922
1921
The answer is that the governments of these countries are using money creation 
as a way to pay for their spending. When the government wants to build roads, 
pay salaries to its soldiers, or give transfer payments to the poor or elderly, it first 
has to raise the necessary funds. Normally, the government does this by levying 
taxes, such as income and sales taxes, and by borrowing from the public by sell-
ing government bonds. Yet the government can also pay for spending simply by 
printing the money it needs. 
When the government raises revenue by printing money, it is said to levy an 
inflation tax. The inflation tax is not exactly like other taxes, however, because no 
one receives a bill from the government for this tax. Instead, the inflation tax is 
subtler. When the government prints money, the price level rises, and the dollars 
in your wallet are less valuable. Thus, the inflation tax is like a tax on everyone who 
holds money. 
The importance of the inflation tax varies from country to country and over 
time. In the United States in recent years, the inflation tax has been a trivial 
inflation tax
the revenue the 
government raises by 
creating money
469
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

source of revenue: It has accounted for less than 3 percent of government reve-
nue. During the 1770s, however, the Continental Congress of the fledgling 
United States relied heavily on the inflation tax to pay for military spending. 
Because the new government had a limited ability to raise funds through regular 
taxes or borrowing, printing dollars was the easiest way to pay the American 
soldiers. As the quantity theory predicts, the result was a high rate of inflation: 
Prices measured in terms of the continental dollar rose more than a hundredfold 
over a few years.
Almost all hyperinflations follow the same pattern as the hyperinflation dur-
ing the American Revolution. The government has high spending, inadequate 
tax revenue, and limited ability to borrow. As a result, it turns to the printing 
press to pay for its spending. The massive increases in the quantity of money lead 
to massive inflation. The inflation ends when the government institutes fiscal 
reforms—such as cuts in government spending—that eliminate the need for the 
inflation tax.
FYI
 Hyperinflation in Zimbabwe
D
uring the decade of the 2000s, the nation of Zimbabwe 
experienced one of history’s most extreme examples of hyper-
inflation. In many ways, the story is common: Large government 
budget deficits led to the creation of large quantities of money 
and high rates of inflation. The hyperinflation ended in April 2009 
when the Zimbabwe central bank stopped printing the Zimbabwe 
dollar, and the nation started using foreign currencies such as the 
U.S. dollar and the South African rand as the medium of exchange.
 
Estimates vary about how high inflation in Zimbabwe got, but 
the magnitude of the problem is well documented by the denomi-
nation of the notes being issued by the central bank. Before the 
hyperinflation started, the Zimbabwe dollar was worth a bit more 
than one U.S. dollar, so the denominations of the paper currency 
were similar to those one would find in the United States. A 
person might carry, for example, a ten-dollar note in his or her 
wallet. In January 2008, however, after years of high inflation, 
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe issued a note worth 10 million 
Zimbabwe dollars, which was then equivalent to about four U.S. 
dollars. But even that did not prove to be large enough. A year 
later, the central bank announced it would issue notes worth 10 
trillion Zimbabwe dollars, then worth about three U.S. dollars. 
 
As prices rose and the central bank printed ever larger denomi-
nations of money, the older, smaller denomination currency lost 
value and became almost worthless. One indication of this phe-
nomenon can be found on this sign from a public restroom in
Zimbabwe:
© EUGENE BARON
470
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

The Fisher Effect
According to the principle of monetary neutrality, an increase in the rate of money 
growth raises the rate of inflation but does not affect any real variable. An impor-
tant application of this principle concerns the effect of money on interest rates. 
Interest rates are important variables for macroeconomists to understand because 
they link the economy of the present and the economy of the future through their 
effects on saving and investment.
To understand the relationship between money, inflation, and interest rates, 
recall the distinction between the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate. 
The nominal interest rate is the interest rate you hear about at your bank. If you 
have a savings account, for instance, the nominal interest rate tells you how fast 
the number of dollars in your account will rise over time. The real interest rate 
corrects the nominal interest rate for the effect of inflation to tell you how fast the 
purchasing power of your savings account will rise over time. The real interest 
rate is the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate:
Real interest rate = Nominal interest rate  Inflation rate.
For example, if the bank posts a nominal interest rate of 7 percent per year and 
the inflation rate is 3 percent per year, then the real value of the deposits grows 
by 4 percent per year.
We can rewrite this equation to show that the nominal interest rate is the sum 
of the real interest rate and the inflation rate: 
Nominal interest rate = Real interest rate  Inflation rate.
This way of looking at the nominal interest rate is useful because different eco-
nomic forces determine each of the two terms on the right side of this equation. 
As we discussed earlier in the book, the supply and demand for loanable funds 
determine the real interest rate. And according to the quantity theory of money, 
growth in the money supply determines the inflation rate.
Let’s now consider how the growth in the money supply affects interest rates. 
In the long run over which money is neutral, a change in money growth should 
not affect the real interest rate. The real interest rate is, after all, a real variable. 
For the real interest rate not to be affected, the nominal interest rate must adjust 
one-for-one to changes in the inflation rate. Thus, when the Fed increases the rate of 
money growth, the long-run result is both a higher inflation rate and a higher nominal interest 
rate. This adjustment of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate is called the 
Fisher effect, after economist Irving Fisher (1867–1947), who first studied it.
Keep in mind that our analysis of the Fisher effect has maintained a long-run 
perspective. The Fisher effect need not hold in the short run because inflation 
may be unanticipated. A nominal interest rate is a payment on a loan, and it is 
typically set when the loan is first made. If a jump in inflation catches the bor-
rower and lender by surprise, the nominal interest rate they agreed on will fail to 
reflect the higher inflation. But if inflation remains high, people will eventually 
come to expect it, and loan agreements will reflect this expectation. To be precise, 
therefore, the Fisher effect states that the nominal interest rate adjusts to expected 
inflation. Expected inflation moves with actual inflation in the long run, but that 
is not necessarily true in the short run.
The Fisher effect is crucial for understanding changes over time in the nominal 
interest rate. Figure 5 shows the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate in the U.S. 
economy since 1960. The close association between these two variables is clear. The 
nominal interest rate rose from the early 1960s through the 1970s because inflation 
Fisher effect
the one-for-one 
adjustment of the 
nominal interest rate to 
the inflation rate
471
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

was also rising during this time. Similarly, the nominal interest rate fell from the early 
1980s through the 1990s because the Fed got inflation under control.
QUICK QUIZ The government of a country increases the growth rate of the money 
supply from 5 percent per year to 50 percent per year. What happens to prices? What 
happens to nominal interest rates? Why might the government be doing this?
The Costs of Inflation
In the late 1970s, when the U.S. inflation rate reached about 10 percent per year, 
inflation dominated debates over economic policy. And even though inflation has 
been low over the past decade, it remains a closely watched macroeconomic vari-
able. One study found that inflation is the economic term mentioned most often in 
U.S. newspapers (far ahead of second-place finisher unemployment and third-place 
finisher productivity).
Inflation is closely watched and widely discussed because it is thought to be a 
serious economic problem. But is that true? And if so, why?
A Fall in Purchasing Power? The Inflation Fallacy
If you ask the typical person why inflation is bad, he will tell you that the answer 
is obvious: Inflation robs him of the purchasing power of his hard-earned dollars. 
Figure 5
The Nominal Interest Rate 
and the Inflation Rate
This figure uses annual data since 1960 to show the nominal interest rate on three-
month Treasury bills and the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index. 
The close association between these two variables is evidence for the Fisher effect: 
When the inflation rate rises, so does the nominal interest rate.
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury; U.S. Department of Labor.
Percent
(per year)
1965
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
1970
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
1960
Inﬂation
Nominal interest rate
472
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

When prices rise, each dollar of income buys fewer goods and services. Thus, it 
might seem that inflation directly lowers living standards. 
Yet further thought reveals a fallacy in this answer. When prices rise, buyers of 
goods and services pay more for what they buy. At the same time, however, sell-
ers of goods and services get more for what they sell. Because most people earn 
their incomes by selling their services, such as their labor, inflation in incomes 
goes hand in hand with inflation in prices. Thus, inflation does not in itself reduce 
people’s real purchasing power.
People believe the inflation fallacy because they do not appreciate the principle 
of monetary neutrality. A worker who receives an annual raise of 10 percent tends 
to view that raise as a reward for her own talent and effort. When an inflation rate 
of 6 percent reduces the real value of that raise to only 4 percent, the worker might 
feel that she has been cheated of what is rightfully her due. In fact, as we discussed 
in the chapter on production and growth, real incomes are determined by real vari-
ables, such as physical capital, human capital, natural resources, and the available 
production technology. Nominal incomes are determined by those factors and the 
overall price level. If the Fed were to lower the inflation rate from 6 percent to zero, 
our worker’s annual raise would fall from 10 percent to 4 percent. She might feel 
less robbed by inflation, but her real income would not rise more quickly.
If nominal incomes tend to keep pace with rising prices, why then is inflation 
a problem? It turns out that there is no single answer to this question. Instead, 
economists have identified several costs of inflation. Each of these costs shows 
some way in which persistent growth in the money supply does, in fact, have 
some effect on real variables.
Shoeleather Costs
As we have discussed, inflation is like a tax on the holders of money. The tax 
itself is not a cost to society: It is only a transfer of resources from households to 
the government. Yet most taxes give people an incentive to alter their behavior to 
avoid paying the tax, and this distortion of incentives causes deadweight losses 
for society as a whole. Like other taxes, the inflation tax also causes deadweight 
losses because people waste scarce resources trying to avoid it.
How can a person avoid paying the inflation tax? Because inflation erodes the 
real value of the money in your wallet, you can avoid the inflation tax by hold-
ing less money. One way to do this is to go to the bank more often. For example, 
rather than withdrawing $200 every four weeks, you might withdraw $50 once 
a week. By making more frequent trips to the bank, you can keep more of your 
wealth in your interest-bearing savings account and less in your wallet, where 
inflation erodes its value.
The cost of reducing your money holdings is called the shoeleather cost of 
inflation because making more frequent trips to the bank causes your shoes to 
wear out more quickly. Of course, this term is not to be taken literally: The actual 
cost of reducing your money holdings is not the wear and tear on your shoes but 
the time and convenience you must sacrifice to keep less money on hand than you 
would if there were no inflation.
The shoeleather costs of inflation may seem trivial. And in fact, they are in the 
U.S. economy, which has had only moderate inflation in recent years. But this cost 
is magnified in countries experiencing hyperinflation. Here is a description of one 
person’s experience in Bolivia during its hyperinflation (as reported in the August 
13, 1985, issue of The Wall Street Journal):
shoeleather costs
the resources wasted 
when inflation encourages 
people to reduce their 
money holdings
473
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

When Edgar Miranda gets his monthly teacher’s pay of 25 million pesos, he 
hasn’t a moment to lose. Every hour, pesos drop in value. So, while his wife 
rushes to market to lay in a month’s supply of rice and noodles, he is off with 
the rest of the pesos to change them into black-market dollars.
Mr. Miranda is practicing the First Rule of Survival amid the most 
out-of-control inflation in the world today. Bolivia is a case study of how 
runaway inflation undermines a society. Price increases are so huge that the 
figures build up almost beyond comprehension. In one six-month period, for 
example, prices soared at an annual rate of 38,000 percent. By official count, 
however, last year’s inflation reached 2,000 percent, and this year’s is expected 
to hit 8,000 percent—though other estimates range many times higher. In any 
event, Bolivia’s rate dwarfs Israel’s 370 percent and Argentina’s 1,100 percent—
two other cases of severe inflation.
It is easier to comprehend what happens to the thirty-eight-year-old 
Mr. Miranda’s pay if he doesn’t quickly change it into dollars. The day he was 
paid 25 million pesos, a dollar cost 500,000 pesos. So he received $50. Just days 
later, with the rate at 900,000 pesos, he would have received $27. 
As this story shows, the shoeleather costs of inflation can be substantial. With 
the high inflation rate, Mr. Miranda does not have the luxury of holding the local 
money as a store of value. Instead, he is forced to convert his pesos quickly into 
goods or into U.S. dollars, which offer a more stable store of value. The time and 
effort that Mr. Miranda expends to reduce his money holdings are a waste of 
resources. If the monetary authority pursued a low-inflation policy, Mr. Miranda 
would be happy to hold pesos, and he could put his time and effort to more pro-
ductive use. In fact, shortly after this article was written, the Bolivian inflation rate 
was reduced substantially with more restrictive monetary policy.
Menu Costs
Most firms do not change the prices of their products every day. Instead, firms 
often announce prices and leave them unchanged for weeks, months, or even 
years. One survey found that the typical U.S. firm changes its prices about once 
a year.
Firms change prices infrequently because there are costs of changing prices. 
Costs of price adjustment are called menu costs, a term derived from a restau-
rant’s cost of printing a new menu. Menu costs include the cost of deciding on 
new prices, the cost of printing new price lists and catalogs, the cost of sending 
these new price lists and catalogs to dealers and customers, the cost of advertising 
the new prices, and even the cost of dealing with customer annoyance over price 
changes.
Inflation increases the menu costs that firms must bear. In the current U.S. 
economy, with its low inflation rate, annual price adjustment is an appropriate 
business strategy for many firms. But when high inflation makes firms’ costs rise 
rapidly, annual price adjustment is impractical. During hyperinflations, for exam-
ple, firms must change their prices daily or even more often just to keep up with 
all the other prices in the economy. 
Relative-Price Variability and the 
Misallocation of Resources
Suppose that the Eatabit Eatery prints a new menu with new prices every January 
and then leaves its prices unchanged for the rest of the year. If there is no inflation, 
menu costs
the costs of changing 
prices
474
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

Eatabit’s relative prices—the prices of its meals compared to other prices in the 
economy—would be constant over the course of the year. By contrast, if the infla-
tion rate is 12 percent per year, Eatabit’s relative prices will automatically fall by 1 
percent each month. The restaurant’s relative prices will be high in the early months 
of the year, just after it has printed a new menu, and low in the later months. And 
the higher the inflation rate, the greater is this automatic variability. Thus, because 
prices change only once in a while, inflation causes relative prices to vary more than 
they otherwise would.
Why does this matter? The reason is that market economies rely on relative 
prices to allocate scarce resources. Consumers decide what to buy by comparing 
the quality and prices of various goods and services. Through these decisions, 
they determine how the scarce factors of production are allocated among indus-
tries and firms. When inflation distorts relative prices, consumer decisions are 
distorted, and markets are less able to allocate resources to their best use.
Inflation-Induced Tax Distortions
Almost all taxes distort incentives, cause people to alter their behavior, and lead 
to a less efficient allocation of the economy’s resources. Many taxes, however, 
become even more problematic in the presence of inflation. The reason is that 
lawmakers often fail to take inflation into account when writing the tax laws. 
Economists who have studied the tax code conclude that inflation tends to raise 
the tax burden on income earned from savings. 
One example of how inflation discourages saving is the tax treatment of capi-
tal gains—the profits made by selling an asset for more than its purchase price. 
Suppose that in 1980 you used some of your savings to buy stock in Microsoft 
Corporation for $10 and that in 2010 you sold the stock for $50. According to the 
tax law, you have earned a capital gain of $40, which you must include in your 
income when computing how much income tax you owe. But suppose the overall 
price level doubled from 1980 to 2010. In this case, the $10 you invested in 1980 
is equivalent (in terms of purchasing power) to $20 in 2010. When you sell your 
stock for $50, you have a real gain (an increase in purchasing power) of only $30. 
The tax code, however, does not take account of inflation and assesses you a tax 
on a gain of $40. Thus, inflation exaggerates the size of capital gains and inadvert-
ently increases the tax burden on this type of income.
Another example is the tax treatment of interest income. The income tax treats 
the nominal interest earned on savings as income, even though part of the nomi-
nal interest rate merely compensates for inflation. To see the effects of this policy, 
consider the numerical example in Table 1. The table compares two economies, 
both of which tax interest income at a rate of 25 percent. In Economy A, inflation 
is zero, and the nominal and real interest rates are both 4 percent. In this case, the 
25 percent tax on interest income reduces the real interest rate from 4 percent to 
3 percent. In Economy B, the real interest rate is again 4 percent, but the inflation 
rate is 8 percent. As a result of the Fisher effect, the nominal interest rate is 12 
percent. Because the income tax treats this entire 12 percent interest as income, 
the government takes 25 percent of it, leaving an after-tax nominal interest rate 
of only 9 percent and an after-tax real interest rate of only 1 percent. In this case, 
the 25 percent tax on interest income reduces the real interest rate from 4 percent 
to 1 percent. Because the after-tax real interest rate provides the incentive to save, 
saving is much less attractive in the economy with inflation (Economy B) than in 
the economy with stable prices (Economy A).
475
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

The taxes on nominal capital gains and on nominal interest income are two 
examples of how the tax code interacts with inflation. There are many others. 
Because of these inflation-induced tax changes, higher inflation tends to discourage 
people from saving. Recall that the economy’s saving provides the resources for 
investment, which in turn is a key ingredient to long-run economic growth. Thus, 
when inflation raises the tax burden on saving, it tends to depress the economy’s 
long-run growth rate. There is, however, no consensus among economists about 
the size of this effect.
One solution to this problem, other than eliminating inflation, is to index the 
tax system. That is, the tax laws could be rewritten to take account of the effects 
of inflation. In the case of capital gains, for example, the tax code could adjust 
the purchase price using a price index and assess the tax only on the real gain. In 
the case of interest income, the government could tax only real interest income 
by excluding that portion of the interest income that merely compensates for 
inflation. To some extent, the tax laws have moved in the direction of indexation. 
For example, the income levels at which income tax rates change are adjusted 
automatically each year based on changes in the consumer price index. Yet many 
other aspects of the tax laws—such as the tax treatment of capital gains and inter-
est income—are not indexed.
In an ideal world, the tax laws would be written so that inflation would not 
alter anyone’s real tax liability. In the world in which we live, however, tax laws 
are far from perfect. More complete indexation would probably be desirable, but 
it would further complicate a tax code that many people already consider too 
complex. 
Confusion and Inconvenience
Imagine that we took a poll and asked people the following question: “This 
year the yard is 36 inches. How long do you think it should be next year?” 
Assuming we could get people to take us seriously, they would tell us that the 
yard should stay the same length—36 inches. Anything else would just com-
plicate life needlessly.
How Inflation Raises the 
Tax Burden on Saving
In the presence of zero inflation, 
a 25 percent tax on interest income 
reduces the real interest rate from 
4 percent to 3 percent. In the 
presence of 8 percent inflation, the 
same tax reduces the real interest 
rate from 4 percent to 1 percent.
Table 1
 
Economy A 
Economy B
 
(price stability) 
(inflation)
Real interest rate 
4% 
4%
Inflation rate 
0 
8
Nominal interest rate 
 
 (real interest rate + inflation rate) 
4 
12
Reduced interest due to 25 percent tax 
 
 (0.25 × nominal interest rate) 
1 
3
After-tax nominal interest rate 
 
 (0.75 × nominal interest rate) 
3 
9
After-tax real interest rate 
 
 (after-tax nominal interest rate – inflation rate) 
3 
1
476
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

What does this finding have to do with inflation? Recall that money, as the 
economy’s unit of account, is what we use to quote prices and record debts. In 
other words, money is the yardstick with which we measure economic trans-
actions. The job of the Federal Reserve is a bit like the job of the Bureau of 
Standards—to ensure the reliability of a commonly used unit of measurement. 
When the Fed increases the money supply and creates inflation, it erodes the real 
value of the unit of account.
It is difficult to judge the costs of the confusion and inconvenience that arise 
from inflation. Earlier, we discussed how the tax code incorrectly measures real 
incomes in the presence of inflation. Similarly, accountants incorrectly measure 
firms’ earnings when prices are rising over time. Because inflation causes dollars 
at different times to have different real values, computing a firm’s profit—the 
difference between its revenue and costs—is more complicated in an economy 
with inflation. Therefore, to some extent, inflation makes investors less able 
to sort successful from unsuccessful firms, which in turn impedes financial 
markets in their role of allocating the economy’s saving to alternative types of 
investment. 
A Special Cost of Unexpected Inflation: 
Arbitrary Redistributions of Wealth
So far, the costs of inflation we have discussed occur even if inflation is steady and 
predictable. Inflation has an additional cost, however, when it comes as a surprise. 
Unexpected inflation redistributes wealth among the population in a way that has 
nothing to do with either merit or need. These redistributions occur because many 
loans in the economy are specified in terms of the unit of account—money. 
Consider an example. Suppose that Sam Student takes out a $20,000 loan at a 
7 percent interest rate from Bigbank to attend college. In 10 years, the loan will 
come due. After his debt has compounded for 10 years at 7 percent, Sam will owe 
Bigbank $40,000. The real value of this debt will depend on inflation over the decade. 
If Sam is lucky, the economy will have a hyperinflation. In this case, wages and 
prices will rise so high that Sam will be able to pay the $40,000 debt out of pocket 
change. By contrast, if the economy goes through a major deflation, then wages 
and prices will fall, and Sam will find the $40,000 debt a greater burden than he 
anticipated. 
This example shows that unexpected changes in prices redistribute wealth 
among debtors and creditors. A hyperinflation enriches Sam at the expense of 
Bigbank because it diminishes the real value of the debt; Sam can repay the loan 
in less valuable dollars than he anticipated. Deflation enriches Bigbank at Sam’s 
expense because it increases the real value of the debt; in this case, Sam has to 
repay the loan in more valuable dollars than he anticipated. If inflation were pre-
dictable, then Bigbank and Sam could take inflation into account when setting the 
nominal interest rate. (Recall the Fisher effect.) But if inflation is hard to predict, it 
imposes risk on Sam and Bigbank that both would prefer to avoid.
This cost of unexpected inflation is important to consider together with another 
fact: Inflation is especially volatile and uncertain when the average rate of infla-
tion is high. This is seen most simply by examining the experience of different 
countries. Countries with low average inflation, such as Germany in the late 20th 
century, tend to have stable inflation. Countries with high average inflation, such 
as many countries in Latin America, tend to have unstable inflation. There are 
no known examples of economies with high, stable inflation. This relationship 
477
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

between the level and volatility of inflation points to another cost of inflation. If 
a country pursues a high-inflation monetary policy, it will have to bear not only 
the costs of high expected inflation but also the arbitrary redistributions of wealth 
associated with unexpected inflation.
Inflation Is Bad, But Deflation May Be Worse
In recent U.S. history, inflation has been the norm. But the level of prices has fallen 
at times, such as during the late nineteenth century and early 1930s. Moreover, 
Japan has experienced declines in its overall price level in recent years. So as we 
conclude our discussion of the costs of inflation, we should briefly consider the 
costs of deflation as well.
Some economists have suggested that a small and predictable amount of defla-
tion may be desirable. Milton Friedman pointed out that deflation would lower 
the nominal interest rate (recall the Fisher effect) and that a lower nominal interest 
rate would reduce the cost of holding money. The shoeleather costs of holding 
money would, he argued, be minimized by a nominal interest rate close to zero, 
which in turn would require deflation equal to the real interest rate. This prescrip-
tion for moderate deflation is called the Friedman rule.
Yet there are also costs of deflation. Some of these mirror the costs of inflation. 
For example, just as a rising price level induces menu costs and relative-price 
variability, so does a falling price level. Moreover, in practice, deflation is rarely 
as steady and predictable as Friedman recommended. More often, it comes as 
a surprise, resulting in the redistribution of wealth toward creditors and away 
from debtors. Because debtors are often poorer, these redistributions in wealth 
are particularly pernicious.
Perhaps most important, deflation often arises because of broader macro-
economic difficulties. As we will see in future chapters, falling prices result 
when some event, such as a monetary contraction, reduces the overall demand 
for goods and services in the economy. This fall in aggregate demand can lead 
to falling incomes and rising unemployment. In other words, deflation is often a 
symptom of deeper economic problems.
The Wizard of Oz and the Free-Silver Debate
As a child, you probably saw the movie The Wizard of Oz, based on a children’s 
book written in 1900. The movie and book tell the story of a young girl, Dorothy, 
who finds herself lost in a strange land far from home. You probably did not 
know, however, that the story is actually an allegory about U.S. monetary policy 
in the late 19th century.
 
From 1880 to 1896, the price level in the U.S. economy fell by 23 percent. 
Because this event was unanticipated, it led to a major redistribution of wealth. 
Most farmers in the western part of the country were debtors. Their creditors were 
the bankers in the east. When the price level fell, it caused the real value of these 
debts to rise, which enriched the banks at the expense of the farmers.
 
According to Populist politicians of the time, the solution to the farmers’ 
problem was the free coinage of silver. During this period, the United States was 
operating with a gold standard. The quantity of gold determined the money sup-
ply and, thereby, the price level. The free-silver advocates wanted silver, as well 
478
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

as gold, to be used as money. If adopted, this proposal would have increased 
the money supply, pushed up the price level, and reduced the real burden of the 
farmers’ debts. 
 
The debate over silver was heated, and it was central to the politics of the 1890s. 
A common election slogan of the Populists was “We Are Mortgaged. All but Our 
Votes.” One prominent advocate of free silver was William Jennings Bryan, the 
Democratic nominee for president in 1896. He is remembered in part for a speech 
at the Democratic Party’s nominating convention in which he said, “You shall not 
press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify 
mankind upon a cross of gold.” Rarely since then have politicians waxed so poetic 
about alternative approaches to monetary policy. Nonetheless, Bryan lost the elec-
tion to Republican William McKinley, and the United States remained on the gold 
standard.
 
L. Frank Baum, author of the book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, was a mid-
western journalist. When he sat down to write a story for children, he made the 
characters represent protagonists in the major political battle of his time. Here is 
how economic historian Hugh Rockoff, writing in the Journal of Political Economy 
in 1990, interprets the story:
 
Dorothy: 
Traditional American values
 
Toto: 
Prohibitionist party, also called the Teetotalers
 
Scarecrow: 
Farmers
 
Tin Woodsman: 
Industrial workers
 
Cowardly Lion: 
William Jennings Bryan
 
Munchkins: 
Citizens of the East
 Wicked Witch of the East: 
Grover Cleveland
Wicked Witch of the West: 
William McKinley
 
Wizard: 
 Marcus Alonzo Hanna, chairman of the 
Republican Party
 
Oz: 
Abbreviation for ounce of gold
 
Yellow Brick Road: 
Gold standard
In the end of Baum’s story, Dorothy does find her way home, but it is not by just 
following the yellow brick road. After a long and perilous journey, she learns 
that the wizard is incapable of helping her or her friends. Instead, Dorothy 
finally discovers the magical power of her silver slippers. (When the book was 
made into a movie in 1939, Dorothy’s slippers were changed from silver to 
ruby. The Hollywood filmmakers were more interested in showing off the new 
technology of Technicolor than in telling a story about 19th-century monetary 
policy.)
 
The Populists lost the debate over the free coinage of silver, but they eventu-
ally got the monetary expansion and inflation that they wanted. In 1898, prospec-
tors discovered gold near the Klondike River in the Canadian Yukon. Increased 
supplies of gold also arrived from the mines of South Africa. As a result, the 
money supply and the price level started to rise in the United States and in other 
countries operating on the gold standard. Within fifteen years, prices in the 
United States were back to the levels that had prevailed in the 1880s, and farmers 
were better able to handle their debts.  ■
QUICK QUIZ List and describe six costs of inflation.
An early debate over 
monetary policy
© MGM / THE KOBAL COLLECTION/PICTURE DESK
479
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION

Conclusion
This chapter discussed the causes and costs of inflation. The primary cause of 
inflation is simply growth in the quantity of money. When the central bank creates 
money in large quantities, the value of money falls quickly. To maintain stable 
prices, the central bank must maintain strict control over the money supply.
The costs of inflation are subtler. They include shoeleather costs, menu costs, 
increased variability of relative prices, unintended changes in tax liabilities, 
confusion and inconvenience, and arbitrary redistributions of wealth. Are these 
costs, in total, large or small? All economists agree that they become huge during 
hyperinflation. But their size for moderate inflation—when prices rise by less than 
10 percent per year—is more open to debate.
Although this chapter presented many of the most important lessons about infla-
tion, the discussion is incomplete. When the central bank reduces the rate of money 
growth, prices rise less rapidly, as the quantity theory suggests. Yet as the economy 
makes the transition to this lower inflation rate, the change in monetary policy will 
Bernanke and 
the Beast 
BY N. GREGORY MANKIW
I
s galloping inflation around the corner? 
Without doubt, the United States is exhib-
iting some of the classic precursors to 
out-of-control inflation. But a deeper look 
suggests that the story is not so simple.
 
Let’s start with first principles. One 
basic lesson of economics is that prices rise 
when the government creates an excessive 
amount of money. In other words, inflation 
occurs when too much money is chasing too 
few goods. 
 
A second lesson is that governments 
resort to rapid monetary growth because 
they face fiscal problems. When government 
spending exceeds tax collection, policy mak-
ers sometimes turn to their central banks, 
which essentially print money to cover the 
budget shortfall.
 
Those two lessons go a long way toward 
explaining history’s hyperinflations, like 
those experienced by Germany in the 1920s 
or by Zimbabwe recently. Is the United 
States about to go down this route?
 
To be sure, we have large budget deficits 
and ample money growth. The federal gov-
ernment’s budget deficit was $390 billion 
in the first quarter of fiscal 2010, or about 
11 percent of gross domestic product. Such 
a large deficit was unimaginable just a few 
years ago.
 
The Federal Reserve has also been rap-
idly creating money. The monetary base—
meaning currency plus bank reserves—is 
the money-supply measure that the Fed 
controls most directly. That figure has more 
than doubled over the last two years.
 
Yet, despite having the two classic ingre-
dients for high inflation, the United States 
has experienced only benign price increases. 
Over the last year, the core Consumer Price 
Index, excluding food and energy, has risen 
by less than 2 percent. And long-term inter-
est rates remain relatively low, suggesting 
that the bond market isn’t terribly worried 
about inflation. What gives?
 
Part of the answer is that while we 
have large budget deficits and rapid money 
growth, one isn’t causing the other. Ben 
S.  Bernanke, the Fed chairman, has been 
printing money not to finance President 
Obama’s spending but to rescue the finan-
cial system and prop up a weak economy. 
 
Moreover, banks have been happy to 
hold much of that new money as excess 
 Inflationary Threats
In the aftermath of the financial crisis and economic downturn of 2008 
and 2009, some observers of the U.S. economy started worrying about 
inflation.
in the news
480
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN

SUMMARY
reserves. In normal times when the Fed 
expands the monetary base, banks lend that 
money, and other money-supply measures 
grow in parallel. But these are not normal 
times. With banks content holding idle cash, 
the broad measure called M2 (including cur-
rency and deposits in checking and savings 
accounts) has grown in the last two years at 
an annual rate of only 6 percent.
 
As the economy recovers, banks may 
start lending out some of their hoards of 
reserves. That could lead to faster growth 
in broader money-supply measures and, 
eventually, to substantial inflation. But the 
Fed has the tools it needs to prevent that 
outcome.
 
For one, it can sell the large portfolio 
of mortgage-backed securities and other 
assets it has accumulated over the last cou-
ple of years. When the private purchasers 
of those assets paid up, they would drain 
reserves from the banking system.
 
And as a result of legislative changes in 
October 2008, the Fed has a new tool: it can 
pay interest on reserves. With short-term 
interest rates currently near zero, this tool has 
been largely irrelevant. But as the economy 
recovers and interest rates rise, the Fed can 
increase the interest rate it pays banks to 
hold reserves as well. Higher interest on 
reserves would discourage bank lending and 
prevent the huge expansion in the monetary 
base from becoming inflationary.
 
But will Mr. Bernanke and his colleagues 
make enough use of these instruments 
when needed? Most likely they will, but 
there are still several reasons for doubt.
 
First, a little bit of inflation might not be 
so bad. Mr. Bernanke and company could 
decide that letting prices rise and thereby 
reducing the real cost of borrowing might 
help stimulate a moribund economy. The 
trick is getting enough inflation to help the 
economy recover without losing control of 
the process. Fine-tuning is hard to do.
 
Second, the Fed could easily over-
estimate the economy’s potential growth. 
In light of the large fiscal imbalance over 
which Mr. Obama is presiding, it’s a good 
bet he will end up raising taxes for most 
Americans in coming years. Higher tax rates 
mean reduced work incentives and lower 
potential output. If the Fed fails to account 
for this change, it could try to promote more 
growth than the economy can sustain, caus-
ing inflation to rise.
 
Finally, even if the Fed is committed to 
low inflation and recognizes the challenges 
ahead, politics could constrain its policy 
choices. Raising interest rates to deal with 
impending inflationary pressures is never 
popular, and after the recent financial crisis, 
Mr. Bernanke cannot draw on a boundless 
reservoir of good will. As the economy 
recovers, responding quickly and fully to 
inflation threats may prove hard in the face 
of public opposition.
 
Investors snapping up 30-year Treasury 
bonds paying less than 5 percent are bet-
ting that the Fed will keep these inflation 
risks in check. They are probably right. But 
because current monetary and fiscal policy 
is so far outside the bounds of historical 
norms, it’s hard for anyone to be sure. A 
decade from now, we may look back at 
today’s bond market as the irrational exu-
berance of this era.
Source: New York Times, January 17, 2010.
• The overall level of prices in an economy adjusts 
to bring money supply and money demand 
into balance. When the central bank increases 
the supply of money, it causes the price level to 
rise. Persistent growth in the quantity of money 
supplied leads to continuing inflation.
• The principle of monetary neutrality asserts 
that changes in the quantity of money influence 
nominal variables but not real variables. Most 
economists believe that monetary neutrality 
approximately describes the behavior of the 
economy in the long run.
SU
SUMMARY
• The overall level of prices in an economy adjusts 
to bring money supply and money demand 
into balance. When the central bank increases
the supply of money, it causes the price level to 
rise. Persistent growth in the quantity of money 
supplied leads to continuing inflation.
• The principle of monetary neutrality asserts 
that changes in the quantity of money influence
nominal variables but not real variables. Most 
economists believe that monetary neutrality 
approximately describes the behavior of the 
economy in the long run.
have disruptive effects on production and employment. That is, even though mone-
tary policy is neutral in the long run, it has profound effects on real variables in the 
short run. Later in this book we will examine the reasons for short-run monetary 
nonneutrality to enhance our understanding of the causes and costs of inflation. 
© DAVID G. KLEIN
481
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
Image not available due to
copyright restrictions

• A government can pay for some of its spending 
simply by printing money. When countries rely 
heavily on this “inflation tax,” the result is 
hyperinflation.
• One application of the principle of monetary 
neutrality is the Fisher effect. According to the 
Fisher effect, when the inflation rate rises, the 
nominal interest rate rises by the same amount so 
that the real interest rate remains the same. 
• Many people think that inflation makes them 
poorer because it raises the cost of what they 
buy. This view is a fallacy, however, because 
inflation also raises nominal incomes. 
• Economists have identified six costs of inflation: 
shoeleather costs associated with reduced 
money holdings, menu costs associated with 
more frequent adjustment of prices, increased 
variability of relative prices, unintended changes 
in tax liabilities due to nonindexation of the tax 
code, confusion and inconvenience resulting 
from a changing unit of account, and arbitrary 
redistributions of wealth between debtors and 
creditors. Many of these costs are large during 
hyperinflation, but the size of these costs for 
moderate inflation is less clear.
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Explain how an increase in the price level 
affects the real value of money.
 2. According to the quantity theory of money, 
what is the effect of an increase in the quantity 
of money? 
 3. Explain the difference between nominal 
and real variables and give two examples 
of each. According to the principle of 
monetary neutrality, which variables 
are affected by changes in the quantity of 
money? 
 4. In what sense is inflation like a tax? How does 
thinking about inflation as a tax help explain 
hyperinflation?
 5. According to the Fisher effect, how does an 
increase in the inflation rate affect the real 
interest rate and the nominal interest rate?
 6. What are the costs of inflation? Which of these 
costs do you think are most important for the 
U.S. economy?
 7. If inflation is less than expected, who benefits—
debtors or creditors? Explain.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. Suppose that this year’s money supply is $500 
billion, nominal GDP is $10 trillion, and real 
GDP is $5 trillion.
a. What is the price level? What is the velocity 
of money?
b. Suppose that velocity is constant and the 
economy’s output of goods and services 
rises by 5 percent each year. What will 
happen to nominal GDP and the price level 
next year if the Fed keeps the money supply 
constant?
c. What money supply should the Fed set 
next year if it wants to keep the price level 
stable?
d. What money supply should the Fed set next 
year if it wants inflation of 10 percent?
•
A government can pay for some of its spending
simply by printing money. When countries rely 
heavily on this “inflation tax,” the result is
hyperinflation.
•
One application of the principle of monetary
neutrality is the Fisher effect. According to the 
Fisher effect, when the inflation rate rises, the 
nominal interest rate rises by the same amount so 
that the real interest rate remains the same.
•
Many people think that inflation makes them 
poorer because it raises the cost of what they 
buy. This view is a fallacy, however, because 
inflation also raises nominal incomes.
• Economists have identified six costs of inflation:
shoeleather costs associated with reduced 
money holdings, menu costs associated with 
more frequent adjustment of prices, increased
variability of relative prices, unintended changes
in tax liabilities due to nonindexation of the tax 
code, confusion and inconvenience resulting 
from a changing unit of account, and arbitrary 
redistributions of wealth between debtors and 
creditors. Many of these costs are large during
hyperinflation, but the size of these costs for 
moderate inflation is less clear.
CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Explain how an increase in the price level 
affects the real value of money.
 2. According to the quantity theory of money, 
what is the effect of an increase in the quantity 
of money?
 3. Explain the difference between nominal 
and real variables and give two examples 
of each. According to the principle of 
monetary neutrality, which variables 
are affected by changes in the quantity of 
money?
 4. In what sense is inflation like a tax? How does
thinking about inflation as a tax help explain 
hyperinflation?
 5. According to the Fisher effect, how does an
increase in the inflation rate affect the real
interest rate and the nominal interest rate?
 6. What are the costs of inflation? Which of these
costs do you think are most important for the
U.S. economy?
 7. If inflation is less than expected, who benefits—
debtors or creditors? Explain.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. Suppose that this year’s money supply is $500 
billion, nominal GDP is $10 trillion, and real
GDP is $5 trillion.
a. What is the price level? What is the velocity
of money?
b. Suppose that velocity is constant and the 
economy’s output of goods and services 
rises by 5 percent each year. What will 
happen to nominal GDP and the price level
next year if the Fed keeps the money supply 
constant?
c. What money supply should the Fed set
next year if it wants to keep the price level
stable?
d. What money supply should the Fed set next
year if it wants inflation of 10 percent?
482
PART VIII 
MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
quantity theory of money, p. 463
nominal variables, p. 465
real variables, p. 465
classical dichotomy, p. 465
monetary neutrality, p. 466
velocity of money, p. 466
quantity equation, p. 467
inflation tax, p. 469
Fisher effect, p. 471
shoeleather costs, p. 473
menu costs, p. 474

 2. Suppose that changes in bank regulations 
expand the availability of credit cards so that 
people need to hold less cash. 
a. How does this event affect the demand for 
money?
b. If the Fed does not respond to this event, 
what will happen to the price level?
c. If the Fed wants to keep the price level stable, 
what should it do?
 3. It is sometimes suggested that the Federal 
Reserve should try to achieve zero inflation. 
If we assume that velocity is constant, does 
this zero-inflation goal require that the rate of 
money growth equal zero? If yes, explain why. 
If no, explain what the rate of money growth 
should equal.
 4. Suppose that a country’s inflation rate increases 
sharply. What happens to the inflation tax on 
the holders of money? Why is wealth that is 
held in savings accounts not subject to a change 
in the inflation tax? Can you think of any way 
holders of savings accounts are hurt by the 
increase in the inflation rate?
 5. Hyperinflations are extremely rare in countries 
whose central banks are independent of the rest 
of the government. Why might this be so?
 6. Let’s consider the effects of inflation in an 
economy composed of only two people: Bob, a 
bean farmer, and Rita, a rice farmer. Bob and 
Rita both always consume equal amounts of rice 
and beans. In 2010, the price of beans was $1, 
and the price of rice was $3.
a. Suppose that in 2011 the price of beans was 
$2 and the price of rice was $6. What was 
inflation? Was Bob better off, worse off, or 
unaffected by the changes in prices? What 
about Rita?
b. Now suppose that in 2011 the price of beans 
was $2 and the price of rice was $4. What 
was inflation? Was Bob better off, worse off, 
or unaffected by the changes in prices? What 
about Rita?
c. Finally, suppose that in 2011 the price of 
beans was $2 and the price of rice was $1.50. 
What was inflation? Was Bob better off, 
worse off, or unaffected by the changes in 
prices? What about Rita?
d. What matters more to Bob and Rita—the 
overall inflation rate or the relative price of 
rice and beans?
 7. If the tax rate is 40 percent, compute the before-
tax real interest rate and the after-tax real 
interest rate in each of the following cases.
a. The nominal interest rate is 10 percent, and 
the inflation rate is 5 percent.
b. The nominal interest rate is 6 percent, and the 
inflation rate is 2 percent.
c. The nominal interest rate is 4 percent, and the 
inflation rate is 1 percent.
 8. What are your shoeleather costs of going to 
the bank? How might you measure these costs 
in dollars? How do you think the shoeleather 
costs of your college president differ from 
your own? 
 9. Recall that money serves three functions in the 
economy. What are those functions? How does 
inflation affect the ability of money to serve 
each of these functions?
 10. Suppose that people expect inflation to equal 
3 percent, but in fact, prices rise by 5 percent. 
Describe how this unexpectedly high inflation 
rate would help or hurt the following:
a. the government
b. a homeowner with a fixed-rate mortgage
c. a union worker in the second year of a labor 
contract
d. a college that has invested some of its 
endowment in government bonds
 11. Explain one harm associated with 
unexpected inflation that is not associated 
with expected inflation. Then explain one 
harm associated with both expected and 
unexpected inflation.
 12. Explain whether the following statements are 
true, false, or uncertain.
a. “Inflation hurts borrowers and helps lenders, 
because borrowers must pay a higher rate of 
interest.”
b. “If prices change in a way that leaves the 
overall price level unchanged, then no one is 
made better or worse off.”
c. “Inflation does not reduce the purchasing 
power of most workers.”
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
 2. Suppose that changes in bank regulations
expand the availability of credit cards so that
people need to hold less cash.
a. How does this event affect the demand for
money?
b. If the Fed does not respond to this event, 
what will happen to the price level?
c. If the Fed wants to keep the price level stable,
what should it do?
 3. It is sometimes suggested that the Federal
Reserve should try to achieve zero inflation.
If we assume that velocity is constant, does 
this zero-inflation goal require that the rate of 
money growth equal zero? If yes, explain why. 
If no, explain what the rate of money growth 
should equal.
 4. Suppose that a country’s inflation rate increases 
sharply. What happens to the inflation tax on
the holders of money? Why is wealth that is
held in savings accounts not subject to a change
in the inflation tax? Can you think of any way 
holders of savings accounts are hurt by the
increase in the inflation rate?
 5. Hyperinflations are extremely rare in countries 
whose central banks are independent of the rest
of the government. Why might this be so?
 6. Let’s consider the effects of inflation in an 
economy composed of only two people: Bob, a 
bean farmer, and Rita, a rice farmer. Bob and
Rita both always consume equal amounts of rice
and beans. In 2010, the price of beans was $1,
and the price of rice was $3.
a. Suppose that in 2011 the price of beans was 
$2 and the price of rice was $6. What was 
inflation? Was Bob better off, worse off, or 
unaffected by the changes in prices? What 
about Rita?
b. Now suppose that in 2011 the price of beans
was $2 and the price of rice was $4. What 
was inflation? Was Bob better off, worse off, 
or unaffected by the changes in prices? What
about Rita?
c. Finally, suppose that in 2011 the price of 
beans was $2 and the price of rice was $1.50. 
What was inflation? Was Bob better off,
worse off, or unaffected by the changes in 
prices? What about Rita?
d. What matters more to Bob and Rita—the 
overall inflation rate or the relative price of 
rice and beans?
 7. If the tax rate is 40 percent, compute the before-
tax real interest rate and the after-tax real
interest rate in each of the following cases.
a. The nominal interest rate is 10 percent, and
the inflation rate is 5 percent.
b. The nominal interest rate is 6 percent, and the 
inflation rate is 2 percent.
c. The nominal interest rate is 4 percent, and the 
inflation rate is 1 percent.
 8. What are your shoeleather costs of going to 
the bank? How might you measure these costs 
in dollars? How do you think the shoeleather 
costs of your college president differ from
your own?
 9. Recall that money serves three functions in the 
economy. What are those functions? How does 
inflation affect the ability of money to serve
each of these functions?
 10. Suppose that people expect inflation to equal 
3 percent, but in fact, prices rise by 5 percent. 
Describe how this unexpectedly high inflation
rate would help or hurt the following:
a. the government
b. a homeowner with a fixed-rate mortgage
c. a union worker in the second year of a labor 
contract
d. a college that has invested some of its 
endowment in government bonds
 11. Explain one harm associated with 
unexpected inflation that is not associated 
with expected inflation. Then explain one 
harm associated with both expected and
unexpected inflation.
 12. Explain whether the following statements are 
true, false, or uncertain.
a. “Inflation hurts borrowers and helps lenders,
because borrowers must pay a higher rate of 
interest.”
b. “If prices change in a way that leaves the 
overall price level unchanged, then no one is 
made better or worse off.”
c. “Inflation does not reduce the purchasing 
power of most workers.”
For further information on topics in this chapter,
additional problems, applications, examples, online
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw
g g
/
/
.
483
CHAPTER 22    MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION


Short-Run Economic 
Fluctuations
IX
PART


Aggregate Demand 
     and Aggregate Supply
E
conomic activity fluctuates from year to year. In most years, the produc-
tion of goods and services rises. Because of increases in the labor force, 
increases in the capital stock, and advances in technological knowledge, 
the economy can produce more and more over time. This growth allows 
everyone to enjoy a higher standard of living. On average over the past half cen-
tury, the production of the U.S. economy as measured by real GDP has grown by 
about 3 percent per year. 
In some years, however, the economy experiences contraction rather than 
growth. Firms find themselves unable to sell all the goods and services they have 
to offer, so they cut back on production. Workers are laid off, unemployment 
rises, and factories are left idle. With the economy producing fewer goods and 
services, real GDP and other measures of income fall. Such a period of falling 
incomes and rising unemployment is called a recession if it is relatively mild and 
a depression if it is more severe. 
recession
a period of declining 
real incomes and rising
unemployment
depression
a severe recession
23
487

An example of such a downturn occurred in 2008 and 2009. From the fourth 
quarter of 2007 to the second quarter of 2009, real GDP for the U.S. economy fell by 
4 percent. The rate of unemployment rose from 4.4 percent in May 2007 to 10.1 percent 
in October 2009—the highest level in more than a quarter century. Not surprisingly, 
students graduating during this time found that desirable jobs were hard to find.
What causes short-run fluctuations in economic activity? What, if anything, can 
public policy do to prevent periods of falling incomes and rising unemployment? 
When recessions and depressions occur, how can policymakers reduce their 
length and severity? These are the questions we take up now.
The variables that we study are largely those we have already seen in previous 
chapters. They include GDP, unemployment, interest rates, and the price level. Also 
familiar are the policy instruments of government spending, taxes, and the money 
supply. What differs from our earlier analysis is the time horizon. So far, our goal 
has been to explain the behavior of these variables in the long run. Our goal now is 
to explain their short-run deviations from long-run trends. In other words, instead of 
focusing on the forces that explain economic growth from generation to generation, we 
are now interested in the forces that explain economic fluctuations from year to year.
There remains some debate among economists about how best to analyze 
short-run fluctuations, but most economists use the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply. Learning how to use this model for analyzing the short-run 
effects of various events and policies is the primary task ahead. This chapter intro-
duces the model’s two pieces: the aggregate-demand c urve and the aggregate-
supply curve. Before turning to the model, however, let’s look at some of the key 
facts that describe the ups and downs of the economy.
Three Key Facts about Economic Fluctuations
Short-run fluctuations in economic activity have occurred in all countries through-
out history. As a starting point for understanding these year-to-year fluctuations, 
let’s discuss some of their most important properties.
Fact 1: Economic Fluctuations Are Irregular 
and Unpredictable
Fluctuations in the economy are often called the business cycle. As this term suggests, 
economic fluctuations correspond to changes in business conditions. When real 
GDP grows rapidly, business is good. During such periods of economic expansion, 
most firms find that customers are plentiful and that profits are growing. When 
real GDP falls during recessions, businesses have trouble. During such periods of 
economic contraction, most firms experience declining sales and dwindling profits. 
The term business cycle is somewhat misleading because it suggests that eco-
nomic fluctuations follow a regular, predictable pattern. In fact, economic fluctua-
tions are not at all regular, and they are almost impossible to predict with much 
accuracy. Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the real GDP of the U.S. economy since 1965. 
The shaded areas represent times of recession. As the figure shows, recessions do 
not come at regular intervals. Sometimes recessions are close together, such as the 
recessions of 1980 and 1982. Sometimes the economy goes many years without a 
recession. The longest period in U.S. history without a recession was the economic 
expansion from 1991 to 2001.
488
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

A Look at Short-Run 
Economic Fluctuations
Figure 1
This figure shows real GDP 
in panel (a), investment 
spending in panel (b), and 
unemployment in panel 
(c) for the U.S. economy 
using quarterly data 
since 1965. Recessions are 
shown as the shaded areas. 
Notice that real GDP and 
investment spending decline 
during recessions, while 
unemployment rises.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce; 
U.S. Department of Labor.
(a) Real GDP
(b) Investment Spending
(c) Unemployment Rate
Billions of
2005 Dollars
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
3,000
5,000
7,000
9,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
$14,000
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Billions of
2005 Dollars
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
$2,500
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Percent of
Labor Force
2
4
6
8
10%
Real GDP
Investment
spending
Unemployment
rate
489
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

Fact 2: Most Macroeconomic Quantities 
Fluctuate Together
Real GDP is the variable most commonly used to monitor short-run changes in 
the economy because it is the most comprehensive measure of economic activity. 
Real GDP measures the value of all final goods and services produced within a 
given period of time. It also measures the total income (adjusted for inflation) of 
everyone in the economy.
It turns out, however, that for monitoring short-run fluctuations, it does not 
really matter which measure of economic activity one looks at. Most macroeco-
nomic variables that measure some type of income, spending, or production fluc-
tuate closely together. When real GDP falls in a recession, so do personal income, 
corporate profits, consumer spending, investment spending, industrial production, 
retail sales, home sales, auto sales, and so on. Because recessions are economy-wide 
phenomena, they show up in many sources of macroeconomic data.
Although many macroeconomic variables fluctuate together, they fluctuate by 
different amounts. In particular, as panel (b) of Figure 1 shows, investment spend-
ing varies greatly over the business cycle. Even though investment averages about 
one-seventh of GDP, declines in investment account for about two-thirds of the 
declines in GDP during recessions. In other words, when economic conditions 
deteriorate, much of the decline is attributable to reductions in spending on new 
factories, housing, and inventories.
Fact 3: As Output Falls, Unemployment Rises
Changes in the economy’s output of goods and services are strongly correlated 
with changes in the economy’s utilization of its labor force. In other words, when 
real GDP declines, the rate of unemployment rises. This fact is hardly surprising: 
When firms choose to produce a smaller quantity of goods and services, they lay 
off workers, expanding the pool of unemployed. 
Panel (c) of Figure 1 shows the unemployment rate in the U.S. economy since 
1965. Once again, the shaded areas in the figure indicate periods of recession. The 
figure shows clearly the impact of recessions on unemployment. In each of the 
recessions, the unemployment rate rises substantially. When the recession ends 
and real GDP starts to expand, the unemployment rate gradually declines. The 
unemployment rate never approaches zero; instead, it fluctuates around its natural 
rate of about 5 or 6 percent.
QUICK QUIZ List and discuss three key facts about economic fluctuations.
Explaining Short-Run Economic Fluctuations
Describing what happens to economies as they fluctuate over time is easy. 
Explaining what causes these fluctuations is more difficult. Indeed, compared to the 
topics we have studied in previous chapters, the theory of economic fluctuations 
remains controversial. In this and the next two chapters, we develop the model that 
most economists use to explain short-run fluctuations in economic activity.
The Assumptions of Classical Economics
In previous chapters, we developed theories to explain what determines most 
important macroeconomic variables in the long run. Chapter    explained the 
“You’re fired. Pass it on.”
© ROBERT MANKOFF. THE NEW YORKER 
COLLECTION/WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM. 
490
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
17

491
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY
level and growth of productivity and real GDP. Chapters 18 and 19 explained 
how the financial system works and how the real interest rate adjusts to balance 
saving and investment. Chapter 20 explained why there is always some unem-
ployment in the economy. Chapters 21 and 22 explained the monetary system and 
how changes in the money supply affect the price level, the inflation rate, and the 
nominal interest rate.
All of this previous analysis was based on two related ideas: the classical 
dichotomy and monetary neutrality. Recall that the classical dichotomy is the 
separation of variables into real variables (those that measure quantities or rela-
tive prices) and nominal variables (those measured in terms of money). According 
to classical macroeconomic theory, changes in the money supply affect nominal 
variables but not real variables. As a result of this monetary neutrality, Chapters 
17 through 20 were able to examine the determinants of real variables (real GDP, 
the real interest rate, and unemployment) without introducing nominal variables 
(the money supply and the price level).
In a sense, money does not matter in a classical world. If the quantity of money 
in the economy were to double, everything would cost twice as much, and every-
one’s income would be twice as high. But so what? The change would be nominal 
(by the standard meaning of “nearly insignificant”). The things that people really 
care about—whether they have a job, how many goods and services they can 
afford, and so on—would be exactly the same. 
This classical view is sometimes described by the saying, “Money is a veil.” 
That is, nominal variables may be the first things we see when we observe an 
economy because economic variables are often expressed in units of money. But 
what’s important are the real variables and the economic forces that determine 
them. According to classical theory, to understand these real variables, we need 
to look behind the veil. 
The Reality of Short-Run Fluctuations
Do these assumptions of classical macroeconomic theory apply to the world in 
which we live? The answer to this question is of central importance to under-
standing how the economy works. Most economists believe that classical theory 
describes the world in the long run but not in the short run. 
Consider again the impact of money on the economy. Most economists believe 
that, beyond a period of several years, changes in the money supply affect prices 
and other nominal variables but do not affect real GDP, unemployment, or other 
real variables—just as classical theory says. When studying year-to-year changes 
in the economy, however, the assumption of monetary neutrality is no longer 
appropriate. In the short run, real and nominal variables are highly intertwined, 
and changes in the money supply can temporarily push real GDP away from its 
long-run trend.
Even the classical economists themselves, such as David Hume, real-
ized that classical economic theory did not hold in the short run. From his 
vantage point in 18th-century England, Hume observed that when the 
money supply expanded after gold discoveries, it took some time for prices 
to rise, and in the meantime, the economy enjoyed higher employment and 
 production.
To understand how the economy works in the short run, we need a new 
model. This new model can be built using many of the tools we developed

in previous chapters, but it must abandon the classical dichotomy and the 
neutrality of money. We can no longer separate our analysis of real variables 
such as output and employment from our analysis of nominal variables such 
as money and the price level. Our new model focuses on how real and nominal 
variables interact. 
The Model of Aggregate Demand and 
Aggregate Supply
Our model of short-run economic fluctuations focuses on the behavior of two 
variables. The first variable is the economy’s output of goods and services, as mea-
sured by real GDP. The second is the average level of prices, as measured by the 
CPI or the GDP deflator. Notice that output is a real variable, whereas the price 
level is a nominal variable. By focusing on the relationship between these two 
variables, we are departing from the classical assumption that real and nominal 
variables can be studied separately. 
Recession Can 
Change a Way of Life 
BY TYLER COWEN
A
s job losses mount and bailout costs 
run into the trillions, the social costs of 
the economic downturn become clearer. The 
primary question, to be sure, is what can be 
done to shorten or alleviate these bad times. 
But there is also a broader set of questions 
about how this downturn is changing our 
lives, in ways beyond strict economics. 
 
All recessions have cultural and social 
effects, but in major downturns the changes 
can be profound. The Great Depression, for 
example, may be regarded as a social and 
cultural era as well as an economic one. 
And the current crisis is also likely to enact 
changes in various areas, from our enter-
tainment habits to our health.
 
First, consider entertainment. Many stud-
ies have shown that when a job is harder 
to find or less lucrative, people spend more 
time on self-improvement and relatively inex-
pensive amusements. During the Depression 
of the 1930s, that meant listening to the 
radio and playing parlor and board games, 
sometimes in lieu of a glamorous night on 
the town. These stay-at-home tendencies 
persisted through at least the 1950s. 
 
In today’s recession, we can also expect 
to turn to less expensive activities—and 
maybe to keep those habits for years. They 
may take the form of greater interest in free 
content on the Internet and the simple plea-
sures of a daily walk, instead of expensive 
vacations and N.B.A. box seats.
 
In any recession, the poor suffer the most 
pain. But in cultural influence, it may well be 
the rich who lose the most in the current crisis. 
This downturn is bringing a larger-than-usual 
decline in consumption by the wealthy. 
 
The shift has been documented by Jonathan 
A. Parker and Annette Vissing-Jorgenson, finance 
professors at North western University, in their 
recent paper, “Who Bears Aggregate Fluctua-
tions and How? Estimates and Implications for 
Consumption Inequality.” Of course, people who 
held much wealth in real estate or stocks have 
taken heavy losses. But most important, the 
 The Social Influences of Economic 
Downturns
The U.S. economy experienced a deep recession in 2008 and 2009, from 
which the economy was just beginning to recover as this book went to 
press. This event led some observers to ask how such events affect society 
more broadly.
in the news
492
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

We analyze fluctuations in the economy as a whole with the model of 
 aggregate demand and aggregate supply, which is illustrated in Figure 2. On 
the vertical axis is the overall price level in the economy. On the horizontal axis 
is the overall quantity of goods and services produced in the economy. The 
 aggregate-demand curve shows the quantity of goods and services that house-
holds, firms, the government, and customers abroad want to buy at each price 
level. The aggregate-supply curve shows the quantity of goods and services that 
firms produce and sell at each price level. According to this model, the price level 
and the quantity of output adjust to bring aggregate demand and aggregate sup-
ply into balance.
It is tempting to view the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply 
as nothing more than a large version of the model of market demand and market 
supply introduced in Chapter 4. In fact, this model is quite different. When we 
consider demand and supply in a specific market—ice cream, for instance—the 
behavior of buyers and sellers depends on the ability of resources to move from 
one market to another. When the price of ice cream rises, the quantity demanded 
falls because buyers will use their incomes to buy products other than ice cream. 
model of aggregate 
demand and 
aggregate supply
the model that most 
economists use to explain 
short-run fluctuations in 
economic activity around 
its long-run trend
aggregate-demand 
curve
a curve that shows the 
quantity of goods and 
services that households, 
firms, the government, and 
customers abroad want to 
buy at each price level
paper says, the labor incomes of high earners 
have declined more than in past recessions, as 
seen in the financial sector. 
 
Popular culture’s catering to the wealthy 
may also decline in this downturn. We can 
expect a shift away from the lionizing of 
fancy restaurants, for example, and toward 
more use of public libraries. Such changes 
tend to occur in downturns, but this time 
they may be especially pronounced.
 
Recessions and depressions, of course, 
are not good for mental health. But it is 
less widely known that in the United States 
and other affluent countries, physical health 
seems to improve, on average, during a 
downturn. Sure, it’s stressful to miss a pay-
check, but eliminating the stresses of a job 
may have some beneficial effects. Perhaps 
more important, people may take fewer car 
trips, thus lowering the risk of accidents, and 
spend less on alcohol and tobacco. They also 
have more time for exercise and sleep, and 
tend to choose home cooking over fast food.
 
In a 2003 paper, “Healthy Living in Hard 
Times,” Christopher J. Ruhm, an econo-
mist at the University of North Carolina 
at Greensboro, found that the death rate 
falls as unemployment rises. In the United 
States, he found, a 1 percent increase in the 
unemployment rate, on average, decreases 
the death rate by 0.5 percent.
 
David Potts studied the social history of 
Australia in the 1930s in his 2006 book, “The 
Myth of the Great Depression.” Australia’s 
suicide rate spiked in 1930, but overall health 
improved and death rates declined; after 
1930, suicide rates declined as well. 
 
While he found in interviews that many 
people reminisced fondly about those 
depression years, we shouldn’t rush to con-
clude that depressions are happy times.
 
Many of their reports are likely illusory, 
as documented by the Harvard psycholo-
gist Daniel Gilbert in his best-selling book 
“Stumbling on Happiness.” According to 
Professor Gilbert, people often have rosy 
memories of very trying periods, which may 
include extreme poverty or fighting in a war.
 
In today’s context, we are also suffering 
fear and anxiety for the rather dubious con-
solation of having some interesting memo-
ries for the distant future.
 
But this downturn will likely mean a 
more prudent generation to come. That is 
implied by the work of two professors, Ulrike 
Malmendier of the University of California, 
Berkeley, and Stefan Nagel of the Stanford 
Business School, in a 2007 paper, “Depression 
Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect 
Risk-Taking?”
 
A generation that grows up in a period 
of low stock returns is likely to take an 
unusually cautious approach to invest-
ing, even decades later, the paper found. 
Similarly, a generation that grows up with 
high inflation will be more cautious about 
buying bonds decades later.
 
In other words, today’s teenagers stand 
less chance of making foolish decisions in 
the stock market down the road. They are 
likely to forgo some good business opportu-
nities, but also to make fewer mistakes.
 
When all is said and done, something 
terrible has happened in the United States 
economy, and no one should wish for such 
an event. But a deeper look at the down-
turn, and the social changes it is bringing, 
shows a more complex picture.
 
In addition to trying to get out of the 
recession—our first priority—many of us 
will be making do with less and relying more 
on ourselves and our families. The social 
changes may well be the next big story of 
this recession.
Source: New York Times, February 1, 2009.
493
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

Similarly, a higher price of ice cream raises the quantity supplied because firms 
that produce ice cream can increase production by hiring workers away from 
other parts of the economy. This microeconomic substitution from one market to 
another is impossible for the economy as a whole. After all, the quantity that our 
model is trying to explain—real GDP—measures the total quantity of goods and 
services produced by all firms in all markets. To understand why the aggregate-
demand curve is downward sloping and why the aggregate-supply curve is 
upward sloping, we need a macroeconomic theory that explains the total quantity 
of goods and services demanded and the total quantity of goods and services sup-
plied. Developing such a theory is our next task.
QUICK QUIZ How does the economy’s behavior in the short run differ from its 
behavior in the long run? • Draw the model of aggregate demand and aggregate 
supply. What variables are on the two axes?
The Aggregate-Demand Curve
The aggregate-demand curve tells us the quantity of all goods and services 
demanded in the economy at any given price level. As Figure 3 illustrates, the 
aggregate-demand curve is downward sloping. This means that, other things 
equal, a decrease in the economy’s overall level of prices (from, say, P1 to P2) raises 
the quantity of goods and services demanded (from Y1 to Y2). Conversely, an 
increase in the price level reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded.
Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve 
Slopes Downward
Why does a change in the price level move the quantity of goods and services 
demanded in the opposite direction? To answer this question, it is useful to recall 
aggregate-supply 
curve
a curve that shows the 
quantity of goods and 
services that firms choose 
to produce and sell at 
each price level
Figure 2
Aggregate Demand 
and Aggregate Supply
Economists use the model 
of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to analyze 
economic fluctuations. On the 
vertical axis is the overall level 
of prices. On the horizontal 
axis is the economy’s total 
output of goods and services. 
Output and the price level 
adjust to the point at which 
the aggregate-supply and 
aggregate-demand curves 
intersect.
Equilibrium
output
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Equilibrium
price level
Aggregate
supply
Aggregate
demand
494
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

that an economy’s GDP (which we denote as Y) is the sum of its consumption (C), 
investment (I), government purchases (G), and net exports (NX):
Y = C + I + G + NX.
Each of these four components contributes to the aggregate demand for goods 
and services. For now, we assume that government spending is fixed by policy. 
The other three components of spending—consumption, investment, and net 
exports—depend on economic conditions and, in particular, on the price level. 
Therefore, to understand the downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve, 
we must examine how the price level affects the quantity of goods and services 
demanded for consumption, investment, and net exports. 
The Price Level and Consumption: The Wealth Effect Consider the 
money that you hold in your wallet and your bank account. The nominal value of 
this money is fixed: One dollar is always worth one dollar. Yet the real value of a 
dollar is not fixed. If a candy bar costs one dollar, then a dollar is worth one candy 
bar. If the price of a candy bar falls to 50 cents, then one dollar is worth two candy 
bars. Thus, when the price level falls, the dollars you are holding rise in value, 
which increases your real wealth and your ability to buy goods and services. 
This logic gives us the first reason the aggregate demand curve is downward 
sloping. A decrease in the price level raises the real value of money and makes consumers 
wealthier, which in turn encourages them to spend more. The increase in consumer spend-
ing means a larger quantity of goods and services demanded. Conversely, an increase in 
the price level reduces the real value of money and makes consumers poorer, which in turn 
reduces consumer spending and the quantity of goods and services demanded. 
The Price Level and Investment: The Interest-Rate Effect The price level 
is one determinant of the quantity of money demanded. When the price level is 
lower, households need to hold less money to buy the goods and services they 
want. Therefore, when the price level falls, households try to reduce their holdings 
The Aggregate-Demand Curve
Figure 3
A fall in the price level from P1 to 
P2 increases the quantity of goods 
and services demanded from Y1 
to Y2. There are three reasons 
for this negative relationship. As 
the price level falls, real wealth 
rises, interest rates fall, and 
the exchange rate depreciates. 
These effects stimulate spending 
on consumption, investment, 
and net exports. Increased 
spending on any or all of these 
components of output means 
a larger quantity of goods and 
services demanded.
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Aggregate
demand
P1
Y1
Y2
P2
1. A decrease
in the price
level . . .
2. . . . increases the quantity of goods
and services demanded.
495
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

of money by lending some of it out. For instance, a household might use its excess 
money to buy interest-bearing bonds. Or it might deposit its excess money in an 
interest-bearing savings account, and the bank would use these funds to make 
more loans. In either case, as households try to convert some of their money into 
interest-bearing assets, they drive down interest rates. (The next chapter analyzes 
this process in more detail.)
Interest rates, in turn, affect spending on goods and services. Because a lower 
interest rate makes borrowing less expensive, it encourages firms to borrow more 
to invest in new plants and equipment, and it encourages households to borrow 
more to invest in new housing. (A lower interest rate might also stimulate con-
sumer spending, especially spending on large durable purchases such as cars, 
which are often bought on credit.) Thus, a lower interest rate increases the quan-
tity of goods and services demanded.
This logic gives us a second reason the aggregate demand curve is downward 
sloping. A lower price level reduces the interest rate, encourages greater spending on 
investment goods, and thereby increases the quantity of goods and services demanded. 
Conversely, a higher price level raises the interest rate, discourages investment spending, 
and decreases the quantity of goods and services demanded.
The Price Level and Net Exports: The Exchange-Rate Effect As we have 
just discussed, a lower price level in the United States lowers the U.S. interest rate. 
In response to the lower interest rate, some U.S. investors will seek higher returns by 
investing abroad. For instance, as the interest rate on U.S. government bonds falls, a 
mutual fund might sell U.S. government bonds to buy German government bonds. 
As the mutual fund tries to convert its dollars into euros to buy the German bonds, 
it increases the supply of dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange. 
The increased supply of dollars to be turned into euros causes the dollar to depre-
ciate relative to the euro. This leads to a change in the real exchange rate—the relative 
price of domestic and foreign goods. Because each dollar buys fewer units of foreign 
currencies, foreign goods become more expensive relative to domestic goods. 
The change in relative prices affects spending, both at home and abroad. 
Because foreign goods are now more expensive, Americans buy less from other 
countries, causing U.S. imports of goods and services to decrease. At the same 
time, because U.S. goods are now cheaper, foreigners buy more from the United 
States, so U.S. exports increase. Net exports equal exports minus imports, so 
both of these changes cause U.S. net exports to increase. Thus, the fall in the real 
exchange value of the dollar leads to an increase in the quantity of goods and 
services demanded.
This logic yields a third reason the aggregate demand curve is downward slop-
ing. When a fall in the U.S. price level causes U.S. interest rates to fall, the real value 
of the dollar declines in foreign exchange markets. This depreciation stimulates U.S. net 
exports and thereby increases the quantity of goods and services demanded. Conversely, 
when the U.S. price level rises and causes U.S. interest rates to rise, the real value of the 
dollar increases, and this appreciation reduces U.S. net exports and the quantity of goods 
and services demanded.
Summing Up There are three distinct but related reasons a fall in the price 
level increases the quantity of goods and services demanded: 
 1. Consumers are wealthier, which stimulates the demand for consumption goods. 
 2. Interest rates fall, which stimulates the demand for investment goods. 
 3. The currency depreciates, which stimulates the demand for net exports. 
496
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

The same three effects work in reverse: When the price level rises, decreased 
wealth depresses consumer spending, higher interest rates depress investment 
spending, and a currency appreciation depresses net exports.
Here is a thought experiment to hone your intuition about these effects. 
Imagine that one day you wake up and notice that, for some mysterious reason, 
the prices of all goods and services have fallen by half, so the dollars you are hold-
ing are worth twice as much. In real terms, you now have twice as much money 
as you had when you went to bed the night before. What would you do with the 
extra money? You could spend it at your favorite restaurant, increasing consumer 
spending. You could lend it out (by buying a bond or depositing it in your bank), 
reducing interest rates and increasing investment spending. Or you could invest 
it overseas (by buying shares in an international mutual fund), reducing the real 
exchange value of the dollar and increasing net exports. Whichever of these three 
responses you choose, the fall in the price level leads to an increase in the quan-
tity of goods and services demanded. This is what the downward slope of the 
aggregate-demand curve represents.
It is important to keep in mind that the aggregate-demand curve (like all 
demand curves) is drawn holding “other things equal.” In particular, our three 
explanations of the downward-sloping aggregate-demand curve assume that 
the money supply is fixed. That is, we have been considering how a change in 
the price level affects the demand for goods and services, holding the amount 
of money in the economy constant. As we will see, a change in the quantity of 
money shifts the aggregate-demand curve. At this point, just keep in mind that 
the aggregate-demand curve is drawn for a given quantity of the money supply.
Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve Might Shift
The downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve shows that a fall in the price 
level raises the overall quantity of goods and services demanded. Many other fac-
tors, however, affect the quantity of goods and services demanded at a given price 
level. When one of these other factors changes, the quantity of goods and services 
demanded at every price level changes, and the aggregate-demand curve shifts.
Let’s consider some examples of events that shift aggregate demand. We can cat-
egorize them according to which component of spending is most directly affected.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Consumption Suppose Americans sud-
denly become more concerned about saving for retirement and, as a result, 
reduce their current consumption. Because the quantity of goods and services 
demanded at any price level is lower, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the 
left. Conversely, imagine that a stock-market boom makes people wealthier and 
less concerned about saving. The resulting increase in consumer spending means 
a greater quantity of goods and services demanded at any given price level, so the 
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right.
Thus, any event that changes how much people want to consume at a given 
price level shifts the aggregate-demand curve. One policy variable that has this 
effect is the level of taxation. When the government cuts taxes, it encourages peo-
ple to spend more, so the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right. When the 
government raises taxes, people cut back on their spending, and the aggregate-
demand curve shifts to the left.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Investment Any event that changes how 
much firms want to invest at a given price level also shifts the aggregate-demand 
curve. For instance, imagine that the computer industry introduces a faster line of 
497
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

computers, and many firms decide to invest in new computer systems. Because 
the quantity of goods and services demanded at any price level is higher, the 
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right. Conversely, if firms become pessimis-
tic about future business conditions, they may cut back on investment spending, 
shifting the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
Tax policy can also influence aggregate demand through investment. For 
example, an investment tax credit (a tax rebate tied to a firm’s investment spend-
ing) increases the quantity of investment goods that firms demand at any given 
interest rate and therefore shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. The 
repeal of an investment tax credit reduces investment and shifts the aggregate-
demand curve to the left. 
Another policy variable that can influence investment and aggregate demand is 
the money supply. As we discuss more fully in the next chapter, an increase in the 
money supply lowers the interest rate in the short run. This decrease in the inter-
est rate makes borrowing less costly, which stimulates investment spending and 
thereby shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. Conversely, a decrease 
in the money supply raises the interest rate, discourages investment spending, 
and thereby shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left. Many economists 
believe that throughout U.S. history, changes in monetary policy have been an 
important source of shifts in aggregate demand.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Government Purchases The most direct 
way that policymakers shift the aggregate-demand curve is through government 
purchases. For example, suppose Congress decides to reduce purchases of new 
weapons systems. Because the quantity of goods and services demanded at any 
price level is lower, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the left. Conversely, if 
state governments start building more highways, the result is a greater quantity of 
goods and services demanded at any price level, so the aggregate-demand curve 
shifts to the right.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Net Exports Any event that changes net 
exports for a given price level also shifts aggregate demand. For instance, when 
Europe experiences a recession, it buys fewer goods from the United States. This 
reduces U.S. net exports at every price level and shifts the aggregate-demand 
curve for the U.S. economy to the left. When Europe recovers from its recession, it 
starts buying U.S. goods again, and the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right.
Net exports can also change because international speculators cause move-
ments in the exchange rate. Suppose, for instance, that these speculators lose 
confidence in foreign economies and want to move some of their wealth into 
the U.S. economy. In doing so, they bid up the value of the U.S. dollar in the 
foreign exchange market. This appreciation of the dollar makes U.S. goods more 
expensive compared to foreign goods, which depresses net exports and shifts the 
aggregate-demand curve to the left. Conversely, speculation that causes a depre-
ciation of the dollar stimulates net exports and shifts the aggregate-demand curve 
to the right.
Summing Up In the next chapter, we analyze the aggregate-demand curve in 
more detail. There we examine more precisely how the tools of monetary and fis-
cal policy can shift aggregate demand and whether policymakers should use these 
tools for that purpose. At this point, however, you should have some idea about 
why the aggregate-demand curve slopes downward and what kinds of events 
and policies can shift this curve. Table 1 summarizes what we have learned so far.
498
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

QUICK QUIZ Explain the three reasons the aggregate-demand curve slopes down-
ward • Give an example of an event that would shift the aggregate-demand curve. 
Which way would this event shift the curve?
The Aggregate-Supply Curve
The aggregate-supply curve tells us the total quantity of goods and services that firms 
produce and sell at any given price level. Unlike the aggregate-demand curve, which 
is always downward sloping, the aggregate-supply curve shows a relationship that 
depends crucially on the time horizon examined. In the long run, the aggregate-supply 
curve is vertical, whereas in the short run, the aggregate-supply curve is upward sloping. To 
understand short-run economic fluctuations, and how the short-run behavior of the 
economy deviates from its long-run behavior, we need to examine both the long-run 
aggregate-supply curve and the short-run aggregate-supply curve. 
Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve 
Is Vertical in the Long Run
What determines the quantity of goods and services supplied in the long run? 
We implicitly answered this question earlier in the book when we analyzed the 
The Aggregate-Demand 
Curve: Summary
Table 1
Why Does the Aggregate-Demand Curve Slope Downward?
1.  The Wealth Effect: A lower price level increases real wealth, which stimulates spending on 
consumption.
2.  The Interest-Rate Effect: A lower price level reduces the interest rate, which stimulates spending 
on investment. 
3.  The Exchange-Rate Effect: A lower price level causes the real exchange rate to depreciate, 
which stimulates spending on net exports.
Why Might the Aggregate-Demand Curve Shift?
1.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Consumption: An event that makes consumers spend more at 
a given price level (a tax cut, a stock-market boom) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the 
right. An event that makes consumers spend less at a given price level (a tax hike, a stock-
market decline) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
2.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Investment: An event that makes firms invest more at a given price 
level (optimism about the future, a fall in interest rates due to an increase in the money supply) 
shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. An event that makes firms invest less at a given 
price level (pessimism about the future, a rise in interest rates due to a decrease in the money 
supply) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left. 
3.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Government Purchases: An increase in government purchases of goods 
and services (greater spending on defense or highway construction) shifts the aggregate-demand curve 
to the right. A decrease in government purchases on goods and services (a cutback in defense or high-
way spending) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
4.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Net Exports: An event that raises spending on net exports at a 
given price level (a boom overseas, speculation that causes an exchange-rate depreciation) shifts 
the aggregate-demand curve to the right. An event that reduces spending on net exports at a 
given price level (a recession overseas, speculation that causes an exchange-rate appreciation) 
shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
499
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

process of economic growth. In the long run, an economy’s production of goods and 
services (its real GDP) depends on its supplies of labor, capital, and natural resources and 
on the available technology used to turn these factors of production into goods and services. 
When we analyzed these forces that govern long-run growth, we did not need 
to make any reference to the overall level of prices. We examined the price level 
in a separate chapter, where we saw that it was determined by the quantity of 
money. We learned that if two economies were identical except that one had twice 
as much money in circulation as the other, the price level would be twice as high 
in the economy with more money. But since the amount of money does not affect 
technology or the supplies of labor, capital, and natural resources, the output of 
goods and services in the two economies would be the same.
Because the price level does not affect the long-run determinants of real GDP, 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical, as in Figure 4. In other words, 
in the long run, the economy’s labor, capital, natural resources, and technology 
determine the total quantity of goods and services supplied, and this quantity 
supplied is the same regardless of what the price level happens to be.
The vertical long-run aggregate-supply curve is a graphical representation of the 
classical dichotomy and monetary neutrality. As we have already discussed, clas-
sical macroeconomic theory is based on the assumption that real variables do not 
depend on nominal variables. The long-run aggregate-supply curve is consistent 
with this idea because it implies that the quantity of output (a real variable) does 
not depend on the level of prices (a nominal variable). As noted earlier, most econo-
mists believe this principle works well when studying the economy over a period 
of many years but not when studying year-to-year changes. Thus, the aggregate-
supply curve is vertical only in the long run.
Why the Long-Run Aggregate-Supply 
Curve Might Shift
Because classical macroeconomic theory predicts the quantity of goods and ser-
vices produced by an economy in the long run, it also explains the position of the 
Figure 4
The Long-Run 
Aggregate-Supply Curve
In the long run, the quantity 
of output supplied depends 
on the economy’s quantities 
of labor, capital, and natural 
resources and on the technology 
for turning these inputs into 
output. Because the quantity 
supplied does not depend on the 
overall price level, the long-run 
aggregate-supply curve is vertical 
at the natural rate of output.
Quantity of
Output
Natural rate
of output
Price
Level
0
Long-run
aggregate
supply
P2
1. A change
in the price
level . . .
2.  . . . does not affect 
the quantity of goods 
and services supplied 
in the long run.
P1
500
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

long-run aggregate-supply curve. The long-run level of production is sometimes 
called potential output or full-employment output. To be more precise, we call it the 
n atural rate of output because it shows what the economy produces when unem-
ployment is at its natural, or normal, rate. The natural rate of output is the level of 
production toward which the economy gravitates in the long run.
Any change in the economy that alters the natural rate of output shifts the long-
run aggregate-supply curve. Because output in the classical model depends on 
labor, capital, natural resources, and technological knowledge, we can categorize 
shifts in the long-run aggregate-supply curve as arising from these four sources. 
Shifts Arising from Changes in Labor Imagine that an economy experi-
ences an increase in immigration. Because there would be a greater number of 
workers, the quantity of goods and services supplied would increase. As a result, 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift to the right. Conversely, if many 
workers left the economy to go abroad, the long-run aggregate-supply curve 
would shift to the left.
The position of the long-run aggregate-supply curve also depends on the natu-
ral rate of unemployment, so any change in the natural rate of unemployment 
shifts the long-run aggregate-supply curve. For example, if Congress were to raise 
the minimum wage substantially, the natural rate of unemployment would rise, 
and the economy would produce a smaller quantity of goods and services. As a 
result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift to the left. Conversely, if 
a reform of the unemployment insurance system were to encourage unemployed 
workers to search harder for new jobs, the natural rate of unemployment would 
fall, and the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift to the right.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Capital An increase in the economy’s capi-
tal stock increases productivity and, thereby, the quantity of goods and services 
supplied. As a result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right. 
Conversely, a decrease in the economy’s capital stock decreases productivity 
and the quantity of goods and services supplied, shifting the long-run aggregate-
supply curve to the left. 
Notice that the same logic applies regardless of whether we are discussing 
physical capital such as machines and factories or human capital such as college 
degrees. An increase in either type of capital will raise the economy’s ability to 
produce goods and services and, thus, shift the long-run aggregate-supply curve 
to the right. 
Shifts Arising from Changes in Natural Resources An economy’s produc-
tion depends on its natural resources, including its land, minerals, and weather. 
The discovery of a new mineral deposit shifts the long-run aggregate-supply curve 
to the right. A change in weather patterns that makes farming more difficult shifts 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.
In many countries, important natural resources are imported. A change in the 
availability of these resources can also shift the aggregate-supply curve. As we 
discuss later in this chapter, events occurring in the world oil market have histori-
cally been an important source of shifts in aggregate supply for the United States 
and other oil-importing nations.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Technological Knowledge Perhaps the 
most important reason that the economy today produces more than it did a generation 
ago is that our technological knowledge has advanced. The invention of the computer, 
for instance, has allowed us to produce more goods and services from any given 
natural rate of 
output
the production of 
goods and services that 
an economy achieves 
in the long run when 
unemployment is at its 
normal rate
501
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

amounts of labor, capital, and natural resources. As computer use has spread through-
out the economy, it has shifted the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the right.
Although not literally technological, many other events act like changes in 
technology. For instance, opening up international trade has effects similar to 
inventing new production processes because it allows a country to specialize in 
higher-productivity industries; therefore, it also shifts the long-run aggregate-
supply curve to the right. Conversely, if the government passes new regulations 
preventing firms from using some production methods, perhaps to address 
worker safety or environmental concerns, the result would be a leftward shift in 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve.
Summing Up Because the long-run aggregate-supply curve reflects the classi-
cal model of the economy we developed in previous chapters, it provides a new 
way to describe our earlier analysis. Any policy or event that raised real GDP in 
previous chapters can now be described as increasing the quantity of goods and 
services supplied and shifting the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the right. 
Any policy or event that lowered real GDP in previous chapters can now be 
described as decreasing the quantity of goods and services supplied and shifting 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the left. 
Using Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply to 
Depict Long-Run Growth and Inflation
Having introduced the economy’s aggregate-demand curve and the long-run 
aggregate-supply curve, we now have a new way to describe the economy’s long-
run trends. Figure 5 illustrates the changes that occur in an economy from decade 
to decade. Notice that both curves are shifting. Although many forces influence the 
economy in the long run and can in theory cause such shifts, the two most impor-
tant forces in practice are technology and monetary policy. Technological progress 
enhances an economy’s ability to produce goods and services, and the resulting 
increases in output are reflected in continual shifts of the long-run aggregate-supply 
curve to the right. At the same time, because the Fed increases the money supply 
over time, the aggregate-demand curve also shifts to the right. As the figure illus-
trates, the result is continuing growth in output (as shown by increasing Y) and con-
tinuing inflation (as shown by increasing P). This is just another way of representing 
the classical analysis of growth and inflation we conducted in earlier chapters.
The purpose of developing the model of aggregate demand and aggregate sup-
ply, however, is not to dress our previous long-run conclusions in new clothing. 
Instead, it is to provide a framework for short-run analysis, as we will see in a 
moment. As we develop the short-run model, we keep the analysis simple by not 
showing the continuing growth and inflation depicted by the shifts in Figure 5. But 
always remember that long-run trends are the background upon which short-run 
fluctuations are superimposed. Short-run fluctuations in output and the price level should 
be viewed as deviations from the continuing long-run trends of output growth and inflation.
Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve Slopes 
Upward in the Short Run
The key difference between the economy in the short run and in the long run is 
the behavior of aggregate supply. The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical 
because, in the long run, the overall level of prices does not affect the economy’s 
ability to produce goods and services. By contrast, in the short run, the price 
502
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

level does affect the economy’s output. That is, over a period of a year or two, an 
increase in the overall level of prices in the economy tends to raise the quantity of 
goods and services supplied, and a decrease in the level of prices tends to reduce 
the quantity of goods and services supplied. As a result, the short-run aggregate-
supply curve is upward sloping, as shown in Figure 6. 
Why do changes in the price level affect output in the short run? Macro-
economists have proposed three theories for the upward slope of the short-run 
aggregate-supply curve. In each theory, a specific market imperfection causes the 
supply side of the economy to behave differently in the short run than it does in 
the long run. The following theories differ in their details, but they share a com-
mon theme: The quantity of output supplied deviates from its long-run, or natural, level 
when the actual price level in the economy deviates from the price level that people expected 
to prevail. When the price level rises above the level that people expected, output 
rises above its natural rate, and when the price level falls below the expected level, 
output falls below its natural rate.
As the economy becomes better able to produce goods and services over time, 
primarily because of technological progress, the long-run aggregate-supply curve 
shifts to the right. At the same time, as the Fed increases the money supply, the 
aggregate-demand curve also shifts to the right. In this figure, output grows 
from Y1990 to Y2000 and then to Y2010, and the price level rises from P1990 to P2000 and 
then to P2010. Thus, the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply offers 
a new way to describe the classical analysis of growth and inflation.
Figure 5
Long-Run Growth 
and Inflation in the 
Model of Aggregate 
Demand and Aggregate 
Supply
Quantity of
Output
Y1990
AD1990
Y2000
AD2000
Y2010
Aggregate 
demand, AD2010
Price
Level
0
Long-run
aggregate
supply,
LRAS1990
LRAS2000
LRAS2010
P1990
1. In the long run,
technological 
progress shifts 
long-run aggregate 
supply . . .
4. . . . and
ongoing inﬂation.
3. . . . leading to growth
in output . . .
P2000
P2010
2. . . . and growth in the 
money supply shifts 
aggregate demand . . .
503
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

The Sticky-Wage Theory The first explanation of the upward slope of the 
short-run aggregate-supply curve is the sticky-wage theory. This theory is the 
simplest of the three approaches to aggregate supply , and some economists 
believe it highlights the most important reason why the economy in the short run 
differs from the economy in the long run. Therefore, it is the theory of short-run 
aggregate supply that we emphasize in this book. 
According to this theory, the short-run aggregate-supply curve slopes upward 
because nominal wages are slow to adjust to changing economic conditions. In 
other words, wages are “sticky” in the short run. To some extent, the slow adjust-
ment of nominal wages is attributable to long-term contracts between workers 
and firms that fix nominal wages, sometimes for as long as three years. In addi-
tion, this prolonged adjustment may be attributable to slowly changing social 
norms and notions of fairness that influence wage setting. 
An example helps explain how sticky nominal wages can result in a short-run 
aggregate-supply curve that slopes upward. Imagine that a year ago a firm expected 
the price level today to be 100, and based on this expectation, it signed a contract 
with its workers agreeing to pay them, say, $20 an hour. In fact, the price level, P,
turns out to be only 95. Because prices have fallen below expectations, the firm gets 
5 percent less than expected for each unit of its product that it sells. The cost of labor 
used to make the output, however, is stuck at $20 per hour. Production is now less 
profitable, so the firm hires fewer workers and reduces the quantity of output sup-
plied. Over time, the labor contract will expire, and the firm can renegotiate with its 
workers for a lower wage (which they may accept because prices are lower), but in 
the meantime, employment and production will remain below their long-run levels.
The same logic works in reverse. Suppose the price level turns out to be 105, 
and the wage remains stuck at $20. The firm sees that the amount it is paid for 
each unit sold is up by 5 percent, while its labor costs are not. In response, it 
hires more workers and increases the quantity supplied. Eventually, the workers 
will demand higher nominal wages to compensate for the higher price level, but 
for a while, the firm can take advantage of the profit opportunity by increasing 
employment and the quantity of output supplied above their long-run levels.
Figure 6
The Short-Run 
Aggregate-Supply 
Curve
In the short run, a fall in the 
price level from P1 to P2 reduces 
the quantity of output supplied 
from Y1 to Y2. This positive 
relationship could be due to 
sticky wages, sticky prices, or 
misperceptions. Over time, 
wages, prices, and perceptions 
adjust, so this positive 
relationship is only temporary.
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Short-run
aggregate
supply
Y2
Y1
1. A decrease
in the price
level . . .
2. . . . reduces the quantity
of goods and services
supplied in the short run.
P1
P2
504
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

In short, according to the sticky-wage theory, the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve is upward sloping because nominal wages are based on expected prices 
and do not respond immediately when the actual price level turns out to be dif-
ferent from what was expected. This stickiness of wages gives firms an incentive 
to produce less output when the price level turns out lower than expected and to 
produce more when the price level turns out higher than expected. 
The Sticky-Price Theory Some economists have advocated another approach 
to explaining the upward slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve, called 
the sticky-price theory. As we just discussed, the sticky-wage theory emphasizes 
that nominal wages adjust slowly over time. The sticky-price theory emphasizes 
that the prices of some goods and services also adjust sluggishly in response to 
changing economic conditions. This slow adjustment of prices occurs in part 
because there are costs to adjusting prices, called menu costs. These menu costs 
include the cost of printing and distributing catalogs and the time required to 
change price tags. As a result of these costs, prices as well as wages may be sticky 
in the short run.
To see how sticky prices explain the aggregate-supply curve’s upward slope, 
suppose that each firm in the economy announces its prices in advance based 
on the economic conditions it expects to prevail over the coming year. Suppose 
further that after prices are announced, the economy experiences an unexpected 
contraction in the money supply, which (as we have learned) will reduce the 
overall price level in the long run. Although some firms can reduce their prices 
immediately in response to an unexpected change in economic conditions, other 
firms may not want to incur additional menu costs. As a result, they may tempo-
rarily lag behind in reducing their prices. Because these lagging firms have prices 
that are too high, their sales decline. Declining sales, in turn, cause these firms to 
cut back on production and employment. In other words, because not all prices 
adjust instantly to changing economic conditions, an unexpected fall in the price 
level leaves some firms with higher-than-desired prices, and these higher-than-
desired prices depress sales and induce firms to reduce the quantity of goods and 
services they produce. 
The same reasoning applies when the money supply and price level turn out 
to be above what firms expected when they originally set their prices. While some 
firms raise their prices immediately in response to the new economic environ-
ment, other firms lag behind, keeping their prices at the lower-than-desired levels. 
These low prices attract customers, which induces these firms to increase employ-
ment and production. Thus, during the time these lagging firms are operating 
with outdated prices, there is a positive association between the overall price level 
and the quantity of output. This positive association is represented by the upward 
slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve.
The Misperceptions Theory A third approach to explaining the upward 
slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve is the misperceptions theory. 
According to this theory, changes in the overall price level can temporarily mis-
lead suppliers about what is happening in the individual markets in which they 
sell their output. As a result of these short-run misperceptions, suppliers respond 
to changes in the level of prices, and this response leads to an upward-sloping 
aggregate-supply curve.
To see how this might work, suppose the overall price level falls below the 
level that suppliers expected. When suppliers see the prices of their products fall, 
they may mistakenly believe that their relative prices have fallen; that is, they may 
505
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

believe that their prices have fallen compared to other prices in the economy. For 
example, wheat farmers may notice a fall in the price of wheat before they notice 
a fall in the prices of the many items they buy as consumers. They may infer from 
this observation that the reward to producing wheat is temporarily low, and they 
may respond by reducing the quantity of wheat they supply. Similarly, workers 
may notice a fall in their nominal wages before they notice that the prices of the 
goods they buy are also falling. They may infer that the reward for working is 
temporarily low and respond by reducing the quantity of labor they supply. In 
both cases, a lower price level causes misperceptions about relative prices, and 
these misperceptions induce suppliers to respond to the lower price level by 
decreasing the quantity of goods and services supplied. 
Similar misperceptions arise when the price level is above what was expected. 
Suppliers of goods and services may notice the price of their output rising and 
infer, mistakenly, that their relative prices are rising. They would conclude that it 
is a good time to produce. Until their misperceptions are corrected, they respond 
to the higher price level by increasing the quantity of goods and services supplied. 
This behavior results in a short-run aggregate-supply curve that slopes upward.
Summing Up There are three alternative explanations for the upward slope 
of the short-run aggregate-supply curve: (1) sticky wages, (2) sticky prices, and 
(3) misperceptions about relative prices. Economists debate which of these theo-
ries is correct, and it is very possible each contains an element of truth. For our 
purposes in this book, the similarities of the theories are more important than the 
differences. All three theories suggest that output deviates in the short run from 
its long-run level (the natural rate) when the actual price level deviates from the 
price level that people had expected to prevail. We can express this mathemati-
cally as follows:
 
Quantity 
 
Natural 
 
 
Actual 
 
Expected
 
of output 
= 
rate of 
+ 
a 
price 
– 
price
 
supplied 
 
output 
 
 
level 
 
level
where a is a number that determines how much output responds to unexpected 
changes in the price level.
Notice that each of the three theories of short-run aggregate supply emphasizes a 
problem that is likely to be temporary. Whether the upward slope of the aggregate-
supply curve is attributable to sticky wages, sticky prices, or misperceptions, 
these conditions will not persist forever. Over time, nominal wages will become 
unstuck, prices will become unstuck, and misperceptions about relative prices 
will be corrected. In the long run, it is reasonable to assume that wages and prices 
are flexible rather than sticky and that people are not confused about relative 
prices. Thus, while we have several good theories to explain why the short-run 
aggregate-supply curve is upward sloping, they are all consistent with a long-run 
aggregate-supply curve that is vertical.
Why the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply 
Curve Might Shift
The short-run aggregate-supply curve tells us the quantity of goods and services 
supplied in the short run for any given level of prices. This curve is similar to the long-
run aggregate-supply curve, but it is upward sloping rather than vertical because of 
sticky wages, sticky prices, and misperceptions. Thus, when thinking about what 
shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve, we have to consider all those variables 
506
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

that shift the long-run aggregate-supply curve plus a new variable—the expected 
price level—that influences the wages that are stuck, the prices that are stuck, and the 
perceptions about relative prices that may be flawed.
Let’s start with what we know about the long-run aggregate-supply curve. As 
we discussed earlier, shifts in the long-run aggregate-supply curve normally arise 
from changes in labor, capital, natural resources, or technological knowledge. 
These same variables shift the short-run aggregate-supply curve. For example, 
when an increase in the economy’s capital stock increases productivity, the 
economy is able to produce more output, so both the long-run and short-run 
aggregate-supply curves shift to the right. When an increase in the minimum 
wage raises the natural rate of unemployment, the economy has fewer employed 
workers and thus produces less output, so both the long-run and short-run 
aggregate-supply curves shift to the left.
The important new variable that affects the position of the short-run aggregate-
supply curve is the price level that people expected to prevail. As we have dis-
cussed, the quantity of goods and services supplied depends, in the short run, 
on sticky wages, sticky prices, and misperceptions. Yet wages, prices, and per-
ceptions are set based on the expected price level. So when people change their 
expectations of the price level, the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts.
To make this idea more concrete, let’s consider a specific theory of aggregate 
supply—the sticky-wage theory. According to this theory, when workers and firms 
expect the price level to be high, they are more likely to reach a bargain with a high 
level of nominal wages. High wages raise firms’ costs, and for any given actual 
price level, higher costs reduce the quantity of goods and services supplied. Thus, 
when the expected price level rises, wages are higher, costs increase, and firms 
produce a smaller quantity of goods and services at any given actual price level. 
Thus, the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left. Conversely, when the 
expected price level falls, wages are lower, costs decline, firms increase output at 
any given price level, and the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right.
A similar logic applies in each theory of aggregate supply. The general lesson 
is the following: An increase in the expected price level reduces the quantity of goods and 
services supplied and shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the left. A decrease in 
the expected price level raises the quantity of goods and services supplied and shifts the short-
run aggregate-supply curve to the right. As we will see in the next section, the influ-
ence of expectations on the position of the short-run aggregate-supply curve plays a 
key role in explaining how the economy makes the transition from the short run to 
the long run. In the short run, expectations are fixed, and the economy finds itself at 
the intersection of the aggregate-demand curve and the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve. In the long run, if people observe that the price level is different from what 
they expected, their expectations adjust, and the short-run aggregate-supply curve 
shifts. This shift ensures that the economy eventually finds itself at the intersection 
of the aggregate-demand curve and the long-run aggregate-supply curve.
You should now have some understanding about why the short-run aggregate-
supply curve slopes upward and what events and policies can cause this curve to 
shift. Table 2 summarizes our discussion.
QUICK QUIZ Explain why the long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical. • Explain 
three theories for why the short-run aggregate-supply curve is upward sloping. • What  
variables shift both the long-run and short-run aggregate-supply curves? • What vari-
able shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve but not the long-run aggregate-supply 
curve?
507
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

Two Causes of Economic Fluctuations
Now that we have introduced the model of aggregate demand and aggregate sup-
ply, we have the basic tools we need to analyze fluctuations in economic activity. 
In particular, we can use what we have learned about aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to examine the two basic causes of short-run fluctuations: shifts 
in aggregate demand and shifts in aggregate supply.
To keep things simple, we assume the economy begins in long-run equilibrium, 
as shown in Figure 7. Output and the price level are determined in the long run 
by the intersection of the aggregate-demand curve and the long-run aggregate-
supply curve, shown as point A in the figure. At this point, output is at its natural 
rate. Because the economy is always in a short-run equilibrium, the short-run 
aggregate-supply curve passes through this point as well, indicating that the 
expected price level has adjusted to this long-run equilibrium. That is, when an 
economy is in its long-run equilibrium, the expected price level must equal the 
actual price level so that the intersection of aggregate demand with short-run 
aggregate supply is the same as the intersection of aggregate demand with long-
run aggregate supply.
The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Demand
Suppose that a wave of pessimism suddenly overtakes the economy. The cause 
might be a scandal in the White House, a crash in the stock market, or the outbreak 
The Short-Run 
Aggregate-Supply 
Curve: Summary
Table 2
Why Does the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Slope Upward?
1.  The Sticky-Wage Theory: An unexpectedly low price level raises the real wage, which causes 
firms to hire fewer workers and produce a smaller quantity of goods and services. 
2.  The Sticky-Price Theory: An unexpectedly low price level leaves some firms with higher-
than-desired prices, which depresses their sales and leads them to cut back production.
3.  The Misperceptions Theory: An unexpectedly low price level leads some suppliers to think their 
relative prices have fallen, which induces a fall in production.
Why Might the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Shift?
1.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Labor: An increase in the quantity of labor available (perhaps due to 
a fall in the natural rate of unemployment) shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease 
in the quantity of labor available (perhaps due to a rise in the natural rate of unemployment) shifts 
the aggregate-supply curve to the left.
2.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Capital: An increase in physical or human capital shifts the 
aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in physical or human capital shifts the aggregate-
supply curve to the left.
3.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Natural Resources: An increase in the availability of natural 
resources shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in the availability of natural 
resources shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the left. 
4.  Shifts Arising from Changes in Technology: An advance in technological knowledge shifts the 
aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in the available technology (perhaps due to 
government regulation) shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the left.
5.  Shifts Arising from Changes in the Expected Price Level: A decrease in the expected price level 
shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the right. An increase in the expected price level 
shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.
508
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

of war overseas. Because of this event, many people lose confidence in the future 
and alter their plans. Households cut back on their spending and delay major 
purchases, and firms put off buying new equipment. 
What is the macroeconomic impact of such a wave of pessimism? In answering 
this question, we can follow the three steps we used in Chapter 4 when analyzing 
supply and demand in specific markets. First, we determine whether the event 
affects aggregate demand or aggregate supply. Second, we decide in which direc-
tion the curve shifts. Third, we use the diagram of aggregate demand and aggre-
gate supply to compare the initial and the new equilibrium. The new wrinkle is 
that we need to add a fourth step: We have to keep track of a new short-run equi-
librium, a new long-run equilibrium, and the transition between them. Table 3 
summarizes the four steps to analyzing economic fluctuations.
The first two steps are easy. First, because the wave of pessimism affects spend-
ing plans, it affects the aggregate-demand curve. Second, because households 
and firms now want to buy a smaller quantity of goods and services for any 
given price level, the event reduces aggregate demand. As Figure 8 shows, the 
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the left from AD1 to AD2.
The Long-Run Equilibrium
Figure 7
The long-run equilibrium of 
the economy is found where 
the aggregate-demand curve 
crosses the long-run aggregate-
supply curve (point A). When the 
economy reaches this long-run 
equilibrium, the expected price 
level will have adjusted to equal 
the actual price level. As a result, 
the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve crosses this point as well.
Natural rate
of output
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Equilibrium
price
Short-run
aggregate
supply
Long-run
aggregate
supply
Aggregate
demand
A
Four Steps for Analyzing 
Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Table 3
1.  Decide whether the event shifts the aggregate demand curve or the aggregate supply 
curve (or perhaps both).
2. Decide in which direction the curve shifts.
3.  Use the diagra m of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to determine the impact 
on output and the price level in the short run.
4.  Use the diagram of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to analyze how the 
economy moves from its new short-run equilibrium to its long-run equilibrium.
509
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

With this figure, we can perform step three: By comparing the initial and the new 
equilibrium, we can see the effects of the fall in aggregate demand. In the short run, 
the economy moves along the initial short-run aggregate-supply curve, AS1, going 
from point A to point B. As the economy moves between these two points, output 
falls from Y1 to Y2, and the price level falls from P1 to P2. The falling level of output 
indicates that the economy is in a recession. Although not shown in the figure, firms 
respond to lower sales and production by reducing employment. Thus, the pes-
simism that caused the shift in aggregate demand is, to some extent, self-fulfilling: 
Pessimism about the future leads to falling incomes and rising unemployment.
Now comes step four—the transition from the short-run equilibrium to the 
long-run equilibrium. Because of the reduction in aggregate demand, the price 
level initially falls from P1 to P2. The price level is thus below the level that people 
were expecting (P1) before the sudden fall in aggregate demand. People can be 
surprised in the short run, but they will not remain surprised. Over time, expec-
tations catch up with this new reality, and the expected price level falls as well. 
The fall in the expected price level alters wages, prices, and perceptions, which in 
turn influences the position of the short-run aggregate-supply curve. For exam-
ple, according to the sticky-wage theory, once workers and firms come to expect 
a lower level of prices, they start to strike bargains for lower nominal wages; the 
reduction in labor costs encourages firms to hire more workers and expands pro-
duction at any given level of prices. Thus, the fall in the expected price level shifts 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the right from AS1 to AS2 in Figure 8. This 
shift allows the economy to approach point C, where the new aggregate-demand 
curve (AD2) crosses the long-run aggregate-supply curve. 
In the new long-run equilibrium, point C, output is back to its natural rate. 
The economy has corrected itself: The decline in output is reversed in the long 
Figure 8
A Contraction in Aggregate 
Demand
A fall in aggregate demand is 
represented with a leftward shift 
in the aggregate-demand curve 
from AD1 to AD2. In the short 
run, the economy moves from 
point A to point B. Output falls 
from Y1 to Y2, and the price level 
falls from P1 to P2. Over time, as 
the expected price level adjusts, 
the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve shifts to the right from 
AS1 to AS2, and the economy 
reaches point C, where the new 
aggregate-demand curve crosses 
the long-run aggregate-supply 
curve. In the long run, the price 
level falls to P3, and output 
returns to its natural rate, Y1.
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Short-run aggregate
supply, AS1
Long-run
aggregate
supply
Aggregate
demand, AD1
A
B
C
P1
P2
P3
Y1
Y2
AD2
AS2
1. A decrease in
aggregate demand . . .
2. . . . causes output to fall in the short run . . .
3. . . . but over 
time, the short-run
aggregate-supply
curve shifts . . .
4. . . . and output returns
to its natural rate.
510
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

run, even without action by policymakers. Although the wave of pessimism has 
reduced aggregate demand, the price level has fallen sufficiently (to P3) to offset 
the shift in the aggregate-demand curve, and people have come to expect this new 
lower price level as well. Thus, in the long run, the shift in aggregate demand is 
reflected fully in the price level and not at all in the level of output. In other words, 
the long-run effect of a shift in aggregate demand is a nominal change (the price 
level is lower) but not a real change (output is the same).
What should policymakers do when faced with a sudden fall in aggregate 
demand? In this analysis, we assumed they did nothing. Another possibility is that, 
as soon as the economy heads into recession (moving from point A to point B), 
policymakers could take action to increase aggregate demand. As we noted earlier, 
an increase in government spending or an increase in the money supply would 
increase the quantity of goods and services demanded at any price and, therefore, 
would shift the aggregate-demand curve to the right. If policymakers act with suf-
ficient speed and precision, they can offset the initial shift in aggregate demand, 
return the aggregate-demand curve to AD1, and bring the economy back to point A. 
If the policy is successful, the painful period of depressed output and employment 
can be reduced in length and severity. The next chapter discusses in more detail the 
ways in which monetary and fiscal policy influence aggregate demand, as well as 
some of the practical difficulties in using these policy instruments. 
To sum up, this story about shifts in aggregate demand has three important lessons:
•  In the short run, shifts in aggregate demand cause fluctuations in the economy’s 
output of goods and services.
FYI
 Monetary Neutrality Revisited
A
ccording to classical economic theory, money is neutral. That is, 
changes in the quantity of money affect nominal variables such 
as the price level but not real variables such as output. Earlier in this 
chapter, we noted that most economists accept this conclusion as 
a description of how the economy works in the long run but not in 
the short run. With the model of aggregate demand and aggregate 
supply, we can illustrate this conclusion and explain it more fully.
 
Suppose that the Federal Reserve reduces the quantity of money 
in the economy. What effect does this change have? As we dis-
cussed, the money supply is one determinant of aggregate demand. 
The reduction in the money supply shifts the aggregate-demand 
curve to the left.
 
The analysis looks just like Figure 8. Even though the cause of 
the shift in aggregate demand is different, we would observe the 
same effects on output and the price level. In the short run, both 
output and the price level fall. The economy experiences a recession. 
But over time, the expected price level falls as well. Firms and work-
ers respond to their new expectations by, for instance, agreeing to 
lower nominal wages. As they do so, the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve shifts to the right. Eventually, the economy finds itself back on 
the long-run aggregate-supply curve.
 
Figure 8 shows when money matters for real variables and when 
it does not. In the long run, money is neutral, as represented by the 
movement of the economy from point A to point C. But in the short 
run, a change in the money supply has real effects, as represented 
by the movement of the economy from point A to point B. An old 
saying summarizes the analysis: “Money is a veil, but when the veil 
flutters, real output sputters.”
511
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

•  In the long run, shifts in aggregate demand affect the overall price level but 
do not affect output.
•  Policymakers who influence aggregate demand can potentially mitigate the 
severity of economic fluctuations.
Two Big Shifts in Aggregate Demand: The Great 
Depression and World War II
At the beginning of this chapter, we established three key facts about economic 
fluctuations by looking at data since 1965. Let’s now take a longer look at U.S. 
economic history. Figure 9 shows data since 1900 on the percentage change in 
real GDP over the previous three years. In an average three-year period, real GDP 
grows about 10 percent—a bit more than 3 percent per year. The business cycle, 
however, causes fluctuations around this average. Two episodes jump out as 
being particularly significant: the large drop in real GDP in the early 1930s and the 
large increase in real GDP in the early 1940s. Both of these events are attributable 
to shifts in aggregate demand.
 
The economic calamity of the early 1930s is called the Great Depression, and 
it is by far the largest economic downturn in U.S. history. Real GDP fell by 27 
percent from 1929 to 1933, and unemployment rose from 3 percent to 25 percent. 
At the same time, the price level fell by 22 percent over these four years. Many 
other countries experienced similar declines in output and prices during this 
period. 
Figure 9
U.S. Real GDP Growth since 
1900
Source: Louis D. Johnston and Samuel H. Williamson, “Annualized Growth Rate of Various Historical Economic Series.” 
Economic History Services, November 2008, http://www.measuringworth.com/growth/index.php; Department of Commerce 
(Bureau of Economic Analysis).
Percent Change
in Real GDP from
Three Years Earlier
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1990
1960
2000
2010
1970
1980
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
The Great 
Depression
The World War II
Boom
Average
growth
Three-year percent change
Over the course of U.S. economic history, two fluctuations stand out as especially 
large. During the early 1930s, the economy went through the Great Depression, 
when the production of goods and services plummeted. During the early 1940s, 
the United States entered World War II, and the economy experienced rapidly 
rising production. Both of these events are usually explained by large shifts in 
aggregate demand.
512
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

 
Economic historians continue to debate the causes of the Great Depression, but 
most explanations center on a large decline in aggregate demand. What caused 
aggregate demand to contract? Here is where the disagreement arises. 
 
Many economists place primary blame on the decline in the money supply: 
From 1929 to 1933, the money supply fell by 28 percent. As you may recall from 
our discussion of the monetary system, this decline in the money supply was due 
to problems in the banking system. As households withdrew their money from 
financially shaky banks and bankers became more cautious and started holding 
greater reserves, the process of money creation under fractional-reserve bank-
ing went into reverse. The Fed, meanwhile, failed to offset this fall in the money 
multiplier with expansionary open-market operations. As a result, the money 
supply declined. Many economists blame the Fed’s failure to act for the Great 
Depression’s severity.
 
Other economists have suggested alternative reasons for the collapse in aggre-
gate demand. For example, stock prices fell about 90 percent during this period, 
depressing household wealth and thereby consumer spending. In addition, the 
banking problems may have prevented some firms from obtaining the financing 
they wanted for investment projects, and this would have depressed investment 
spending. It is possible that all these forces may have acted together to contract 
aggregate demand during the Great Depression.
 
The second significant episode in Figure 9—the economic boom of the early 
1940s—is easier to explain. The obvious cause of this event was World War II. As 
the United States entered the war overseas, the federal government had to devote 
more resources to the military. Government purchases of goods and services 
increased almost fivefold from 1939 to 1944. This huge expansion in aggregate 
demand almost doubled the economy’s production of goods and services and led 
to a 20 percent increase in the price level (although widespread government price 
controls limited the rise in prices). Unemployment fell from 17 percent in 1939 to 
about 1 percent in 1944—the lowest level in U.S. history. ■
The Recession of 2008–2009
In 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy experienced a financial crisis and a severe 
downturn in economic activity. In many ways, it was the worst macroeconomic 
event in more than half a century.
 
The story of this downturn begins a few years earlier with a substantial boom 
in the housing market. The boom was, in part, fueled by low interest rates. In 
the aftermath of the recession of 2001, the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates 
to historically low levels. Low interest rates helped the economy recover, but by 
making it less expensive to get a mortgage and buy a home, they also contributed 
to a rise in housing prices.
 
In addition to low interest rates, various developments in the mortgage mar-
ket made it easier for subprime borrowers—those borrowers with a higher risk of 
default based on their income and credit history—to get loans to buy homes. 
One development was securitization, the process by which a financial institu-
tion (specifically, a mortgage originator) makes loans and then (with the help 
of an investment bank) bundles them together into financial instruments called 
mortgage-backed securities. These mortgage-backed securities were then sold to 
other institutions (such as banks and insurance companies), which may not have 
The outcome of a massive 
decrease in aggregate demand
© BETTMANN/CORBIS
513
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

fully appreciated the risks in these securities. Some economists blame inadequate 
regulation for these high-risk loans. Others blame misguided government policy: 
Some policies encouraged this high-risk lending to make the goal of homeowner-
ship more attainable for low-income families. Together, these many forces drove 
up housing demand and housing prices. From 1995 to 2006, average housing 
prices in the United States more than doubled.
 
The high price of housing, however, proved unsustainable. From 2006 to 2009, 
housing prices nationwide fell about 30 percent. Such price fluctuations should 
not necessarily be a problem in a market economy. After all, price movements 
are how markets equilibrate supply and demand. In this case, however, the price 
But Have We 
Learned Enough? 
BY N. GREGORY MANKIW
L
ike most economists, those at the Inter-
national Monetary Fund are lowering their 
growth forecasts. The financial turmoil gripping 
Wall Street will probably spill over onto every 
other street in America. Most likely, current job 
losses are only the tip of an ugly iceberg.
 
But when Olivier Blanchard, the I.M.F.’s 
chief economist, was asked about the possi-
bility of the world sinking into another Great 
Depression, he reassuringly replied that the 
chance was “nearly nil.” He added, “We’ve 
learned a few things in 80 years.”
 
Yes, we have. But have we learned what 
caused the Depression of the 1930s? Most 
important, have we learned enough to avoid 
doing the same thing again?
 
The Depression began, to a large extent, 
as a garden-variety downturn. The 1920s 
were a boom decade, and as it came to a 
close the Federal Reserve tried to rein in 
what might have been called the irrational 
exuberance of the era. 
 
In 1928, the Fed maneuvered to drive up 
interest rates. So interest-sensitive sectors 
like construction slowed.
 
But things took a bad turn after the 
crash of October 1929. Lower stock prices 
made households poorer and discouraged 
consumer spending, which then made up 
three-quarters of the economy. (Today it’s 
about two-thirds.) 
 
According to the economic historian 
Christina D. Romer, a professor at the 
University of California, Berkeley, the great 
volatility of stock prices at the time also 
increased consumers’ feelings of uncer-
tainty, inducing them to put off purchases 
until the uncertainty was resolved. Spending 
on consumer durable goods like autos 
dropped precipitously in 1930. 
 
Next came a series of bank panics. From 
1930 to 1933, more than 9,000 banks were 
shuttered, imposing losses on depositors 
and shareholders of about $2.5 billion. As 
a share of the economy, that would be the 
equivalent of $340 billion today. 
 
The banking panics put downward pres-
sure on economic activity in two ways. First, 
they put fear into the hearts of depositors. 
Many people concluded that cash in their mat-
tresses was wiser than accounts at local banks.
 
As they withdrew their funds, the bank-
ing system’s normal lending and money 
creation went into reverse. The money 
supply collapsed, resulting in a 24 percent 
drop in the consumer price index from 1929 
to 1933. This deflation pushed up the real 
burden of households’ debts.
 Modern Parallels to the Great 
Depression
As the economy sank in recession in 2008, some observers wondered 
whether we might see a downturn similar to the Great Depression. As of 
2010, when this book was going to press, that scenario seemed unlikely. 
But the similarities between the events of 2008 and 2009 and those of 
the 1930s were too troubling to ignore. This article describes how things 
looked in the midst of the recent economic downturn.
in the news
514
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

decline had two related repercussions that caused a sizable fall in aggregate 
demand.
 
The first repercussion was a substantial rise in mortgage defaults and home 
foreclosures. During the housing boom, many homeowners had bought their 
homes with mostly borrowed money and minimal down payments. When hous-
ing prices declined, these homeowners were underwater (they owed more on their 
mortgages than their homes were worth). Many of these homeowners stopped 
paying their loans. The banks servicing the mortgages responded to these defaults 
by taking the houses away in foreclosure procedures and then selling them off. 
The banks’ goal was to recoup whatever they could from the bad loans. As you 
 
Second, the disappearance of so many 
banks made credit hard to come by. Small 
businesses often rely on established rela-
tionships with local bankers when they 
need loans, either to tide them over in 
tough times or for business expansion. With 
so many of those relationships interrupted 
at the same time, the economy’s ability to 
channel financial resources toward their 
best use was seriously impaired.
 
Together, these forces proved cataclys-
mic. Unemployment, which had been 3 
percent in 1929, rose to 25 percent in 1933. 
Even during the worst recession since then, 
in 1982, the United States economy did not 
experience half that level of unemployment.
 
Policy makers in the 1930s responded 
vigorously as the situation deteriorated. But 
like a doctor facing a patient with a new 
disease and strange symptoms, they often 
acted in ways that, with the benefit of hind-
sight, appeared counterproductive.
 
Probably the most important source 
of recovery after 1933 was monetary 
expansion, eased by President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt’s decision to abandon the gold 
standard and devalue the dollar. From 1933 
to 1937, the money supply rose, stopping 
the deflation. Production in the economy 
grew about 10 percent a year, three times 
its normal rate.
 
Less successful were various market 
interventions. According to a study by 
the economists Harold L. Cole and Lee 
E. Ohanian, both of the University of 
California, Los Angeles, and the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, President 
Roosevelt made things worse when he 
encouraged the formation of cartels through 
the National Industrial Recovery Act of 
1933. Similarly, they argue, the National 
Labor Relations Act of 1935 strengthened 
organized labor but weakened the recovery 
by impeding market forces. 
 
Looking back at these events, it’s hard 
to avoid seeing parallels to the current situ-
ation. Today, as then, uncertainty has con-
sumers spooked. By some measures, stock 
market volatility in recent days has reached 
levels not seen since the 1930s. With vola-
tility spiking, the University of Michigan’s 
survey reading of consumer sentiment has 
been plunging.
 
Deflation across the economy is not a 
problem (yet), but deflation in the housing 
market is the source of many of our pres-
ent difficulties. With so many homeowners 
owing more on their mortgages than their 
houses are worth, default is an unfortu-
nate but often rational choice. Widespread 
foreclosures, however, only perpetuate the 
downward spiral of housing prices, further 
defaults and additional losses at financial 
institutions. 
 
The Fed and the Treasury Department, 
intent on avoiding the early policy inaction 
that let the Depression unfold, have been 
working hard to keep credit flowing. But 
the financial situation they face is, arguably, 
more difficult than that of the 1930s. Then, 
the problem was largely a crisis of confi-
dence and a shortage of liquidity. Today, 
the problem may be more a shortage of 
solvency, which is harder to solve.
 
What’s next? Perhaps the most trou-
bling study of the 1930s economy was 
written in 1988 by the economists Kathryn 
Dominguez, Ray Fair and Matthew Shapiro; 
it was called “Forecasting the Depression: 
Harvard Versus Yale.” (Mr. Fair is an eco-
nomics professor at Yale; Ms. Dominguez 
and Mr. Shapiro are at the University of 
Michigan.)
 
The three researchers show that the 
leading economists at the time, at compet-
ing forecasting services run by Harvard and 
Yale, were caught completely by surprise 
by the severity and length of the Great 
Depression. What’s worse, despite many 
advances in the tools of economic analysis, 
modern economists armed with the data 
from the time would not have forecast 
much better. In other words, even if another 
Depression were around the corner, you 
shouldn’t expect much advance warning 
from the economics profession.
 
Let me be clear: Like Mr. Blanchard at 
the I.M.F., I am not predicting another Great 
Depression. We have indeed learned a lot 
over the last 80 years. But you should take 
that economic forecast, like all others, with 
more than a single grain of salt. 
Source: New York Times, October 26, 2008.
515
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

might have expected from your study of supply and demand, the increase in the 
number of homes for sale exacerbated the downward spiral of house prices. As 
house prices fell, spending on the construction of housing also collapsed.
 
A second repercussion was that the various financial institutions that owned 
mortgage-backed securities suffered huge losses. In essence, by borrowing large 
sums to buy high-risk mortgages, these companies had bet that house prices 
would keep rising; when this bet turned bad, they found themselves at or near 
the point of bankruptcy. Because of these large losses, many financial institutions 
did not have funds to loan out, and the ability of the financial system to channel 
resources to those who could best use them was impaired. Even creditworthy 
customers found themselves unable to borrow to finance investment spending.
 
As a result of all these events, the economy experienced a large contractionary 
shift in aggregate demand. Real GDP and employment both fell sharply. Real 
GDP declined by almost 4 percent between the fourth quarter of 2007 and the 
second quarter of 2009. The rate of unemployment rose from 4.4 percent in May 
2007 to 10.1 percent in October 2009. 
 
As the crisis unfolded, the U.S government responded in a variety of ways. 
Three policy actions—all aimed in part at returning aggregate demand to its 
previous level—are most noteworthy. First, the Fed cut its target for the federal 
funds rate from 5.25 percent in September 2007 to about zero in December 2008. 
The Federal Reserve also started buying mortgage-backed securities and other 
private loans in open-market operations. By purchasing these instruments from 
the banking system, the Fed provided banks with additional funds in the hope 
that the banks would makes loans more readily available. 
 
Second, in an even more unusual move in October 2008, Congress appropri-
ated $700 billion for the Treasury to use to rescue the financial system. The goal 
was to stem the financial crisis on Wall Street and make loans easier to obtain. 
Much of these funds were used for equity injections into banks. That is, the 
Treasury put funds into the banking system, which the banks could use to make 
loans; in exchange for these funds, the U.S. government became a part owner of 
these banks, at least temporarily.
 
Finally, when Barack Obama became president in January 2009, his first major 
initiative was a large increase in government spending. After a relatively brief con-
gressional debate over the form of the legislation, the new president signed a $787 
billion stimulus bill on February 17, 2009. This policy move is discussed more fully in 
the next chapter when we consider the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand.
 
As this book was going to press, the economy was starting to recover from 
the economic downturn. Real GDP was growing again, and unemployment had 
fallen to 9.5 percent in June 2010. Which, if any, of these many policy moves were 
most important for promoting this economic recovery? That is surely a question 
that macroeconomic historians will debate in the years to come. ■
The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Supply
Imagine once again an economy in its long-run equilibrium. Now suppose that 
suddenly some firms experience an increase in their costs of production. For 
example, bad weather in farm states might destroy some crops, driving up the 
cost of producing food products. Or a war in the Middle East might interrupt the 
shipping of crude oil, driving up the cost of producing oil products.
To analyze the macroeconomic impact of such an increase in production costs, 
we follow the same four steps as we always do. First, which curve is affected? 
Because production costs affect the firms that supply goods and services, changes 
516
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

in production costs alter the position of the aggregate-supply curve. Second, in 
which direction does the curve shift? Because higher production costs make sell-
ing goods and services less profitable, firms now supply a smaller quantity of 
output for any given price level. Thus, as Figure 10 shows, the short-run aggre-
gate-supply curve shifts to the left from AS1 to AS2. (Depending on the event, the 
long-run aggregate-supply curve might also shift. To keep things simple, how-
ever, we will assume that it does not.)
The figure allows us to perform step three of comparing the initial and the new 
equilibrium. In the short run, the economy goes from point A to point B, moving 
along the existing aggregate-demand curve. The output of the economy falls from 
Y1 to Y2, and the price level rises from P1 to P2. Because the economy is experienc-
ing both stagnation (falling output) and inflation (rising prices), such an event is 
sometimes called stagflation.
Now consider step four—the transition from the short-run equilibrium to the 
long-run equilibrium. According to the sticky-wage theory, the key issue is how 
stagflation affects nominal wages. Firms and workers may at first respond to the 
higher level of prices by raising their expectations of the price level and setting 
higher nominal wages. In this case, firms’ costs will rise yet again, and the short-
run aggregate-supply curve will shift farther to the left, making the problem 
of stagflation even worse. This phenomenon of higher prices leading to higher 
wages, in turn leading to even higher prices, is sometimes called a wage-price spiral. 
At some point, this spiral of ever-rising wages and prices will slow. The low 
level of output and employment will put downward pressure on workers’ wages 
because workers have less bargaining power when unemployment is high. As 
nominal wages fall, producing goods and services becomes more profitable, and 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right. As it shifts back toward 
AS1, the price level falls, and the quantity of output approaches its natural rate. In 
stagflation
a period of falling output 
and rising prices
An Adverse Shift in Aggregate 
Supply
Figure 10
When some event increases firms’ 
costs, the short-run aggregate-
supply curve shifts to the left 
from AS1 to AS2. The economy 
moves from point A to point B. 
The result is stagflation: Output 
falls from Y1 to Y2, and the price 
level rises from P1 to P2.
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Aggregate demand
A
B
Y1
Y2
3. . . . and 
the price 
level to rise.
2. . . . causes output to fall . . .
1. An adverse shift in the short-
run aggregate-supply curve . . .
Short-run
aggregate
supply, AS1
Long-run
aggregate
supply
P2
P1
AS2
517
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

the long run, the economy returns to point A, where the aggregate-demand curve 
crosses the long-run aggregate-supply curve.
This transition back to the initial equilibrium assumes, however, that aggregate 
demand is held constant throughout the process. In the real world, that may not be 
the case. Policymakers who control monetary and fiscal policy might attempt to off-
set some of the effects of the shift in the short-run aggregate-supply curve by shift-
ing the aggregate-demand curve. This possibility is shown in Figure 11. In this case, 
changes in policy shift the aggregate-demand curve to the right from AD1 to AD2—
exactly enough to prevent the shift in aggregate supply from affecting output. The 
economy moves directly from point A to point C. Output remains at its natural rate, 
and the price level rises from P1 to P3. In this case, policymakers are said to accommo-
date the shift in aggregate supply. An accommodative policy accepts a permanently 
higher level of prices to maintain a higher level of output and employment. 
To sum up, this story about shifts in aggregate supply has two important lessons:
•  Shifts in aggregate supply can cause stagflation—a combination of recession 
(falling output) and inflation (rising prices). 
•  Policymakers who can influence aggregate demand can potentially mitigate 
the adverse impact on output but only at the cost of exacerbating the problem 
of inflation. 
Oil and the Economy
Some of the largest economic fluctuations in the U.S. economy since 1970 have 
originated in the oil fields of the Middle East. Crude oil is a key input into the 
production of many goods and services, and much of the world’s oil comes from 
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and other Middle Eastern countries. When some event 
Figure 11
Accommodating an Adverse 
Shift in Aggregate Supply
Faced with an adverse shift 
in aggregate supply from AS1 
to AS2, policymakers who can 
influence aggregate demand 
might try to shift the aggregate-
demand curve to the right from 
AD1 to AD2. The economy would 
move from point A to point 
C. This policy would prevent 
the supply shift from reducing 
output in the short run, but the 
price level would permanently 
rise from P1 to P3.
Quantity of
Output
Natural rate
of output
Price
Level
0
Short-run
aggregate
supply, AS1
Long-run
aggregate
supply
Aggregate demand, AD1
A
C
P2
P3
P1
AS2
3. . . . which
causes the
price level 
to rise 
further . . .
4. . . . but keeps output
at its natural rate.
2. . . . policymakers can
accommodate the shift
by expanding aggregate
demand . . .
1. When short-run aggregate
supply falls . . .
AD2
518
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

(usually political in origin) reduces the supply of crude oil flowing from this 
region, the price of oil rises around the world. U.S. firms that produce gasoline, 
tires, and many other products experience rising costs, and they find it less prof-
itable to supply their output of goods and services at any given price level. The 
result is a leftward shift in the aggregate-supply curve, which in turn leads to 
stagflation.
 
The first episode of this sort occurred in the mid-1970s. The countries with 
large oil reserves got together as members of OPEC, the Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries. OPEC is a cartel—a group of sellers that attempts 
to thwart competition and reduce production to raise prices. And indeed, oil 
prices rose substantially. From 1973 to 1975, oil approximately doubled in price. 
Oil-importing countries around the world experienced simultaneous inflation 
and recession. The U.S. inflation rate as measured by the CPI exceeded 10 percent 
for the first time in decades. Unemployment rose from 4.9 percent in 1973 to 8.5 
percent in 1975.
 
Almost the same thing happened a few years later. In the late 1970s, the 
OPEC countries again restricted the supply of oil to raise the price. From 
1978 to 1981, the price of oil more than doubled. Once again, the result was 
FYI
 The Origins of the Model of Aggregate 
Demand and Aggregate Supply
N
ow that we have a preliminary understand-
ing of the model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply, it is worthwhile to step back from 
it and consider its history. How did this model of 
short-run fluctuations develop? The answer is that 
this model, to a large extent, is a by-product of the 
Great Depression of the 1930s. Economists and 
policymakers at the time were puzzled about what 
had caused this calamity and were uncertain about 
how to deal with it.
 
In 1936, economist John Maynard Keynes 
published a book titled The General Theory of 
Employment, Interest, and Money, which 
attempted to explain short-run economic fluc-
tuations in general and the Great Depression in particular. Keynes’s 
primary message was that recessions and depressions can occur 
because of inadequate aggregate demand for goods and services. 
 
Keynes had long been a critic of classical economic theory—
the theory we examined earlier in the book—because it could 
explain only the long-run effects of policies. A 
few years before offering The General Theory, 
Keynes had written the following about classical 
economics:
The long run is a misleading guide to current 
affairs. In the long run we are all dead. Economists 
set themselves too easy, too useless a task if in 
tempestuous seasons they can only tell us when 
the storm is long past, the ocean will be flat.
Keynes’s message was aimed at policymakers as 
well as economists. As the world’s economies suf-
fered with high unemployment, Keynes advocated 
policies to increase aggregate demand, including 
government spending on public works. 
 
In the next chapter, we examine in detail how policymakers can 
use the tools of monetary and fiscal policy to influence aggregate 
demand. The analysis in the next chapter, as well as in this one, 
owes much to the legacy of John Maynard Keynes.
John Maynard Keynes
© KEYSTONE/HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGE
519
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

stagflation. Inflation, which had subsided somewhat after the first OPEC 
event, again rose above 10 percent per year. But because the Fed was not 
willing to accommodate such a large rise in inflation, a recession was soon to 
follow. Unemployment rose from about 6 percent in 1978 and 1979 to about 
10 percent a few years later.
 
The world market for oil can also be a source of favorable shifts in aggre-
gate supply. In 1986, squabbling broke out among members of OPEC. Member 
countries reneged on their agreements to restrict oil production. In the world 
market for crude oil, prices fell by about half. This fall in oil prices reduced costs 
to U.S. firms, which now found it more profitable to supply goods and services 
at any given price level. As a result, the aggregate-supply curve shifted to the 
right. The U.S. economy experienced the opposite of stagflation: Output grew 
rapidly, unemployment fell, and the inflation rate reached its lowest level in 
many years.
 
In recent years, the world market for oil has not been as important a source of 
economic fluctuations. Part of the reason is that conservation efforts and changes 
in technology have reduced the economy’s dependence on oil. The amount of oil 
used to produce a unit of real GDP has declined about 40 percent since the OPEC 
shocks of the 1970s. As a result, the economic impact of any change in oil prices is 
smaller today than it was in the past. ■
QUICK QUIZ Suppose that the election of a popular presidential candidate suddenly 
increases people’s confidence in the future. Use the model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to analyze the effect on the economy.
Conclusion
This chapter has achieved two goals. First, we have discussed some of the impor-
tant facts about short-run fluctuations in economic activity. Second, we have 
introduced a basic model to explain those fluctuations, called the model of aggre-
gate demand and aggregate supply. We continue our study of this model in the 
next chapter to understand more fully what causes fluctuations in the economy 
and how policymakers might respond to these fluctuations.
Changes in Middle East oil 
production are one source of 
U.S. economic fluctuations.
© YASSER AL-ZAYYAT/AFP/GETTY IMAGES
SUMMARY
• All societies experience short-run economic fluc-
tuations around long-run trends. These fluctua-
tions are irregular and largely unpredictable. 
When recessions do occur, real GDP and other 
measures of income, spending, and production 
fall, and unemployment rises.
• Classical economic theory is based on the 
assumption that nominal variables such as 
the money supply and the price level do not 
influence real variables such as output and 
employment. Most economists believe that this 
assumption is accurate in the long run but not in 
the short run. Economists analyze short-run eco-
nomic fluctuations using the model of aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply. According to this 
model, the output of goods and services and the 
overall level of prices adjust to balance aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply.
SU
SUMMARY
•
All societies experience short-run economic fluc-
tuations around long-run trends. These fluctua-
tions are irregular and largely unpredictable.
When recessions do occur, real GDP and other 
measures of income, spending, and production
fall, and unemployment rises.
•
Classical economic theory is based on the
assumption that nominal variables such as 
the money supply and the price level do not 
influence real variables such as output and 
employment. Most economists believe that this 
assumption is accurate in the long run but not in 
the short run. Economists analyze short-run eco-
nomic fluctuations using the model of aggregate
demand and aggregate supply. According to this 
model, the output of goods and services and the 
overall level of prices adjust to balance aggregate
demand and aggregate supply.
520
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

• The aggregate-demand curve slopes downward 
for three reasons. The first is the wealth effect: A 
lower price level raises the real value of house-
holds’ money holdings, which stimulates con-
sumer spending. The second is the interest-rate 
effect: A lower price level reduces the quantity 
of money households demand; as households 
try to convert money into interest-bearing assets, 
interest rates fall, which stimulates investment 
spending. The third is the exchange-rate effect: 
As a lower price level reduces interest rates, 
the dollar depreciates in the market for foreign-
currency exchange, which stimulates net exports.
• Any event or policy that raises consumption, 
investment, government purchases, or net exports 
at a given price level increases aggregate demand. 
Any event or policy that reduces consumption, 
investment, government purchases, or net exports 
at a given price level decreases aggregate demand.
• The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical. 
In the long run, the quantity of goods and ser-
vices supplied depends on the economy’s labor, 
capital, natural resources, and technology but 
not on the overall level of prices. 
• Three theories have been proposed to explain the 
upward slope of the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve. According to the sticky-wage theory, 
an unexpected fall in the price level temporar-
ily raises real wages, which induces firms to 
reduce employment and production. According 
to the sticky-price theory, an unexpected fall 
in the price level leaves some firms with prices 
that are temporarily too high, which reduces 
their sales and causes them to cut back produc-
tion. According to the misperceptions theory, 
an unexpected fall in the price level leads sup-
pliers to mistakenly believe that their relative 
prices have fallen, which induces them to reduce 
production. All three theories imply that output 
deviates from its natural rate when the actual 
price level deviates from the price level that 
people expected.
• Events that alter the economy’s ability to produce 
output, such as changes in labor, capital, natural 
resources, or technology, shift the short-run 
aggregate-supply curve (and may shift the long-
run aggregate-supply curve as well). In addition, 
the position of the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve depends on the expected price level. 
• One possible cause of economic fluctuations is a 
shift in aggregate demand. When the aggregate-
demand curve shifts to the left, for instance, 
output and prices fall in the short run. Over 
time, as a change in the expected price level 
causes wages, prices, and perceptions to adjust, 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to 
the right. This shift returns the economy to its 
natural rate of output at a new, lower price level.
• A second possible cause of economic fluctuations 
is a shift in aggregate supply. When the short-run 
aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left, the effect 
is falling output and rising prices—a combination 
called stagflation. Over time, as wages, prices, 
and perceptions adjust, the short-run aggregate-
supply curve shifts back to the right, returning 
the price level and output to their original levels.
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Name two macroeconomic variables that 
decline when the economy goes into a recession. 
Name one macroeconomic variable that rises 
during a recession.
 2. Draw a diagram with aggregate demand, 
short-run aggregate supply, and long-run 
aggregate supply. Be careful to label the axes 
correctly.
•
The aggregate-demand curve slopes downward
for three reasons. The first is the wealth effect: A
lower price level raises the real value of house-
holds’ money holdings, which stimulates con-
sumer spending. The second is the interest-rate
effect: A lower price level reduces the quantity 
of money households demand; as households
try to convert money into interest-bearing assets, 
interest rates fall, which stimulates investment
spending. The third is the exchange-rate effect:
As a lower price level reduces interest rates, 
the dollar depreciates in the market for foreign-
currency exchange, which stimulates net exports.
•
Any event or policy that raises consumption,
investment, government purchases, or net exports
at a given price level increases aggregate demand.
Any event or policy that reduces consumption,
investment, government purchases, or net exports
at a given price level decreases aggregate demand.
•
The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical.
In the long run, the quantity of goods and ser-
vices supplied depends on the economy’s labor, 
capital, natural resources, and technology but 
not on the overall level of prices. 
•
Three theories have been proposed to explain the 
upward slope of the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve. According to the sticky-wage theory, 
an unexpected fall in the price level temporar-
ily raises real wages, which induces firms to 
reduce employment and production. According
to the sticky-price theory, an unexpected fall 
in the price level leaves some firms with prices
that are temporarily too high, which reduces
their sales and causes them to cut back produc-
tion. According to the misperceptions theory,
an unexpected fall in the price level leads sup-
pliers to mistakenly believe that their relative
prices have fallen, which induces them to reduce
production. All three theories imply that output 
deviates from its natural rate when the actual 
price level deviates from the price level that 
people expected.
•
Events that alter the economy’s ability to produce
output, such as changes in labor, capital, natural
resources, or technology, shift the short-run
aggregate-supply curve (and may shift the long-
run aggregate-supply curve as well). In addition,
the position of the short-run aggregate-supply 
curve depends on the expected price level.
•
One possible cause of economic fluctuations is a
shift in aggregate demand. When the aggregate-
demand curve shifts to the left, for instance,
output and prices fall in the short run. Over 
time, as a change in the expected price level 
causes wages, prices, and perceptions to adjust, 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to 
the right. This shift returns the economy to its 
natural rate of output at a new, lower price level.
•
A second possible cause of economic fluctuations
is a shift in aggregate supply. When the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left, the effect
is falling output and rising prices—a combination
called stagflation. Over time, as wages, prices,
and perceptions adjust, the short-run aggregate-
supply curve shifts back to the right, returning
the price level and output to their original levels.
CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QU S
O
S
O
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. Name two macroeconomic variables that 
decline when the economy goes into a recession. 
Name one macroeconomic variable that rises 
during a recession.
2. Draw a diagram with aggregate demand, 
short-run aggregate supply, and long-run 
aggregate supply. Be careful to label the axes 
correctly.
recession, p. 487
depression, p. 487
model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply, p. 493
aggregate-demand curve, p. 493
aggregate-supply curve, p. 494
natural rate of output, p. 501
stagflation, p. 517
521
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY

 3. List and explain the three reasons the aggregate-
demand curve is downward sloping.
 4. Explain why the long-run aggregate-supply 
curve is vertical.
 5. List and explain the three theories for why the 
short-run aggregate-supply curve is upward 
sloping.
 6. What might shift the aggregate-demand curve 
to the left? Use the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply to trace through the 
short-run and long-run effects of such a shift on 
output and the price level. 
 7. What might shift the aggregate-supply curve 
to the left? Use the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply to trace through the 
short-run and long-run effects of such a shift on 
output and the price level. 
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
 1. Suppose the economy is in a long-run 
equilibrium.
a. Draw a diagram to illustrate the state of 
the economy. Be sure to show aggregate 
demand, short-run aggregate supply, and 
long-run aggregate supply.
b. Now suppose that a stock-market crash 
causes aggregate demand to fall. Use your 
diagram to show what happens to output 
and the price level in the short run. What 
happens to the unemployment rate? 
c. Use the sticky-wage theory of aggregate sup-
ply to explain what will happen to output and 
the price level in the long run (assuming there 
is no change in policy). What role does the 
expected price level play in this adjustment? 
Be sure to illustrate your analysis in a graph.
 2. Explain whether each of the following events 
will increase, decrease, or have no effect on 
long-run aggregate supply.
a. The United States experiences a wave of 
immigration.
b. Congress raises the minimum wage to $10 
per hour.
c. Intel invents a new and more powerful com-
puter chip.
d. A severe hurricane damages factories along 
the East Coast.
 3. Suppose an economy is in long-run equilibrium.
a. Use the model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to illustrate the initial equi-
librium (call it point A). Be sure to include 
both short-run and long-run aggregate supply.
b.  The central bank raises the money supply by 
5 percent. Use your diagram to show what 
happens to output and the price level as the 
economy moves from the initial to the new 
short-run equilibrium (call it point B).
c. Now show the new long-run equilibrium 
(call it point C). What causes the economy to 
move from point B to point C?
d. According to the sticky-wage theory of 
aggregate supply, how do nominal wages at 
point A compare to nominal wages at point 
B? How do nominal wages at point A com-
pare to nominal wages at point C?
e. According to the sticky-wage theory of 
aggregate supply, how do real wages at point 
A compare to real wages at point B? How do 
real wages at point A compare to real wages 
at point C?
f. Judging by the impact of the money supply 
on nominal and real wages, is this analysis 
consistent with the proposition that money 
has real effects in the short run but is neutral 
in the long run? 
 4. In 1939, with the U.S. economy not yet 
fully recovered from the Great Depression, 
President Roosevelt proclaimed that 
Thanksgiving would fall a week earlier than 
usual so that the shopping period before 
Christmas would be longer. Explain what 
President Roosevelt might have been trying to 
achieve, using the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply.
 5. Explain why the following statements are false.
a. “The aggregate-demand curve slopes down-
ward because it is the horizontal sum of the 
demand curves for individual goods.”
b. “The long-run aggregate-supply curve is 
vertical because economic forces do not affect 
long-run aggregate supply.”
3. List and explain the three reasons the aggregate-
demand curve is downward sloping.
4. Explain why the long-run aggregate-supply 
curve is vertical.
5. List and explain the three theories for why the
short-run aggregate-supply curve is upward
sloping.
6. What might shift the aggregate-demand curve 
to the left? Use the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply to trace through the
short-run and long-run effects of such a shift on 
output and the price level. 
7. What might shift the aggregate-supply curve
to the left? Use the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply to trace through the
short-run and long-run effects of such a shift on 
output and the price level. 
O
S 
 
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS
1. Suppose the economy is in a long-run
equilibrium.
a. Draw a diagram to illustrate the state of 
the economy. Be sure to show aggregate 
demand, short-run aggregate supply, and
long-run aggregate supply.
b. Now suppose that a stock-market crash 
causes aggregate demand to fall. Use your
diagram to show what happens to output 
and the price level in the short run. What
happens to the unemployment rate?
c. Use the sticky-wage theory of aggregate sup-
ply to explain what will happen to output and
the price level in the long run (assuming there 
is no change in policy). What role does the
expected price level play in this adjustment?
Be sure to illustrate your analysis in a graph.
2. Explain whether each of the following events
will increase, decrease, or have no effect on
long-run aggregate supply.
a. The United States experiences a wave of 
immigration.
b. Congress raises the minimum wage to $10
per hour.
c. Intel invents a new and more powerful com-
puter chip.
d. A severe hurricane damages factories along
the East Coast.
3. Suppose an economy is in long-run equilibrium.
a. Use the model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to illustrate the initial equi-
librium (call it point A). Be sure to include 
both short-run and long-run aggregate supply.
b.  The central bank raises the money supply by
5 percent. Use your diagram to show what 
happens to output and the price level as the
economy moves from the initial to the new 
short-run equilibrium (call it point B).
c. Now show the new long-run equilibrium
(call it point C). What causes the economy to 
move from point B to point C?
d. According to the sticky-wage theory of 
aggregate supply, how do nominal wages at 
point A compare to nominal wages at point 
B? How do nominal wages at point A com-
pare to nominal wages at point C?
e. According to the sticky-wage theory of 
aggregate supply, how do real wages at point
A compare to real wages at point B? How do 
real wages at point A compare to real wages 
at point C?
f. Judging by the impact of the money supply 
on nominal and real wages, is this analysis
consistent with the proposition that money 
has real effects in the short run but is neutral 
in the long run? 
4. In 1939, with the U.S. economy not yet 
fully recovered from the Great Depression, 
President Roosevelt proclaimed that 
Thanksgiving would fall a week earlier than 
usual so that the shopping period before 
Christmas would be longer. Explain what 
President Roosevelt might have been trying to 
achieve, using the model of aggregate demand 
and aggregate supply.
5. Explain why the following statements are false.
a. “The aggregate-demand curve slopes down-
ward because it is the horizontal sum of the
demand curves for individual goods.”
b. “The long-run aggregate-supply curve is
vertical because economic forces do not affect
long-run aggregate supply.”
522
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

c. “If firms adjusted their prices every day, then 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve would 
be horizontal.”
d. “Whenever the economy enters a recession, 
its long-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to 
the left.”
 6. For each of the three theories for the upward 
slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve, 
carefully explain the following:
a. How the economy recovers from a recession 
and returns to its long-run equilibrium with-
out any policy intervention.
b. What determines the speed of that recovery.
 7. Suppose the Fed expands the money supply, but 
because the public expects this Fed action, it simul-
taneously raises its expectation of the price level. 
What will happen to output and the price level in 
the short run? Compare this result to the outcome if 
the Fed expanded the money supply but the public 
didn’t change its expectation of the price level.
 8. The economy begins in long-run equilibrium. 
Then one day, the president appoints a new 
chairman of the Federal Reserve. This new 
chairman is well-known for his view that infla-
tion is not a major problem for an economy. 
a. How would this news affect the price level 
that people would expect to prevail?
b. How would this change in the expected price 
level affect the nominal wage that workers and 
firms agree to in their new labor contracts?
c. How would this change in the nominal wage 
affect the profitability of producing goods 
and services at any given price level?
d. How does this change in profitability affect 
the short-run aggregate-supply curve?
e. If aggregate demand is held constant, how 
does this shift in the aggregate-supply curve 
affect the price level and the quantity of out-
put produced?
f. Do you think this Fed chairman was a good 
appointment?
 9. Explain whether each of the following events 
shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve, the 
aggregate-demand curve, both, or neither. For 
each event that does shift a curve, draw a dia-
gram to illustrate the effect on the economy.
a. Households decide to save a larger share of 
their income.
b. Florida orange groves suffer a prolonged 
period of below-freezing temperatures.
c. Increased job opportunities overseas cause 
many people to leave the country.
 10. For each of the following events, explain the 
short-run and long-run effects on output and 
the price level, assuming policymakers take no 
action.
 a. The stock market declines sharply, reducing 
consumers’ wealth.
 b. The federal government increases spending 
on national defense.
 c. A technological improvement raises produc-
tivity.
 d. A recession overseas causes foreigners to buy 
fewer U.S. goods. 
 11. Suppose firms become very optimistic about 
future business conditions and invest heavily in 
new capital equipment.
a. Draw an aggregate-demand/aggregate-
supply diagram to show the short-run effect of 
this optimism on the economy. Label the new 
levels of prices and real output. Explain in 
words why the aggregate quantity of output 
supplied changes.
b. Now use the diagram from part (a) to show 
the new long-run equilibrium of the econ-
omy. (For now, assume there is no change 
in the long-run aggregate-supply curve.) 
Explain in words why the aggregate quan-
tity of output demanded changes between the 
short run and the long run.
c. How might the investment boom affect the 
long-run aggregate-supply curve? Explain.
 12. In economy A, all workers agree in advance on 
the nominal wages that their employers will 
pay them. In economy B, half of all workers 
have these nominal wage contracts, while the 
other half have indexed employment contracts, 
so their wages rise and fall automatically with 
the price level. According to the sticky-wage 
theory of aggregate supply, which economy 
has a more steeply sloped short-run aggregate-
supply curve? In which economy would a 5 per-
cent increase in the money supply have a larger 
impact on output? In which economy would it 
have a larger impact on the price level? Explain. 
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at 
www.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
523
CHAPTER 23    AGGREGATE DEMAND AND AGGREGATE SUPPLY


Th e Infl uence of  Monetary 
   and Fiscal Policy on 
     Aggregate Demand
I
magine that you are a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, the 
group at the Federal Reserve that sets monetary policy. You observe that 
the president and Congress have agreed to raise taxes. How should the Fed 
respond to this change in fiscal policy? Should it expand the money supply, 
contract the money supply, or leave the money supply the same?
To answer this question, you need to consider the impact of monetary and 
fiscal policy on the economy. In the preceding chapter, we used the model of 
aggregate demand and aggregate supply to explain short-run economic fluctua-
tions. We saw that shifts in the aggregate-demand curve or the aggregate-supply 
curve cause fluctuations in the economy’s overall output of goods and services 
and its overall level of prices. As we noted in the previous chapter, monetary and 
fiscal policy can each influence aggregate demand. Thus, a change in one of these 
525
24

policies can lead to short-run fluctuations in output and prices. Policymakers will 
want to anticipate this effect and, perhaps, adjust the other policy in response.
In this chapter, we examine in more detail how the government’s policy tools 
influence the position of the aggregate-demand curve. These tools include mon-
etary policy (the supply of money set by the central bank) and fiscal policy (the lev-
els of government spending and taxation set by the president and Congress). We 
have previously discussed the long-run effects of these policies. In Chapters    and 
  , we saw how fiscal policy affects saving, investment, and long-run economic 
growth. In Chapters    and   , we saw how monetary policy influences the price 
level in the long run. We now see how these policy tools can shift the aggregate-
demand curve and, in doing so, affect macroeconomic variables in the short run.
As we have already learned, many factors influence aggregate demand besides 
monetary and fiscal policy. In particular, desired spending by households and 
firms determines the overall demand for goods and services. When desired spend-
ing changes, aggregate demand shifts. If policymakers do not respond, such shifts 
in aggregate demand cause short-run fluctuations in output and employment. As 
a result, monetary and fiscal policymakers sometimes use the policy levers at their 
disposal to try to offset these shifts in aggregate demand and thereby stabilize the 
economy. Here we discuss the theory behind these policy actions and some of the 
difficulties that arise in using this theory in practice.
How Monetary Policy Influences Aggregate Demand
The aggregate-demand curve shows the total quantity of goods and services 
demanded in the economy for any price level. The preceding chapter discussed 
three reasons the aggregate-demand curve slopes downward: 
•  The wealth effect: A lower price level raises the real value of households’ 
money holdings, which are part of their wealth. Higher real wealth stimu-
lates consumer spending and thus increases the quantity of goods and ser-
vices demanded.
•  The interest-rate effect: A lower price level reduces the amount of money peo-
ple want to hold. As people try to lend out their excess money holdings, the 
interest rate falls. The lower interest rate stimulates investment spending 
and thus increases the quantity of goods and services demanded. 
•  The exchange-rate effect: When a lower price level reduces the interest rate, 
investors move some of their funds overseas in search of higher returns. 
This movement of funds causes the real value of the domestic currency to 
fall in the market for foreign-currency exchange. Domestic goods become 
less expensive relative to foreign goods. This change in the real exchange 
rate stimulates spending on net exports and thus increases the quantity of 
goods and services demanded.
These three effects occur simultaneously to increase the quantity of goods and 
services demanded when the price level falls and to decrease it when the price 
level rises.
Although all three effects work together to explain the downward slope of the 
aggregate-demand curve, they are not of equal importance. Because money hold-
ings are a small part of household wealth, the wealth effect is the least important 
526
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
17
18
21
22

of the three. In addition, because exports and imports represent only a small frac-
tion of U.S. GDP, the exchange-rate effect is not large for the U.S. economy. (This 
effect is more important for smaller countries, which typically export and import 
a higher fraction of their GDP.) For the U.S. economy, the most important reason for 
the downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve is the interest-rate effect. 
To better understand aggregate demand, we now examine the short-run deter-
mination of interest rates in more detail. Here we develop the theory of liquidity 
preference. This theory of interest-rate determination will help explain the down-
ward slope of the aggregate-demand curve, as well as how monetary and fiscal pol-
icy can shift this curve. By shedding new light on aggregate demand, the theory of 
liquidity preference expands our understanding of what causes short-run economic 
fluctuations and what policymakers can potentially do about them.
The Theory of Liquidity Preference
In his classic book The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, John 
Maynard Keynes proposed the theory of liquidity preference to explain the factors 
that determine an economy’s interest rate. The theory is, in essence, an application 
of supply and demand. According to Keynes, the interest rate adjusts to balance 
the supply of and demand for money.
You may recall that economists distinguish between two interest rates: The 
nominal interest rate is the interest rate as usually reported, and the real interest rate 
is the interest rate corrected for the effects of inflation. When there is no inflation, 
the two rates are the same. But when borrowers and lenders expect prices to rise 
over the course of the loan, they agree to a nominal interest rate that exceeds the 
real interest rate by the expected rate of inflation. The higher nominal interest rate 
compensates for the fact that they expect the loan to be repaid in less valuable 
dollars.
Which interest rate are we now trying to explain with the theory of liquidity 
preference? The answer is both. In the analysis that follows, we hold constant the 
expected rate of inflation. This assumption is reasonable for studying the economy 
in the short run, because expected inflation is typically stable over short periods 
of time. In this case, nominal and real interest rates differ by a constant. When the 
nominal interest rate rises or falls, the real interest rate that people expect to earn 
rises or falls as well. For the rest of this chapter, when we refer to changes in the 
interest rate, you should envision the real and nominal interest rates moving in 
the same direction.
Let’s now develop the theory of liquidity preference by considering the supply 
and demand for money and how each depends on the interest rate. 
Money Supply The first piece of the theory of liquidity preference is the sup-
ply of money. As we first discussed in Chapter   , the money supply in the U.S. 
economy is controlled by the Federal Reserve. The Fed alters the money supply 
primarily by changing the quantity of reserves in the banking system through the 
purchase and sale of government bonds in open-market operations. When the Fed 
buys government bonds, the dollars it pays for the bonds are typically deposited 
in banks, and these dollars are added to bank reserves. When the Fed sells govern-
ment bonds, the dollars it receives for the bonds are withdrawn from the banking 
system, and bank reserves fall. These changes in bank reserves, in turn, lead to 
changes in banks’ ability to make loans and create money. Thus, by buying and 
selling bonds in open-market operations, the Fed alters the quantity of money in 
the economy.
theory of liquidity 
preference
Keynes’s theory that 
the interest rate adjusts 
to bring money supply 
and money demand into 
balance
527
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND
21

In addition to open-market operations, the Fed can influence the money sup-
ply using a variety of other tools. One option is for the Fed to change how much 
it lends to banks. For example, a decrease in the discount rate (the interest rate at 
which banks can borrow reserves from the Fed) encourages more bank borrow-
ing, which increases bank reserves and thereby the money supply. Conversely, an 
increase in the discount rate discourages bank borrowing, which decreases bank 
reserves and the money supply. The Fed also alters the money supply by changing 
reserve requirements (the amount of reserves banks must hold against deposits) 
and by changing the interest rate it pays banks on the reserves they are holding.
These details of monetary control are important for the implementation of Fed 
policy, but they are not crucial for the analysis in this chapter. Our goal here is 
to examine how changes in the money supply affect the aggregate demand for 
goods and services. For this purpose, we can ignore the details of how Fed policy 
is implemented and assume that the Fed controls the money supply directly. In 
other words, the quantity of money supplied in the economy is fixed at whatever 
level the Fed decides to set it. 
Because the quantity of money supplied is fixed by Fed policy, it does not 
depend on other economic variables. In particular, it does not depend on the 
interest rate. Once the Fed has made its policy decision, the quantity of money 
supplied is the same, regardless of the prevailing interest rate. We represent a 
fixed money supply with a vertical supply curve, as in Figure 1.
According to the theory of liquidity preference, the interest rate adjusts to bring the 
quantity of money supplied and the quantity of money demanded into balance. If 
the interest rate is above the equilibrium level (such as at r1), the quantity of money 
people want to hold (Md
1) is less than the quantity the Fed has created, and this surplus 
of money puts downward pressure on the interest rate. Conversely, if the interest rate 
is below the equilibrium level (such as at r2), the quantity of money people want to 
hold (Md
2) is greater than the quantity the Fed has created, and this shortage of money 
puts upward pressure on the interest rate. Thus, the forces of supply and demand in 
the market for money push the interest rate toward the equilibrium interest rate, at 
which people are content holding the quantity of money the Fed has created.
Equilibrium in the Money 
Market
Figure 1
Quantity of
Money
Interest
Rate
Equilibrium
interest
rate
0
Money
demand
Quantity ﬁxed
by the Fed
Money
supply
r1
r2
Md
1
Md
2
528
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Money Demand The second piece of the theory of liquidity preference is the 
demand for money. As a starting point for understanding money demand, recall 
that any asset’s liquidity refers to the ease with which that asset can be converted 
into the economy’s medium of exchange. Because money is the economy’s medi-
um of exchange, it is by definition the most liquid asset available. The liquidity of 
money explains the demand for it: People choose to hold money instead of other 
assets that offer higher rates of return because money can be used to buy goods 
and services.
Although many factors determine the quantity of money demanded, the one 
emphasized by the theory of liquidity preference is the interest rate. The reason is 
that the interest rate is the opportunity cost of holding money. That is, when you 
hold wealth as cash in your wallet, instead of as an interest-bearing bond, you 
lose the interest you could have earned. An increase in the interest rate raises the 
cost of holding money and, as a result, reduces the quantity of money demanded. 
A decrease in the interest rate reduces the cost of holding money and raises the 
quantity demanded. Thus, as shown in Figure 1, the money-demand curve slopes 
downward.
Equilibrium in the Money Market According to the theory of liquidity 
preference, the interest rate adjusts to balance the supply and demand for money. 
There is one interest rate, called the equilibrium interest rate, at which the quantity 
of money demanded exactly balances the quantity of money supplied. If the inter-
est rate is at any other level, people will try to adjust their portfolios of assets and, 
as a result, drive the interest rate toward the equilibrium.
For example, suppose that the interest rate is above the equilibrium level, 
such as r1 in Figure 1. In this case, the quantity of money that people want to 
hold, Md
1, is less than the quantity of money that the Fed has supplied. Those 
people who are holding the surplus of money will try to get rid of it by buying 
interest-bearing bonds or by depositing it in an interest-bearing bank account. 
Because bond issuers and banks prefer to pay lower interest rates, they respond 
to this surplus of money by lowering the interest rates they offer. As the interest 
rate falls, people become more willing to hold money until, at the equilibrium 
interest rate, people are happy to hold exactly the amount of money the Fed has 
supplied.
Conversely, at interest rates below the equilibrium level, such as r2 in Figure 1, 
the quantity of money that people want to hold, Md
2, is greater than the quantity of 
money that the Fed has supplied. As a result, people try to increase their holdings 
of money by reducing their holdings of bonds and other interest-bearing assets. 
As people cut back on their holdings of bonds, bond issuers find that they have 
to offer higher interest rates to attract buyers. Thus, the interest rate rises and 
approaches the equilibrium level.
The Downward Slope of the 
Aggregate-Demand Curve
Having seen how the theory of liquidity preference explains the economy’s equi-
librium interest rate, we now consider the theory’s implications for the aggregate 
demand for goods and services. As a warm-up exercise, let’s begin by using the 
theory to reexamine a topic we already understand—the interest-rate effect and 
the downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve. In particular, suppose that 
the overall level of prices in the economy rises. What happens to the interest rate 
529
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

FYI
 Interest Rates in the Long Run and the 
Short Run
In an earlier chapter, we said that the interest rate adjusts to bal-
ance the supply of loanable funds (national saving) and the demand 
for loanable funds (desired investment). Here we just said that the 
interest rate adjusts to balance the supply of and demand for money. 
Can we reconcile these two theories? 
 
To answer this question, we need to focus on three macroeco-
nomic variables: the economy’s output of goods and services, the 
interest rate, and the price level. According to the classical macro-
economic theory we developed earlier in the book, these variables 
are determined as follows:
1.  Output is determined by the supplies of capital and labor and 
the available production technology for turning capital and 
labor into output. (We call this the natural rate of output.)
2.  For any given level of output, the interest rate adjusts to 
balance the supply and demand for loanable funds. 
3.  Given output and the interest rate, the price level adjusts to 
balance the supply and demand for money. Changes in the 
supply of money lead to proportionate changes in the price 
level.
These are three of the essential propositions of classical economic 
theory. Most economists believe that these propositions do a good 
job of describing how the economy works in the long run.
 
Yet these propositions do not hold in the short run. As we 
discussed in the preceding chapter, many prices are slow to adjust 
to changes in the money supply; this fact is reflected in a short-run 
aggregate-supply curve that is upward sloping rather than vertical. As 
a result, in the short run, the overall price level cannot, by itself, move 
to balance the supply of and demand for money. This stickiness of the 
price level requires the interest rate to move to bring the money mar-
ket into equilibrium. These changes in the interest rate, in turn, affect 
the aggregate demand for goods and services. As aggregate demand 
fluctuates, the economy’s output of goods and services moves away 
from the level determined by factor supplies and technology. 
 
To think about the operation of the economy in the short run 
(day to day, week to week, month to month, or quarter to quarter), 
it is best to keep in mind the following logic:
1.  The price level is stuck at some level (based on previously 
formed expectations) and, in the short run, is relatively unre-
sponsive to changing economic conditions.
2.  For any given (stuck) price level, the interest rate adjusts to 
balance the supply of and demand for money.
3.  The interest rate that balances the money market influences 
the quantity of goods and services demanded and thus the 
level of output. 
Notice that this precisely reverses the order of analysis used to study 
the economy in the long run.
 
The two different theories of the interest rate are useful for dif-
ferent purposes. When thinking about the long-run determinants of 
interest rates, it is best to keep in mind the loanable-funds theory, 
which highlights the importance of an economy’s saving propensi-
ties and investment opportunities. By contrast, when thinking about 
the short-run determinants of interest rates, it is best to keep in 
mind the liquidity-preference theory, which highlights the impor-
tance of monetary policy.
that balances the supply and demand for money, and how does that change affect 
the quantity of goods and services demanded?
As we discussed in Chapter   , the price level is one determinant of the quan-
tity of money demanded. At higher prices, more money is exchanged every time 
a good or service is sold. As a result, people will choose to hold a larger quantity 
of money. That is, a higher price level increases the quantity of money demanded 
for any given interest rate. Thus, an increase in the price level from P1 to P2 shifts 
the money-demand curve to the right from MD1 to MD2, as shown in panel (a) of 
Figure 2.
530
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
22

The Money Market 
and the Slope of the 
Aggregate-Demand 
Curve
Figure 2
An increase in the price level from P1 to P2 shifts the money-demand curve to the 
right, as in panel (a). This increase in money demand causes the interest rate to rise 
from r1 to r2. Because the interest rate is the cost of borrowing, the increase in the 
interest rate reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded from Y1 to Y2. This 
negative relationship between the price level and quantity demanded is represented 
with a downward-sloping aggregate-demand curve, as in panel (b).
Quantity
of Money
Quantity ﬁxed
by the Fed
0
Interest
Rate
r2
r1
Money demand at 
price level P2, MD2 
Money demand at
price level P1, MD1 
Money
supply
(a) The Money Market
(b) The Aggregate-Demand Curve
3. . . . 
which
increases
the 
equilibrium
interest
rate . . . 
2. . . . increases the
demand for money . . . 
Quantity
of Output
0
Price
Level
Aggregate
demand
P2
Y2
Y1
P1
4. . . . which in turn reduces the quantity
of goods and services demanded.
1. An
increase
in the
price
level . . . 
Notice how this shift in money demand affects the equilibrium in the money 
market. For a fixed money supply, the interest rate must rise to balance money 
supply and money demand. Because the higher price level has increased the 
amount of money people want to hold, it has shifted the money demand curve 
to the right. Yet the quantity of money supplied is unchanged, so the interest rate 
must rise from r1 to r2 to discourage the additional demand. 
This increase in the interest rate has ramifications not only for the money market 
but also for the quantity of goods and services demanded, as shown in panel (b). At 
a higher interest rate, the cost of borrowing and the return to saving are greater. 
Fewer households choose to borrow to buy a new house, and those who do buy 
smaller houses, so the demand for residential investment falls. Fewer firms choose 
to borrow to build new factories and buy new equipment, so business investment 
falls. Thus, when the price level rises from P1 to P2, increasing money demand 
from MD1 to MD2 and raising the interest rate from r1 to r2, the quantity of goods 
and services demanded falls from Y1 to Y2. 
This analysis of the interest-rate effect can be summarized in three steps: 
(1) A higher price level raises money demand. (2) Higher money demand leads 
to a higher interest rate. (3) A higher interest rate reduces the quantity of goods 
and services demanded. The same logic works in reverse: A lower price level 
reduces money demand, which leads to a lower interest rate, and this in turn 
increases the quantity of goods and services demanded. The result of this analy-
sis is a negative relationship between the price level and the quantity of goods 
and services demanded, as illustrated by a downward-sloping aggregate-
demand curve.
531
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

Changes in the Money Supply
So far, we have used the theory of liquidity preference to explain more fully how 
the total quantity of goods and services demanded in the economy changes as the 
price level changes. That is, we have examined movements along a downward-
sloping aggregate-demand curve. The theory also sheds light, however, on some 
of the other events that alter the quantity of goods and services demanded. 
Whenever the quantity of goods and services demanded changes for any given 
price level, the aggregate-demand curve shifts.
One important variable that shifts the aggregate-demand curve is monetary 
policy. To see how monetary policy affects the economy in the short run, suppose 
that the Fed increases the money supply by buying government bonds in open-
market operations. (Why the Fed might do this will become clear later, after we 
understand the effects of such a move.) Let’s consider how this monetary injection 
influences the equilibrium interest rate for a given price level. This will tell us 
what the injection does to the position of the aggregate-demand curve.
As panel (a) of Figure 3 shows, an increase in the money supply shifts the 
money-supply curve to the right from MS1 to MS2. Because the money-demand 
curve has not changed, the interest rate falls from r1 to r2 to balance money supply 
and money demand. That is, the interest rate must fall to induce people to hold the 
additional money the Fed has created, restoring equilibrium in the money market. 
Once again, the interest rate influences the quantity of goods and services 
demanded, as shown in panel (b) of Figure 3. The lower interest rate reduces 
the cost of borrowing and the return to saving. Households buy more and larger 
houses, stimulating the demand for residential investment. Firms spend more on 
In panel (a), an increase in the money supply from MS1 to MS2 reduces the equilibrium 
interest rate from r1 to r2. Because the interest rate is the cost of borrowing, the fall in 
the interest rate raises the quantity of goods and services demanded at a given price 
level from Y1 to Y2. Thus, in panel (b), the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right 
from AD1 to AD2.
A Monetary Injection
Figure 3
MS2
Money
supply, 
MS1
Y1
Aggregate
demand, AD1
Y2
P
Money demand 
at price level P
AD2
Quantity
of Money
0
Interest
Rate
r1
r2
(a) The Money Market
(b) The Aggregate-Demand Curve
Quantity
of Output
0
Price
Level
3. . . . which increases the quantity of goods 
and services demanded at a given price level.
2. . . . the
equilibrium
interest rate
falls . . . 
1. When the Fed
increases the
money supply . . . 
532
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

new factories and new equipment, stimulating business investment. As a result, 
the quantity of goods and services demanded at a given price level, P, rises from 
Y1 to Y2. Of course, there is nothing special about P: The monetary injection raises 
the quantity of goods and services demanded at every price level. Thus, the entire 
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right.
To sum up: When the Fed increases the money supply, it lowers the interest rate and 
increases the quantity of goods and services demanded for any given price level, shifting 
the aggregate-demand curve to the right. Conversely, when the Fed contracts the money 
supply, it raises the interest rate and reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded 
for any given price level, shifting the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
The Role of Interest-Rate Targets in Fed Policy
How does the Federal Reserve affect the economy? Our discussion here and 
earlier in the book has treated the money supply as the Fed’s policy instrument. 
When the Fed buys government bonds in open-market operations, it increases the 
money supply and expands aggregate demand. When the Fed sells government 
bonds in open-market operations, it decreases the money supply and contracts 
aggregate demand.
Discussions of Fed policy often treat the interest rate, rather than the money 
supply, as the Fed’s policy instrument. Indeed, in recent years, the Federal 
Reserve has conducted policy by setting a target for the federal funds rate—the 
interest rate that banks charge one another for short-term loans. This target is 
reevaluated every six weeks at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC). The FOMC has chosen to set a target for the federal funds rate, rather 
than for the money supply, as it has done at times in the past.
There are several related reasons for the Fed’s decision to use the federal funds 
rate as its target. One is that the money supply  is hard to measure with sufficient 
precision. Another is that money demand fluctuates over time. For any given 
money supply, fluctuations in money demand would lead to fluctuations in inter-
est rates, aggregate demand, and output. By contrast, when the Fed announces a 
target for the federal funds rate, it essentially accommodates the day-to-day shifts 
in money demand by adjusting the money supply accordingly.
The Fed’s decision to target an interest rate does not fundamentally alter our 
analysis of monetary policy. The theory of liquidity preference illustrates an 
important principle: Monetary policy can be described either in terms of the money 
supply or in terms of the interest rate. When the FOMC sets a target for the federal 
funds rate of, say, 6 percent, the Fed’s bond traders are told: “Conduct whatever 
open-market operations are necessary to ensure that the equilibrium interest rate 
equals 6 percent.” In other words, when the Fed sets a target for the interest rate, 
it commits itself to adjusting the money supply to make the equilibrium in the 
money market hit that target.
As a result, changes in monetary policy can be viewed either in terms of chang-
ing the interest rate target or in terms of changing the money supply. When you 
read in the newspaper that “the Fed has lowered the federal funds rate from 6 to 
5 percent,” you should understand that this occurs only because the Fed’s bond 
traders are doing what it takes to make it happen. To lower the federal funds 
rate, the Fed’s bond traders buy government bonds, and this purchase increases 
the money supply and lowers the equilibrium interest rate (just as in Figure 3). 
Similarly, when the FOMC raises the target for the federal funds rate, the bond 
traders sell government bonds, and this sale decreases the money supply and 
raises the equilibrium interest rate. 
533
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

FYI
 The Zero Lower Bound
As we have just seen, monetary policy works through interest rates. 
This conclusion raises a question: What if the Fed’s target interest 
rate has fallen as far as it can? In the recession of 2008 and 2009, 
the federal funds rate fell to about zero. What, if anything, can 
monetary policy do then to stimulate the economy?
 
Some economists describe this situation as a liquidity trap. 
According to the theory of liquidity preference, expansionary mon-
etary policy works by reducing interest rates and stimulating invest-
ment spending. But if interest rates have already fallen almost to 
zero, then perhaps monetary policy is no longer effective. Nominal 
interest rates cannot fall below zero: Rather than making a loan at 
a negative nominal interest rate, a person would just hold cash. In 
this environment, expansionary monetary policy raises the supply of 
money, making the public’s asset portfolio more liquid, but because 
interest rates can’t fall any further, the extra liquidity might not have 
any effect. Aggregate demand, production, and employment may be 
“trapped” at low levels.
 
Other economists are skeptical about the relevance of liquid-
ity traps and believe that a central bank continues to have tools 
to expand the economy, even after its interest rate target hits 
its lower bound of zero. One possibility is that the central bank 
could raise inflation expectations by committing itself to future 
monetary expansion. Even if nominal interest rates cannot fall 
any further, higher expected inflation can lower real interest rates 
by making them negative, which would stimulate investment 
spending. 
 
A second possibility is that the central bank could conduct 
expansionary open-market operations with a larger variety of finan-
cial instruments than it normally uses. For example, it could buy 
mortgages and corporate debt and thereby lower the interest rates 
on these kinds of loans. The Federal Reserve actively pursued this 
last option during the downturn of 2008 and 2009.
 
Some economists have suggested that the possibility of hitting 
the zero lower bound for interest rates justifies setting the target 
rate of inflation well above zero. Under zero inflation, the real inter-
est rate, like the nominal interest, can never fall below zero. But if 
the normal rate of inflation is, say, 4 percent, then the central bank 
can easily push the real interest rate to negative 4 percent by lower-
ing the nominal interest rate toward zero. Thus, moderate inflation 
gives monetary policymakers more room to stimulate the economy 
when needed, reducing the risk of hitting up against the zero lower 
bound and having the economy fall into a liquidity trap.
The lessons from this analysis are simple: Changes in monetary policy aimed at 
expanding aggregate demand can be described either as increasing the money supply or 
as lowering the interest rate. Changes in monetary policy aimed at contracting aggregate 
demand can be described either as decreasing the money supply or as raising the interest rate.
Why the Fed Watches the Stock Market 
(and Vice Versa)
“The stock market has predicted nine out of the past five recessions.” So quipped 
Paul Samuelson, the famed economist (and textbook author). Samuelson was 
surely right that the stock market is highly volatile and can give wrong signals 
about the economy. But fluctuations in stock prices are often a sign of broader 
economic developments. The economic boom of the 1990s, for example, appeared 
not only in rapid GDP growth and falling unemployment but also in rising stock 
prices, which increased about fourfold during this decade. Similarly, the deep 
recession of 2008 and 2009 was reflected in falling stock prices: From November 
2007 to March 2009, the stock market lost about half its value.
534
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

 
How should the Fed respond to stock-market fluctuations? The Fed has no rea-
son to care about stock prices in themselves, but it does have the job of monitoring 
and responding to developments in the overall economy, and the stock market is 
a piece of that puzzle. When the stock market booms, households become wealth-
ier, and this increased wealth stimulates consumer spending. In addition, a rise 
in stock prices makes it more attractive for firms to sell new shares of stock, and 
this stimulates investment spending. For both reasons, a booming stock market 
expands the aggregate demand for goods and services.
 
As we discuss more fully later in the chapter, one of the Fed’s goals is to sta-
bilize aggregate demand, because greater stability in aggregate demand means 
greater stability in output and the price level. To promote stability, the Fed might 
respond to a stock-market boom by keeping the money supply lower and interest 
rates higher than it otherwise would. The contractionary effects of higher inter-
est rates would offset the expansionary effects of higher stock prices. In fact, this 
analysis does describe Fed behavior: Real interest rates were kept high by histori-
cal standards during the stock-market boom of the late 1990s.
 
The opposite occurs when the stock market falls. Spending on consumption 
and investment tends to decline, depressing aggregate demand and pushing 
the economy toward recession. To stabilize aggregate demand, the Fed would 
increase the money supply and lower interest rates. And indeed, that is what it 
typically does. For example, on October 19, 1987, the stock market fell by 22.6 
percent—one of the biggest one-day drops in history. The Fed responded to the 
market crash by increasing the money supply and lowering interest rates. The 
federal funds rate fell from 7.7 percent at the beginning of October to 6.6 percent 
at the end of the month. In part because of the Fed’s quick action, the economy 
avoided a recession. Similarly, as we discussed in a case study in the preceding 
chapter, the Fed also reduced interest rates during the economic downturn and 
stock market decline of 2008 and 2009, but this time monetary policy was not suf-
ficient to avert a deep recession.
 
While the Fed keeps an eye on the stock market, stock-market participants also 
keep an eye on the Fed. Because the Fed can influence interest rates and economic 
activity, it can alter the value of stocks. For example, when the Fed raises inter-
est rates by reducing the money supply, it makes owning stocks less attractive 
for two reasons. First, a higher interest rate means that bonds, the alternative 
to stocks, are earning a higher return. Second, the Fed’s tightening of monetary 
policy reduces the demand for goods and services, which reduces profits. As a 
result, stock prices often fall when the Fed raises interest rates. ■
QUICK QUIZ Use the theory of liquidity preference to explain how a decrease in the 
money supply affects the equilibrium interest rate. How does this change in monetary 
policy affect the aggregate-demand curve?
How Fiscal Policy Influences Aggregate Demand
The government can influence the behavior of the economy not only with mone-
tary policy but also with fiscal policy. Fiscal policy refers to the government’s 
choices regarding the overall level of government purchases and taxes. Earlier 
in the book, we examined how fiscal policy influences saving, investment, and 
growth in the long run. In the short run, however, the primary effect of fiscal 
policy is on the aggregate demand for goods and services.
fiscal policy
the setting of the level of 
government spending and 
taxation by government 
policymakers 
535
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

Changes in Government Purchases
When policymakers change the money supply or the level of taxes, they shift 
the aggregate-demand curve indirectly by influencing the spending decisions of 
firms or households. By contrast, when the government alters its own purchases 
of goods and services, it shifts the aggregate-demand curve directly.
Suppose, for instance, that the U.S. Department of Defense places a $20 billion 
order for new fighter planes with Boeing, the large aircraft manufacturer. This 
order raises the demand for the output produced by Boeing, which induces the 
company to hire more workers and increase production. Because Boeing is part of 
the economy, the increase in the demand for Boeing planes means an increase in 
the total quantity of goods and services demanded at each price level. As a result, 
the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right.
By how much does this $20 billion order from the government shift the aggre-
gate-demand curve? At first, one might guess that the aggregate-demand curve 
shifts to the right by exactly $20 billion. It turns out, however, that this is not the 
case. There are two macroeconomic effects that cause the size of the shift in aggre-
gate demand to differ from the change in government purchases. The first—the 
multiplier effect—suggests the shift in aggregate demand could be larger than 
$20 billion. The second—the crowding-out effect—suggests the shift in aggregate 
demand could be smaller than $20 billion. We now discuss each of these effects 
in turn. 
The Multiplier Effect
When the government buys $20 billion of goods from Boeing, that purchase has 
repercussions. The immediate impact of the higher demand from the govern-
ment is to raise employment and profits at Boeing. Then, as the workers see 
higher earnings and the firm owners see higher profits, they respond to this 
increase in income by raising their own spending on consumer goods. As a 
result, the government purchase from Boeing raises the demand for the prod-
ucts of many other firms in the economy. Because each dollar spent by the gov-
ernment can raise the aggregate demand for goods and services by more than a 
dollar, government purchases are said to have a multiplier effect on aggregate 
demand.
This multiplier effect continues even after this first round. When consumer 
spending rises, the firms that produce these consumer goods hire more people 
and experience higher profits. Higher earnings and profits stimulate consumer 
spending once again and so on. Thus, there is positive feedback as higher demand 
leads to higher income, which in turn leads to even higher demand. Once all these 
effects are added together, the total impact on the quantity of goods and services 
demanded can be much larger than the initial impulse from higher government 
spending. 
Figure 4 illustrates the multiplier effect. The increase in government purchases 
of $20 billion initially shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right from AD1 
to AD2 by exactly $20 billion. But when consumers respond by increasing their 
spending, the aggregate-demand curve shifts still further to AD3.
This multiplier effect arising from the response of consumer spending can 
be strengthened by the response of investment to higher levels of demand. For 
instance, Boeing might respond to the higher demand for planes by deciding 
to buy more equipment or build another plant. In this case, higher government 
demand spurs higher demand for investment goods. This positive feedback from 
demand to investment is sometimes called the investment accelerator.
multiplier effect
the additional shifts in 
aggregate demand that 
result when expansionary 
fiscal policy increases 
income and thereby 
increases consumer 
spending
536
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

The Multiplier Effect
An increase in government 
purchases of $20 billion can 
shift the aggregate-demand 
curve to the right by more 
than $20 billion. This multiplier 
effect arises because increases 
in aggregate income stimulate 
additional spending by 
consumers. 
Figure 4
Quantity of
Output
Price
Level
0
Aggregate demand, AD1
$20 billion
AD2
AD3
1. An increase in government purchases
of $20 billion initially increases aggregate
demand by $20 billion . . . 
2. . . . but the multiplier
effect can amplify the
shift in aggregate
demand.
A Formula for the Spending Multiplier
Some simple algebra permits us to derive a formula for the size of the multiplier 
effect that arises when an increase in government purchases induces increases in 
consumer spending. An important number in this formula is the marginal propen-
sity to consume (MPC)—the fraction of extra income that a household consumes 
rather than saves. For example, suppose that the marginal propensity to consume 
is 3⁄4. This means that for every extra dollar that a household earns, the household 
spends $0.75 (3⁄4 of the dollar) and saves $0.25. With an MPC of 3⁄4, when the work-
ers and owners of Boeing earn $20 billion from the government contract, they 
increase their consumer spending by 3⁄4 × $20 billion, or $15 billion.
To gauge the impact on aggregate demand of a change in government pur-
chases, we follow the effects step by step. The process begins when the govern-
ment spends $20 billion, which implies that national income (earnings and profits) 
also rises by this amount. This increase in income in turn raises consumer spend-
ing by MPC × $20 billion, which in turn raises the income for the workers and 
owners of the firms that produce the consumption goods. This second increase in 
income again raises consumer spending, this time by MPC × (MPC × $20 billion). 
These feedback effects go on and on. 
To find the total impact on the demand for goods and services, we add up all 
these effects:
 
Change in government purchases = 
$20 billion
 
First change in consumption 
= MPC × $20 billion
 
Second change in consumption 
=  MPC2 × $20 billion
 
Third change in consumption 
=  MPC3 × $20 billion
 
• 
•
 
• 
•
 
• 
•
 
Total change in demand  
 
 
= (1 + MPC + MPC2 + MPC3 + . . .) × $20 billion.
537
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

Here “. . .” represents an infinite number of similar terms. Thus, we can write the 
multiplier as follows:
 
Multiplier = 1 + MPC + MPC2 + MPC3 + . . . .
This multiplier tells us the demand for goods and services that each dollar of 
government purchases generates.
To simplify this equation for the multiplier, recall from math class that this 
expression is an infinite geometric series. For x between –1 and +1,
1 + x + x2 + x3 + . . . = 1/(1 – x).
In our case, x = MPC. Thus, 
Multiplier = 1/(1 – MPC).
For example, if MPC is 3⁄4, the multiplier is 1/(1 – 3⁄4), which is 4. In this case, the 
$20 billion of government spending generates $80 billion of demand for goods 
and services.
This formula for the multiplier shows an important conclusion: The size of the 
multiplier depends on the marginal propensity to consume. While an MPC of 
¾ leads to a multiplier of 4, an MPC of ½ leads to a multiplier of only 2. Thus, a 
larger MPC means a larger multiplier. To see why this is true, remember that the 
multiplier arises because higher income induces greater spending on consump-
tion. With a larger MPC, consumption responds more to a change in income, and 
so the multiplier is larger.
Other Applications of the Multiplier Effect
Because of the multiplier effect, a dollar of government purchases can generate 
more than a dollar of aggregate demand. The logic of the multiplier effect, how-
ever, is not restricted to changes in government purchases. Instead, it applies to 
any event that alters spending on any component of GDP—consumption, invest-
ment, government purchases, or net exports.
For example, suppose that a recession overseas reduces the demand for 
U.S. net exports by $10 billion. This reduced spending on U.S. goods and 
services depresses U.S. national income, which reduces spending by U.S. 
consumers. If the marginal propensity to consume is ¾ and the multiplier 
is 4, then the $10 billion fall in net exports means a $40 billion contraction in 
aggregate demand.
As another example, suppose that a stock-market boom increases households’ 
wealth and stimulates their spending on goods and services by $20 billion. This 
extra consumer spending increases national income, which in turn generates 
even more consumer spending. If the marginal propensity to consume is ¾ and 
the multiplier is 4, then the initial impulse of $20 billion in consumer spending 
translates into an $80 billion increase in aggregate demand.
The multiplier is an important concept in macroeconomics because it shows 
how the economy can amplify the impact of changes in spending. A small initial 
change in consumption, investment, government purchases, or net exports can 
end up having a large effect on aggregate demand and, therefore, the economy’s 
production of goods and services.
538
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

The Crowding-Out Effect
The multiplier effect seems to suggest that when the government buys $20 billion 
of planes from Boeing, the resulting expansion in aggregate demand is necessarily 
larger than $20 billion. Yet another effect works in the opposite direction. While 
an increase in government purchases stimulates the aggregate demand for goods 
and services, it also causes the interest rate to rise, which reduces investment 
spending and puts downward pressure on aggregate demand. The reduction in 
aggregate demand that results when a fiscal expansion raises the interest rate is 
called the crowding-out effect.
To see why crowding out occurs, let’s consider what happens in the money 
market when the government buys planes from Boeing. As we have discussed, 
this increase in demand raises the incomes of the workers and owners of this 
firm (and because of the multiplier effect, of other firms as well). As incomes rise, 
households plan to buy more goods and services and, as a result, choose to hold 
more of their wealth in liquid form. That is, the increase in income caused by the 
fiscal expansion raises the demand for money. 
The effect of the increase in money demand is shown in panel (a) of Figure 5. 
Because the Fed has not changed the money supply, the vertical supply curve 
remains the same. When the higher level of income shifts the money-demand 
curve to the right from MD1 to MD2, the interest rate must rise from r1 to r2 to keep 
supply and demand in balance.
crowding-out effect
the offset in aggregate 
demand that results 
when expansionary fiscal 
policy raises the interest 
rate and thereby reduces 
investment spending
The Crowding-Out 
Effect
Figure 5
Panel (a) shows the money market. When the government increases its purchases of 
goods and services, the resulting increase in income raises the demand for money 
from MD1 to MD2, and this causes the equilibrium interest rate to rise from r1 to r2. 
Panel (b) shows the effects on aggregate demand. The initial impact of the increase 
in government purchases shifts the aggregate-demand curve from AD1 to AD2. 
Yet because the interest rate is the cost of borrowing, the increase in the interest 
rate tends to reduce the quantity of goods and services demanded, particularly for 
investment goods. This crowding out of investment partially offsets the impact of the 
fiscal expansion on aggregate demand. In the end, the aggregate-demand curve shifts 
only to AD3. 
Quantity
of Money
Quantity ﬁxed
by the Fed
0
Interest
Rate
r2
r1
Money demand, MD1
Money
supply
(a) The Money Market
3. . . . which
increases
the
equilibrium
interest
rate . . . 
2. . . . the increase in
spending increases
money demand . . . 
MD2
Quantity
of Output
0
Price
Level
Aggregate demand, AD1
(b) The Shift in Aggregate Demand
4. . . . which in turn
partly offsets the
initial increase in
aggregate demand.
AD2
AD3
$20 billion
1. When an increase in government 
purchases increases aggregate
demand . . . 
539
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

The increase in the interest rate, in turn, reduces the quantity of goods and ser-
vices demanded. In particular, because borrowing is more expensive, the demand 
for residential and business investment goods declines. That is, as the increase in 
government purchases increases the demand for goods and services, it may also 
crowd out investment. This crowding-out effect partially offsets the impact of 
government purchases on aggregate demand, as illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 5. 
The increase in government purchases initially shifts the aggregate-demand curve 
from AD1 to AD2, but once crowding out takes place, the aggregate-demand curve 
drops back to AD3.
To sum up: When the government increases its purchases by $20 billion, the aggregate 
demand for goods and services could rise by more or less than $20 billion depending on the 
sizes of the multiplier and crowding-out effects. The multiplier effect by itself makes the 
shift in aggregate demand greater than $20 billion. The crowding-out effect pushes 
the aggregate-demand curve in the opposite direction and, if large enough, could 
result in an aggregate-demand shift of less than $20 billion.
Changes in Taxes
The other important instrument of fiscal policy, besides the level of government 
purchases, is the level of taxation. When the government cuts personal income 
taxes, for instance, it increases households’ take-home pay. Households will save 
some of this additional income, but they will also spend some of it on consumer 
goods. Because it increases consumer spending, the tax cut shifts the aggregate-
demand curve to the right. Similarly, a tax increase depresses consumer spending 
and shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
The size of the shift in aggregate demand resulting from a tax change is also 
affected by the multiplier and crowding-out effects. When the government cuts 
taxes and stimulates consumer spending, earnings and profits rise, which further 
stimulates consumer spending. This is the multiplier effect. At the same time, 
higher income leads to higher money demand, which tends to raise interest rates. 
Higher interest rates make borrowing more costly, which reduces investment 
spending. This is the crowding-out effect. Depending on the size of the multiplier 
and crowding-out effects, the shift in aggregate demand could be larger or smaller 
than the tax change that causes it.
In addition to the multiplier and crowding-out effects, there is another impor-
tant determinant of the size of the shift in aggregate demand that results from a 
tax change: households’ perceptions about whether the tax change is permanent 
or temporary. For example, suppose that the government announces a tax cut of 
$1,000 per household. In deciding how much of this $1,000 to spend, households 
must ask themselves how long this extra income will last. If households expect the 
tax cut to be permanent, they will view it as adding substantially to their financial 
resources and, therefore, increase their spending by a large amount. In this case, the 
tax cut will have a large impact on aggregate demand. By contrast, if households 
expect the tax change to be temporary, they will view it as adding only slightly to 
their financial resources and, therefore, will increase their spending by only a small 
amount. In this case, the tax cut will have a small impact on aggregate demand.
An extreme example of a temporary tax cut was the one announced in 1992. In 
that year, President George H. W. Bush faced a lingering recession and an upcom-
ing reelection campaign. He responded to these circumstances by announcing a 
reduction in the amount of income tax that the federal government was with-
holding from workers’ paychecks. Because legislated income tax rates did not 
change, however, every dollar of reduced withholding in 1992 meant an extra 
dollar of taxes due on April 15, 1993, when income tax returns for 1992 were to 
540
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

FYI
 How Fiscal Policy Might Affect 
Aggregate Supply
So far, our discussion of fiscal policy has stressed how changes in 
government purchases and changes in taxes influence the quantity 
of goods and services demanded. Most economists believe that 
the short-run macroeconomic effects of fiscal policy work primarily 
through aggregate demand. Yet fiscal policy can potentially influ-
ence the quantity of goods and services supplied as well.
 
For instance, consider the effects of tax changes on aggregate 
supply. One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that 
people respond to incentives. When government policymakers cut 
tax rates, workers get to keep more of each dollar they earn, so they 
have a greater incentive to work and produce goods and services. 
If they respond to this incentive, the quantity of goods and services 
supplied will be greater at each price level, and the aggregate-
supply curve will shift to the right. 
 
Some economists, called supply-siders, have argued that the 
influence of tax cuts on aggregate supply is large. According to some 
supply-siders, the influence is so large that a cut in tax rates will 
 stimulate enough additional produ ction and income that tax rev-
enue will actually increase. This is certainly a theoretical possibility, 
but most economists do not consider it the normal case. While the 
supply-side effects of taxes are important to consider, they are usually 
not large enough to cause tax revenue to rise when tax rates fall.
 
Like changes in taxes, changes in government purchases can 
also potentially affect aggregate supply. Suppose, for instance, that 
the government increases expenditure on a form of government-
provided capital, such as roads. Roads are used by private businesses 
to make deliveries to their customers; an increase in the quantity 
of roads increases these businesses’ productivity. Hence, when the 
government spends more on roads, it increases the quantity of goods 
and services supplied at any given price level and, thus, shifts the 
aggregate-supply curve to the right. This effect on aggregate supply 
is probably more important in the long run than in the short run, 
however, because it would take some time for the government to 
build the new roads and put them into use.
be filed. Thus, this “tax cut” actually represented only a short-term loan from the 
government. Not surprisingly, the impact of the policy on consumer spending 
and aggregate demand was relatively small.
QUICK QUIZ Suppose that the government reduces spending on highway construc-
tion by $10 billion. Which way does the aggregate-demand curve shift? Explain why 
the shift might be larger than $10 billion. Explain why the shift might be smaller than 
$10 billion.
Using Policy to Stabilize the Economy
We have seen how monetary and fiscal policy can affect the economy’s aggregate 
demand for goods and services. These theoretical insights raise some important 
policy questions: Should policymakers use these instruments to control aggregate 
demand and stabilize the economy? If so, when? If not, why not?
The Case for Active Stabilization Policy
Let’s return to the question that began this chapter: When the president and 
Congress raise taxes, how should the Federal Reserve respond? As we have seen, 
the level of taxation is one determinant of the position of the aggregate-demand 
541
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

curve. When the government raises taxes, aggregate demand will fall, depress-
ing production and employment in the short run. If the Federal Reserve wants to 
prevent this adverse effect of the fiscal policy, it can expand aggregate demand by 
increasing the money supply. A monetary expansion would reduce interest rates, 
stimulate investment spending, and expand aggregate demand. If monetary pol-
icy responds appropriately, the combined changes in monetary and fiscal policy 
could leave the aggregate demand for goods and services unaffected.
This analysis is exactly the sort followed by members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee. They know that monetary policy is an important determinant 
of aggregate demand. They also know that there are other important determi-
nants as well, including fiscal policy set by the president and Congress. As a 
result, the Fed’s Open Market Committee watches the debates over fiscal policy 
with a keen eye.
This response of monetary policy to the change in fiscal policy is an example of 
a more general phenomenon: the use of policy instruments to stabilize aggregate 
demand and, as a result, production and employment. Economic stabilization has 
been an explicit goal of U.S. policy since the Employment Act of 1946. This act 
states that “it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the federal government 
to . . . promote full employment and production.” In essence, the government has 
chosen to hold itself accountable for short-run macroeconomic performance.
The Employment Act has two implications. The first, more modest, implication 
is that the government should avoid being a cause of economic fluctuations. Thus, 
most economists advise against large and sudden changes in monetary and fis-
cal policy, for such changes are likely to cause fluctuations in aggregate demand. 
Moreover, when large changes do occur, it is important that monetary and fiscal 
policymakers be aware of and respond to each others’ actions.
The second, more ambitious, implication of the Employment Act is that the 
government should respond to changes in the private economy to stabilize 
aggregate demand. The act was passed not long after the publication of Keynes’s 
The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, which has been one of the 
most  influential books ever written about economics. In it, Keynes emphasized 
the key role of aggregate demand in explaining short-run economic fluctuations. 
Keynes claimed that the government should actively stimulate aggregate demand 
when aggregate demand appeared insufficient to maintain production at its full-
employment level. 
Keynes (and his many followers) argued that aggregate demand fluctuates 
because of largely irrational waves of pessimism and optimism. He used the term 
“animal spirits” to refer to these arbitrary changes in attitude. When pessimism 
reigns, households reduce consumption spending, and firms reduce investment 
spending. The result is reduced aggregate demand, lower production, and higher 
unemployment. Conversely, when optimism reigns, households and firms increase 
spending. The result is higher aggregate demand, higher production, and inflation-
ary pressure. Notice that these changes in attitude are, to some extent, self-fulfilling.
In principle, the government can adjust its monetary and fiscal policy in 
response to these waves of optimism and pessimism and, thereby, stabilize the 
economy. For example, when people are excessively pessimistic, the Fed can 
expand the money supply to lower interest rates and expand aggregate demand. 
When they are excessively optimistic, it can contract the money supply to raise 
interest rates and dampen aggregate demand. Former Fed Chairman William 
McChesney Martin described this view of monetary policy very simply: “The 
Federal Reserve’s job is to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going.”
542
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Keynesians in the White House
When a reporter in 1961 asked President John F. Kennedy why he advocated a 
tax cut, Kennedy replied, “To stimulate the economy. Don’t you remember your 
Economics 101?” Kennedy’s policy was, in fact, based on the analysis of fiscal 
policy we have developed in this chapter. His goal was to enact a tax cut, which 
would raise consumer spending, expand aggregate demand, and increase the 
economy’s production and employment.
 
In choosing this policy, Kennedy was relying on his team of economic advisers. 
This team included such prominent economists as James Tobin and Robert Solow, 
who later would win Nobel Prizes for their contributions to economics. As stu-
dents in the 1940s, these economists had closely studied John Maynard Keynes’s 
General Theory, which then was only a few years old. When the Kennedy advisers 
proposed cutting taxes, they were putting Keynes’s ideas into action.
 
Although tax changes can have a potent influence on aggregate demand, they 
have other effects as well. In particular, by changing the incentives that people 
face, taxes can alter the aggregate supply of goods and services. Part of the 
Kennedy proposal was an investment tax credit, which gives a tax break to firms 
that invest in new capital. Higher investment would not only stimulate aggregate 
demand immediately but also increase the economy’s productive capacity over 
time. Thus, the short-run goal of increasing production through higher aggregate 
demand was coupled with a long-run goal of increasing production through 
higher aggregate supply. And indeed, when the tax cut Kennedy proposed was 
finally enacted in 1964, it helped usher in a period of robust economic growth.
 
Since the 1964 tax cut, policymakers have from time to time used fiscal policy 
as a tool for controlling aggregate demand. For example, when President Barack 
Obama moved into the Oval Office in 2009, he faced an economy in the midst 
of a recession. One of his first policy initiatives was a stimulus bill that included 
substantial increases in government spending. The accompanying In the News 
box discusses some of the debate over this policy initiative. ■
The Case against Active Stabilization Policy
Some economists argue that the government should avoid active use of monetary 
and fiscal policy to try to stabilize the economy. They claim that these policy instru-
ments should be set to achieve long-run goals, such as rapid economic growth and 
low inflation, and that the economy should be left to deal with short-run fluctua-
tions on its own. These economists may admit that monetary and fiscal policy can 
stabilize the economy in theory, but they doubt whether it can do so in practice.
The primary argument against active monetary and fiscal policy is that these 
policies affect the economy with a long lag. As we have seen, monetary policy 
works by changing interest rates, which in turn influence investment spending. 
But many firms make investment plans far in advance. Thus, most economists 
believe that it takes at least six months for changes in monetary policy to have 
much effect on output and employment. Moreover, once these effects occur, they 
can last for several years. Critics of stabilization policy argue that because of this 
lag, the Fed should not try to fine-tune the economy. They claim that the Fed often 
reacts too late to changing economic conditions and, as a result, ends up being 
a cause of rather than a cure for economic fluctuations. These critics advocate a 
passive monetary policy, such as slow and steady growth in the money supply.
543
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

Fiscal policy also works with a lag, but unlike the lag in monetary policy, the 
lag in fiscal policy is largely attributable to the political process. In the United 
States, most changes in government spending and taxes must go through con-
gressional committees in both the House and the Senate, be passed by both 
legislative bodies, and then be signed by the president. Completing this process 
can take months or, in some cases, years. By the time the change in fiscal policy 
is passed and ready to implement, the condition of the economy may well have 
changed.
These lags in monetary and fiscal policy are a problem in part because economic 
forecasting is so imprecise. If forecasters could accurately predict the condition of 
the economy a year in advance, then monetary and fiscal policymakers could look 
ahead when making policy decisions. In this case, policymakers could stabilize 
the economy despite the lags they face. In practice, however, major recessions and 
depressions arrive without much advance warning. The best policymakers can do 
at any time is to respond to economic changes as they occur.
Much Ado about 
Multipliers
I
t is the biggest peacetime fiscal expansion 
in history. Across the globe countries have 
countered the recession by cutting taxes and 
by boosting government spending. The G20 
group of economies, whose leaders meet 
this week in Pittsburgh, have introduced 
stimulus packages worth an average of 2% 
of GDP this year and 1.6% of GDP in 2010. 
Co-ordinated action on this scale might sug-
gest a consensus about the effects of fiscal 
stimulus. But economists are in fact deeply 
divided about how well, or indeed whether, 
such stimulus works. 
 
The debate hinges on the scale of the 
“fiscal multiplier”. This measure, first for-
malised in 1931 by Richard Kahn, a student 
of John Maynard Keynes, captures how 
effectively tax cuts or increases in govern-
ment spending stimulate output. A multi-
plier of one means that a $1 billion increase 
in government spending will increase a 
country’s GDP by $1 billion.
 
The size of the multiplier is bound to vary 
according to economic conditions. For an 
economy operating at full capacity, the fiscal 
multiplier should be zero. Since there are no 
spare resources, any increase in government 
demand would just replace spending else-
where. But in a recession, when workers and 
factories lie idle, a fiscal boost can increase 
overall demand. And if the initial stimulus 
triggers a cascade of expenditure among 
consumers and businesses, the multiplier 
can be well above one. 
 
The multiplier is also likely to vary accord-
ing to the type of fiscal action. Government 
spending on building a bridge may have a 
bigger multiplier than a tax cut if consumers 
save a portion of their tax windfall. A tax cut 
targeted at poorer people may have a bigger 
impact on spending than one for the afflu-
ent, since poorer folk tend to spend a higher 
share of their income.
 
Crucially, the overall size of the fiscal 
multiplier also depends on how people 
react to higher government borrowing. If 
the government’s actions bolster confidence 
and revive animal spirits, the multiplier 
could rise as demand goes up and private 
investment is “crowded in.” But if interest 
rates climb in response to government bor-
rowing then some private investment that 
would otherwise have occurred could get 
“crowded out.” And if consumers expect 
higher future taxes in order to finance new 
government borrowing, they could spend 
 How Large Is the Fiscal Policy Multiplier?
In the global economic downturn of 2008 and 2009, governments 
around the world turned to fiscal policy to prop up aggregate demand. 
in the news
544
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Automatic Stabilizers
All economists—both advocates and critics of stabilization policy—agree that the 
lags in implementation render policy less useful as a tool for short-run stabiliza-
tion. The economy would be more stable, therefore, if policymakers could find 
a way to avoid some of these lags. In fact, they have. Automatic stabilizers are 
changes in fiscal policy that stimulate aggregate demand when the economy goes 
into a recession without policymakers having to take any deliberate action.
The most important automatic stabilizer is the tax system. When the economy 
goes into a recession, the amount of taxes collected by the government falls 
automatically because almost all taxes are closely tied to economic activity. The 
personal income tax depends on households’ incomes, the payroll tax depends 
on workers’ earnings, and the corporate income tax depends on firms’ profits. 
Because incomes, earnings, and profits all fall in a recession, the government’s tax 
revenue falls as well. This automatic tax cut stimulates aggregate demand and, 
thereby, reduces the magnitude of economic fluctuations.
automatic 
stabilizers
changes in fiscal policy 
that stimulate aggregate 
demand when the 
economy goes into a 
recession without policy-
makers having to take any 
deliberate action
less today. All that would reduce the fiscal 
multiplier, potentially to below zero. 
 
Different assumptions about the impact 
of higher government borrowing on inter-
est rates and private spending explain wild 
variations in the estimates of multipliers 
from today’s stimulus spending. Economists 
in the Obama administration, who assume 
that the federal funds rate stays constant for 
a four-year period, expect a multiplier of 1.6 
for government purchases and 1.0 for tax 
cuts from America’s fiscal stimulus. An alter-
native assessment by John Cogan, Tobias 
Cwik, John Taylor and Volker Wieland uses 
models in which interest rates and taxes 
rise more quickly in response to higher 
public borrowing. Their multipliers are much 
smaller. They think America’s stimulus will 
boost GDP by only one-sixth as much as the 
Obama team expects. 
 
When forward-looking models disagree 
so dramatically, careful analysis of previ-
ous fiscal stimuli ought to help settle 
the debate. Unfortunately, it is extremely 
tricky to isolate the impact of changes 
in fiscal policy. One approach is to use 
microeconomic case studies to examine 
consumer behaviour in response to specific 
tax rebates and cuts. These studies, largely 
based on tax changes in America, find that 
permanent cuts have a bigger impact on 
consumer spending than temporary ones 
and that consumers who find it hard to 
borrow, such as those close to their credit-
card limit, tend to spend more of their tax 
windfall. But case studies do not measure 
the overall impact of tax cuts or spending 
increases on output. 
 
An alternative approach is to try to tease 
out the statistical impact of changes in 
government spending or tax cuts on GDP. 
The difficulty here is to isolate the effects 
of fiscal-stimulus measures from the rises 
in social-security spending and falls in tax 
revenues that naturally accompany reces-
sions. This empirical approach has narrowed 
the range of estimates in some areas. It has 
also yielded interesting cross-country com-
parisons. Multipliers are bigger in closed 
economies than open ones (because less of 
the stimulus leaks abroad via imports). They 
have traditionally been bigger in rich coun-
tries than emerging ones (where investors 
tend to take fright more quickly, pushing 
interest rates up). But overall economists 
find as big a range of multipliers from 
empirical estimates as they do from theo-
retical models. 
 
To add to the confusion, the post-war 
experiences from which statistical analyses 
are drawn differ in vital respects from the 
current situation. Most of the evidence 
on multipliers for government spending 
is based on military outlays, but today’s 
stimulus packages are heavily focused on 
infrastructure. Interest rates in many rich 
countries are now close to zero, which may 
increase the potency of, as well as the need 
for, fiscal stimulus. Because of the financial 
crisis relatively more people face borrow-
ing constraints, which would increase the 
effectiveness of a tax cut. At the same time, 
highly indebted consumers may now be 
keen to cut their borrowing, leading to a 
lower multiplier. And investors today have 
more reason to be worried about rich coun-
tries’ fiscal positions than those of emerging 
markets. 
 
Add all this together and the truth is that 
economists are  flying blind. They can make 
relative judgments with some confidence. 
Temporary tax cuts pack less punch than 
permanent ones, for instance. Fiscal multipli-
ers will probably be lower in heavily indebted 
economies than in prudent ones. But poli-
cymakers looking for precise estimates are 
deluding themselves.
Source: Economist, September 24, 2009.
545
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

Government spending also acts as an automatic stabilizer. In particular, when 
the economy goes into a recession and workers are laid off, more people apply 
for unemployment insurance benefits, welfare benefits, and other forms of income 
support. This automatic increase in government spending stimulates aggregate 
demand at exactly the time when aggregate demand is insufficient to maintain 
full employment. Indeed, when the unemployment insurance system was first 
enacted in the 1930s, economists who advocated this policy did so in part because 
of its power as an automatic stabilizer.
The automatic stabilizers in the U.S. economy are not sufficiently strong to prevent 
recessions completely. Nonetheless, without these automatic stabilizers, output and 
employment would probably be more volatile than they are. For this reason, many 
economists oppose a constitutional amendment that would require the federal gov-
ernment always to run a balanced budget, as some politicians have proposed. When 
the economy goes into a recession, taxes fall, government spending rises, and the 
government’s budget moves toward deficit. If the government faced a strict balanced-
budget rule, it would be forced to look for ways to raise taxes or cut spending in a 
recession. In other words, a strict balanced-budget rule would eliminate the auto-
matic stabilizers inherent in our current system of taxes and government spending.
QUICK QUIZ Suppose a wave of negative “animal spirits” overruns the economy, 
and people become pessimistic about the future. What happens to aggregate 
demand? If the Fed wants to stabilize aggregate demand, how should it alter the 
money supply? If it does this, what happens to the interest rate? Why might the Fed 
choose not to respond in this way?
TOLES © 2001 THE WASHINGTON POST. REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION 
OF UNIVERSAL UCLICK. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
546
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

 Offbeat Indicators
Because monetary and fiscal policy work with long lags, policymakers 
are constantly searching for clues about where the economy is heading.  
This article, written as the 2001 recession was just ending, describes some 
unusual ways economists monitor macroeconomic conditions.
in the news
Economic Numbers
Befuddle Even the Best
BY GEORGE HAGER
E
conomists pore over scores of numbers 
every week, trying to sense when the 
recession is over. But quirky indicators and 
gut instinct might be almost as helpful—
maybe even more so.
 
Is your dentist busy? Dentists say people 
put off appointments when times turn tough, 
then reschedule when the economy improves.
 
How far away do you have to park when 
you go to the mall? Fewer shoppers equal 
more parking spaces. 
 
If you drive to work, has your commute 
time gotten shorter or longer?
 
Economist Michael Evans says a col-
league with a pipeline into the garbage 
business swears by his own homegrown 
Chicago Trash index. Collections plunged 
after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, rebounded 
in October but then fell off again in mid-
November. “Trash is a pretty good indi-
cator of what people are buying,” says 
Evans, an economist with Evans Carrol & 
Associates. “They’ve got to throw out the 
wrappings.” . . .
 
What’s actually happening is often 
clear only in hindsight. That’s one reason 
the National Bureau of Economic Research 
waited until November to declare that a 
recession began last March—and why it 
took them until December 1992 to declare 
that the last recession had ended more than 
a year earlier, in March 1991.
 
“The data can fail you,” says Allen Sinai, 
chief economist for Decision Economics. Sinai 
cautions that if numbers appear to be going 
up (or down), it’s best to wait to see what 
happens over two or three months before 
drawing a conclusion—something hairtrig-
ger financial markets routinely don’t do.
 
“We have lots of false predictions of 
recoveries by (stock) markets that don’t 
happen,” he says.
 
Like a lot of economists, Sinai leavens 
the numbers with informal observations. 
These days, he’s paying particular atten-
tion to what business executives say at 
meetings and cocktail parties because their 
mood—and their plans for investing and 
hiring—are key to a comeback.
 
Even the Federal Reserve, whose more 
than 200 economists monitor about every 
piece of the economy that can be mea-
sured, make room for anecdotes. Two 
weeks before every policy meeting, the Fed 
publishes its “beige book,” a survey based 
on off-the-record conversations between 
officials at the Fed’s 12 regional banks and 
local businesses.
 
The 
reports 
are 
peppered 
with 
quotes from unnamed business people 
(“Everybody’s decided to go shopping 
again,” someone told the Richmond Fed 
Bank last month) and the occasional odd 
detail that reveals just how far down the 
Fed inquisitors sometimes drill. Last March, 
the Dallas Fed Bank reported “healthy sales 
of singing gorillas” for Valentine’s Day.
Source: USA Today, December 26, 2001.
© IMAGE SOURCE/GETTY IMAGES
Bad Times
Good Times
547
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND

SUMMARY
SU
SUMMARY
Conclusion
• In developing a theory of short-run economic 
fluctuations, Keynes proposed the theory of 
liquidity preference to explain the determinants 
of the interest rate. According to this theory, the 
interest rate adjusts to balance the supply and 
demand for money. 
• An increase in the price level raises money 
demand and increases the interest rate that 
brings the money market into equilibrium. 
Because the interest rate represents the cost 
of borrowing, a higher interest rate reduces 
investment and, thereby, the quantity of goods 
and services demanded. The downward-sloping 
aggregate-demand curve expresses this nega-
tive relationship between the price level and the 
quantity demanded.
• Policymakers can influence aggregate demand 
with monetary policy. An increase in the money 
supply reduces the equilibrium interest rate for 
any given price level. Because a lower interest rate 
stimulates investment spending, the aggregate-
demand curve shifts to the right. Conversely, a 
decrease in the money supply raises the equilib-
rium interest rate for any given price level and 
shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
• Policymakers can also influence aggregate demand 
with fiscal policy. An increase in government 
purchases or a cut in taxes shifts the aggregate-
demand curve to the right. A decrease in govern-
ment purchases or an increase in taxes shifts the 
aggregate-demand curve to the left.
• When the government alters spending or taxes, 
the resulting shift in aggregate demand can be 
larger or smaller than the fiscal change. The mul-
tiplier effect tends to amplify the effects of fiscal 
policy on aggregate demand. The crowding-out 
effect tends to dampen the effects of fiscal policy 
on aggregate demand.
• Because monetary and fiscal policy can influence 
aggregate demand, the government sometimes 
uses these policy instruments in an attempt 
to stabilize the economy. Economists disagree 
about how active the government should be in 
this effort. According to advocates of active sta-
bilization policy, changes in attitudes by house-
holds and firms shift aggregate demand; if the 
government does not respond, the result is 
undesirable and unnecessary fluctuations in 
output and employment. According to critics of 
active stabilization policy, monetary and fiscal 
policy work with such long lags that attempts 
at stabilizing the economy often end up being 
destabilizing. 
Before policymakers make any change in policy, they need to consider all the 
effects of their decisions. Earlier in the book, we examined classical models of 
the economy, which describe the long-run effects of monetary and fiscal policy. 
There we saw how fiscal policy influences saving, investment, and long-run 
growth and how monetary policy influences the price level and the inflation 
rate.
In this chapter, we examined the short-run effects of monetary and fiscal 
policy. We saw how these policy instruments can change the aggregate demand 
for goods and services and alter the economy’s production and employment 
in the short run. When Congress reduces government spending to balance the 
budget, it needs to consider both the long-run effects on saving and growth 
and the short-run effects on aggregate demand and employment. When the 
Fed reduces the growth rate of the money supply, it must take into account 
the long-run effect on inflation as well as the short-run effect on production. 
In all parts of government, policymakers must keep in mind both long-run and 
short-run goals.
548
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What is the theory of liquidity preference? How 
does it help explain the downward slope of the 
aggregate-demand curve?
 2. Use the theory of liquidity preference to explain 
how a decrease in the money supply affects the 
aggregate-demand curve.
 3. The government spends $3 billion to buy police 
cars. Explain why aggregate demand might 
increase by more than $3 billion. Explain why 
aggregate demand might increase by less than 
$3 billion.
 4. Suppose that survey measures of consumer 
confidence indicate a wave of pessimism is 
sweeping the country. If policymakers do noth-
ing, what will happen to aggregate demand? 
What should the Fed do if it wants to stabilize 
aggregate demand? If the Fed does nothing, 
what might Congress do to stabilize aggregate 
demand?
 5. Give an example of a government policy that 
acts as an automatic stabilizer. Explain why the 
policy has this effect.
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
 1. Explain how each of the following develop-
ments would affect the supply of money, 
the demand for money, and the interest rate. 
Illustrate your answers with diagrams.
a. The Fed’s bond traders buy bonds in open-
market operations.
b. An increase in credit-card availability reduces 
the cash people hold.
c. The Federal Reserve reduces banks’ reserve 
requirements.
d. Households decide to hold more money to 
use for holiday shopping.
e. A wave of optimism boosts business invest-
ment and expands aggregate demand.
 2. The Federal Reserve expands the money 
supply by 5 percent. 
a. Use the theory of liquidity preference to 
illustrate in a graph the impact of this policy 
on the interest rate. 
b. Use the model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to illustrate the impact of 
this change in the interest rate on output and 
the price level in the short run.
c. When the economy makes the transition 
from its short-run equilibrium to its long-run 
equilibrium, what will happen to the price 
level? 
d. How will this change in the price level affect 
the demand for money and the equilibrium 
interest rate?
e. Is this analysis consistent with the proposi-
tion that money has real effects in the short 
run but is neutral in the long run? 
 3. Suppose a computer virus disables the 
nation’s automatic teller machines, making 
withdrawals from bank accounts less conve-
nient. As a result, people want to keep more 
cash on hand, increasing the demand for 
money.
a. Assume the Fed does not change the 
money supply. According to the theory of 
liquidity preference, what happens to the 
interest rate? What happens to aggregate 
demand? 
b. If instead the Fed wants to stabilize aggregate 
demand, how should it change the money 
supply?
c. If it wants to accomplish this change in the 
money supply using open-market operations, 
what should it do?
CO
C
S
KEY CONCEPTS
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
 1. What is the theory of liquidity preference? How
does it help explain the downward slope of the
aggregate-demand curve?
 2. Use the theory of liquidity preference to explain
how a decrease in the money supply affects the
aggregate-demand curve.
 3. The government spends $3 billion to buy police 
cars. Explain why aggregate demand might 
increase by more than $3 billion. Explain why
aggregate demand might increase by less than 
$3 billion.
 4. Suppose that survey measures of consumer 
confidence indicate a wave of pessimism is
sweeping the country. If policymakers do noth-
ing, what will happen to aggregate demand?
What should the Fed do if it wants to stabilize 
aggregate demand? If the Fed does nothing,
what might Congress do to stabilize aggregate
demand?
 5. Give an example of a government policy that
acts as an automatic stabilizer. Explain why the
policy has this effect.
O
S
C
O
S
PROBLEMS AND APPLICATIONS 
 1. Explain how each of the following develop-
ments would affect the supply of money,
the demand for money, and the interest rate.
Illustrate your answers with diagrams.
a. The Fed’s bond traders buy bonds in open-
market operations.
b. An increase in credit-card availability reduces
the cash people hold.
c. The Federal Reserve reduces banks’ reserve
requirements.
d. Households decide to hold more money to
use for holiday shopping.
e. A wave of optimism boosts business invest-
ment and expands aggregate demand.
 2. The Federal Reserve expands the money
supply by 5 percent.
a. Use the theory of liquidity preference to
illustrate in a graph the impact of this policy
on the interest rate. 
b. Use the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply to illustrate the impact of 
this change in the interest rate on output and 
the price level in the short run.
c. When the economy makes the transition 
from its short-run equilibrium to its long-run 
equilibrium, what will happen to the price 
level? 
d. How will this change in the price level affect 
the demand for money and the equilibrium
interest rate?
e. Is this analysis consistent with the proposi-
tion that money has real effects in the short
run but is neutral in the long run?
 3. Suppose a computer virus disables the 
nation’s automatic teller machines, making 
withdrawals from bank accounts less conve-
nient. As a result, people want to keep more 
cash on hand, increasing the demand for
money.
a. Assume the Fed does not change the 
money supply. According to the theory of 
liquidity preference, what happens to the 
interest rate? What happens to aggregate 
demand?
b. If instead the Fed wants to stabilize aggregate 
demand, how should it change the money
supply?
c. If it wants to accomplish this change in the
money supply using open-market operations,
what should it do?
549
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND
theory of liquidity preference, 
p. 527
fiscal policy, p. 535
multiplier effect, p. 536
crowding-out effect, p. 539
automatic stabilizers, p. 545

 4. Consider two policies—a tax cut that will last 
for only one year and a tax cut that is expected 
to be permanent. Which policy will stimulate 
greater spending by consumers? Which policy 
will have the greater impact on aggregate 
demand? Explain.
 5. The economy is in a recession with high unem-
ployment and low output.
a. Draw a graph of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply to illustrate the current 
situation. Be sure to include the aggregate-
demand curve, the short-run aggregate-
supply curve, and the long-run aggregate-
supply curve.
b. Identify an open-market operation that 
would restore the economy to its natural rate.
c. Draw a graph of the money market to illus-
trate the effect of this open-market operation. 
Show the resulting change in the interest rate.
d. Draw a graph similar to the one in part 
(a) to show the effect of the open-market 
operation on output and the price level. 
Explain in words why the policy has the 
effect that you have shown in the graph.
 6. In the early 1980s, new legislation allowed 
banks to pay interest on checking deposits, 
which they could not do previously.
a. If we define money to include checking 
deposits, what effect did this legislation have 
on money demand? Explain.
b. If the Federal Reserve had maintained a con-
stant money supply in the face of this change, 
what would have happened to the interest 
rate? What would have happened to aggre-
gate demand and aggregate output?
c. If the Federal Reserve had maintained a 
constant market interest rate (the interest rate 
on nonmonetary assets) in the face of this 
change, what change in the money supply 
would have been necessary? What would 
have happened to aggregate demand and 
aggregate output?
 7. Suppose economists observe that an increase in 
government spending of $10 billion raises the total 
demand for goods and services by $30 billion.
a. If these economists ignore the possibility of 
crowding out, what would they estimate the 
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) to be?
b. Now suppose the economists allow for crowd-
ing out. Would their new estimate of the MPC 
be larger or smaller than their initial one?
 8. Suppose the government reduces taxes by 
$20 billion, that there is no crowding out, and 
that the marginal propensity to consume is ¾.
a. What is the initial effect of the tax reduction 
on aggregate demand?
b. What additional effects follow this initial 
effect? What is the total effect of the tax cut 
on aggregate demand?
c. How does the total effect of this $20 billion 
tax cut compare to the total effect of a $20 
billion increase in government purchases? 
Why?
d. Based on your answer to part (c), can you 
think of a way in which the government 
can increase aggregate demand without 
changing the government’s budget 
deficit?
 9. An economy is operating with output $400 
billion below its natural rate, and fiscal policy-
makers want to close this recessionary gap. The 
central bank agrees to adjust the money supply 
to hold the interest rate constant, so there is 
no crowding out. The marginal propensity to 
consume is 4∕5, and the price level is completely 
fixed in the short run. In what direction and by 
how much would government spending need 
to change to close the recessionary gap? Explain 
your thinking.
 10. Suppose government spending increases. 
Would the effect on aggregate demand be 
larger if the Federal Reserve held the money 
supply constant in response or if the Fed were 
committed to maintaining a fixed interest rate? 
Explain.
 11. In which of the following circumstances is 
expansionary fiscal policy more likely to lead to 
a short-run increase in investment? Explain.
a. When the investment accelerator is large or 
when it is small?
b. When the interest sensitivity of investment is 
large or when it is small?
 12. For various reasons, fiscal policy changes auto-
matically when output and employment fluctuate.
a. Explain why tax revenue changes when the 
economy goes into a recession.
b. Explain why government spending changes 
when the economy goes into a recession.
c. If the government were to operate under a 
strict balanced-budget rule, what would it 
have to do in a recession? Would that make 
the recession more or less severe?
550
PART IX 
SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

 13. Some members of Congress have proposed a 
law that would make price stability the sole 
goal of monetary policy. Suppose such a law 
were passed.
a. How would the Fed respond to an event that 
contracted aggregate demand?
b. How would the Fed respond to an event that 
caused an adverse shift in short-run aggre-
gate supply? 
In each case, is there another monetary policy that 
would lead to greater stability in output?
For further information on topics in this chapter, 
additional problems, applications, examples, online 
quizzes, and more, please visit our website at www
.cengage.com/economics/mankiw.
551
CHAPTER 24    THE INFLUENCE OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY ON AGGREGATE DEMAND


glossary
553
a
absolute advantage  the ability to pro-
duce a good using fewer inputs than 
another producer
accounting profit  total revenue minus 
total explicit cost
aggregate-demand curve  a curve 
that shows the quantity of goods and 
services that households, firms, the 
government, and customers abroad 
want to buy at each price level
aggregate-supply curve  a curve that 
shows the quantity of goods and ser-
vices that firms choose to produce and 
sell at each price level
automatic stabilizers  changes in fiscal 
policy that stimulate aggregate demand 
when the economy goes into a reces-
sion without policymakers having to 
take any deliberate action
average fixed cost  fixed cost divided 
by the quantity of output
average revenue  total revenue divided 
by the quantity sold
average total cost  total cost divided by 
the quantity of output
average variable cost  variable cost 
divided by the quantity of output
b
bank capital  the resources a bank’s 
owners have put into the institution
bond  a certificate of indebtedness
budget deficit  a shortfall of tax 
­revenue from government spending
budget surplus  an excess of tax 
­revenue over government spending
business cycle  fluctuations in econom-
ic activity, such as employment and 
production
c
capital requirement  a government reg-
ulation specifying a minimum amount 
of bank capital
catch-up effect  the property whereby 
countries that start off poor tend to 
grow more rapidly than countries that 
start off rich
central bank  an institution designed 
to oversee the banking system and 
regulate the quantity of money in the 
economy
circular-flow diagram  a visual model 
of the economy that shows how dollars 
flow through markets among house-
holds and firms
classical dichotomy  the theoretical 
separation of nominal and real variables
Coase theorem  the proposition that if 
private parties can bargain without cost 
over the allocation of resources, they 
can solve the problem of externalities 
on their own
club goods  goods that are excludable 
but not rival in consumption
collective bargaining  the process by 
which unions and firms agree on the 
terms of employment
commodity money  money that takes the 
form of a commodity with intrinsic value
common resources  goods that are rival 
in consumption but not excludable
comparative advantage  the ability to 
produce a good at a lower opportunity 
cost than another producer
competitive market  a market with 
many buyers and sellers trading identi-
cal products so that each buyer and 
seller is a price taker
complements  two goods for which 
an increase in the price of one leads 
to a decrease in the demand for the 
other
compounding  the accumulation of a 
sum of money in, say, a bank account, 
where the interest earned remains in 
the account to earn additional interest 
in the future
constant returns to scale  the property 
whereby long-run average total cost 
stays the same as the quantity of output 
changes
consumer price index (CPI)  a mea-
sure of the overall cost of the goods 
and services bought by a typical 
consumer
consumer surplus  the amount a 
buyer is willing to pay for a good 
minus the amount the buyer actually 
pays for it
consumption  spending by house-
holds on goods and services, with 
the exception of purchases of new 
housing
corrective tax  a tax designed to induce 
private decision makers to take account 
of the social costs that arise from a 
negative externality
cost  the value of everything a seller 
must give up to produce a good
cost–benefit analysis  a study that 
compares the costs and benefits to soci-
ety of providing a public good

554
GLOSSARY
cross-price elasticity of demand 
a measure of how much the quantity 
demanded of one good responds to a 
change in the price of another good, 
computed as the percentage change in 
quantity demanded of the first good 
divided by the percentage change in 
the price of the second good
crowding out  a decrease in investment 
that results from government borrowing
crowding-out effect  the offset in 
aggregate demand that results when 
expansionary fiscal policy raises the 
interest rate and thereby reduces 
investment spending
currency  the paper bills and coins in 
the hands of the public
cyclical unemployment  the deviation 
of unemployment from its natural rate
d
deadweight loss  the fall in total 
surplus that results from a market dis-
tortion, such as a tax
demand curve  a graph of the relation-
ship between the price of a good and 
the quantity demanded
demand deposits  balances in bank 
accounts that depositors can access on 
demand by writing a check
demand schedule  a table that shows 
the relationship between the price of a 
good and the quantity demanded
depression  a severe recession
diminishing marginal product  the 
property whereby the marginal product 
of an input declines as the quantity of 
the input increases
diminishing returns  the property 
whereby the benefit from an extra unit 
of an input declines as the quantity of 
the input increases
discount rate  the interest rate on the 
loans that the Fed makes to banks
discouraged workers  individuals who 
would like to work but have given up 
looking for a job
diseconomies of scale  the property 
whereby long-run average total cost 
rises as the quantity of output increases
diversification  the reduction of risk 
achieved by replacing a single risk with a 
large number of smaller, ­unrelated risks
e
economic profit  total revenue minus 
total cost, including both explicit and 
implicit costs
economics  the study of how society 
manages its scarce resources
economies of scale  the property 
whereby long-run average total cost 
falls as the quantity of output increases
efficiency  the property of society ­getting 
the most it can from its scarce resources
efficiency wages  above-­equilibrium 
wages paid by firms to increase worker 
productivity
efficient markets hypothesis  the 
­theory that asset prices reflect all 
­publicly available information about 
the value of an asset
efficient scale  the quantity of output 
that minimizes average total cost
elasticity  a measure of the responsive-
ness of quantity demanded or quantity 
supplied to one of its determinants
equality  the property of distributing 
economic prosperity uniformly among 
the members of society
equilibrium  a situation in which the 
market price has reached the level 
at which quantity supplied equals 
­quantity demanded
equilibrium price  the price that balances 
quantity supplied and quantity demanded
equilibrium quantity  the quantity 
supplied and the quantity demanded at 
the equilibrium price
excludability  the property of a good 
whereby a person can be prevented 
from using it
explicit costs  input costs that require 
an outlay of money by the firm
exports  goods produced domestically 
and sold abroad
externality  the uncompensated impact 
of one person’s actions on the well-
being of a bystander
f
federal funds rate  the interest rate at 
which banks make overnight loans to 
one another
Federal Reserve (Fed)  the central bank 
of the United States
fiat money  money without intrinsic 
value that is used as money because of 
government decree
finance  the field that studies how 
people make decisions regarding the 
allocation of resources over time and 
the handling of risk
financial intermediaries  financial 
institutions through which savers can 
indirectly provide funds to borrowers
financial markets  financial institutions 
through which savers can directly pro-
vide funds to borrowers
financial system  the group of institu-
tions in the economy that help to match 
one person’s saving with another per-
son’s investment
firm-specific risk  risk that affects only 
a single company
fiscal policy  the setting of the level of 
government spending and taxation by 
government policymakers
Fisher effect  the one-for-one adjust-
ment of the nominal interest rate to the 
inflation rate
fixed costs  costs that do not vary with 
the quantity of ­output produced
fractional-reserve banking  a banking 
system in which banks hold only a frac-
tion of deposits as reserves
free rider  a person who receives the 
benefit of a good but avoids paying for it
frictional unemployment  unemploy-
ment that results because it takes time 
for workers to search for the jobs that 
best suit their tastes and skills

555
GLOSSARY
fundamental analysis  the study of a 
company’s accounting statements and 
future prospects to determine its value
future value  the amount of money in the 
future that an amount of money today 
will yield, given prevailing interest rates
g
GDP deflator  a measure of the price 
level calculated as the ratio of nominal 
GDP to real GDP times 100
government purchases  spending on 
goods and services by local, state, and 
federal governments
gross domestic product (GDP)  the 
market value of all final goods and 
services produced within a country in a 
given period of time
h
human capital  the knowledge 
and skills that workers acquire through 
education, training, and experience
i
implicit costs  input costs that do not 
require an outlay of money by the firm
imports  goods produced abroad and 
sold domestically
incentive  something that induces a 
person to act
income elasticity of demand  a 
measure of how much the quantity 
demanded of a good responds to a 
change in consumers’ income, comput-
ed as the percentage change in quantity 
demanded divided by the percentage 
change in income
indexation  the automatic correction by 
law or contract of a dollar amount for 
the effects of inflation
inferior good  a good for which, other 
things equal, an increase in income 
leads to a decrease in demand
inflation  an increase in the overall 
level of prices in the economy
inflation rate  the percentage change in 
the price index from the preceding period
inflation tax  the revenue the govern-
ment raises by creating money
informational efficiency  the descrip-
tion of asset prices that rationally 
reflect all available information
internalizing the externality  altering 
incentives so that people take account 
of the external effects of their actions
investment  spending on capital equip-
ment, inventories, and structures, 
including household purchases of new 
housing
j
job search  the process by which work-
ers find appropriate jobs given their 
tastes and skills
l
labor force  the total number of work-
ers, including both the employed and 
the unemployed
labor-force ­participation rate  the 
­percentage of the adult population that 
is in the labor force
law of demand  the claim that, other 
things equal, the quantity demanded of a 
good falls when the price of the good rises
law of supply  the claim that, other things 
equal, the quantity supplied of a good 
rises when the price of the good rises
law of supply and demand  the claim 
that the price of any good adjusts to bring 
the quantity supplied and the quantity 
demanded for that good into balance
leverage  the use of borrowed money to 
supplement existing funds for purposes 
of investment
leverage ratio  the ratio of assets to 
bank capital
liquidity  the ease with which an asset 
can be converted into the economy’s 
medium of exchange
m
macroeconomics  the study of economy-
wide phenomena, including inflation, 
unemployment, and economic  
growth
marginal changes  small incremental 
adjustments to a plan of action
marginal cost  the increase in total 
cost that arises from an extra unit of 
production
marginal product  the increase in out-
put that arises from an ­additional unit 
of input
marginal revenue  the change in total 
revenue from an additional unit sold
market  a group of buyers and sellers 
of a particular good or service
market economy  an economy that 
allocates resources through the decen-
tralized decisions of many firms and 
households as they interact in markets 
for goods and services
market failure  a situation in which a 
market left on its own fails to allocate 
resources efficiently
market for loanable funds  the mar-
ket in which those who want to save 
supply funds and those who want to 
borrow to invest demand funds
market power  the ability of a single 
economic actor (or small group of 
actors) to have a substantial influence 
on market prices
market risk  risk that affects all compa-
nies in the stock market
medium of exchange  an item that buy-
ers give to sellers when they want to 
purchase goods and services
menu costs  the costs of changing 
prices
microeconomics  the study of how 
households and firms make decisions 
and how they interact in markets
model of aggregate demand and 
aggregate supply  the model that most 
economists use to explain short-run fluc-
tuations in economic activity around its 
long-run trend

556
GLOSSARY
monetary neutrality  the proposition 
that changes in the money supply do 
not affect real variables
monetary policy  the setting of the 
money supply by policymakers in the 
central bank
money  the set of assets in an economy 
that people regularly use to buy goods 
and services from other people
money multiplier  the amount of 
money the banking system ­generates 
with each ­dollar of reserves
money supply  the quantity of money 
available in the economy
monopoly  a firm that is the sole seller 
of a product without close substitutes
multiplier effect  the additional shifts 
in aggregate demand that result when 
expansionary fiscal policy increases 
income and thereby increases consumer 
spending
mutual fund  an institution that sells 
shares to the public and uses the 
­proceeds to buy a portfolio of stocks 
and bonds
n
national saving (saving)  the total 
income in the economy that remains 
after paying for consumption and gov-
ernment purchases
natural monopoly  a monopoly that 
arises because a single firm can supply 
a good or service to an entire market at 
a smaller cost than could two or more 
firms
natural rate of output  the produc­-
tion of goods and services that an  
economy achieves in the long run  
when ­unemployment is at its normal 
rate
natural rate of unemployment  the 
normal rate of unemployment around 
which the unemployment rate 
fluctuates
natural resources  the inputs into the 
production of goods and services that 
are provided by nature, such as land, 
rivers, and mineral deposits
net exports  spending on domestically 
produced goods by foreigners (exports) 
minus spending on foreign goods by 
domestic residents (imports)
nominal GDP  the production of goods 
and services valued at current prices
nominal interest rate  the interest rate 
as usually reported without a correc-
tion for the effects of inflation
nominal variables  variables measured 
in monetary units
normal good  a good for which, other 
things equal, an increase in income 
leads to an increase in demand
normative statements  claims that attempt 
to prescribe how the world should be
o
open-market operations  the purchase 
and sale of U.S. government bonds by 
the Fed
opportunity cost  whatever must be 
given up to obtain some item
p
physical capital  the stock of equip-
ment and structures that are used to 
produce goods and services
positive statements  claims that 
attempt to describe the world as it is
present value  the amount of money 
today that would be needed, using 
prevailing interest rates, to produce a 
given future amount of money
price ceiling  a legal maximum on the 
price at which a good can be sold
price discrimination  the business 
practice of selling the same good at dif-
ferent prices to ­different customers
price elasticity of demand  a measure 
of how much the quantity demanded 
of a good responds to a change in 
the price of that good, computed as 
the percentage change in quantity 
­demanded divided by the percentage 
change in price
price elasticity of supply  a measure 
of how much the quantity supplied 
of a good responds to a change in the 
price of that good, computed as the 
percentage change in quantity supplied 
divided by the percentage change in 
price
price floor  a legal minimum on the 
price at which a good can be sold
private goods  goods that are both 
excludable and rival in consumption
private saving  the income that house-
holds have left after paying for taxes 
and consumption
producer price index  a measure of the 
cost of a basket of goods and services 
bought by firms
producer surplus  the amount a seller 
is paid for a good minus the seller’s 
cost of ­providing it
production function  the relationship 
between the quantity of inputs used to 
make a good and the quantity of out-
put of that good
production possibilities frontier  a 
graph that shows the combinations of 
output that the economy can possibly 
produce given the available factors of 
production and the available produc-
tion technology
productivity  the quantity of goods and 
services produced from each unit of 
labor input
profit  total revenue minus total cost
property rights  the ability of an indi-
vidual to own and exercise control over 
scarce resources
public goods  goods that are neither 
excludable nor rival in consumption
public saving  the tax revenue that the 
government has left after paying for its 
spending
q
quantity demanded  the amount of a 
good that buyers are willing and able 
to purchase

557
GLOSSARY
quantity equation  the equation M × V 
= P × Y relates the quantity of money, 
the velocity of money, and the dollar 
value of the economy’s output of goods 
and services
quantity supplied  the amount of a good 
that sellers are willing and able to sell
quantity theory of money  a theory 
asserting that the quantity of money 
available determines the price level 
and that the growth rate in the quan-
tity of money available determines the 
­inflation rate
r
random walk  the path of a vari-
able whose changes are impossible  
to predict
rational people  people who systemati-
cally and purposefully do the best they 
can to achieve their objectives
real GDP  the production of goods and 
services valued at constant prices
real interest rate  the interest rate 
­corrected for the effects of inflation
real variables  variables measured in 
physical units
recession  a period of declining real 
incomes and rising unemployment
reserve ratio  the fraction of deposits 
that banks hold as reserves
reserve requirements  regulations on 
the minimum amount of reserves that 
banks must hold against deposits
reserves  deposits that banks have 
received but have not loaned out
risk aversion  a dislike of uncertainty
rivalry in consumption  the property 
of a good whereby one person’s use 
diminishes other people’s use
s
scarcity  the limited nature of society’s 
resources
shoeleather costs  the resources wasted 
when inflation encourages people to 
reduce their money holdings
shortage  a situation in which quantity 
demanded is greater than quantity 
supplied
stagflation  a period of falling output 
and ­rising prices
stock  a claim to partial ownership in 
a firm
store of value  an item that people can 
use to transfer purchasing power from 
the present to the future
strike  the organized withdrawal of 
labor from a firm by a union
structural unemployment  unemploy-
ment that results because the number of 
jobs available in some labor markets is 
insufficient to provide a job for every-
one who wants one
substitutes  two goods for which an 
increase in the price of one leads to an 
increase in the demand for the other
sunk cost  a cost that has already been 
committed and cannot be recovered
supply curve  a graph of the 
­relationship between the price of a 
good and the quantity supplied
supply schedule  a table that shows 
the relationship between the price of a 
good and the quantity supplied
surplus  a situation in which quan-
tity supplied is greater than quantity 
demanded
t
tariff  a tax on goods produced abroad 
and sold domestically
tax incidence  the manner in which the 
burden of a tax is shared among par-
ticipants in a market
technological knowledge  society’s 
understanding of the best ways to pro-
duce goods and services
theory of liquidity preference 
Keynes’s theory that the interest rate 
adjusts to bring money supply and 
money demand into balance
total cost  the market value of the 
inputs a firm uses in production
total revenue (for firm)  the amount a 
firm receives for the sale of its output
total revenue (in a market)  the amount 
paid by buyers and received by sellers 
of a good, computed as the price of the 
good times the quantity sold
Tragedy of the Commons  a ­parable 
that illustrates why common resources 
are used more than is desirable from 
the standpoint of society as a whole
transaction costs  the costs that parties 
incur in the process of agreeing to and 
following through on a bargain
u
unemployment insurance  a ­government 
program that partially protects workers’ 
incomes when they become unemployed
unemployment rate  the percentage of 
the labor force that is unemployed
union  a worker association that bar-
gains with employers over wages, 
benefits, and working conditions
unit of account  the yardstick people 
use to post prices and record debts
v
variable costs  costs that vary with the 
quantity of output produced
velocity of money  the rate at which 
money changes hands
w
welfare economics  the study of how 
the allocation of resources affects eco-
nomic well-being
willingness to pay  the maximum 
amount that a buyer will pay for a 
good
world price  the price of a good that 
prevails in the world market for that 
good

558
index
a
Absolute advantage, 54
Absolute value, 91
Accounting, 377–378
Accounting profit, 238
Acemoglu, Daron, 366–367
Adams, Scott, 402–403
Adjustment process, 464–465
Adverse selection, 398
Aggregate demand, 487–488
automatic stabilizers, 545–546
changes in government purchases, 536
changes in money supply, 532–533
changes in taxes, 540–541
crowding-out effect, 539–540
economic fluctuations of, 487–494
effects of shift in, 508–513
fiscal policy and, 525–526, 535–541
Great Depression, 512–513
interest-rate targets in Fed policy,  
533–534
long-run growth and inflation, 502
monetary policy and, 525–526, 526–535
multiplier effect, 536, 537–538
recession of 2008–2009, 513–516
shifts in, 512–513
stabilization policy, 541–545
theory of liquidity preference, 527–529
World War II, 512–513
Aggregate demand curve, 493, 
494–499
downward slope of, 494–497, 529–531
exchange-rate effect, 496–497
interest-rate effect, 495–496
shifts in, 497–498
wealth effect, 495
Aggregate supply, 487–488. 
economic fluctuations of, 487–494
effects of shift in, 516–518
fiscal policy and, 541
long-run growth and inflation, 502
oil and the economy, 518–520
stagflation, 517
wage-price spiral, 517
Aggregate-supply curve, 493, 499–508. 
menu costs, 505
misperceptions theory, 505–506
natural rate of output, 501
shifts in, 501–502
slopes upward in short run, 502–506
sticky-price theory, 505
sticky-wage theory, 504–505
vertical in long run, 499–500
Alkire, Caroline, 37
American Stock Exchange, 374
Andrews, Edmund L., 181
Animals as common resources, 228–229
Annuity, 397
Antipoverty programs, fighting poverty is 
public good, 222
Antitrust laws
Clayton Antitrust Act, 295–296
increasing competition with, 295–297
Sherman Antitrust Act, 295–296
Antitrust policy, Obama’s, 296–297
Arbitrage, 291
Argentina
economic growth of, 349
GDP, 363
inward-oriented policies of trade, 363
underground economy in, 320–321
Asset valuation, 400–406
AT&T, 296, 298
Australia, underground economy, 320
Austria, hyperinflation in, 468
Automatic stabilizers, 545, 545–546
Automobile industry, safety laws, 7–8
Average cost, 243–245, 298
Average fixed cost, 244, 250
Average fixed cost (AFC) curve,  
244, 246
Average revenue (AR), 257, 259, 280–281
Average total cost, 243, 245–250
Average total cost (ATC) curve, 244, 246, 
259
Average variable cost, 244, 250
Average variable cost (AVC) curve,  
244, 246
b
Balaguer, Diane, 334–335
Balance sheet, 444
Balanced budget, 385
Bangladesh
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
Bank capital, 447, 447–448
Banks. See Central bank; European 
Central Bank
as financial intermediaries, 374–375
bank capital, leverage, and financial crisis 
of 2008–2009, 447–448
Fed lending to, 449–450
money creation with fractional-reserve 
banking, 444–445
money multiplier, 445–447
money supply and, 443–448
100-percent-reserve banking, 443–444
runs, money supply and, 452
Bar graph, 40, 41
Barboza, David, 59
Barter, 436
Base year, 317
Basket of goods and services,  
330–333
Baum, L. Frank, 479
Bernanke, Ben, 442, 454–455, 480–481
Blackstone, Brian, 166
Blanchard, Olivier, 514–515
Bolivia
hyperinflation in, 473–474
underground economy in, 320–321
Bond, 372, 373
Bond market, 372–373
Botswana, elephants as  
private good, 229
Brand-name product, 285
Brazil
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
promoting human capital, 361
Budget deficit, 379, 384–386
Budget surplus, 379, 384–386
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 315
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 330,  
410, 418
Bush, George W.
antitrust policy under, 296–297
appointed Bernanke, 442
government debt under, 388
Business cycle, 16, 488
Buyers
marginal, 137
number of, and shifts in demand, 71
taxes on, affect market  
outcomes, 123–124
variables that influence, 71
willingness to pay, 136
Note: Page numbers in boldface refer to 
pages where key terms are defined

559
index
c
Campbell, Doug, 320–321
Canada
economic growth of, 349
NAFTA and, 187
trade and distribution of income, 184
Cap and trade, 208–209
Capital
aggregate-supply curve shifts arising from 
changes in, 501
bank, 447, 447–448
cost of, 237–238
human, 353, 354, 360, 361
physical, 353, 353–354
Capital requirement, 448
Carbon emissions, 200–201, 208–209
Carbon tax, 208–209
Cartel
OPEC, 519
union as, 425, 426
Carter, Jimmy, 460
Catan, Thomas, 296–297
Catch-up effect, 357, 357–358
Cause and effect, 46–48
Central bank, 441. See also European 
Central Bank; Federal Reserve (Fed)
Centrally planned economies, 10
Chad, economic growth rate of, 348
Chetty, Raj, 421
Chicago School of Economists, 296
Chile, unilateral approach to free trade, 186
China
economic growth of, 349
economic growth rate of, 348
game-playing factories, 59
GDP and quality of life in, 324
tariffs on Chinese tires, 181
trade and distribution of income, 185
Chronic joblessness, 417
Circular-flow diagram, 24, 24–26, 309
Classical dichotomy, 465, 465–466
Clayton Antitrust Act, 295–296
Clean Air Act, 37, 207
Clinton, Bill, government debt and, 388
Closed economy, 378
Club goods, 219, 278
Coase, Ronald, 210
Coase theorem, 210, 210–211
Cole, Harold L., 515
Collective bargaining, 425, 424–426
Combs, Sean (Diddy), 8–9
Command-and-control policies, 202, 203
Commodity money, 437
Common resources, 217–218, 218, 218–219, 
224–229
animals as, 228–229
as natural monopoly, 278
clean air and water, 226
congested roads, 227–228
elephants, 229
importance of property rights, 229
oceans least regulated, 228
Tragedy of the Commons, 224–225
wildlife as, 228
Comparative advantage, 54–59, 55, 173
Competition, 66–67
international trade increases, 182
markets and, 66–67
monopoly vs., 279–280, 300
perfectly competitive markets, 66
Competitive firm
demand shift in short and long run, 269
long-run supply curve, 265
marginal-cost curve, 259–261
market supply with entry and exit, 
266–268
market supply with fixed number of, 266
measuring profit in graph, 264–265
profit maximization and, 258–265
revenue of, 256–258
short-run decision to shut down, 261–262
short-run supply curve, 263
sunk costs and, 262–263
supply curve, marginal cost as, 261
supply decision, 259–261
vs. monopoly, 279–280
zero profit and, 268–269
Competitive market, 66, 256, 256–258, 
265–271
Complements, 70
cross-price elasticity of demand, 98
Compounding, 394
magic of, 396
rule of 70, 396
Congestion
common resource and, 227–228
gas tax and, 204
traffic and toll roads, 226–228
Congestion pricing, 226–227
Congressional Budget Office, 31, 209, 413
Constant returns to scale, 249, 355
Consumer price index (CPI), 330, 330–337
Consumer surplus, 136–150, 137
Consumption, 313
aggregate-demand curve shifts due to 
changes in, 497
as component of GDP, 313, 315
price-level and, aggregate-demand curve 
downward slope, 495
rivalry in, 218–219
trade expands set of opportunities, 53
Control on prices, 112–121
Coordinate system, 41–44
Coordination problems, 249
Copyright, 275–278
Corrective taxes, 203, 204–207
Correlation, positive and negative, 42
Cost(s), 141, 236–238
average, 243–244
average fixed, 244, 250
average total, 243, 247–248, 250, 266
average variable, 244, 250
different costs produce upward-sloping 
supply curve, 271
economic profit vs. accounting  
profit, 238
economies of scale and, 180–182
explicit, 237, 250
fixed, 242, 242–243, 250
implicit, 237, 250
in short run and long run, 247–249
marginal, 243–244, 244, 244–245, 250
menu, 474, 505
of capital, 237–238
of confusion, costs of inflation and, 
476–477
of inconvenience, inflation and, 476–477
of inflation, 472–479
of possible sellers, 141
of production, 235–236
of taxation, 155–156
opportunity, 27, 54, 54–55, 236–237
production and, 239–241
shoeleather, 473, 473–474
social, 198, 289
sunk, 261, 262, 262–263
total revenue, total cost, and profit, 236
total, 236, 239, 250
transaction, 212
types of, 250
variable, 242, 242–243, 250
various measures of, 241–247
welfare, 286–289
willingness to sell and, 141–142
Cost curve. See Total-cost curve
and their shapes, 244–246
typical, 246–247
Cost of living, 329–336
Cost-benefit analysis, 223, 223–224
Cost-of-living allowance (COLA), 338
Council of Economic Advisers, 31
Cowen, Tyler, 490–491
CPI. See Consumer price index
Credit cards, money and, 440
Credit crunch, 448
Credit risk, bonds, 373
Cross-price elasticity of demand, 97, 98
Crowding out, 386
Crowding-out effect, 539, 539–540
Currency, 438–441, 439
Current Population Survey, 410
Curves, 42–46
Cyclical unemployment, 410, 413
d
Date of maturity, bonds, 373
Davies, Kert, 37
Deadweight loss, 159, 160–163, 287–289
DeBeers, 277
Debt finance, 373–374
Debt, government, 385, 386–388
Default, bonds, 373
Deflation, 307–308, 460, 478
Defoe, Daniel, 352

560
index
Demand, 67–73
applications of, 101–106
change in, 79, 81
decrease in, 69
elasticity of. See Demand elasticity
excess, 78
expectations and, 71
income changes, 70
increase in, 69, 80, 270
individual, 68–69
inelastic, 92
law of, 67
market, 68–69
market forces of supply and, 65
number of buyers and, 71
perfectly elastic, 92
perfectly inelastic, 92
price elasticity of, 93
prices of related goods and, 70
reducing smoking, 71–73
relationship between price and quantity 
demanded, 67–68
supply and, 77–84, 111–112
tastes and, 70
Demand curve, 42–44, 67–68, 68
demand schedule and, 138
difference between competitive firm and 
monopoly, 279–280
elasticity of linear, 96
for monopoly, 282
measuring consumer surplus with, 139
price elasticity of demand and, 92–94
shifts in, 69–73
shifts in vs. movements along, 72
using to measure consumer surplus, 
137–138
variety of, 92–94
Demand deposits, 439
Demand elasticity, 90–98
Demand schedule, 67, 68, 138
Denmark, Laffer curve, 166
Department of Justice, antitrust laws, 295
Department of Labor, 330, 410, 424
Depreciation, 313
Depression, 487. See Great Depression
Diamond, Jared, 366
Diminishing marginal product, 241
Diminishing returns, 357, 357–358
Discount coupons, 293
Discount rate, 449
Discount window, 449
Discounting, 294–295, 395
Discouraged workers, 415
Discrimination, price, 290–294
Diseconomies of scale, 248, 248–249
Disposable personal income, 313
Diversification, 398, 398–399
Dividend, 375
Dividend yield, 375
Dominquez, Kathryn, 515
Double coincidence of wants, 436
Dow Jones Industrial Average, 374
Downs, Anthony, 226
Downward slope of aggregate-demand 
curve, 529–531
Dugger, Celia W., 361
e
Earned income tax credit, 121
Earnings per share, 375
Economic fluctuations, 490–494, 508–520
Economic growth
aggregate demand and aggregate supply 
to depict long-run, 502
around world, 348–352
diminishing returns and catch-up effect, 
357–358
education and, 359–360
experiences, variety of, 349
free trade and, 363–364
health and nutrition, 360–362
importance of long-run growth, 368
investment from abroad, 358–359
natural resources as limit to, 355–356
population growth and, 364–368
production possibilities frontier and, 27–29
productivity and, 352–356
property rights and political stability, 
362–363
public policy and, 356–368
research and development, 364
saving and investment, 356–357
Economic models, 24–29
Economic profit, 238
Economic Report of the President, 31
Economic variables, 337–341
Economic welfare
price discrimination and, 291
total surplus and, 145–146
Economic well-being, GDP as measure of, 
319–324
Economics, 4. See Welfare economics
environmental, 37
of President Obama, 32–33
of unions, 425
reasons for studying, 14–15
supply-side, and Laffer curve, 165–166
ten principles of, 3–4
who studies, 30
Economies of scale, 248, 248–249
as causes of monopoly, 278
lower costs through, 180–182
specialization and, 249
Economy
centrally planned, 10
closed, 378
interest rates in U.S., 341
labor-force participation of men and 
women in U.S., 413–414
market, 10–11
money in U.S., 439–440, 441
oil and shifts in aggregate supply, 518–520
open, 378
U.S. deep economic downturn, 16
underground, 163, 320–321
unions good or bad for, 426
using policy to stabilize, 541–546
Education
as positive externality, 199, 360
cost of college, 5–6
economic growth and, 359–360
public policy and, 359–360
social optimum and, 200
Efficiency, 5, 145
government intervention and, 12–13
informational, 402
market. See Market efficiency
monopoly and, 287–289
of equilibrium quantity, 147
of markets, 135–136
production possibilities frontier and, 27
total surplus and, 145–146
Efficiency wages, 426, 426–429
Efficient markets hypothesis,  
401, 401–405
Efficient scale, 246, 267
Einstein, Albert, 22
Elasticity, 90. See Demand elasticity
along a linear demand curve, 96–97
applications of, 89–106
deadweight loss and, 160–163
income elasticity of demand, 97
of supply, 98–101
real world, 94
tax incidence and, 125–127
Elephants, common resource, 229
Entry/exit into market
firm’s long-run decision to, 264
long run market supply with, 266–268
monopoly, 276–279
Environmental Defense, 37
Environmental economics, 37
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
37, 203–204, 205–207
Environmental regulations, 203
Equality, 5, 146
government intervention and, 13
Equilibrium, 77, 77–79
analyzing changes in, 79–84
consumer and producer surplus in mar-
ket, 146
decrease in supply affects, 81
in money market, 528, 529
increase in demand affects, 80
long-run, 509
markets not in, 78
monetary, 461–462
of supply and demand, 77
without international trade, 172–173
zero-profit, 268–269
Equilibrium interest rate, 529
Equilibrium price, 77
Equilibrium quantity, 77, 147
Equity finance, 373–374
Essay on the Principle of Population as It 
Affects the Future Improvement of Society, 
An (Malthus), 364

561
index
European Central Bank, 166
Excess demand, 78
Excess supply, 77–78
Exchange-rate effect, 496–497, 526
Excludability, 218, 218–219
Explicit costs, 237, 250
Exports, 58. See also International trade 
gains and losses from exporting country, 
174–175
Exports, net, 314, 314–315
Externality, 12, 12–13, 151, 195–213, 196, 
360
carbon tax, 208–209
Coase theorem, 210–211
command-and-control policies, 202, 203
corrective taxes and subsidies, 203–205
education as, 199
gas tax and, 204–205
internalizing, 199
market inefficiency and, 197–202
negative, 196, 198–199
of country living, 200–201
positive, 196, 199–202
private solutions to, 209–212
public policies toward, 202–209
technology spillovers, 201–202
tradable pollution permits, 205–207
transaction costs, 212
f
Factors of production, 24–26, 353
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 117
Fair, Ray, 515
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), 452
Federal funds rate, 452, 452–453, 533
Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC), 442, 454–455, 533, 542
Federal Reserve (Fed), 32, 441
exit strategy, 454–455
federal funds rate, 452–453
FOMC, 442
lending to banks, 449–450
organization of, 442
problems in controlling money supply, 
451
quantity of reserves, 449–450
reserve ratio, 450–451
role of interest-rate target in, 533–534
stock market and, 534–535
system, 441–443
tools of monetary control, 448–455
Fiat money, 438
FICA (Federal Insurance Contributions 
Act), 124
Finance, 394
Financial crises
key elements of, 377
of 2008–2009, 447–448, 454–455
Financial institutions, 372–376, 516
Financial intermediaries, 374, 374–376
Financial markets, 372, 372–374
Financial system, 371–372, 372
Firms. See Competitive firm
as a natural monopoly, 278–279
in circular-flow diagram, 24–26
in competitive market, 255–256
marginal, 271
market supply with fixed number of, 266
Firm-specific risk, 399, 398–399
Fiscal policy, 525–526, 535, 536–546
Fisher effect, 471, 471–472
Fisher, Irving, 471
Fixed costs, 242, 242–243, 250
Fogel, Robert, 360–362
FOMC. See Federal Open Market 
Committee
Food Stamp program, 221–222
Ford Motor Company, 247–248
Ford, Gerald, 15
Ford, Henry, 428–429
Foreclosures, 515–516
Foreign investment, 358–359
Fractional-reserve banking, 444, 444–445
Free rider, 220
Free trade, 171–188, 363–364
Free-rider problem, 220
Free-silver debate, 478–479
Frictional unemployment, 417, 419
Friedman, Milton, 478
Full-employment output, 501
Fundamental analysis, 401
Future value, 394
g
G20 group of economies, 542
Gabon, economic growth rate of, 348
Gains from trade
comparative advantage, 54–59
deadweight losses and, 159–160
of exporting country, 174–175
of importing country, 175–177
production possibilities, 50–52
specialization, 52–54
Gasoline prices, incentive effects of, 8–9
Gasoline tax
as corrective tax, 204–205
road congestion and, 204
GDP. See Gross domestic product
GDP deflator, 317, 317–318, 336–337
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT), 187
General Theory of Employment, Interest, and 
Money, The (Keynes), 519, 527, 543–544
Generic products, 285
Germany
average income in, 347
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
hyperinflation in, 468
inflation in, 15
tax rate and labor taxes, 166
Gilbert, Daniel, 491
Glaeser, Edward L., 200–201
Gold standard, 437
Good(s), final, 70, 311
club, 219, 278
complements, 70
CPI basket of, 330–333, 333–334
currently produced, GDP includes, 311
different kinds of, 218–219
excludability of, 218–219
inferior, 70, 97
intermediate, 311
international trade increases variety of, 
180
markets for, 24–26
normal, 70, 97
private, 218, 218–219
public, 217–218, 218, 218–219, 220–224
related, 70
rivalry in consumption, 218–219
substitutes, 70
tangible, 311
types of, 219
Goolsbee, Austan, 9
Goulder, Lawrence, 37
Government debt, 385
crowding out, 386
history of U.S., 386–388
Graphs, 40–48
cause and effect, 46–48
curves in, 42–44
measuring profit in, 264–265
of single variable, 40–41
of two variables, 41–42
slope of, 44–46
Great Britain
caloric consumption and height of popula-
tion, 360
unilateral approach to free trade, 186
Great Depression
bank runs during, 452
modern parallels to, 514–515
shift in aggregate demand, 512–513
Great Moderation, 404–405
Green economists, 37
Greenhouse, Steven, 120
Greenpeace, 37
Greenspan, Alan, 406
Gross domestic product (GDP), 307–308, 
310, 359. See Nominal GDP; Real GDP
beyond, 322–323
components of, 312–315
consumption, 313
economy’s income and expenditure, 308
exclusions from, 319–324
GDP deflator, 317–318
government purchases, 314
inadequate measure of economic health, 322
investment, 313–314
measure of economic well-being, 319

562
index
Gross domestic product (continued)
measurement of, 310–312
net exports, 314–315
per capital, 315
quality of life and, 324
real growth in U.S. since 1900, 512
underground economy and, 320–321
Gross national product (GNP), 313, 359
“Guns and butter” tradeoff, 5
h
Health
economic growth and, 360–362
efficiency wages and, 427
GDP as inadequate measure of economic 
health, 322–323
Health insurance, 397–398
“Healthy Living in Hard Times” 
(Ruhm), 491
Hershey, Robert D., Jr., 334–335
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr., 155
Hong Kong, trade and distribution 
of income, 185
Hoover, Herbert, 329
Households
decisions faced by, 3
in circular-flow diagram, 24–26
Housing
in basket of goods of CPI, 332
recession of 2008–2009 and, 513–516
rent control, 115–116
Human capital, 353, 354, 360
economic growth and, 356–368
education as investment in, 359–360
health and nutrition as investment in, 360–362
per worker, 354
promoting, 361
Human life, value of, 223–224
Human organs, market for, 149–150
Hume, David, 465–466
Hungary, hyperinflation in, 468
Hyperinflation, 460
in Bolivia, 473–474
in Zimbabwe, 470
money and prices during, 468
i
Identity, 312, 378–379
Implicit costs, 237, 250
Import quotas, 35, 179
Imports, 58. See also International trade
gains and losses of importing country, 
175–177
Incentives, 7, 7–9
incentive pay, 9
investment, 384
savings, 382–383
unemployed and, 420–421
Income, 307–313
Income elasticity of demand, 97
Index funds, 376, 403–405
Indexation, 338, 338–339
India
average income in, 347
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
Individual demand, 68–69
Individual vs. market supply, 73–74
Indonesia
average income in, 347
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
Industrial organization, 236
Industrial policy, 201–202
Inelastic demand, 90, 92
Inelastic supply, 98
Inferior good, 70, 97
Inflation, 15, 318, 330, 517
arbitrary redistributions of wealth, 477–478
brief look at adjustment process, 464–465
classical dichotomy and monetary neutral-
ity, 465–466
confusion and inconvenience, 476–477
correcting economic variables for effect 
of, 337–341
costs of, 472–479
effects of a monetary injection, 463–464
effects of on box office receipts, 339
fall in purchasing power, 472–473
Fisher effect, 471–472
inflation tax, 468–470
inflation-induced tax distortions, 475–476
level of prices and value of money, 461
measures of, 337
measuring a nation’s income, 307–308
menu costs, 474
money growth and, 459–460
money supply and, 15
money supply, money demand, and mon-
etary equilibrium, 461–462
raises tax burden on saving, 476
relative-price variability and misallocation 
of resources, 474–475
shoeleather costs, 473–474
short-run-trade-off between unemploy-
ment and, 16
special cost of unexpected, 477–478
theory of, 460–472
velocity and quantity equation, 466–468
Inflation fallacy, 472–473
Inflation rate, 318, 330, 332
calculating of, 331
nominal interest rate and, 472
Inflation tax, 468–470, 469
Inflationary threats, 480–481
Inflation-induced tax distortions, 475
Informational efficiency, 402
Input prices and supply, 74–76
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 11, 57, 249
Insolvency, 448
Insurance, 397–398, 420–422
Intangible services, GDP includes, 311
Interest rate(s)
equilibrium, 529
federal funds rate, 452, 452–453, 533
in long run and short run, 530
in U.S. economy, 341
nominal, 339–341, 340, 471, 527
real, 339–341, 340, 471, 527
subprime borrowers, 513–516
supply and demand for loanable funds, 
380–382
theory of liquidity preference, 527
Interest-rate effect, 526
aggregate-demand curve, 495–496
Intermediate good, 311
Internalizing the externality, 199
International Monetary Fund, 514–515
International trade, 171–188
Intrinsic value, 437
Intuit, 295
Inventory, GDP and, 314
Investment, 313, 313–314, 371–372, 
379–384, 495–498, 536
Invisible hand, 11–13, 32, 149, 321
Inward-oriented policies, 363
j
Jacoby, Jeff, 82
Japan
average income in, 347
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
inflation rate, 460
trade and distribution of income, 184
underground economy in, 320–321
Job search, 418, 418–422
Jobless benefits, recession and, 420–421
Jobs
argument for trade restrictions, 182–183
chronic joblessness, 417
number, 418
Jolly, David, 322–323
Junk bonds, 373
k
Kahn, Mathew, 200–201
Kennedy, John F., tax cuts under,  
544–545
Kennedy, Robert, 319–323
Kenya, elephant poaching, 229
Keynes, John Maynard, 32–33, 519, 527, 
543–544
Keynesians in White House, 544–545
Kremer, Michael, 368
Krugman, Paul, 184–185
Kuwait, source of crude oil, 518–520

563
index
l
Labor
aggregate-supply curve shifts arising from 
changes in, 501
alternative measures of underutilization, 415
jobs argument for trade restrictions, 182–183
taxes on, 162–163
Labor demand, minimum wage and, 119
Labor force, 411
Labor market, 118, 412
Labor tax, 162–163, 166
Laffer curve, 165–166
Laffer, Arthur, 165, 166
Laissez faire, 148
Landsburg, Steven E., 183
Law of demand, 67
Law of supply and demand, 79
Law of supply, 73
Lender of last resort, 442
Leslie, Philip, 294–295
Leverage, 447, 447–448
Leverage ratio, 447
Linear demand curve, elasticity and total 
revenue along, 96–97
Liquidity, 437
theory of liquidity preference, 527–529
trap, 534
Loanable funds
market for, 380–388
supply and demand for, 380–382
Long run
aggregate-supply curve, 499–502
costs in, 247–249
decision to exit or enter a market, 264
equilibrium, 509
interest rates in, 530
market supply with entry and exit, 
266–268
rent control, 115–116
shift in demand, 269
supply curve might slope upward, 269–271
Long-run growth
Inflation and, 502
importance of, 368
Long-term unemployment, rise of, 417
Losses. See Deadweight loss
of exporting country, 174–175
of importing country, 175–177
Luxuries
income elasticity of demand and, 97
price elasticity of demand and, 90
Luxury tax, 127
m
Mackereleconomics, 438–439
Macroeconomics, 29, 308
analyzing fluctuations of, 509
quantities fluctuate together, 490–491
Malawi, elephants as private good, 229
Mali, poor country, 350–351
Malmendier, Ulrike, 491
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 364–365
Marginal benefits, 6
Marginal buyer, 137
Marginal change, 6
Marginal cost, 6, 243–246, 244, 250, 298
Marginal cost (MC) curve, 244–246, 
259–261
Marginal firm, 271
Marginal product, 240, 241
Marginal propensity to consume (MPC), 
537
Marginal revenue (MR), 258, 259
curve for monopoly, 282
for competitive firm, 257
monopoly, 280, 281
Marginal seller, 143
Marginal tax rate, 162
Market(s), 66. See Competitive market
bond, 372–373
competition and, 66–67
definition of, 90–91
efficiency of, 135–136
financial, 372, 372–374
firm’s long-run decision to exit or enter, 264
for goods and services, 24–26
for insurance, 397–398
for loanable funds, 380, 380–388
for the factors of production, 24–26
perfectly competitive, 66
stock, 373–374
Market demand, 68–69
Market economy, 10, 10–11
Market efficiency, 145–151
Market equilibrium, evaluating, 146–149
Market failure, 12, 12–13, 150–151, 299. See 
also Externality
government budget deficits and surpluses, 
384–386
investment incentives, 384
savings incentives, 382–383
supply and demand for loanable funds, 
380–382
Market forces of supply and demand, 65
Market inefficiency, externalities and, 
197–202
Market irrationality, 406
Market outcomes
price ceilings and, 112–113
price floors and, 116–117
taxes on buyers and, 123–124
taxes on sellers and, 121–123
Market power, 13, 151, 256, 277
Market risk, 399
Market supply
as sum of individual supplies, 75
vs. individual supply, 73–74
with entry and exit, long run, 266–268
with fixed number of firms, short run, 266
Market value, GDP is, 310–312
Market-based policies, 202, 203–207
Market-clearing price, 77
McTeer, Robert D., Jr., 14–15
Medicare, 124
tax, 162
Medium of exchange, 375, 437
Menu costs, 474, 505
Mexico
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
living standards in, 13
middle-income country, 350–351
NAFTA and, 187
underground economy in, 320–321
Microeconomics, 29, 308
Microsoft Corporation, 275–276, 295–296
Middle East, source of crude oil, 518–520
Midpoint method, 91–92
Minimum wage, 117–119, 424
Minimum wage laws, 120–121, 422–424
Model of aggregate demand and aggre-
gate supply, 493, 493–520
Monetary control, Fed’s tools of, 448–455
Monetary equilibrium, 461–462
Monetary injection, 463–464, 532
Monetary neutrality, 465–466, 466
Fischer effect, 471
revisited, 511
Monetary policy, 442
aggregate demand and, 526–535
effects of monetary injection, 463–464
expansionary, 534
free-silver debate, 478–479
influence of on aggregate demand, 
525–526
role of interest-rate targets in Fed policy, 
533–534
stabilization policy arguments, 541–545
zero lower bound, 534
Monetary system, 435–436
banks and the money supply, 443–448
Federal Reserve system, 441–443, 448–455
meaning of money, 436–441
Money, 436
commodity, 437
creation with fractional-reserve banking, 
444–445
credit cards and, 440
during hyperinflations, 468
fiat, 438
functions of, 437
future value, 394
in U.S. economy, 439–440
kinds of, 437–438
measuring time value of, 394–396
present value, 394–396
quantity theory of, 460, 463
value of, 461
velocity of, 466–468
Money demand, 461–462
theory of liquidity preference, 529
Money growth, inflation and, 459–460
Money market, equilibrium in, 528
Money multiplier, 445–447, 446

564
index
Money supply, 442, 461–462
bank capital, leverage, and financial crisis 
of 2008–2009, 447–448
bank runs and, 452
banks and, 443–448
changes in, 532–533
creation with fractional-reserve banking, 
444–445
discount rate, 449
Fed’s tools of monetary control, 448–455
Great Depression, 512–513
inflation and, 15
monetary neutrality, 466
money multiplier, 445–447
open-market operations, 449
problems in controlling, 451
reserve requirements, 450–451
theory of liquidity preference, 527–528
Monopoly, 67, 275–276, 276, 276–279
antitrust laws, 295–297
deadweight loss and, 287–289
drugs vs. generic drugs, 285–286
economies of scale as, 278
government-created, 277–278
inefficiency of, 288–289
natural, 219, 278–279
prevalence of, 299–300
price discrimination, 290–294
production and pricing decisions, 279–286
profit maximization, 282–284
profit of, 284–285
public ownership, 299,
public policy toward, 294–299
regulation, 297–298
resources, 276, 277
revenue of, 280–282
social cost, 289
supply curve and, 284
vs. competition, 279–280, 300
welfare cost of, 286–289
Moral hazard, insurance, 398
Morris, Eric A., 226
Mortgage defaults, 515–516
Mortgage-backed securities, 513
Multiplier effect, 536–538
Municipal bonds, 373
Murray, Sara, 417, 420–421
Muskie, Edmund, 207
Mutual funds, 375, 375–376
Myth of the Great Depression, The (Potts), 491
n
Nader, Ralph, 7
NAFTA. See North American Free Trade 
Agreement
Nagel, Stefan, 491
Namibia, elephants as private good, 229
NASDAQ (National Association of 
Securities Dealers Automated 
Quotation system), 374
National defense, 221
National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 204
National income, 313
National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933, 
515
National Institutes of Health, 221, 364
National Labor Relations Act of 1935, 
515
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), 
425
National saving, 378
National Science Foundation, 221, 364
Nationals, 313
National-security argument for trade 
restrictions, 184–185
Natural disasters, price and, 82–83
Natural monopoly, 219, 278, 278–279
Natural rate of output, 501
Natural rate of unemployment, 410, 412
Natural resources, 353, 354
aggregate-supply curve shifts arising from 
changes in, 501
limit to growth, 355–356
per worker, 354
population growth stretching of, 364–365
Negative correlation. 42
Negative externality, 196, 198–199, 208
Net exports, 314, 315, 496–498
Net national product (NNP), 313
New York Stock Exchange, 374
Newton, Isaac, 22
Nigeria
average income in, 347
GDP and quality of life in, 324
living standards in, 13
Nominal GDP, 316, 467
numerical example of real vs., 316–317
real GDP vs., 315–319
velocity and the quantity equation, 466
Nominal interest rate, 339–341, 340, 527
Fisher effect, 471
in U.S. economy, 341
inflation rate and, 472
Nominal variables, 465
Normal good, 70, 97
Normative statements, 30–31, 31
North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), 187
Nutrition, health and, 360–362
o
Obama, Barack, 16, 181, 208–209, 442, 516
antitrust policy, 296–297
Observation, 22–23
Oceans, common resources, 228
Ohanian, Lee E., 515
Oil industry
economy and shifts in aggregate supply, 
518–520
OPEC and price of oil, 103–105
price ceilings and lines at gas pump, 114–115
Omitted variable, 46–47
100-percent-reserve banking, 443–444
OPEC. See Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries
Open economies, 378
Open-market operations, 443, 449, 534
Opportunity cost, 6, 27, 54, 54–55, 236–238
Optimum, social, 198, 200
Ordered pair, 41
Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC)
application of supply, demand, and 
­elasticity, 103–105
failure to keep price of oil high, 103–105
increase in price of crude oil, 114–115
oil and economy, 518–520
Organs (human), market for, 149–150
Origin, of graph, 41
Output, 530
effect, 281
efficient level of, 287
full-employment, 501
levels of, 283
natural rate of, 501
potential, 501
unemployment rises as output falls, 491–492
Outsourcing, 183, 184–185
Outward-oriented policies, 363
p
Pakistan
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
Parker, Jonathan A., 490–491
Patent, expiration of, 286
Patent laws, 277–278
Patent protection, 201–202
Paying interest on reserves, 451
Payroll tax, burden of, 124–125
Peltzman, Sam, 8
Perfect price discrimination, 291–292
Perfectly competitive markets, 66, 256
Perfectly elastic demand, 92
Perfectly elastic supply, 99
Perfectly inelastic demand, 92
Perfectly inelastic supply, 99
Perpetuity, bonds, 373
Personal income, 313
Peru, underground economy in, 320–321
Physical capital, 353–354
Pie chart, 40
Pigou, Arthur, 203
Pigovian taxes, 203
Poland, hyperinflation in, 468
Political failure, 299
Pollution
as negative externality, 226
cap and trade, 208–209

565
index
clean air and water as common resource, 
226
corrective taxes and, 203–204
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
203–204
gas tax, 205
objections to economic analysis of, 207–209
regulation and, 203
social optimum and, 198
tradable pollution permits, 205–207
Population breakdown in 2009, 411
Population growth, economic growth 
and, 364–368
“Population Growth and Technological 
Change: One Million B.C. to 1990” 
(Kremer), 368
Portfolio, mutual funds, 375
Positive correlation, 42
Positive externalities, 196, 199–202
Positive statements, 30–31, 31
Potential output, 501
Potts, David, 491
Poverty, fighting, as public good, 221–222
Present value, 394–396
Price(s), 375. See Consumer Price Index
allocation of resources and, 84
control on, 112–121, 119–121
during hyperinflations, 468
equilibrium, 77
higher price raises producer surplus, 
144–145
input prices and supply, 74–76
level of, 461
lower price raises consumer surplus, 
138–139
market-clearing, 77
natural disasters and, 82–83
of related goods and demand, 70
quantity demanded and, 67–68
quantity supplied and, 73, 74
relative-price variability, 474–475
shortages and, 78
surplus and, 77–78
when supply and demand shifts, 83
willingness to pay, 136–137
world, 173
Price-earnings ratio, 375
Price-gouging, 83
Price ceiling, 112
binding constraint, 112
lines at gas pump, 114–115
market outcomes and, 112–113
not binding, 112
rent control, 115–116
Price discrimination, 290, 290–294
analytics of, 291–293
economic welfare and, 291
examples of, 293–294
moral of story, 291
parable about pricing, 290–291
rational strategy for a profit-maximizing 
monopolist, 291
willingness to pay and, 291
Price effect, 281
Price elasticity of demand, 90, 90–97
Price elasticity of supply, 98–101
Price floor, 112, 116–117
Price indexers, in field with, 334–335
Price level, 495–497, 530
Price maker, 275
Price of trade, 56
Price takers, 66, 174, 256, 275
Pricing
average-cost, 298
congestion, 226–227
dynamics of pricing tickets, 294–295
marginal-cost, 298
value, 226–227
Pricing decisions, monopoly and,  
279–286
Principal, bonds, 373
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation 
(Ricardo), 57
Private goods, 218, 218–219
Private saving, 379
Procter & Gamble Co., 298
Producer price index, 333
Producer surplus, 141, 150
Product, brand-name, 285
Production
cost of, 235–236
factors of, 24–26, 353
growth and, 347–348
process, 277
resources, limited quantities of, 269–271
within country, GDP measures value of, 311
within specific interval of time, GDP mea-
sures value of, 311
Production and costs, 239–241
Production function, 239, 239–241, 355
illustration, 358
to total-cost curve, 241
total cost and, 239
Production possibilities frontier, 26, 
26–29, 50–52
Productivity, 14, 353
determinants of, 352–356
health and nutrition affects, 360–362
human capital per worker, 354
importance of, 352–353
living standards and, 14, 353
natural resources per worker, 354
physical capital per workers, 353–354
production function, 355
technological knowledge, 354–355
Profit, 236
accounting, 238
as area between price and average total 
cost, 266
economic, 238
measuring in graph for competitive firm, 
264–265
of monopoly, 284–285
Profit maximization, 258–265, 282–284
Property rights, 11
economic growth and, 362–363
importance of, 229
technology and, 202
Public goods, 217–218, 218, 218–224, 
278, 364
Public policy, 13. See also Antitrust laws; 
Fiscal policy; Monetary policy
diminishing returns and catch-up effect, 
357–358
economic growth and, 356–368
education and, 359–360
free trade and, 363–364
health and nutrition, 360–362
investment from abroad, 358–359
job search and, 419–420
population growth and, 364–368
property rights and political stability, 
362–363
research and development, 364
saving and investment, 356–357
toward externalities, 202–209
Public policy toward monopolies, 294–299
Public saving, 379
Purchasing power, inflation and, 472–473
q
Quality
change in, and CPI, 335
efficiency wages and, 427
theory of efficiency wages and worker 
quality, 427
Quantity
equilibrium, 77
of reserves, Fed influences, 449–450
when supply and demand shifts, 83
Quantity demanded, 67
change in, 80–81
relationship between price and, 67–68
Quantity discounts, example of price 
­discrimination, 294
Quantity equation, 466–468, 467
Quantity supplied, 73
Quantity theory of money, 460, 463
Quotas, import, 35, 179
r
Random walk, 402
index funds and, 403–405
Rational people, 6
Reagan, Ronald, 34, 460
government debt and, 388
tax cuts under, 165
Real GDP, 317
economic fluctuations and, 488–494
growth in U.S. since 1900, 512
numerical example of nominal vs., 
316–317
of various countries, 324
over recent history, 318–319
vs. nominal GDP, 315–319

566
index
Real interest rate, 339–341, 340, 527
Fisher effect, 471
in U.S. economy, 341
Real variables, 465
Recession, 388, 487
cultural and social effect of, 490–491
jobless benefits and, 420–421
of 2008–2009, 513–516
real GDP and, 318
Reefer Madness: Sex, Drugs and Cheap 
Labor in the American Black Market 
(Schlosser), 321
Regulation
of externalities, 203
public policy toward monopolies, 297–298
Reis, Ricardo, 566
Relative-price variability and misalloca-
tion of resources, 474–475
Rent control, 35
evaluating price controls, 120–121
in short run and long run, 115–116
price ceiling, 115–116
Rent subsidies, 120–121
Research
and development, 364
basic, as public good, 221
grants, 364
Reserve ratio, 444, 450–451
Reserve requirement, 444, 450, 450–451
Reserves, 444, 449–451
Resources
common, 217–218, 218, 218–219, 224–229, 278
limited quantities of production, 269–271
monopoly, 276, 277
natural, 353, 354, 501
prices and allocation of, 84
relative-price variability and misallocation 
of, 474–475
scarcity of, 4
Retail sales, measuring a nation’s income, 
308
Retained earnings, 313
Revenue. See Total revenue
average, 257
marginal, 258
of competitive firm, 256–258
of monopoly, 280–282
tax, 157
total, 236
Reverse causality, 47–48
Rhodes, Cecil, 277
Ricardo, David, 57
Rickard, Lisa, 296
Right-to-work laws, 425
Risk
and return, trade-off between, 399–400
firm-specific, 399
managing, 396–400
market, 399
Risk aversion, 396, 396–397
Rivalry in consumption, 218, 218–219
Road congestion, gasoline tax and, 204
Robinson Crusoe, (Defoe), 352
Rockefeller, John D., 352
Rodriguez, Alex, 329
Romer, Christina D., 514
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 515
Ruhm, Christopher J., 491
Rule of 70, 396
Russia
GDP and quality of life in, 324
inflation rate, 460
Ruth, Babe, 329
s
Sachs, Jeffrey, 366
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 322
Saudi Arabia, source of crude oil, 518–520
Saving, 371–372, 378
and investment in national income ac-
counts, 377–380
as supply for loanable funds, 382–383
defined, 379–380
economic growth and, 356–357
inflation raises tax burden on, 476
national, 378
private, 379
public, 379
Savings incentives, 382–383
Scarcity, 4
Scatterplot, 41
Scheck, Justin, 438
Schlosser, Eric, 321
Schumpeter, Joseph, 33
Scientific method, 22–23
Seasonal adjustment, 312
Sectoral shifts, 419
Securitization, 513
Senegal, economic growth rate of, 348
Shadow economy, 320–321
Shapiro, Matthew, 515
Shaw, George Bernard, 34, 350
Sherman Antitrust Act, 295–296
Shoeleather costs, 473, 473–474
Short run
aggregate-supply curve slopes upward in 
502–506
costs in, 247–249
increase in demand, 270
interest rates in, 530
market supply with fixed number of firms, 
266
rent control, 115–116
shift in demand, 269
Shortage, 78
lines at gas pump, 114–115
price ceilings and, 113
Short-run economic fluctuations, 489, 
492–494
Siegel, Jeremy, 404–405
Sierra Club, 210
Singapore
economic growth rate of, 348
pursued outward-oriented policies, 363
trade and distribution of income, 185
Slope, 44–46
Smith, Adam, 11, 12, 32–33, 57, 149, 249, 
321
Smith, M. Patricia, 120
Smoking, reducing, 71–73
Social cost, 198
monopoly’s profit, 289
Social optimum
education and, 200
pollution and, 198
Social sanctions, private solution to exter-
nalities, 210
Social Security, 124
indexation of benefits under, 338–339
tax, 162
Society
decisions faced by, 3–4
faces short-run trade-off between inflation 
and unemployment, 16
South Korea
caloric consumption and height of popula-
tion, 360
economic growth rate of, 348
GDP to investment, 358
pursued outward-oriented policies, 363
trade and distribution of income, 185
unilateral approach to free trade, 186
Soviet Union, collapse of communism in, 10
Specialization
driving force of, 54–59
economies of scale and, 249
trade and, 52–54
Specific technological knowledge, 221
Specter, Arlen, 298
Speculative bubble, 406
Stabilization
automatic stabilizers, 545–546
policy arguments, 541–545
Stagflation, 517
Stagnation, 517
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, 374, 405
Standard of living
determinants of, 13–14
relationship between productivity and, 14
Standard Oil, Sherman Antitrust  
Act and, 296
Statistical discrepancy, 312, 313
Stein, Charles, 148
Sticky-price theory, aggregate-supply 
curve and, 505
Sticky-wage theory, aggregate-supply 
curve and, 504–505
Stigler, George, 299
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 322–323
Still Stuck in Traffic Coping With Peak-Hour 
Traffic Congestion (Downs), 226
Stock, 373
cartoonist’s guide to picking, 402–403

567
index
diversification of firm-specific risk, 
398–399
efficient markets hypothesis, 401–402
fundamental analysis, 401
market irrationality, 406
random walks and index funds, 403–405
Stock index, 374
Stock market, 373–374, 534–535
Stockman, David, 165
Store of value, 375, 437
Strike, 425
Structural unemployment, 418, 422–424
Stumbling on Happiness (Gilbert), 491
Subprime borrowers, 513
Subsidies
market-based policy, 203–205
rent, 120–121
wage, 120–121
Substitutes, 70
cross-price elasticity of demand, 98
price elasticity of demand and, 90
Substitution bias, 333
Summers, Lawrence H., 32–33, 421
Sunk cost, 261, 262, 262–263
Supply, 73–76. See See Aggregate supply; 
Money supply
applications of, 101–106
change in, 80–81
computing price elasticity of, 98–99
decrease in, 74, 81
elasticity of, 98–101
excess, 77–78
increase in, 74, 102
individual, 73–74
inelastic, 98
input prices and, 74–76
law of, 73
market vs. individual, 73–74
number of sellers and, 76
perfectly elastic, 99
perfectly inelastic, 99
price elasticity of, 98, 100, 101
relationship between price and quantity 
supplied, 73
technology and, 76
Supply and demand, 65, 77–84, 111–112
Supply curve, 73
in competitive market, 265–271
monopoly and, 284
price elasticity of supply, 99–101
shifts in, 74–76
shifts in vs. movements along, 79–80
supply schedule and, 74, 142
using to measure producer surplus,  
142–143
variety of, 99–101
Supply schedule, 73
supply curve and, 74, 142
Supply-side economics and Laffer curve, 
165–166
Surplus, 77. See also Consumer surplus; 
Producer surplus; Total surplus
price floors and, 117
Sweden
Laffer curve, 166
underground economy in, 320–321
Switzerland, underground economy in, 
320–321
Synergies, 296–297
t
Taiwan
economic growth rate of, 348
pursued outward-oriented policies, 363
trade and distribution of income, 185
Tangible goods, GDP includes, 311
Tanzania, elephant poaching, 229
Tariffs, 35, 177
compared to import quotas, 179
deadweight loss and, 178
effects of in international trade, 177–179
on Chinese tires, 181
Tax burden divided, 126
Tax cuts under Kennedy, 544–545
Tax incidence, 121, 125–127
Tax revenue, 157
deadweight loss and, 163–166
Tax treatment, bonds, 373
Taxation, costs of, 155–156
Taxes, 121–127
carbon, 208–209
changes in, 540–541
corrective, 203
cuts under Reagan, 165
deadweight loss of taxation, 156–160, 
163–166
gas, 204–205
incidence, 121
inflation, 468–470
Laffer curve and supply-side economics, 
165–166
luxury, 127
new research on taxation, 166
on buyers, market outcomes and, 123–124
on labor, 162–163
on sellers, market outcomes and, 121–123
payroll, 124–125
Pigovian, 203
Technological knowledge, 353, 354, 
354–355
aggregate-supply curve shifts arising from 
changes in, 501–502
specific, 221
Technological progress, population 
growth promoting of, 367–368
Technology
shifts in supply curve and, 76
spillovers, 201–202
Teenage labor market, minimum wage 
and, 118–119
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
program, 221
Term, bonds, 373
Textile market, 172–188
Thailand, underground economy in, 
320–321
Theory, 22–23
Theory of efficiency wages, 426–429
Theory of inflation, 460–472
Theory of liquidity preference, 527, 
527–529
Ticket scalping, 148–149
Time horizon, price elasticity of demand, 91
Time value of money, measuring, 394–396
Time-series graph, 40, 41
Toll roads, 226–227
Total cost, 236, 250
average, 243, 250
production function and, 239
Total revenue, 94, 95, 236
along a linear demand curve, 96–97
for competitive firm, 257
monopoly, 280, 281
price elasticity of demand and, 94–96
Total surplus, 145–146, 148
Total-cost curve, 241, 243
from production function to, 241
production function and, 240
Tradable permits, 37
Tradable pollution permits, market-based 
policy, 205–207
Trade. See also Free trade; Gains from 
trade; International trade
agreements and World Trade Organiza-
tion, 186–187
barriers, 35
benefits of, 10
comparative advantage and, 55–56
deadweight losses and gains from, 
159–160
equilibrium without international, 172–173
interdependence and gains from, 49–50
price of, 56
specialization and, 52–54
Trade deficit, measuring a nation’s 
income, 308
Trade restrictions
arguments for, 182–187
infant-industry argument for, 185–186
jobs argument for, 182–183
national-security argument, 184–185
protection-as-a-bargaining-chip  
argument, 186
tariffs, 35
unfair-competition argument for, 186
Trade skirmishes, 181
Trade-offs, 4–5
between inflation and unemployment, 16
between risk and return, 399–400
policy decisions and, 31
production possibilities frontier and, 27–28
Traffic, congested roads as public goods 
or common resources, 227–228
Tragedy of the Commons, 224, 224–225
Transaction costs, 212
Transfer payments, 314

568
index
Transportation
in basket of goods of CPI, 332
incentive pay for bus drivers, 9
Truman, Harry, 31
Trustbusters, 296–297
Turnover, efficiency wages and, 427
u
Uganda, elephant poaching, 229
Underground economy, 163, 320–321
Unemployment, 409–410
chronic joblessness, 417
cyclical, 410, 413
efficiency wages and, 426–429
frictional, 417
how long without work, 416
identifying, 410–418
incentives and, 420–421
job search and, 418–422
measuring a nation’s income, 308
measuring of, 410–413
minimum-wage laws and, 422–424
natural rate of, 410, 412
rise of long-term, 417
rises as output falls, 491–492
short-run trade-off between inflation and, 
16
structural, 418
Unemployment insurance, 420, 420–422
Unemployment rate, 411
measures, 414–415
since 1960, 413
Unfair-competition argument for trade 
restrictions, 186
Union, 424
as type of cartel, 426
collective bargaining and, 424–426
economics of, 425
good or bad for economy, 426
type of cartel, 425
Unit elasticity, 92
Unit of account, 437
United Kingdom
advanced economy, 350
economic growth of, 349
underground economy in, 320–321
United States
average income in, 347
cap and trade, 208–209
carbon tax, 208–209
economic growth of, 349
GDP and quality of life in, 324
GDP to investment, 358
government debt, history of, 386–388
inflation in, 15
inflation rate, 460
international trade with, 58
labor taxes, 166
living standards in, 13–14
NAFTA and, 187
real GDP growth since 1900, 512
trade and distribution of income,  
184–185
underground economy in, 320–321
various laws to manage use of fish and 
other wildlife, 228
United States economy
financial institutions in, 372–376
interest rates in, 341
labor-force participation of men and 
women in, 413–414
measures of money stock for, 441
money in, 439–440
Unpaid internships, 120
Unsafe at Any Speed (Nader), 7
Urbanization, carbon emissions and, 
200–201
U.S. Chamber Institute for Legal Reform, 
296
U.S. Department of Commerce, 315
U.S. Supreme Court, antitrust laws, 296
U-shaped average total cost, 245–246
Utility
concept of, 397
function, 397
v
Value pricing, 226–227
Values, differences among economists in, 
34–35
Variable costs, 242, 242–243, 250
average, 244, 250
Variable tolling, 226–227
Variables
graphs of single, 40–41
graphs of two, 41–42
nominal, 465
omitted, 46–47
real, 465
that influence buyers, 71
that influence sellers, 76
Varian, Hal R., 294–295
Vascellaro, Jessica E., 37
Velocity of money, 466, 466–468
Venezuela, inflation rate, 460
Verizon Communications Inc., 298
Vissing-Jorgenson, Annette, 490–491
w
Wage subsidies, 120–121
Wage-price spiral, 517
Wages
efficiency, 426, 426–429
$5-a-day, 428–429
free trade and, 184–185
minimum, 117–119
sticky-wage theory, 504–505
theory of efficiency, 426–429
Wagner Act, 425
Water distribution as natural monopoly, 
278
Wealth, arbitrary redistributions of, 
477–478
Wealth effect, 495, 526
Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 12
Welfare
effects of free trade, 174
effects of tariffs, 178
in monopolized market, 289
system, 221–222
tax affects, 158
Welfare cost of monopoly, 286–289
Welfare economics, 136–141, 157–159, 197
Willingness to pay, 136, 136–137
price discrimination and, 291
Willingness to sell, cost and, 141–142
Wonderful Wizard of Oz, The (Baum), 
478–479
Worker
discouraged, 415
effort, 428
health, 427
human capital per, 354
natural resources, 354
physical capital per, 353–354
quality, 427
turnover, 427
World, economic growth around, 348–352
World price, 173
World Trade Organization (WTO), 181, 
186–187
World War II, shift in aggregate demand, 
512–513
x
X-coordinate, 41
y
Y-coordinate, 41
z
Zero lower bound, 534
Zero profit, 268–269
Zimbabwe
elephants as private good, 229
hyperinflation in, 470
inflation rate, 460
underground economy in, 320–321

