
Engage, Assess, Reﬂect
•  Pearson eText—Keeps students engaged in learning on their own time, while 
helping them achieve greater conceptual understanding of course material. The 
MyLab with Pearson eText provides students with a complete digital learning 
experience—all in one place. 
•  Branching, Decision-Making Simulations—Put your students in the role 
of manager as they make a series of decisions based on a realistic business 
challenge. The simulations change and branch based on their decisions, 
creating various scenario paths. At the end of each simulation, students 
receive a grade and a detailed report of the choices they made with the 
associated consequences included.
•  Writing Space—Better writers make great learners 
who perform better in their courses. Designed to help 
you develop and assess concept mastery and critical 
thinking, the Writing Space oﬀers a single place to 
create, track, and grade writing assignments, provide 
resources, and exchange meaningful, personalized 
feedback with students, quickly and easily. Thanks to 
assisted-graded and create-your-own assignments, you decide your level of involvement in evaluating 
students’ work. Because of integration with Turnitin®, Writing Space can check students’ work for improper
citation or plagiarism.
•  Personal Inventory Assessments—Is a collection of online exercises designed 
to promote self-reﬂection and engagement in students, enhancing their ability to 
connect with management concepts. Assessments are assignable by instructors who 
can then track students’ completions. Student results include a written explanation 
and graphic display that shows how their results compare to the class as a whole, 
and can be used to promote classroom discussion.

with Pearson MyLab Management®
• Learning Catalytics™—Is an interactive, student response tool that 
uses students’ smartphones, tablets, or laptops to engage them in more 
sophisticated tasks and thinking. Now included with MyLab with eText, 
Learning Catalytics enables you to generate classroom discussion, guide 
your lecture, and promote peer-to-peer learning with real-time analytics.
• Dynamic Study Modules—Helps students study effectively on their own by 
continuously assessing their activity and performance in real time. Here’s how it 
works: students complete a set of questions with a unique answer format that also 
asks them to indicate their confidence level. Questions repeat until the student can 
answer them all correctly and confidently. Once completed, Dynamic Study Modules 
explain the concept using materials from the text. These are available as graded 
assignments prior to class, and accessible on smartphones, tablets, and computers. 
• Reporting Dashboard—View, analyze, and report learning outcomes 
clearly and easily, and get the information you need to keep your students 
on track throughout the course with the new Reporting Dashboard. 
Available via the MyLab Gradebook and fully mobile-ready, the Reporting 
Dashboard presents student performance data at the class, section, and 
program levels in an accessible, visual manner.
• Accessibility (ADA)—Pearson works continuously to ensure our products are 
as accessible as possible to all students. The platform team for our Business 
MyLab products is working toward achieving WCAG 2.0 Level AA and Section 508 
standards, as expressed in the Pearson Guidelines for Accessible Educational 
Web Media. Moreover, our products support customers in meeting their 
obligation to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) by providing 
access to learning technology programs for users with disabilities.
The following information provides tips and answers to frequently asked 
questions for those using assistive technologies to access the Business MyLab 
products. As product accessibility evolves continuously, please email our 
Accessibility Team at disability.support@pearson.com for the most up-to-date 
information.
• LMS Integration—You can now link from Blackboard Learn, Brightspace by 
D2L, Canvas, or Moodle to Pearson MyLab Management. Access assignments, 
rosters, and resources, and synchronize grades with your LMS gradebook.
For students, single sign-on provides access to all the personalized 
learning resources that make studying more efficient and effective.
A L W A Y S  L E A R N I N G

This page intentionally left blank

F o u r t e e n t h  E d i t i o n
Essentials of  
Organizational Behavior
Stephen P. Robbins
San Diego State University
Timothy A. Judge
The Ohio State University
Harlow, England • London • New York • Boston • San Francisco • Toronto • Sydney • Dubai • Singapore • Hong Kong 
Tokyo • Seoul • Taipei • New Delhi • Cape Town • Sao Paulo • Mexico City • Madrid • Amsterdam • Munich • Paris • Milan
G l o b a l  E d i t i o n

Vice President, Business Publishing: Donna Battista
Director of Portfolio Management: Stephanie Wall
Portfolio Manager: Kris Ellis-Levy
Editorial Assistant: Hannah Lamarre
Portfolio Manager, Global Edition: Steven Jackson
Associate Acquisitions Editor, Global Edition: Ishita Sinha 
Associate Project Editor, Global Edition: Paromita Banerjee
Vice President, Product Marketing: Roxanne McCarley
Director of Strategic Marketing: Brad Parkins
Strategic Marketing Manager: Deborah Strickland
Product Marketer: Becky Brown
Field Marketing Manager: Lenny Ann Kucenski
Product Marketing Assistant: Jessica Quazza
Vice President, Production and Digital Studio, Arts and 
Business: Etain O’Dea
Director of Production, Business: Jeff Holcomb
Managing Producer, Business: Ashley Santora
Content Producer, Global Edition: Nitin Shankar
Senior Manufacturing Controller, Global Edition:  
Trudy Kimber
Content Producer: Claudia Fernandes
Operations Specialist: Carol Melville
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Manager, Learning Tools: Brian Surette
Content Developer, Learning Tools: Lindsey Sloan
Managing Producer, Digital Studio, Arts and Business: 
Diane Lombardo
Digital Studio Producer: Monique Lawrence
Digital Studio Producer: Alana Coles
Media Production Manager, Global Edition: Vikram Kumar
Full-Service Project Management and Composition:  
Cenveo® Publisher Services
Interior Designer: Cenveo® Publisher Services
Cover Art: pernsanitfoto/Shutterstock
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text.
PEARSON, ALWAYS LEARNING, and PEARSON MYLAB MANAGEMENT® are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson Educa-
tion, Inc. or its affiliates in the U.S. and/or other countries.
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2018
The rights of Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge to be identified as the authors of this work have been asserted by them in accor-
dance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Essentials of Organizational Behavior, 14th Edition, ISBN 978-0-13-
452385-9 by Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge, published by Pearson Education © 2018.  
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of the publisher or a license permitting 
restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does not vest in the author or 
publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorse-
ment of this book by such owners. 
ISBN 10: 1-292-22141-0
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-22141-0
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Typeset in Times LT Pro by Cenveo Publisher Services
Printed and bound by Vivar, Malaysia

This book is dedicated to our friends and colleagues in  
The Organizational Behavior Teaching Society  
who, through their teaching, research and commitment  
to the leading process, have significantly  
improved the ability of students  
to understand and apply OB concepts.

BRIEF CONTENTS
PART 1 	An Introduction   31
Chapter 1 	
Welcome to the World of OB  31
PART 2 	Individual Differences  47
Chapter 2 	
Attitudes  47
Chapter 3 	
Emotions  60
Chapter 4 	
Personality Factors  77
Chapter 5 	
Perceptual Processes  95
Chapter 6 	
Valuing Diversity  113
Chapter 7 	
Basic Motivation  130
Chapter 8 	
Applied Motivation  150
PART 3 	Groups in Organizations  166
Chapter 9 	
Communication  166
Chapter 10 	 Basics of Group Behavior  182
Chapter 11 	 From Groups to Teams  200
Chapter 12 	 Characteristics of Leaders  216
Chapter 13 	 Power and Politics in Organizations  237
Chapter 14 	 Conflict in Organizations  256
PART 4 	Organizational Systems  275
Chapter 15 	 Organization Structure and Design  275
Chapter 16 	 Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture  295
Chapter 17 	 Organizational Change  315
6

7
CONTENTS
Preface  22
Acknowledgments  29
About the Authors  30
PART 1 	An Introduction  31
	 Chapter 1 	WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF OB  31
Chapter Warm-up   31
Management and Organizational Behavior   32
Organizational Behavior (OB) Defined   33
Effective versus Successful Managerial Activities   33
Watch It—Herman Miller: Organizational Behavior   34
Complementing Intuition with Systematic Study   34
Big Data   35
Disciplines That Contribute to the OB Field   36
Psychology   36
Social Psychology   36
Sociology   37
Anthropology   37
There Are Few Absolutes in OB   37
Challenges and Opportunities for OB   38
Continuing Globalization   38
Workforce Demographics   40
Workforce Diversity   40
Social Media   40
Employee Well-Being at Work   41
Positive Work Environment   41
Ethical Behavior   42
Coming Attractions: Developing an OB Model   42
Overview   42
Inputs   43
Processes   43
Outcomes   44
Summary   45
Implications for Managers   45
Personal Inventory Assessments: Multicultural Awareness Scale   46

8	
Contents
PART 2 	Individual Differences  47
	 Chapter 2 	ATTITUDES  47
Chapter Warm-up   47
Attitudes   47
Watch It—Gawker Media: Attitudes and Job Satisfaction   49
Attitudes and Behavior   49
Job Attitudes   50
Job Satisfaction and Job Involvement   50
Organizational Commitment   50
Perceived Organizational Support   50
Employee Engagement   51
Measuring Job Satisfaction   51
Approaches to Measurement   52
Measured Job Satisfaction Levels   52
What Causes Job Satisfaction?   52
Job Conditions   53
Personality   54
Pay   54
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)   54
Outcomes of Job Satisfaction   55
Job Performance   55
Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB)   55
Customer Satisfaction   55
Life Satisfaction   56
The Impact of Job Dissatisfaction   56
Counterproductive Work Behavior (CWB)   56
Understanding the Impact   58
Summary   59
Implications for Managers   59
Try It—Simulation: Attitudes & Job Satisfaction  59
Personal Inventory Assessments: Core Self-Evaluation (CSE) 
Scale   59
	 Chapter 3 	EMOTIONS  60
Chapter Warm-up   60
What Are Emotions and Moods?   60
The Basic Emotions   61
Moral Emotions   62

The Basic Moods: Positive and Negative Affect   62
Experiencing Moods and Emotions   63
The Function of Emotions   63
Sources of Emotions and Moods   64
Personality   65
Time of Day   65
Day of the Week   65
Weather   65
Stress   67
Sleep   67
Exercise   67
Age   67
Sex   67
Emotional Labor   68
Controlling Emotional Displays   68
Emotional Dissonance and Mindfulness   69
Affective Events Theory   69
Emotional Intelligence   69
Emotion Regulation   71
Emotion Regulation Influences and Outcomes   71
Emotion Regulation Techniques   71
Ethics of Emotion Regulation   72
Watch It—East Haven Fire Department: Emotions and Moods   72
OB Applications of Emotions and Moods   72
Selection   72
Decision Making   73
Creativity   73
Motivation   73
Leadership   73
Customer Service   74
Job Attitudes   74
Deviant Workplace Behaviors   74
Safety and Injury at Work   75
Summary   75
Implications for Managers   75
Try It—Simulation: Emotions & Moods  76
Personal Inventory Assessments: Emotional Intelligence 
Assessment   76
	
Contents    9

	 Chapter 4 	PERSONALITY FACTORS  77
Chapter Warm-up   77
Personality   77
What Is Personality?   78
Personality Frameworks   79
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator   79
The Big Five Personality Model   80
How Do the Big Five Traits Predict Behavior at Work?   81
The Dark Triad   82
Other Personality Attributes Relevant to OB   84
Core Self-Evaluation (CSE)   84
Self-Monitoring   85
Proactive Personality   85
Personality and Situations   85
Situation Strength Theory   86
Trait Activation Theory   87
Values   88
Watch It—Honest Tea: Ethics–Company Mission and Values   88
Terminal versus Instrumental Values   88
Generational Values   89
Linking an Individual’s Personality and Values to the 
Workplace   89
Person–Job Fit   89
Person–Organization Fit   90
Other Dimensions of Fit   90
Cultural Values   91
Hofstede’s Framework   91
The GLOBE Framework   92
Comparison of Hofstede’s Framework and the Globe 
Framework   92
Summary   94
Implications for Managers   94
Personal Inventory Assessments: Personality Style 
Indicator   94
	 Chapter 5 	PERCEPTUAL PROCESSES  95
Chapter Warm-up   95
What Is Perception?   95
Factors That Influence Perception   96
Watch It—Orpheus Group Casting: Social Perception and 
Attribution  97
10	
Contents

Person Perception: Making Judgments about Others   97
Attribution Theory   97
Common Shortcuts in Judging Others   99
The Link between Perception and Individual Decision 
Making   100
Decision Making in Organizations   100
The Rational Model, Bounded Rationality, and Intuition   100
Common Biases and Errors in Decision Making   102
Influences on Decision Making: Individual Differences and 
Organizational Constraints   104
Individual Differences   105
Organizational Constraints   106
What about Ethics in Decision Making?   106
Three Ethical Decision Criteria   107
Choosing between Criteria   107
Behavioral Ethics   108
Lying   108
Creativity, Creative Decision Making, and Innovation in 
Organizations   108
Creative Behavior   109
Causes of Creative Behavior   109
Creative Outcomes (Innovation)   111
Summary   111
Implications for Managers   111
Try It—Simulation: Perception & Individual Decision 
Making   112
Personal Inventory Assessments: How Creative Are 
You?   112
	 Chapter 6 	VALUING DIVERSITY  113
Chapter Warm-up   113
Diversity   113
Demographic Characteristics   114
Levels of Diversity   114
Discrimination   115
Stereotype Threat   115
Discrimination in the Workplace   116
Biographical Characteristics   117
Age   117
Sex   118
Race and Ethnicity   119
	
Contents    11

Disabilities   119
Hidden Disabilities   120
Other Differentiating Characteristics   121
Religion   121
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity   121
Cultural Identity   123
Watch It—Verizon: Diversity   123
Ability   123
Intellectual Abilities   123
Physical Abilities   125
Implementing Diversity Management Strategies   125
Attracting, Selecting, Developing, and Retaining Diverse 
Employees   126
Diversity in Groups   127
Diversity Programs   128
Summary   128
Implications for Managers   129
Try It—Simulation: Human Resources  129
Personal Inventory Assessments: Intercultural Sensitivity 
Scale   129
	 Chapter 7 	BASIC MOTIVATION  130
Chapter Warm-up   130
Motivation   130
Watch It—Motivation (TWZ  Role Play)  131
Early Theories of Motivation   131
Hierarchy of Needs Theory   131
Two-Factor Theory   132
McClelland’s Theory of Needs   132
Contemporary Theories of Motivation   134
Self-Determination Theory   134
Goal-Setting Theory   135
Other Contemporary Theories of Motivation   138
Self-Efficacy Theory   138
Reinforcement Theory   140
Equity Theory/Organizational Justice   141
Expectancy Theory   145
Job Engagement   146
12	
Contents

Integrating Contemporary Theories of Motivation   146
Summary   148
Implications for Managers   148
Try It—Simulation: Motivation   148
Personal Inventory Assessments: Work Motivation Indicator  149
	 Chapter 8 	APPLIED MOTIVATION  150
Chapter Warm-up  150
Motivating by Job Design: The Job Characteristics  
Model (JCM)   151
Elements of the JCM   151
Efficacy of the JCM   151
Motivating Potential Score (MPS)   152
Cultural Generalizability of the JCM   153
Using Job Redesign to Motivate Employees   153
Job Rotation   153
Relational Job Design   154
Using Alternative Work Arrangements  
to Motivate Employees   154
Flextime   155
Job Sharing   156
Telecommuting   157
Using Employee Involvement and Participation (EIP)  
to Motivate Employees   157
Cultural EIP   158
Forms of Employee Involvement Programs   158
Using Extrinsic Rewards to Motivate Employees   159
What to Pay: Establishing a Pay Structure   159
How to Pay: Rewarding Individual Employees through 
Variable-Pay Programs   159
Using Benefits to Motivate Employees   163
Using Intrinsic Rewards to Motivate Employees   163
Watch It—ZAPPOS: Motivating Employees through Company 
Culture   164
Summary   164
Implications for Managers   165
Try It—Simulation: Extrinsic & Intrinsic Motivation  165
Personal Inventory Assessments: Diagnosing the Need for 
Team Building    165
	
Contents    13

14	
Contents
PART 3 	Groups in Organizations  166
	 Chapter 9 	COMMUNICATION   166
Chapter Warm-up  166
Communication   167
Functions of Communication   167
The Communication Process   168
Direction of Communication   168
Downward Communication   169
Upward Communication   169
Lateral Communication   169
Formal Small-Group Networks   170
The Grapevine   170
Modes of Communication   171
Oral Communication   171
Written Communication   172
Nonverbal Communication   172
Choice of Communication Channel   172
Channel Richness   172
Choosing Communication Methods   173
Information Security   174
Persuasive Communication   174
Automatic and Controlled Processing   174
Tailoring the Message   175
Barriers to Effective Communication   176
Filtering   176
Selective Perception   176
Information Overload   176
Emotions   177
Language   177
Silence   177
Communication Apprehension   177
Lying   178
Cultural Factors   178
Cultural Barriers   178
Cultural Context   179
A Cultural Guide   179
Watch It—Communication (TWZ Role Play)   180

Summary   180
Implications for Managers   181
Try It—Simulation: Communication  181
Personal Inventory Assessments: Communication Styles   181
	Chapter 10 	BASICS OF GROUP BEHAVIOR  182
Chapter Warm-up    182
Groups and Group Identity   183
Social Identity   183
Ingroups and Outgroups   183
Stages of Group Development   184
Watch It—Witness.org: Managing Groups & Teams  184
Group Property 1: Roles   185
Role Perception   186
Role Expectations   186
Role Conflict   186
Group Property 2: Norms   186
Norms and Emotions   187
Norms and Conformity   187
Norms and Behavior   188
Positive Norms and Group Outcomes   188
Negative Norms and Group Outcomes   189
Norms and Culture   190
Group Property 3: Status, and Group Property 4: Size   190
Group Property 3: Status   190
Group Property 4: Size   192
Group Property 5: Cohesiveness, and Group Property  
6: Diversity   192
Group Property 5: Cohesiveness   193
Group Property 6: Diversity   193
Group Decision Making   195
Groups versus the Individual   195
Groupthink   196
Groupshift or Group Polarization   197
Group Decision-Making Techniques   197
Summary   198
Implications for Managers   199
Try It—Simulation: Group Behavior  199
Personal Inventory Assessments: Communicating 
Supportively   199
	
Contents    15

16	
Contents
	Chapter 11 	FROM GROUPS TO TEAMS  200
Chapter Warm-up   200
Why Have Teams Become so Popular?   200
Differences between Groups and Teams   201
Types of Teams   202
Problem-Solving Teams   202
Self-Managed Work Teams   202
Cross-Functional Teams   203
Virtual Teams   204
Multiteam Systems   204
Watch It—Teams (TWZ Role Play)   205
Creating Effective Teams   205
Team Context: What Factors Determine Whether  
Teams Are Successful?   206
Team Composition   207
Team Processes   210
Turning Individuals into Team Players   212
Selecting: Hiring Team Players   213
Training: Creating Team Players   213
Rewarding: Providing Incentives to Be a  
Good Team Player   213
Beware! Teams Aren’t Always the Answer   214
Summary   214
Implications for Managers   214
Try It—Simulation: Teams   215
Personal Inventory Assessments: Team Development 
Behaviors   215
	Chapter 12 	CHARACTERISTICS OF LEADERS  216
Chapter Warm-up   216
Watch It—Leadership (TWZ Role Play)   216
Trait Theories of Leadership   217
Personality Traits and Leadership   217
Emotional Intelligence (EI) and Leadership   218
Behavioral Theories   218
Initiating Structure   218
Consideration   219
Cultural Differences   219
Contingency Theories   219
The Fiedler Model   219

Situational Leadership Theory   221
Path–Goal Theory   221
Leader–Participation Model   222
Contemporary Theories of Leadership   222
Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Theory   222
Charismatic Leadership   224
Transactional and Transformational Leadership   226
Responsible Leadership   229
Authentic Leadership   229
Ethical Leadership   230
Servant Leadership   230
Positive Leadership   231
Trust   231
Mentoring   233
Challenges to Our Understanding of Leadership   233
Leadership as an Attribution   233
Substitutes for and Neutralizers of Leadership   234
Online Leadership   235
Summary   235
Implications for Managers   235
Try It—Simulation: Leadership    236
Personal Inventory Assessments: Ethical Leadership 
Assessment   236
	Chapter 13 	POWER AND POLITICS IN ORGANIZATIONS  237
Chapter Warm-up   237
Watch It—Power and Political Behavior   237
Power and Leadership   238
Bases of Power   238
Formal Power   238
Personal Power   239
Which Bases of Power Are Most Effective?   240
Dependence: The Key to Power   240
The General Dependence Postulate   240
What Creates Dependence?   240
Social Network Analysis: A Tool for Assessing 
Resources   241
Power Tactics   242
Using Power Tactics   242
	
Contents    17

18	
Contents
Cultural Preferences for Power Tactics   243
Applying Power Tactics   244
How Power Affects People   244
Power Variables   244
Sexual Harassment: Unequal Power in the Workplace   245
Politics: Power in Action   246
Definition of Organizational Politics   246
The Reality of Politics   246
Causes and Consequences of Political Behavior   247
Factors Contributing to Political Behavior   247
How Do People Respond to Organizational Politics?   249
Impression Management   250
The Ethics of Behaving Politically   252
Mapping Your Political Career   253
Summary   254
Implications for Managers   255
Try It—Simulation: Power & Politics  255
Personal Inventory Assessments: Gaining Power and 
Influence   255
	Chapter 14 	CONFLICT IN ORGANIZATIONS  256
Chapter Warm-up   256
A Definition of Conflict   256
Types of Conflict   258
Loci of Conflict   259
The Conflict Process   259
Stage I: Potential Opposition or Incompatibility   260
Stage II: Cognition and Personalization   261
Stage III: Intentions   261
Stage IV: Behavior   262
Stage V: Outcomes   263
Watch It—Gordon Law Group: Conflict and Negotiation   265
Negotiation   265
Bargaining Strategies   265
The Negotiation Process   267
Individual Differences in Negotiation Effectiveness   269
Negotiating in a Social Context   271
Reputation   271
Relationships   272

Third-Party Negotiations   272
Summary   273
Implications for Managers   273
Personal Inventory Assessments: Strategies for Handling 
Conflict   274
PART 4 	Organizational Systems  275
	Chapter 15 	ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE AND DESIGN  275
Chapter Warm-up   275
What Is Organizational Structure?   276
Work Specialization   276
Departmentalization   277
Chain of Command   278
Span of Control   279
Centralization and Decentralization   280
Formalization   281
Boundary Spanning   281
Common Organizational Frameworks and Structures   282
The Simple Structure   282
The Bureaucracy   283
The Matrix Structure   284
Alternate Design Options   285
The Virtual Structure   285
The Team Structure   286
The Circular Structure   287
The Leaner Organization: Downsizing   287
Why Do Structures Differ?   288
Organizational Strategies   288
Organization Size   290
Technology   290
Environment   290
Institutions   291
Organizational Designs and Employee Behavior   292
Work Specialization   292
Span of Control   292
Centralization   293
Predictability versus Autonomy   293
National Culture   293
Watch It—ZipCar: Organizational Structure   293
Summary   293
Implications for Managers   294
	
Contents    19

20	
Contents
Try It—Simulation: Organizational Structure   294
Personal Inventory Assessments: Organizational Structure 
Assessment   294
	Chapter 16 	CREATING AND MAINTAINING ORGANIZATIONAL 
CULTURE  295
Chapter Warm-up   295
Watch It—Organizational Culture (TWZ Role Play)   295
What Is Organizational Culture?   296
A Definition of Organizational Culture   296
Do Organizations Have Uniform Cultures?   296
Strong versus Weak Cultures   297
Culture versus Formalization   298
What Do Cultures Do?   298
The Functions of Culture   298
Culture Creates Climate   299
The Ethical Dimension of Culture   299
Culture and Sustainability   300
Culture and Innovation   301
Culture as an Asset   301
Culture as a Liability   302
Creating and Sustaining Culture   303
How a Culture Begins   303
Keeping a Culture Alive   304
Summary: How Organizational Cultures Form   306
How Employees Learn Culture   306
Stories   307
Rituals   307
Symbols   307
Language   308
Influencing an Organizational Culture   308
An Ethical Culture   308
A Positive Culture   309
A Spiritual Culture   310
The Global Context   312
Summary   313
Implications for Managers   313
Try It—Simulation: Organizational Culture   313
Personal Inventory Assessments: Organizational Structure 
Assessment   314

	Chapter 17 	ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE  315
Chapter Warm-up   315
Change   315
Forces for Change   316
Reactionary versus Planned Change   316
Resistance to Change   317
Overcoming Resistance to Change   317
The Politics of Change   319
Approaches to Managing Organizational Change   320
Lewin’s Three-Step Model   320
Kotter’s Eight-Step Plan   320
Action Research   321
Organizational Development   321
Creating a Culture for Change   323
Managing Paradox   323
Stimulating a Culture of Innovation   324
Creating a Learning Organization   325
Organizational Change and Stress   326
Watch It—East Haven Fire Department: Managing Stress   326
Stress at Work   326
What Is Stress?   327
Potential Sources of Stress at Work   328
Individual Differences in Stress   330
Cultural Differences   331
Consequences of Stress at Work   331
Managing Stress   332
Individual Approaches   332
Organizational Approaches   333
Summary   334
Implications for Managers   335
Try It—Simulation: Change   335
Personal Inventory Assessments: Tolerance of Ambiguity 
Scale   335
Epilogue   336
Endnotes   337
Glossary   384
Index   393
	
Contents    21

PREFACE
This book was created as an alternative to the 600- or 700-page comprehensive text in 
organizational behavior (OB). It attempts to provide balanced coverage of all the key 
elements comprising the discipline of OB in a style that readers will find both informa-
tive and interesting. We’re pleased to say that this text has achieved a wide following in 
short courses and executive programs as well as in traditional courses as a companion 
volume to experiential, skill development, case, and readings books. It is currently used 
at more than 500 colleges and universities in the United States, Canada, Latin America, 
Europe, Australia, and Asia. It’s also been translated into Spanish, Portuguese, Japanese, 
Chinese, Dutch, Polish, Turkish, Danish, and Bahasa Indonesian.
KEY CHANGES FOR THE FOURTEENTH EDITION
•	 Increased content coverage was added to include updated research, relevant discus-
sion, and new exhibits on current issues of all aspects of organizational behavior.
•	 Increased integration of contemporary global issues was added into topic 
discussions.
•	 Extensive reorganization of all chapters with new headings and subsections to 
make navigating the print and digital versions of the text easier and bring important 
content to the fore.
•	 Increased cross-references between chapters to link themes and concepts for the 
student’s quick access and to provide a more in-depth understanding of topics.
•	 New assisted graded questions that students can complete and submit via Pearson 
MyLab Management are provided for each chapter.
•	 A new feature, Try It, has been added to 14 chapters to direct the student’s atten-
tion to Pearson MyLab Management simulations specific to the content in the text.
•	 A new blue box feature has been introduced in 8 chapters. These box features  
highlight global examples of the section covered.
RETAINED FROM THE PREVIOUS EDITION
What do people like about this book? Surveys of users have found general agreement 
about the following features. Needless to say, they’ve all been retained in this edition.
•	 Length. Since its inception in 1984, we’ve tried diligently to keep this book in the 
range of 325 to 400 pages. Users tell us this length allows them considerable flex-
ibility in assigning supporting materials and projects.
•	 Balanced topic coverage. Although short in length, this book continues to provide 
balanced coverage of all the key concepts in OB. This includes not only traditional 
topics such as personality, motivation, and leadership but also cutting-edge issues 
such as emotions, diversity, negotiation, and teamwork.
•	 Writing style. This book is frequently singled out for its fluid writing style and ex-
tensive use of examples. Users regularly tell us that they find this book “conver-
sational,” “interesting,” “student friendly,” and “very clear and understandable.”
22

•	 Practicality. This book has never been solely about theory. It’s about using theory 
to better explain and predict the behavior of people in organizations. In each edi-
tion of this book, we have focused on making sure that readers see the link between 
OB theories, research, and implications for practice.
•	 Absence of pedagogy. Part of the reason we’ve been able to keep this book short in 
length is that it doesn’t include review questions, cases, exercises, or similar teach-
ing/learning aids. It continues to provide only the basic core of OB knowledge, al-
lowing instructors the maximum flexibility in designing and shaping their courses.
•	 Integration of globalization, diversity, and ethics. The topics of globalization and 
cross-cultural differences, diversity, and ethics are discussed throughout this book. 
Rather than being presented only in separate chapters, these topics have been wo-
ven into the context of relevant issues. Users tell us they find that this integrative 
approach makes these topics more fully part of OB and reinforces their importance.
•	 Comprehensive supplements. Although this book may be short in length, it’s not short 
on supplements. It comes with a complete, high-tech support package for both fac-
ulty and students. Instructors are provided with a comprehensive Instructor’s Manual 
and Test Bank, TestGenerator, and PowerPoint slides. The Pearson MyLab Manage-
ment course provides both instructors and students with various types of assessments, 
video exercises, decision-making simulations, and Personal Inventory Assessments.
CHAPTER-BY-CHAPTER CHANGES
Chapter 1: Welcome to the World of OB
•	 New content: Effective versus Successful Managerial Activities; Current Usage 
of, New Trends in, and Limitations of Big Data; Workforce Demographics; Social 
Media; and Inputs, Processes, and Outcomes of our General Model of Organiza-
tional Behavior
•	 Newly revised sections: Management and Organizational Behavior
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Introduction to Organiza-
tional Behavior, Big Data, Adapting to Differing Cultural and Regulatory Norms, 
Positive Work Environments, and Ethical Behavior
•	 New features: Blue Box (Telefónica), Watch It (Herman Miller: Organizational 
Behavior) and Personal Inventory Assessments (Multicultural Awareness Scale)
Chapter 2: Attitudes
•	 New content: The Causes of Job Satisfaction, including Job Conditions, Personal-
ity, Pay, and Corporate Social Responsibility; Life Satisfaction as an Outcome of 
Job Satisfaction; and Counterproductive Work Behavior (CWB) as an Outcome of 
Job Dissatisfaction
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives and Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Attitudes and Behavior, Em-
ployee Engagement, Measured Job Satisfaction Levels, How Satisfied Are People 
in Their Jobs, and Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB) as an Outcome of 
Job Satisfaction
	
Preface    23

•	 New features: Watch It (Gawker Media: Attitudes and Job Satisfaction), Personal 
Inventory Assessments [Core Self-Evaluation (CSE) Scale], and Try It (Simulation: 
Attitudes & Job Satisfaction)
Chapter 3: Emotions
•	 New content: Moral Emotions; the Functions of Emotions, including Whether or 
Not Emotions Make Us Ethical; Emotion Regulation Influences, Outcomes, and 
Techniques; and the Ethics of Emotion Regulation
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, Time of the Day as a Source of 
Emotions and Moods, Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Stress, Sleep, Age, and Sex 
as Sources of Emotions and Moods; Controlling Emotional Displays; Emotional 
Intelligence; Safety and Injury at Work as Outcomes of Emotions and Moods; and 
International Research on the Basic Emotions, Experiencing Moods, and Emotions, 
as well as on the Day of the Week and Weather as Sources of Emotions and Moods
•	 New features: Personal Inventory Assessments (Emotional Intelligence Assess-
ment) and Try It (Simulation: Emotions & Moods)
Chapter 4: Personality Factors
•	 New content: Whether or Not the Big Five Personality Traits Predict Behavior at 
Work, Other Dark-Side Traits, and Other Dimensions of Fit
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, Personality Frameworks, the Myers-
Briggs Type Indicator, Cultural Values, Summary, and Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Describing Personality; the 
Big Five Personality Model; the Dark Triad, Proactive Personality; Organiza-
tional Situations, Generational Values; Person–Organization Fit; and International 
Research on Measuring Personality, Narcissism, and Person–Job Fit
•	 New features: Watch It (Honest Tea: Ethics—Company Mission and Values), and 
Personality Inventory Assessment (Personality Style Indicator)
Chapter 5: Perceptual Processes
•	 New content: The Perceiver, Target, and Context as Factors That Influence Percep-
tion, Randomness Error; Nudging as an Influence on Decision Making; Choosing 
between the Three Ethical Decision Criteria; Lying and Ethical Decision Making; 
and Ethics and Creativity
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, the Halo Effect, Escalation of Com-
mitment, Creative Potential, and Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Person Perception: Making Judg-
ments about Others; Attribution Theory; the Link between Perception and Individual 
Decision Making; Gender as an Influence on Decision Making; Creative Behavior; 
Intelligence, Personality, and Expertise as Causes of Creative Behavior; the Creative 
Environment; and International Research on the Three Ethical Decision Criteria
•	 New features: Blue Box (Sony), Watch It (Orpheus Group Casting: Social Percep-
tion and Attribution), Try It (Simulation: Perception & Individual Decision Mak-
ing), and Personal Inventory Assessments (How Creative Are You?)
24	
Preface

Chapter 6: Valuing Diversity
•	 New content: Stereotype Threat and Hidden Disabilities
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, Demographic Characteristics, 
Discrimination, Implementing Diversity Management Strategies, and Implications 
for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Discrimination in the 
Workplace; Biographical Characteristics, including Age, Sex, Race, and Ethnic-
ity; Disabilities; the Wonderlic Intellectual Ability Test; Diversity in Groups; 
and International Research on Religion, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, and 
Physical Abilities
•	 New features: Personal Inventory Assessments (Intercultural Sensitivity Scale), 
Watch It (Verizon: Diversity), and Try It (Simulation: Human Resources)
Chapter 7: Basic Motivation
•	 New content: Goal-Setting and Ethics, Reinforcement Theory, Influencing Self-
Efficacy in Others, Ensuring Justice, and Culture and Justice
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, Goal-Setting Theory, and Equity 
Theory/Organizational Justice
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Hierarchy of Needs Theory 
as well as International Research on McClelland’s Theory of Needs, Goal-Setting 
Theory, Self-Determination Theory, Self-Efficacy Theory, and Equity Theory/
Organizational Justice
•	 New features: Watch It [Motivation (TWZ Role Play)], Try It (Simulation: 
Motivation), and Personal Inventory Assessments (Work Motivation Indicator)
Chapter 8: Applied Motivation
•	 Newly revised sections: The Job Characteristics Model, Job Rotation, Reward-
ing Individual Employees through Variable-Pay Programs, and Using Benefits to 
Motivate Employees
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Job Rotation; Relational Job De-
sign; Flextime; Job Sharing; Participative Management; Establishing a Pay Structure; 
Merit-Based Pay; Employee Stock Ownership Plans; Using Intrinsic Rewards; and Inter-
national Research on the Job Characteristics Model, Telecommuting, Cultural Employee 
Involvement Programs, Representative Participation, Rewarding Individual Employees 
through Variable-Pay Programs, Piece-Rate Pay, Bonuses, and Profit-Sharing Plans
•	 New features: Blue Box (Belgian Law), Personal Inventory Assessments (Diagnos-
ing the Need for Team Building), Watch It (Zappos: Motivating Employees through 
Company Culture), and Try It (Simulation: Extrinsic & Intrinsic Motivation)
Chapter 9: Communication
•	 New content: Managing Behavior, Feedback, Emotional Feedback, Emotional 
Sharing, Persuasion, and Information Exchange
•	 Newly revised sections: Downward and Upward Communication, The Grapevine, 
Oral Communication, and Telephone
	
Preface    25

•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Functions of Communication 
and Information Overload
•	 New features: Blue Box (IKEA), Watch It [Communication (TWZ Role Play)], 
Personal Inventory Assessments (Communication Styles), and Try It (Simulation: 
Communication)
Chapter 10: Basics of Group Behavior
•	 New content: Social Identity, Ingroups and Outgroups, Norms and Emotions, Pos-
itive and Negative Norms and Group Outcomes, Norms and Culture, Group Status 
Inequity, and Group Status and Stigmatization
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives; Role Expectations; Role Conflict; 
Group Status, Group Size, and Dynamics, Group Cohesiveness; Group Diversity; 
and Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Group Norms, Group Status 
and Norms, Group Status and Group Interaction, Group Size and Dynamics, Chal-
lenges of Group Diversity, Group Effectiveness and Efficiency, and International 
Research in Group Diversity
•	 New features: Blue Box (Samsung), Watch It (Witness.org: Managing Groups & 
Teams), Personal Inventory Assessments (Communicating Supportively), and Try It 
(Simulation: Group Behavior)
Chapter 11: From Groups to Teams
•	 New content: Cultural Differences in Work Teams, Team Identity, Team Cohe-
sion, and Shared Mental Models
•	 Newly revised sections: Problem-Solving Teams, Summary, and Implications for 
Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: The Popularity of Teams, 
Cross-Functional Teams, Virtual Teams, Multiteam Systems, Creating Effective 
Teams, Team Composition, Personality of Team Members, Size of Teams, and 
International Research on Climate of Trust
•	 New features: Blue Box (Nu Skin Enterprises), Watch It [Teams (TWZ Role 
Play)], Personal Inventory Assessments (Team Development Behaviors), and Try 
It (Simulation: Teams)
Chapter 12: Characteristics of Leaders
•	 New content: Dark Side Traits, Leader–Member Exchange Theory, How Transforma-
tional Leadership Works, Transformational versus Charismatic Leadership, Emotional 
Intelligence and Leadership, Leader-Participation Model, and Trust and Culture
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, Trait Theories of Leadership, Con-
temporary Theories of Leadership, Behavioral Theories, Responsible Leadership, 
and Authentic Leadership
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Big Five Traits, Transac-
tional and Transformational Leadership, Path–Goal Theory, Servant Leadership, 
26	
Preface

and International Research on Charismatic Leadership and the Evaluation of 
Transformational Leadership
•	 New features: Blue Box (Richard Branson), Watch It [Leadership (TWZ Role 
Play)], Personal Inventory Assessments (Ethical Leadership Assessment), and 
Try It (Simulation: Leadership)
Chapter 13: Power and Politics in Organizations
•	 New content: The General Dependence Postulate, Social Network Analysis, Sex-
ual Harassment, Inter-Organizational Factors Contributing to Political Behavior, 
Interviews and Impression Management, Scarcity, and Nonsubstitutability
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives and Individual Factors Contributing 
to Political Behavior
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Impression Management, 
Performance Evaluations and Impression Management, Organizational Factors, 
and Contributing to Political Behavior
•	 New features: Blue Box (ZTE Corporation), Watch It (Power and Political Behavior),  
Personal Inventory Assessments (Gaining Power and Influence), and Try It (Simula-
tion: Power & Politics)
Chapter 14: Conflict in Organizations
•	 New content: Negotiating in a Social Context, Reputation and Relationships in 
Negotiations, and Third-Party Negotiations
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives, A Definition of Conflict, Loci of 
Conflict, and Stage IV of the Conflict Process: Behavior, Personality Traits, and 
Gender Differences in Negotiations
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Functional Outcomes, Prepa-
ration and Planning for Negotiation, and International Research on Personal Vari-
ables as Sources of Conflict and Cultural Influences on Negotiation
•	 New features: Watch It (Gordon Law Group: Conflict and Negotiation) and Per-
sonal Inventory Assessments (Strategies for Handling Conflict)
Chapter 15: Organization Structure and Design
•	 New content: Implications of Organizational Structure for OB; Boundary Span-
ning; Types of Organizational Structures, including Functional, Divisional, Team, 
and Circular Structures; and Institutions and Strategy
•	 Newly revised sections: Learning Objectives and Description of Organizational 
Structure
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: The Leaner Organization: 
Downsizing, Organizational Strategies and Structure, and International Research 
on Technology and Strategy
•	 New features: Personal Inventory Assessments (Organizational Structure Assess-
ment), Try It (Simulation: Organizational Structure), and Watch It (ZipCar: Orga-
nizational Structure)
	
Preface    27

Chapter 16: Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture
•	 New content: The Ethical Dimensions of Culture, Culture and Sustainability, 
Culture and Innovation, Culture as an Asset, Strengthening Dysfunctions, Rivals, 
and Influencing an Organizational Culture
•	 Newly revised sections: Description of Organizational Culture, Barriers to 
Acquisitions and Mergers, Ethical Culture, Positive Culture, Rewarding More 
Than Punishing, and Building on Employee Strengths
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Organizational Socialization
•	 New features: Try It (Simulation: Organizational Culture) and Personal Inventory 
Assessments (Organizational Structure Assessment)
Chapter 17: Organizational Change
•	 New content: Reactionary versus Planned Change; The Politics of Change; Action 
Research; Sensitivity Training, Managing the Change Paradox; Describing and 
Creating a Learning Organization; Organizational Change and Stress; Allostasis; 
Potential Sources of Stress at Work; Environmental, Personal, and Organizational 
Factors Leading to Stress; Stress Additivity; Perception and Stress; Job Experi-
ence and Stress; Personality Traits and Stress; Cultural Differences and Stress; and 
Wellness Programs
•	 Newly revised sections: Description of Change, Forces for Change, Coercion as 
a Tactic to Overcome Resistance to Change, Demands and Resources, Social Sup-
port and Stress, Summary, and Implications for Managers
•	 New research incorporated in the following areas: Resistance to Change, De-
veloping Positive Relationships to Overcome Resistance to Change, Context and 
Innovation, Behavioral Symptoms of Stress, and International Research on Com-
munication to Overcome Resistance to Change and on Idea Champions
•	 New features: Try It (Simulation: Change), Watch It (East Haven Fire Depart-
ment: Managing Stress), and Personal Inventory Assessments (Tolerance of Am-
biguity Scale)
INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES
At Pearson’s Global Editions catalog, http://www.pearsonglobaleditions.com, instructors 
can easily register to gain access to a variety of instructor resources available with this text 
in downloadable format. If assistance is needed, our dedicated technical support team is 
ready to help with the media supplements that accompany this text. Visit https://support 
.pearson.com/getsupport for answers to frequently asked questions and toll-free user sup-
port phone numbers.
The following supplements are available with this text:
•	 Instructor’s Resource Manual
•	 Test Bank
•	 TestGen® Computerized Test Bank
•	 PowerPoint Presentation
This title is available as an eBook and can be purchased at most eBook retailers.
28	
Preface

29
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We owe a debt of gratitude to all those at Pearson who have supported this text over the 
past 25 years and who have worked so hard on the development of this latest edition. On 
the editorial side, we want to thank Director of Portfolio Management Stephanie Wall, 
Portfolio Manager Kris Ellis-Levy, Managing Producer Ashley Santora, Content Pro-
ducer Claudia Fernandes, and Editorial Assistant Hannah Lamarre. On the production 
side, we want to thank Moumita Majumdar and Revathi Viswanathan, Project Managers 
at Cenveo® Publisher Services. The authors are grateful for Lori Ehrman Tinkey of the 
University of Notre Dame for her invaluable assistance in manuscript editing and prepa-
ration. Thank you also to David Glerum, Ph.D., for his input. Last but not least, we would 
like to thank the marketing team for promoting the book to the market, and the sales 
staff who have been selling this book over its many editions. We appreciate the attention 
you’ve given this book.
GLOBAL EDITION 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Pearson would like to thank Swapna Koshy, University Of Wollongong; John Opute, 
London South Bank University; Louise Stansfield, Helsinki Metropolia University of 
Applied Sciences; and Jon and Diane Sutherland, freelance writers, for their contribu-
tion to the Global Edition. We would also like to thank Irene Ong Pooi Fong, Taylor’s 
University; Khaled Haque, Management Specialist; and Neelofer Mashood, Middlesex 
University Dubai, for reviewing the Global Edition content and providing feedback to 
improve it.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Stephen P. Robbins, 
Ph.D. University of Arizona
Stephen P. Robbins is Professor Emeritus of Management at San Diego State University 
and the world’s best-selling textbook author in the areas of both management and orga-
nizational behavior. His books are used at more than a thousand U.S. colleges and uni-
versities, have been translated into 19 languages, and have adapted editions for Canada, 
Australia, South Africa, and India. Dr. Robbins is also the author of the best-selling books 
The Truth About Managing People, 2nd ed. (Financial Times/Prentice Hall, 2008) and 
Decide & Conquer (Financial Times/Prentice Hall, 2004).
In his “other life,” Dr. Robbins actively participates in masters’ track competitions. 
Since turning 50 in 1993, he’s won 18 national championships and 12 world titles, and 
set numerous U.S. and world age-group records at 60, 100, 200, and 400 meters. In 2005, 
Dr. Robbins was elected into the USA Masters’ Track & Field Hall of Fame.
Timothy A. Judge, 
Ph.D. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Timothy A. Judge is currently the Alutto Professor of Leadership at The Ohio State Uni-
versity and Visiting Professor, Division of Psychology & Language Sciences, Univer-
sity College London. He has held academic positions at the University of Notre Dame, 
University of Florida, University of Iowa, Cornell University, Charles University in the 
Czech Republic, Comenius University in Slovakia, and University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. Dr. Judge’s primary research interests are in (1) personality, moods, and 
emotions; (2) job attitudes; (3) leadership and influence behaviors; and (4) careers  
(person–organization fit, career success). Dr. Judge has published more than 154 articles 
in these and other major topics in journals such as the Academy of Management Journal 
and the Journal of Applied Psychology. He is a fellow of several organizations, including 
the American Psychological Association and the Academy of Management. Among the 
many professional acknowledgments of his work, most recently Dr. Judge was awarded 
the Academy of Management Human Resources Division’s Scholarly Achievement 
Award for 2014. Dr. Judge is a co-author of Organizational Behavior, 17th ed., with 
Stephen P. Robbins, and Staffing Organizations, 8th ed., with Herbert G. Heneman III. 
He is married and has three children—a daughter who is a health care social worker, a 
daughter who is studying for a master’s degree, and a son in middle school.
30

31
Welcome to the 
World of OB
1 
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Define organizational behavior (referred to as OB throughout the text).
	 2.	 Show the value of systematic study to OB.
	 3.	 Identify the major behavioral science disciplines that contribute to OB.
	 4.	 Demonstrate why few absolutes apply to OB.
	 5.	 Identify managers’ challenges and opportunities in applying OB concepts.
	 6.	 Compare the three levels of analysis in this text’s OB model.
A
s you begin your study of this text, you might be wondering, “What is organizational 
behavior and why does it matter to me?” We get to the definition of organizational 
behavior, or OB, in a moment, but let’s begin with the end in mind—why OB matters, and 
what the study of OB offers you.
First, a bit of history. Until the late 1980s, business school curricula emphasized the 
technical aspects of management, focusing on economics, accounting, finance, and quan-
titative techniques. Course work in human behavior and people skills received relatively 
PART 1  An Introduction

32	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
less attention. Since then, however, business schools have realized the significant role 
interpersonal skills play in determining a manager’s effectiveness. In fact, a survey of 
over 2,100 CFOs across 20 industries indicated that a lack of interpersonal skills is the 
top reason why some employees fail to advance.1
One of the principal applications of OB is toward an improvement in interper-
sonal skills. Developing managers’ interpersonal skills helps organizations attract and 
keep high-performing employees, which is important since outstanding employees are 
always in short supply and are costly to replace. But the development of interpersonal 
skills is not the only reason OB matters. Secondly, from the organizational standpoint, 
incorporating OB principles can help transform a workplace from good to great, with a 
positive impact on the bottom line. Companies known as good places to work—such as 
Telefónica, Adobe Systems, Cisco, McKinsey & Company, Procter & Gamble, Facebook, 
and Southwest Airlines2—have been found to generate superior financial performance.3 
Third, there are strong associations between the quality of workplace relationships and 
employee job satisfaction, stress, and turnover. For example, one very large survey of 
hundreds of workplaces and more than 200,000 respondents showed that social relation-
ships among coworkers and supervisors were strongly related to overall job satisfaction. 
Positive social relationships also were associated with lower stress at work and lower 
intentions to quit.4 Further research indicates that employees who relate to their man-
agers with supportive dialogue and proactivity find that their ideas are endorsed more 
often, which improves workplace satisfaction.5 Fourth, increasing the OB element in 
organizations can foster social responsibility awareness. Accordingly, universities have 
begun to incorporate social entrepreneurship education into their curriculum in order to 
train future leaders to address social issues within their organizations.6 This is especially 
important because there is a growing need for understanding the means and outcomes of 
corporate social responsibility, known as CSR.7 We discuss CSR more fully in Chapter 2.
We understand that in today’s competitive and demanding workplace, managers 
can’t succeed on their technical skills alone. They also have to exhibit good people skills. 
This text has been written to help both managers and potential managers develop those 
people skills with the knowledge that understanding human behavior provides. In so 
doing, we believe you’ll also obtain lasting skills and insight about yourself and others.
MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
The roles of a manager—and the necessary skills needed to perform as one—are con-
stantly evolving. More than ever, individuals are placed into management positions with-
out management training or informed experience. According to a large-scale survey, more 
than 58 percent of managers reported they had not received any training and 25 percent 
admitted they were not ready to lead others when they were given the role.8 Added to that 
challenge, the demands of the job have increased: the average manager has seven direct 
reports (five was once the norm), and has less management time to spend with them than 
before.9 Considering that a Gallup poll found organizations chose the wrong candidate for 
management positions 82 percent of the time,10 we conclude that the more you can learn 
about people and how to manage them, the better prepared you will be to be that right 
candidate. OB will help you get there.
Telefónica 
This Spanish 
multinational 
broadband and 
telecommunications 
provider is one 
of the best places 
to work because 
of their ‘people’ 
focus. Telefonica’s 
concerted efforts 
to keep its 123,700 
employees happy 
and productive 
includes putting in 
place a confidential 
help channel, 
which allows 
employees to clarify 
queries regarding 
operational matters 
and raise instances 
of non-compliance.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
33
Organizational Behavior (OB) Defined
Organizational behavior (OB) is a field of study that investigates the impact individuals, 
groups, and structure have on behavior within organizations, for the purpose of applying 
such knowledge toward improving an organization’s effectiveness. That’s a mouthful, so 
let’s break it down.
OB is a field of study, meaning that it is a distinct area of expertise with a common 
body of knowledge. What does it study? It studies three determinants of behavior within 
organizations: individuals, groups, and structure. In addition, OB applies the knowledge 
gained about individuals, groups, and the effect of structure on behavior in order to make 
organizations work more effectively.
To sum up our definition, OB is the study of what people do in an organization and 
the way their behavior affects the organization’s performance. Because OB is concerned 
specifically with employment-related situations, it examines behavior in the context of 
job satisfaction, absenteeism, employment turnover, productivity, human performance, 
and management. Although debate exists about the relative importance of each, OB in-
cludes these core topics:11
•	 Motivation
•	 Leader behavior and power
•	 Interpersonal communication
•	 Group structure and processes
•	 Attitude development and perception
•	 Change processes
•	 Conflict and negotiation
•	 Work design
Effective versus Successful Managerial Activities
Now that we understand what OB is, we may begin to apply some concepts. Consider 
the important issue of effective management. What makes one manager more effective 
than another? To answer the question, Fred Luthans, a prominent OB researcher, and his 
associates looked at what managers do from a unique perspective.12 They asked, “Do 
managers who move up most quickly in an organization do the same activities and with 
the same emphasis as managers who do the best job?” You might think the answer is yes, 
but that’s not always the case.
Luthans and his associates studied more than 450 managers. All engaged in four 
managerial activities:
1.	 Traditional management. Decision making, planning, and controlling.
2.	 Communication. Exchanging routine information and processing paperwork.
3.	 Human resources (HR) management. Motivating, disciplining, managing con-
flict, staffing, and training.
4.	 Networking. Socializing, politicking, and interacting with outsiders.
The “average” manager spent 32 percent of his or her time in traditional manage-
ment activities, 29 percent communicating, 20 percent in HR management activities, and 
19 percent networking. However, the time and effort different individual managers spent 
Organizational 
behavior 
A field of study that 
investigates the impact 
individuals, groups, 
and structure have 
on behavior within 
organizations, for the 
purpose of applying 
such knowledge 
toward improving 
an organization’s 
effectiveness.

34	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
on those activities varied a great deal. Among managers who were successful (defined 
in terms of speed of promotion within their organizations), networking made the largest 
relative contribution to success and HR management activities made the least relative 
contribution, which is the opposite of the average manager. Indeed, other studies in Aus-
tralia, Israel, Italy, Japan, and the United States confirm the link between networking, 
social relationships, and success within an organization.13 However, Luthans and associ-
ates found that among effective managers (defined in terms of quantity and quality of 
their performance and the satisfaction and commitment of their employees), communica-
tion made the largest relative contribution and networking the least. This finding is more 
in line with the average manager, with the important exception of increased emphasis 
on communication. The connection between communication and effective managers is 
clear. Managers who explain their decisions and seek information from colleagues and 
employees—even if the information turns out to be negative—are the most effective.14
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Herman Miller: Organizational 
Behavior.
COMPLEMENTING INTUITION WITH SYSTEMATIC STUDY
Whether you’ve explicitly thought about it before or not, you’ve been “reading” people 
almost all your life by watching their actions and interpreting what you see, or by trying 
to predict what people might do under different conditions. The casual approach to read-
ing others can often lead to erroneous predictions, but using a systematic approach can 
improve your accuracy.
Underlying the systematic approach is the belief that behavior is not random. 
Rather, we can identify fundamental consistencies underlying the behavior of all indi-
viduals and modify them to reflect individual differences. These fundamental consisten-
cies are very important. Why? Because they allow for predictability. Behavior is generally 
predictable, and the systematic study of behavior is a means to making reasonably accu-
rate predictions. When we use the term systematic study, we mean looking at relation-
ships, attempting to attribute causes and effects, and basing our conclusions on scientific 
evidence—that is, on data gathered under controlled conditions and measured, and inter-
preted, in a rigorous manner.
Evidence-based management (EBM) complements systematic study by basing 
managerial decisions on the best available scientific evidence. For example, we want doc-
tors to make decisions about patient care based on the latest available evidence, and EBM 
argues that managers should do the same, thinking more scientifically about management 
problems. A manager might pose a question, search for the best available evidence, and 
apply the relevant information to the question or case at hand. You might wonder what 
manager would not base decisions on evidence, but the vast majority of management deci-
sions are still made “on the fly,” with little to no systematic study of available evidence.15
Systematic study and EBM add to intuition, or those “gut feelings” about what 
makes others (and ourselves) “tick.” Of course, the things you have come to believe in 
an unsystematic way are not necessarily incorrect. Jack Welch (former CEO of General 
When you see this 
icon, Global OB issues 
are being discussed in 
the paragraph.
Systematic study
Looking at 
relationships, 
attempting to attribute 
causes and effects, and 
drawing conclusions 
based on scientific 
evidence.
Evidence-based 
management (EBM) 
The basing of 
managerial decisions 
on the best available 
scientific evidence.
Intuition 
An instinctive feeling 
not necessarily 
supported by research.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
35
Electric) noted, “The trick, of course, is to know when to go with your gut.”16 But if we 
make all decisions with intuition or gut instinct, we’re likely working with incomplete 
information—like making an investment decision with only half the data about the poten-
tial for risk and reward.
Big Data
Data, the foundation of EBM, have been used to evaluate behavior since at least 1749, 
when the word “statistic” was coined to mean a “description of the state.”17 Statistics back 
then were used for purposes of governance, but since the data collection methods were 
clumsy and simplistic, so were the conclusions. “Big data”—the extensive use of statisti-
cal compilation and analysis—didn’t become possible until computers were sophisticated 
enough to both store and manipulate large amounts of information. The use of big data 
began with online retailers but has since permeated virtually every business.
CURRENT USAGE  No matter how many terabytes of data firms collect or from how 
many sources, the reasons for data analytics include: predicting events, from a book 
purchase to a spacesuit malfunction; detecting how much risk is incurred at any time, 
from the risk of a fire to that of a loan default; and preventing catastrophes large and 
small, from a plane crash to the overstocking of a product.18 With big data, U.S. defense 
contractor BAE Systems protects itself from cyber-attacks, San Francisco’s Bank of 
the West uses customer data to create tiered pricing systems, and London’s Graze.com 
analyzes customers’ preferences to select snack samples to send with their orders.19
NEW TRENDS  The use of big data for understanding, helping, and managing people is 
relatively new but holds promise. In fact, research on 10,000 workers in China, Germany, 
India, the United Kingdom, and the United States indicated that employees expect the 
next transformation in the way people work will rely more on technological advancements 
than on any other factor, such as demographic changes.20
It is good news for the future of business that researchers, the media, and company 
leaders have identified the potential of data-driven management and decision making. A 
manager who uses data to define objectives, develop theories of causality, and test those the-
ories can determine which employee activities are relevant to the objectives.21 Big data has 
implications for correcting management assumptions and increasing positive performance 
outcomes. Increasingly, it is applied toward making effective decisions (Chapter 5) and 
managing organizational change (Chapter 17). It is quite possible that the best use of big 
data in managing people will come from OB and psychology research where it might, for 
instance, even help employees with mental illnesses monitor and change their behavior.22
LIMITATIONS  As technological capabilities for handling big data have increased, so 
have issues of privacy and appropriate application. This is particularly true when data 
collection includes surveillance instruments. For instance, an experiment in Brooklyn, 
New York, has been designed to improve the quality of life for residents, but the researchers 
will collect potentially intrusive data from infrared cameras, sensors, and smartphone 
Wi-Fi signals.23 Through similar methods of surveillance monitoring, a bank call center 
and a pharmaceutical company found that employees were more productive with more 
social interaction, so they changed their break time policies so more people took breaks 

36	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
together. They then saw sales increase and turnover decrease. Bread Winners Café in 
Dallas, Texas, constantly monitors all employees in the restaurant through surveillance 
and uses that data to promote or discipline its servers.24 Privacy and application issues 
abound with these techniques, but abandoning them is not necessarily the fix.
An understanding of deeper OB issues can help find the productive balance. These 
big data tactics and others might yield results—and research indicates that, in fact, elec-
tronic performance monitoring does increase task performance and citizenship behavior 
(helping behaviors towards others), at least in the short term. But critics point out that 
after Frederick Taylor introduced surveillance analytics in 1911 to increase productiv-
ity through monitoring and feedback controls, his management control techniques were 
surpassed by Alfred Sloan’s greater success with management outcomes, achieved by 
providing meaningful work to employees.25
We are not advising you to throw intuition out the window. In dealing with people, 
leaders often rely on hunches, and sometimes the outcomes are excellent. At other times, 
human tendencies get in the way. What we are advising is to use evidence as much as pos-
sible to inform your intuition and experience. The prudent use of big data, along with an 
understanding of human behavioral tendencies, can contribute to sound decision making 
and ease natural biases. That is the promise of OB.
DISCIPLINES THAT CONTRIBUTE TO THE OB FIELD
OB is an applied behavioral science built on contributions from a number of behavioral 
disciplines, mainly psychology and social psychology, sociology, and anthropology. Psy-
chology’s contributions have been principally at the individual or micro-level of analysis, 
while the other disciplines have contributed to our understanding of macro concepts such 
as group processes and organization. Exhibit 1-1 is an overview of the major contribu-
tions to the study of OB.
Psychology
Psychology seeks to measure, explain, and sometimes change the behavior of humans and 
other animals. Contributors to the knowledge of OB are learning theorists, personality theorists, 
counseling psychologists, and, most important, industrial and organizational psychologists.
Early industrial and organizational psychologists studied the problems of fatigue, 
boredom, and other working conditions that could impede efficient work performance. 
More recently, their contributions have expanded to include learning, perception, per-
sonality, emotions, training, leadership effectiveness, needs and motivational forces, job 
satisfaction, decision-making processes, performance appraisals, attitude measurement, 
employee-selection techniques, work design, and job stress.
Social Psychology
Social psychology, generally considered a branch of psychology, blends concepts from 
both psychology and sociology to focus on people’s influence on one another. One major 
study area is change—how to implement it and how to reduce barriers to its acceptance. 
Social psychologists also contribute to measuring, understanding, and changing attitudes; 
identifying communication patterns; and building trust. Finally, they have made impor-
tant contributions to our study of group behavior, power, and conflict.
Psychology
The science that seeks 
to measure, explain, 
and sometimes change 
the behavior of humans 
and other animals.
Social psychology 
An area of psychology 
that blends concepts 
from psychology and 
sociology to focus on 
the influence of people 
on one another.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
37
Sociology
While psychology focuses on the individual, sociology studies people in relation to their 
social environment or culture. Sociologists have contributed to OB through their study of 
group behaviors in organizations, particularly formal and complex organizations. Perhaps 
most importantly, sociologists have studied organizational culture, formal organization 
theory and structure, organizational technology, communications, power, and conflict.
Anthropology
Anthropology is the study of societies in order to learn about human beings and their 
activities. Anthropologists’ work on cultures and environments has helped us understand 
differences in fundamental values, attitudes, and behavior among people in different 
countries and within different organizations. Much of our current understanding of or-
ganizational culture, organizational climate, and differences among national cultures is a 
result of the work of anthropologists or those using their methods.
THERE ARE FEW ABSOLUTES IN OB
Laws in the physical sciences—chemistry, astronomy, physics—are consistent and apply in 
a wide range of situations. They allow scientists to generalize about the pull of gravity or to 
be confident about sending astronauts into space to repair satellites. Human beings are com-
plex, and few, if any, simple and universal principles explain human behavior. Because we 
Sociology 
The study of people in 
relation to their social 
environment or culture.
Anthropology
The study of societies 
to learn about human 
beings and their 
activities.
Sociology
Social psychology
Anthropology
Psychology
Behavioral
science
Output
Unit of
analysis
Contribution
Learning
Motivation
Personality
Emotions
Perception
Training
Leadership effectiveness
Job satisfaction
Individual decision making
Performance appraisal
Attitude measurement
Employee selection
Work design
Work stress
Behavioral change
Attitude change
Communication
Group processes
Group decision making
Formal organization theory
Organizational technology
Organizational change
Organizational culture
Comparative values
Comparative attitudes
Cross-cultural analysis
Organizational culture
Organizational environment
Power
Communication
Power
Conﬂict
Intergroup behavior
Study of
organizational
behavior
Organization
system
Individual
Group
EXHIBIT 1-1 
Toward an OB 
Discipline

38	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
are not alike, our ability to make simple, accurate, and sweeping generalizations about our-
selves is limited. Two people often act very differently in the same situation, and the same 
person’s behavior changes in different situations. For instance, not everyone is motivated 
by money, and people may behave differently at a religious service than they do at a party.
This doesn’t mean, of course, that we can’t offer reasonably accurate explanations 
of human behavior or make valid predictions. It does mean that OB concepts must reflect 
situational, or contingency, conditions. We can say x leads to y, but only under condi-
tions specified in z—the contingency variables. The science of OB was developed by 
applying general concepts to a particular situation, person, or group. For example, OB 
scholars would avoid stating that everyone likes complex and challenging work (a gen-
eral concept). Why? Because not everyone wants a challenging job. Some people prefer 
routine over varied work, or simple over complex tasks. A job attractive to one person 
may be unattractive to another; its appeal is contingent on the person who holds it. Often, 
we find both general effects (money does have some ability to motivate most of us) and 
contingencies (some of us are more motivated by money than others, and some situations 
are more about money than others). We best understand OB when we realize how both 
(general effects and the contingencies that affect them) often guide behavior.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR OB
Understanding organizational behavior has never been more important for managers. 
Take a quick look at the dramatic changes in organizations. The typical employee is get-
ting older; the workforce is becoming increasingly diverse; and global competition re-
quires employees to become more flexible and cope with rapid change.
As a result of these changes and others, employment options have adapted to include 
new opportunities for workers. Exhibit 1-2 details some of the types of options individuals 
may find offered to them by organizations or for which they would like to negotiate. Under 
each heading in the exhibit, you will find a grouping of options from which to choose—or 
combine. For instance, at one point in your career you may find yourself employed full 
time in an office in a localized, nonunion setting with a salary and bonus compensation 
package, while at another point you may wish to negotiate for a flextime, virtual position 
and choose to work from overseas for a combination of salary and extra paid time off.
In short, today’s challenges bring opportunities for managers to use OB concepts. In 
this section, we review some—but not nearly all—of the critical developing issues confront-
ing managers for which OB offers solutions or, at least, meaningful insights toward solutions.
Continuing Globalization
Organizations are no longer constrained by national borders. Samsung, the largest South 
Korean business conglomerate, sells most of its products to organizations in other coun-
tries; Burger King is owned by a Brazilian firm; and McDonald’s sells hamburgers in 118 
countries on 6 continents. Even Apple—arguably the U.S. company with the strongest 
U.S. identity—employs twice as many workers outside the United States as it does inside 
the country. And all major automobile makers now manufacture cars outside their bor-
ders; Honda builds cars in Ohio, Ford in Brazil, Volkswagen in Mexico, and both Mer-
cedes and BMW in the United States and South Africa. The world has become a global 
village. In the process, the manager’s job has changed. Effective managers anticipate and 
adapt their approaches to the global issues we discuss next. 
Contingency 
variables
Situational factors or 
variables that moderate 
the relationship 
between two or more 
variables.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
39
WORKING WITH PEOPLE FROM DIFFERENT CULTURES  In your own country or on 
foreign assignment, you’ll find yourself working with bosses, peers, and other employees 
born and raised in different cultures. What motivates you may not motivate them. Or 
your communication style may be straightforward and open, which others may find 
uncomfortable and threatening. To work effectively with people from different cultures, 
you need to understand how their culture and background have shaped them and how to 
adapt your management style to fit any differences.
ADAPTING TO DIFFERING CULTURAL AND REGULATORY NORMS  To be effective, 
managers need to know the cultural norms of the workforce in each country where they 
do business. For instance, in some countries a large percentage of the workforce enjoys 
long holidays. There are national and local regulations to consider, too. Managers of 
subsidiaries abroad need to be aware of the unique financial and legal regulations applying 
to “guest companies” or else risk violating them. Violations can have implications for their 
operations in that country and also for political relations between countries. Managers 
also need to be cognizant of differences in regulations for competitors in that country; 
many times, understanding the laws can lead to success or failure. For example, knowing 
local banking laws allowed one multinational firm—the Bank of China—to seize control 
of a storied (and very valuable) London building, Grosvenor House, from under the nose 
Employed
Underemployed/
underutilized
Re-employed
Unemployed/jobless
Entrepreneur
Retired
Furloughed
Laid off
Categories of
Employment 
Job seeking
Places of
Employment
Anchored
(ofﬁce/cubicle) 
Floating (shared
space)
Virtual
Flexible
Work from home
Compensation
for Employment  
Salary
Hourly
Overtime
Bonus
Contract
Time off
Beneﬁts
Conditions of
Employment 
Local
Expatriate
Flexpatriate
International 
business traveler
Visa employee
Short-term assignee 
Union/nonunion
employee
Types of
Employment
Job share
Contingent
Independent
contractor
Temporary
Intern
Full-time
Part-time
Flextime
Reduced hours
EXHIBIT 1-2 
Employment Options
Sources: J.R. Anderson Jr., et al., “Action Items: 42 Trends Affecting Benefits, Compensation, Training, Staffing and Technol-
ogy,” HR Magazine (January 2013) p. 33; M. Dewhurst, B. Hancock, and D. Ellsworth, “Redesigning Knowledge Work,” 
Harvard Business Review (January-February 2013), 58–64; E. Frauenheim, “Creating a New Contingent Culture,“ Workforce 
Management (August 2012), 34–39; N. Koeppen, “State Job Aid Takes Pressure off Germany,” The Wall Street Journal 
(February 1, 2013), p. A8; and M. A. Shaffer, M. L. Kraimer, Y,-P. Chen, and M.C. Bolino, “Choices, Challenges, and Career 
Consequences of Global Work Experiences: A Review and Future Agenda,” Journal of Management (July 2012), 1282–1327.

40	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
of the owner, the Indian hotel group Sahara. Management at Sahara contended that the 
loan default that led to the seizure was a misunderstanding regarding one of their other 
properties in New York.26 Globalization can get complicated.
Workforce Demographics
The workforce has always adapted to variations in the economy, longevity, birth rates, 
socioeconomic conditions, and other changes that have a widespread impact. People 
adapt to survive, and OB studies the way those adaptations affect individuals’ behavior. 
For instance, even though the 2008 global recession ended years ago, some trends from 
those years are continuing: many people who have been long unemployed have left the 
workforce,27 while others have cobbled together several part-time jobs28 or settled for on-
demand work.29 Further options that have been particularly popular for younger educated 
workers have included obtaining specialized industry training after college,30 accepting 
full-time jobs that are lower-level,31 and starting their own companies.32 As students of 
OB, we can investigate what factors lead employees to make various choices and how 
their experiences affect their perceptions of their workplaces. In turn, this can help us 
predict organizational outcomes.
Longevity and birth rates have also changed the dynamics in organizations. Global 
longevity rates have increased by six years in a very short time (since 1990),33 while 
birth rates are decreasing for many developed countries; trends that together indicate a 
lasting shift toward an older workforce. OB research can help explain what this means 
for employee attitudes, organizational culture, leadership, structure, and communication. 
Finally, socioeconomic shifts have a profound effect on workforce demographics. For 
example, the days when women stayed home because it was expected are just a memory 
in some cultures, while in others, women face significant barriers to entry into the work-
force. We are interested in how these women fare in the workplace, and how their condi-
tions can be improved. This is just one illustration of how cultural and socioeconomic 
changes affect the workplace, but it is one of many. We discuss how OB can provide 
understanding and insight on workforce issues throughout this text.
Workforce Diversity
One of the most important challenges for organizations is workforce diversity, a trend by 
which organizations are becoming more heterogeneous in terms of employees’ gender, age, 
race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and other characteristics. Managing this diversity is a global 
concern. Though we have more to say about it in the next chapter, suffice it to say here that 
diversity presents great opportunities and poses challenging questions for managers and em-
ployees. How can we leverage differences within groups for competitive advantage? Should we 
treat all employees alike? Should we recognize individual and cultural differences? What are 
the legal requirements in each country? Does increasing diversity even matter? It is important 
to address the spoken and unspoken concerns of organizations today.
Social Media
As we discuss in Chapter 9, social media in the business world is here to stay. Despite its 
pervasiveness, many organizations continue to struggle with employees’ use of social me-
dia in the workplace. For instance, in February 2015, a Texas pizzeria fired an emp­loyee 
Workforce diversity 
The concept that 
organizations are 
becoming more 
heterogeneous in 
terms of gender, age, 
race, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation, and other 
characteristics.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
41
before her first day of work because she tweeted unflattering comments about her future 
job. In December 2014, Nordstrom fired an Oregon employee who had posted a personal 
Facebook comment seeming to advocate violence against white police officers.34 These 
examples show that social media is a difficult issue for today’s managers, presenting 
both a challenge and an opportunity for OB. For instance, how much should HR look 
into a candidate’s social media presence? Should a hiring manager read the candidate’s 
Twitter feeds, or just do a quick perusal of his or her Facebook profile? Managers need 
to adopt policies designed to protect employees and their organizations with balance and 
understanding.
Once employees are on the job, many organizations have policies about accessing 
social media at work—when, where, and for what purposes. But what about the impact 
of social media on employee well-being? One recent study found that subjects who woke 
up in a positive mood and then accessed Facebook frequently found their mood worsened 
during the day. Moreover, subjects who checked Facebook frequently over a two-week 
period reported a decreased level of satisfaction with their lives.35 Managers—and OB—
are trying to increase employee satisfaction, and therefore improve and enhance positive 
organizational outcomes. We discuss these issues further in Chapters 2 and 3.
Employee Well-Being at Work
One of the biggest challenges to maintaining employee well-being is the reality that 
many workers never get away from the virtual workplace. While communication tech-
nology allows many technical and professional employees to do their work at home, 
in their cars, or on the beach in Tahiti, it also means many feel like they’re not part of 
a team. “The sense of belonging is very challenging for virtual workers, who seem to 
be all alone out in cyberland,” said Ellen Raineri of Kaplan University, and many can 
relate to this feeling.36 Another challenge is that organizations are asking employees to 
put in longer hours. According to one recent study, one in four employees shows signs 
of burnout, and two in three report high stress levels and fatigue.37 This may actually 
be an underestimate because workers report maintaining “always on” access for their 
managers through e-mail and texting. Finally, employee well-being is challenged by 
heavy outside commitments. Millions of single-parent employees and employees with 
dependent parents face significant challenges in balancing work and family responsibili-
ties, for instance.
As you’ll see in later chapters, the field of OB offers a number of suggestions to 
guide managers in designing workplaces and jobs that can help employees deal with 
work–life conflicts.
Positive Work Environment
A growing area in OB research is positive organizational scholarship (POS; also called 
positive organizational behavior), which studies how organizations develop human 
strengths, foster vitality and resilience, and unlock potential. Researchers in this area say 
too much of OB research and management practice has been targeted toward identify-
ing what’s wrong with organizations and their employees. In response, they try to study 
what’s good about them.38 Some key subjects in positive OB research are engagement, 
hope, optimism, and resilience in the face of strain. Researchers hope to help practitioners 
create positive work environments for employees.
Positive 
organizational 
scholarship
An area of OB 
research that concerns 
how organizations 
develop human 
strengths, foster 
vitality and resilience, 
and unlock potential.

42	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
Although positive organizational scholarship does not deny the value of the nega-
tive (such as critical feedback), it does challenge researchers to look at OB through a new 
lens and pushes organizations to make use of employees’ strengths rather than dwell on 
their limitations. One aspect of a positive work environment is the organization’s culture, 
the topic of Chapter 16. Organizational culture influences employee behavior so strongly 
that organizations have employed “culture officers” to shape and preserve the company’s 
personality.39
Ethical Behavior
In an organizational world characterized by cutbacks, expectations of increasing produc-
tivity, and tough competition; it’s not surprising many employees feel pressured to cut 
corners, break rules, and engage in other questionable practices. Increasingly they face 
ethical dilemmas and ethical choices in which they are required to identify right and 
wrong conduct. Should they “blow the whistle” if they uncover illegal activities in their 
companies? Do they follow orders with which they don’t personally agree? Should they 
“play politics” to advance their careers?
What constitutes good ethical behavior has never been clearly defined and, in re-
cent years, the line differentiating right from wrong has blurred. We see people all around 
us engaging in unethical practices—elected officials pad expense accounts or take bribes; 
corporate executives inflate profits to cash in lucrative stock options; and university ad-
ministrators look the other way when winning coaches encourage scholarship athletes to 
take easy courses or even, in the recent case at the University of North Carolina–Chapel 
Hill, sham courses with fake grades.40 When caught, we see people give excuses such as 
“Everyone does it” or “You have to seize every advantage.”
Today’s manager must create an ethically healthy climate for employees in which 
they can do their work productively with minimal ambiguity about right and wrong 
behaviors. Companies that promote a strong ethical mission, encourage employees to 
behave with integrity, and provide strong leadership can influence employee decisions 
to behave ethically.41 Classroom training sessions in ethics have also proven helpful 
in maintaining a higher level of awareness of the implications of employee choices as 
long as the training sessions are given on an ongoing basis.42 In upcoming chapters, we 
discuss the actions managers can take to create an ethically healthy climate and help 
employees sort through ambiguous situations.
COMING ATTRACTIONS: DEVELOPING AN OB MODEL
We conclude this chapter by presenting a general model that defines the field of OB and 
stakes out its parameters, concepts, and relationships. By studying the model, you will 
have a good picture of how the topics in this text can inform your approach to manage-
ment issues and opportunities.
Overview
A model is an abstraction of reality, a simplified representation of some real-world phe-
nomenon. Exhibit 1-3 presents the skeleton of our OB model. It proposes three types of 
variables (inputs, processes, and outcomes) at three levels of analysis (individual, group, 
and organizational). In the chapters to follow, we proceed from the individual level  
Ethical dilemmas 
and ethical choices 
Situations in which 
individuals are 
required to define right 
and wrong conduct.
Model 
An abstraction of 
reality, a simplified 
representation of some 
real-world phenomenon.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
43
(Chapters 6 through 8) to group behavior (Chapters 10 through 14) to the organizational 
system (Chapters 15 through 17). The model illustrates that inputs lead to processes, 
which lead to outcomes; we discuss interrelationships at each level of analysis. Notice 
that the model also shows that outcomes can influence inputs in the future, which high-
lights the broad-reaching effect OB initiatives can have on an organization’s future.
Inputs
Inputs are the variables like personality, group structure, and organizational culture that 
lead to processes. These variables set the stage for what will occur in an organization 
later. Many are determined in advance of the employment relationship. For example, indi-
vidual diversity characteristics, personality, and values are shaped by a combination of an 
individual’s genetic inheritance and childhood environment. Group structure, roles, and 
team responsibilities are typically assigned immediately before or after a group is formed. 
Finally, organizational structure and culture are usually the result of years of development 
and change as the organization adapts to its environment and builds up customs and norms.
Processes
If inputs are like the nouns in OB, processes are like verbs. Processes are actions that 
indi­viduals, groups, and organizations engage in as a result of inputs and that lead to 
certain outcomes. At the individual level, processes include emotions and moods, motiva-
tion, perception, and decision making. At the group level, they include communication, 
leadership, power and politics, and conflict and negotiation. Finally, at the organizational 
level, processes include HR management and change practices.
Inputs 
Variables like 
personality, group 
structure, and 
organizational culture 
that lead to processes.
Processes
Actions that 
individuals, groups, 
and organizations 
engage in as a result of 
inputs and that lead to 
certain outcomes.
Processes
Individual Level
• Emotions and moods
• Motivation
• Perception
• Decision making
Group Level
• Communication
• Leadership
• Power and politics
• Conﬂict and negotiation
Organizational Level
• Human resource
 management
• Change practices
Outcomes
Individual Level
• Attitudes and stress
• Task performance
• Citizenship behavior
• Withdrawal behavior
Group Level
• Group cohesion
• Group functioning
Organizational Level
• Productivity
• Survival
Inputs
Individual Level
• Diversity
• Personality
• Values
Group Level
• Group structure
• Group roles
• Team responsibilities
Organizational Level
• Structure
• Culture
EXHIBIT 1-3 
A Basic OB Model

44	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
Outcomes
Outcomes are the key variables that you want to explain or predict, and that are af-
fected by some other variables. What are the primary outcomes in OB? Scholars have 
emphasized individual-level outcomes, such as attitudes and stress, task performance, 
citizenship behavior, and withdrawal. At the group level, cohesion and functioning are the 
dependent variables. Finally, at the organizational level, we look at overall productivity 
and survival. Because these outcomes are covered in all the chapters, we briefly discuss 
each so you can understand the goal of OB.
ATTITUDES AND STRESS  As we discuss in depth in Chapter 2, employee attitudes 
are the evaluations employees make, ranging from positive to negative, about objects, 
people, or events.  For example, the statement “I really think my job is great” is a 
positive job attitude, while “My job is boring and tedious” is a negative job attitude. 
Stress is an unpleasant psychological condition that occurs in response to environmental 
pressures.
Some people might think influencing employee attitudes and stress is purely soft 
stuff and not the business of serious managers, but as you will learn, attitudes often have 
behavioral consequences that directly relate to organizational effectiveness. Ample evi-
dence shows that employees who are more satisfied and treated fairly are more willing to 
engage in the above-and-beyond citizenship behavior that is so vital in the contemporary 
business environment.
TASK PERFORMANCE  The combination of effectiveness and efficiency at doing your 
core job tasks is a reflection of your level of task performance. If we think about the 
job of a factory worker, task performance could be measured by the number and quality 
of products produced in an hour. The task performance measurement of a teacher would 
be the level of education that students obtain. The task performance measurement of 
consultants might be the timeliness and quality of the presentations they offer to the 
client. All these types of performance relate to the core duties and responsibilities of a job 
and are often directly related to the functions listed on a formal job description.
ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP BEHAVIOR (OCB)  The discretionary behavior that is 
not part of an employee’s formal job requirements, and that contributes to the psychological 
and social environment of the workplace, is called organizational citizenship behavior 
(OCB), or simply citizenship behavior. Successful organizations have employees who 
do more than their usual job duties—who provide performance beyond expectations. 
Organizations want and need employees who make positive contributions that aren’t 
in any job description, and evidence indicates organizations that have such employees 
outperform those that don’t. As a result, OB is concerned with citizenship behavior as an 
outcome variable.
WITHDRAWAL BEHAVIOR  We’ve already mentioned behavior that goes above and 
beyond task requirements, but what about behavior that in some way is below task 
requirements? Withdrawal behavior is the set of actions that employees take to separate 
themselves from the organization. There are many forms of withdrawal, ranging from 
showing up late or failing to attend meetings to absenteeism and turnover. Employee 
withdrawal can have a very negative effect on an organization.
Outcomes 
Key factors that are 
affected by some other 
variables.
Attitudes 
Evaluative statements or 
judgments concerning 
objects, people, or 
events. 
Stress
An unpleasant 
psychological process 
that occurs in response 
to environmental 
pressures.
Task performance 
The combination of 
effectiveness and 
efficiency at doing 
core job tasks.
Organizational 
citizenship behavior 
(OCB) 
 Discretionary behavior 
that contributes to the 
psychological and 
social environment of 
the workplace.
Withdrawal behavior 
The set of actions 
employees take to 
separate themselves 
from the organization.

	
Chapter 1   •  Welcome to the World of OB	
45
GROUP COHESION  Although many outcomes in our model can be conceptualized as 
individual-level phenomena, some relate to the way groups operate. Group cohesion 
is the extent to which members of a group support and validate one another at work. 
In other words, a cohesive group is one that sticks together. When employees trust one 
another, seek common goals, and work together to achieve these common ends, the group 
is cohesive; when employees are divided among themselves in terms of what they want 
to achieve and have little loyalty to one another, the group is not cohesive. We can apply 
OB concepts toward group cohesion.
GROUP FUNCTIONING  In the same way that positive job attitudes can be associated 
with higher levels of task performance, group cohesion should lead to positive group 
functioning. Group functioning refers to the quantity and quality of a group’s work 
output. In the same way that the performance of a sports team is more than the sum of 
each individual player’s performance, group functioning in work organizations is more 
than the sum of individual task performances.
PRODUCTIVITY  The highest level of analysis in OB is the organization as a whole. An 
organization is productive if it achieves its goals by transforming inputs into outputs at the 
lowest cost. Thus productivity requires both effectiveness and efficiency.
A business firm is effective when it attains its sales or market share goals, but its 
productivity also depends on achieving those goals efficiently. Popular measures of orga-
nizational efficiency include return on investment, profit per dollar of sales, and output 
per hour of labor.
Service organizations must include customer needs and requirements in assessing 
their effectiveness. Why? Because a clear chain of cause and effect runs from employee 
attitudes and behavior to customer attitudes and profitability. For example, a recent study 
of six hotels in China indicated that negative employee attitudes decreased customer sat-
isfaction and ultimately harmed the organization’s profitability.43
SURVIVAL  The final outcome we consider is organizational survival, which is simply 
evidence that the organization is able to exist and grow over the long term. The survival of 
an organization depends not just on how productive the organization is, but also on how 
well it fits with its environment. A company that is very productively making goods and 
services of little value to the market is unlikely to survive for long, so survival also relies on 
perceiving the market successfully, making good decisions about how and when to pursue 
opportunities, and successfully managing change to adapt to new business conditions.
SUMMARY
Managers need to develop their interpersonal, or people, skills to be effective in their jobs. 
OB investigates the impact that individuals, groups, and structure have on behavior within an 
organization, and then applies that knowledge to make organizations work more effectively.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Resist the inclination to rely on generalizations; some provide valid insights into 
human behavior, but many are erroneous. Get to know the person, and understand 
the context.
Group cohesion 
The extent to which 
members of a group 
support and validate 
one another while at 
work.
Group functioning 
The quantity and 
quality of a group’s 
work output.
Productivity 
The combination 
of the effectiveness 
and efficiency of an 
organization.
Effectiveness
The degree to which an 
organization meets the 
needs of its clientele or 
customers.
Efficiency
The degree to which 
an organization can 
achieve its ends at a 
low cost.
Organizational 
survival 
The degree to which an 
organization is able to 
exist and grow over the 
long term.

46	
Part 1  •  An Introduction
•	 Use metrics rather than hunches to explain cause-and-effect relationships.
•	 Work on your interpersonal skills to increase your leadership potential.
•	 Improve your technical skills and conceptual skills through training and staying 
current with OB trends like big data.
•	 OB can improve your employees’ work quality and productivity by showing you 
how to empower your employees, design and implement change programs, im-
prove customer service, and help your employees balance work–life conflicts.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Multicultural Awareness Scale
Any study of organizational behavior (OB) starts with knowledge of yourself. As one 
step, take this PIA to determine your multicultural awareness.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
	 1-1.	 How do you think an understanding of organizational behavior (OB) might contribute to 
your ability to manage others effectively?
	 1-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

Attitudes
2
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Contrast the three components of an attitude.
	 2.	 Summarize the relationship between attitudes and behavior.
	 3.	 Compare the major job attitudes.
	 4.	 Identify the two approaches for measuring job satisfaction.
	 5.	 Summarize the main causes of job satisfaction.
	 6.	 Identify three outcomes of job satisfaction.
	 7.	 Identify four employee responses to job dissatisfaction.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
ATTITUDES
Attitudes are evaluative statements—either favorable or unfavorable—about objects, 
people, or events. They reflect how we feel about something. When you say “I like my 
job,” you are expressing your attitude about your work.
Attitudes are complex. If you ask people about their attitudes toward religion, Lady 
Gaga, or an organization, you may get simple responses, but the underlying reasons are 
probably complicated. To fully understand attitudes, we must consider their fundamental 
properties or components.
Attitudes 
Evaluative statements 
or judgments 
concerning objects, 
people, or events.
PART 2  Individual Differences
47

48	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Typically, researchers assume attitudes have three components: cognition, affect, 
and behavior.1 The statement “My pay is low” is a cognitive component of an attitude—
a description of or belief in the way things are. It sets the stage for the more critical part 
of an attitude—its affective component. Affect is the emotional or feeling segment of an 
attitude reflected in the statement “I am angry over how little I’m paid.” Affect can lead 
to behavioral outcomes. The behavioral component of an attitude describes an intention 
to behave a certain way toward someone or something—as in, “I’m going to look for 
another job that pays better.”
Viewing attitudes as having three components—cognition, affect, and behavior—
helps us understand their complexity and the potential relationship between attitudes 
and behavior. For example, imagine you just realized that someone treated you unfairly. 
Aren’t you likely to have feelings about this, occurring virtually instantaneously along 
with the realization? Thus, cognition and affect are intertwined.
Exhibit 2-1 illustrates how the three components of an attitude are related. In this 
example, an employee didn’t get a promotion he thought he deserved. His attitude toward 
his supervisor is illustrated as follows: The employee thought he deserved the promotion 
(cognition); he strongly dislikes his supervisor (affect); and he has complained and taken 
action (behavior). Although we often think cognition causes affect, which then causes 
behavior, in reality these components are difficult to separate.
In organizations, attitudes are important for their behavioral component. If workers 
believe, for example, that managers, auditors, and engineers are in a conspiracy to make 
employees work harder for less money, we should try to understand how this attitude 
formed, how it impacts job behavior, and how it might be changed.
Cognitive component 
The opinion or belief 
segment of an attitude.
Affective component 
The emotional or 
feeling segment of an 
attitude.
Behavioral 
component
An intention to behave 
in a certain way toward 
someone or something.
Negative
attitude
toward
supervisor
Cognitive = evaluation
My supervisor gave a promotion
to a coworker who deserved it
less than I do. My supervisor is unfair.
Affective = feeling
I dislike my supervisor!
Cognition, affect, and behavior are closely related.
Behavioral = action
I’m looking for other work; I’ve
complained about my supervisor
to anyone who would listen.
EXHIBIT 2-1
The Components 
of an Attitude

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
49
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Gawker Media: Attitudes and Job 
Satisfaction.
ATTITUDES AND BEHAVIOR
Early research on attitudes assumed they were causally related to behavior—that is, the at-
titudes people hold determine what they do. However, one researcher—Leon Festinger—
argued that attitudes follow behavior. Other researchers have agreed that attitudes predict 
future behavior.2
Did you ever notice how people change what they say so that it doesn’t contradict 
what they do? Perhaps a friend of yours consistently argued that her apartment complex 
was better than yours until another friend in your complex asked her to move in with 
him; once she moved to your complex, you noticed her attitude toward her former apart-
ment became more critical. Cases of attitude following behavior illustrate the effects of 
cognitive dissonance,3 contradictions individuals might perceive between their attitudes 
and their behavior.
People seek consistency among their attitudes, and between their attitudes and their 
behavior.4 Any form of inconsistency is uncomfortable, and individuals will therefore 
att­empt to reduce it. People seek a stable state, which is a minimum of dissonance. When 
there is dissonance, people will alter either the attitudes or the behavior, or they will de-
velop a rationalization for the discrepancy. Recent research found, for instance, that the 
attitudes of employees who experienced emotionally challenging work events improved 
after they talked about their experiences with coworkers. Social sharing helped these 
empl­oyees adjust their attitudes to behavioral expectations.5
No individual can avoid dissonance. You know texting while walking is unsafe, but 
you do it anyway and hope nothing bad happens. Or you give someone advice you have 
trouble following yourself. The desire to reduce dissonance depends on three factors, in-
cluding the importance of the elements creating dissonance and the degree of influence we 
believe we have over those elements. The third factor is the rewards of dissonance; high 
rewards accompanying high dissonance tend to reduce tension inherent in the dissonance 
(dissonance is less distressing if accompanied by something good, such as a higher pay raise 
than expected). Individuals are more motivated to reduce dissonance when the attitudes are 
important or when they believe the dissonance is due to something they can control.
The most powerful moderators of the attitudes relationship are the importance of 
the attitude, its correspondence to behavior, its accessibility, the presence of social pres-
sures, and whether a person has direct experience with the attitude.6 Important attitudes 
reflect our fundamental values, self-interest, or identification with individuals or groups 
we value. These attitudes tend to show a strong relationship to our behavior. However, 
discrepancies between attitudes and behaviors tend to occur when social pressures to be-
have in certain ways hold exceptional power, as in most organizations. You’re more likely 
to remember attitudes you frequently express, and attitudes that our memories can easily 
access are more likely to predict our behavior. The attitude–behavior relationship is also 
likely to be much stronger if an attitude refers to something with which we have direct 
personal experience.
Cognitive dissonance 
Any incompatibility 
between two or more 
attitudes or between 
behavior and attitudes.

50	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
JOB ATTITUDES
We have thousands of attitudes, but OB focuses on a very limited number that form posi-
tive or negative evaluations employees hold about their work environments. Much of the 
research has looked at three attitudes: job satisfaction, job involvement, and organiza-
tional commitment.7 Other important attitudes include perceived organizational support 
and employee engagement.
Job Satisfaction and Job Involvement
When people speak of employee attitudes, they usually mean job satisfaction, a positive 
feeling about a job resulting from an evaluation of its characteristics. A person with high 
job satisfaction holds positive feelings about the work, while a person with low satisfac-
tion holds negative feelings. Because OB researchers give job satisfaction high impor-
tance, we review this attitude in detail later.
Related to job satisfaction is job involvement, the degree to which people identify 
psychologically with their jobs and consider their perceived performance levels important 
to their self-worth.8 Employees with high job involvement strongly identify with and re-
ally care about the kind of work they do. Another closely related concept is psychological 
empowerment—employees’ beliefs regarding the degree to which they influence their 
work environment, their competencies, the meaningfulness of their job, and their per-
ceived autonomy.9
Research suggests that empowerment initiatives need to be tailored to desired be-
havioral outcomes. Research in Singapore found that good leaders empower their em-
ployees by fostering their self-perception of competence—through involving them in 
decisions, making them feel their work is important, and giving them discretion to “do 
their own thing.”10
Organizational Commitment
An employee with organizational commitment identifies with a particular organization 
and its goals and wishes to remain a member. Emotional attachment to an organization 
and belief in its values is the “gold standard” for employee commitment.11 
Employees who are committed will be less likely to engage in work withdrawal 
even if they are dissatisfied because they have a sense of organizational loyalty or attach-
ment.12 Even if employees are not currently happy with their work, they are willing to 
make sacrifices for the organization if they are committed enough.
Perceived Organizational Support
Perceived organizational support (POS) is the degree to which employees believe the 
organization values their contributions and cares about their well-being. An excellent 
example is Research and Development (R&D) engineer John Greene, whose POS is sky-
high because when he was diagnosed with leukemia, CEO Marc Benioff and 350 fellow 
Salesforce.com employees covered all his medical expenses and stayed in touch with him 
throughout his recovery. No doubt stories like this are part of the reason Salesforce.com 
was the eighth of Fortune’s 100 Best Companies to Work For in 2015.13
People perceive their organizations as supportive when rewards are deemed fair, when 
employees have a voice in decisions, and when they see their supervisors as supportive.14 
Job satisfaction  
A positive feeling about 
one’s job resulting 
from an evaluation of 
its characteristics.
Job involvement 
The degree to which 
a person identifies 
with a job, actively 
participates in it, and 
considers performance 
important to their 
self-worth.
Psychological 
empowerment 
Employees’ belief in 
the degree to which 
they affect their work 
environment, their 
competence, the 
meaningfulness of 
their job, and their 
perceived autonomy in 
their work.
Organizational 
commitment
The degree to which 
an employee identifies 
with a particular 
organization and its 
goals and wishes to 
maintain membership 
in the organization.
Perceived 
organizational 
support (POS) 
The degree to which 
employees believe an 
organization values 
their contribution 
and cares about their 
well-being.

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
51
POS is a predictor of employment outcomes, but there are some cultural inf­luences. POS 
is important in countries where the power distance—the degree to which people in a 
country accept that power in institutions and organizations is distributed une­qually—is 
lower. In low power-distance countries like the United States, people are more likely to 
view work as an exchange than as a moral obligation, so employees look for reasons to feel 
supported by their organizations. In high power-distance countries like China, employee 
POS perceptions are not as deeply based on employer demonstrations of fairness, support, 
and encouragement. The difference is in the level of expectation by employees.
Employee Engagement
Employee engagement is an individual’s involvement with, satisfaction with, and en-
thusiasm for the work he or she does. To evaluate engagement, we might ask employees 
whether they have access to resources and opportunities to learn new skills, whether 
they feel their work is important and meaningful, and whether interactions with cowork-
ers and supervisors are rewarding.15 Highly engaged employees have a passion for their 
work and feel a deep connection to their companies; disengaged employees have essen-
tially checked out, putting time but not energy or attention into their work. Engagement 
becomes a real concern for most organizations because so few employees—between 17 
percent and 29 percent, surveys indicate—are highly engaged by their work. Employee 
engagement is related to job engagement, which we discuss in detail in Chapter 7.
Engagement levels determine many measurable outcomes. Promising research 
findings have earned employee engagement a following in many business organizations 
and management consulting firms. However, the concept generates active debate about its 
usefulness, partly because of the difficulty of identifying what creates engagement. The 
two top reasons for engagement that participants gave in a recent study were: (1) having 
a good manager they enjoy working for; and (2) feeling appreciated by their supervi-
sor. However, most of their other reasons didn’t relate to the engagement construct.16 
Another study in Australia found that emotional intelligence was linked to employee en-
gagement.17 Other research suggested that engagement fluctuates partially due to daily 
challenges and demands.18
There is some distinctiveness among attitudes, but they overlap greatly for various 
reasons, including the employee’s personality. Altogether, if you know someone’s level 
of job satisfaction, you know most of what you need to know about how that person sees 
the organization. Let’s next dissect the concept more carefully. How do we measure job 
satisfaction? How satisfied are employees with their jobs?
MEASURING JOB SATISFACTION
Our definition of job satisfaction—a positive feeling about a job resulting from an evalua-
tion of its characteristics—is broad. Yet that breadth is appropriate. A job is more than just 
shuffling papers, writing programming code, waiting on customers, or driving a truck. 
Jobs require interacting with coworkers and bosses, following organizational rules and 
policies, determining the power structure, meeting performance standards, living with 
less-than-ideal working conditions, adapting to new technologies, and so forth. An em-
ployee’s assessment of satisfaction with the job is thus a complex summation of many 
discrete elements. How, then, do we measure it?
Power distance 
A national culture 
attribute that describes 
the extent to which a 
society accepts that 
power in institutions 
and organizations is 
distributed unequally.
Employee 
engagement 
An individual’s 
involvement with, 
satisfaction with, and 
enthusiasm for the 
work he or she does.

52	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Approaches to Measurement
Two approaches are popular. The single global rating is a response to one question, such 
as “All things considered, how satisfied are you with your job?” Respondents circle a 
number between 1 and 5 on a scale from “highly satisfied” to “highly dissatisfied.” The 
second method, the summation of job facets, is more sophisticated. It identifies key ele-
ments in a job, such as the type of work, skills needed, supervision, present pay, promo-
tion opportunities, culture, and relationships with coworkers. Respondents rate these on 
a standardized scale, and researchers add the ratings to create an overall job satisfaction 
score.
Is one of these approaches superior? Intuitively, summing up responses to a num-
ber of job factors seems likely to achieve a more accurate evaluation of job satisfaction. 
Research, however, doesn’t support the intuition.19 This is one of those rare instances in 
which simplicity seems to work as well as complexity, making one method essentially as 
valid as the other. Both methods can be helpful. The single global rating method isn’t very 
time consuming, while the summation of job facets helps managers zero in on problems 
and deal with them faster and more accurately.
Measured Job Satisfaction Levels
Are most people satisfied with their jobs? Generally, yes, to the tune of 49–69 percent of 
employees worldwide.20 Job satisfaction levels can remain quite consistent over time. For 
instance, average job satisfaction levels in the United States were consistently high from 
1972 to 2006.21 However, economic conditions tend to influence job satisfaction rates. In 
late 2007, the economic contraction precipitated a drop-off in job satisfaction; the lowest 
point was in 2010, when only 42.6 percent of U.S. workers reported satisfaction with their 
jobs.22 Thankfully, the job satisfaction rate increased to 47.7 percent in 2014,23 but the 
level was still far off the 1987 level of 61.1 percent.24 Job satisfaction rates tend to vary 
in different cultures worldwide, and of course there are always competing measurements 
that offer alternative viewpoints.
The facets of job satisfaction levels can vary widely. As shown in Exhibit 2-2, 
people have typically been more satisfied with their jobs overall, the work itself, and 
their sup­ervisors and coworkers than they have been with their pay and promotion 
opportunities.
Regarding cultural differences in job satisfaction, Exhibit 2-3 provides the results 
of a global study of job satisfaction levels of workers in 15 countries, with the highest 
levels in Mexico and Switzerland. Do employees in these cultures have better jobs? Or 
are they simply more positive (and less self-critical)? Conversely, the lowest levels in the 
study were from South Korea. Autonomy is low in South Korean culture, and businesses 
tend to be rigidly hierarchical in structure. Does this make for lower job satisfaction?25 It 
is difficult to discern all the factors influencing the scores, but exploring how businesses 
are responding to changes brought on by globalization may give us clues.
WHAT CAUSES JOB SATISFACTION?
Think about the best job you’ve ever had. What made it the best? The reasons can differ 
greatly. Let’s consider some characteristics that likely influence job satisfaction, starting 
with job conditions.

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
53
0
20
10
40
30
60
50
80
70
100
90
Work Itself
Pay
Percentage
Promotion
Supervision
Coworkers
Overall
EXHIBIT 2-2
Average Job 
Satisfaction 
Levels by Facet
5.72
5.63
5.51
5.45 5.44
5.30 5.27 5.24 5.22 5.18
4.89
4.76
4.20
Mexico
Switzerland
Norway
Denmark
United States
Japan
Germany
Sweden
Great Britain
Canada
Russia
Australia
Czech Republic
France
South Korea
4.40
4.60
4.80
5.00
5.20
5.40
5.60
5.80
6.00
5.88
5.46
5.16
EXHIBIT 2-3
Average Levels 
of Employee Job 
Satisfaction by 
Country
Source: J. H. Westo-
ver, “The Impact  
of Comparative 
State-Directed 
Development on 
Working Conditions 
and Employee Satis-
faction,” Journal  
of Management  
& Organization 19, 
no. 4 (2012),  
537–554.
Job Conditions
Generally, interesting jobs that provide training, variety, independence, and control satisfy 
most employees. Interdependence, feedback, social support, and interaction with cowork-
ers outside the workplace are also strongly related to job satisfaction, even after account-
ing for characteristics of the work itself.26 As you may have guessed, managers also play 
a big role in employees’ job satisfaction. Employees who feel empowered by their leaders 

54	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
experience higher job satisfaction, according to one study of a large Hong Kong telecom-
munications corporation.27 Research in Israel further suggested that a manager’s atten-
tiveness, responsiveness, and support increase the employee’s job satisfaction.28
Thus, job conditions—especially the intrinsic nature of the work itself, social in-
teractions, and supervision—are important predictors of job satisfaction. Although each 
is important, and although their relative value will vary across employees, the intrinsic 
nature of the work is most important.29 In other words, you have to like what you do.
Personality
As important as job conditions are to job satisfaction, personality also plays an important 
role. People who have positive core self-evaluations (CSEs; see Chapter 4 for further 
discussion)—who believe in their inner worth and basic competence—are more satisfied 
with their jobs than people with negative CSEs. Additionally, in the context of commit-
ment to one’s career, CSE influences job satisfaction. People with high levels of both 
CSE and career commitment may realize particularly high job satisfaction.30
Pay
You’ve probably noticed that pay comes up often when people discuss job satisfaction. 
Pay does correlate with job satisfaction and overall happiness for many people, but the 
effect can be smaller once an individual reaches a standard level of comfortable living. As 
a corollary, money does motivate people, as we discover in Chapter 8. But what motivates 
us is not necessarily the same as what makes us happy.
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Would you be as happy to work for an organization with a stated social welfare mission as 
you would for an organization without one? An organization’s commitment to corporate 
social responsibility (CSR), or its self-regulated actions to benefit society or the envi-
ronment beyond what is required by law, increasingly affects employee job satisfaction. 
Organizations practice CSR through environmental sustainability initiatives, nonprofit 
work, charitable giving, and other globally attuned philanthropy.
CSR is good for the planet and good for people. Employees whose personal values 
fit with the organization’s CSR mission are often more satisfied. In fact, of 59 large and 
small organizations recently surveyed, 86 percent reported they have happier employees 
as a result of their CSR programs.31
The relationship between CSR and job satisfaction is particularly strong for mil-
lennials. “The next generation of employees is seeking out employers that are focused on 
the triple bottom line: people, planet, and revenue,” said Susan Cooney, founder of phi-
lanthropy firm Givelocity.32 CSR allows workers to serve a higher purpose or contribute 
to a mission. According to researcher Amy Wrzesniewski, people who view their work as 
part of a higher purpose often realize higher job satisfaction.33 However, an organization’s 
CSR efforts must be well governed and its initiatives must be sustainable for long-term 
job satisfaction benefits.34
Although the link between CSR and job satisfaction is strengthening, not all em-
ployees find value in CSR.35 However, when managed well it can also significantly con-
tribute to increased employee job satisfaction. Therefore, organizations need to address 
Core self-evaluation 
(CSE)
Believing in one’s 
inner worth and basic 
competence.
Corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) 
An organization’s self-
regulated actions to 
benefit society or the 
environment beyond 
what is required by 
law.

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
55
a few issues in order to be most effective. First, not all projects are equally meaningful 
for every person’s job satisfaction, yet participation for all employees is sometimes ex-
pected. Second, some organizations require employees to contribute in a prescribed man-
ner. Pressuring people to go “above and beyond” in ways that are not natural for them 
can burn them out for future CSR projects36 and lower their job satisfaction, particularly 
when CSR projects provide direct benefits to the organization (such as positive press 
coverage).37 People want CSR to be genuine and authentic.
Lastly, CSR measures can seem disconnected from the employee’s actual work,38 
providing no increase to job satisfaction. In sum, CSR is a needed, positive trend of ac-
countability and serving.
OUTCOMES OF JOB SATISFACTION
Having discussed some of the causes of job satisfaction, we now turn to some specific 
outcomes.
Job Performance
As a general rule, happy workers are more likely to be productive workers. Some re-
searchers used to believe the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance 
was a myth, but a review of 300 studies suggested the correlation is quite robust.39 Indi-
viduals with higher job satisfaction perform better, and organizations with more satisfied 
employees tend to be more effective than those with fewer.
Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB)
It seems logical that job satisfaction should be a major determinant of an employee’s orga-
nizational citizenship behavior (known as OCB or citizenship behavior, see Chapter 1).40 
OCBs include people talking positively about their organizations, helping others, and 
going beyond the normal expectations of their jobs. Evidence suggests job satisfaction is 
moderately correlated with OCB; people who are more satisfied with their jobs are more 
likely to engage in citizenship behavior.41
Why does job satisfaction lead to OCB? One reason is trust. Research in 18 coun-
tries suggests that managers reciprocate employees’ OCBs with trusting behaviors of 
their own.42 Individuals who feel their coworkers support them are also more likely to 
engage in helpful behaviors than those who have antagonistic coworker relationships.43 
Personality matters, too. Individuals with certain personality traits (agreeableness and 
conscientiousness, for example; see Chapter 4) are more satisfied with their work, which 
in turn leads them to engage in more OCB.44 Finally, individuals who receive positive 
feedback on their OCBs from their peers are more likely to continue their citizenship 
activities.45
Customer Satisfaction
Because service organization managers should be concerned with pleasing customers, it’s 
reasonable to ask whether employee satisfaction is related to positive customer outcomes. 
For frontline employees who have regular customer contact, the answer is “yes.” Satisfied 
employees appear to increase customer satisfaction and loyalty.46

56	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
A number of companies are acting on this evidence. Online shoe retailer Zappos is 
so committed to finding customer service employees who are satisfied with the job that 
it offers a $2,000 bribe to quit the company after training, figuring the least satisfied will 
take the cash and go.47 Zappos employees are empowered to “create fun and a little weird-
ness” to ensure that customers are satisfied, and it works: of the company’s more than 
24 million customers, 75 percent are repeat buyers. For Zappos, employee satisfaction 
has a direct effect on customer satisfaction.
Life Satisfaction
Until now, we’ve treated job satisfaction as if it were separate from life satisfaction, but 
they may be more related than you think.48 Research in Europe indicates that job satis-
faction is positively correlated with life satisfaction, and our attitudes and experiences in 
life spill over into our job approaches and experiences.49 Furthermore, life satisfaction 
decreases when people become unemployed, according to research in Germany, and not 
just because of the loss of income.50 For most individuals, work is an important part of 
life, and therefore it makes sense that our overall happiness depends in no small part on 
our happiness in our work (our job satisfaction).
THE IMPACT OF JOB DISSATISFACTION
What happens when employees dislike their jobs? One theoretical model—the exit–
voice–loyalty–neglect framework—is helpful for understanding the consequences of dis-
satisfaction. The framework’s four responses differ along two dimensions: constructive/
destructive and active/passive. The responses are as follows:51
•	 Exit. The exit response directs behavior toward leaving the organization, including 
looking for a new position or resigning. To measure the effects of this response to 
dissatisfaction, researchers study individual terminations and collective turnover—
the total loss to the organization of employee knowledge, skills, abilities, and other 
characteristics.52
•	 Voice. The voice response includes actively and constructively attempting to im-
prove conditions, including suggesting improvements, discussing problems with 
superiors, and undertaking union activity.
•	 Loyalty. The loyalty response means passively but optimistically waiting for con-
ditions to improve, including speaking up for the organization in the face of external 
criticism and trusting the organization and its management to “do the right thing.”
•	 Neglect. The neglect response passively allows conditions to worsen and includes 
chronic absenteeism or lateness, reduced effort, and an increased error rate.
Exit and neglect behaviors are linked to performance variables such as productivity, 
absenteeism, and turnover. But this model expands employee responses to include voice 
and loyalty—constructive behaviors that allow individuals to tolerate unpleasant situa-
tions or improve working conditions. As helpful as this framework is, it’s quite general. 
We next address behavioral responses to job dissatisfaction.
Counterproductive Work Behavior (CWB)
Substance abuse, stealing at work, undue socializing, gossiping, absenteeism, and tardi-
ness are examples of behaviors that are destructive to organizations. They are indicators 
Exit 
Dissatisfaction 
expressed through 
behavior directed 
toward leaving the 
organization.
Voice 
Dissatisfaction 
expressed through 
active and constructive 
attempts to improve 
conditions.
Loyalty 
Dissatisfaction 
expressed by passively 
waiting for conditions 
to improve.
Neglect
Dissatisfaction 
expressed through 
allowing conditions to 
worsen.

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
57
of a broader syndrome called counterproductive work behavior (CWB; related terms 
are deviant behavior in the workplace, or simply withdrawal behavior; see Chapter 1).53 
Like other behaviors we have discussed, CWB doesn’t just happen—the behaviors often 
follow negative and sometimes long-standing attitudes. Therefore, if we can identify the 
predictors of CWB, we may lessen the probability of its effects.
Generally, job dissatisfaction predicts CWB. People who are not satisfied with their 
work become frustrated, which lowers their performance54 and makes them more likely 
to commit CWB.55 Other research suggests that, in addition to vocational misfit (being 
in the wrong line of work), lack of fit with the organization (working in the wrong kind 
of organizational culture; see person–organization fit, Chapter 4) predicts CWB.56 Our 
immediate social environment also matters. One German study suggests that we are in-
fluenced toward CWB by the norms of our immediate work environment, such that indi-
viduals in teams with high absenteeism are more likely to be absent themselves.57 CWB 
can, furthermore, be a response to abusive supervision from managers, which then spurs 
further abuse, starting a vicious cycle.58
One important point about CWB is that dissatisfied employees often choose one 
or more specific behaviors due to idiosyncratic factors. One worker might quit. Another 
might use work time to surf the Internet or take work supplies home for personal use. In 
short, workers who don’t like their jobs “get even” in various ways. Because those ways 
can be quite creative, controlling only one behavior with policies and punishments leaves 
the root cause untouched. Employers should seek to correct the source of the problem—
the dissatisfaction—rather than try to control the different responses.
According to U.K. research, sometimes CWB is an emotional reaction to perceived 
unfairness, a way to try to restore an employee’s sense of equity exchange.59 It therefore 
has complex ethical implications. For example, is someone who takes a box of markers 
home from the office for his children acting unethically? Some people consider this steal-
ing. Others may want to look at moderating factors such as the employee’s contribution 
to the organization before they decide. Does the person generously give extra time and 
effort to the organization, with little thanks or compensation? If so, they might see CWB 
behavior as part of an attempt to “even the score.”
As a manager, you can take steps to mitigate CWB. You can poll employee at-
titudes, for instance, and identify areas for workplace improvement. If there is no voca-
tional fit, the employee will not be fulfilled,60 so you can try to screen for that to avoid a 
mismatch. Tailoring tasks to a person’s abilities and values should increase job satisfac-
tion and reduce CWB.61 Furthermore, creating strong teams, integrating supervisors with 
them, providing formalized team policies, and introducing team-based incentives may 
help lower the CWB “contagion” that lowers the standards of the group.62
ABSENTEEISM  We find a consistent negative relationship between satisfaction and 
absenteeism, but the relationship is moderate to weak.63 Generally, when numerous 
alternative jobs are available, dissatisfied employees have high absence rates, but when 
there are few alternatives, dissatisfied employees have the same (low) rate of absence 
as satisfied employees.64 Organizations that provide liberal sick leave benefits are 
encouraging all their employees—including those who are highly satisfied—to take days 
off. You may find work satisfying yet still want to enjoy a three-day weekend if those days 
come free with no penalties.
Counterproductive 
work behavior 
(CWB)
Intentional employee 
behavior that is 
contrary to the interests 
of the organization.

58	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
TURNOVER  The relationship between job satisfaction and turnover is stronger than 
between satisfaction and absenteeism.65 Overall, a pattern of lowered job satisfaction is 
the best predictor of intent to leave. Turnover has a workplace environment connection too. 
If the climate within an employee’s immediate workplace is one of low job satisfaction 
leading to turnover, there will be a contagion effect. This suggests managers should 
consider the job satisfaction (and turnover) patterns of coworkers when assigning workers 
to a new area.66 Employees’ job embeddedness—connections to the job and community 
that result in an increased commitment to the organization—can be closely linked to 
their job satisfaction and the probability of turnover such that where job embeddedness 
is high, the probability of turnover decreases, particularly in collectivist (group-centered; 
see Chapter 3) cultures where membership in an organization is of high personal value. 
Job embeddedness also negatively predicts important employment outcomes of OCB, 
CWB, and absenteeism, and positively predicts job performance.67 Embedded employees 
thus seem more satisfied with their jobs and are less likely to want to consider alternative 
job prospects.
Lastly, the satisfaction–turnover relationship is affected by alternative job prospects. 
If an employee accepts an unsolicited job offer, job dissatisfaction was less predictive of 
turnover because the employee more likely left in response to “pull” (the lure of the other 
job) than “push” (the unattractiveness of the current job). Similarly, job dissatisfaction is 
more likely to translate into turnover when other employment opportunities are plentiful. 
Furthermore, when employees have high “human capital” (high education, high ability), 
job dissatisfaction is more likely to translate into turnover because they have, or perceive, 
many available alternatives.68
Understanding the Impact
Given the evidence we’ve just reviewed, it should come as no surprise that job satisfac-
tion can affect the bottom line. One study by a management consulting firm separated 
large organizations into those with high morale (more than 70 percent of employees ex-
pressed overall job satisfaction) and medium or low morale (fewer than 70 percent). The 
stock prices of companies in the high-morale group grew 19.4 percent, compared with 
10 percent for the medium- or low-morale group. Despite these results, many managers 
are unconcerned about employee job satisfaction. Others overestimate how satisfied em-
ployees are, so they don’t think there’s a problem when there is one. For example, in one 
study of 262 large employers, 86 percent of senior managers believed their organizations 
treated employees well, but only 55 percent of employees agreed; another study found 
55 percent of managers, compared to only 38 percent of employees, thought morale was 
good in their organization.69
Regular surveys can reduce gaps between what managers think employees feel and 
what they really feel. A gap in understanding can affect the bottom line in small franchise 
sites as well as in large companies. As manager of a KFC restaurant in Houston, Jonathan 
McDaniel surveyed his employees every three months. Results led him to make changes, 
such as giving employees greater say about which workdays they had off. McDaniel be-
lieved the process itself was valuable. “They really love giving their opinions,” he said. 
“That’s the most important part of it—that they have a voice and that they’re heard.” 
Surveys are no panacea, but if job attitudes are as important as we believe, organizations 
need to use every reasonable method find out how they can be improved.70
Job embeddedness 
The extent to which 
an employee’s 
connections to the 
job and community 
result in an increased 
commitment to the 
organization.

	
Chapter 2  •  Attitudes	
59
SUMMARY
Managers should be interested in their employees’ attitudes because attitudes influence 
behavior and indicate potential problems. Creating a satisfied workforce is hardly a guar-
antee of successful organizational performance, but evidence strongly suggests managers’ 
efforts to improve employee attitudes will likely result in positive outcomes, including 
greater organizational effectiveness, higher customer satisfaction, and increased profits.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Of the major job attitudes—job satisfaction, job involvement, organizational com-
mitment, perceived organizational support (POS), and employee engagement—
remember that an employee’s job satisfaction level is the best single predictor of 
behavior.
•	 Pay attention to your employees’ job satisfaction levels as determinants of their 
performance, turnover, absenteeism, and withdrawal behaviors.
•	 Measure employee job attitudes objectively and at regular intervals in order to 
determine how employees are reacting to their work.
•	 To raise employee satisfaction, evaluate the fit between the employee’s work in-
terests and the intrinsic parts of the job; then create work that is challenging and 
interesting to the individual.
•	 Consider the fact that high pay alone is unlikely to create a satisfying work 
environment.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Attitudes & Job 
Satisfaction.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Core Self-Evaluation (CSE) Scale
You probably have a general awareness of your CSE, or how you candidly view your 
capabilities. This PIA can provide you with further insight.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 2-1.	 Based on your own experiences, can you identify situations in which your job attitudes 
directly influenced your behavior?
	 2-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

60
Emotions
3
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Differentiate between emotions and moods.
	 2.	 Identify the sources of emotions and moods.
	 3.	 Show the impact emotional labor has on employees.
	 4.	 Describe affective events theory.
	 5.	 Describe emotional intelligence.
	 6.	 Identify strategies for emotion regulation.
	 7.	 Apply concepts about emotions and moods to specific OB issues.
WHAT ARE EMOTIONS AND MOODS?
In our analysis of the role of emotions and moods in the workplace, we need three terms 
that are closely intertwined: affect, emotions, and moods. Affect is a generic term that 
covers a broad range of feelings, including both emotions and moods.1 Emotions are 
intense feelings directed at someone or something.2 Moods are less intense feelings than 
emotions and often arise without a specific event acting as a stimulus.3 Exhibit 3-1 shows 
the relationships among affect, emotions, and moods.
First, as the exhibit shows, affect is a broad term that encompasses emotions and 
moods. Second, there are differences between emotions and moods. Emotions are more 
Affect
A broad range of 
feelings that people 
experience.
Emotions 
Intense feelings 
that are directed at 
someone or something.
Moods 
Feelings that tend to 
be less intense than 
emotions and that lack 
a contextual stimulus.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
61
likely to be caused by a specific event and are more fleeting than moods. Also, some 
researchers speculate that emotions may be more action-oriented—they may lead us to 
some immediate action—while moods may be more cognitive, meaning they may cause 
us to think or brood for a while.4
Affect, emotions, and moods are separable in theory; in practice, the distinction 
isn’t always defined. When we review the OB topics on emotions and moods, you may 
see more information about emotions in one area and more about moods in another. This 
is simply the state of the research. Let’s start with a review of the basic emotions.
The Basic Emotions
How many emotions are there? There are dozens, including anger, contempt, enthusi-
asm, envy, fear, frustration, disappointment, embarrassment, disgust, happiness, hate, 
hope, jealousy, joy, love, pride, surprise, and sadness. Numerous researchers have tried to 
limit them to a fundamental set.5 Other scholars argue that it makes no sense to think in 
terms of “basic” emotions, because even emotions we rarely experience, such as shock, 
can have a powerful effect on us.6 It’s unlikely psychologists or philosophers will ever 
completely agree on a set of basic emotions, or even on whether there is such a thing. 
Still, many researchers agree on six universal emotions—anger, fear, sadness, happiness, 
disgust, and surprise. We sometimes mistake happiness for surprise, but rarely do we 
confuse happiness and disgust.
Psychologists have tried to identify basic emotions by studying how we express 
them. Of our myriad ways of expressing emotions, facial expressions have proved one 
of the most difficult to interpret.7 One problem is that some emotions are too complex 
to be easily represented on our faces. Second, people may not interpret emotions from 
vocalizations (such as sighs or screams) the same way across cultures. One study found 
that while vocalizations conveyed meaning in all cultures, the specific emotions people 
Emotions
• Caused by speciﬁc event
• Very brief in duration (seconds
   or minutes)
• Speciﬁc and numerous in nature
   (many speciﬁc emotions such as
   anger, fear, sadness, happiness,
   disgust, surprise)
• Usually accompanied by distinct
   facial expressions
• Action oriented in nature
Moods
• Cause is often general and unclear
• Last longer than emotions (hours
   or days)
• More general (two main dimensions—
   positive affect and negative affect—
   that are composed of multiple speciﬁc
   emotions)
• Generally not indicated by distinct
   expressions
• Cognitive in nature
Affect
Deﬁned as a broad range of feelings that people experience.
Affect can be experienced in the form of emotions or moods.
EXHIBIT 3-1 
Affect, Emotions, 
and Moods

62	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
perceived varied. For example, Himba participants (from northwestern Namibia) did 
not agree with Western participants that crying meant sadness or a growl meant anger.8 
Lastly, cultures have norms that govern emotional expression, so the way we experience 
an emotion isn’t always the same as the way we show it. For example, people in the 
Middle East and the United States recognize a smile as indicating happiness, but in the 
Middle East, a smile is also often interpreted as a sign of sexual attraction, so women have 
learned not to smile at men.
Cultural differences regarding emotions can be apparent between countries that 
are individualistic and collectivistic—broad terms that describe the general outlook of 
people in a society. Individualistic countries are those in which people see themselves 
as independent and desire personal goals and personal control. Individualistic values are 
present in North America and Western Europe, for example. Collectivistic countries are 
those in which people see themselves as interdependent and seek community and group 
goals. Collectivistic values are found in Asia, Africa, and South America, for example.9 
For this application, we find that in collectivist countries, people are more likely to believe 
another’s emotional displays are connected to their personal relationship, while people 
in individualistic cultures don’t think others’ emotional expressions are directed at them.
Moral Emotions
Researchers have been studying what are called moral emotions; that is, emotions that 
have moral implications because of our instant judgment of the situation that evokes 
them. Examples of moral emotions include sympathy for the suffering of others, guilt 
about our own immoral behavior, anger about injustice done to others, and contempt for 
those who behave unethically.
Another example is the disgust we feel about violations of moral norms, called 
moral disgust. Moral disgust is different from disgust. Say you stepped in cow dung by 
mistake—you might feel disgusted by it, but not moral disgust—you probably wouldn’t 
make a moral judgment. In contrast, say you watched a video of a police officer making 
a sexist or racist slur. You might feel disgusted in a different way because it offends your 
sense of right and wrong. In fact, you might feel a variety of emotions based on your 
moral judgment of the situation.10
The Basic Moods: Positive and Negative Affect
Emotions can be fleeting, but moods can endure... for quite a while. As a first step 
toward studying the effect of moods and emotions in the workplace, we classify emo-
tions into two categories: positive and negative. Positive emotions—such as joy and 
gratitude—express a favorable evaluation or feeling. Negative emotions—such as anger 
and guilt—express the opposite. Keep in mind that emotions can’t be neutral. Being 
neutral is being nonemotional.11
The two categories of emotions represent overall mood states, known as positive 
and negative affect (see Exhibit 3-2). We can think of positive affect as a mood dimension 
consisting of positive emotions such as excitement, enthusiasm, and elation at the high 
end (high positive affect) and boredom, depression, and fatigue at the low end (low posi-
tive affect, or lack of positive affect). Negative affect is a mood dimension consisting of 
nervousness, stress, and anxiety at the high end (high negative affect) and contentedness, 
calmness, and serenity at the low end (low negative affect, or lack of negative affect). 
Individualistic 
Countries/cultures 
in which people 
see themselves as 
independent and 
desire personal goals 
and personal control. 
Individualistic values 
are present in North 
America and Western 
Europe, for example.
Collectivistic 
Cultural difference 
regarding emotions can 
be apparent between 
countries that are 
individualistic and 
collectivistic—broad 
terms that describe 
the general outlook 
of people in a society 
(which are discussed in 
greater detail in the next 
chapter, Chapter 5).
Moral emotions 
Emotions that have 
moral implications 
because of our instant 
judgment of the 
situation that evokes 
them.
Positive affect
A mood dimension 
that consists of specific 
positive emotions 
such as excitement, 
self-assurance, and 
cheerfulness at the 
high end and boredom, 
sluggishness, and 
tiredness at the low end.
Negative affect 
A mood dimension that 
consists of emotions 
such as nervousness, 
stress, and anxiety at the 
high end and relaxation, 
tranquility, and poise at 
the low end.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
63
While we rarely experience both positive and negative affect at the same time, over time 
people do differ in how much they experience of each. Some people (we might call them 
emotional or intense) may experience quite a bit of high positive and high negative affect 
over, say, a week’s time. Others (we might call them unemotional or phlegmatic) experi-
ence little of either. And still others may experience one much more predominately than 
the other.
Experiencing Moods and Emotions
As if it weren’t complex enough to consider the many distinct emotions and moods a 
person might identify, the reality is that we each experience moods and emotions differ-
ently. For most people, positive moods are somewhat more common than negative moods. 
Indeed, research finds a positivity offset, meaning that at zero input (when nothing in 
particular is going on), most individuals experience a mildly positive mood.12 This ap-
pears to be true for employees in a wide range of job settings. For example, one study 
of customer-service representatives in a British call center revealed that people reported 
experiencing positive moods 58 percent of the time, despite the stressful environment.13 
Another research finding is that negative emotions lead to negative moods.
There is much to be learned in exploring cultural differences. Some cultures em-
brace negative emotions, such as Japan and Russia, while others emphasize positive emo-
tions and expressions, such as Mexico and Brazil.14 There may also be a difference in 
the value of negative emotions between collectivist and individualist countries, and this 
difference may be the reason negative emotions are less detrimental to the health of Japa-
nese than Americans.15 For example, the Chinese consider negative emotions—while not 
always pleasant—as potentially more useful and constructive than do Americans.
The Function of Emotions
Emotions may be a mystery, but they can be critical to an effectively functioning 
workplace. For example, employees with more positive emotions demonstrate higher 
Positivity offset 
The tendency of 
most individuals to 
experience a mildly 
positive mood at zero 
input (when nothing in 
particular is going on).
High Negative
Affect
Low Positive
Affect
High Positive
Affect
Low Negative
Affect
Tense
Alert
Excited
Elated
Happy
Content
Serene
Relaxed
Calm
Fatigued
Bored
Depressed
Sad
Upset
Stressed
Nervous
EXHIBIT 3-2 
The Affective 
Circumplex

64	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
performance and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB; see Chapter 1), less turnover 
and counterproductive work behavior (CWB; see Chapter 2), particularly when they feel 
supported by their organizations in their effort to do well in their jobs.16 Gratefulness 
and awe have also been shown to positively predict OCB,17 which in turn increases trust 
and emotional expressions of concern.18 Let’s discuss two critical areas—rationality and 
ethicality—in which emotions can enhance performance.
DO EMOTIONS MAKE US IRRATIONAL?  How often have you heard someone say, 
“Oh, you’re just being emotional?” You might have been offended. Observations like 
this suggest that rationality and emotion are in conflict, and by exhibiting emotion, you 
are acting irrationally. The perceived association between the two is so strong that some 
researchers argue displaying emotions such as sadness to the point of crying is so toxic 
to a career that we should leave the room rather than allow others to witness it.19 This 
perspective suggests the demonstration or even experience of emotions can make us seem 
weak, brittle, or irrational. However, this is wrong.
Research increasingly indicates that emotions are critical to rational thinking. Brain 
injury studies in particular suggest we must have the ability to experience emotions to be 
rational. Why? Because our emotions provide a context for how we understand the world 
around us. For instance, a recent study indicated that individuals in a negative mood are 
better able to discern truthful information than people in a happy mood.20 Therefore, if 
we have a concern about someone telling the truth, shouldn’t we conduct an inquiry while 
we are actively concerned, rather than wait until we cheer up? There may be benefits to 
this, or maybe not, depending on all the factors including the range of our emotions. The 
keys are to acknowledge the effect that emotions and moods are having on us, and to not 
discount our emotional responses as irrational or invalid.
DO EMOTIONS MAKE US ETHICAL?  A growing body of research has begun to examine 
the relationship between emotions and moral attitudes.21 It was previously believed that, 
like decision making in general, most ethical decision making was based on higher-
order cognitive processes, but the research on moral emotions increasingly questions this 
perspective. Numerous studies suggest that moral judgments are largely based on feelings 
rather than on cognition, even though we tend to see our moral boundaries as logical and 
reasonable, not as emotional.
To some degree, our beliefs are shaped by our peer, interest, and work groups which 
influence our perceptions of others, resulting in unconscious responses and a feeling that 
our shared emotions are “right.” Unfortunately, this feeling sometimes allows us to justify 
purely emotional reactions as rationally “ethical.”22 We also tend to judge out-group mem-
bers (anyone who is not in our group) more harshly for moral transgressions than in-group 
members, even when we are trying to be objective.23 In addition, perhaps to restore an emo-
tional sense of fair play, we are likely to spitefully want outgroup members to be punished.24
SOURCES OF EMOTIONS AND MOODS
Have you ever said, “I got up on the wrong side of the bed today.” Have you ever snapped 
at a coworker or family member for no reason? If you have, you probably wonder where 
those emotions and moods originated. Here we discuss some of the most commonly ac-
cepted influences.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
65
Personality
Moods and emotions have a personality trait component, meaning that some people have 
built-in, natural tendencies to experience certain moods and emotions more frequently 
than others do. People also experience the same emotions with different intensities; the 
degree to which they experience them is called their affect intensity.25 Affectively in-
tense people experience both positive and negative emotions deeply: when they’re sad, 
they’re really sad, and when they’re happy, they’re really happy.
Time of Day
Moods vary by the time of day. A fascinating study assessed patterns by analyzing mil-
lions of Twitter messages from across the globe.26 The researchers noted the presence of 
words connoting positive affect (happy, enthused, excited) and negative affect (sad, angry, 
anxious). You can see the trends they observed in the positive affect part of Exhibit 3-3. 
Daily fluctuations in mood followed a similar pattern in most countries. These results 
are comparable to previous research. A major difference, though, happens in the evening. 
Whereas most research suggests that positive affect tends to drop after 7 p.m., this study 
suggests that it increases before the midnight decline. We have to wait for further research 
to see which description is accurate. The negative affect trends in this study were more 
consistent with past research, showing that negative affect is lowest in the morning and 
tends to increase over the course of the day and evening.
Day of the Week
Are people in their best moods on the weekends? In most cultures that is true—for ex-
ample, U.S. adults tend to experience their highest positive affect on Friday, Saturday, and 
Sunday, and their lowest on Monday.27 As shown in Exhibit 3-3, again based on the study 
of Twitter messages, that tends to be true in several other cultures as well. For Germans 
and Chinese, positive affect is highest from Friday to Sunday and lowest on Monday. 
This isn’t the case in all cultures, however. As the exhibit shows, in Japan positive affect 
is higher on Monday than on either Friday or Saturday.
As for negative affect, Monday is the highest negative-affect day across most cul-
tures. However, in some countries, negative affect is lower on Friday and Saturday than 
on Sunday. It may be that while Sunday is enjoyable as a day off (and thus we have higher 
positive affect), we also get a bit stressed about the week ahead (which is why negative 
affect is higher).
Weather
When do you think you would be in a better mood—when it’s 70 degrees and sunny, 
or on a gloomy, cold, rainy day? Many people believe their mood is tied to the weather. 
However, a fairly large and detailed body of evidence suggests weather has little effect on 
mood, at least for most people.28 Illusory correlation, which occurs when we associate 
two events that in reality have no connection, explains why people tend to think weather 
influences them. For example, employees may be more productive on bad weather days, 
a study in Japan and the United States recently indicated, but not because of mood—
instead, the worse weather removed some work distractions.29
Affect intensity 
Individual differences 
in the strength with 
which individuals 
experience their 
emotions.
Illusory correlation 
The tendency of people 
to associate two events 
when in reality there is 
no connection.

Level of Positive Affect
Time-of-Day
SAT
MON
THR
12AM
1AM
2AM
3AM
4AM
5AM
6AM
7AM
8AM
9AM
10AM
11AM
12PM
1PM
2PM
3PM
4PM
5PM
6PM
7PM
8PM
9PM
10PM
11PM
SAT
MON
THU
12AM
1AM
2AM
3AM
4AM
5AM
6AM
7AM
8AM
9AM
10AM
11AM
12PM
1PM
2PM
3PM
4PM
5PM
6PM
7PM
8PM
9PM
10PM
11PM
Level of Negative Affect
Time-of-Day
EXHIBIT 3-3 
Time-of-Day Effects on Mood of U.S. Adults as Rated from Twitter Postings
Sources: Based on S. A. Golder and M. W. Macy, “Diurnal and Seasonal Mood Vary with Work, Sleep, and Daylength 
Across Diverse Cultures,” Science 333 (2011), 1878–1881; A. Elejalde-Ruiz, “Seize the day,” Chicago Tribune 
(September 5, 2012), downloaded June 20, 2013 from http://articles.chicagotribune.com/.
Note: Based on analysis of U.S. Twitter postings and coding of words that represent positive feelings (delight, enthusi-
asm) and negative feelings (fear, guilt). Lines represent percent of total words in Twitter post that convey these moods.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
67
Stress
As you might imagine, stressful events at work (a nasty e-mail, impending deadline, loss 
of a big sale, reprimand from the boss, etc.) can negatively affect moods. The effects of 
stress also build over time. As the authors of one study noted, “A constant diet of even 
low-level stressful events has the potential to cause workers to experience gradually 
increasing levels of strain over time.”30 Mounting levels of stress can worsen our moods, 
as we experience more negative emotions. Although sometimes we thrive on it, most 
of us find stress usually takes a toll on our mood. In fact, when situations are overly 
emotionally charged and stressful, we have a natural response to disengage, to literally 
look away.31
Sleep
U.S. adults report sleeping less than adults did a generation ago.32 According to research-
ers and public health specialists, 41 million U.S. workers sleep less than six hours per 
night and suffer from sleep deprivation. Sleep quality affects moods and decision making, 
and increased fatigue puts workers at risk of disease, injury, and depression.33 Poor or re-
duced sleep also makes it difficult to control emotions. Even one bad night’s sleep makes 
us more angry and risk-prone.34 Poor sleep impairs job satisfaction35 and makes us less 
able to make ethical judgments.36 On the positive side, increased regular sleep enhances 
creativity, performance, and career success.
Exercise
You often hear that people should exercise to improve their mood. Does “sweat therapy” 
really work? It appears so. Research consistently shows exercise enhances people’s posi-
tive moods.37 While not terribly strong overall, the effects are strongest for those who are 
depressed.
Age
Do young people experience more extreme positive emotions (so-called youthful exuber-
ance) than older people? Surprisingly, no. What about age and satisfaction? Regarding 
life satisfaction, there is a cultural assumption that older people are more prone to depres-
sion and loneliness. Actually, a study of adults ages 18 to 94 found that positive moods 
increased with age. “Contrary to the popular view that youth is the best time of life, the 
peak of emotional life may not occur until well into the seventh decade,” researcher Laura 
Carstensen said.38
Sex
Many people believe women are more emotional than men. Is there any truth to this? 
Evidence does confirm women experience emotions more intensely, tend to “hold onto” 
emotions longer than men, and display more frequent expressions of both positive and 
negative emotions, except anger.39 One study of participants from 37 different coun-
tries found that men consistently reported higher levels of powerful emotions like anger, 
whereas women reported more powerless emotions like sadness and fear. Thus, there are 
some sex differences in the experience and expression of emotions.40

68	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Let’s put together what we’ve learned about emotions and moods with workplace 
coping strategies, beginning with emotional labor.
EMOTIONAL LABOR
Employees expend physical and mental labor by putting body and mind, respectively, 
into their jobs. But jobs also require emotional labor, an employee’s expression of 
organizationally desired emotions during interpersonal transactions at work. Emotional 
labor is a key component of effective job performance. We expect flight attendants to 
be cheerful, funeral directors to be sad, and doctors to be emotionally neutral. At the 
least, your managers expect you to be courteous, not hostile, in your interactions with 
coworkers.
Controlling Emotional Displays
The way we experience an emotion is obviously not always the same as the way we 
show it. To analyze emotional labor, we divide emotions into felt or displayed emotions.41 
Felt emotions are our actual emotions. In contrast, displayed emotions are those the 
organization requires workers to show and considers appropriate in a given job. They’re 
not innate; they’re learned, and they may or may not coincide with felt emotions. For 
instance, research suggests that in U.S. workplaces, it is expected that employees should 
typically display positive emotions like happiness and excitement, and suppress negative 
emotions like fear, anger, disgust, and contempt.42
Displaying fake emotions requires us to suppress real ones. Surface acting is hid-
ing inner feelings and emotional expressions in response to display rules. Surface acting 
is literally “putting on a face” of appropriate response to a given situation, like smiling 
at a customer when you don’t feel like it. Surface acting on a daily basis can also lead to 
emotional exhaustion at home, work-family conflict, and insomnia.43 In the workplace, 
daily surface acting leads to exhaustion, fewer OCBs,44 increased stress, and decreased 
job satisfaction.45 Perhaps due to the costs of creatively expressing what we don’t feel, 
individuals who vary their surface-acting responses may have lower job satisfaction and 
higher levels of work withdrawal than those who consistently give the same responses.46 
Employees who engage in surface displays should be given a chance to relax and recharge. 
For example, a study that looked at how cheerleading instructors spent their breaks from 
teaching found those who used the time to rest and relax were more effective after their 
breaks than those who did chores during their breaks.47
Deep acting is trying to modify our true inner feelings based on display rules. 
Surface acting deals with displayed emotions, and deep acting deals with felt emotions. 
Deep acting is less psychologically costly than surface acting because we are actu-
ally trying to experience the emotion, so we experience less emotional exhaustion. In 
the workplace, deep acting can have a positive impact. For example, one study in the 
Netherlands and Germany found that individuals in service jobs earned significantly 
more direct pay (tips) after they received training in deep acting.48 Deep acting has a 
positive relationship with job satisfaction and job performance.49 Employees who can 
depersonalize or standardize their work interactions that require emotional labor may 
be able to successfully carry on their acting while thinking of other tasks, thus bypass-
ing the emotional impact.50
Emotional labor
A situation in which 
an employee expresses 
organizationally 
desired emotions 
during interpersonal 
transactions at work.
Felt emotions 
An individual’s actual 
emotions.
Displayed emotions 
Emotions that are 
organizationally 
required and 
considered appropriate 
in a given job.
Surface acting 
Hiding one’s inner 
feelings and forgoing 
emotional expressions 
in response to display 
rules.
Deep acting 
Trying to modify one’s 
true inner feelings 
based on display rules.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
69
Emotional Dissonance and Mindfulness
When employees have to project one emotion while feeling another, this disparity is 
called emotional dissonance. Bottled-up feelings of frustration, anger, and resentment 
can lead to emotional exhaustion. Long-term emotional dissonance is a predictor for job 
burnout, declines in job performance, and lower job satisfaction.51
It is important to counteract the effects of emotional labor and emotional dissonance. 
Research in the Netherlands and Belgium indicates that while surface acting was stressful 
to employees, mindfulness—objectively and deliberately evaluating our emotional situa-
tion in the moment—was negatively correlated with emotional exhaustion and positively 
affected job satisfaction.52 When people become non-judgmentally aware of the emotions 
they are experiencing, they are better able to look at situations more clearly. Mindfulness 
has been shown to increase the ability to shape our behavioral responses to emotions.53
The concepts within emotional labor make intuitive and organizational sense. Af-
fective events theory, discussed next, fits a job’s emotional labor requirements into a 
construct with implications for work events, emotional reactions, job satisfaction, and job 
performance.
AFFECTIVE EVENTS THEORY
We’ve seen that emotions and moods are an important part of our personal and work 
lives. But how do they influence our job performance and satisfaction? Affective events 
theory (AET) proposes that employees react emotionally to things that happen to them 
at work, and this reaction influences their job performance and satisfaction.54 Say you 
just found out your company is downsizing. You might experience a variety of negative 
emotions, causing you to worry that you’ll lose your job. Because it is out of your hands, 
you may feel insecure and fearful, and spend much of your time worrying rather than 
working. Needless to say, your job satisfaction will also be down.
Work events trigger positive or negative emotional reactions, to which employees’ 
personalities and moods predispose them to respond with greater or lesser intensity.55 Peo-
ple who score low on emotional stability (see Chapter 4) are more likely to react strongly to 
negative events, and an emotional response to a given event can depend on mood. Finally, 
emotions influence a number of performance and satisfaction variables, such as OCB, 
organizational commitment, level of effort, intention to quit, and workplace deviance.
In sum, AET offers two important messages.56 First, emotions provide valuable in-
sights into how workplace events influence employee performance and satisfaction. Sec-
ond, employees and managers shouldn’t ignore emotions or the events that cause them, 
even when they appear minor, because they accumulate. The AET framework highlights 
the emotionality of the workplace and its real outcomes. Emotional intelligence is another 
framework that may help us understand the impact of emotions on job performance, so 
we look at that next.
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
As the CEO of an international talent company, Terrie Upshur-Lupberger was at a career 
pinnacle. So why was she resentful and unhappy? A close friend observed, “Terrie, you 
were out on the skinny branch—you know, the one that breaks easily in a strong wind. You 
Emotional dissonance 
Inconsistencies 
between the emotions 
people feel and the 
emotions they project.
Mindfulness 
Objectively and 
deliberately evaluating 
the emotional situation 
in the moment.
Affective events 
theory (AET) 
A model that suggests 
that workplace events 
cause emotional 
reactions on the 
part of employees, 
which then influence 
workplace attitudes 
and behaviors.

70	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
were so busy and overwhelmed and out of touch with your own values, cares, and guiding 
beliefs that you failed to pay attention to the branch that was about to break.”57 According 
to Upshur-Lupberger, she had failed to notice that her moods constantly swung toward 
frustration and exhaustion. Her job satisfaction, productivity, relationships, and results 
suffered. Worst, she was too busy to realize the deficiencies until she was completely 
depleted. She said, “I learned that, as a leader, you either pay attention to and manage 
the moods (including your own) in the organization, or . . . . you ignore them and pay the 
price.”58 Upshur-Lupberger learned the value of emotional intelligence.
Emotional intelligence (EI) is a person’s ability to: (1) perceive emotions in him 
or herself and others; (2) understand the meaning of these emotions; and (3) regulate his 
or her own emotions accordingly, as shown in Exhibit 3-4. People who know their own 
emotions and are good at reading emotional cues—for instance, knowing why they’re 
angry and how to express themselves without violating norms—are most likely to have 
high EI.59
Several studies suggest EI plays an important role in job performance. One study 
that used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technology found that executive 
MBA students who performed best on a strategic decision-making task were more likely 
to incorporate emotion centers of the brain into their choice processes.60 One simulation 
study showed that students who were good at identifying and distinguishing among their 
own feelings were able to make more profitable investment decisions.61
Although organizational behavior (OB) is progressing in its understanding of EI, 
and several studies suggest it plays an important role in job performance, many questions 
remain unanswered. One relates to proving what EI may predict. For example, while 
evidence indicates that EI correlates with job performance, the correlation isn’t high and 
is explained to a large degree by traits such as emotional stability. A second question is 
about the reliability of EI testing. For example, part of the reason EI has only a modest 
correlation with job effectiveness is that it is hard to measure—mostly it is measured with 
self-report inventories, which of course are often far from objective!
All questions aside, EI is wildly popular among consulting firms and in the pop-
ular press, and it has accumulated some support in the research literature. Love it or 
hate it, one thing is for sure—EI is here to stay. So might be our next topic—emotion 
regulation—an independent concept from emotional labor and emotional intelligence, 
although they are related.62
Emotional 
intelligence (EI) 
The ability to detect 
and to manage 
emotional cues and 
information.
Perceive Emotions in Self
and Others
Understand the Meaning of
Emotions
Regulate Emotions
Conscientiousness
Cognitive
Emotional Stability
EXHIBIT 3-4 
A Cascading 
Model of 
Emotional 
Intelligence

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
71
EMOTION REGULATION
Have you ever tried to cheer yourself up when you’re feeling down, or calm yourself 
when you’re feeling angry? If so, you have engaged in emotion regulation. The central 
idea behind emotion regulation is to identify and modify the emotions you feel. Recent 
research suggests that emotion management ability is a strong predictor of task perfor-
mance for some jobs and for OCB.63 Therefore, in our study of OB, we are interested 
in whether and how emotion regulation should be used in the workplace. We begin by 
identifying which individuals might naturally employ it.
Emotion Regulation Influences and Outcomes
As you might suspect, not everyone is equally good at regulating emotions. Individuals 
who are higher in the personality trait of neuroticism (see Chapter 4) have more trouble 
doing so and often find their moods are beyond their ability to control. Individuals who 
have lower levels of self-esteem are also less likely to try to improve their sad moods, per-
haps because they are less likely than others to feel they deserve to be in a good mood.64
The workplace environment has an effect on an individual’s tendency to employ 
emotion regulation. In general, diversity in work groups increases the likelihood that you 
will regulate your emotions. For example, younger employees are likely to regulate their 
emotions when their work groups include older members.65 Racial diversity also has an 
effect: if diversity is low, the minority may engage in emotion regulation, perhaps to “fit 
in” with the majority race as much as possible; if diversity is high and many different 
races are represented, the majority race will employ emotion regulation, perhaps to in-
tegrate themselves with the whole group.66 These findings suggest a beneficial outcome 
of diversity—it may cause us to regulate our emotions more consciously and effectively.
While regulating your emotions might seem beneficial, research suggests there is a 
downside to trying to change the way you feel. Changing your emotions takes effort, and 
as we noted when discussing emotional labor, this effort can be exhausting. Sometimes 
attempts to change an emotion actually make the emotion stronger; for example, trying 
to talk yourself out of being afraid can make you focus more on what scares you, which 
makes you more afraid.67 From another perspective, research suggests that avoiding nega-
tive emotional experiences is less likely to lead to positive moods than does seeking out 
positive emotional experiences.68 For example, you’re more likely to experience a posi-
tive mood if you have a pleasant conversation with a friend than if you avoid an unpleas-
ant conversation with a hostile coworker.
Emotion Regulation Techniques
Researchers of emotion regulation often study the strategies people employ to change 
their emotions. One related technique of emotion regulation is emotional suppression, lit-
erally suppressing—blocking or ignoring—initial emotional responses to situations. This 
response seems to facilitate practical thinking in the short term. However, it appears to be 
helpful only when a strongly negative event would elicit a distressed emotional reaction 
in a crisis situation.69 For example, a portfolio manager might suppress an emotional reac-
tion to a sudden drop in the value of a stock and therefore be able to clearly decide how to 
plan. Suppression used in crisis situations appears to help an individual recover from the 
event emotionally, while suppression used as an everyday emotion regulation technique 
can take a toll on mental ability, emotional ability, health, and relationships.70
Emotion regulation 
The process of 
identifying and 
modifying felt 
emotions.

72	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
While emotion regulation techniques can help us cope with difficult workplace situ-
ations, research indicates that the effect varies. For example, one study in Taiwan found 
that all participants who worked for abusive supervisors reported emotional exhaustion 
and work withdrawal tendencies, but to different degrees based on the emotion regula-
tion strategies they employed. Thus, while there is much promise in emotion regulation 
techniques, the best route to a positive workplace is to recruit positive-minded individuals 
and train leaders to manage their moods, job attitudes, and performance.71 The best lead-
ers manage emotions as much as they do tasks and activities. The best employees can use 
their knowledge of emotion regulation to decide when to speak up and how to express 
themselves effectively.72
Ethics of Emotion Regulation
Emotion regulation has important ethical implications. On one end of the continuum, 
some people might argue that controlling your emotions is unethical because it requires 
a degree of acting. On the other end, people might argue that all emotions should be con-
trolled so you can take a dispassionate perspective. Both arguments—and all arguments 
in between—have ethical pros and cons you will have to decide for yourself. Consider 
the reasons for emotion regulation and the outcomes. Are you regulating your emotions 
so you don’t react inappropriately, or are you regulating your emotions so no one knows 
what you are thinking? Finally, consider this: you may be able to “fake it ’til you make 
it.” Acting like you are in a good mood might put you in a good mood. In one study, a 
group of participants was asked to hold only a conversation with a barista serving them 
at Starbucks, while another group was asked to act happy. The happy actors reported later 
that they were in much better moods.73
Now that we have studied the role of emotions and moods in OB, let’s consider the 
opportunities for more specific applications that our understanding provides.
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled East Haven Fire Department: 
Emotions and Moods.
OB APPLICATIONS OF EMOTIONS AND MOODS
Our understanding of emotions and moods can affect many aspects of OB. Let’s think 
through some of them.
Selection
One implication from the evidence on EI is that employers should consider it a factor in 
hiring employees, especially for jobs that demand a high degree of social interaction. In 
fact, more employers are starting to use EI measures to hire people. For example, a study 
of U.S. Air Force recruiters showed that top-performing recruiters exhibited high levels 
of EI. Using these findings, the Air Force revamped its selection criteria. A follow-up 
investigation found hires who had high EI scores became 2.6 times more successful than 
those with lower scores.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
73
Decision Making
Moods and emotions have effects on decision making that managers should under-
stand. Positive emotions and moods seem to help people make sound decisions. 
Positive emotions also enhance problem-solving skills, so positive people find better 
solutions.74
OB researchers continue to debate the role of negative emotions and moods in deci-
sion making. One recent study suggested that people who are saddened by events may 
make the same decisions as they would have, absent those events, while people who are 
angered by events might make stronger (though not necessarily better) choices.75 Another 
study found that participants made choices reflecting more original thinking when in a 
negative mood.76 Still other research indicated that individuals in a negative mood may 
take higher risks than when in a positive mood.77 Taken together, these and other studies 
suggest negative (and positive) emotions impact decision making, but that there are other 
variables which require further research.78
Creativity
As we see throughout this text, one goal of leadership is to maximize employee productiv-
ity through creativity. Creativity is influenced by emotions and moods, but there are two 
schools of thought on the relationship. Much research suggests that people in good moods 
tend to be more creative than people in bad moods.79 People in good moods produce more 
ideas and more options, and others find their ideas original.80 It seems that people expe-
riencing positive moods or emotions are more flexible and open in their thinking, which 
may explain why they’re more creative.81 All the activating moods, whether positive or 
negative, seem to lead to more creativity, whereas deactivating moods lead to less.82 For 
example, we discussed earlier that other factors such as fatigue may boost creativity. 
A study of 428 students found they performed best on a creative problem-solving task 
when they were fatigued, suggesting that tiredness may free the mind to consider novel 
solutions.83
Motivation
Several studies have highlighted the importance of moods and emotions on motivation. 
Giving people performance feedback—whether real or fake—influences their mood, 
which then influences their motivation.84 For example, one study looked at the moods of 
insurance sales agents in Taiwan.85 Agents in a good mood were found to be more help-
ful toward their coworkers and also felt better about themselves. These factors in turn 
led to superior performance in the form of higher sales and better supervisor reports of 
performance.
Leadership
Research indicates that putting people in a good mood makes good sense. Leaders who 
focus on inspirational goals generate greater optimism, cooperation, and enthusiasm in 
employees, leading to more positive social interactions with coworkers and customers.86 
A study with Taiwanese military participants indicated that by sharing emotions, trans-
formational leaders inspire positive emotions in their followers that lead to higher task 
performance.87

74	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Leaders are perceived as more effective when they share positive emotions, and 
followers are more creative in a positive emotional environment. What about when lead-
ers are sad? Research found that leader displays of sadness increased the analytic perfor-
mance of followers, perhaps because followers attended more closely to tasks to help the 
leaders.88
Customer Service
Workers’ emotional states influence the level of customer service they give, which in turn 
influences levels of repeat business and customer satisfaction.89 This result is primarily 
due to emotional contagion—the “catching” of emotions from others.90 When someone 
experiences positive emotions and laughs and smiles at you, you tend to respond posi-
tively. Of course, the opposite is true as well.
Studies indicate a matching effect between employee and customer emotions. In 
the employee-to-customer direction, research finds that customers who catch the positive 
moods or emotions of employees shop longer. In the other direction, when an employee 
feels unfairly treated by a customer, it’s harder for the employee to display the positive 
emotions the organization expects.91 High-quality customer service places demands on 
employees because it often puts them in a state of emotional dissonance, which can be 
damaging to the employee and the organization. Managers can interrupt negative conta-
gion by fostering positive moods.
Job Attitudes
Ever hear the advice “Never take your work home with you,” meaning you should forget 
about work once you go home? That’s easier said than done. The good news is that it ap-
pears a positive mood at work can spill over to your off-work hours, and a negative mood 
at work can be restored to a positive mood after a break. Several studies have shown 
people who had a good day at work tend to be in a better mood at home that evening, 
and vice versa. Other research has found that although people do emotionally take their 
work home with them, by the next day the effect is usually gone.92 The bad news is that 
the moods of the people in your household may affect yours. As you might expect, one 
study found if one member of a couple was in a negative mood during the workday, the 
negative mood spilled over to the spouse at night.93 The relationship between moods and 
job attitudes is reciprocal—the way our workday goes colors our moods, but our moods 
also affect the way we see our jobs.
Deviant Workplace Behaviors
Anyone who has spent much time in an organization realizes people can behave in ways 
that violate established norms and threaten the organization, its members, or both.94 These 
counterproductive work behaviors (CWBs; see Chapter 2) can be traced to negative emo-
tions and can take many forms. People who feel negative emotions are more likely than 
others to engage in short-term deviant behavior at work, such as gossiping or surfing the 
Internet,95 though negative emotions can also lead to more serious forms of CWB.
For instance, envy is an emotion that occurs when you resent someone for hav-
ing something you don’t have but strongly desire—such as a better work assignment, 
larger office, or higher salary. It can lead to malicious deviant behaviors. An envious 
Emotional contagion 
The process by which 
people’s emotions are 
caused by the emotions 
of others.

	
Chapter 3  •  Emotions	
75
employee could undermine other employees and take all the credit for things others 
accomplished. Angry people look for other people to blame for their bad mood, inter-
pret other people’s behavior as hostile, and have trouble considering others’ points of 
view.96 It’s not hard to see how these thought processes can lead directly to verbal or 
physical aggression.
One study in Pakistan found that anger correlated with more aggressive CWBs such 
as abuse against others and production deviance, while sadness did not. Interestingly, 
neither anger nor sadness predicted workplace deviance, which suggests that managers 
need to take employee expressions of anger seriously; employees may stay with an or-
ganization and continue to act aggressively toward others.97 Once aggression starts, it’s 
likely that other people will become angry and aggressive, so the stage is set for a serious 
escalation of negative behavior. Managers therefore need to stay connected with their 
employees to gauge emotions and emotional intensity levels.
Safety and Injury at Work
Research relating negative affectivity to increased injuries at work suggests employers 
might improve health and safety (and reduce costs) by ensuring workers aren’t engaged in 
potentially dangerous activities when they’re in a bad mood. Bad moods can contribute to 
injury at work in several ways.98 Individuals in negative moods tend to be more anxious, 
which can make them less able to cope effectively with hazards. A person who is always 
fearful will be more pessimistic about the effectiveness of safety precautions because she 
feels she’ll just get hurt anyway, or she might panic or freeze up when confronted with a 
threatening situation. Negative moods also make people more distractable, and distrac-
tions can obviously lead to careless behaviors.
Selecting positive team members can contribute towards a positive work environ-
ment because positive moods transmit from team member to team member. One study 
of 130 leaders and their followers found that leaders who are charismatic transfer their 
positive emotions to their followers through a contagion effect.99 It makes sense, then, to 
choose team members predisposed to positive moods.
SUMMARY
Emotions and moods are similar in that both are affective in nature. But they’re also 
different—moods are more general and less contextual than emotions. The time of day, 
stressful events, and sleep patterns are some of the many factors that influence emotions 
and moods. OB research on emotional labor, affective events theory, emotional intel-
ligence, and emotional regulation helps us understand how people deal with emotions. 
Emotions and moods have proven relevant for virtually every OB topic we study, with 
implications for managerial practices.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Recognize that emotions are a natural part of the workplace and good management 
does not mean creating an emotion-free environment.
•	 To foster effective decision making, creativity, and motivation in employees, model 
positive emotions and moods as much as is authentically possible.

76	
Part 2  •  Individual Differences
•	 Provide positive feedback to increase the positivity of employees. Of course, it also 
helps to hire people who are predisposed to positive moods.
•	 In the service sector, encourage positive displays of emotion, which make customers 
feel more positive and thus improve customer service interactions and negotiations.
•	 Understand the role of emotions and moods to significantly improve your ability to 
explain and predict your coworkers’ and others’ behavior.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Emotions & Moods.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Emotional Intelligence Assessment
Have you always been able to “read” others well? Do people say you seem to have “the 
right thing to say” for every occasion? Complete this PIA to determine your emotional 
intelligence (EI).
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 3-1.	 Do you think it is possible to reliably construct good emotions and moods in people? Why 
or why not?
	 3-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

77
Personality Factors
4
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
www.mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Describe personality, the way it is measured, and the factors that shape it.
	 2.	 Describe the strengths and weaknesses of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI) personality framework and the Big Five Model.
	 3.	 Discuss how the concepts of core self-evaluation (CSE), self-monitoring, and pro-
active personality contribute to the understanding of personality.
	 4.	 Describe how the situation affects whether personality predicts behavior.
	 5.	 Contrast terminal and instrumental values.
	 6.	 Describe the differences between person–job fit and person–organization fit.
	 7.	 Compare Hofstede’s five value dimensions and the GLOBE framework.
PERSONALITY
Why are some people quiet and passive, while others are loud and aggressive? Are certain 
personality types better adapted than others for certain jobs? Before we can answer these 
questions, we need to address a more basic one: what is personality?

78	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
What Is Personality?
When we speak of someone’s personality, we use many adjectives to describe how they 
act and seem to think; in fact, research participants used 624 distinct adjectives to describe 
people they knew.1 As organizational behaviorists, however, we organize characteristics 
by overall traits describing the growth and development of a person’s personality.
DEFINING PERSONALITY  For our purposes, think of personality as the sum of ways in 
which an individual reacts to and interacts with others. We most often describe personality 
in terms of the measurable traits a person exhibits.
Early work on personality tried to identify and label enduring characteristics that 
describe an individual’s behavior including shy, aggressive, submissive, lazy, ambitious, 
loyal, and timid. When someone exhibits these characteristics in a large number of situ-
ations and they are relatively enduring over time, we call them personality traits.2 The 
more consistent the characteristic over time and the more frequently it occurs in diverse 
situations, the more important the trait is in describing the individual.
ASSESSING PERSONALITY  Personality assessments have been increasingly used 
in diverse organizational settings. In fact, 8 of the top 10 U.S. private companies and 
57 percent of all large U.S. companies use them,3 including Xerox, McDonald’s, and 
Lowe’s.4 Schools such as DePaul University have also begun to use personality tests 
in their admissions process.5 Personality tests are useful in hiring decisions and help 
managers forecast who is best for a job.6
MEASURING RESULTS  The most common means of measuring personality is through 
self-report surveys in which individuals evaluate themselves on a series of factors, such 
as “I worry a lot about the future.” In general, when people know their personality scores 
are going to be used for hiring decisions, they rate themselves as about half a standard 
deviation more conscientious and emotionally stable than if they are taking the test to 
learn more about themselves.7 Another problem is accuracy; for example, a candidate 
who is in a bad mood when taking a survey may very well receive inaccurate scores.
CULTURE AND RATINGS  Research indicates our culture influences the way we rate 
ourselves. People in individualistic countries (see Chapter 3) like the United States and 
Australia trend toward self-enhancement, while people in collectivistic countries (see 
Chapter 3) like Taiwan, China, and South Korea trend toward self-diminishment. Self-
enhancement does not appear to harm a person’s career in individualistic countries, 
but it does in collectivist countries, where humility is valued. Interestingly, underrating 
(self-diminishment) may harm a person’s career in both collectivistic and individualistic 
communities.8
SELF-REPORTS AND OBSERVER-RATINGS  Observer-ratings surveys provide an 
independent assessment of personality. Here, a coworker or another observer does the 
rating. Though the results of self-reports and observer-ratings surveys are strongly 
correlated, research suggests observer-ratings surveys predict job success more than 
self-ratings alone.9 However, each can tell us something unique about an individual’s 
behavior, so a combination of self-reports and observer-ratings predicts performance 
Personality
The sum total of ways 
in which an individual 
reacts to and interacts 
with others.
Personality traits
Enduring 
characteristics 
that describe an 
individual’s behavior.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
79
better than any one type of information. The implication is clear: Use both self-reports and 
observers-ratings (per SS) of personality when making important employment decisions.
PERSONALITY DETERMINANTS  An early debate centered on whether an individual’s 
personality is the result of heredity or environment. Personality appears to be a result of 
both; however, research tends to support the importance of heredity over environment. 
Heredity refers to factors determined at conception. Physical stature, facial features, 
gender, temperament, muscle composition and reflexes, energy level, and biological 
rhythms are either completely or substantially influenced by parentage—by your 
biological parents’ genetic, physiological, and inherent psychological makeup. The 
heredity approach argues that the ultimate explanation of an individual’s personality is 
the molecular structure of the genes, located on the chromosomes. This is not to suggest 
that personality never changes. For example, people’s scores on dependability tend to 
increase over time, as when young adults start families and establish careers. Personality 
is also more changeable in adolescence and more stable among adults.10 However, strong 
individual differences in dependability remain; everyone tends to change by about the 
same amount, so their rank order stays roughly the same.11
PERSONALITY FRAMEWORKS
Throughout history, people have sought to understand what makes individuals behave in 
myriad ways. Many of our behaviors stem from our personalities, so understanding the 
components of personality helps us predict behavior. Important theoretical frameworks 
and assessment tools, discussed next, help us categorize and study the dimensions of 
personality.
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is the most widely used personality-
assessment instrument in the world.12 It is a 100-question personality test that asks people 
how they usually feel or act in situations. Respondents are classified as extraverted or 
introverted (E or I), sensing or intuitive (S or N), thinking or feeling (T or F), and judging 
or perceiving (J or P):
•	 Extraverted (E) versus Introverted (I). Extraverted individuals are outgoing, 
sociable, and assertive. Introverts are quiet and shy.
•	 Sensing (s) versus Intuitive (N). Sensing types are practical and prefer routine and 
order, and they focus on details. Intuitives rely on unconscious processes and look 
at the “big picture.”
•	 Thinking (T) versus Feeling (F). Thinking types use reason and logic to handle 
problems. Feeling types rely on their personal values and emotions.
•	 Judging (J) versus Perceiving (P). Judging types want control and prefer order 
and structure. Perceiving types are flexible and spontaneous.
The MBTI describes personality types by identifying one trait from each of the 
four pairs. For example, Introverted/Intuitive/Thinking/Judging people (INTJs) are  
visionaries with original minds and great drive. They are skeptical, critical, indepen-
dent, determined, and often stubborn. ENFJs are natural teachers and leaders. They are 
Heredity
Factors determined 
at conception; 
one’s biological, 
physiological, and 
inherent psychological 
makeup.
Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI)
A personality test that 
taps 4 characteristics 
and classifies people 
into 1 of 16 personality 
types.

80	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
relational, motivational, intuitive, idealistic, ethical, and kind. ESTJs are organizers. They 
are realistic, logical, analytical, and decisive, perfect for business or mechanics. The 
ENTP type is innovative, individualistic, versatile, and attracted to entrepreneurial ideas. 
This person tends to be resourceful in solving challenging problems but may neglect 
routine assignments.
One problem with the MBTI is that the model forces a person into one type or 
another; that is, you’re either introverted or extraverted. There is no in-between. Another 
problem is with the reliability of the measure: When people retake the assessment, they 
often receive different results. An additional problem is in the difficulty of interpretation. 
There are levels of importance for each of the MBTI facets, and separate meanings for 
certain combinations of facets, all of which require trained interpretation that can leave 
room for error. Finally, results from the MBTI tend to be unrelated to job performance.
The Big Five Personality Model
The MBTI may lack strong supporting evidence, but an impressive body of research 
supports the Big Five Model, which proposes that five basic dimensions underlie all oth-
ers and encompass most of the significant variation in human personality.13 Test scores 
of these traits do a very good job of predicting how people behave in a variety of real-
life situations14 and remain relatively stable for an individual over time, with some daily 
variations.15 These are the Big Five factors:
•	 Conscientiousness. The conscientiousness dimension is a measure of reliability. A 
highly conscientious person is responsible, organized, dependable, and persistent. 
Those who score low on this dimension are easily distracted, disorganized, and 
unreliable.
•	 Emotional stability. The emotional stability dimension taps a person’s ability to 
withstand stress. People with emotional stability tend to be calm, self-confident, 
and secure. High scorers are more likely to be positive and optimistic; they are gen-
erally happier than low scorers. Emotional stability is sometimes discussed as its 
converse, neuroticism. Low scorers (those with high neuroticism) are hypervigilant 
and vulnerable to the physical and psychological effects of stress. Those with high 
neuroticism tend to be nervous, anxious, depressed, and insecure.
•	 Extraversion. The extraversion dimension captures our comfort level with  
relationships. Extraverts tend to be gregarious, assertive, and sociable. They are 
generally happier and are often ambitious.16 On the other hand, introverts (low ex-
traversion) tend to be more thoughtful, reserved, timid, and quiet.
•	 Openness to experience. The openness to experience dimension addresses the 
range of a person’s interests and their fascination with novelty. Open people are 
creative, curious, and artistically sensitive. Those at the low end of the category are 
conventional and find comfort in the familiar.
•	 Agreeableness. The agreeableness dimension refers to an individual’s propensity 
to defer to others. Agreeable people are cooperative, warm, and trusting. You might 
expect agreeable people to be happier than disagreeable people. They are, but only 
slightly. When people choose organizational team members, agreeable individuals 
are usually their first choice. In contrast, people who score low on agreeableness 
can be cold and antagonistic.
Big Five Model
A personality 
assessment model 
that taps five basic 
dimensions.
Conscientiousness
A personality dimension 
that describes someone 
who is responsible, 
dependable, persistent, 
and organized.
Emotional stability
A personality dimension 
that characterizes 
someone as calm, 
self-confident, and 
secure (positive) versus 
nervous, depressed, and 
insecure (negative).
Extraversion
A personality 
dimension describing 
someone who is 
sociable, gregarious, 
and assertive.
Openness to experience
A personality dimension 
that characterizes 
someone in terms of 
imagination, sensitivity, 
and curiosity.
Agreeableness
A personality 
dimension that 
describes someone 
who is good natured, 
cooperative, and 
trusting.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
81
How Do the Big Five Traits Predict Behavior at Work?
There are many relationships between the Big Five personality dimensions and job per-
formance,17 and we are learning more about them every day. Let’s explore one trait at a 
time, beginning with the strongest predictor of job performance—conscientiousness.
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS AT WORK  Conscientiousness is key. As researchers recently 
stated, “Personal attributes related to conscientiousness and agreeableness are important 
for success across many jobs, spanning across low to high levels of job complexity, 
training, and experience.”18 Employees who score higher in conscientiousness develop 
higher levels of job knowledge, probably because highly conscientious people learn more 
(conscientiousness may be related to GPA),19 and these levels correspond with higher 
levels of job performance. Conscientious people are also more able to maintain their job 
performance when faced with abusive supervision, according to a study in India.20
Like any trait, conscientiousness has its pitfalls. Highly conscientious individuals 
can prioritize work over family, resulting in more conflict between their work and family 
roles (termed work-family conflict).21 They may also become too focused on their own 
work to help others in the organization,22 and they don’t adapt well to changing contexts. 
Furthermore, conscientious people may have trouble learning complex skills early in a 
training process because their focus is on performing well rather than on learning. Finally, 
they are often less creative, especially artistically.23
Despite pitfalls, conscientiousness is the best overall predictor of job performance. 
However, the other Big Five traits are also related to aspects of performance and have 
other implications for work and for life. Exhibit 4-1 summarizes these other relations.
• Less negative thinking and
 fewer negative emotions
• Less hypervigilant
• Higher job and life 
   satisfaction
• Lower stress levels
• Better interpersonal skills
• Greater social dominance
• More emotionally expressive
Extraversion
• Higher performance
• Enhanced leadership
• Higher job and life satisfaction
• Increased learning
• More creative
• More ﬂexible and autonomous
Openness
• Training performance
• Enhanced leadership
• More adaptable to change
• Better liked
• More compliant and
 conforming
Agreeableness
• Higher performance
• Lower levels of deviant
 behavior
• Greater effort and persistence
• More drive and discipline
• Better organized and planning
Conscientiousness
• Higher performance
• Enhanced leadership
• Greater longevity
BIG FIVE TRAITS
WHY IS IT RELEVANT?
WHAT DOES IT AFFECT?
Emotional stability
EXHIBIT 4-1 
Model of How 
Big Five Traits 
Influence OB 
Criteria

82	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
EMOTIONAL STABILITY AT WORK  Of the Big Five traits, emotional stability is most 
strongly related to life satisfaction, job satisfaction, and low stress levels. People with 
high emotional stability can adapt to unexpected or changing demands in the workplace.24 
At the other end of the spectrum, neurotic individuals who are unable to cope with these 
demands may experience burnout.25 These people also tend to experience work-family 
conflict, which can affect work outcomes.26
EXTRAVERSION AT WORK  Extraverts perform better in jobs with significant 
interpersonal interaction. They are socially dominant, “take charge” people.27 Extraversion 
is a relatively strong predictor of leadership emergence in groups. Some negatives are that 
extraverts are more impulsive than introverts, are more likely to be absent from work, and 
may be more likely than introverts to lie during job interviews.28
OPENNESS AT WORK  Open people are more likely to be effective leaders—and more 
comfortable with ambiguity. They cope better with organizational change and are more 
adaptable. While openness isn’t related to initial performance on a job, individuals higher 
in openness are less susceptible to a decline in performance over a longer time period.29 
Open people also experience less work-family conflict.30
AGREEABLENESS AT WORK  Agreeable individuals are better liked than disagreeable 
people; they tend to do better in interpersonally oriented jobs such as customer service. 
They’re more compliant and rule abiding, less likely to get into accidents, and more 
satisfied in their jobs. They also contribute to organizational performance by engaging 
in organizational citizenship behavior (OCB; see Chapter 1).31 Disagreeable people, on 
the other hand, are more likely to engage in counterproductive work behavior (CWB; see 
Chapter 2), as are people low in conscientiousness.32 Low agreeableness also predicts 
involvement in work accidents.33 Lastly, agreeableness is associated with lower levels of 
career success (especially earnings), perhaps because highly agreeable people consider 
themselves less marketable and are less willing to assert themselves.34
In general, the Big Five personality factors appear in almost all cross-cultural stud-
ies,35 including China, Israel, Germany, Japan, Spain, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, and 
the United States. However, a study of illiterate indigenous people in Bolivia suggested 
the Big Five framework may be less applicable when studying the personalities of small, 
remote groups.36
The Dark Triad
With the exception of neuroticism, the Big Five traits are what we call socially desirable, 
meaning we would be glad to score high on them. They also have the most verifiable links 
to important organizational outcomes. Researchers have identified three other socially 
undesirable traits, which we all have in varying degrees and which are also relevant to 
organizational behavior (OB): Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy. Owing to 
their negative nature, researchers have labeled these the Dark Triad—though they do not 
always occur together.37
The Dark Triad may sound sinister, but these traits are not clinical pathologies 
hindering everyday functioning. They might be expressed particularly strongly when an 
individual is under stress and unable to moderate any inappropriate responses. Sustained 
Dark Triad
A constellation of 
negative personality 
traits consisting of 
Machiavellianism, 
narcissism, and 
psychopathy.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
83
high levels of dark personality traits can cause individuals to derail their careers and 
personal lives.38
MACHIAVELLIANISM  Hao is a young bank manager in Shanghai. He’s received three 
promotions in the past four years and makes no apologies for the aggressive tactics he’s 
used. “My name means clever, and that’s what I am—I do whatever I have to do to get 
ahead,” he says. Hao would be termed Machiavellian.
The personality characteristic of Machiavellianism (often abbreviated Mach) is 
named after Niccolo Machiavelli, who wrote in the sixteenth century on how to gain and 
use power. An individual high in Machiavellianism is pragmatic, maintains emotional 
distance, and believes that ends can justify means. “If it works, use it” is consistent with 
a high-Mach perspective. High Machs manipulate more, win more, are persuaded less by 
others, but persuade others more than do low Machs.39 They are more likely to act aggres-
sively and engage in CWBs as well. Surprisingly, Machiavellianism does not significantly 
predict overall job performance.40 High-Mach employees, by manipulating others to their 
advantage, win in the short term at a job, but lose those gains in the long term because 
they are not well liked.
Machiavellian tendencies may have ethical implications. One study showed high-
Mach job seekers were less positively affected by the knowledge that an organization 
engaged in a high level of corporate social responsibility (CSR; see Chapter 2),41 suggest-
ing that high-Mach people may care less about sustainability issues. Another study found 
Machs’ ethical leadership behaviors were less likely to translate into followers’ work 
engagement because followers see through these behaviors and realize they are cases of 
surface acting.42
NARCISSISM  Sabrina likes to be the center of attention. She often looks at herself 
in the mirror, has extravagant dreams about her future, and considers herself a person 
of many talents. Sabrina is a narcissist. The trait is named for the Greek myth of 
Narcissus, a youth so vain and proud he fell in love with his own image. In psychology, 
narcissism describes a person who has a grandiose sense of self-importance, requires 
excessive admiration, and is arrogant. Narcissists often have fantasies of grand 
success, a tendency to exploit situations and people, a sense of entitlement, and a lack 
of empathy.43 However, narcissists can be hypersensitive and fragile people.44 They 
also may experience more anger.45
While narcissism seems to have little relationship to job effectiveness or OCB,46 it 
is one of the largest predictors of increased CWB in individualistic cultures—but not in 
collectivist cultures that discourage self-promotion.47 Narcissists commonly think they 
are overqualified for their positions.48 When they receive feedback about their perfor-
mance, they often tune out information that conflicts with their positive self-perception, 
but they will work harder if rewards are offered.49
On the bright side, narcissists may be more charismatic than others.50 They also 
might be found in business more often than in other fields. They are more likely to be 
chosen for leadership positions, and medium ratings of narcissism (neither extremely 
high nor extremely low) are positively correlated with leadership effectiveness.51 Some 
evidence suggests that narcissists are more adaptable and make better business decisions 
than others when the issue is complex.52 Furthermore, a study of Norwegian bank em-
ployees found those scoring high on narcissism enjoyed their work more.53
Machiavellianism
The degree to which 
an individual is 
pragmatic, maintains 
emotional distance, 
and believes that ends 
can justify means.
Narcissism
The tendency to 
be arrogant, have a 
grandiose sense of self-
importance, require 
excessive admiration, 
and have a sense of 
entitlement.

84	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
PSYCHOPATHY  Psychopathy is part of the Dark Triad, but in OB, it does not connote 
clinical mental illness. In the OB context, psychopathy is defined as a lack of concern for 
others, and a lack of guilt or remorse when actions cause harm.54 Measures of psychopathy 
attempt to assess motivation to comply with social norms, impulsivity, willingness to use 
deceit to obtain desired ends, and disregard, that is, the lack of empathic concern for others.
The literature is not consistent about whether psychopathy is important to work 
behavior. One review found little correlation between measures of psychopathy and job 
performance or CWB. Another found antisocial personality, which is closely related to 
psychopathy, was positively related to advancement in the organization but unrelated to 
other aspects of career success and effectiveness.55 Still other research suggests psychop-
athy is related to the use of hard influence tactics (threats, manipulation) and bullying 
work behavior (physical or verbal threatening).56 The cunning displayed by people who 
score high on psychopathy may thus help them gain power in an organization but keep 
them from using it toward healthy ends for themselves or their organizations.
OTHER TRAITS  The Dark Triad is a helpful framework for studying the three dominant 
dark-side traits in current personality research, and researchers are exploring other traits 
as well. One emerging framework incorporates five additional aberrant compound traits 
based on the Big Five. First, antisocial people are indifferent and callous toward others. 
They use their extraversion to charm people, but they may be prone to violent CWBs 
and risky decision making. Second, borderline people have low self-esteem and high 
uncertainty. They are unpredictable in their interactions at work, are inefficient, and may 
have low job satisfaction.57 Third, schizotypal individuals are eccentric and disorganized. 
In the workplace, they can be highly creative, although they are susceptible to work 
stress. Fourth, obsessive-compulsive people are perfectionists and can be stubborn, yet 
they attend to details, carry a strong work ethic, and may be motivated by achievement. 
Fifth, avoidant individuals feel inadequate and hate criticism. They can function only in 
environments requiring little interaction.58
OTHER PERSONALITY ATTRIBUTES RELEVANT TO OB
As we’ve discussed, studies of traits have much to offer the field of OB. Now we’ll look 
at other attributes that are powerful predictors of behavior in organizations: core self-
evaluations, self-monitoring, and proactive personality.
Core Self-Evaluation (CSE)
As discussed in Chapter 2, core self-evaluations (CSEs) are bottom-line conclusions in-
dividuals have about their capabilities, competence, and worth as a person. People with 
positive CSEs like themselves and see themselves as effective and in control of their envi-
ronment. Those with negative CSEs tend to dislike themselves, question their capabilities, 
and view themselves as powerless over their environment.59 Recall that CSEs relate to job 
satisfaction, because people who are positive on this trait see more challenge in their jobs 
and actually attain more complex jobs.
People with positive CSEs perform better than others because they set more ambi-
tious goals, are more committed to their goals, and persist longer in attempting to reach 
them. People who have high CSEs provide better customer service, are more popular 
Psychopathy
The tendency for a 
lack of concern for 
others and a lack of 
guilt or remorse when 
actions cause harm.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
85
coworkers, and may have careers that begin on better footing and ascend more rapidly 
over time.60 They perform especially well if they feel their work provides meaning and 
is helpful to others.61 Therefore, people with high CSEs may thrive in organizations with 
high CSR.
Self-Monitoring
Zoe is always in trouble at work. Although she’s competent, hardworking, and produc-
tive, she receives average ratings in performance reviews, and seems to have made a 
career out of irritating her bosses. Zoe’s problem is that she’s politically inept and unable 
to adjust her behavior to fit changing situations. As she says, “I’m true to myself. I don’t 
remake myself to please others.” Zoe is a low self-monitor.
Self-monitoring describes an individual’s ability to adjust behavior to external, 
situational factors.62 High self-monitors show considerable adaptability in adjusting their 
behavior to external situational factors. They are highly sensitive to external cues and can 
behave differently in varying situations, sometimes presenting striking contradictions be-
tween their public personae and their private selves. Evidence indicates high self-monitors 
pay closer attention to the behavior of others and are more capable of conforming than 
are low self-monitors.63 Low self-monitors like Zoe can’t disguise themselves in that way. 
They tend to display their true dispositions and attitudes in every situation; hence, there is 
high behavioral consistency between who they are and what they do.
Proactive Personality
Did you ever notice that some people actively take the initiative to improve their cur-
rent circumstances or create new ones? These are proactive personalities.64 Those with a 
proactive personality identify opportunities, show initiative, take action, and persevere 
until meaningful change occurs, compared to others who generally react to situations. 
Proactive individuals have many desirable behaviors that organizations covet. They have 
higher levels of job performance65 and do not need much oversight.66 They are receptive 
to changes in job demands and thrive when they can informally tailor their jobs to their 
strengths. Proactive individuals often achieve career success.67
Proactive personality may be important for work teams. One study of 95 R&D 
teams in 33 Chinese companies revealed that teams with high average levels of proac-
tive personality were more innovative.68 Proactive individuals are also more likely to ex-
change information with others in a team, which builds trust relationships.69 Like other 
traits, proactive personality is affected by the context. One study of bank branch teams in 
China found that if a team’s leader was not proactive, the potential benefits of the team’s 
proactivity became dormant, or worse, their proactivity was suppressed by the leader.70 In 
terms of pitfalls, one study of 231 Flemish unemployed individuals found that proactive 
individuals abandoned their job searches sooner. It may be that proactivity includes step-
ping back in the face of failure.71
PERSONALITY AND SITUATIONS
Earlier we discussed how research shows heredity is more important than the environ-
ment in developing our personalities. The environment is not irrelevant, though. Some 
personality traits, such as the Big Five, tend to be effective in almost any environment or 
Self-monitoring
A personality trait 
that measures an 
individual’s ability 
to adjust his or her 
behavior to external, 
situational factors.
Proactive personality
People who identify 
opportunities, show 
initiative, take action, 
and persevere until 
meaningful change 
occurs.

86	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
situation. However, we are learning that the effect of particular traits on behavior depends 
on the situation. Two theoretical frameworks, situation strength and trait activation, help 
explain how this works.
Situation Strength Theory
Imagine you are in a meeting with your department. How likely are you to walk out, shout 
at a colleague, or turn your back on everyone? Probably highly unlikely. Now imagine 
working from home. You might work in your pajamas, listen to loud music, or take a catnap.
Situation strength theory proposes that the way personality translates into behav-
ior depends on the strength of the situation. By situation strength, we mean the degree to 
which norms, cues, or standards dictate appropriate behavior. Strong situations show us 
what the right behavior is, pressure us to exhibit it, and discourage the wrong behavior. 
In weak situations, conversely, “anything goes,” and thus we are freer to express our 
personality in behavior. Personality traits better predict behavior in weak situations than 
in strong ones.
COMPONENTS OF SITUATION STRENGTH  Researchers have analyzed situation strength 
in organizations in terms of four elements:72
1.	 Clarity, or the degree to which cues about work duties and responsibilities are avail-
able and clear—jobs high in clarity produce strong situations because individuals 
can readily determine what to do. For example, the job of janitor probably provides 
higher clarity about each task than the job of nanny.
2.	 Consistency, or the extent to which cues regarding work duties and responsibilities 
are compatible with one another—jobs with high consistency represent strong situ-
ations because all the cues point toward the same desired behavior. The job of acute 
care nurse, for example, probably has higher consistency than the job of manager.
3.	 Constraints, or the extent to which individuals’ freedom to decide or act is limited 
by forces outside their control—jobs with many constraints represent strong situa-
tions because an individual has limited discretion. Bank examiner, for example, is 
probably a job with stronger constraints than forest ranger.
4.	 Consequences, or the degree to which decisions or actions have important implica-
tions for the organization or its members, clients, supplies, and so on—jobs with 
important consequences represent strong situations because the environment is 
probably heavily structured to guard against mistakes. A surgeon’s job, for exam-
ple, has higher consequences than a foreign-language teacher’s.
ORGANIZATIONAL SITUATIONS  Some researchers have speculated that organizations 
are, by definition, strong situations because they impose rules, norms, and standards 
that govern behavior. These constraints are usually appropriate. For example, we would 
not want an employee to feel free to engage in sexual harassment, follow questionable 
accounting procedures, or come to work only when the mood strikes.
The elements of situation strength are often determined by organizational rules and 
guidelines, which adds some objectivity to them. However, the perception of these rules influ-
ences how the person will respond to the situation’s strength. For instance, a person who is usu-
ally self-directed may view step-by-step instructions (high clarity) for a simple task as a lack 
Situation strength 
theory
A theory indicating 
that the way 
personality translates 
into behavior depends 
on the strength of the 
situation.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
87
of faith in his ability. Another person who is a rule follower might appreciate the detailed in-
structions. Their responses (and work attitudes) will reflect their perception of the situation.73
Creating strong rules to govern diverse systems might be not only difficult but also 
unwise. In sum, managers need to recognize the role of situation strength in the work-
place and find the appropriate balance.
Trait Activation Theory
Another important theoretical framework toward understanding personality and situations 
is Trait Activation Theory (TAT). TAT predicts that some situations, events, or interven-
tions “activate” a trait more than others. Using TAT, we can foresee which jobs suit certain 
personalities. For example, a commission-based compensation plan would likely activate 
individual differences because extraverts are more reward-sensitive, than, say, open people. 
Conversely, in jobs that encourage creativity, differences in openness may better predict 
desired behavior than differences in extraversion. See Exhibit 4-2 for specific examples.
TAT also applies to personality tendencies. For example, a recent study found peo-
ple learning online responded differently when their behavior was electronically moni-
tored. Those who had a high fear of failure had higher apprehension from the monitoring 
than others, and consequently learned significantly less. In this case, a feature of the 
environment (electronic monitoring) activated a trait (fear of failing), and the combina-
tion of the two meant lowered job performance.74 TAT can also work in a positive way. 
One study found that, in a supportive environment, everyone behaved prosocially, but in a 
harsh environment, only people with prosocial tendencies exhibited them.75
Together, situation strength and trait activation theories show that the debate over 
nature versus nurture might best be framed as nature and nurture. Not only do both affect 
behavior, but they interact with one another. Put another way, personality and the situa-
tion both affect work behavior, but when the situation is right, the power of personality to 
predict behavior is even higher.
Trait Activation 
Theory (TAT)
A theory that predicts 
that some situations, 
events, or interventions 
“activate” a trait more 
than others.
Detail Orientation 
Required
Social Skills 
Required
Competitive 
Work
Innovation 
Required
Dealing with 
Angry People
Time Pressure 
(Deadlines)
Jobs scoring high (the traits listed here should predict behavior in these jobs)
Air trafﬁc controller
Accountant
Legal secretary
Clergy
Therapist
Concierge
Coach/scout
Financial manager
Sales representative
Actor
Systems analyst
Advertising 
writer
Correctional ofﬁcer
Telemarketer
Flight attendant
Broadcast news 
analyst
Editor
Airline pilot
Jobs scoring low (the traits listed here should not predict behavior in these jobs)
Forester
Software engineer
Postal clerk
Court reporter
Composer
Skincare specialist
Masseuse
Pump operator
Historian
Archivist
Biologist
Mathematician
Model
Broadcast 
technician
Nuclear reactor 
operator
Medical 
technician
Statistician
Fitness trainer
Jobs that score high activate these traits (make them more relevant to predicting behavior)
Conscientiousness (+)
Extraversion (+)
Agreeableness (+)
Extraversion (+)
Agreeableness (–)
Openness (+)
Extraversion (+)
Agreeableness (+)
Neuroticism (–)
Conscientiousness (+)
Neuroticism (–)
EXHIBIT 4-2 
Trait Activation Theory: Jobs in Which Certain Big Five Traits Are More Relevant
Note: A plus (+) sign means individuals who score high on this trait should do better in this job. A minus (−) sign 
means individuals who score low on this trait should do better in this job.

88	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
VALUES
Having discussed personality traits, we now turn to values. Values are often very specific 
and describe belief systems rather than behavioral tendencies. Some beliefs or values 
reflect a person’s personality, but we don’t always act consistently with our values. Is 
capital punishment right or wrong? Is a desire for power good or bad? The answers to 
these questions are value-laden.
Values represent basic convictions that “a specific mode of conduct or end-state of 
existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite or converse mode of conduct or 
end-state of existence.”76 Values contain a judgmental element because they carry an indi-
vidual’s ideas about what is right, good, or desirable. They have both content and intensity 
attributes. The content attribute says a mode of conduct or end-state of existence is impor-
tant. The intensity attribute specifies how important it is. When we rank values in terms of 
intensity, we obtain that person’s value system. We all have a hierarchy of values according 
to the relative importance we assign to values such as freedom, pleasure, self-respect, hon-
esty, obedience, and equality. Values tend to be relatively stable and enduring.77
Values lay the foundation for understanding attitudes and motivation, and they in-
fluence our perceptions. We enter an organization with preconceived notions of what 
“ought” and “ought not” to be. These notions contain our interpretations of right and 
wrong and our preferences for certain behaviors or outcomes. Regardless of whether they 
clarify or bias our judgment, our values influence our attitudes and behaviors at work.
While values can sometimes augment decision making, at times they can cloud ob-
jectivity and rationality.78 Suppose you enter an organization with the view that allocating 
pay on the basis of performance is right, while allocating pay on the basis of seniority is 
wrong. How will you react if you find the organization you’ve just joined rewards senior-
ity and not performance? You’re likely to be disappointed—this can lead to job dissatis-
faction and a decision not to exert a high level of effort because “It’s probably not going 
to lead to more money anyway.” Would your attitudes and behavior be different if your 
values aligned with the organization’s pay policies? Most likely.
 
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Honest Tea: Ethics—Company Mission 
and Values.
Terminal versus Instrumental Values
How can we organize values? One researcher—Milton Rokeach—argued that we can 
separate them into two categories. One set, called terminal values, refers to desirable 
end-states. These are the goals a person would like to achieve during a lifetime. The other 
set, called instrumental values, refers to preferable modes of behavior, or means of 
achieving the terminal values. Each of us places value on both the ends (terminal values) 
and the means (instrumental values). Some examples of terminal values are prosperity 
and economic success, freedom, health and well-being, world peace, and meaning in 
life. Examples of instrumental values are autonomy and self-reliance, personal discipline, 
kindness, and goal-orientation. A balance between terminal and instrumental values is 
important, as well as an understanding of how to strike this balance.
Values
Basic convictions that 
a specific mode of 
conduct or end-state of 
existence is personally 
or socially preferable to 
an opposite or converse 
mode of conduct or 
end-state of existence.
Value system
A hierarchy based 
on a ranking of an 
individual’s values in 
terms of their intensity.
Terminal values
Desirable end-states 
of existence; the goals 
a person would like to 
achieve during his or 
her lifetime.
Instrumental values
Preferable modes of 
behavior or means 
of achieving one’s 
terminal values.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
89
Generational Values
Researchers have integrated several analyses of work values into groups that attempt 
to capture the shared views of different cohorts or generations in the U.S. workforce.79 
You will surely be familiar with the labels—for example, baby boomers, gen xers, mil-
lennials—some of which are used internationally. It is important to remember that while 
categories are helpful, they represent trends... not the beliefs of individuals.
Though it is fascinating to think about generational values, remember these clas-
sifications lack solid research support. Early research was plagued by methodological 
problems that made it difficult to assess whether differences actually exist. Reviews sug-
gest many of the generalizations are either overblown or incorrect.80 True differences 
across generations often do not support popular conceptions of how generations differ. 
For example, the value placed on leisure has increased over generations from the baby 
boomers to the millennials and work centrality has declined, but research did not find that 
millennials had more altruistic work values than their predecessors.81 Generational clas-
sifications may help us understand our own and other generations better, but we must also 
appreciate their limits.
LINKING AN INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONALITY  
AND VALUES TO THE WORKPLACE
Thirty years ago, organizations were concerned with personality in order to match indi-
viduals to specific jobs. That concern has expanded to include how well the individual’s 
personality and values match the organization. Why? Because managers today are less 
interested in an applicant’s ability to perform a specific job than with his or her flexibility 
to meet changing situations and maintain commitment to the organization. Still, one of 
the first types of fit managers look for is person–job fit.
Person–Job Fit
The effort to match job requirements with personality characteristics is described by John 
Holland’s personality–job fit theory, one of the more proven theories in use interna-
tionally.82 The Vocational Preference Inventory questionnaire contains 160 occupational 
titles. Respondents indicate which they like or dislike, and their answers form personality 
profiles. Holland presented six personality types and proposed that satisfaction and the 
propensity to leave a position depend on how well individuals match their personalities to 
a job. Exhibit 4-3 describes the six types, their personality characteristics, and examples 
of congruent occupations for each.
There are cultural implications for person–job fit that speak to workers’ expecta-
tions that jobs will be tailored to them. In individualistic countries where workers ex-
pect to be heard and respected by management, increasing person–job fit by tailoring the 
job to the person increases the individual’s job satisfaction. However, in collectivistic 
countries, person–job fit is a weaker predictor of job satisfaction because people do not 
expect to have jobs tailored to them, so they value person–job fit efforts less. Therefore, 
managers in collectivistic cultures should not violate cultural norms by designing jobs for 
individuals; rather they should seek people who will likely thrive in jobs that have already 
been structured.83
Personality–job fit 
theory
A theory that identifies 
six personality types 
and proposes that the 
fit between personality 
type and occupational 
environment 
determines satisfaction 
and turnover.

90	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
Person–Organization Fit
We’ve noted that researchers have looked at matching people to organizations and jobs. 
If an organization has a dynamic and changing environment and needs employees who 
are able to readily change tasks and move easily between teams, it’s more important that 
employees’ personalities fit with the overall organization’s culture than with the charac-
teristics of any specific job.
Person–organization fit essentially means people are attracted to and selected by or-
ganizations that match their values, and they leave organizations that are not compatible with 
their personalities.84 Using the Big Five terminology, for instance, we could expect that extra-
verts fit well with aggressive and team-oriented cultures; people high on agreeableness match 
better with a supportive organizational climate; and highly open people fit better in organi-
zations that emphasize innovation rather than standardization.85 Following these guidelines 
when hiring should yield employees who fit better with the organization’s culture, which 
should, in turn, result in higher employee satisfaction and reduced turnover. Research on per-
son–organization fit has also looked at whether people’s values match the organization’s cul-
ture. A match predicts job satisfaction, commitment to the organization, and low turnover.86
In pursuit of fit, it is more important than ever for organizations to manage their 
image online since job seekers view company websites as part of their pre-application 
process. Applicants want to see a user-friendly website that provides information about 
company philosophies and policies. For example, millennials in particular may react 
positively when they perceive an organization is committed to work–life balance. The 
website is so important to the development of perceived person–organization fit that im-
provements to its style (usability) and substance (policies) can lead to more applicants.87
Other Dimensions of Fit
Although person–job fit and person–organization fit are considered the most salient  
dimensions for workplace outcomes, other avenues of fit are worth examining. These 
include person–group fit and person–supervisor fit. Person–group fit is important in team 
settings, where the dynamics of team interactions significantly affect work outcomes. 
Person–supervisor fit has become an important area of research since poor fit in this  
dimension can lead to lower job satisfaction and reduced performance.
Person–organization 
fit
A theory that people 
are attracted to 
and selected by 
organizations that 
match their values, and 
leave when there is not 
compatibility.
Type
Personality Characteristics
Congruent Occupations
Realistic: Prefers physical activities that
Shy, genuine, persistent, stable, conforming, 
Mechanic, drill press operator,
require skill, strength, and coordination
practical
assembly-line worker, farmer
Investigative: Prefers activities that involve 
Analytical, original, curious, independent
Biologist, economist, mathematician,
thinking, organizing, and understanding
news reporter
Social: Prefers activities that involve
Sociable, friendly, cooperative, understanding
Social worker, teacher, counselor,
helping and developing others
clinical psychologist
Conventional: Prefers rule-regulated,
Conforming, efﬁcient, practical, unimaginative, 
Accountant, corporate manager, bank 
orderly, and unambiguous activities
inﬂexible
teller, file clerk
Enterprising: Prefers verbal activities
Self-conﬁdent, ambitious, energetic, 
Lawyer, real estate agent, public
in which there are opportunities to
domineering
relations specialist, small business
inﬂuence others and attain power
manager
Artistic: Prefers ambiguous and
Imaginative, disorderly, idealistic, emotional, 
Painter, musician, writer, interior
unsystematic activities that allow
impractical
decorator
creative expression
EXHIBIT 4-3 
Holland’s Typology of Personality and Congruent Occupations

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
91
All dimensions of fit are sometimes broadly referred to as person–environment 
fit. Each dimension can predict work attitudes, which are partially based on culture. A 
recent meta-analysis of person–environment fit in East Asia, Europe, and North Amer-
ica suggested the dimensions of person–organization and person–job fit are the stron-
gest predictors of positive work attitudes and performance in North America. These 
dimensions are important to a lesser degree in Europe, and they are least important in 
East Asia.88
CULTURAL VALUES
Unlike personality, which is largely genetically determined, values are learned. They are 
passed down through generations and they vary by cultures. As researchers have sought 
to understand cultural value differences, two important frameworks have emerged from 
Geert Hofstede and the GLOBE studies.
Hofstede’s Framework
One of the most widely referenced approaches for analyzing variations among cultures 
was done by Geert Hofstede.89 Hofstede surveyed more than 116,000 IBM employees in 
40 countries about their work-related values and found managers and employees varied 
on five value dimensions of national culture:
•	 Power distance. Power distance describes the degree to which people in a country 
accept that power in institutions and organizations is distributed unequally. A high 
rating on power distance means large inequalities of power and wealth exist and 
are tolerated in the culture, as in a class or caste system that discourages upward 
mobility. A low power distance rating characterizes societies that stress equality 
and opportunity.
•	 Individualism versus collectivism. Individualism is the degree to which people 
prefer to act as individuals rather than as members of groups and believe in an 
individual’s rights above all else. Collectivism emphasizes a tight social frame-
work in which people expect others in groups of which they are a part to look after 
them and protect them. In OB, we tend to refer to the terms in the framework of 
individualist(ic) and collectivist(ic) countries/cultures.
•	 Masculinity versus femininity. Hofstede’s construct of masculinity is the degree 
to which the culture favors traditional masculine roles such as achievement, power, 
and control, as opposed to viewing men and women as equals. A high masculin-
ity rating indicates the culture has separate roles for men and women, with men 
dominating the society. A high femininity rating means the culture sees little dif-
ferentiation between male and female roles and treats women as the equals of men 
in all respects.
•	 Uncertainty avoidance. The degree to which people in a country prefer structured 
over unstructured situations defines their uncertainty avoidance. In cultures scor-
ing high on uncertainty avoidance, people have increased anxiety about uncertainty 
and ambiguity and use laws and controls to reduce uncertainty. People in cultures 
low on uncertainty avoidance are more accepting of ambiguity, are less rule ori-
ented, take more risks, and more readily accept change.
Collectivism
A national culture 
attribute that describes a 
tight social framework 
in which people expect 
others in groups of 
which they are a part 
to look after them 
and protect them 
Collectivistic countries/
cultures in which people 
see themselves as 
interdependent and seek 
community and group 
goals. Collectivistic 
values are found in 
Asia, Africa, and South 
America, for example.
Masculinity
A national culture 
attribute that 
describes the extent 
to which the culture 
favors traditional 
masculine work roles 
of achievement, 
power, and control. 
Societal values are 
characterized by 
assertiveness and 
materialism.
Power distance
A national culture 
attribute that describes 
the extent to which a 
society accepts that 
power in institutions 
and organizations is 
distributed unequally.
Individualism
A national culture 
attribute that describes 
the degree to which 
people prefer to act as 
individuals rather than 
as members of groups.

92	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
•	 Long-term versus short-term orientation. This typology measures a society’s  
devotion to traditional values. People in a culture with long-term orientation look 
to the future and value thrift, persistence, and tradition. In a short-term orienta-
tion, people value the here and now; they also accept change more readily and don’t 
see commitments as impediments to change.
How do different countries score on Hofstede’s dimensions? Exhibit 4-4 shows the 
ratings of the countries for which data are available. For example, power distance is higher 
in Malaysia than in any other country. The United States is very individualistic; in fact, 
it’s the most individualistic nation of all (closely followed by Australia and Great Britain). 
Guatemala is the most collectivistic nation. The country with the highest masculinity rank 
by far is Japan, and the country with the highest femininity rank is Sweden. Greece scores 
the highest in uncertainty avoidance, while Singapore scores the lowest. Hong Kong has 
one of the longest-term orientations; Pakistan has the shortest-term orientation.
Research across 598 studies with more than 200,000 respondents has investigated 
the relationship of Hofstede’s cultural values and a variety of organizational criteria at both 
the individual and national levels of analysis.90 Overall, the five original culture dimen-
sions were found to be equally strong predictors of relevant outcomes. The researchers also 
found measuring individual scores resulted in much better predictions of most outcomes 
than assigning all people in a country the same cultural values. In sum, this research suggests 
Hofstede’s framework may be a valuable way of thinking about differences among people, 
but we should be cautious about assuming all people from a country have the same values.
The GLOBE Framework
Founded in 1993, the Global Leadership and Organizational Behavior Effectiveness 
(GLOBE) research program is an ongoing cross-cultural investigation of leadership and 
national culture. Using data from 825 organizations in 62 countries, the GLOBE team 
identified 9 dimensions on which national cultures differ.91 Some dimensions—such as 
power distance, individualism/collectivism, uncertainty avoidance, gender differentiation 
(similar to masculinity versus femininity), and future orientation (similar to long-term 
versus short-term orientation)—resemble the Hofstede dimensions. The main difference 
is that the GLOBE framework added dimensions, such as humane orientation (the degree 
to which a society rewards individuals for being altruistic, generous, and kind to others) 
and performance orientation (the degree to which a society encourages and rewards group 
members for performance improvement and excellence).
Comparison of Hofstede’s Framework  
and the GLOBE Framework
Which framework is better, Hofstede’s or the GLOBE? That’s hard to say, and each has 
its supporters. We give more emphasis to Hofstede’s dimensions here because they have 
stood the test of time and the GLOBE study confirmed them. For example, a review of 
the organizational commitment literature shows both the Hofstede and GLOBE individu-
alism/collectivism dimensions operated similarly. Specifically, both frameworks showed 
organizational commitment tends to be lower in individualistic countries.92 Both frame-
works have a great deal in common, and each has something to offer.
Femininity
A national culture 
attribute that indicates 
little differentiation 
between male and 
female roles; a high 
rating indicates that 
women are treated as 
the equals of men in all 
aspects of the society.
Uncertainty avoidance
A national culture 
attribute that describes 
the extent to which a 
society feels threatened 
by uncertain and 
ambiguous situations 
and tries to avoid them.
Long-term orientation
A national culture 
attribute that 
emphasizes the future, 
thrift, and persistence.
Short-term 
orientation
A national culture 
attribute that 
emphasizes the present 
and accepts change.

	
Chapter 4  •  Personality Factors	
93
Power Distance
Individualism
versus Collectivism
Masculinity 
versus Femininity
Uncertainty
Avoidance
Long- versus 
Short-Term
Orientation
Country
Index
Rank
Index
Rank
Index
Rank
Index
Rank
Index
Rank
Argentina
49
35–36
46
22–23
56
20–21
86
10–15
Australia
36
41
90
2
61
16
51
37
31
22–24
Austria
11
53
55
18
79
2
70
24–25
31
22–24
Belgium
65
20
75
8
54
22
94
5–6
38
18
Brazil
69
14
38
26–27
49
27
76
21–22
65
6
Canada
39
39
80
4–5
52
24
48
41–42
23
30
Chile
63
24–25
23
38
28
46
86
10–15
Colombia
67
17
13
49
64
11–12
80
20
Costa Rica
35
42–44
15
46
21
48–49
86
10–15
Denmark
18
51
74
9
16
50
23
51
46
10
Ecuador
78
8–9
8
52
63
13–14
67
28
El Salvador
66
18–19
19
42
40
40
94
5–6
Finland
33
46
63
17
26
47
59
31–32
41
14
France
68
15–16
71
10–11
43
35–36
86
10–15
39
17
Germany
35
42–44
67
15
66
9–10
65
29
31
22–24
Great Britain
35
42–44
89
3
66
9–10
35
47–48
25
28–29
Greece
60
27–28
35
30
57
18–19
112
1
Guatemala
95
2–3
6
53
37
43
101
3
Hong Kong
68
15–16
25
37
57
18–19
29
49–50
96
2
India
77
10–11
48
21
56
20–21
40
45
61
7
Indonesia
78
8–9
14
47–48
46
30–31
48
41–42
Iran
58
29–30
41
24
43
35–36
59
31–32
Ireland
28
49
70
12
68
7–8
35
47–48
43
13
Israel
13
52
54
19
47
29
81
19
Italy
50
34
76
7
70
4–5
75
23
34
19
Jamaica
45
37
39
25
68
7–8
13
52
Japan
54
33
46
22–23
95
1
92
7
80
4
Korea (South)
60
27–28
18
43
39
41
85
16–17
75
5
Malaysia
104
1
26
36
50
25–26
36
46
Mexico
81
5–6
30
32
69
6
82
18
The Netherlands
38
40
80
4–5
14
51
53
35
44
11–12
New Zealand
22
50
79
6
58
17
49
39–40
30
25–26
Norway
31
47–48
69
13
8
52
50
38
44
11–12
Pakistan
55
32
14
47–48
50
25–26
70
24–25
0
34
Panama
95
2–3
11
51
44
34
86
10–15
Peru
64
21–23
16
45
42
37–38
87
9
Philippines
94
4
32
31
64
11–12
44
44
19
31–32
Portugal
63
24–25
27
33–35
31
45
104
2
30
25–26
Singapore
74
13
20
39–41
48
28
8
53
48
9
South Africa
49
35–36
65
16
63
13–14
49
39–40
Spain
57
31
51
20
42
37–38
86
10–15
19
31–32
Sweden
31
47–48
71
10–11
5
53
29
49–50
33
20
Switzerland
34
45
68
14
70
4–5
58
33
40
15–16
Taiwan
58
29–30
17
44
45
32–33
69
26
87
3
Thailand
64
21–23
20
39–41
34
44
64
30
56
8
Turkey
66
18–19
37
28
45
32–33
85
16–17
United States
40
38
91
1
62
15
46
43
29
27
Uruguay
61
26
36
29
38
42
100
4
Venezuela
81
5–6
12
50
73
3
76
21–22
Yugoslavia
76
12
27
33–35
21
48–49
88
8
Regions:
Arab countries
80
7
38
26–27
53
23
68
27
East Africa
64
21–23
27
33–35
41
39
52
36
25
28–29
West Africa
77
10–11
20
39–41
46
30–31
54
34
16
33
EXHIBIT 4-4 
Hofstede’s Cultural Values by Nation
Source: Copyright Geert Hofstede BV, hofstede@bart.nl. Reprinted with permission.

94	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
SUMMARY
Personality matters to OB. It does not explain all behavior, but it sets the stage. Emerging 
theory and research reveal how personality matters more in some situations than others. 
The Big Five has been a particularly important advancement, though the Dark Triad and 
other traits matter as well. Every trait has advantages and disadvantages for work behav-
ior, and there is no perfect constellation of traits that is ideal in every situation. Personality 
can help you to understand why people (including yourself!) act, think, and feel the way 
we do, and the astute manager can put that understanding to use by taking care to place 
employees in situations that best fit their personalities.
Values often underlie and explain attitudes, behaviors, and perceptions. Values tend 
to vary internationally along dimensions that can predict organizational outcomes; how-
ever, an individual may or may not hold values that are consistent with the values of the 
national culture.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Consider screening job candidates for conscientiousness—and the other Big Five 
traits, depending on the criteria your organization finds most important. Other as-
pects, such as core self-evaluation or narcissism, may be relevant in certain situations.
•	 Although the MBTI has faults, you can use it in training and development to help 
employees better understand each other, open up communication in work groups, 
and possibly reduce conflicts.
•	 Evaluate jobs, work groups, and your organization to determine the optimal per-
sonality fit.
•	 Take into account situational factors when evaluating observable personality traits, 
and lower the situation strength to better ascertain personality characteristics.
•	 The more you consider people’s cultural differences, the better you will be able 
to determine their work behavior and create a positive organizational climate that 
performs well.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Personality Style Indicator
What’s your personality? You’ve probably been wondering as you read this chapter. Take 
this PIA to obtain some indications of your personality style.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 4-1.	 Do you think the personalities of businesspeople may be more alike than different?
	 4-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

95
Perceptual Processes
5
  Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Explain the factors that influence perception.
	 2.	 Describe attribution theory.
	 3.	 Explain the link between perception and decision making.
	 4.	 Contrast the rational model of decision making with bounded rationality and 
intuition.
	 5.	 Explain how individual differences and organizational constraints affect decision 
making.
	 6.	 Contrast the three ethical decision criteria.
	 7.	 Describe the three-stage model of creativity.
WHAT IS PERCEPTION?
Perception is a process by which we organize and interpret sensory impressions in order 
to give meaning to their environment. What we perceive can be substantially different 
from objective reality. For example, all employees in a firm may view it as a great place 
Perception
A process by which 
individuals organize 
and interpret their 
sensory impressions in 
order to give meaning 
to their environment.

96	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
to work—favorable working conditions, interesting job assignments, good pay, excellent 
benefits, understanding and responsible management—but, as most of us know, it’s very 
unusual to find universal agreement.
Why is perception important in the study of OB? Simply because people’s behav-
ior is based on their perception of what reality is, not on reality itself. The world as it 
is perceived is the world that is behaviorally important. In other words, our perception 
becomes the reality from which we act.
Factors That Influence Perception
A number of factors shape and sometimes distort perception. These factors can reside in 
the perceiver, the object or target being perceived, or the situation in which the percep-
tion is made.
PERCEIVER  When you look at a target, your interpretation of what you see is influenced by 
your personal characteristics—attitudes, personality, motives, interests, past experiences, 
and expectations. In some ways, we hear what we want to hear1 and see what we want 
to see—not because it’s the truth, but because it conforms to our thinking. For instance, 
research indicated that supervisors perceived employees who started work earlier in the 
day as more conscientious and therefore as higher performers; however, supervisors who 
were night owls themselves were less likely to make that erroneous assumption.2 Some 
perceptions created by attitudes like these can be counteracted by objective evaluation, 
but others can be insidious. Consider, for instance, observer perceptions of a recent 
shooting in New York. There were two eyewitnesses—one said a police officer chased 
and shot a fleeing man; the other said a handcuffed man lying on the ground was shot. 
Neither perceived the situation correctly: The man was actually attempting to attack a 
police officer with a hammer when he was shot by another officer.3
TARGET  The characteristics of the target also affect what we perceive. Because we 
don’t look at targets in isolation, the relationship of a target to its background influences 
perception, as does our tendency to group close things and similar things together. We 
can perceive women, men, Whites, African Americans, Asians, or members of any other 
group that shares some surface characteristics (see Chapter 6) as alike in other, unrelated 
ways as well. Often, these assumptions are harmful, as when people who have criminal 
records are prejudged in the workplace as a result (whether or not it is known that they 
were wrongly arrested).4 Sometimes differences can work in our favor, though, such as 
when we are drawn to those that are different from what we expect. For instance, one 
study found that participants respected a professor wearing a T-shirt and sneakers in the 
classroom more than the same professor dressed traditionally. The professor stood out 
from the norm in the classroom setting and was therefore perceived as an individualist.5
CONTEXT  Context matters too. The time at which we see an object or event can influence 
our attention, as can location, light, heat, or situational factors. For instance, at a club 
on Saturday night you may not notice someone “decked out.” Yet that same person so 
attired for your Monday morning management class would certainly catch your attention. 
Neither the perceiver nor the target has changed between Saturday night and Monday 
morning, but the situation is different.

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	
97
People are usually not aware of the factors that influence their view of reality. In 
fact, people are not even that perceptive about their own abilities.6 Thankfully, awareness 
and objective measures can reduce our perceptual distortions. For instance, when people 
are asked to ponder specific aspects of their ability, they become more realistic in their 
self-perceptions.7 Let’s next consider how we make perceptions of others.
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Orpheus Group Casting: Social 
Perception and Attribution.
PERSON PERCEPTION: MAKING JUDGMENTS ABOUT OTHERS
The perception concepts most relevant to OB include person perceptions, or the percep-
tions people form about each other. Many of our perceptions of others are formed by first 
impressions and small cues that have little supporting evidence. Let’s unravel some of 
our human tendencies that interfere with correct person perception, beginning with the 
evidence behind attribution theory.
Attribution Theory
Nonliving objects such as desks, machines, and buildings are subject to the laws of na-
ture, but they have no beliefs, motives, or intentions. People do. When we observe people, 
we attempt to explain their behavior. Our perception and judgment of a person’s actions 
are influenced by the assumptions we make about that person’s state of mind.
Attribution theory tries to explain the ways we judge people differently, depend-
ing on the meaning we attribute to a behavior.8 For instance, consider what you think 
when people smile at you. Do you think they are cooperative, exploitative, or competi-
tive? We assign meaning to smiles and other expressions in many different ways.9
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL CAUSATION  Attribution theory suggests that when we 
observe an individual’s behavior, we attempt to determine whether it was internally or 
externally caused. That determination depends largely on three factors: (1) distinctiveness, 
(2) consensus, and (3) consistency. Let’s clarify the differences between internal and 
external causation, and then we’ll discuss the determining factors.
Internally caused behaviors are those an observer believes to be under the personal 
behavioral control of another individual. Externally caused behavior is what we imagine 
the situation forced the individual to do. If an employee is late for work, you might attribute 
that to his overnight partying and subsequent oversleeping. This is an internal attribution. 
But if you attribute his lateness to a traffic snarl, you are making an external attribution.
DISTINCTIVENESS, CONSENSUS, AND CONSISTENCY  Distinctiveness refers to whether 
an individual displays different behaviors in different situations. Is the employee who 
arrives late today also one who regularly “blows off” other kinds of commitments? What 
we want to know is whether this behavior is unusual. If it is, we are likely to give it an 
external attribution. If it’s not, we will probably judge the behavior to be internal.
Attribution theory
An attempt to 
determine whether an 
individual’s behavior is 
internally or externally 
caused.

98	
Part 2 • Individual Differences
If everyone who faces a similar situation responds in the same way, we can say the 
behavior shows consensus. The behavior of our tardy employee meets this criterion if 
all employees who took the same route were also late. From an attribution perspective, 
if consensus is high, you would probably give an external attribution to the employee’s 
tardiness, whereas if other employees who took the same route made it to work on time, 
you would attribute his lateness to an internal cause.
Finally, an observer looks for consistency in a person’s actions. Does the person 
respond the same way over time? Coming in 10 minutes late for work is not perceived the 
same for an employee who hasn’t been late for several months as for an employee who 
is late three times a week. The more consistent the behavior, the more we are inclined to 
attribute it to internal causes.
Exhibit 5-1 summarizes the key elements in attribution theory. It tells us, for in-
stance, that if an employee, Katelyn, generally performs at about the same level on related 
tasks as she does on her current task (low distinctiveness); other employees frequently 
perform differently—better or worse—than Katelyn on that task (low consensus); and 
Katelyn’s performance on this current task is consistent over time (high consistency), 
anyone judging Katelyn’s work will likely hold her primarily responsible for her task 
performance (internal attribution).
ERRORS AND BIASES  Errors or biases distort attributions. When we make judgments 
about the behavior of other people, we tend to underestimate the influence of external 
factors and overestimate the influence of internal or personal factors.10 This fundamental 
attribution error can explain why a sales manager attributes the poor performance of her 
sales agents to laziness rather than to a competitor’s innovative product line. Individuals 
and organizations tend to attribute their own successes to internal factors such as ability 
or effort, while blaming failure on external factors such as bad luck or difficult coworkers. 
Similarly, people tend to attribute ambiguous information as relatively flattering, accept 
positive feedback, and reject negative feedback. This is called self-serving bias.11
Fundamental attribu-
tion error
The tendency to 
underestimate 
the influence of 
external factors and 
overestimate the 
influence of internal 
factors when making 
judgments about the 
behavior of others.
Self-serving bias
The tendency for 
individuals to attribute 
their own successes to 
internal factors and put 
the blame for failures 
on external factors.
Individual behavior
External
Internal
External
Internal
Internal
External
Distinctiveness
Observation
Attribution
of cause
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
Interpretation
Consistency
Consensus
EXHIBIT 5-1
Attribution 
Theory

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	
99
Self-serving biases may be less common in East Asian cultures, but evidence sug-
gests they still operate there.12 Studies indicate Chinese managers assess blame for mis-
takes using the same distinctiveness, consensus, and consistency cues used by Western 
managers.13 They also become angry and punish those deemed responsible for failure, a 
reaction shown in many studies of Western managers. It might just take more evidence for 
Asian managers to conclude someone else should be blamed.
Common Shortcuts in Judging Others
Shortcuts for judging others often allow us to make accurate perceptions rapidly and pro-
vide valid data for making predictions. As we’ve seen, they can and do sometimes result 
in significant distortions. Let’s explore this further.
SELECTIVE PERCEPTION  Any characteristic that makes a person, an object, or an event 
stand out will increase the probability we will perceive it. Why? Because it is impossible 
for us to assimilate everything we see; we can only take in certain stimuli. Thus, you are 
more likely to notice cars like your own, and your boss may reprimand some people, 
but not others, for doing the same thing. Because we can’t observe everything going on 
around us, we use selective perception. We don’t choose randomly: we select according 
to our interests, background, experience, and attitudes. Seeing what we want to see, we 
sometimes draw unwarranted conclusions from an ambiguous situation.
HALO EFFECT  When we draw an impression about an individual on the basis of a single 
characteristic, such as intelligence, sociability, or appearance, a halo effect is operating.14 
The halo effect is easy to demonstrate. If you knew someone was, say, gregarious, what 
else would you infer? You probably wouldn’t say the person was introverted, right? 
You might assume the person was loud, happy, or quick-witted, when in fact gregarious 
does not include those other attributes. As managers, we need to be careful not to draw 
inferences from small clues.
CONTRAST EFFECTS  An old adage among entertainers is “Never follow an act that has 
kids or animals in it.” Why? Audiences love children and animals so much that you’ll 
look bad in comparison. This example demonstrates how the contrast effect can distort 
perceptions. We don’t evaluate a person in isolation. Our reaction is influenced by other 
people we have recently encountered.
STEREOTYPING  When we judge someone on the basis of our perception of the group to 
which he or she belongs, we are stereotyping.15 Stereotypes can be deeply ingrained and 
powerful enough to influence life-and-death decisions. One study, controlling for a wide 
array of factors (such as aggravating or mitigating circumstances), showed that the degree 
to which Black defendants in murder trials looked “stereotypically black” essentially 
doubled their odds of receiving a death sentence if convicted.16 Another study found that 
students tended to assign higher scores for leadership potential and effective leadership to 
Whites than to minorities, supporting the stereotype of Whites as better leaders.17
We deal with the unmanageable number of stimuli of our complex world by us-
ing stereotypes or shortcuts called heuristics to make decisions quickly. For example, it 
does make sense to assume that Allison from finance will be able to help you figure out a 
forecasting problem. The challenge occurs when we generalize inaccurately or too much.
Halo effect
The tendency to draw 
a general impression 
about an individual on 
the basis of a single 
characteristic.
Contrast effect
Evaluation of a 
person’s characteristics 
that is affected by 
comparisons with 
other people recently 
encountered who rank 
higher or lower on the 
same characteristics.
Stereotyping
Judging someone 
on the basis of one’s 
perception of the group 
to which that person 
belongs.
Selective perception
The tendency to 
selectively interpret 
what one sees on the 
basis of one’s interests, 
background, experience, 
and attitudes.

100	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
THE LINK BETWEEN PERCEPTION AND INDIVIDUAL  
DECISION MAKING
Individuals make decisions, choices from among two or more alternatives. Ideally, 
decision making would be an objective process, but the way individuals make deci-
sions and the quality of their choices are largely influenced by their perceptions. 
Individual decision making is an important factor of behavior at all levels of an 
organization.
Decision making occurs as a reaction to a problem. That is, a discrepancy ex-
ists between the current state of affairs and some desired state, requiring us to consider 
alternative courses of action. If your car breaks down and you rely on it to get to work, 
you have a problem that requires a decision on your part.18 Unfortunately, most problems 
don’t come neatly labeled. One person’s problem is another person’s satisfactory state 
of affairs. One manager may view her division’s 2 percent decline in quarterly sales to 
be a serious problem requiring immediate action on her part. Her counterpart in another 
division, who also had a 2 percent sales decrease, might consider it quite acceptable. So 
awareness that a problem exists and that a decision might or might not be needed is a 
perceptual issue.
Every decision requires us to interpret and evaluate information. We typically 
receive data from multiple sources that we need to screen, process, and interpret. 
Which data are relevant to the decision, and which are not? Our perceptions will an-
swer that question. We also need to develop alternatives and evaluate their strengths 
and weaknesses. Again, our perceptual process will affect the outcome. Finally, we 
have to consider how our perceptions of the situation influence our decisions. For 
instance, how good are you at saying no? Research indicates that we perceive that 
saying no is uncomfortable, and often after saying no we will feel obligated to say 
yes to subsequent requests. In fact, people are so uncomfortable saying no that they 
may agree to unethical acts. When student participants in a study asked 108 strangers 
to write “pickle” in library books, half of them did it!19
DECISION MAKING IN ORGANIZATIONS
Business schools train students to follow rational decision-making models. While such 
rationalistic models have merit, they don’t always describe how people make decisions. 
OB improves the way we make decisions in organizations by addressing the decision-
making errors people commit in addition to the perception errors we’ve discussed. First, 
we describe some decision-making constructs, and then outline a few of the most com-
mon errors.
The Rational Model, Bounded Rationality, and Intuition
In OB, there are generally accepted constructs of decision making each of us employs 
to make determinations: rational decision making, bounded rationality, and intuition. 
Though their processes make sense, they may not lead to the most accurate (or best) deci-
sions. More importantly, there are times when one strategy may lead to a better outcome 
than another in a given situation.
Decisions
Choices made from 
among two or more 
alternatives.
Problem
A discrepancy between 
the current state of 
affairs and some 
desired state.

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 101
RATIONAL DECISION MAKING  We often think the best decision maker is rational 
and makes consistent, value-maximizing choices within specified constraints.20 Rational 
decisions follow a six-step rational decision-making model21 (see Exhibit 5-2).
The rational decision-making model assumes the decision maker has complete 
information, is able to identify all relevant options in an unbiased manner, and chooses 
the option with the highest utility.22 In reality, though, most decisions don’t follow the 
rational model; people are usually content to find an acceptable or reasonable solution 
to a problem rather than an optimal one. We tend to limit our choices to the neighbor-
hood of the problem’s symptom and the current alternative at hand. As one expert in 
decision making put it, “Most significant decisions are made by judgment, rather than 
by a defined prescriptive model.”23 People are remarkably unaware of making subop-
timal decisions.24
BOUNDED RATIONALITY  Often, we don’t follow the rational decision-making 
model for a reason: Our limited information-processing capability makes it impossible 
to assimilate all the information necessary to optimize, even if the information is 
readily obtainable.25 Because we cannot formulate and solve complex problems with 
full rationality, we operate within the confines of bounded rationality. We construct 
simplified models that extract the essential features from problems without capturing 
all their complexity. We can then behave rationally within the limits of the simple 
model.
One outcome of bounded rationality is a tendency to satisfice, or seek solutions that 
are satisfactory and sufficient (“good enough” in our estimation). While the satisficing 
answer is acceptable but not necessarily optimal, it’s not always a bad method. Often, 
a simple process may frequently be more sensible than the traditional rational decision-
making model.26 To use the rational model, you need to gather a great deal of informa-
tion about all the options, compute applicable weights, and then calculate values across 
a huge number of criteria. All these processes can cost time, energy, and money. If there 
are many unknown weights and preferences, the fully rational model may not be any 
more accurate than a best guess. Sometimes a fast-and-frugal process of solving problems 
might be your best option.
INTUITION  Perhaps the least rational way of making decisions is intuitive decision 
making, an unconscious process created from distilled experience.27 Intuitive decision 
making occurs outside conscious thought; relies on holistic associations, or links 
between disparate pieces of information; is fast; and is affectively charged, meaning it 
engages the emotions.28 While intuition isn’t rational, it isn’t necessarily wrong. Nor 
does it always contradict rational analysis; the two can complement each other.
Does intuition help effective decision making? Researchers are divided, but most ex-
perts are skeptical, in part because intuition is hard to measure and analyze. Probably the best 
advice from one expert is: “Intuition can be very useful as a way of setting up a hypothesis 
Rational
Characterized by 
making consistent, 
value-maximizing 
choices within 
specified constraints.
Rational decision-
making model
A decision-making 
model that describes 
how individuals 
should behave in order 
to maximize some 
outcome.
Bounded rationality
A process of 
making decisions by 
constructing simplified 
models that extract 
the essential features 
from problems without 
capturing all their 
complexity.
Intuitive decision 
making
An unconscious 
process created out of 
distilled experience.
1. Define the problem.
2. Identify the decision criteria.
3. Allocate weights to the criteria.
4. Develop the alternatives.
5. Evaluate the alternatives.
6. Select the best alternative.
EXHIBIT 5-2
Steps in the 
Rational 
Decision-Making 
Model

102	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
but is unacceptable as ‘proof.’” Use hunches derived from your experience to speculate, yes, 
but test those hunches with objective data and rational, dispassionate analysis.29
Common Biases and Errors in Decision Making
Decision makers engage in bounded rationality, but systematic biases and errors can creep 
into their judgments.30 To minimize effort and avoid trade-offs, people tend to rely too 
heavily on experience, impulses, gut feelings, and convenient rules of thumb. Shortcuts 
can distort rationality. Exhibit 5-3 provides some suggestions for how to avoid falling into 
these biases and errors.
OVERCONFIDENCE BIAS  We tend to be overconfident about our abilities and the abilities 
of others; also, we are usually not aware of this bias.31 For example, when people say 
they’re 90 percent confident about the range a certain number might take, their estimated 
ranges contain the correct answer only about 50 percent of the time—and experts are no 
more accurate in setting up confidence intervals than are novices.32
Individuals whose intellectual and interpersonal abilities are weakest are most 
likely to overestimate their performance and ability.33 There’s also a negative relation-
ship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and performance of their new ventures: the more 
optimistic, the less successful.34 The tendency to be too confident about their ideas might 
keep some from planning how to avoid problems that arise.
ANCHORING BIAS  Anchoring bias is a tendency to fixate on initial information and fail 
to adequately adjust for subsequent information.35 As we discussed earlier in the chapter 
in relationship to employment interviews, the mind appears to give a disproportionate 
amount of emphasis to the first information it receives. Anchors are widely used by 
people in professions in which persuasion skills are important—advertising, management, 
politics, real estate, and law.
Anchoring bias
A tendency to fixate 
on initial information, 
from which one then 
fails to adequately 
adjust for subsequent 
information.
Focus on Goals. Without goals, you can’t be rational, you don’t know what information you
need, you don’t know which information is relevant and which is irrelevant, you’ll ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to choose between alternatives, and you’re far more likely to experience regret over the choices 
you make. Clear goals make decision making easier and help you eliminate options that are
inconsistent with your interests.
Look for Information That Disconﬁrms Your Beliefs. One of the most effective means for
counteracting overconﬁdence and the conﬁrmation and hindsight biases is to actively look for 
information that contradicts your beliefs and assumptions. When we overtly consider various ways
we could be wrong, we challenge our tendencies to think we’re smarter than we actually are.
Don’t Try to Create Meaning out of Random Events. The educated mind has been trained
to look for cause-and-effect relationships. When something happens, we ask why. And when we 
can’t ﬁnd reasons, we often invent them. You have to accept that there are events in life that are  
outside your control. Ask yourself if patterns can be meaningfully explained or whether they 
are merely coincidence. Don’t attempt to create meaning out of coincidence.
Increase Your Options. No matter how many options you’ve identiﬁed, your ﬁnal choice can
be no better than the best of the option set you’ve selected. This argues for increasing your decision
alternatives and for using creativity in developing a wide range of diverse choices. The more 
alternatives you can generate, and the more diverse those alternatives, the greater your chance of
ﬁnding an outstanding one.
EXHIBIT 5-3
Reducing Biases 
and Errors
Source: S. P. 
Robbins, Decide & 
Conquer: Making 
Winning Decisions 
and Taking Control 
of Your Life (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: 
Financial Times/
Prentice Hall, 2004), 
81–84.

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 103
Any time a negotiation takes place, so does anchoring. When a prospective em-
ployer asks how much you made in your prior job, your answer typically anchors the 
employer’s offer. (Remember this when you negotiate your salary, but set the anchor only 
as high as you truthfully can.) The more precise your anchor is, the smaller the adjust-
ment. Some research suggests people think of making an adjustment after an anchor is 
set as rounding off a number: If you suggest a salary of $55,000, your boss will consider 
$50,000 to $60,000 a reasonable range for negotiation, but if you mention $55,650, your 
boss is more likely to consider $55,000 to $56,000 the range of likely values.36
CONFIRMATION BIAS  The rational decision-making process assumes we objectively 
gather information. But we don’t. We selectively gather it. Confirmation bias represents 
a case of selective perception: we seek out information that reaffirms our past choices, 
and we discount information that contradicts them.37 We also tend to accept at face value 
information that confirms our preconceived views, while we are skeptical of information 
that challenges them. We even tend to seek sources most likely to tell us what we want to 
hear, and we give too much weight to supporting information and too little to that which is 
contradictory. Fortunately, those who feel there is a strong need to be accurate in making 
a decision are less prone to confirmation bias.
AVAILABILITY BIAS  People tend to fear flying more than driving in a car. But if flying 
on a commercial airline were as dangerous as driving, the equivalent of two 747s filled 
to capacity would crash every week, killing all aboard. Because the media give more 
attention to air accidents, we tend to overstate the risk of flying and understate the risk 
of driving.
Availability bias is our tendency to base judgments on readily available informa-
tion. A combination of readily available information and our previous direct experience 
with similar information has a particularly strong impact on our decision making. Also, 
events that evoke emotions, are particularly vivid, or are more recent tend to be more 
available in our memory, leading us to overestimate the chances of unlikely events such 
as being in an airplane crash, suffering complications from medical treatment, or getting 
fired.38 Availability bias can also explain why managers give more weight in performance 
appraisals to recent employee behaviors than to behaviors of 6 or 9 months earlier.39
ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT  Another distortion that creeps into decisions is 
a tendency to escalate commitment, often for increasingly nonrational reasons.40 
Escalation of commitment refers to our staying with a decision even if there is clear 
evidence it’s wrong. When is escalation most likely to occur? Evidence indicates it occurs 
when individuals view themselves as responsible for the outcome. The fear of personal 
failure even biases the way we search for and evaluate information so that we choose only 
information that supports our dedication. It doesn’t appear to matter whether we chose 
the failing course of action or if it was assigned to us—we feel responsible and escalate 
in either case. Also, the sharing of decision authority—such as when others review the 
choice we made—can lead to higher escalation.41
We usually think of escalation of commitment as ungrounded. However, per-
sistence in the face of failure is responsible for a great many of history’s greatest 
feats, including the building of the Pyramids, the Great Wall of China, the Panama 
Canal, and the Empire State Building among others. Researchers suggest a balanced 
Confirmation bias
The tendency to 
seek out information 
that reaffirms past 
choices and to 
discount information 
that contradicts past 
judgments.
Availability bias
The tendency for 
people to base 
their judgments on 
information that is 
readily available to 
them.
Escalation of 
commitment
An increased 
commitment to a 
previous decision 
in spite of negative 
information.

104	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
approach includes frequent evaluation of the spent costs and whether the next step 
is worth the anticipated costs.42 As such, what we want to combat is the tendency to 
automatically escalate commitment.
RANDOMNESS ERROR  Most of us like to think we have some control over our world. Our 
tendency to believe we can predict the outcome of random events is the randomness error.
Decision making suffers when we try to create meaning from random events, par-
ticularly when we turn imaginary patterns into superstitions.43 These can be completely 
contrived (“I never make important decisions on Friday the 13th”) or they can evolve 
from a reinforced past pattern of behavior (wearing a lucky T-shirt).
RISK AVERSION  Mathematically speaking, we should find a 50–50 flip of the coin for 
$100 to be worth as much as a sure promise of $50. After all, the expected value of the 
gamble over a number of trials is $50. However, nearly everyone but committed gamblers 
would rather have the sure thing than a risky prospect.44 For many people, a 50–50 flip of 
a coin even for $200 might not be worth as much as a sure promise of $50, even though 
the gamble is mathematically worth twice as much! This tendency to prefer a sure thing 
over a risky outcome is risk aversion.
Risk aversion has important business implications. For example, to offset the in-
herent risk employees accept in a commission-based wage, companies may pay com-
missioned employees considerably more than they do those on straight salaries. Second, 
risk-averse employees will stick with the established way of doing their jobs rather than 
take a chance on innovative methods. Continuing with a strategy that has worked in the 
past minimizes risk, but it will lead to stagnation. Third, ambitious people with power that 
can be taken away (most managers) appear to be especially risk averse, perhaps because 
they don’t want to gamble with everything they’ve worked so hard to achieve.45 CEOs at 
risk of termination are exceptionally risk averse, even when a riskier investment strategy 
is in their firms’ best interests.46
HINDSIGHT BIAS  Hindsight bias is the tendency to believe falsely, after the outcome 
is known, that we would have accurately predicted it.47 When we have feedback on the 
outcome, we seem good at concluding it was obvious.
For instance, the original home video rental industry in which movies were rented 
at brick-and-mortar stores collapsed as online distribution outlets ate away at the mar-
ket.48 Some have suggested that if rental companies like Blockbuster had leveraged their 
brand to offer online streaming and kiosks, they could have avoided failure. While that 
seems obvious now in hindsight, tempting us to think we would have predicted it, many 
experts failed to predict industry trends in advance. Though criticisms of decision makers 
may have merit,49 as Malcolm Gladwell, author of Blink and The Tipping Point, writes, 
“What is clear in hindsight is rarely clear before the fact.”50
INFLUENCES ON DECISION MAKING: INDIVIDUAL  
DIFFERENCES AND ORGANIZATIONAL CONSTRAINTS
We turn here to factors that influence the way people make decisions and the degree to 
which they are susceptible to errors and biases. We discuss individual differences and 
then organizational constraints.
Randomness error
The tendency of 
individuals to believe 
that they can predict 
the outcome of random 
events.
Risk aversion
The tendency to 
prefer a sure gain of a 
moderate amount over 
a riskier outcome, even 
if the riskier outcome 
might have a higher 
expected payoff.
Hindsight bias
The tendency to 
believe falsely, after an 
outcome of an event 
is actually known, 
that one would have 
accurately predicted 
that outcome.
Sony
Kazuo Hirai, the 
CEO of Sony, has 
pursued a policy 
of restructuring 
and streamlining 
the 70-year-old 
Japanese electronics 
conglomerate. In 
2015, he divided 
Sony into three 
potentially profitable 
business areas, no 
longer pursuing 
growth in regions 
where intense 
competition put it 
at a disadvantage. 
Hirai’s risk aversion 
and downplaying 
volume was in the 
hopes of renewing 
growth.

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 105
Individual Differences
As we discussed, decision making in practice is characterized by bounded rationality, 
common biases and errors, and the use of intuition. Individual differences such as person-
ality also create deviations from the rational model.
PERSONALITY  Specific facets of conscientiousness—particularly achievement striving 
and dutifulness—may affect escalation of commitment.51 First, achievement-oriented 
people hate to fail, so they escalate their commitment, hoping to forestall failure. Dutiful 
people, however, are more inclined to do what they see as best for the organization, so 
they are less likely to escalate their commitment. Second, achievement-striving individuals 
appear more susceptible to hindsight bias, perhaps because they have a need to justify their 
actions.52 We don’t have evidence yet on whether dutiful people are immune to this bias.
GENDER  Who makes better decisions, men or women? It depends on the situation. 
When the situation isn’t stressful, decision making by men and women is about equal 
in quality. In stressful situations, it appears that men become more egocentric and make 
more risky decisions, while women become more empathetic and their decision making 
improves.53
GENERAL MENTAL ABILITY  We know people with higher levels of general mental ability 
(GMA; see Chapter 4) are able to process information more quickly, solve problems more 
accurately, and learn faster, so you might expect them to be less susceptible to common 
decision errors. However, GMA appears to help people avoid only some of them.54 Smart 
people are just as likely to fall prey to anchoring, overconfidence, and escalation of 
commitment; probably because being smart doesn’t alert you to the possibility you’re too 
confident or emotionally defensive. It’s not that intelligence never matters. Once warned 
about decision-making errors, more intelligent people learn more quickly to avoid them.
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES  Cultures differ in time orientation, the value they place on 
rationality, their belief in the ability of people to solve problems, and their preference 
for collective decision making. Differences in time orientation help us understand, for 
instance, why managers in Egypt make decisions at a much slower and more deliberate 
pace than their U.S. counterparts. Second, while rationality is valued in North America, 
that’s not true elsewhere. A North American manager might make a decision intuitively 
but know it’s important to appear to proceed in a rational fashion because rationality is 
highly valued in the West. In countries such as Iran, where rationality is not paramount to 
other factors, efforts to appear rational are not necessary.
Third, some cultures emphasize solving problems, while others focus on accepting 
situations as they are. The United States falls in the first category; Thailand and Indonesia 
are examples of the second. Because problem-solving managers believe they can and 
should change situations to their benefit, U.S. managers might identify a problem long 
before their Thai or Indonesian counterparts would choose to recognize it as such. Fourth, 
decision making in Japan, a collectivistic society (see Chapter 3), is much more group-
oriented than in the United States, an individualistic society (see Chapter 3). The Japanese 
value conformity and cooperation, so before Japanese CEOs make an important decision, 
they collect a large amount of information to use in consensus-forming group decisions.

106	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
NUDGING  Anyone who has ever seen a commercial knows about nudging. Commercials 
represent one of the most outright forms of an organization’s attempt to influence our 
perceptions (of a product) and our decision (to acquire that product). Nudging has also 
been used positively in the development of corporate social responsibility (CSR; see 
Chapter 2) initiatives to change people’s expectations for organizations.55 People differ 
in their susceptibility to suggestion, but it is probably fair to say we are all receptive to 
nudging to some degree.
Organizational Constraints
Organizations can constrain decision makers, which is both good (to help prevent biases) 
and bad (to circumvent rational evaluation). For instance, managers shape decisions to 
reflect the organization’s performance evaluation and reward systems, to comply with 
formal regulations, and to meet organizationally imposed time constraints. Precedents 
can also limit decisions.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SYSTEMS  Managers are influenced by the criteria on 
which they are evaluated. If a division manager believes the manufacturing plants under 
his responsibility are operating best when he hears nothing negative, the plant managers 
will spend a good part of their time ensuring that negative information doesn’t reach him.
REWARD SYSTEMS  The organization’s reward systems influence decision makers by 
suggesting which choices have better personal payoffs. For example, if the organization 
rewards risk aversion, managers are more likely to make conservative decisions.
FORMAL REGULATIONS  David, a shift manager at a Taco Bell restaurant in San 
Antonio, Texas, describes constraints he faces on his job: “I’ve got rules and regulations 
covering almost every decision I make—from how to make a burrito to how often I need 
to clean the restrooms. My job doesn’t come with much freedom of choice.” David’s 
situation is not unique. All but the smallest organizations create rules and policies to 
program decisions and get individuals to act in the intended manner. In doing so, they 
limit decision choices.
SYSTEM-IMPOSED TIME CONSTRAINTS  Almost all important decisions come with explicit 
deadlines. For example, a report on new product development may have to be ready for 
executive committee review by the first of the month. Such conditions often make it difficult, 
if not impossible, for managers to gather all information before making a final choice.
HISTORICAL PRECEDENTS  Decisions aren’t made in a vacuum; they have context. For 
example, it’s common knowledge that the largest determinant of the size of any given 
year’s budget is last year’s budget. Choices made today are largely a result of choices 
made over the years.
WHAT ABOUT ETHICS IN DECISION MAKING?
Ethical considerations should be important to all organizational decision making. In this 
section, we present three ways to frame decisions ethically. We also address the important 
issue of how lying affects decision making.

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 107
Three Ethical Decision Criteria
The first ethical yardstick is utilitarianism, which proposes making decisions solely on 
the basis of their outcomes, ideally to provide the greatest good for the greatest number.56 
This view dominates business decision making and is consistent with goals such as ef-
ficiency, productivity, and high profits. Keep in mind that utilitarianism is not always as 
objective as it sounds. One study indicated that the ethicality of utilitarianism is influ-
enced in ways we don’t realize. Participants were given a moral dilemma: The weight of 
five people bends a footbridge so it is low to some train tracks. A train is about to hit the 
bridge. The choice is to let all five people perish, or push the one heavy man off the bridge 
to save four people. In the United States, South Korea, France, and Israel, 20 percent of 
respondents chose to push the man off the bridge, in Spain, 18 percent, and in Korea, 
none. This might speak to cultural utilitarian values, but a minor change, asking people 
to answer in a non-native language they knew, caused more participants to push the man 
overboard: in one group, 33 percent pushed the man, and in another group 44 percent 
did.57 The emotional distance of answering in a non-native language thus seemed to foster 
a utilitarian viewpoint. It appears that even our view of what we consider pragmatic is 
changeable.
A second ethical criterion is to make decisions consistent with fundamental liber-
ties and privileges, as set forth in documents such as the U.S. Bill of Rights. An emphasis 
on rights in decision making means respecting and protecting the basic rights of indi-
viduals, such as the right to privacy, free speech, and due process. This criterion protects 
whistle-blowers58 when they reveal an organization’s unethical practices to the press or 
government agencies, using their right to free speech.
A third criterion is to impose and enforce rules fairly and impartially to ensure 
justice or an equitable distribution of benefits and costs.59 Justice perspectives are 
sometimes used to justify paying people the same wage for a given job regardless 
of performance differences and using seniority as the primary determinant in layoff 
decisions.
Choosing between Criteria
Decision makers, particularly in for-profit organizations, feel comfortable with utilitari-
anism. The “best interests” of the organization and its stockholders can justify a lot of 
questionable actions, such as large layoffs. But many critics feel this perspective needs 
to change. Public concern about individual rights and social justice suggests managers 
should develop ethical standards based on nonutilitarian criteria. This presents a chal-
lenge because satisfying individual rights and social justice creates far more ambiguities 
than utilitarian effects on efficiency and profits. However, while raising prices, selling 
products with questionable effects on consumer health, closing down inefficient plants, 
laying off large numbers of employees, and moving production overseas to cut costs can 
be justified in utilitarian terms, there may no longer be a single measure by which good 
decisions are judged.
This is where CSR comes in to affect a positive change. As we can see by look-
ing at utilitarian ideals, organizations are not motivated to respond equitably when 
they are looking only at a balance sheet. However, public pressure on organizations 
to behave responsibly has meant sustainability issues now affect the bottom line: 
consumers increasingly choose to purchase goods and services from organizations 
Utilitarianism
A system in which 
decisions are made to 
provide the greatest 
good for the greatest 
number.
Whistle-blowers
Individuals who report 
unethical practices 
by their employer to 
outsiders.

108	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
with effective CSR initiatives, high performers are attracted to work for CSR or-
ganizations, governments offer incentives to organizations for sustainability efforts, 
and so forth. CSR is now beginning to make good business sense, folding ethics into 
utilitarian computations.
Behavioral Ethics
Increasingly, researchers are turning to behavioral ethics—an area of study that analyzes 
how people behave when confronted with ethical dilemmas. Their research tells us that 
while ethical standards exist collectively in societies and organizations, and individually 
in the form of personal ethics, we do not always follow ethical standards promoted by our 
organizations, and we sometimes violate our own standards. Our ethical behavior varies 
widely from one situation to the next.
Lying
Are you a liar? Many of us would not like to be labeled as a liar. But if a liar is merely 
someone who lies, we are all liars. We lie to ourselves, and we lie to others. We lie con-
sciously and unconsciously. We tell big lies and create small deceptions. Lying is one of 
the top unethical activities we may indulge in daily, and it undermines all efforts toward 
sound decision making.
The truth is that one of the reasons we lie is because lying is difficult for others to 
detect. In more than 200 studies, individuals correctly identified people who were lying 
only 47 percent of the time, which is less than random picking.60 This seems to be true 
no matter what lie-detection technique is employed. For example, one technique police 
officers use is based on the theory that people look up and to the right when they lie. 
Unfortunately, researchers who tested the technique could not substantiate the underlying 
theory.61
Lying is deadly to decision making, whether we detect the lies or not. Managers—
and organizations—simply cannot make good decisions when facts are misrepresented 
and people give false motives for their behaviors. Lying is a big ethical problem as well. 
From an organizational perspective, using fancy lie-detection techniques and entrapping 
liars when possible yields unreliable results.62 The most lasting solution comes from OB, 
which studies ways to prevent lying by working with our natural propensities to create 
environments that are non-conducive to lying.
CREATIVITY, CREATIVE DECISION MAKING,  
AND INNOVATION IN ORGANIZATIONS
Models will often improve our decisions, but a decision maker also needs creativity, the 
ability to produce novel and useful ideas. Novel ideas are different from what’s been done 
before but which are appropriate for the problem.
Creativity allows the decision maker to fully appraise and understand problems, 
including seeing problems others can’t see. Although all aspects of OB are complex, that 
is especially true for creativity. To simplify, Exhibit 5-4 provides a three-stage model of 
creativity in organizations. The core of the model is creative behavior, which has both 
causes (predictors of creative behavior) and effects (outcomes of creative behavior).
Behavioral ethics
Analyzing how people 
actually behave when 
confronted with ethical 
dilemmas.
Creativity
The ability to produce 
novel and useful ideas.
Three-stage model of 
creativity
The proposition that 
creativity involves three 
stages: causes (creative 
potential and creative 
environment), creative 
behavior, and creative 
outcomes (innovation).

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 109
Creative Behavior
Creative behavior occurs in four steps, each of which leads to the next:63
1.	 Problem formulation. Any act of creativity begins with a problem that the be-
havior is designed to solve. Thus, problem formulation is the stage of creative 
behavior in which we identify a problem or opportunity that requires a solution that 
is as yet unknown.
2.	 Information gathering. Given a problem, the solution is rarely directly at hand. 
We need time to learn more and to process that learning. Thus, information gath-
ering is the stage of creative behavior when knowledge is sought and possible solu-
tions to a problem incubate in an individual’s mind. Information gathering leads us 
to identifying innovation opportunities.64
3.	 Idea generation. Idea generation is the process of creative behavior in which 
we develop possible solutions to a problem from relevant information and 
knowledge. Sometimes we do this alone, when tricks like taking a walk65 and 
doodling66 can jump-start the process. Increasingly, though, idea generation is 
collaborative.
4.	 Idea evaluation. Finally, it’s time to choose from the ideas we have generated. 
Thus, idea evaluation is the process of creative behavior in which we evaluate 
potential solutions problems to identify the best one.
Causes of Creative Behavior
Having defined creative behavior, the main stage in the three-stage model, we now look 
back to the causes of creativity: creative potential and creative environment.
CREATIVE POTENTIAL  Is there such a thing as a creative personality? Indeed. While 
creative genius is rare—whether in science (Stephen Hawking), the performing 
arts (Martha Graham), or business (Steve Jobs)—most people have some of 
the characteristics shared by exceptionally creative people. The more of these 
characteristics we have, the higher our creative potential. Innovation is one of the top 
organizational goals for leaders, with the facets of:
Problem formulation
The stage of creative 
behavior that involves 
identifying a problem 
or opportunity 
requiring a solution 
that is as yet unknown.
Information gathering
The stage of creative 
behavior when 
possible solutions to a 
problem incubate in an 
individual’s mind.
Idea generation
The process of 
creative behavior that 
involves developing 
possible solutions to a 
problem from relevant 
information and 
knowledge.
Idea evaluation
The process of creative 
behavior involving the 
evaluation of potential 
solutions to problems 
to identify the best one.
Creative outcomes (Innovation)
Novelty
Usefulness
Creative behavior
Problem formulation
Information gathering
Idea generation
Idea evaluation
Causes of creative behavior
Creative potential
Creative environment
EXHIBIT 5-4
Three-Stage 
Model of 
Creativity in 
Organizations

110	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
1.	 Intelligence and Creativity Intelligence is related to creativity. Smart people are 
more creative because they are better at solving complex problems. However, they 
may also be more creative because they have greater “working memory,” that is, 
they can recall more information related to the task at hand.67 Along the same lines, 
recent research in the Netherlands indicates that an individual’s high need for cog-
nition (desire to learn) is correlated with greater creativity.68
2.	 Personality and Creativity The Big Five personality trait of openness to experience 
(see Chapter 4) correlates with creativity, probably because open individuals are less 
conformist in behavior and more divergent in thinking.69 Other traits of creative people 
include proactive personality, self-confidence, risk taking, tolerance for ambiguity, and 
perseverance.70 Hope, self-efficacy (belief in your capabilities), and positive affect 
also predict an individual’s creativity.71 Furthermore, research in China suggests that 
people with high core self-evaluations are better able than others to maintain creativity 
in negative situations.72 Perhaps counterintuitively, some research supports the “mad 
genius” theory that some people with mental illness are wildly creative partially due 
to their psychopathology; history certainly provides examples, such as Vincent van 
Gogh, John Forbes Nash, and others. However, the converse isn’t true—people who 
are creative may have less psychopathology as a group than the general population.73
3.	 Expertise and Creativity Expertise is the foundation for all creative work and 
thus is the single most important predictor of creative potential. For example, film 
writer, producer, and director Quentin Tarantino spent his youth working in a video 
rental store, where he built up an encyclopedic knowledge of movies. The expertise 
of others is important, too. People with larger social networks have greater expo-
sure to diverse ideas and informal access to the expertise and resources of others.74
4.	 Ethics and Creativity Although creativity is linked to many desirable individual 
characteristics, it is not correlated with ethicality. People who cheat may actually 
be more creative than those who behave ethically, according to recent research. It 
may be that dishonesty and creativity can both stem from a rule-breaking desire.75
CREATIVE ENVIRONMENT  Most of us have creative potential we can learn to apply, 
but as important as creative potential is, by itself it is not enough. We need to be in 
an environment where creative potential can be realized. Of the many environmental 
factors, perhaps most important is motivation. If you aren’t motivated to be creative, it is 
unlikely you will be. Intrinsic motivation, or the desire to work on something because it’s 
interesting, exciting, satisfying, and challenging (discussed in more detail in Chapter 7), 
correlates fairly strongly with creative outcomes.76 However, it is also valuable to work 
in an environment that rewards and recognizes creative work. A study of health care 
teams found that team creativity translated into innovation only when the climate actively 
supported innovation.77 The organization should foster the free flow of ideas, including 
providing fair and constructive judgment. Freedom from excessive rules also encourages 
creativity; employees should have the freedom to decide what work is to be done and 
how to do it. One study in China revealed that both structural empowerment (in which 
the structure of the work unit allows sufficient employee freedom) and psychological 
empowerment (which lets the individual feel personally enabled to decide) were related 
to employee creativity.78 However, research in Slovenia found that creating a competitive 
climate where achievement at any cost is valued will stymie creativity.79

	
Chapter 5  •  Perceptual Processes	 111
Teams matter to creativity too. As we will learn in Chapter 11, more work today is 
being done in teams, and many people believe diversity will increase team creativity. Past 
research has suggested that diverse teams are not more creative. More recently, however, 
one study of Dutch teams revealed that when team members were explicitly asked to 
understand and consider the point of view of the other team members (an exercise called 
perspective taking), diverse teams were more creative than those with less diversity.80 
Leadership might make the difference. One study of 68 Chinese teams reported that di-
versity was positively related to team creativity only when the team’s leader was inspira-
tional and instilled members with confidence.81
Creative Outcomes (Innovation)
The final stage in our model of creativity is the outcome. We can define creative out-
comes as ideas or solutions judged to be novel and useful by relevant stakeholders. 
Novelty itself does not generate a creative outcome if it isn’t useful. Thus, “off-the-
wall” solutions are creative only if they help solve the problem. The usefulness of the 
solution might be self-evident (the iPad), or it might be considered successful by only 
the stakeholders initially.82
An organization may harvest many creative ideas from its employees and call 
itself innovative. However, as one expert stated, “Ideas are useless unless used.” Soft 
skills help translate ideas into results. One researcher found that in a large agribusi-
ness company, creative ideas were most likely to be implemented when an individual 
was motivated to translate the idea into practice—and had strong networking 
ability.83 These studies highlight an important fact: creative ideas do not implement 
themselves; translating them into creative outcomes is a social process that requires 
utilizing other concepts addressed in this text, including power and politics, leader-
ship, and motivation.
SUMMARY
Individuals base their behavior not on the way their external environment actually 
is, but rather on the way they see it or believe it to be. An understanding of the way 
people make decisions can help us explain and predict behavior, but few important 
decisions are simple or unambiguous enough for the rational model’s assumptions to 
apply. We find individuals looking for solutions that satisfice rather than optimize, 
injecting biases and prejudices into the decision process, and relying on intuition. 
Managers should encourage creativity in employees and teams to create a route to 
innovative decision making.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Behavior follows perception, so to influence behavior at work, assess how people 
perceive their work. Often behaviors we find puzzling can be explained by under-
standing the initiating perceptions.
•	 Make better decisions by recognizing perceptual biases and decision-making errors 
we tend to commit. Learning about these problems doesn’t always prevent us from 
making mistakes, but it does help.

112	 Part 2 • Individual Differences
•	 Adjust your decision-making approach to the national culture you’re operating in 
and to the criteria your organization values. If you’re in a country that doesn’t value 
rationality, don’t feel compelled to follow the decision-making model or to try to 
make your decisions appear rational. Adjust your decision approach to ensure com-
patibility with the organizational culture.
•	 Combine rational analysis with intuition. These are not conflicting approaches to 
decision making. By using both, you can actually improve your decision-making 
effectiveness.
•	 Try to enhance your creativity. Actively look for novel solutions to problems, at-
tempt to see problems in new ways, use analogies, and hire creative talent. Try to 
remove work and organizational barriers that might impede creativity.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Perception & Individual 
Decision Making
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
How Creative Are You?
Everyone is innovative, to some degree. Take this PIA to find out if you are wildly or 
mildly creative.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 5-1. 	 How do you think our perceptions influence our creativity?
	 5-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

113
Valuing Diversity
6
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Demonstrate how workplace discrimination undermines organizational 
effectiveness.
	 2.	 Explain how stereotypes function in organizational settings.
	 3.	 Describe how key biographical characteristics are relevant to OB.
	 4.	 Explain how other differentiating characteristics factor into OB.
	 5.	 Demonstrate the relevance of intellectual and physical abilities to OB.
	 6.	 Describe how organizations manage diversity effectively.
DIVERSITY
We are, each of us, unique. This is obvious enough, but managers sometimes forget they 
need to recognize and capitalize on individual differences to get the most from their em-
ployees. In this chapter, you’ll learn how individual characteristics like age, gender, race, 
ethnicity, and abilities can influence employee performance. You’ll also see how manag-
ers can develop awareness about these characteristics and manage a diverse workforce 
effectively. But first, let’s take an overview perspective of the changing workforce.

114	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Demographic Characteristics
Worldwide, workplace demographics have undergone rapid and lasting change toward 
equality in the past 50–60 years. Perhaps most noticeably, the predominantly White, male 
managerial workforce of the past has given way to a gender-balanced, multiethnic work-
force. For instance, in 1950 only 29.6 percent of the U.S. workforce was female,1 but by 
2014, women comprised 47 percent.2 Both in the United States and internationally, women 
today are much more likely than before to be employed full time.3 Also, in the United 
States, the earnings gap between Whites and other racial and ethnic groups has decreased 
significantly due to increased presence of minorities in the workplace. In comparison, in 
the United Kingdom women constitute about 51 percent of the workforce, though with sig-
nificant differences in the wages offered to them in comparison to their male counterparts,4 
and ethnic minorities account for about 32 percent. Migrants account for about 10 percent 
(6 percent from European economic area and the remaining 4 percent from outside the 
EU). From the perspective of age, in the United States and globally, workers over the age of 
55 are an increasingly large portion of the workplace. Currently, in Australia there are more 
workers over age 55 than there are under age 25.5 Similarly, in the United Kingdom work-
ers over the age of 49 account for 24 percent of employees, up from 20 percent in 2004, 
and this shift is set to continue. These changes are increasingly reflected in the makeup of 
managerial and professional positions across Europe and several other regions in the world. 
Levels of Diversity
Although much has been said about diversity in age, race, gender, ethnicity, religion, and 
disability status, experts now recognize that these demographic characteristics are just 
the tip of the diversity iceberg.6 Demographics mostly reflect surface-level diversity, 
not thoughts and feelings, and can lead employees to perceive one another through ste-
reotypes and assumptions. However, evidence has shown that people are less concerned 
about demographic differences if they see themselves as sharing more important charac-
teristics, such as personality and values, that represent deep-level diversity.7
Managing diversity involves and benefits everyone. To appreciate this further, and 
understand the difference between surface and deep level diversity, consider the follow-
ing example. Philip and Sharon are managers who do not seem to have much in common. 
Philip is young, and recently hired male from an East European-speaking neighborhood in 
London with a Marketing degree. Sharon is an older woman from rural Manchester who 
started as a secretary after her College education and worked her way up to the hierarchy. 
At first, these coworkers may notice their surface-level differences in education, ethnicity, 
regional background, and gender. However, as they get to one and understand one another, 
they may find they are both deeply committed to their families, share a common way of 
thinking about work problems, like to work collaboratively and are interested in interna-
tional assignments. These deep-level similarities can overshadow the more superficial 
differences between them and the research suggests they will work together. There can 
be serious repercussions to discrimination and exclusion, which often stem from socially-
constructed inequalities. It is important for managers to acknowledge the role of inclusion 
when considering diversity, which will help improve opportunities for all.8
Throughout this text, you will encounter differences between deep- and surface-
level diversity in various contexts. Diversity is an important concept in OB since individ-
ual differences shape preferences for rewards, communication styles, reactions to leaders, 
negotiation styles, and many other aspects of behavior in organizations. Unfor­tunately, 
increased diversity may give way to discriminatory practices, which we discuss next.
Surface-level diversity
Differences in 
easily perceived 
characteristics such as 
gender, race, ethnicity, 
age, or disability, that 
do not necessarily 
reflect the ways people 
think or feel but that 
may activate certain 
stereotypes.
Deep-level diversity 
Differences in values, 
personality, and work 
preferences that 
become progressively 
more important for 
determining similarity 
as people get to know 
one another better.

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 115
DISCRIMINATION
Although diversity presents many opportunities for organizations, diversity management 
includes working to eliminate unfair discrimination. To discriminate is to note a differ-
ence between things, which in itself isn’t necessarily bad. Noticing one employee is more 
qualified is necessary for making good hiring decisions; noticing another is taking on 
leadership responsibilities exceptionally well is necessary for making strong promotion 
decisions. Usually when we talk about discrimination, though, we mean allowing our 
behavior to be influenced by stereotypes about groups of people. Stereotyping is judging 
someone on the basis of our perception of the group to which that person belongs. To use 
a machine metaphor, you might think of stereotypes as the fuel that powers the discrimi-
nation engine. Stereotypes can be insidious not only because they may affect the fairness 
of the organization, but because they can affect how potential targets of discrimination 
see themselves.
Stereotype Threat
Let’s say you are sitting in a restaurant, waiting for the blind date your coworker arranged 
to find you in the crowded room. How do you think your coworker described you to this 
person? Now consider how you would describe yourself to this new person if you’d talked 
on the phone before the date. What identifiable characteristics would you mention as a 
shorthand way for your date to know a bit about you so he or she could recognize you in 
the restaurant?
Chances are good that you’d mention your race, something about how you express 
your gender (such as the way you dress), how old you are, and maybe what you do for a 
living. You might also mention how tall you are if you are remarkably tall or short, and—if 
you’re candid—you might mention something about your build (heavyset, petite, in be-
tween). Overall, you’d give cues to your blind date about characteristics that are distinctive, 
or stand out, about you. Interestingly, what you tell someone about yourself says a lot about 
what you think about yourself. Just as we stereotype others, we also stereotype ourselves.
Stereotype threat describes the degree to which we internally agree with the gen-
erally negative stereotyped perceptions of our groups. Along with that comes a fear of 
being judged when we are identified with the negative connotations of that group. This 
can happen when we are a minority in a situation. For instance, an older worker applying 
for a job in a predominately millennial-age workforce may assume the interviewer thinks 
he is out of touch with current trends. What creates a stereotype threat is not whether this 
worker is or is not up to date with trends, but whether he internally agrees that older work-
ers (the group he identifies with) are out of date (the stereotype).
Stereotype threat has serious implications for the workplace. Employees who feel 
it may have lower performance, lower satisfaction, negative job attitudes, decreased en-
gagement, decreased motivation, higher absenteeism, more health issues, and higher 
turnover intentions.9 Thankfully, this is something we can combat in the workplace by 
treating employees as individuals, and not highlighting group differences. The follow-
ing organizational changes can be successful in reducing stereotype threat: increasing 
awareness of how stereotypes may be perpetuated; reducing differential and preferential 
treatment through objective assessments; banning stereotyped practices and messages; 
confronting even small, seemingly innocuous aggressions against minority groups and 
adopting transparent practices that signal the value of all employees.10
Discrimination 
Noting of a difference 
between things; 
often we refer to 
unfair discrimination, 
which means making 
judgments about 
individuals based on 
stereotypes regarding 
their demographic 
group.
Stereotyping
Judging someone 
on the basis of one’s 
perception of the group 
to which that person 
belongs.
Stereotype threat 
The degree to which 
we internally agree 
with the generally 
negative stereotyped 
perceptions of our 
groups.

116	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Discrimination in the Workplace
To review, rather than looking at individual characteristics, unfair discrimination assumes 
everyone in a group is the same. This discrimination is often very harmful for employees, 
as we’ve just discussed, and for organizations.
Exhibit 6-1 provides definitions and examples of some forms of discrimination in 
organizations. Although many are prohibited by law and therefore are not a part of organi-
zations’ official policies, the practices persist. Tens of thousands of cases of employment 
discrimination are documented every year, and many more go unreported. Since dis-
crimination has increasingly come under both legal scrutiny and social disapproval, most 
overt forms have faded, which may have resulted in an increase in more covert forms like 
incivility or exclusion, especially when leaders look the other way.11
As you can see, discrimination can occur in many ways, and its effects can vary 
depending on organizational context and the personal biases of employees. Some forms 
 Type of Discrimination
Definition
Examples from Organizations
Discriminatory 
policies or practices
Actions taken by representatives 
of the organization that deny equal 
opportunity to perform or unequal 
rewards for performance.
Older workers may be targeted for 
layoffs because they are highly paid 
and have lucrative benefits.
Sexual harassment
Unwanted sexual advances and 
other verbal or physical conduct of a 
sexual nature that create a hostile or 
offensive work environment.
Salespeople at one company went 
on company-paid visits to strip clubs, 
brought strippers into the office to 
celebrate promotions, and fostered 
pervasive sexual rumors.
Intimidation
Overt threats or bullying directed 
at members of specific groups of 
employees.
African American employees at some 
companies have found nooses hanging 
over their workstations.
Mockery and insults
Jokes or negative stereotypes; 
sometimes the result of jokes taken 
too far.
Arab Americans have been asked 
at work whether they were carrying 
bombs or were members of 
terrorist organizations.
Exclusion
Exclusion of certain people from 
job opportunities, social events, 
discussions, or informal mentoring; 
can occur unintentionally.
Many women in finance claim they are 
assigned to marginal job roles or are 
given light workloads that don’t lead to 
promotion.
Incivility
Disrespectful treatment, including 
behaving in an aggressive manner, 
interrupting the person, or ignoring 
varying opinions.
Female lawyers note that male 
attorneys frequently cut them off 
or do not adequately address their 
comments.
EXHIBIT 6-1 
Forms of Discrimination in Organizations
Sources: J. Levitz and P. Shishkin, “More Workers Cite Age Bias after Layoffs,” The Wall Street Journal, March 11, 
2009, D1–D2; W. M. Bulkeley, “A Data-storage Titan Confronts Bias Claims,” The Wall Street Journal, September 12, 
2007, A1, A16; D. Walker, “Incident with Noose Stirs Old Memories,“ McClatchy-Tribune Business News, June 29, 
2008; D. Solis, “Racial Horror Stories Keep EEOC Busy,“ Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, July 30, 2005, 1; H. lbish 
and A. Stewart, Report on Hate Crimes and Discrimination against Arab Americans: The Post-September 11 Backlash, 
September 11, 2001-October 11, 2001 (Washington, DC: American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, 2003); A. 
Raghavan, “Wall Street’s Disappearing Women,” Forbes, March 16, 2009, 72–78; and L. M. Cortina, “Unseen Injustice: 
Incivility as Modern Discrimination in Organizations,“ Academy of Management Review 33, no. 1 (2008): 55–75. 

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 117
of discrimination like exclusion or incivility are especially hard to root out since they may 
occur simply because the actor isn’t aware of the effects of his or her actions. Like ste-
reotype threat, actual discrimination can lead to increased negative consequences for em-
ployers, including reduced productivity and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB; 
see Chapter 1), more conflict, increased turnover, and even increased risk-taking behav-
ior.12 Unfair discrimination also leaves qualified job candidates out of initial hiring and 
promotions. Thus, even if an employment discrimination lawsuit is never filed, a strong 
business case can be made for aggressively working to eliminate unfair discrimination.
Whether it is overt or covert, intentional or unintentional, discrimination is one of the 
primary factors that prevents diversity. On the other hand, recognizing diversity opportunities 
can lead to an effective diversity management program and ultimately to a more successful 
organization. Diversity is a broad term, and the phrase workplace diversity can refer to any 
characteristic that makes people different from one another. The following section covers 
some important surface-level characteristics that differentiate members of the workforce.
BIOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Biographical characteristics such as age, gender, race, ethnicity, and disability are some 
of the most obvious ways employees differ. Let’s begin by looking at factors that are eas-
ily definable and readily available—data that can be obtained, for the most part, from an 
employee’s human resources (HR) file. Variations in surface-level characteristics may be 
the basis for discrimination against classes of employees, so it is worth knowing how re-
lated they actually are to work outcomes. As a general rule, many biographical differences 
are not important to actual work outcomes, and far more variation occurs within groups 
sharing biographical characteristics than between them.
Age
Age in the workforce is likely to be an issue of increasing importance during the next 
decade for many reasons. For one, the workforce is aging worldwide in most developed 
countries;13 by estimates, 93 percent of the growth in the labor force from 2006 to 2016 
came from workers over age 54.14 In the United States, the proportion of the workforce age 
55 and older is 22 percent and increasing.15 Legislation has, for all intents and purposes, 
outlawed mandatory retirement. Moreover, the United States and Australia, among other 
countries, have laws directly against age discrimination.16 Most workers today no longer 
have to retire at age 70, and 62 percent of workers age 45 to 60 plan to delay retirement.17
Stereotypes of older workers as being behind the times, grumpy, and inflexible are 
changing. Managers often see a number of positive qualities that older workers bring to 
their jobs, such as experience, judgment, a strong work ethic, and a commitment to qual-
ity. For example, the Public Utilities Board, the water agency of Singapore, reports that 27 
percent of its workforce is over age 55 and the older workers provide workforce stability.18 
Industries like health care, education, government, and nonprofit service often welcome 
older workers.19 However, older workers are still perceived as less adaptable and less mo-
tivated to learn new technology.20 When organizations seek individuals who are open to 
change and training, the perceived negatives associated with age clearly hinder the initial 
hiring of older workers and increase the likelihood they will be let go during cutbacks.
Now let’s take a look at the evidence. What effect does age actually have on two of 
our most important outcomes, job performance and job satisfaction?
Biographical 
characteristics 
Personal 
characteristics—such 
as age, gender, race, 
and length of tenure—
that are objective and 
easily obtained from 
personnel records. 
These characteristics 
are representative of 
surface-level diversity.

118	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
AGE AND JOB PERFORMANCE  Despite misperceptions, the majority of studies show 
“virtually no relationship between age and job performance,” according to Director 
Harvey Sterns of the Institute for Life-Span Development and Gerontology.21 Indeed, 
some studies indicate that older adults perform better than their younger counterparts. For 
example, in Munich a four-year study of 3,800 Mercedes-Benz workers found that “the 
older workers seemed to know better how to avoid severe errors,” said Matthias Weiss, 
the academic coordinator of the study.22 Related to performance, there is a conception 
that creativity diminishes as people age. Researcher David Galenson, who studied the 
ages of peak creativity, found that people who create through experimentation do “their 
greatest work in their 40s, 50s, and 60s. These artists rely on wisdom, which increases 
with age.”23
AGE AND JOB SATISFACTION  Regarding job satisfaction, an important topic in Chapter 2, 
a review of more than 800 studies found that older workers tend to be more satisfied 
with their work, report better relationships with coworkers, and are more committed to 
their organizations.24 Other studies, however, have found that job satisfaction increases 
up to middle age, at which point it begins to drop off. When we separate the results by 
job type, we find that satisfaction tends to increase among professionals as they age, 
whereas among nonprofessionals it falls during middle age and then rises again in the 
later years.
Sex
Few issues initiate more debates, misconceptions, and unsupported opinions than whether 
women perform as well on jobs as men do. In reality, few—if any—differences between 
men and women affect job performance.25 Though in general men may have slightly 
higher math ability and women slightly higher verbal ability, the differences are fairly 
small, and there are no consistent male–female differences in problem-solving ability, 
analytical skills, or learning ability.26 In the workplace, one meta-analysis of job perfor-
mance studies found that women scored slightly higher than men did on performance 
measures.27 A separate meta-analysis of 95 leadership studies indicated that women and 
men are rated equally effective as leaders.28
Yet biases and stereotypes persist. In the hiring realm, managers are influenced 
by gender bias when selecting candidates for certain positions.29 For instance, men are 
preferred in hiring decisions for male-dominated occupations, particularly when men are 
doing the hiring.30 Once on the job, men and women may be offered a similar number of 
developmental experiences, but females are less likely to be assigned challenging posi-
tions by men, assignments that could help them achieve higher organizational positions.31 
Moreover, men are more likely to be chosen for leadership roles even though men and 
women are equally effective leaders. A study of 20 organizations in Spain, for example, 
suggested that men are generally selected for leadership roles that require handling orga-
nizational crises.32 According to Naomi Sutherland, senior partner in diversity at recruiter 
Korn Ferry, “Consciously or subconsciously, companies are still hesitant to take the risk 
on someone who looks different from their standard leadership profile.”33
Worldwide, there are many misconceptions and contradictions about male and fe-
male workers. Thankfully, many countries have laws against sex discrimination, including 
Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Other countries, such as Belgium, 
France, Norway, and Spain, are seeking gender diversity through laws to increase the 

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 119
percentage of women on boards of directors. Gender biases and gender discrimination are 
still serious issues, but there are indications that the situation is improving.
Race and Ethnicity
Race is a controversial issue in society and in organizations. We define race as the heri-
tage people use to identify themselves; ethnicity is the additional set of cultural character-
istics that often overlaps with race. Typically, we associate race with biology and ethnicity 
with culture, but there is a history of self-identifying for both classifications. Laws against 
race and ethnic discrimination are in effect in many countries, including Australia, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States.35
Race and ethnicity have been studied as they relate to employment outcomes such as 
hiring decisions, performance evaluations, pay, and workplace discrimination. Individu-
als may slightly favor colleagues of their own race in performance evaluations, promotion 
decisions, and pay raises, although such differences are not found consistently, especially 
when highly structured methods of decision making are employed.36 Also, some indus-
tries have remained less racially diverse than others. For instance, U.S. advertising and 
media organizations suffer from a lack of racial diversity in their management ranks, even 
though their client base is increasingly ethnically diverse.37
Finally, members of racial and ethnic minorities report higher levels of discrimina-
tion in the workplace.38 African Americans generally fare worse than Whites in employ-
ment decisions (a finding that may not apply outside the United States). They receive 
lower ratings in employment interviews, lower job performance ratings, less pay, and 
fewer promotions.39 Lastly, while this does not necessarily prove overt racial discrimina-
tion, African Americans are often discriminated against even in controlled experiments. 
For example, one study of low-wage jobs found that African American applicants with 
no criminal history received fewer job offers than did White applicants with criminal 
records.40
Disabilities
Workplace policies, both official and circumstantial, regarding individuals with physi-
cal or mental disabilities vary from country to country. Countries such as Australia, the 
United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan have specific laws to protect individuals 
with disabilities.41 These laws have resulted in greater acceptance and accommodation of 
people with physical or mental impairments. In 2006, the UN Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities (or UNCRPD) defined it as those with long-term physical, 
mental, or sensory impairments, which may hinder their full and effective participation in 
society on an equal basis with others.42
SCOPE OF DISABILITIES  The U.K. Disability Discrimination Act defines it as sufferers 
of a physical or mental impairment that has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on 
carrying out normal day-to-day activities. The final clause, normal day-to-day activities, 
has been subject to certain controversy. The courts interpret it as referring to ordinary 
everyday tasks that an average person carries out. The controversy arises because this 
often means that someone may not then be classified as disabled and, hence, has no case 
in law when their impairment prevents them from carrying out an aspect of their work, 

120	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
which does not fall under the definition. It is interesting to see how the case law further 
develops in this area from the perspective of the United States and the United Kingdom.
DISABILITIES AND OUTCOMES  The impact of disabilities on employment outcomes 
has been explored from a variety of perspectives. On the one hand, when disability 
status was randomly manipulated among hypothetical candidates in a study, disabled 
individuals were rated as having superior personal qualities like dependability.43 Another 
review suggested that workers with disabilities receive higher performance evaluations. 
However, according to research, individuals with disabilities tend to encounter lower 
performance expectations and are less likely to be hired.44 Mental disabilities may impair 
performance more than physical disabilities: Individuals with such common mental health 
issues as depression and anxiety are significantly more likely to be absent from work.45
The elimination of discrimination against the disabled workforce has long been 
problematic. In Europe, for instance, policies to motivate employers have failed to boost 
the workforce participation rate for workers with disabilities, and outright quota systems 
in Germany, France, and Poland have backfired.46 However, the recognition of the talents 
and abilities of individuals with disabilities has made a positive impact. In addition, tech-
nology and workplace advancements have greatly increased the scope of available jobs 
for those with all types of disabilities. Managers need to be attuned to the true require-
ments of each job and match the skills of the individual to them, providing accommoda-
tions when needed. But what happens when employees do not disclose their disabilities? 
Let’s discuss this next.
Hidden Disabilities
As we mentioned earlier, disabilities include observable characteristics like missing 
limbs, illnesses that require a person to use a wheelchair, and blindness. Other disabilities 
may not be obvious, at least at first. Unless an individual decides to disclose a disability 
that isn’t easily observable, it can remain hidden at the discretion of the employee. These 
are called hidden disabilities (or invisible disabilities). Hidden disabilities generally fall 
under the categories of sensory disabilities (for example, impaired hearing), autoimmune 
disorders (like rheumatoid arthritis), chronic illness or pain (like carpal tunnel syndrome), 
cognitive or learning impairments (like ADHD), sleep disorders (like insomnia), and psy-
chological challenges (like PTSD).47
As a result of recent changes to the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments 
Act of 2008, U.S. organizations must accommodate employees with a very broad range 
of impairments. However, employees must disclose their conditions to their employers 
in order to be eligible for workplace accommodations and employment protection. Since 
many employees do not want to disclose their invisible disabilities, they are prevented 
from getting the workplace accommodations they need in order to thrive in their jobs. 
Research indicates that individuals with hidden disabilities are afraid of being stigmatized 
or ostracized if they disclose their disabilities to others in the workplace, and they believe 
their managers will think they are less capable of strong job performance.48
In some ways, a hidden disability is not truly invisible. For example, a person with 
undisclosed autism will still exhibit the behaviors characteristic of the condition, such 
as difficulties with verbal communication and adaptability.49 You may observe behaviors 
that lead you to suspect an individual has a hidden disability. Unfortunately, you may 

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 121
attribute the behavior to other causes—for instance, you may incorrectly ascribe the slow, 
slurred speech of a coworker to an alcohol problem rather than to the long-term effects 
of a stroke.
As for the employee, research suggests that disclosure helps all—the individual, oth-
ers, and organizations. Disclosure may increase the job satisfaction and well-being of the 
individual, help others understand and assist the individual to succeed in the workplace, 
and allow the organization to accommodate the situation to achieve top performance.50
OTHER DIFFERENTIATING CHARACTERISTICS
The last set of characteristics we’ll look at includes religion, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, and cultural identity. These characteristics illustrate deep-level differences that 
provide opportunities for workplace diversity, as long as discrimination can be overcome.
Religion
Not only do religious and nonreligious people question each other’s belief systems, often 
people of different religious faiths conflict with one another. There are few—if any—
countries in which religion is a nonissue in the workplace. For this reason, employers 
are prohibited by law from discriminating against employees based on religion in many 
countries, including Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.51 Islam is 
one of the most popular religions in the world, and it is the majority religion in many 
countries. However, in the United States, Muslims are a minority group that is growing. 
There are nearly three million Muslims in the United States, and the number is predicted 
to double by 2030, when they will represent 1.7 percent of the population, according 
to the Pew Research Center. At that point, there will be as many Muslims in the United 
States as there are Jews and Episcopalians.52 Despite these numbers, there is evidence in 
studies that people are discriminated against for their Islamic faith. For instance, U.S. job 
applicants in Muslim-identified religious attire who applied for hypothetical retail jobs 
had shorter, more interpersonally negative interviews than applicants who did not wear 
Muslim-identified attire.53
Religious discrimination has been a growing source of discrimination claims in the 
United States, partially because the issues are complex. Recently, Samantha Elauf, who 
was turned down for employment because she wears a hijab—a black head scarf—sued 
for religious discrimination. “I learned I was not hired by Abercrombie because I wear a 
head scarf, which is a symbol of modesty in my Muslim faith,” she said. When she inter-
viewed, she was not aware of the organization’s rule against head coverings and did not 
mention her reason for the scarf. Should employers be required to deduce why applicants 
dress as they do and then protect them? Even the Supreme Court is not certain.54
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
While much has changed, the full acceptance and accommodation of lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual, and transgender (LGBT) employees remains a work in progress. In the United States, 
a Harvard University study sent fictitious but realistic resumés to 1,700 actual entry-level 
job openings. The applications were identical with one exception: Half mentioned in-
volvement in gay organizations during college, and the other half did not. The applica-
tions without the mention received 60 percent more callbacks than the ones with it.55

122	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Perhaps as a result of perceived discrimination, many LGBT employees do not 
disclose their status. For example, John Browne, former CEO of British Petroleum (BP), 
hid his sexual orientation until he was 59 years old, when the press threatened to disclose 
that he was gay. Fearing the story would result in turmoil for the company, he resigned. 
Browne wrote, “Since my outing in 2007, many societies around the world have done 
more to embrace people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. But the business 
world has a long way to go.”56
SEXUAL ORIENTATION LAWS  U.S. federal law does not prohibit discrimination 
against employees based on sexual orientation, although 29 states and more than 160 
municipalities do. In those states and municipalities that do protect against discrimination 
based on sexual orientation, roughly as many claims are filed for sexual orientation 
discrimination as for sex and race discrimination.57 Some other countries are more 
progressive: for instance, Australia has laws against discriminating on the basis of sexual 
preference, and the United Kingdom has similar laws regarding sexual orientation.58 
However, the distinctions in these laws may not be broad enough—researchers have 
acknowledged a new acronym, QUILTBAG, to describe individuals who are queer/
questioning, undecided, intersex, lesbian, transgender, bisexual, asexual, or gay.59
As a first step in the United States, the federal government has prohibited discrimi-
nation based on sexual orientation against government employees. The Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) held that sex-stereotyping against lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual individuals represents gender discrimination enforceable under the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964.60 Also, pending federal legislation against discrimination based on 
sexual orientation—the Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA)—passed the Sen-
ate but is not yet law.61
ORGANIZATIONAL POLICIES ON SEXUAL ORIENTATION  Even in the absence of 
federal legislation, many organizations have implemented policies and procedures that 
cover sexual orientation. For example, IBM, once famous for requiring all employees to 
wear white shirts and ties, has changed its ultra-conservative environment. Former vice-
president Ted Childs said, “IBM ensures that people who are gay, lesbian, bisexual, or 
transgender feel safe, welcomed, and valued within the global walls of our business. . . . 
The contributions that are made by [gay and transgender] IBMers accrue directly to our 
bottom line and ensure the success of our business.”62
IBM is not alone. Surveys indicate that more than 90 percent of the Fortune 500 
have policies that cover sexual orientation. As for gender identity, companies are increas-
ingly adopting policies to govern the way their organizations treat transgender employ-
ees. In 2001, only eight companies in the Fortune 500 had policies on gender identity. 
That number is now more than 250.
However, among the Fortune 1,000, some noteworthy companies do not currently 
have domestic-partner benefits or nondiscrimination clauses for LGBT employees, in-
cluding ExxonMobil, currently second in the Fortune rankings of the largest U.S. com-
panies.63 Some companies claim they do not need to provide LGBT benefits for religious 
reasons. Moreover, some organizations that claim to be inclusive don’t live up to the 
claim. For example, a recent study of five social cooperatives in Italy indicated that these 
so-called inclusive organizations actually expect individuals to remain quiet about their 
status.64

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 123
Cultural Identity
We have seen that people sometimes define themselves in terms of race and ethnicity. 
Many people carry a strong cultural identity as well, a link with the culture of family 
ancestry that lasts a lifetime, no matter where the individual may live in the world. People 
choose their cultural identity, and they also choose how closely they observe the norms 
of that culture. Cultural norms influence the workplace, sometimes resulting in clashes. 
Organizations must adapt. Workplace practices that coincided with the norms of a per-
son’s cultural identity were commonplace years ago, when societies were less mobile. 
People looked for work near familial homes, and organizations established holidays, ob-
servances, practices, and customs that suited the majority. Organizations were generally 
not expected to accommodate each individual’s preferences.
Thanks to global integration and changing labor markets, today’s organizations do 
well to understand and respect the cultural identities of their employees, both as groups 
and as individuals. A U.S. company looking to do business in, say, Latin America, needs 
to understand that employees in those cultures expect long summer holidays. A company 
that requires employees to work during this culturally established break will meet strong 
resistance.
An organization seeking to be sensitive to the cultural identities of its employees 
should look beyond accommodating its majority groups and instead create as much of an 
individualized approach to practices and norms as possible. Often, managers can provide 
the bridge of workplace flexibility to meet both organizational goals and individual needs.
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Verizon: Diversity.
ABILITY
Contrary to what we were taught in grade school, we weren’t all created equal in our 
abilities. For example, regardless of how motivated you are, you may not be able to act as 
well as Jennifer Lawrence, play basketball as well as LeBron James, or write as well as 
Stephen King. Of course, all of us have strengths and weaknesses that make us relatively 
superior or inferior to others in performing certain tasks or activities. From management’s 
standpoint, the challenge is to understand the differences to increase the likelihood that a 
given employee will perform their job well.
What does ability mean? As we use the term, ability is an individual’s current ca-
pacity to perform the various tasks of a job. Overall abilities are essentially made up of 
two sets of factors: intellectual and physical.
Intellectual Abilities
Intellectual abilities are abilities needed to perform mental activities—thinking, reason-
ing, and problem solving. Most societies place a high value on intelligence, and for good 
reason. Smart people generally earn more money and attain higher levels of education. 
They are also more likely to emerge as leaders of groups. However, assessing and measur-
ing intellectual ability are not always simple, partially because people aren’t consistently 
Ability An individual’s 
capacity to perform the 
various tasks in a job.
Intellectual abilities 
The capacity to do 
mental activities—
thinking, reasoning, 
and problem solving.

124	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
capable of correctly assessing their own cognitive ability.65 IQ tests are designed to ascer-
tain a person’s general intellectual abilities, but the origins, influence factors, and testing 
of intelligence quotient (IQ) are controversial.66 So, too, are popular college admission 
tests, such as the SAT and ACT, and graduate admission tests in business (GMAT), law 
(LSAT), and medicine (MCAT). The firms that produce these tests don’t claim they assess 
intelligence, but experts know they do.67
DIMENSIONS OF INTELLECTUAL ABILITY  The seven most frequently cited dimensions 
making up intellectual abilities are number aptitude, verbal comprehension, perceptual 
speed, inductive reasoning, deductive reasoning, spatial visualization, and memory.68 
Exhibit 6-2 describes these dimensions.
Intelligence dimensions are positively correlated, so if you score high on verbal 
comprehension, for example, you’re more likely to also score high on spatial visualiza-
tion. The correlations aren’t perfect, meaning people do have specific abilities that predict 
important work-related outcomes when considered individually.69 However, they are high 
enough that researchers also recognize a general factor of intelligence, general mental 
ability (GMA). Evidence supports the idea that the structures and measures of intel-
lectual abilities can be generalized across cultures. Someone in Venezuela or Sudan, for 
instance, does not have a different set of mental abilities than an American or Czech 
individual. There is some evidence that IQ scores vary to some degree across cultures, 
but those differences become much smaller when we take into account educational and 
economic differences.70
THE WONDERLIC INTELLECTUAL ABILITY TEST  It might surprise you that the 
intelligence test most widely used in hiring decisions takes only 12 minutes to complete. 
General mental 
ability (GMA) 
An overall factor 
of intelligence, as 
suggested by the 
positive correlations 
among specific 
intellectual ability 
dimensions.
 Dimension
Description
Job Example
Number aptitude 
Ability to do speedy and accurate 
arithmetic.
Accountant: Computing the sales tax 
on a set of items. 
Verbal comprehension
Ability to understand what is read or 
heard and the relationship of words to 
each other.
Plant manager: Following corporate 
policies on hiring.
Perceptual speed
Ability to identify visual similarities and 
differences quickly and accurately.
Fire investigator: Identifying clues to 
support a charge of arson. 
Inductive reasoning
Ability to identify a logical sequence in 
a problem and then solve the problem.
Market researcher: Forecasting 
demand  for a product in the next 
time period.
Deductive reasoning
Ability to use logic and assess the 
implications of an argument.
Supervisor: Choosing between two 
different suggestions offered by 
employees.
Spatial visualization
Ability to imagine how an object 
would look if its position in space 
were changed.
Interior decorator: Redecorating 
an office.
Memory
Ability to retain and recall past 
experiences.
Salesperson: Remembering the 
names of customers.
EXHIBIT 6-2 
Dimensions of Intellectual Ability

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 125
It’s the Wonderlic Cognitive Ability Test. There are different forms of the test, but each 
has 50 questions and the same general construct. Here are two questions to try:
•	 When rope is selling at $0.10 a foot, how many feet can you buy for $0.60?
•	 Assume the first two statements are true. Is the final one:
1.	 True.
2.	 False.
3.	 Not certain.
a.	 The boy plays baseball.
b.	 All baseball players wear hats.
c.	 The boy wears a hat.
The Wonderlic measures both speed (almost nobody has time to answer every question) and 
power (the questions get harder as you go along), so the average score is quite low—about 
21 of 50. Because the Wonderlic is able to provide valid information cheaply (for $5 to $10 
per applicant), many organizations use it in hiring decisions including Publix supermar-
kets, Manpower staffing systems, BP, and Dish satellite systems.71 Most of these companies 
don’t give up other hiring tools, such as application forms or interviews. Rather, they add the 
Wonderlic for its ability to provide valid data on applicants’ intelligence levels.
INTELLECTUAL ABILITY AND JOB SATISFACTION  While intelligence is a big help in 
performing a job well, it doesn’t make people happier or more satisfied with their jobs. 
Why not? Although intelligent people perform better and tend to have more interesting 
jobs, they are also more critical when evaluating their job conditions. Thus, smart people 
have it better, but they also expect more.72
Physical Abilities
Though the changing nature of work suggests intellectual abilities are increasingly impor-
tant for many jobs, physical abilities have been and will remain valuable. Research on 
hundreds of jobs has identified nine basic abilities needed in the performance of physical 
tasks.73 These are described in Exhibit 6-3. High employee performance is likely to be 
achieved when the extent to which a job requires each of the nine abilities matches the 
abilities of employees in that job.
Organizations are increasingly aware that an optimally productive workforce in-
cludes all types of people and does not automatically exclude anyone on the basis of 
broad categories of abilities. For example, a pilot program of software company SAP in 
Germany, India, and Ireland has found that employees with autism perform excellently 
in precision-oriented tasks like debugging software.74 The potential benefits of diversity 
are enormous for forward-thinking managers. Of course, integrating diverse people into 
an optimally productive workforce takes skill. We discuss how to bring the talents of a 
div­erse workforce together in the next section.
IMPLEMENTING DIVERSITY MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
As we mentioned before, discrimination—for any reason—leads to increased turnover, 
which is detrimental to organizational performance. While a better representation of all 
racial groups in organizations remains a goal, an individual of minority status is much 
Physical abilities 
The capacity to do 
tasks that demand 
stamina, dexterity, 
strength, and similar 
characteristics.

126	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
less likely to leave the organization if there is a feeling of inclusiveness, known as a posi-
tive diversity climate.75 Although the reasons aren’t completely understood, a positive 
climate for diversity can also lead to increased sales, suggesting there are organizational 
performance gains associated with reducing racial and ethnic discrimination.76
How do we move beyond the destructiveness of discrimination? The answer is in 
understanding one another’s viewpoints. Evidence suggests that some people find inter-
acting with other racial groups uncomfortable unless there are clear behavioral scripts to 
guide their behavior,77 so creating diverse work groups focused on mutual goals could be 
helpful, along with developing a positive diversity climate.
We have discussed the facts surrounding stereotypes and discrimination, the ef-
fect of employee differences and how they influence important employment outcome 
variables, explained some of the laws countries use to curtail discrimination, explored 
some of the policies organizations employ to mandate inclusiveness, and suggested ways 
orga­nizations can address certain specific employee conditions. We now look at how a 
manager can and should manage employee differences. Active diversity management 
makes everyone more aware of and sensitive to the needs and differences of others. This 
definition highlights the fact that diversity programs include and are meant for everyone, 
regardless of characteristics and in light of varying specific abilities. Diversity is much 
more likely to be successful when we see it as everyone’s business than when we believe 
it helps only certain groups of employees.
Attracting, Selecting, Developing, and Retaining Diverse Employees
One method of enhancing workforce diversity is to target recruitment messages to spe-
cific demographic groups that are underrepresented in the workforce. This means plac-
ing advertisements in publications geared toward those groups; pairing with colleges, 
Positive diversity 
climate 
In an organization, 
an environment of 
inclusiveness and an 
acceptance of diversity.
Diversity 
management 
The process and 
programs by which 
managers make 
everyone more aware 
of and sensitive to the 
needs and differences 
of others.
Strength Factors
1. Dynamic strength 
Ability to exert muscular force repeatedly or continuously 
over time.
2. Trunk strength
Ability to exert muscular strength using the trunk 
(particularly abdominal) muscles.
3. Static strength
Ability to exert force against external objects.
4. Explosive strength
Ability to expend a maximum of energy in one or a series 
of explosive acts.
Flexibility Factors
5.  Extent flexibility
Ability to move the trunk and back muscles as far as possible.
6. Dynamic flexibility
Ability to make rapid, repeated flexing movements.
Other Factors
7. Body coordination
Ability to coordinate the simultaneous actions of different 
parts of the body.
8. Balance
Ability to maintain equilibrium despite forces pulling off 
balance.
9. Stamina
Ability to continue maximum effort requiring prolonged 
effort over time.
EXHIBIT 6-3 
Types of Physical 
Abilities

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 127
universities, and other institutions with significant numbers of underrepresented minori-
ties, such as what Microsoft is doing to encourage women to pursue technology studies;78 
and forming partnerships with associations like the Society of Women Engineers or the 
National Minority Supplier Development Council.
Research has shown that women and minorities have greater interest in employ-
ers that make special efforts to highlight a commitment to diversity in their recruiting 
materials. Diversity advertisements that fail to show women and minorities in positions 
of organizational leadership send a negative message about the diversity climate at an 
organization.79 Of course, to show the pictures, organizations must actually have diversity 
in their management ranks.
Some companies have been actively working toward recruiting less-represented 
groups. Etsy, an online retailer, hosts engineering classes and provides grants for aspiring 
women coders, and then hires the best.80 McKinsey & Co., Bain & Co., Boston Consult-
ing Group, and Goldman Sachs have similarly been actively recruiting women who left 
the workforce to start families by offering phase-in programs and other benefits.81
The selection process is one of the most important places to apply diversity efforts. 
Hiring managers need to value fairness and objectivity in selecting employees and focus 
on the productive potential of new recruits. When managers use a well-defined protocol 
for assessing applicant talent and the organization clearly prioritizes nondiscrimination 
policies, qualifications become far more important factors than demographic characteris-
tics in determining who gets hired.82
Individuals who are demographically different from their coworkers may be more 
likely to feel lower commitment and to leave, but a positive diversity climate can aid 
retention. Many diversity training programs are available to employers, and research 
efforts are focusing on identifying the most effective initiatives. It seems that the best 
programs are inclusive in both their design and implementation.83 A positive diversity 
climate should be the goal since all workers appear to prefer an organization that values 
diversity.
Diversity in Groups
Most contemporary workplaces require extensive work in group settings. When people 
work in groups, they need to establish a common way of looking at and accomplishing 
the major tasks, and they need to communicate with one another often. If they feel little 
sense of membership and cohesion in their groups, all group attributes are likely to suffer.
In some cases, diversity in various traits can hurt team performance, whereas in 
other cases it can facilitate performance.84 Whether diverse or homogeneous teams are 
more effective depends on the characteristic of interest. Demographic diversity (in gen-
der, race, and ethnicity) does not appear to help or hurt team performance in general, 
although racial diversity in management groups may increase organizational performance 
in the right conditions.85
Teams of individuals who are highly intelligent, conscientious, and interested in 
working in team settings are more effective. Thus, diversity in these variables is likely to 
be a bad thing—it makes little sense to try to form teams that mix in members who are 
lower in intelligence or conscientiousness, or who are uninterested in teamwork. In other 
cases, diversity can be a strength. Groups of individuals with different types of expertise 
and education are more effective than homogeneous groups. Similarly, a group made 

128	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
entirely of assertive people who want to be in charge, or a group whose members all 
prefer to follow the lead of others, will be less effective than a group that mixes leaders 
and followers.
Regardless of the composition of the group, differences can be leveraged to achieve 
superior performance. The most important factor is to emphasize the similarities among 
members.86 Managers who emphasize higher-order goals and values in their leadership 
style are more effective in managing diverse teams.87
Diversity Programs
Organizations use a variety of diversity programs in recruiting and selection policies, 
as well as in training and development practices. Effective, comprehensive workforce 
programs encouraging diversity have three distinct components. First, they teach man-
agers about the legal framework for equal employment opportunity and encourage fair 
treatment of all people regardless of their demographic characteristics. Second, they teach 
managers how a diverse workforce will be better able to serve a diverse market of cus-
tomers and clients. Third, they foster personal development practices that bring out the 
skills and abilities of all workers, acknowledging how differences in perspective can be a 
valuable way to improve performance for everyone.88
Most negative reactions to employment discrimination are based on the idea that 
discriminatory treatment is unfair. Regardless of race or gender, people are generally in 
favor of diversity-oriented programs, including affirmative action programs (AAP), to 
increase the representation of minority groups and ensure everyone a fair opportunity to 
show their skills and abilities.
Organizational leaders should examine their workforces to determine whether target 
groups have been underutilized. If groups of employees are not proportionally represented 
in top management, managers should look for any hidden barriers to advancement. Man-
agers can often improve recruiting practices, make selection systems more transparent, 
and provide training for those employees who have not had adequate exposure to diver-
sity material in the past. The organization should also clearly communicate its policies to 
emplo­yees so they can understand how and why certain practices are followed. Communi-
cations should focus as much as possible on qualifications and job performance; emphasiz-
ing certain groups as needing more assistance could backfire.
Finally, research indicates a tailored approach will be needed for international orga­
nizations. For instance, a case study of the multinational Finnish company TRANSCO 
found it was possible to develop a consistent global philosophy for diversity management. 
However, differences in legal and cultural factors across nations forced the company to 
develop unique policies to match the cultural and legal frameworks of each country in 
which it operated.89
SUMMARY
This chapter looked at diversity from many perspectives. We paid particular attention to 
three variables—biographical characteristics, abilities, and diversity programs. Diversity 
management must be an ongoing commitment that crosses all levels of the organization. 
Policies to improve the climate for diversity can be effective, and diversity management 
can be learned.

	
Chapter 6  •  Valuing Diversity	 129
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Understand your organization’s antidiscrimination policies thoroughly and share 
them with all employees.
•	 Assess and challenge your stereotype beliefs to increase your objectivity.
•	 Look beyond readily observable biographical characteristics and consider the 
individual’s capabilities before making management decisions; remain open and 
encouraging for individuals to disclose any hidden disabilities.
•	 Fully evaluate what accommodations a person with disabilities will need and then 
fine-tune the job to that person’s abilities.
•	 Seek to understand and respect the unique biographical characteristics of each indi-
vidual; a fair but individualistic approach yields the best performance.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the Simulation: Human Resources.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Intercultural Sensitivity Scale
Are you aware of intercultural dynamics? Take this PIA to assess your intercultural 
sensitivity.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 6-1.	 What is the most diverse group you have worked in? List all the ways in which this group 
was diverse.
	 6-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab  
Management
®

130
Basic Motivation
7
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Describe the three key elements of motivation.
	 2.	 Compare the early theories of motivation.
	 3.	 Contrast the elements of self-determination theory and goal-setting theory.
	 4.	 Demonstrate the differences among self-efficacy theory, reinforcement theory,  
equity theory, and expectancy theory.
	 5.	 Identify the implications of employee job engagement for managers.
	 6.	 Describe how the contemporary theories of motivation complement one another.
MOTIVATION
Some individuals seem driven to succeed. The same young student who struggles to read 
a textbook for more than 20 minutes may devour a Harry Potter book in a day. The differ-
ence is the situation. As we analyze the concept of motivation, keep in mind that levels of 
motivation vary both between individuals and within individuals at different times.
We define motivation as the processes that account for an individual’s intensity, 
direction, and persistence of effort toward attaining a goal.1 While general motivation 
is concerned with effort toward any goal, we’ll narrow the focus to organizational 
goals.
Motivation 
The processes that 
account for an 
individual’s intensity, 
direction, and 
persistence of effort 
toward attaining a goal.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 131
Intensity describes how hard a person tries. This is the element most of us focus on 
when we talk about motivation. However, high intensity is unlikely to lead to favorable 
job-performance outcomes unless the effort is channeled in a direction that benefits the 
organization. Therefore, we consider the quality of effort as well as its intensity. Effort 
directed toward, and consistent with, the organization’s goals is the kind of effort we 
should be seeking. Finally, motivation has a persistence dimension. This measures how 
long a person can maintain effort. Motivated individuals stay with a task long enough to 
achieve their goals.
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled Motivation  
(TWZ Role Play).
EARLY THEORIES OF MOTIVATION
Three theories of employee motivation formulated during the 1950s are probably the best 
known. Although they are now of questionable validity (as we’ll discuss), they represent 
a foundation, and practicing managers still use their terminology.
Hierarchy of Needs Theory
The best-known theory of motivation is Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,2 which 
hypothesizes that within every human being there is a hierarchy of five needs. Recently, a 
sixth need has been proposed for a highest level—intrinsic values—which is said to have 
originated from Maslow, but it has yet to gain widespread acceptance.3 The original five 
needs are:
1.	 Physiological. Includes hunger, thirst, shelter, sex, and other bodily needs.
2.	 Safety-security. Security and protection from physical and emotional harm.
3.	 Social-belongingness. Affection, belongingness, acceptance, and friendship.
4.	 Esteem. Internal factors such as self-respect, autonomy, and achievement, and ex-
ternal factors such as status, recognition, and attention.
5.	 Self-actualization. Drive to become what we are capable of becoming; includes 
growth, achieving our potential, and self-fulfillment.
According to Maslow, as each need becomes substantially satisfied, the next one 
becomes dominant. So if you want to motivate someone, you need to understand what 
level of the hierarchy that person is currently on and focus on satisfying needs at or above 
that level. We depict the hierarchy as a pyramid in Exhibit 7-1 since this is its best-known 
representation, but Maslow referred to the needs only in terms of levels.
Maslow’s theory has received long-standing wide recognition, particularly among 
practicing managers. It is intuitively logical and easy to understand, and some research 
has validated it.4 Unfortunately, however, most research has not, especially when the the-
ory is applied to diverse cultures,5 with the possible exception of physiological needs.6 
But old theories, especially intuitively logical ones, die hard. It is thus important to be 
aware of the prevailing public acceptance of the hierarchy when discussing motivation.
Hierarchy of needs 
Abraham Maslow’s 
hierarchy of five 
needs—physiological, 
safety, social, 
esteem, and self-
actualization—in 
which, as each need is 
substantially satisfied, 
the next need becomes 
dominant.

132	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Two-Factor Theory
Believing an individual’s relationship to work is basic, and that the attitude toward work 
can determine success or failure, psychologist Frederick Herzberg wondered, “What do 
people want from their jobs?” He asked people to describe, in detail, situations in which 
they felt exceptionally good or bad about their jobs. The responses differed significantly 
and led Herzberg to his two-factor theory (also called motivation-hygiene theory, but 
this term is not used much today).7
According to a recent survey reported in the Harvard Business Review which iden-
tified thousands of events that lead to extreme satisfaction and dissatisfaction.8 
Conditions such as quality of supervision, pay, company policies, physical work 
conditions, relationships with others, and job security are hygiene factors. When they’re 
adequate, people will not be dissatisfied; neither will they be satisfied. If we want to 
motivate people on their jobs, we should emphasize factors associated with the work 
itself or with outcomes directly derived from it such as promotional opportunities, per-
sonal growth opportunities, recognition, responsibility, and achievement. These are the 
characteristics people find intrinsically rewarding. Note that Herzberg proposed a dual 
continuum: The opposite of “satisfaction” is “no satisfaction,” and the opposite of “dis-
satisfaction” is “no dissatisfaction” (see Exhibit 7-2).
Two-factor theory has not been well supported in research. Criticisms center on 
Herzberg’s original methodology and his assumptions, such as the statement that sat-
isfaction is strongly related to productivity. Subsequent research has also shown that if 
hygiene and motivational factors are equally important to a person, both are capable of 
motivating.
Regardless of the criticisms, Herzberg’s theory has been quite influential and is 
currently very much in use in research in Asia.9 Most managers worldwide are familiar 
with its recommendations.
McClelland’s Theory of Needs
You have one beanbag and five targets set up in front of you, each farther away than 
the last. Target A sits almost within arm’s reach. If you hit it, you get $2. Target B is a 
bit farther out and pays $4, but only about 80 percent of the people who try can hit it. 
Target C pays $8, and about half the people who try can hit it. Very few people can hit 
Target D, but the payoff is $16 for those who do. Finally, Target E pays $32, but it’s 
almost impossible to achieve. Which would you try for? If you selected C, you’re likely 
to be a high achiever. Why? Read on.
Two-factor theory 
A theory that relates 
intrinsic factors 
to job satisfaction 
and associates 
extrinsic factors with 
dissatisfaction. Also 
called motivation-
hygiene theory.
Self-
actualization
Safety-security
Physiological
Social-belongingness
Esteem
EXHIBIT 7-1 
Maslow’s 
Hierarchy of 
Needs
Source: H. Skelsey, 
“Maslow’s 
Hierarchy of 
Needs—the Sixth 
Level,” Psychologist 
(2014): 982–83.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 133
McClelland’s theory of needs was developed by David McClelland and his asso-
ciates.10 As opposed to Maslow’s hierarchy, these needs are more like motivating factors 
than strict needs for survival. There are three:
•	 Need for achievement (nAch) is the drive to excel, to achieve in relationship to a 
set of standards.
•	 Need for power (nPow) is the need to make others behave in a way they would not 
have otherwise.
•	 Need for affiliation (nAff) is the desire for friendly and close interpersonal 
relationships.
McClelland and subsequent researchers focused most of their attention on nAch. 
High achievers perform best when they perceive their probability of success as 0.5—that 
is, a 50–50 chance. They dislike gambling with high odds because they get no achieve-
ment satisfaction from success that comes by pure chance. Similarly, they dislike low 
odds (high probability of success) because then there is no challenge to their skills. They 
like to set goals that require stretching themselves a little. The view that high nAch acts 
as an internal motivator presupposes two cultural characteristics—willingness to accept 
a moderate degree of risk (which excludes countries with strong uncertainty-avoidance 
characteristics, see Chapter 4), and concern with performance (which applies to countries 
with strong achievement characteristics). This combination is found predominantly in 
Anglo-American countries such as the United States, Canada, and Great Britain, and 
much less in collectivistic countries like Chile and Portugal.
The three needs are linked to important job outcomes. First, when jobs have a 
high degree of personal responsibility and feedback, along with an intermediate degree 
of risk, high achievers are strongly motivated. Second, high nAch does not necessar-
ily make someone a good manager, especially in large organizations. People with high 
nAch are interested in how well they do personally, and not in influencing others to 
do well. Third, the most effective leaders are high in nPow and nAff, according to re-
cent research11—the “rough edges” of nPow may be tempered by the nAff desire to be 
included.
McClelland’s theory has research support, particularly cross-culturally (when 
cultural dimensions including power distance [see Chapter 4] are taken into account).12 
McClelland’s theory 
of needs 
A theory that 
achievement, power, 
and affiliation are 
three important needs 
that help explain 
motivation.
Need for achievement 
(nAch) 
The drive to excel, to 
achieve in relationship 
to a set of standards, 
and to strive to succeed.
Need for power 
(nPow) 
The need to make 
others behave in a way 
in which they would 
not have behaved 
otherwise.
Need for affiliation 
(nAff) 
The desire for friendly 
and close interpersonal 
relationships.
Satisfaction
Traditional view
Herzberg’s view
Dissatisfaction
Satisfaction
No satisfaction
No dissatisfaction
Dissatisfaction
Satisfaction
Dissatisfaction
No dissatisfaction
Dissatisfaction
Satisfaction
No satisfaction
Motivators
Hygiene factors
EXHIBIT 7-2 
Contrasting 
View of 
Satisfaction and 
Dissatisfaction

134	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
First, the concept of nAch has received a great deal of research attention and accep-
tance in a wide array of fields, including organizational behavior (OB), psychology, 
and general business.13 Second, the nPow concept also has research support, but it 
may be more familiar to people in broad terms than in relation to the original defi-
nition.14 We will discuss power much more in Chapter 13. Third, the nAff concept 
is well established and accepted in research. Although it may seem like an updated 
version of Maslow’s social need, it is actually quite separate. Many people take for 
granted the idea that human beings have a drive toward relationships, so none of us 
may completely lack this motivation. Fourth, personality characteristics influence our 
need pursuit, too. Recent research of Cameroonian and German adults indicates high 
neuroticism may constrain the drive toward establishing relationships (see Chapter 4). 
Agreeableness supports our pursuit of affiliation, while extraversion has no significant 
effect.15
CONTEMPORARY THEORIES OF MOTIVATION
Contemporary theories of motivation have one thing in common: Each has a reasonable 
degree of valid supporting documentation. We call them “contemporary theories” be-
cause they represent the latest thinking in explaining employee motivation. This doesn’t 
mean they are unquestionably right.
Self-Determination Theory
“It’s strange,” said Marcia. “I started work at the Humane Society as a volunteer. I put 
in 15 hours a week helping people adopt pets. And I loved coming to work. Then, three 
months ago, they hired me full-time at $11 an hour. I’m doing the same work I did before. 
But I’m not finding it as much fun.”
Does Marcia’s reaction seem counterintuitive? There’s an explanation for it. It’s 
called self-determination theory, which proposes that people prefer to feel they have 
control over their actions, so anything that makes a previously enjoyed task feel more 
like an obligation than a freely chosen activity will undermine motivation.16 The the-
ory is widely used in psychology, management, education, and medical research, and 
has given rise to several corollaries including organizational evaluation theory and self- 
concordance theory, discussed next.
COGNITIVE EVALUATION THEORY  Much research on self-determination theory in OB 
has focused on cognitive evaluation theory, a complementary theory hypothesizing that 
extrinsic rewards will reduce intrinsic interest in a task. When people are paid for work, it 
feels less like something they want to do and more like something they have to do. Self-
determination theory proposes that in addition to being driven by a need for autonomy, 
people seek ways to achieve competence and make positive connections with others. Its 
major implications relate to work rewards.
What does self-determination theory suggest about providing rewards? It suggests 
that some caution in the use of extrinsic rewards to motivate is wise, and that pursuing 
goals from intrinsic motives (such as a strong interest in the work itself) is more sustain-
ing to human motivation than are extrinsic rewards. Similarly, cognitive evaluation the-
ory suggests that providing extrinsic incentives may, in many cases, undermine intrinsic 
Self-determination 
theory
A theory of motivation 
that is concerned with 
the beneficial effects 
of intrinsic motivation 
and the harmful effects 
of extrinsic motivation.
Cognitive evaluation 
theory
A version of self-
determination theory 
in which allocating 
extrinsic rewards for 
behavior that had been 
previously intrinsically 
rewarding tends to 
decrease the overall 
level of motivation if 
the rewards are seen as 
controlling.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 135
motivation. For example, if a computer programmer values writing code because she likes 
to solve problems, a bonus for writing a certain number of lines of code every day could 
feel coercive, and her intrinsic motivation could suffer. She may or may not increase her 
number of lines of code per day in response to the extrinsic motivator. In support of the 
theory, one meta-analysis confirmed that intrinsic motivation contributes to the quality of 
work, while incentives contribute to the quantity of work. Although intrinsic motivation 
predicts performance whether or not there are incentives, it may therefore be less of a pre-
dictor when incentives are tied to performance directly (such as with monetary bonuses) 
rather than indirectly.17
SELF-CONCORDANCE  A more recent outgrowth of self-determination theory is self-
concordance, which considers how strongly people’s reasons for pursuing goals are 
consistent with their interests and core values. OB research suggests that people who 
pursue work goals for intrinsic reasons are more satisfied with their jobs, feel they fit 
into their organizations better, and perform better.18 Across cultures, if individuals pursue 
goals because of intrinsic interest, they are more likely to attain goals, are happier when 
they do, and are happy even if they do not.19 Why? Because the process of striving toward 
goals is fun whether or not the goal is achieved. Recent research reveals that when people 
do not enjoy their work for intrinsic reasons, those who work because they feel obligated 
to do so can still perform acceptably, though they experience higher levels of strain as a 
result.20
What does all this mean? For individuals, it means you should choose your job for 
reasons other than extrinsic rewards. For organizations, it means managers should pro-
vide intrinsic as well as extrinsic incentives. Managers need to make the work interesting, 
provide recognition, and support employee growth and development. Employees who 
feel that what they do is within their control and a result of free choice are likely to be 
more motivated by their work and committed to their employers.21
Goal-Setting Theory
You’ve likely heard the sentiment a number of times: “Just do your best. That’s all anyone 
can ask.” But what does “do your best” mean? Do we ever know whether we’ve achieved 
that vague goal? Research on goal-setting theory, proposed by Edwin Locke, reveals 
the impressive effects of goal specificity, challenge, and feedback on performance. Un-
der the theory, intentions to work toward a goal are considered a major source of work 
motivation.22
DIFFICULTY AND FEEDBACK DIMENSIONS  Goal-setting theory is well supported. 
First, evidence strongly suggests that specific goals increase performance; that difficult 
goals, when accepted, produce higher performances than do easy goals; and that feedback 
leads to higher performance than does non-feedback.23 Second, the more difficult the goal 
is, the higher the level of performance. Once a hard task has been accepted, we can expect 
the employee to exert a high level of effort to try to achieve it. Third, people do better when 
they get feedback on how well they are progressing toward their goals—that is, feedback 
guides behavior. But all feedback is not equally potent. Self-generated feedback—with 
which employees are able to monitor their own progress or receive feedback from the task 
process itself—is more powerful than externally generated feedback.24
Self-concordance 
The degree to which 
people’s reasons for 
pursuing goals are 
consistent with their 
interests and core 
values.
Goal-setting theory 
A theory that specific 
and difficult goals, 
with feedback, lead to 
higher performance.

136	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
If employees can participate in the setting of their own goals, will they try harder? 
The evidence is mixed. In some studies, participatively set goals yielded superior per-
formance; in others, individuals performed best when assigned goals by their boss. One 
study in China found, for instance, that participative team goal setting improved team 
outcomes.25 Another study found that participation results in more achievable goals for 
individuals.26 Without participation, the individual pursuing the goal needs to clearly un-
derstand its purpose and importance.27
GOAL COMMITMENT, TASK CHARACTERISTICS, AND NATIONAL CULTURE FACTORS
Three personal factors influence the goals–performance relationship: goal commitment, 
task characteristics, and national culture.
1.	 Goal commitment. Goal-setting theory assumes an individual is committed to the 
goal and determined not to lower or abandon it. The individual (1) believes he or 
she can achieve the goal and (2) wants to achieve it.28 Goal commitment is most 
likely to occur when goals are made public, when the individual has an internal 
locus of control, when the goals are self-set rather than assigned, and when they are 
based at least partially on individual ability.29
2.	 Task characteristics. Goals themselves seem to affect performance more strongly 
when tasks are simple rather than complex, well learned rather than novel, indepen-
dent rather than interdependent, and on the high end of achievable.30 On interdepen-
dent tasks, group goals are more effective.
3.	 National characteristics. Goals may have different effects in different cultures. 
In collectivistic and high power-distance cultures, achievable moderate goals can 
be more motivating than difficult ones.31 However, research has not shown group-
based goals to be effective in collectivist than in individualist cultures (see Chap-
ter 3). More research is needed to assess how goal constructs might differ across 
cultures.
INDIVIDUAL AND PROMOTION FOCI  Research has found that people differ in the way 
they regulate their thoughts and behaviors during goal pursuit. Generally, people fall into 
one of two categories, though they can belong to both. Those with a promotion focus 
strive for advancement and accomplishment, and approach conditions that move them 
closer toward desired goals. This concept is similar to the approach side of the approach-
avoidance framework discussed in Chapter 4. Those with a prevention focus strive 
to fulfill duties and obligations, as well as avoid conditions, that pull them away from 
desired goals. Aspects of this concept are similar to the avoidance side of the approach-
avoidance framework. Although you would be right to note that both strategies are in the 
service of goal accomplishment, the manner in which they get there is quite different. 
As an example, consider studying for an exam. You could engage in promotion-focused 
activities such as reading class materials, or you could engage in prevention-focused 
activities such as refraining from doing things that would get in the way of studying, such 
as playing video games.
Ideally, it’s probably best to be both promotion and prevention oriented.32 Keep 
in mind a person’s job satisfaction will be more heavily impacted by failure when that 
Promotion focus 
A self-regulation 
strategy that involves 
striving for goals 
through advancement 
and accomplishment.
Prevention focus  
A self-regulation 
strategy that involves 
striving for goals by 
fulfilling duties and 
obligations.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 137
person has an avoidance (prevention) outlook,33 so set achievable goals, remove distrac-
tions, and provide structure to reduce the potential for missing a goal.34
GOAL-SETTING IMPLEMENTATION  How do managers make goal-setting theory 
operational? That’s often left up to the individual. Some managers set aggressive 
performance targets—what General Electric called “stretch goals.” Some leaders, such as 
U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs (and former Procter & Gamble CEO) Robert McDonald 
and Best Buy’s CEO Hubert Joly, are known for their demanding performance goals. But 
many managers don’t set goals. When asked whether their jobs had clearly defined goals, 
a minority of respondents to a survey said yes.35
A more systematic way to utilize goal setting is with management by objectives 
(MBO), an initiative most popular in the 1970s but still used today. MBO emphasizes 
participatively set goals that are tangible, verifiable, and measurable. As in Exhibit 7-3, 
the organization’s overall objectives are translated into specific cascading objectives for 
each level (divisional, departmental, individual). Because lower-unit managers jointly 
participate in setting their own goals, MBO works from the bottom up as well as from the 
top down. The result is a hierarchy that links objectives at one level to those at the next. 
For the individual employee, MBO provides specific personal performance objectives.
Many elements in MBO programs match the propositions of goal-setting theory. 
You’ll find MBO programs in many business, health care, educational, government, and 
nonprofit organizations.36 A version of MBO, called Management by Objectives and Re-
sults (MBOR), has been used for over 30 years in the governments of Denmark, Norway, 
and Sweden.37 However, the popularity of these programs does not mean they always 
work.38 When MBO fails, the culprits tend to be unrealistic expectations, lack of com-
mitment by top management, and inability or unwillingness to allocate rewards based on 
goal accomplishment.
GOAL SETTING AND ETHICS  The relationship between goal setting and ethics is 
quite complex: If we emphasize the attainment of goals, what is the cost? The answer is 
probably found in the standards we set for goal achievement. For example, when money 
Management by 
objectives (MBO)   
A program that 
encompasses specific 
goals, participatively 
set, for an explicit time 
period and including 
feedback on goal 
progress.
Overall
organizational
objectives
Divisional
objectives
Departmental
objectives
Individual
objectives
XYZ Company
Industrial products division
Consumer products division
Production
Sales
Marketing
Research
Development
Customer
service
EXHIBIT 7-3 
Cascading of 
Objectives

138	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
is tied to goal attainment, we may focus on getting the money and become willing to 
compromise ourselves ethically. If instead we are primed with thoughts about how we are 
spending our time when we are pursuing the goal, we are more likely to act ethically.39 
However, this result is limited to thoughts about how we are spending our time. If we are 
put under time pressure and worry about that, thoughts about time turn against us. Time 
pressure also increases as we are nearing a goal, which can tempt us to act unethically to 
achieve it.40 Specifically, we may forego mastering tasks and adopt avoidance techniques 
so we don’t look bad,41 both of which can incline us toward unethical choices.
OTHER CONTEMPORARY THEORIES OF MOTIVATION
Self-determination theory and goal-setting theory are well supported contemporary theo-
ries of motivation. But they are far from the only noteworthy OB theories on the subject. 
Self-efficacy, reinforcement, equity/organizational justice, and expectancy theories reveal 
different aspects of our motivational processes and tendencies.
Self-Efficacy Theory
Self-efficacy theory, also known as social cognitive theory or social learning theory, 
refers to an individual’s belief that he or she is capable of performing a task.42 The higher 
your self-efficacy, the more confidence you have in your ability to succeed. So, in difficult 
situations people with low self-efficacy are more likely to lessen their effort or give up 
altogether, while those with high self-efficacy will try harder to master the challenge.43 
Self-efficacy can create a positive spiral in which those with high efficacy become more 
engaged in their tasks and then, in turn, increase performance, which increases effi-
cacy further.44 One study introduced the additional explanation that self-efficacy may 
be associated with a higher level of focused attention, which may lead to increased task 
performance.45
Goal-setting theory and self-efficacy theory don’t compete; they complement each 
other. As Exhibit 7-4 shows, employees whose managers set difficult goals for them will 
have a higher level of self-efficacy and set higher goals for their own performance. Why? 
Setting difficult goals for people communicates your confidence in them.
INCREASING SELF-EFFICACY IN YOURSELF  The researcher who developed self-
efficacy theory, Albert Bandura, proposes four ways self-efficacy can be increased:46
1.	 Enactive mastery.
2.	 Vicarious modeling.
3.	 Verbal persuasion.
4.	 Arousal.
The most important source of increasing self-efficacy is enactive mastery—that 
is, gaining relevant experience with the task or job. The second source is vicarious 
modeling—becoming more confident because you see someone else doing the task. 
Vicarious modeling is most effective when you see yourself as similar to the person you 
are observing. The third source is verbal persuasion: we become more confident when 
someone convinces us we have the skills necessary to be successful. Motivational speak-
ers use this tactic. Finally, arousal increases self-efficacy. Arousal leads to an energized 
state so we get “psyched up,” feel up to the task, and perform better. But if the task 
Self-efficacy theory 
An individual’s belief 
that he or she is 
capable of performing 
a task.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 139
requires a steady, lower-key perspective (say, carefully editing a manuscript), arousal 
may in fact hurt performance even as it increases self-efficacy because we might hurry 
through the task.
Intelligence and personality are absent from Bandura’s list, but they too can increase 
self-efficacy.47 People who are intelligent, conscientious, and emotionally stable are so 
much more likely to have high self-efficacy that some researchers argue self-efficacy is 
less important than prior research suggested.48 They believe it is partially a by-product in 
a smart person with a confident personality.
INFLUENCING SELF-EFFICACY IN OTHERS  The best way for a manager to use verbal 
persuasion is through the Pygmalion effect, a term based on the Greek myth about a 
sculptor (Pygmalion) who fell in love with a statue he carved. The Pygmalion effect is 
a form of self-fulfilling prophecy in which believing something can make it true. Here, 
it is often used to describe “that what one person expects can come to serve a self-
fulfilling prophecy.”49 An example from research should make this clear. In studies, 
teachers were told their students had very high IQ scores when, in fact, they spanned 
a range from high to low. Consistent with the Pygmalion effect, the teachers spent 
more time with the students they thought were smart, gave them more challenging 
assignments, and expected more of them—all of which led to higher student self-efficacy 
and better achievement outcomes.50 This strategy has been used in the workplace too, 
with replicable results and enhanced effects when leader-subordinate relationships are 
strong.51
Training programs often make use of enactive mastery by having people practice 
and build their skills. In fact, one reason training works is that it increases self-efficacy, 
Individual has
higher level of job
or task performance
Manager sets
difﬁcult, speciﬁc
goal for job or task
Individual sets
higher personal
(self-set) goal for his or
her performance
Individual has
conﬁdence that given
level of performance
will be attained
(self-efﬁcacy)
EXHIBIT 7-4 
Joint Effects of Goals and Self-Efficacy on Performance
Source: Based on E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task 
Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” American Psychologist 57, no. 9 (2002): 705–17.

140	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
particularly when the training is interactive and feedback is given afterward.52 Individuals 
with higher levels of self-efficacy also appear to reap more benefits from training pro-
grams and are more likely to use their training on the job.53
Reinforcement Theory
Goal setting is a cognitive approach, proposing that individuals’ purposes direct their 
actions. Reinforcement theory, in contrast, takes a behavioristic view, arguing that re-
inforcement conditions behavior. The two theories are clearly philosophically at odds. 
Reinforcement theorists see behavior as environmentally caused. You need not be con-
cerned, they would argue, with internal cognitive events; what controls behavior are 
reinforcers—any consequences that, when they immediately follow responses, increase 
the probability that the behavior will be repeated.
Reinforcement theory ignores the inner state of the individual and concentrates 
solely on what happens when he or she takes some action. Because it is not concerned 
with what initiates behavior, it is not, strictly speaking, a theory of motivation. But it does 
provide a powerful means of analyzing what controls behavior, and this is why we typi-
cally consider reinforcement concepts in discussions of motivation.54
OPERANT CONDITIONING/BEHAVIORISM AND REINFORCEMENT  Operant condition-
ing theory, probably the most relevant component of reinforcement theory for manage-
ment, argues that people learn to behave a certain way to either get something they want 
or to avoid something they don’t want. Unlike reflexive or unlearned behavior, operant 
behavior is influenced by the reinforcement or lack of reinforcement brought about by 
consequences. Reinforcement strengthens a behavior and increases the likelihood it will 
be repeated.55
B. F. Skinner, one of the most prominent advocates of operant conditioning, dem-
onstrated that people will most likely engage in desired behaviors if they are positively 
reinforced for doing so; that rewards are most effective if they immediately follow the 
desired response; and that behavior that is not rewarded, or is punished, is less likely 
to be repeated. The concept of operant conditioning was part of Skinner’s broader con-
cept of behaviorism, which argues that behavior follows stimuli in a relatively un-
thinking manner. Skinner’s form of radical behaviorism rejects feelings, thoughts, and 
other states of mind as causes of behavior. In short, under behaviorism people learn to 
associate stimulus and response, but their conscious awareness of this association is 
irrelevant.56
SOCIAL-LEARNING THEORY AND REINFORCEMENT  Individuals can learn by being 
told or by observing what happens to other people, as well as through direct experience. 
Much of what we have learned comes from watching models—parents, teachers, peers, 
film and television performers, bosses, and so forth. The view that we can learn through 
both observation and direct experience is called social-learning theory.57
Although social-learning theory is an extension of operant conditioning—that is, it 
assumes behavior is a function of consequences—it also acknowledges the effects of ob-
servational learning and perception. People respond to the way they perceive and define 
consequences, not to the objective consequences themselves.
Reinforcement theory 
A theory that behavior 
is a function of its 
consequences.
Behaviorism 
A theory that behavior 
follows stimuli in a 
relatively unthinking 
manner.
Social-learning 
theory
The view that we can 
learn through both 
observation and direct 
experience.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 141
Equity Theory/Organizational Justice
Ainsley is a student working toward a bachelor’s degree in finance. In order to gain some 
work experience and increase her marketability, she has accepted a summer internship in 
the finance department at a pharmaceutical company. She is quite pleased with the pay: 
$15 an hour is more than other students in her cohort receive for their summer intern-
ships. At work she meets Josh, a recent graduate working as a middle manager in the 
same finance department. Josh makes $30 an hour and is dissatisfied. Specifically, he 
tells Ainsley that, compared to managers at other pharmaceutical companies, he makes 
much less. “It isn’t fair,” he complains. “I work just as hard as they do, yet I don’t make 
as much. Maybe I should go work for the competition.”
How could someone making $30 an hour be less satisfied with his pay than someone 
making $15 an hour and be less motivated as a result? The answer lies in equity theory and, 
more broadly, in principles of organizational justice. According to equity theory, employees 
compare what they get from their jobs (their outcomes such as pay, promotions, recogni-
tion, or a bigger office) to what they put into it (their inputs such as effort, experience, and 
education). Employees therefore take the ratio of their Outcomes (O) to their Inputs (I) and 
compare it to the ratio of others, usually someone similar like a coworker or someone do-
ing the same job. This is shown in Exhibit 7-5. If we believe our ratio is equal to those with 
whom we compare ourselves, a state of equity exists and we perceive our situation as fair.
Based on equity theory, employees who perceive inequity will make one of six 
choices:58
1.	 Change inputs (exert less effort if underpaid or more if overpaid).
2.	 Change outcomes (individuals paid on a piece-rate basis can increase their pay by 
producing a higher quantity of units of lower quality).
3.	 Distort perceptions of self (“I used to think I worked at a moderate pace, but now I 
realize I work a lot harder than everyone else”).
4.	 Distort perceptions of others (“Mike’s job isn’t as desirable as I thought”).
5.	 Choose a different referent (“I may not make as much money as my brother-in-law, 
but I’m doing a lot better than my Dad did when he was my age”).
6.	 Leave the field (quit the job).
Equity theory has support from some researchers, but not from all.59 However, al-
though equity theory’s propositions have not all held up, the hypothesis served as an 
important precursor to the study of organizational justice, or more simply fairness, in 
Equity theory
A theory that 
individuals compare 
their job inputs and 
outcomes with those 
of others and then 
respond to eliminate 
any inequities.
Organizational justice 
An overall perception 
of what is fair in the 
workplace, composed 
of distributive, 
procedural, 
informational, and 
interpersonal justice.
Ratio Comparisons*
Perception
Inequity due to being underrewarded
Equity
Inequity due to being overrewarded
*Where 
represents the employee and 
represents relevant others
O
IB
O
IA
O
IB
O
IA
O
IB
O
IA
O
IB
O
IA
EXHIBIT 7-5 
Equity Theory

142	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
the workplace.60 Organizational justice is concerned broadly with how employees feel 
authorities and decision makers at work treat them. For the most part, employees evalu-
ate how fairly they are treated, as shown in Exhibit 7-6. Let’s discuss some of the topics 
related to organizational justice next.
DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE  Distributive justice is concerned with the fairness of outcomes, 
such as the pay and recognition that employees receive. Outcomes can be allocated in 
many ways. For example, raises can be distributed equally among employees, or they 
can be based on which employees need money the most. However, as we discussed 
about equity theory, employees tend to perceive their outcomes are fairest when they are 
distributed equitably.
Does the same logic apply to teams? At first glance, it would seem that distributing 
rewards equally among team members is best for boosting morale and teamwork—that 
way, no one is favored. However, a study of U.S. National Hockey League teams suggests 
otherwise. Differentiating the pay of team members on the basis of their inputs (how well 
they performed in games) attracted better players to the team, made it more likely they 
would stay, and increased team performance.61
PROCEDURAL JUSTICE  Although employees care a lot about what outcomes are 
distributed (distributive justice), they also care about how they are distributed. While 
distributive justice looks at what outcomes are allocated, procedural justice examines 
how.62 For one, employees perceive that procedures are fairer when they are given a say in 
Distributive justice 
Perceived fairness 
of the amount and 
allocation of rewards 
among individuals.
Procedural justice 
The perceived fairness 
of the process used 
to determine the 
distribution of rewards.
Organizational Justice
Deﬁnition: overall perception
of what is fair in the workplace
Example: I think this is a fair
place to work.
Distributive Justice
Deﬁnition: perceived fairness of outcome
Example: I got the pay raise I deserved.
Procedural Justice
Deﬁnition: perceived fairness of process
used to determine outcome
Example: I had input into the process
used to give raises and was given a
good explanation of why I received
the raise I did.
Interactional Justice
Deﬁnition: perceived degree to which
one is treated with dignity and respect
Example: When telling me about my
raise, my supervisor was very nice
and complimentary.
EXHIBIT 7-6 
Model of 
Organizational 
Justice

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 143
the decision-making process. Having direct influence over how decisions are made, or at 
the very least being able to present our opinion to decision makers, creates a sense of control 
and helps us to feel empowered (we discuss empowerment more in the next chapter).
If outcomes are favorable and individuals get what they want, they care less about 
the process, so procedural justice doesn’t matter as much when distributions are per-
ceived to be fair. It’s when outcomes are unfavorable that people pay close attention to 
the process. If the process is judged to be fair, then employees are more accepting of 
unfavorable outcomes.63 Why is this the case? Think about it. If you are hoping for a 
raise and your manager informs you that you did not receive one, you’ll probably want 
to know how raises were determined. If it turns out your manager allocated raises based 
on merit and you were simply outperformed by a coworker, then you’re more likely to 
accept your manager’s decision than if raises were based on favoritism. Of course, if 
you get the raise in the first place, then you’ll be less concerned with how the decision 
was made.
INFORMATIONAL JUSTICE  Beyond outcomes and procedures, research has shown that 
employees care about two other types of fairness that have to do with the way they are 
treated during interactions with others. The first type is informational justice, which 
reflects whether managers provide employees with explanations for key decisions and 
keep them informed of important organizational matters. The more detailed and candid 
managers are with employees, the more fairly treated those employees feel.
Though it may seem obvious that managers should be honest with their em-
ployees and not keep them in the dark about organizational matters, many managers 
are hesitant to share information. This is especially the case with bad news, which is 
uncomfortable for both the manager delivering it and the employee receiving it. Expla-
nations for bad news are beneficial when they take the form of excuses after the fact 
(“I know this is bad, and I wanted to give you the office, but it wasn’t my decision”) 
rather than justifications (“I decided to give the office to Sam, but having it isn’t a big 
deal”).64
INTERPERSONAL JUSTICE  The second type of justice relevant to interactions between 
managers and employees is interpersonal justice, which reflects whether employees 
are treated with dignity and respect. Compared to the other forms of justice we’ve 
discussed, interpersonal justice is unique in that it can occur in everyday interactions 
between managers and employees.65 This quality allows managers to take advantage 
of (or miss out on) opportunities to make their employees feel fairly treated. Many 
managers may view treating employees politely and respectfully as too “soft,” choosing 
more aggressive tactics out of a belief that doing so will be more motivating. Although 
displays of negative emotions such as anger may be motivating in some cases,66 managers 
sometimes take this too far. Consider former Rutgers University men’s basketball coach 
Mike Rice, who was caught on video verbally and even physically abusing players, and 
was subsequently fired.67
JUSTICE OUTCOMES  After all this talk about types of justice, how much does justice 
really matter to employees? A great deal, as it turns out. When employees feel fairly 
treated, they respond in a number of positive ways. All the types of justice discussed 
in this section have been linked to higher levels of task performance and citizenship 
Informational justice 
The degree to which 
employees are 
provided truthful 
explanations for 
decisions.
Interpersonal justice 
The degree to which 
employees are treated 
with dignity and 
respect.

144	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
behaviors such as helping coworkers, as well as lower levels of counterproductive 
behaviors such as shirking job duties. Distributive and procedural justice are more 
strongly associated with task performance, while informational and interpersonal 
justice are more strongly associated with citizenship behavior. Even more physiological 
outcomes, such as how well employees sleep and the state of their health, have been 
linked to fair treatment.68
Despite all attempts to enhance fairness, perceived injustices are still likely to oc-
cur. Fairness is often subjective; what one person sees as unfair, another may see as 
perfectly appropriate. In general, people see allocations or procedures favoring them-
selves as fair.69 So, when addressing perceived injustices, managers need to focus their 
actions on the source of the problem. In addition, if employees feel they have been treated 
unjustly, opportunities to express frustration have been shown to reduce the desire for 
retribution.70
ENSURING JUSTICE  How can an organization affect the justice perceptions and rule 
adherence of its managers? This depends upon the motivation of each manager. Some 
managers are likely to calculate justice by their degree of adherence to the justice rules 
of the organization. These managers will try to gain greater subordinate compliance 
with behavioral expectations, create an identity of being fair to their employees, or 
establish norms of fairness. Other managers may be motivated in justice decisions by 
their emotions. When they have a high positive affect and/or a low negative affect, these 
managers are most likely to act fairly.
It might be tempting for organizations to adopt strong justice guidelines in attempts 
to mandate managerial behavior, but this isn’t likely to be universally effective. In cases 
where managers have more rules and less discretion, those who calculate justice are more 
likely to act fairly, but managers whose justice behavior follows from their affect may act 
more fairly when they have greater discretion.71
CULTURE AND JUSTICE  Across nations, the same basic principles of procedural justice 
are respected, in that workers around the world prefer rewards based on performance 
and skills over rewards based on seniority.72 However, inputs and outcomes are valued 
differently in various cultures.73
We may think of justice differences in terms of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions 
(see Chapter 4). One large-scale study of over 190,000 employees in 32 countries and 
regions suggested that justice perceptions are most important to people in countries with 
individualistic, feminine, uncertainty-avoidance, and low power-distance values.74 Orga-
nizations can tailor programs to meet these justice expectations. For example, in countries 
that are highest in individualism, such as Australia and the United States, competitive pay 
plans and rewards for superior individual performance may enhance feelings of justice. 
In countries dominated by uncertainty avoidance, such as France, fixed-pay compensa-
tion and employee participation may help employees feel more secure. The dominant 
dimension in Sweden is femininity, so relational concerns are considered important there. 
Swedish organizations may therefore want to provide work–life balance initiatives and 
social recognition. Austria, in contrast, has a strong low power-distance value. Ethical 
concerns may be foremost to individuals in perceiving justice in Austrian organizations, 
so organizations there may want to openly justify inequality between leaders and workers 
and provide symbols of ethical leadership.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 145
Expectancy Theory
One of the most widely accepted explanations of motivation is Victor Vroom’s expec-
tancy theory.75 Although it has critics, most evidence supports the theory.76
Expectancy theory argues that the strength of our tendency to act a certain way 
depends on the strength of our expectation of a given outcome and its attractiveness. In 
practical terms, employees are motivated to exert a high level of effort when they believe 
that it will lead to a good performance appraisal, that a good appraisal will lead to orga-
nizational rewards such as salary increases and/or intrinsic rewards, and that the rewards 
will satisfy their personal goals. The theory, therefore, focuses on three relationships (see 
Exhibit 7-7):
1.	 Effort–performance relationship. The probability perceived by the individual 
that exerting a given amount of effort will lead to performance.
2.	 Performance–reward relationship. The degree to which the individual believes 
performing at a particular level will lead to the attainment of a desired outcome.
3.	 Rewards–personal goals relationship. The degree to which organizational re-
wards satisfy an individual’s personal goals or needs and the attractiveness of those 
potential rewards for the individual.77 Expectancy theory helps explain why a lot of 
workers aren’t motivated on their jobs and do only the minimum necessary to get by.
As a vivid example of how expectancy theory can work, consider stock analysts. 
They make their living trying to forecast a stock’s future price; the accuracy of their buy, 
sell, or hold recommendations is what keeps them in work or gets them fired. But the 
dynamics are not simple. Analysts place few sell ratings on stocks, although in a steady 
market as many stocks are falling as are rising. Expectancy theory provides an explana-
tion: Analysts who place a sell rating on a company’s stock have to balance the benefits 
they receive from their accuracy against the risks they run by drawing that company’s ire. 
What are these risks? They include public rebuke, professional blackballing, and exclu-
sion from information. When analysts place a buy rating on a stock, they face no such 
trade-off because, obviously, companies love it when analysts recommend that investors 
buy their stock. So the incentive structure suggests the expected outcome of buy ratings 
is higher than the expected outcome of sell ratings, and that’s why buy ratings vastly 
outnumber sell ratings.78
Does expectancy theory tend to work? Some critics suggest it has only limited 
use and is more valued where individuals clearly perceive effort–performance, and 
performance–reward, linkages.79 Because few individuals do, the theory tends to be 
idealistic. If organizations actually rewarded individuals for performance rather than 
seniority, effort, skill level, and job difficulty, expectancy theory might be more valid. 
Expectancy theory 
A theory that the 
strength of a tendency 
to act in a certain 
way depends on 
the strength of an 
expectation that the 
act will be followed by 
a given outcome and 
on the attractiveness 
of that outcome to the 
individual.
Individual
effort
1
2
3
Individual
performance
    Effort–performance relationship
    Performance–reward relationship
    Rewards–personal goals relationship
Organizational
rewards
Personal
goals
1
2
3
EXHIBIT 7-7 
Expectancy 
Theory

146	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
However, rather than invalidating it, this criticism can explain why a significant segment 
of the workforce exerts low effort on the job.
JOB ENGAGEMENT
When Joseph reports to his job as a hospital nurse, it seems that everything else in his 
life goes away, and he becomes completely absorbed in what he is doing. His emotions, 
thoughts, and behavior are all directed toward patient care. In fact, he can get so caught 
up in his work that he isn’t even aware of how long he’s been there. As a result of this 
total commitment, he is more effective in providing patient care and feels uplifted by his 
time at work.
Joseph has a high level of job engagement, the investment of an employee’s physi-
cal, cognitive, and emotional energies into job performance.80 Practicing managers and 
scholars have become interested in facilitating job engagement, believing factors deeper 
than liking a job or finding it interesting drives performance. Researchers attempt to mea-
sure this deeper level of commitment. Job engagement is linked with employee engage-
ment, which we discussed in Chapter 2.
Over the past 30 years, the Gallup organization has been studying the extent to 
which engagement is linked to positive work outcomes for millions of employees.81 The 
results indicate there are far more engaged employees in highly successful organiza-
tions than in average ones, and groups with more engaged employees have higher levels 
of productivity, fewer safety incidents, and lower turnover. Academic studies have also 
found positive outcomes. For instance, one review found levels of engagement were 
associated with task performance and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB; see 
Chapter 1).82
What makes people more likely to be engaged in their jobs? One key is the degree 
to which an employee believes it is meaningful to engage in work. This is partially de-
termined by job characteristics and access to sufficient resources to work effectively.83 
Another factor is a match between the individual’s values and those of the organization.84 
Leadership behaviors that inspire workers to a greater sense of mission also increase 
employee engagement.85
INTEGRATING CONTEMPORARY THEORIES OF MOTIVATION
Our job might be simpler if, after presenting a half-dozen theories, we could say only one 
was found valid. But many of the theories in this chapter are complementary. We now 
tie them together to help you understand their interrelationships. To help, Exhibit 7-8 
integrates much of what we know about motivation. Its basic foundation is the expectancy 
model that was shown in Exhibit 7-7. Let’s walk through Exhibit 7-8. (We will look at job 
design closely in Chapter 8.)
We begin by explicitly recognizing that opportunities can either aid or hinder indi-
vidual effort. Note that the individual effort box on the left also has another arrow leading 
into it, from the person’s goals. Consistent with goal-setting theory, the goals–effort loop 
is meant to remind us that goals direct behavior.
Expectancy theory predicts employees will exert a high level of effort if they per-
ceive strong relationships between effort and performance, performance and reward, 
and rewards and satisfaction of personal goals. Each of these relationships is, in turn, 
Job engagement 
The investment of an 
employee’s physical, 
cognitive, and 
emotional energies into 
job performance.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 147
influenced by other factors. For effort to lead to good performance, the individual must 
have the ability to perform and perceive the performance appraisal system as fair and 
objective. The performance–reward relationship will be strong if the individual perceives 
that performance (rather than seniority, personal favorites, or other criteria) is rewarded. 
If cognitive evaluation theory were fully valid in the actual workplace, we would predict 
that basing rewards on performance should decrease the individual’s intrinsic motivation. 
The final link in expectancy theory is the rewards–goals relationship. Motivation is high 
if the rewards for high performance satisfy the dominant needs consistent with individual 
goals.
A closer look at Exhibit 7-8 also reveals that the model considers achievement 
motivation, job design, reinforcement, and equity theories/organizational justice. A 
high achiever is not motivated by an organization’s assessment of performance or 
organizational rewards, hence the jump from effort to personal goals for those with 
high nAch. Remember, high achievers are internally driven as long as their jobs pro-
vide them with personal responsibility, feedback, and moderate risks. They are not 
as concerned with the effort–performance, performance–reward, or rewards–goal 
linkages.
Individual
performance
Organizational
rewards
Personal
goals
Opportunity
Ability
Performance
evaluation
criteria
High nAch
Equity comparison/
Organizational justice
Objective
performance
evaluation
system
Individual
effort
Reinforcement
Dominant
needs
Goals direct behavior
Job design
O
IA
IB
O
:
EXHIBIT 7-8 
Integrating 
Contemporary 
Theories of 
Motivation

148	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Reinforcement theory enters the model by recognizing that the organization’s 
rewards reinforce the individual’s performance. If employees see a reward system as 
“paying off” for good performance, the rewards will reinforce and encourage good per-
formance. Rewards also play a key part in organizational justice research. Individuals will 
judge the favorability of their outcomes (for example, their pay) relative to what others 
receive but also with respect to how they are treated: When people are disappointed by 
their rewards, they are likely to be sensitive to the perceived fairness of the procedures 
used and the consideration given to them by their supervisors.
SUMMARY
The motivation theories in this chapter differ in their predictive strength. Maslow’s hi-
erarchy, two-factor theory, and McClelland’s theory focus on needs. Self-determination 
theory and related theories have merits to consider. Goal-setting theory can be helpful but 
does not cover absenteeism, turnover, or job satisfaction. Self-efficacy theory contributes 
to our understanding of personal motivation. Reinforcement theory can also be helpful, 
but not regarding employee satisfaction or the decision to quit. Equity theory provided 
the spark for research on organizational justice. Expectancy theory can be helpful, but as-
sumes employees have few constraints on decision making, and this limits its applicabil-
ity. Job engagement goes a long way toward explaining employee commitment. Together, 
these concepts provide a theoretical foundation of what is known about motivation in the 
workplace.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Make sure extrinsic rewards for employees are not viewed as coercive, but instead 
provide information about competence and relatedness.
•	 Consider goal-setting theory: Clear and difficult goals often lead to higher levels of 
employee productivity.
•	 Consider reinforcement theory regarding quality and quantity of work, persistence 
of effort, absenteeism, tardiness, and accident rates.
•	 Consult equity theory to help understand productivity, satisfaction, absence, and 
turnover variables.
•	 Expectancy theory offers a powerful explanation of performance variables such as 
employee productivity, absenteeism, and turnover.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Motivation.

	
Chapter 7  •  Basic Motivation	 149
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Work Motivation Indicator
Do you find that some jobs motivate you more than others? Take this PIA to determine 
your work motivation.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 7-1.	 What do you think are the most important motivational aspects for a manager to keep in 
mind for managing a small group of employees? Why?
	 7-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

150
Applied Motivation
8
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Describe how the job characteristics model (JCM) motivates by changing the 
work environment.
	 2.	 Compare the main ways that jobs can be redesigned.
	 3.	 Explain how specific alternative work arrangements can motivate employees.
	 4.	 Describe how employee involvement measures can motivate employees.
	 5.	 Demonstrate how the different types of variable-pay programs can increase  
employee motivation.
	 6.	 Show how flexible benefits turn benefits into motivators.
	 7.	 Identify the intrinsic motivational benefits of employee recognition programs.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 151
MOTIVATING BY JOB DESIGN: THE JOB  
CHARACTERISTICS MODEL (JCM)
The way work is structured has a bigger impact on an individual’s motivation than how 
it might first appear. Job design suggests that the way elements in a job are organized 
can influence employee effort, and the model discussed next can serve as a framework to 
identify opportunities for changes to those elements. Developed by J. Richard Hackman 
and Greg Oldham, the job characteristics model (JCM) describes jobs in terms of five 
core job dimensions:1
1.	 Skill variety is the degree to which a job requires different activities using special-
ized skills and talents. The work of a garage owner-operator who does electrical 
repairs, rebuilds engines, does bodywork, and interacts with customers scores high 
on skill variety. The job of a body shop worker who sprays paint eight hours a day 
scores low on this dimension.
2.	 Task identity is the degree to which a job requires completion of a whole and 
identifiable piece of work. A cabinetmaker who designs furniture, selects the wood, 
builds the objects, and finishes them has a job that scores high on task identity. A 
job scoring low on this dimension is operating a lathe solely to make table legs.
3.	 Task significance is the degree to which a job affects the lives or work of other 
people. The job of a nurse helping patients in a hospital intensive care unit scores 
high on task significance; sweeping floors in a hospital scores low.
4.	 Autonomy is the degree to which a job provides the worker freedom, indepen-
dence, and discretion in scheduling work and determining the procedures for car-
rying it out. A sales manager who schedules her own work and tailors her sales 
approach to each customer without supervision has a highly autonomous job. An 
account representative who is required to follow a standardized sales script with 
potential customers has a job low on autonomy.
5.	 Feedback is the degree to which carrying out work activities generates direct and 
clear information about your own performance. A job with high feedback is testing 
and inspecting iPads. Installing components of iPads as they move down an assem-
bly line provides low feedback.
Elements of the JCM
Exhibit 8-1 presents the JCM. The JCM proposes that individuals obtain internal rewards 
when they learn (knowledge of results in the model) that they personally have performed 
well (experienced responsibility) on a task they care about (experienced meaningfulness). 
The more these three psychological states are present, the greater will be employees’ 
motivation, performance, and satisfaction, and the lower their absenteeism and likelihood 
of leaving. As Exhibit 8-1 indicates, individuals with a high growth need are more likely 
to experience the critical psychological states when their jobs are enriched—and respond 
to them more positively.
Efficacy of the JCM
Much evidence supports the JCM concept that the presence of these job characteristics 
generates higher job satisfaction and organizational commitment through increased mo-
tivation.2 One study suggested that when employees were “other oriented” (concerned 
Job design 
The way the elements 
in a job are organized.
Job characteristics 
model (JCM) 
A model that proposes 
any job can be described 
in terms of five core 
job dimensions: skill 
variety, task identity, 
task significance, 
autonomy, and 
feedback.
Skill variety 
The degree to which a 
job requires a variety 
of different activities.
Task identity 
The degree to 
which a job requires 
completion of a whole 
and identifiable piece 
of work.
Task significance
The degree to which 
a job has a substantial 
impact on the lives or 
work of other people.
Autonomy 
The degree to which 
a job provides 
substantial freedom 
and discretion to 
the individual in 
scheduling the work 
and in determining the 
procedures to be used 
in carrying it out.
Feedback 
The degree to which 
carrying out the work 
activities required by 
a job results in the 
individual obtaining 
direct and clear 
information about the 
effectiveness of his or 
her performance.

152	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
with the welfare of others at work), the relationship between intrinsic job characteristics 
and job satisfaction was weaker,3 meaning that our job satisfaction comes less from these 
characteristics when we care about others. Another study proposed that the degree of 
psychological ownership we feel toward our work enhances our motivation, particularly 
if the feelings of ownership are shared among a work group.4 Other research has explored 
the JCM in unique settings such as virtual work situations, finding that if individuals work 
together online but not in person, their experience of meaningfulness, responsibility, and 
knowledge of results can suffer. Thankfully, managers can mitigate these outcomes for 
employees by consciously developing personal relationships with them and increasing 
their sense of task significance, autonomy, and feedback.5
Motivating Potential Score (MPS)
We can combine the core dimensions of the JCM into a single predictive index, called the 
motivating potential score (MPS) and calculated as follows:
MPS = Skill variety + Task identity + Task significance
3
* Autonomy * Feedback
To be high on motivating potential, jobs must be high in at least one of the three fac-
tors that lead to experienced meaningfulness and high in both autonomy and feedback. If 
jobs score high on motivating potential, the model predicts that motivation, performance, 
and satisfaction will improve, while absence and turnover will be reduced. But we can better 
calculate motivating potential by simply adding characteristics rather than using the formula. 
Think about your job. Do you have the opportunity to work on different tasks, or is your day 
routine? Are you able to work independently, or do you constantly have a supervisor or co-
worker looking over your shoulder? Your answers indicate your job’s motivating potential.
Motivating potential 
score (MPS)
A predictive index that 
suggests the motivating 
potential in a job.
Personal and
work outcomes
Skill variety
Task identity
Task signiﬁcance
Experienced
Meaningfulness
of the work
High-internal
work motivation
Autonomy
Experienced
Responsibility for
outcomes of the work
High-quality
work performance
High satisfaction
with the work
Feedback
Knowledge of the
actual results of the
work activities
Low absenteeism
and turnover
Core job
dimensions
Critical
psychological states
Employee growth-
need strength
EXHIBIT 8-1 
The Job Characteristics Model
Source: Hackman, J. R. & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of job diagnostic survey. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
60, 159-170 

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 153
Cultural Generalizability of the JCM
A few studies have tested the JCM in different cultures, but the results aren’t consistent. 
The fact that the model is relatively individualistic (it considers the relationship between 
the employee and his or her work) suggests job enrichment strategies may not have the 
same effects in collectivistic cultures as in individualistic cultures (such as the United 
States, see Chapter 3). Indeed, one study in Nigeria, which has a highly collectivistic 
culture, found that while the MPS was highly influenced by job dimensions, the correla-
tions were different than the general data gathered from predominately individualistic 
countries.6 In contrast, another study suggested the degree to which jobs had intrinsic job 
motivators predicted job satisfaction and job involvement equally well for U.S., Japanese, 
and Hungarian employees.7 More research is needed in this area.
USING JOB REDESIGN TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
“Every day was the same thing,” Frank said. “Stand on that assembly line. Wait for an in-
strument panel to be moved into place. Unlock the mechanism and drop the panel into the 
Jeep Liberty as it moved by on the line. Then I plugged in the harnessing wires. I repeated 
that for eight hours a day. I don’t care that they were paying me 24 dollars an hour. I was 
going crazy. Finally, I just said this isn’t going to be the way I’m going to spend the rest 
of my life. My brain was turning to JELL-O. So I quit. Now I work in a print shop and I 
make less than 15 dollars an hour. But let me tell you, the work I do is really interesting. 
The job changes all the time, I’m continually learning new things, and the work really 
challenges me! I look forward every morning to going to work again.”
The repetitive tasks in Frank’s job at the Jeep plant provided little variety, auton-
omy, or motivation. In contrast, his job in the print shop is challenging and stimulating. 
From an organizational perspective, the failure of Frank’s first employer to redesign his 
job into a more satisfying one led to increased turnover. Redesigning jobs therefore has 
important practical implications—reduced turnover and increased job satisfaction among 
them. Let’s look at some ways to put the JCM into practice to make jobs more motivating.
Job Rotation
If employees suffer from over-routinization of their work, one alternative is job rotation, 
or the periodic shifting of an employee from one task to another with similar skill require-
ments at the same organizational level (also called cross-training). Manufacturers also 
use job rotation as needed to respond more flexibly to the volume of incoming orders. 
New managers are sometimes rotated through jobs, too, to help them get a picture of a 
whole organization.8 For these reasons, job rotation can be applied in any setting where 
cross-training is feasible, from manufacturing floors to hospital wards. At Singapore Air-
lines, for instance, a ticket agent may temporarily take on the duties of a baggage handler, 
both for cross-training and to get exposure to different aspects of the organization. Exten-
sive job rotation is among the reasons Singapore Airlines is rated one of the best airlines 
in the world.9
The use of job rotation has been shown to increase job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment.10 Additionally, evidence from Italy, Britain, and Turkey indicated that job ro-
tation is associated with higher levels of organizational performance in manufacturing set-
tings.11 It reduces boredom, increases motivation, and helps employees understand how their 
Job rotation 
The periodic shifting of 
an employee from one 
task to another.

154	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
work contributes to the organization. It may also increase safety and reduce repetitive-based 
work injuries, but that is currently a topic of much study and debate, with mixed findings.12
Job rotation does have its drawbacks. Work that is done repeatedly may become 
habitual and routine, which does make decision making more automatic and efficient, but 
less thoughtfully considered. Second, training costs increase when each rotation necessi-
tates that an employee learn new skills. Third, moving a worker into a new position reduces 
overall productivity for that role. Fourth, job rotation creates disruptions when members of 
the work group have to adjust to new employees. Finally, supervisors may have to spend 
more time answering questions and monitoring the work of recently rotated employees.
Relational Job Design
While redesigning jobs on the basis of job characteristics theory is likely to make work 
more intrinsically motivating, research is also exploring how to make jobs more proso-
cially motivating to people. In other words, how can managers design work so employees 
are motivated to promote the well-being of the organization’s beneficiaries (customers, 
clients, patients, and employees)? This view, relational job design, shifts the spotlight 
from the employee to those whose lives are affected by the job that employee performs.13 
It also motivates individuals toward increased job performance.14
One way to make jobs more prosocially motivating is to better connect employees 
with the beneficiaries of their work. This can be done by, for example, relating stories 
from customers who have found the company’s products or services to be helpful. Meet-
ing beneficiaries firsthand—or even just seeing pictures of them—allows employees to 
see that their actions affect real people and have tangible consequences. It makes custom-
ers or clients more memorable and emotionally vivid, which leads employees to consider 
the effects of their work actions more. Lastly, connections allow employees to better 
understand the perspective of beneficiaries, which fosters higher levels of commitment.
Relational job design, with its focus on prosocial motivation, is an especially salient 
topic for organizations with corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives. As we dis-
cussed in Chapter 2, CSR efforts often include invitations for employees to volunteer their 
time and effort, sometimes using the skills they gained on the job (like Home Depot em-
ployees when they help rebuild homes) but often not (such as when bank employees help 
rebuild homes with groups like Habitat for Humanity). In both cases, the employees may be 
able to interact with the beneficiaries of their efforts. Research also indicates that corporate-
sponsored volunteer programs enhanced in the JCM dimensions of meaningfulness and 
task significance motivate employees to volunteer.15 But while this motivation for prosocial 
behavior is noteworthy, it is not the same as relational job design: for one, the CSR efforts 
are through volunteering (not on-the-job); and for another, the work they are providing is 
not usually the same work they do at their jobs (Home Depot workers do not build homes 
on the job). However, relational job design holds intriguing possibilities for CSR initiatives.
USING ALTERNATIVE WORK ARRANGEMENTS  
TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
As you surely know, there are many approaches toward motivating people, and we’ve 
discussed some of them. Another approach to motivation is to consider alternative work 
arrangements such as flextime, job sharing, and telecommuting. These are likely to be 
Relational job design
Constructing jobs so 
employees see the 
positive difference 
they can make in the 
lives of others directly 
through their work.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 155
especially important for a diverse workforce of dual-earner couples, single parents, and 
employees caring for sick or aging relatives.
Flextime
Susan is the classic “morning person.” Every day she rises at 5:00 a.m. sharp, full of en-
ergy. However, as she puts it, “I’m usually ready for bed right after the 7:00 p.m. news.” 
Her flexible work schedule as a claims processor at The Hartford Financial Services 
Group is perfect for her situation: her office opens at 6:00 a.m. and closes at 7:00 p.m., 
and she schedules her 8-hour day within this 13-hour period.
Susan’s schedule is an example of flextime, short for “flexible work time.” Flex-
time employees must work a specific number of hours per week but may vary their hours 
of work within limits. As in Exhibit 8-2, each day consists of a common core, usually six 
hours, with a flexibility band surrounding it. The core may be 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., with 
the office actually opening at 6:00 a.m. and closing at 6:00 p.m. Employees must be at 
their jobs during the common core period, but they may accumulate their other two hours 
Schedule 1 
Percent Time:
100% = 40 hours per week
Core Hours:
9:00 A.M.–5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday 
(1 hour lunch)
Work Start Time:
Between 8:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M.
Work End Time:
Between 5:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Schedule 2 
Percent Time:
100% = 40 hours per week
Work Hours:
8:00 A.M.–6:30 P.M., Monday through Thursday
(1/2 hour lunch)
Friday off
Work Start Time:
8:00 A.M.
Work End Time:
6:30 P.M.
Schedule 3 
Percent Time:
90% = 36 hours per week
Work Hours:
8:30 A.M.–5:00 P.M., Monday through Thursday
(1/2 hour lunch)
8:00 A.M.–Noon, Friday (no lunch)
Work Start Time:
8:30 A.M. (Monday–Thursday); 8:00 A.M. (Friday)
Work End Time:
5:00 P.M. (Monday–Thursday); Noon (Friday)
Schedule 4 
Percent Time:
80% = 32 hours per week
8:00 A.M.–6:00 P.M., Monday through Wednesday
(1/2 hour lunch)
Work Hours:
8:00 A.M.–11:30 A.M. Thursday (no lunch)
Friday off
Work Start Time:
Between 8:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M.
Work End Time:
Between 5:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M.
EXHIBIT 8-2 
Possible Flextime 
Staff Schedules
Flextime
Flexible work hours.

156	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
around that. Some flextime programs allow employees to accumulate extra hours and 
turn them into days off.
Flextime has become extremely popular. According to a recent survey, a major-
ity (60 percent) of U.S. organizations offer some form of flextime.16 This is not just a 
U.S. phenomenon, though. In Germany, for instance, 73 percent of businesses offer flex-
time, and such practices are becoming more widespread in Japan as well.17 In Germany, 
Belgium, the Netherlands, and France, by law employers are not allowed to refuse an em-
ployee’s request for either a part-time or a flexible work schedule as long as the request 
is reasonable, such as to care for an infant child.18
Most of the evidence stacks up favorably. Perhaps most important from the orga-
nization’s perspective, flextime increases profitability. Interestingly, though, this effect 
seems to occur only when flextime is promoted as a work–life balance strategy (not when 
it is for the organization’s gain).19 Flextime also tends to reduce absenteeism,20 prob-
ably for several reasons. Employees can schedule their work hours to align with personal 
demands, reducing tardiness and absences, and they can work when they are most pro-
ductive. Flextime can also help employees balance work and family lives; in fact, it is a 
popular criterion for judging how “family friendly” a workplace is.
However, flextime is not applicable to every job or every worker. It is not a viable 
option for anyone whose service job requires being at a workstation at certain hours, for 
example. It also appears that people who have a strong desire to separate their work and 
family lives are less apt to want flextime, so it’s not a motivator for everyone.21 Also of 
note, research in the United Kingdom indicated that employees in organizations with 
flextime do not realize a reduction in their levels of stress, suggesting that this option may 
not truly improve work–life balance.22
Job Sharing
Job sharing allows two or more individuals to split a traditional full-time job. One 
employee might perform the job from 8:00 a.m. to noon, perhaps, and the other from 
1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., or the two could work full but alternate days. For example, top Ford 
engineers Julie Levine and Julie Rocco engaged in a job-sharing program that allowed 
both of them to spend time with their families while redesigning the Explorer crossover. 
Typically, one of them would work late afternoons and evenings while the other worked 
mornings. They both agreed that the program worked well, although making it feasible 
required a great deal of time and preparation.23
Only 18 percent of U.S. organizations offered job sharing in 2014, a 29 percent 
decrease since 2008.24 Reasons it is not more widely adopted include the difficulty of 
finding compatible partners to job share and the historically negative perceptions of job 
share individuals as not completely committed to their jobs and employers. However, 
eliminating job sharing for these reasons might be short-sighted. Job sharing allows an 
organization to draw on the talents of more than one individual for a given job. It opens 
the opportunity to acquire skilled workers—for instance, parents with young children and 
retirees—who might not be available on a full-time basis. From the employee’s perspec-
tive, job sharing can increase motivation and satisfaction.
An employer’s decision to use job sharing is often based on economics and national 
policy. Two part-time employees sharing a job can be less expensive in terms of salary 
and benefits than one full-timer because training, coordination, and administrative costs 
Job sharing
An arrangement that 
allows two or more 
individuals to split a 
traditional full-time 
job.
Belgium
Under Belgian law, 
the working day is 
limited to 11 hours 
and a maximum of  
50 hours per week.  
Many Belgian 
companies have  
flexi-time 
arrangements. All  
employees are  
present during a  
“block time” (usually 
8:30–11:30 a.m. and 
1:30–4:00 p.m). 
Employees can 
then make up their 
required hours by 
starting earlier than 
the block time, 
reducing the time 
they take for lunch, 
or by working extra 
hours after the block 
time.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 157
can be high. On the other hand, in the United States the Affordable Care Act may cre-
ate a financial incentive for companies to increase job-sharing arrangements in order to 
avoid the requirement to provide health care to full-time employees.25 Many German and 
Japanese26 firms have been using job sharing—but for a very different reason. Germany’s 
Kurzarbeit program, which is now close to 100 years old, kept employment levels from 
plummeting throughout the economic crisis by switching full-time workers to part-time 
job-sharing work.27
Telecommuting
It might be close to the ideal job for many people: no rush hour traffic, flexible hours, 
freedom to dress as you please, and few interruptions. Telecommuting refers to work-
ing at home—or anywhere else the employee chooses that is outside the workplace—at 
least two days a week on a computer linked to the employer’s office.28 (A closely related 
concept—working from a virtual office—describes working outside the workplace on a 
relatively permanent basis.) A sales manager working from home is telecommuting, but 
a sales manager working from her car on a business trip is not because the location is not 
by choice.
While the movement away from telecommuting by some companies makes head-
lines, it appears that for most organizations, it remains popular. For example, almost  
50 percent of managers in Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States are per-
mitted telecommuting options. Telecommuting is less of a practice in China, but there, 
too, it is growing.29 In developing countries, the telecommuting percentage is between 10 
and 20 percent.30 Organizations that actively encourage telecommuting include Amazon, 
IBM, American Express,31 Intel, Cisco Systems,32 and a number of U.S. government 
agencies.33
From the employee’s standpoint, telecommuting can increase feelings of isola-
tion and reduce job satisfaction.34 Research indicates it does not reduce work–family 
conflicts, though perhaps it is because telecommuting often increases work hours 
beyond the contracted workweek.35 Telecommuters are also vulnerable to the “out 
of sight, out of mind” effect: Employees who aren’t at their desks, miss impromptu 
meetings in the office, and don’t share in day-to-day informal workplace interactions 
may be at a disadvantage when it comes to raises and promotions because they’re 
perceived as not putting in the requisite “face time.”36 As for a CSR benefit of re-
ducing car emissions by allowing telecommuting, research indicates that employees 
actually drive over 45 miles more per day, due to increased personal trips, when they 
telecommute!37
USING EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION (EIP)  
TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
Employee involvement and participation (EIP)38 is a process that uses employees’ 
input to increase their commitment to organizational success. If workers are engaged in 
decisions that increase their autonomy and control over their work lives, they will become 
more motivated, committed to the organization, productive, and satisfied with their jobs. 
These benefits don’t stop with individuals—when teams are given more control over their 
work, morale and performance increase as well.39
Telecommuting
Working from home 
at least two days a 
week on a computer 
that is linked to the 
employer’s office.
Employee 
involvement and 
participation (EIP) 
A participative process 
that uses the input of 
employees to increase 
employee commitment 
to organizational 
success.

158	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
Cultural EIP
To be successful, EIP programs should be tailored to local and national norms.40 Employ-
ees in many traditional cultures that value formal hierarchies do not especially value EIP 
programs, but this is changing. In China, for instance, some employees are becoming less 
high power–distance oriented. In one study, Chinese workers who were very accepting of 
traditional Chinese cultural values showed few benefits from participative decision mak-
ing. However, Chinese workers who were less traditional were more satisfied and had 
higher performance ratings under participative management.41 Another study conducted 
in China showed that involvement increased employees’ thoughts and feelings of job se-
curity, enhancing their well-being.42 These differences within China may well reflect the 
current transitional nature of that culture. Research in urban China indicated that some 
EIP programs, namely, those that favor consultation and expression but not participation 
in decision making, yielded higher job satisfaction.43
Forms of Employee Involvement Programs
Let’s look at two major forms of employee involvement—participative management and 
representative participation—in more detail.
PARTICIPATIVE MANAGEMENT  Common to all participative management programs 
is joint decision making, in which subordinates share a significant degree of decision-
making power with their immediate superiors. This sharing can occur either formally 
through, say, briefings or surveys, or informally through daily consultations, as a way 
to enhance motivation through trust and commitment.44 Participative management has, 
at times, been considered a panacea for poor morale and low productivity. In reality, for 
participative management to be effective, followers must have trust and confidence in their 
leaders. Leaders should avoid coercive techniques and instead stress the organizational 
consequences of decision making to their followers.45
Studies of the participation–performance relationship have yielded mixed find-
ings.46 Organizations that institute participative management may realize higher stock 
returns, lower turnover rates, and higher labor productivity, although these effects are 
typically not large.47 Research at the individual level indicates participation typically has 
only a modest influence on employee productivity, motivation, and job satisfaction. This 
doesn’t mean participative management isn’t beneficial. However, it is not a sure means 
for improving performance.
REPRESENTATIVE PARTICIPATION  Most countries in western Europe require companies 
to practice representative participation. Representative participation redistributes 
power within an organization, putting labor’s interests on a more equal footing with 
the interests of management and stockholders by including a small group of employees 
as participants in decision making. The two most common forms of representation are 
works councils and board representatives. Works councils are groups of nominated or 
elected employees who must be consulted when management makes decisions about 
employees. Board representatives are employees who sit on a company’s board of 
directors and represent employees’ interests. In the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, 
and New Zealand, representative participation was originally the only EIP program; it 
was formed to allow employee representatives to discuss issues outside union agreements 
Participative 
management
A process in which 
subordinates share a 
significant degree of 
decision-making power 
with their immediate 
superiors.
Representative 
participation 
A system in which 
workers participate 
in organizational 
decision making 
through a small group 
of representative 
employees.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 159
and the representatives were all from the union. However, representative groups are now 
increasingly a mix of union and non-union, or separate from the union arrangement.48
The influence of representative participation on working employees seems to be mixed, 
but generally an employee would need to feel his or her interests were well represented and 
make a difference to the organization in order for motivation to increase. Thus representative 
participation as a motivational tool is surpassed by more direct participation methods.
USING EXTRINSIC REWARDS TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
As we saw in Chapter 2, pay is not the only factor driving job satisfaction. However, 
it does motivate people, and companies often underestimate its importance. One study 
found that while 45 percent of employers thought pay was a key factor in losing top talent, 
71 percent of top performers called it a foremost reason.49
Given that pay is so important, will the organization lead, match, or lag the market 
in pay? How will individual contributions be recognized? In this section, we consider 
(1) what to pay employees (decided by establishing a pay structure), and (2) how to pay 
individual employees (decided through variable-pay plans).
What to Pay: Establishing a Pay Structure
There are many ways to pay employees. The process of initially setting pay levels entails 
balancing internal equity—the worth of the job to the organization (usually established 
through a technical process called job evaluation), and external equity—the competitive-
ness of an organization’s pay relative to pay in its industry (usually established through 
pay surveys). Obviously, the best pay system reflects what the job is worth, while also 
staying competitive relative to the labor market.
Pay more, and you may get better-qualified, more highly motivated employees who 
will stay with the organization longer. A study covering 126 large organizations found 
employees who believed they were receiving a competitive pay level had higher morale 
and were more productive, and customers were more satisfied as well.50 But pay is of-
ten the highest single operating cost for an organization, which means paying too much 
can make the organization’s products or services too expensive. It’s a strategic decision 
an organization must make, with clear trade-offs.
In the case of Walmart, it appears that its strategic decision on pay did not work. While 
annual growth in U.S. stores slowed to around 1 percent in 2011, one of Walmart’s larger com-
petitors, Costco, grew around 8 percent. The average worker at Costco made approximately 
$45,000, compared to approximately $17,500 for the average worker at Walmart-owned Sam’s 
Club. Costco’s strategy was that it will get more if it pays more—and higher wages resulted 
in increased employee productivity and reduced turnover. Given the subsequent Walmart de-
cision to increase worker wages throughout the organization, perhaps its executives agree.51
How to Pay: Rewarding Individual Employees  
through Variable-Pay Programs
Piece rate, merit based, bonus, profit sharing, and employee stock ownership plans are 
all forms of a variable-pay program (also known as pay-for-performance), which bases 
a portion of an employee’s pay on some individual and/or organizational measure of 
performance. The variable portion may be all or part of the paycheck, and it may be 
Variable-pay program
A pay plan that 
bases a portion of an 
employee’s pay on 
some individual and/or 
organizational measure 
of performance.

160	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
paid annually or upon attainment of benchmarks. It can also be either optional for the 
employee or an accepted condition of employment.52 Variable-pay plans have long been 
used to compensate salespeople and executives, but the scope of variable-pay jobs has 
broadened as the motivational potential has been realized.
Globally, around 80 percent of companies offer some form of variable-pay plan. 
In the United States, 91 percent of companies offer a variable-pay program.53 In Latin 
America, more than 90 percent of companies offer some form of variable-pay plan. 
Latin American companies also have the highest percentage of total payroll allocated 
to variable pay, at nearly 18 percent. European and U.S. companies are lower, at about 
12 percent.54 When it comes to executive compensation, Asian companies are outpacing 
western companies in their use of variable pay.55
Unfortunately, not all employees see a strong connection between pay and perfor-
mance. The results of pay-for-performance plans vary. For instance, one study of 415 
companies in South Korea suggested that group-based pay-for-performance plans may 
have a strong positive effect on organizational performance.56 On the other hand, research 
in Canada indicated that variable-pay plans increase job satisfaction only if employee 
effort is rewarded as well as performance.57
Secrecy also pays a role in the motivational success of variable-pay plans. Although 
in some government and not-for-profit agencies pay amounts are either specifically or 
generally made public, most U.S. organizations encourage or require pay secrecy.58 Is this 
good or bad? Unfortunately, it’s bad: pay secrecy has a detrimental effect on job perfor-
mance. Even worse, it adversely affects high performers more than other employees. It 
very likely increases employees’ perception that pay is subjective, which can be demoti-
vating. While individual pay amounts may not need to be broadcast to restore the balance, 
if general pay categories are made public and employees feel variable pay is linked ob-
jectively to their performance, the motivational effects of variable pay can be retained.59
Do variable-pay programs increase motivation and productivity? Generally yes, 
but that doesn’t mean everyone is equally motivated by them.60 Many organizations have 
more than one variable pay element in operation, such as an Employee Stock Option 
Plan (ESOP) and bonuses, so managers should evaluate the effectiveness of the overall 
plan in terms of the employee motivation gained from each element separately and from 
all elements together. Managers should monitor their employees’ performance–reward 
expectancy, since a combination of elements that makes employees feel that their greater 
performance will yield them greater rewards will be the most motivating.61
Let’s examine the different types of variable-pay programs in more detail.
PIECE-RATE PAY  The piece-rate pay plan has long been popular as a means of 
compensating production workers with a fixed sum for each unit of production completed, 
but it can be used in any organizational setting where the outputs are similar enough to 
be evaluated by quantity. A pure piece-rate plan provides no base salary and pays the 
employee only for what he or she produces. Ballpark workers selling peanuts and soda 
are frequently paid piece-rate. If they sell 40 bags of peanuts at $1 each for their earnings, 
their take is $40. The more peanuts they sell, the more they earn. Alternatively, piece-rate 
plans are sometimes distributed to sales teams, so a ballpark worker makes money on a 
portion of the total number of bags of peanuts sold by the group during a game.
Piece-rate plans are known to produce higher productivity and wages, so they can 
be attractive to organizations and motivating for workers.62 In fact, one major Chinese 
Piece-rate pay plan
A pay plan in which 
workers are paid a 
fixed sum for each 
unit of production 
completed.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 161
university increased its piece-rate pay for articles by professors and realized 50 percent 
increased research productivity.63 The chief concern of both individual and team piece-
rate workers is financial risk. A recent experiment in Germany found that 68 percent of 
risk-averse individuals prefer an individual piece-rate system, and that lower performers 
prefer team piece-rate pay. Why? The authors suggested risk-averse and high-performing 
individuals would rather take their chances on pay based on what they can control (their 
own work) because they are concerned others will slack off in a team setting.64 This is a 
valid concern, as we will discuss in the next chapter.
Organizations should verify that their piece-rate plans are indeed motivating to in-
dividuals. European research has suggested that when the pace of work is determined 
by uncontrollable outside factors such as customer requests, rather than internal factors 
such as coworkers, targets, and machines, a piece-rate plan is not motivating.65 Either 
way, managers must be mindful of the motivation for workers to decrease quality in order 
to increase their speed of output. They should also be aware that by rewarding volume, 
piece-rate plans increase the probability of workplace injuries.66
MERIT-BASED PAY  A merit-based pay plan pays for individual performance based 
on performance appraisal ratings. A main advantage is that high performers can get 
bigger raises. If designed correctly, merit-based plans let individuals perceive a strong 
relationship between their performance and their rewards.67
Most large organizations have merit-based pay plans, especially for salaried em-
ployees. Merit pay is slowly taking hold in the public sector. For example, New York 
City’s public hospital system pays doctors based on how well they reduce costs, increase 
patient satisfaction, and improve the quality of care.68A move away from merit pay, on the 
other hand, is coming from some organizations that don’t feel it separates high and low 
performers enough. When the annual review and raise are months away, the motivation of 
this reward for high performers diminishes. Even companies that have retained merit pay 
are rethinking the allocation.69
Despite their intuitive appeal, merit-based pay plans have several limitations. One 
is that they are typically based on an annual performance appraisal and thus are only as 
valid as the performance ratings, which are often subjective. This brings up issues of 
discrimination, as we discussed in Chapter 6. Research indicates that African American 
employees receive lower performance ratings than White employees, women’s ratings 
are higher than men’s, and there are demographic differences in the distribution of salary 
increases, even with all other factors being equal.70 Another limitation is that the pay-raise 
pool of available funds fluctuates on economic or other conditions that have little to do 
with individual performance. For instance, a colleague at a top university who performed 
very well in teaching and research was given a pay raise of $300. Why? Because the 
pay-raise pool was very small. Yet that amount is more of a cost-of-living increase than 
pay-for-performance. Lastly, unions typically resist merit-based pay plans. For example, 
relatively few U.S. teachers are covered by merit pay for this reason. Instead, seniority-
based pay, which gives all employees the same raises, predominates.
BONUS  An annual bonus is a significant component of total compensation for many 
jobs. Once reserved for upper management, bonus plans are now routinely offered to 
employees in all levels of the organization. The incentive effects should be higher than 
those of merit pay because rather than paying for previous performance now rolled into 
Merit-based pay plan 
A pay plan based on 
performance appraisal 
ratings.
Bonus 
A pay plan that 
rewards employees for 
recent performance 
rather than historical 
performance.

162	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
base pay, bonuses reward recent performance (merit pay is cumulative, but the increases 
are generally much smaller than bonus amounts). When times are bad, firms can cut 
bonuses to reduce compensation costs. Workers on Wall Street, for example, saw their 
average bonus drop by more than a third as their firms faced greater scrutiny.71
Bonus plans have a clear upside: they are motivating for workers. As an example, a 
recent study in India found that when a higher percentage of overall pay was reserved for 
the potential bonuses of managers and employees, productivity increased.72 This example 
also highlights the downside of bonuses: they leave employees’ pay more vulnerable to 
cuts. This is problematic, especially when employees depend on bonuses or take them for 
granted. “People have begun to live as if bonuses were not bonuses at all but part of their 
expected annual income,” said Jay Lorsch, a Harvard Business School professor. Key-
Span Corp., a 9,700-employee utility company in New York, combined yearly bonuses 
with a smaller merit-pay raise. Elaine Weinstein, KeySpan’s senior vice president of HR, 
credits the plan with changing the culture from “entitlement to meritocracy.”73
PROFIT-SHARING PLAN  A profit-sharing plan distributes compensation based on 
some established formula designed around a company’s profitability. Compensation 
can be direct cash outlays or, particularly for top managers, allocations of stock 
options. When you read about executives like Mark Zuckerberg, who accepts an 
absurdly modest $1 salary, remember that many executives are granted generous stock 
options. In fact, Zuckerberg has made as much as $2.3 billion after cashing out some 
of his stock options.74 Of course, the vast majority of profit-sharing plans are not 
so grand in scale. Jacob Luke started his own lawn-mowing business at age 13. He 
employed his brother Isaiah and friend Marcel and paid them each 25 percent of the 
profits he made on each yard.
Studies generally support the idea that organizations with profit-sharing plans have 
higher levels of profitability than those without them.75 These plans have also been linked 
to higher levels of employee commitment, especially in small organizations.76 Profit shar-
ing at the organizational level appears to have positive impacts on employee attitudes; 
employees report a greater feeling of psychological ownership.77 Recent research in Can-
ada indicates that profit-sharing plans motivate individuals to higher job performance 
when they are used in combination with other pay-for-performance plans.78 Obviously, 
profit sharing does not work when there is no reported profit per se, such as in nonprofit 
organizations, or often in the public sector.
EMPLOYEE STOCK OWNERSHIP PLAN  An employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) 
is a company-established benefit plan in which employees acquire stock, often at below-
market prices, as part of their benefits. Research on ESOPs indicates they increase 
employee satisfaction and innovation;79 however, they have the potential to increase job 
satisfaction only when employees psychologically experience ownership.80 Even so, 
ESOPs may not inspire lower absenteeism or greater motivation,81 perhaps because the 
employee’s actual monetary benefit comes with cashing in the stock at a later date. Thus, 
employees need to be kept regularly informed of the status of the business and have the 
opportunity to positively influence it in order to feel motivated toward higher personal 
performance.82
ESOPs for top management can reduce unethical behavior. For instance, CEOs are 
less likely to manipulate firm earnings reports to make themselves look good in the short 
Profit-sharing plan
An organization-
wide program 
that distributes 
compensation based 
on some established 
formula designed 
around a company’s 
profitability.
Employee stock 
ownership plan 
(ESOP)
A company-established 
benefits plan in which 
employees acquire 
stock, often at below-
market prices, as part 
of their benefits.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 163
run when they have an ownership share.83 Of course, not all companies want ESOPs, and 
they won’t work in all situations.
USING BENEFITS TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
Like pay, benefits are both a provision and a motivator. Todd E. is married and has three 
young children; his wife is at home full time. His Citigroup colleague Allison M. is mar-
ried too, but her husband has a high-paying job with the federal government, and they 
have no children. Todd is concerned about having a good medical plan and enough life 
insurance to support his family in case it’s needed. In contrast, Allison’s husband already 
has her medical needs covered on his plan, and life insurance is a low priority. Allison 
is more interested in extra vacation time and long-term financial benefits, such as a tax-
deferred savings plan.
A standardized benefits package would be unlikely to meet the needs of Todd and 
Allison well. Citigroup can, however, cover both sets of needs with flexible benefits.
Consistent with expectancy theory’s thesis that organizational rewards should be 
linked to each employee’s goals, flexible benefits individualize rewards by allowing each 
employee to choose the compensation package that best satisfies his or her current needs 
and situation. Flexible benefits can accommodate differences in employee needs based on 
age, marital status, partner’s benefit status, and number and age of dependents.
Benefits in general can be a motivator for a person to go to work, and for a person to 
choose one organization over another. But are flexible benefits more motivating than tra-
ditional plans? It’s difficult to tell. Some organizations that have moved to flexible plans 
report increased employee retention, job satisfaction, and productivity. However, flexible 
benefits may not substitute for higher salaries when it comes to motivation.84 Further-
more, as more organizations worldwide adopt flexible benefits, the individual motivation 
they produce will likely decrease (the plans will be seen as a standard work provision). 
The downsides of flexible benefit plans may be obvious: They may be more costly to 
manage, and identifying the motivational impact of different provisions is challenging.
Given the intuitive motivational appeal of flexible benefits, however, it may be sur-
prising that their usage is not yet global. In China, only a limited percentage of companies 
offer flexible plans,85 as is true for many other Asian countries.86 Almost all major corpora-
tions in the United States offer them, and a recent survey of 211 Canadian organizations 
found that 60 percent offer flexible benefits, up from 41 percent in 2005.87 A similar survey 
of firms in the United Kingdom found that nearly all major organizations were offering 
flexible benefits programs, with options ranging from supplemental medical insurance to 
holiday trading (with coworkers), discounted bus travel, and child care assistance.88
USING INTRINSIC REWARDS TO MOTIVATE EMPLOYEES
We have discussed motivating employees through job design and by the extrinsic rewards 
of pay and benefits. On an organizational level, are those the only ways to motivate em-
ployees? Not at all! We would be remiss if we overlooked intrinsic rewards organizations 
can provide, such as employee recognition programs. Let’s start with an example. Laura 
makes $8.50 per hour working at her fast-food job in Pensacola, Florida, and the job isn’t 
very challenging or interesting. Yet Laura talks enthusiastically about the job, her boss, 
and the company that employs her. “What I like is the fact that Guy [her supervisor] 
Flexible benefits 
A benefits plan that 
allows each employee 
to put together a 
benefits package 
individually tailored to 
his or her own needs 
and situation.

164	 Part 2  •  Individual Differences
appreciates the effort I make. He compliments me regularly in front of the other people 
on my shift, and I’ve been chosen Employee of the Month twice in the past six months. 
Did you see my picture on that plaque on the wall?”
Organizations are increasingly realizing what Laura knows: Recognition programs 
increase an employee’s intrinsic motivation for work. An employee recognition pro-
gram is a plan to encourage specific behaviors by formally appreciating specific em-
ployee contributions. Employee recognition programs range from a spontaneous and 
private thank-you to widely publicized formal programs in which the procedures for at-
taining recognition are clearly identified.
A few years ago, 1,500 employees were surveyed in a variety of work settings to 
find out what they considered the most powerful workplace motivator. Their response? 
Recognition, recognition, and more recognition. Other research suggests financial incen-
tives may be more motivating in the short term, but in the long run nonfinancial incen-
tives work best.89 Surprisingly, there is not a lot of research on the motivational outcomes 
or global usage of employee recognition programs. However, studies indicated that em-
ployee recognition programs are associated with self-esteem, self-efficacy, and job satis-
faction,90 and the broader outcomes from intrinsic motivation are well documented.
An obvious advantage of recognition programs is that they are inexpensive: praise 
is free!91 With or without financial rewards, they can be highly motivating to employ-
ees. Despite the increased popularity of such programs, though, critics argue they are 
highly susceptible to political manipulation by management. When applied to jobs for 
which performance factors are relatively objective, such as sales, recognition programs 
are likely to be perceived by employees as fair. In most jobs, however, performance cri-
teria aren’t self-evident, which allows managers to manipulate the system and recognize 
their favorites. Abuse can undermine the value of recognition programs and demoralize 
employees. Therefore, where formal recognition programs are used, care must be taken to 
ensure fairness. Where they are not, it is important to motivate employees by consistently 
recognizing their performance efforts.
Employee recognition 
program
A plan to encourage 
specific employee 
behaviors by 
formally appreciating 
specific employee 
contributions.
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Zappos: Motivating Employees through 
Company Culture.
SUMMARY
As we’ve seen in the chapter, understanding what motivates individuals is ultimately 
key to organizational performance. Employees whose differences are recognized, who 
feel valued, and who have the opportunity to work in jobs tailored to their strengths 
and interests will be motivated to perform at the highest levels. Employee participation 
can also increase employee productivity, commitment to work goals, motivation, and 
job satisfaction. However, we cannot overlook the powerful role of organizational re-
wards in influencing motivation. Pay, benefits, and intrinsic rewards must be carefully 
and thoughtfully designed in order to enhance employee motivation toward positive or-
ganizational outcomes.

	
Chapter 8  •  Applied Motivation	 165
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Recognize individual differences. Spend the time necessary to understand what’s 
important to each employee. Design jobs to align with individual needs to maxi-
mize their motivation potential.
•	 Use goals and feedback. You should give employees firm, specific goals, and em-
ployees should get feedback on how well they are faring in pursuit of those goals.
•	 Allow employees to participate in decisions that affect them. Employees can con-
tribute to setting work goals, choosing their own benefits packages, and solving 
productivity and quality problems.
•	 Link rewards to performance. Rewards should be contingent on performance, and 
employees must perceive the link between the two.
•	 Check the system for equity. Employees should perceive that individual effort and 
outcomes explain differences in pay and other rewards.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Extrinsic & Intrinsic 
Motivation.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Diagnosing the Need for Team Building
We might be tempted to think that assembling a group for a project is team building, but 
intentional team building is much different. Take this PIA to find out how to diagnose the 
need for planned team building.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 8-1. 	 What compensation and benefits plan would motivate you most in your next job? In a job 
five years from now? What are the similarities and differences between these two points in 
time, and why?
	 8-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

166
Communication
9
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Describe the functions and process of communication.
	 2.	 Contrast downward, upward, and lateral communication through small-group net-
works and the grapevine.
	 3.	 Contrast oral, written, and nonverbal communication.
	 4.	 Describe how channel richness underlies the choice of communication channel.
	 5.	 Differentiate between automatic and controlled processing of persuasive 
messages.
	 6.	 Identify common barriers to effective communication.
	 7.	 Discuss how to overcome potential problems of cross-cultural communication.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
PART 3  Groups in Organizations

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 167
COMMUNICATION
Communication is powerful: no group or organization can exist without sharing meaning 
among its members. In this chapter, we’ll analyze communication and ways we can make 
it more effective.
Communication must include both the transfer and the understanding of mean-
ing. Communicating is more than merely imparting meaning; that meaning must also be 
understood. It is only thus that we can convey information and ideas. In perfect commu-
nication, if it existed, a thought would be transmitted so the receiver understood the same 
mental picture the sender intended. Though it sounds elementary, perfect communication 
is never achieved in practice. Increased understanding of the functions and processes of 
communication can lead to positive changes in organizational behavior.
Functions of Communication
Communication serves five major functions within a group or organization: management, 
feedback, emotional sharing, persuasion, and information exchange.1 Almost every com-
munication interaction that takes place in a group or organization performs one or more 
of these functions, and none of the five is more important than any of the others.
MANAGING BEHAVIOR  Communication acts to manage member behavior in several 
ways. Organizations have authority hierarchies and formal guidelines for employees that 
guide communication flow. When employees follow their job descriptions or comply 
with company policies, communication performs a management function. Informal 
communication controls behavior too. When work groups tease or harass a member who 
produces too much (and makes the rest of the members look bad), they are informally 
communicating, and managing, the member’s behavior.
FEEDBACK  Communication creates feedback by clarifying to employees what they must 
do, how well they are doing it, and how they can improve their performance. We saw this 
operating in goal-setting theory in Chapter 7. Formation of goals, feedback on progress, 
and reward for desired behavior all require communication and stimulate motivation.
EMOTIONAL SHARING  The workgroup is a primary source of social interaction for many 
employees. Communication within the group is a fundamental mechanism by which members 
show satisfaction and frustration. Communication, therefore, provides for the emotional 
sharing of feelings and fulfillment of social needs. For example, after a White police officer 
shot an unarmed Black man in Ferguson, Missouri, in 2015, software engineer Carl Jones 
wanted to process his feelings through talking with his coworkers at his corporation. It can 
be difficult for companies to remain neutral today and they may need to be seen taking a 
stance over political or social issues. For instance, under the caption “All homes are created 
equal”, IKEA used pictures of gay couples in its U.S. and Russian catalogs, in support 
of LGBT issues. However, IKEA has come under fire over local versions of its furniture 
catalog, such as the special Israeli or Saudi versions, which did not feature women.2
PERSUASION  Like emotional sharing, persuasion can be good or bad depending on if, 
say, a leader is trying to persuade a workgroup to commit to the organization’s corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) initiatives or to, conversely, persuade the workgroup to break 
the law to meet an organizational goal. These may be extreme examples, but it’s important 
to remember that persuasion can benefit or harm an organization.
Communication 
The transfer and the 
understanding of 
meaning.
IKEA
The multinational 
IKEA Group, the 
world’s largest 
furniture retailer, 
is well-known for 
being a values-
driven company 
and for its social 
and environmental 
initiatives 
throughout the 
whole value chain 
from product 
development 
to production, 
distribution and 
retail. For example, 
co-workers are 
encouraged to 
participate in 
virtual meetings 
but if business 
travel is necessary, 
employees can 
use the IKEA 
Intranet to see the 
CO2 footprint left 
by getting to a 
specific location by 
various transport 
alternatives.

168	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
INFORMATION EXCHANGE  The final function of communication is information 
exchange to facilitate decision making. Communication provides the information 
individuals and groups need to make decisions by transmitting the data needed to identify 
and evaluate choices.
The Communication Process
Before communication can take place it needs a purpose, a message to be conveyed be-
tween a sender and a receiver. The sender encodes the message (converts it to a symbolic 
form) and passes it through a medium (channel) to the receiver, who decodes it. The result 
is a transfer of meaning from one person to another.3
Exhibit 9-1 depicts this communication process. The key parts of this model are 
(1) the sender, (2) encoding, (3) the message, (4) the channel, (5) decoding, (6) the re-
ceiver, (7) noise, and (8) feedback.
The sender initiates a message by encoding a thought. The message is the actual 
physical product of the sender’s encoding. When we speak, the speech is the message. 
When we write, the writing is the message. When we gesture, the movements of our arms 
and the expressions on our faces are the message. The channel is the medium through 
which the message travels. The sender selects it, determining whether to use a formal 
or informal channel. Formal channels are established by the organization and transmit 
messages that are related to the professional activities of members. They traditionally fol-
low the authority chain within the organization. Other forms of messages, such as those 
that are personal or social, follow informal channels, which are spontaneous and subject 
to individual choice.4 The receiver is the person(s) to whom the message is directed, who 
must first translate the symbols into understandable form. This step is the decoding of 
the message. Noise represents communication barriers that distort the clarity of the mes-
sage, such as perceptual problems, information overload, semantic difficulties, or cultural 
differences. The final link in the communication process is a feedback loop. Feedback 
is the check on how successful we have been in transferring our messages as originally 
intended. It determines whether understanding has been achieved.
DIRECTION OF COMMUNICATION
Communication can flow vertically or laterally, through formal small-group networks or 
the informal grapevine. We subdivide the vertical dimension into downward and upward 
directions.5
Communication 
process 
The steps between a 
source and a receiver 
that result in the transfer 
and understanding of 
meaning.
Formal channels 
Communication 
channels established 
by an organization 
to transmit messages 
related to the 
professional activities 
of members.
Informal channels
Communication 
channels that are 
created spontaneously 
and that emerge as 
responses to individual 
choices.
Sender
Encoding
message
Channel
Noise
Feedback
Message
received
Receiver
Message
decoding
Message
to be
sent
EXHIBIT 9-1
The Communication Process

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 169
Downward Communication
Communication that flows from one level of a group or organization to a lower level is 
downward communication. Group leaders and managers use it to assign goals, provide 
job instructions, explain policies and procedures, point out problems that need attention, 
and offer feedback.
In downward communication, the delivery mode and the context of the informa-
tion are of high importance. We will talk more about communication methods later, but 
consider the ultimate downward communication: the performance review. Alan Buckelew, 
CEO of Carnival Cruise Lines says, “A review is probably the one time when you want to 
be physically present.” The Samsonite CEO agrees: “A conference call cannot substitute 
for face-to-face interactions.” Automated performance reviews have allowed managers to 
review their subordinates without discussions, which is efficient but misses critical oppor-
tunities for growth, motivation, and relationship-building.6 In general, employees subjected 
to less direct, personalized communication are less likely to understand the intentions of 
the message correctly. The best communicators explain the reasons behind their downward 
communications but also solicit communication from the employees they supervise.
Upward Communication
Upward communication flows to a higher level in the group or organization. It’s used to 
provide feedback to higher-ups, inform them of progress toward goals, and relay current 
problems. Upward communication keeps managers aware of how employees feel about 
their jobs, coworkers, and the organization in general. Managers also rely on upward 
communication for ideas on how conditions can be improved.
Given that most managers’ job responsibilities have expanded, upward com-
munication is increasingly difficult because managers can be overwhelmed and easily 
distracted. To engage in effective upward communication, try to communicate in short 
summaries rather than long explanations, support your summaries with actionable items, 
and prepare an agenda to make sure you use your boss’s attention well.7 And watch what 
you say, especially if you are communicating something to your manager that will be 
unwelcome. If you’re turning down an assignment, for example, be sure to project a “can 
do” attitude while asking advice about your workload dilemma or inexperience with the 
assignment.8 Your delivery can be as important as the content of your communication.
Lateral Communication
When communication occurs between members of the same workgroup, members at the 
same level in separate workgroups, or any other horizontally equivalent workers, we de-
scribe it as lateral communication.
Lateral communication saves time and facilitates coordination. Some lateral relation-
ships are formally sanctioned. More often, they are informally created to short-circuit the 
vertical hierarchy and expedite action. So from management’s viewpoint, lateral communi-
cations can be good or bad. Because strictly adhering to the formal vertical structure for all 
communications can be inefficient, lateral communication occurring with management’s 
knowledge and support can be beneficial. But dysfunctional conflict can result when for-
mal vertical channels are breached, when members go above or around their superiors, or 
when bosses find actions have been taken or decisions made without their knowledge.

170	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Formal Small-Group Networks
Formal organizational networks can be complicated, including hundreds of people and a 
half-dozen or more hierarchical levels. We’ve condensed these networks into three com-
mon small groups of five people each (see Exhibit 9-2): chain, wheel, and all channel.
The chain rigidly follows the formal chain of command; this network approxi-
mates the communication channels you might find in a rigid three-level organization. 
The wheel relies on a central figure to act as the conduit for all group communication; it 
simulates the communication network you might find on a team with a strong leader. The 
all-channel network permits group members to actively communicate with each other; 
it’s most often characterized by self-managed teams, in which group members are free to 
contribute and no one person takes on a leadership role. Many organizations today like to 
consider themselves all channel, meaning that anyone can communicate with anyone (but 
sometimes they shouldn’t).
As Exhibit 9-3 demonstrates, the effectiveness of each network is determined by 
the dependent variable that concerns you. The structure of the wheel facilitates the emer-
gence of a leader, the all-channel network is best if you desire high member satisfaction, 
and the chain is best if accuracy is most important. Exhibit 9-3 leads us to the conclusion 
that no single network will be best for all occasions.
The Grapevine
The informal communication network in a group or organization is called the grapevine.9 
Although rumors and gossip transmitted through the grapevine may be informal, it’s still an 
important source of information for employees and candidates. Grapevine or word-of-mouth 
information from peers about a company has important effects on whether job applicants 
join an organization,10 even over and above informal ratings on websites like Glassdoor.
Grapevine
An organization’s 
informal 
communication 
network.
Chain
Wheel
All Channel
EXHIBIT 9-2
Three Common 
Small Group 
Networks
Networks
Wheel
Criteria
Chain
All Channel
Speed
Accuracy
Emergence of a leader
Member satisfaction
Moderate
High
Moderate
Moderate
Fast
High
High
Low
Fast
Moderate
None
High
EXHIBIT 9-3
Small Group 
Networks and 
Effectiveness 
Criteria

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 171
The grapevine is an important part of any group or organization communication 
network. It serves employees’ needs: small talk creates a sense of closeness and friend-
ship among those who share information, although research suggests it often does so at 
the expense of those in the outgroup.11 It also gives managers a feel for the morale of their 
organization, the issues employees consider important, and employee anxieties. Evidence 
indicates that managers can study the gossip driven largely by employee social networks 
to learn more about how positive and negative information is flowing through the or-
ganization.12 Furthermore, managers can identify influencers (highly networked people 
trusted by their coworkers13) by noting which individuals are small talkers (those who 
regularly communicate about insignificant, unrelated issues). Small talkers tend to be 
influencers. One study found that social talkers are so influential that they were signifi-
cantly more likely to retain their jobs during layoffs.14 Thus, while the grapevine may not 
be sanctioned or controlled by the organization, it can be understood and leveraged a bit.
MODES OF COMMUNICATION
How do group members transfer meaning among each other? They rely on oral, written, 
and nonverbal communication. This much is obvious, but as we will discuss, the choice 
between modes can greatly enhance or detract from the way the perceiver reacts to the 
message. Certain modes are highly preferred for specific types of communication. We 
will cover the latest thinking and practical application.
Oral Communication
A primary means of conveying messages is oral communication. Speeches, formal one-
on-one and group discussions, and the informal rumor mill or grapevine are popular 
forms of oral communication.
The advantages of oral communication are speed, feedback, and exchange. Regard-
ing speed, we can convey a verbal message and receive a response in minimal time. As 
one professional put it, “Face-to-face communication on a consistent basis is still the 
best way to get information to and from employees.”15 If the receiver is unsure of the 
message, rapid feedback allows the sender to quickly detect and correct it. Unfortunately, 
we should acknowledge that we are usually bad listeners. Researchers indicate that we 
are prone to “listener burnout” in which we tune the other person out and rush to offer 
advice. “Good listeners overcome their natural inclination to fix the other’s problems and 
to keep the conversation brief,” said Professor Graham Bodie.16 Active listening; in which 
we remove distractions, lean in, make eye contact, paraphrase, and encourage the talker 
to continue17—helps us learn more and build trust if we are genuine and not judgmen-
tal.18 The exchange given through oral communication has social, cultural, and emotional 
components. Cultural social exchange, in which we purposefully share exchanges that 
transcend cultural boundaries, can build trust, cooperation, and agreement between indi-
viduals and teams.19
One major disadvantage of oral communication surfaces whenever a message has to 
pass through a number of people: the more people, the greater the potential distortion. If 
you’ve ever played “Telephone,” you know the problem. Each person who receives a whis-
pered message in this pass-along game interprets the message in his or her own way. The 
message’s content, when it reaches its destination, is often very different from the original, 
Atos
Thierry Breton, 
CEO of Atos SE, 
a leading digital 
services company 
with 100,000 
employees in 72 
countries, is known 
for instigating 
a companywide 
zero-email policy. 
In 2011, he 
decided he could 
improve employee 
productivity by 
banning internal 
email. Atos’s own 
social network 
is a platform 
betterdesigned to 
facilitate group 
communication, 
resulting in 
more efficient 
collaboration and 
information sharing 
among employees 
who report feeling 
far more productive.

172	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
even when we think the message is simple and straightforward. Therefore, oral-commu-
nication “chains” are generally more of a liability than an effective tool in organizations.
Written Communication
Written communication includes letters, e-mail, instant messaging, organizational peri-
odicals, and any other method that conveys written words or symbols. The advantages 
depend on what written mode is used. Written business communication today is usually 
conducted via letters, PowerPoint®, e-mail, instant messaging, text messaging, social me-
dia, apps, and blogs. Some of these create a digital or physical long-term record, while the 
advantage of others is quick, fleeting information exchange. The disadvantages are also 
specific to each written mode. We will therefore discuss the applications more in a bit.
Nonverbal Communication
Every time we deliver a verbal message, we also impart an unspoken message.20 Sometimes 
the nonverbal component may stand alone as a powerful message of our business communi-
cation. No discussion of communication would thus be complete without consideration of 
nonverbal communication; which includes body movements, the intonations or emphasis we 
give to words, facial expressions, and the physical distance between the sender and receiver.
We could argue that every body movement has meaning, and no movement is acci-
dental (though some are unconscious). We act out our state of being with nonverbal body 
language. For example, we smile to project trustworthiness, uncross our arms to appear 
approachable, and stand to signal authority.21
If you read the minutes of a meeting, you wouldn’t grasp the impact of what was 
said the same way as if you had been there or could see the meeting on video. Why not? 
There is no record of nonverbal communication, and the emphasis given to words or 
phrases (intonation) is missing. Both make the meaning clear. Intonations can change 
the meaning of a message. Facial expressions also convey meaning. Facial expressions, 
along with intonations, can show arrogance, aggressiveness, fear, shyness, and other 
characteristics.
Physical distance also has meaning. What is considered proper spacing between 
people largely depends on cultural norms. A businesslike distance in some European 
countries feels intimate in many parts of North America. If someone stands closer to you 
than is considered appropriate, it may indicate aggressiveness or sexual interest; if farther 
away, it may signal disinterest or displeasure with what is being said.
CHOICE OF COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
Why do people choose one channel of communication over another? A model of media 
richness helps explain channel selection among managers.22
Channel Richness
Channels differ in their capacity to convey information. Some are rich in that they can 
(1) handle multiple cues simultaneously, (2) facilitate rapid feedback, and (3) be very 
personal. Others are lean, in that they score low on these factors. Face-to-face conversa-
tion scores highest in channel richness because it transmits the most information per 
Channel richness 
The amount of 
information that can 
be transmitted during 
a communication 
episode.

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 173
communication episode–multiple information cues (words, postures, facial expressions, 
gestures, intonations), immediate feedback (both verbal and nonverbal), and the personal 
touch of being present. Other examples of media with high channel richness (in descend-
ing order) include video conferences, telephone conversations, live speeches, and voice 
mail.  Impersonal written media such as formal reports and bulletins score lowest in rich-
ness as well as memos, letters, prerecorded speeches, and e-mail.23
In sum, rich channels give us the chance to observe. The unconscious aspects of 
communication help us understand the full meaning of a message. When these aspects 
are missing, we must look for other clues to deduce the sender’s emotions and attitudes.
Choosing Communication Methods
The choice of channel depends on whether the message is routine. Routine messages tend 
to be straightforward and have minimal ambiguity; channels low in richness can carry them 
efficiently. Nonroutine communications are likely to be complicated and have the potential 
for misunderstanding. Managers can communicate them effectively only by selecting rich 
channels.
CHOOSING ORAL COMMUNICATION  Whenever you need to gauge the receiver’s 
receptivity, oral communication is usually the better choice. The marketing plan for 
a new product, for instance, may need to be worked out with clients in person, so 
you can see their reactions to each idea you propose. Also consider the receiver’s 
preferred mode of communication; some individuals focus on content better in 
written form and others prefer discussion. For example, if your manager requests a 
meeting with you, you may not want to ask for an e-mail exchange instead. The pace 
of your work environment matters too. A fast-paced workplace may thrive on pop-by 
meetings, while a deadline-heavy team project may progress faster with scheduled 
Skype videoconferences.
Much of what we communicate face-to-face is in the delivery, so also consider 
your speaking skills when choosing your communication method. Research indicates the 
sound of your voice is twice as important as what you are saying. A good speaking voice, 
clear and moderated, can be a help to your career; while loud, questioning, irritating, im-
mature, falsetto, breathy, or monotone voice tones can hinder you. If your voice is prob-
lematic, your work teams can help you raise your awareness so you can make changes, or 
you may benefit from the help of a voice coach.24
CHOOSING WRITTEN COMMUNICATION  Written communication is generally the most 
reliable mode for complex and lengthy communications, and it can be the most efficient 
method for short messages when, for instance, a two-sentence text can take the place of a 
10-minute phone call. But keep in mind that written communication can be limited in its 
emotional expression.
Choose written communication when you want the information to be tangible, ver-
ifiable, and “on the record.” Letters are used in business primarily for networking and 
record-keeping purposes, and when signatures need to be authentic. Also, a handwritten 
thank-you note is never a wrong choice for an applicant to send after an employment in-
terview, and handwritten envelopes are often put right on the receiver’s desk unopened by 
administrative staff. In general, you should respond to instant messages only when they are 

174	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
professional and initiate them only when you know they will be welcome; remember that 
your conversation will not be stored for later reference. Texts are cheap to send and receive, 
and the willingness to be available for quick communications from clients and managers is 
conducive to good business. However, some users—and managers—view text messaging 
as intrusive and distracting, so establish some protocols first. Some of the most spectacu-
lar gains in social media are in the sales arena, both business-to-public and business-to-
business. For instance, one sales representative for virtual meetings company PGi landed 
his fastest sale ever by instantly connecting with a potential client after TweetDeck alerted 
him that a CEO was tweeting his frustration about Web conferencing.25 Finally, curtail  
usage of blogs, posting, and commenting; both options are more public than you may 
think, and your words are easily found by your name via search engines like Google.
CHOOSING NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  It’s important to be alert to nonverbal 
aspects of communication; look for these cues as well as the literal meaning of a sender’s 
words. You should particularly be aware of contradictions between the messages. For 
example, someone who frequently glances at her wristwatch is giving the message that 
she would prefer to terminate the conversation no matter what she actually says. We 
misinform others when we express one message verbally, such as trust, but nonverbally 
communicate a contradictory message that reads, “I don’t have confidence in you.”
Information Security
Security is a huge concern for nearly all organizations with private or proprietary infor-
mation about clients, customers, and employees. Organizations worry about the security 
of the electronic information they need to protect such as hospital patient data, physical 
information they still keep in file cabinets, and information they entrust their employees 
with knowing. Most companies actively monitor employee Internet use and e-mail re-
cords, and some even use video surveillance and record phone conversations. Necessary 
though they may be, such practices can seem invasive to employees. An organization can 
relieve employee concerns by engaging them in the creation of information-security poli-
cies and giving them some control over how their personal information is used.26
PERSUASIVE COMMUNICATION
We’ve discussed a number of methods for communication up to this point. Now we turn 
our attention to one of the functions of communication—persuasion—and the features 
that might make messages more or less persuasive to an audience.
Automatic and Controlled Processing
To understand the process of persuasion, it is useful to consider two different ways we 
process information.27 Think about the last time you bought a can of soda. Did you care-
fully research brands, or did you reach for the can that had the most appealing advertis-
ing? If we’re honest, we’ll admit glitzy ads and catchy slogans have an influence on our 
choices as consumers. We often rely on automatic processing, a relatively superficial 
consideration of evidence and information, making use of heuristics like those we dis-
cussed in Chapter 5. Automatic processing takes little time and low effort, so it makes 
sense to use it for processing persuasive messages related to topics you don’t care much 
Automatic processing 
A relatively superficial 
consideration 
of evidence and 
information making 
use of heuristics.

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 175
about. The disadvantage is that it lets us be easily fooled by a variety of tricks, like a cute 
jingle or glamorous photo.
Now consider the last time you chose a place to live. You probably sourced experts 
who knew something about the area, gathered information about prices, and considered 
the costs and benefits of renting versus buying. You were engaging in more effortful 
controlled processing, a detailed consideration of evidence and information, relying on 
facts, figures, and logic. Controlled processing requires effort and energy, and it’s harder 
to fool someone who has taken the time and effort to engage in it. So what makes some-
one engage in either shallow or deep processing? Let’s explore how we might determine 
what types of processing an audience will use.      
INTEREST LEVEL  One of the best predictors of whether people will use an automatic 
or controlled process for reacting to a persuasive message is their level of interest in it.28 
Interest levels reflect the impact a decision is going to have on your life. When people are 
very interested in the outcome of a decision, they’re more likely to process information 
carefully. That’s probably why people look for so much more information when deciding 
about something important (like where to live) than something relatively unimportant 
(like which soda to drink).
PRIOR KNOWLEDGE  People who are well informed about a subject area are more 
likely to use controlled processing strategies. They have already thought through various 
arguments for or against a specific course of action, and therefore won’t readily change 
their position unless very good, thoughtful reasons are provided. On the other hand, 
people who are poorly informed about a topic can change their minds more readily, even 
in the face of fairly superficial arguments presented without a great deal of evidence. A 
better-informed audience is likely to be much harder to persuade.
PERSONALITY  Do you always read at least five reviews of a movie before deciding 
whether to see it? Perhaps you even research films by the same stars and director. If so, 
you are probably high in need for cognition, a personality trait of individuals who are 
most likely to be persuaded by evidence and facts.29 Those who are lower in their need for 
cognition are more likely to use automatic processing strategies, relying on intuition and 
emotion to guide their evaluation of persuasive messages.
MESSAGE CHARACTERISTICS  Another factor that influences whether people use 
an automatic or controlled processing strategy is the characteristics of the message 
itself. Messages provided through relatively lean communication channels, with 
little opportunity for users to interact with the content of the message, encourage 
automatic processing. Conversely, messages provided through richer communication 
channels encourage more deliberative processing.
Tailoring the Message
The most important implication is to match your persuasive message to the type of pro-
cessing your audience is likely to use. When the audience is not interested in a persuasive 
message topic, when they are poorly informed, when they are low in need for cognition, 
and when information is transmitted through relatively lean channels, they’ll be more 
likely to use automatic processing. In these cases, use messages that are more emotionally 
Controlled processing 
A detailed 
consideration 
of evidence and 
information relying 
on facts, figures, and 
logic.
Need for cognition 
A personality trait of 
individuals depicting 
the ongoing desire to 
think and learn.

176	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
laden and associate positive images with your preferred outcome. On the other hand, 
when the audience is interested in a topic, when they are high in need for cognition, or 
when the information is transmitted through rich channels, then it is a better idea to focus 
on rational arguments and evidence to make your case.
BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION
A number of barriers can slow or distort effective communication, barriers that we need 
to recognize and reduce. In this section, we highlight the most important.
Filtering
Filtering refers to a sender’s purposely manipulating information so the receiver will see 
it more favorably. A manager who tells his boss what he feels the boss wants to hear is 
filtering information.
The more vertical levels in the organization’s hierarchy, the more opportunities 
there are for filtering. But some filtering will occur wherever there are status differences. 
Factors such as fear of conveying bad news and the desire to please the boss often lead 
employees to tell their superiors what they think they want to hear, thus distorting upward 
communications.
Selective Perception
Selective perception is important because the receivers in the communication process se-
lectively see and hear based on their needs, motivations, experience, background, and other 
personal characteristics. Receivers also project their interests and expectations into com-
munications as they decode them. For example, an employment interviewer who expects a 
female job applicant to put her family ahead of her career is likely to see that characteristic 
in all female applicants, regardless of whether any of the women actually feel that way. 
As we said in Chapter 5, we don’t see reality; we interpret what we see and call it reality.
Information Overload
Individuals have a finite capacity for processing data. When the information we have to 
work with exceeds our processing capacity, the result is information overload. We’ve 
seen in this text that dealing with it has become a huge challenge for individuals and for 
organizations. It’s a challenge you can manage, to some degree, by following the steps 
outlined earlier in this chapter.
What happens when individuals have more information than they can sort and use? 
They tend to select, ignore, pass over, or forget it. Or they may put off further processing 
until the overload situation ends. In any case, lost information and less effective commu-
nication results, making it all the more important to deal well with overload.
More generally, as an Intel study shows, it may make sense to connect less fre-
quently to technology, to, in the words of one article, “avoid letting the drumbeat of 
digital missives constantly shake up and reorder to-do lists.”30 One radical way is to limit 
the number of devices you access. For example, Coors Brewing executive Frits van Paas-
schen jettisoned his desktop computer in favor of mobile devices only, and Eli Lilly & 
Co. moved its sales teams from laptops plus other devices to just iPads. Both these moves 
have resulted in increased productivity.31
Filtering
A sender’s 
manipulation of 
information so that 
it will be seen more 
favorably by the 
receiver.
Information overload 
A condition in which 
information inflow 
exceeds an individual’s 
processing capacity.

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 177
Emotions
You may interpret the same message differently when you’re angry or distraught than 
when you’re happy. For example, individuals in positive moods are more confident about 
their opinions after reading a persuasive message, so well-designed arguments have a 
stronger impact on their opinions.32 People in negative moods are more likely to scruti-
nize messages in greater detail, whereas those in positive moods tend to accept communi-
cations at face value.33 Extreme emotions such as jubilation or depression are most likely 
to hinder effective communication. In such instances, we are most prone to disregard our 
rational and objective thinking processes and substitute emotional judgments.
Language
Even when we’re communicating in the same language, words mean different things to 
different people. Age and context are two of the biggest factors that influence such dif-
ferences. For example, when business consultant Michael Schiller asked his 15-year-old 
daughter where she was going with friends, he said, “You need to recognize your ARAs 
and measure against them.” Schiller said that in response, his daughter “looked at him 
like he was from outer space.”34 (ARA stands for accountability, responsibility, and au-
thority.) Those new to corporate lingo may find acronyms such as ARA, words such as 
deliverables (verifiable outcomes of a project), and phrases such as get the low-hanging 
fruit (deal with the easiest parts first) bewildering, in the same way parents may be mysti-
fied by teen slang.35
Silence
It’s easy to ignore silence or lack of communication because it is defined by the absence 
of information. This is often a mistake—silence itself can be the message to communi-
cate non-interest or inability to deal with a topic. Silence can also be a simple outcome 
of information overload, or a delaying period for considering a response. For whatever 
reasons, research suggests using silence and withholding communication are common 
and problematic.36 One survey found that more than 85 percent of managers reported re-
maining silent about at least one issue of significant concern.37 The impact of silence can 
be organizationally detrimental. Employee silence can mean managers lack information 
about ongoing operational problems; management silence can leave employees bewil-
dered. Silence regarding discrimination, harassment, corruption, and misconduct means 
top management cannot take action to eliminate problematic behavior.
Communication Apprehension
An estimated 5 to 20 percent of the population suffers debilitating communication 
apprehension, or social anxiety.38 These people experience undue tension and anxiety 
in oral communication, written communication, or both.39 They may find it extremely 
difficult to talk with others face to face or become extremely anxious when they have to 
use the phone, relying on memos or e-mails when a phone call would be faster and more 
appropriate.
Oral-communication apprehensives avoid situations, such as teaching, for which 
oral communication is a dominant requirement.40 But almost all jobs require some oral 
Communication 
apprehension 
Undue tension and 
anxiety about oral 
communication, 
written 
communication, or 
both.

178	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
communication. Of greater concern is evidence that high oral-communication apprehen-
sives distort the communication demands of their jobs in order to minimize the need for 
communication. Be aware that some people severely limit their oral communication and 
rationalize their actions by telling themselves communicating isn’t necessary for them to 
do their job effectively.
Lying
The final barrier to effective communication is outright misrepresentation of information, 
or lying. People differ in their definition of a lie. For example, is deliberately withholding 
information about a mistake a lie, or do you have to actively deny your role in the mistake 
to pass the threshold? While the definition of a lie befuddles ethicists and social scientists, 
there is no denying the prevalence of lying. People may tell one to two lies per day, with 
some individuals telling considerably more.41 Compounded across a large organization, 
this is an enormous amount of deception happening every day. Evidence shows people are 
more comfortable lying over the phone than face-to-face, and more comfortable lying in 
e-mails than when they have to write with pen and paper.42
CULTURAL FACTORS
Effective communication is difficult under the best of conditions. Cross-cultural factors 
clearly create the potential for increased communication problems. A gesture that is well 
understood and acceptable in one culture can be meaningless or lewd in another. Unfor-
tunately, only 18 percent of companies have documented strategies for communicating 
with employees across cultures, and only 31 percent require that corporate messages be 
customized for consumption in other cultures.
Cultural Barriers
There are a number of problems related to language difficulties in cross-cultural commu-
nications. First are barriers caused by semantics. Words mean different things to different 
people, particularly people from different national cultures. Some words don’t translate 
between cultures. For instance, the Finnish word sisu means something akin to “guts” or 
“dogged persistence” but is essentially untranslatable into English. Similarly, capitalists 
in Russia may have difficulty communicating with their British or Canadian counterparts 
because English terms such as efficiency, free market, and regulation have no direct Rus-
sian equivalents.
Second are barriers caused by word connotations. Words imply different things in 
different languages. Negotiations between U.S. and Japanese executives can be difficult 
because the Japanese word hai translates as “yes,” but its connotation is “Yes, I’m listen-
ing” rather than “Yes, I agree.”
Third are barriers caused by tone differences. In some cultures, language is formal; 
in others, it’s informal. In some cultures, the tone changes depending on the context: People 
speak differently at home, in social situations, and at work. Using a personal, informal 
style when a more formal style is expected can be inappropriate.
Fourth are differences in tolerance for conflict and methods for resolving con-
flicts. People from individualist cultures tend to be more comfortable with direct conflict 
and will make the source of their disagreements overt. Collectivists are more likely to 

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 179
acknowledge conflict only implicitly and avoid emotionally charged disputes. They may 
attribute conflicts to the situation more than to the individuals and therefore may not re-
quire explicit apologies to repair relationships, whereas individualists prefer explicit state-
ments, accepting responsibility for conflicts and public apologies to restore relationships.
Cultural Context
Cultures tend to differ in the degree to which context influences the meaning individuals 
take from communication.43 In high-context cultures such as China, Korea, Japan, and 
Vietnam, people rely heavily on nonverbal and subtle situational cues in communicating 
with others, and a person’s official status, place in society, and reputation carry consid-
erable weight. What is not said may be more significant than what is said. In contrast, 
people from Europe and North America reflect their low-context cultures. They rely 
essentially on spoken and written words to convey meaning; body language and formal 
titles are secondary (see Exhibit 9-4).
Contextual differences mean quite a lot in terms of communication. Communication 
in high-context cultures implies considerably more trust by both parties. What may appear 
to be casual and insignificant conversation, in fact reflects the desire to build a relationship 
and create trust. Oral agreements imply strong commitments in high-context cultures. And 
who you are—your age, seniority, rank in the organization—is highly valued and heavily 
influences your credibility. Managers can therefore “make suggestions” rather than give 
orders. But in low-context cultures, enforceable contracts tend to be in writing, precisely 
worded, and highly legalistic. Similarly, low-context cultures value directness. Managers 
are expected to be explicit and precise in conveying intended meaning.
A Cultural Guide
There is much to be gained from business intercultural communications. It is safe to as-
sume every one of us has a different viewpoint that is culturally shaped. Because we do 
have differences, we have an opportunity to reach the most creative solutions possible 
with the help of others if we communicate effectively.
According to Fred Casmir, a leading expert in intercultural communication re-
search, we often do not communicate well with people outside of our culture because we 
tend to generalize from only their cultural origin. This can be insensitive and potentially 
High-context cultures
Cultures that rely 
heavily on nonverbal 
and subtle situational 
cues in communication.
Low-context cultures
Cultures that rely 
heavily on words to 
convey meaning in 
communication.
Chinese
Korean
Japanese
Vietnamese
Arab
Greek
Spanish
Italian
English
North American
Scandinavian
Swiss
German
High
context
Low
context
EXHIBIT 9-4
Continuum of 
Countries with 
High and Low 
Context Cultures

180	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
disastrous, especially when we make assumptions based on observable characteristics. 
Many of us have a richly varied ethnic background and would be offended if someone ad-
dressed us according to what culture our physical features might favor, for instance. Also, 
attempts to be culturally sensitive to another person are often based on stereotypes propa-
gated by media. These stereotypes usually do not have a correct or current relevance.
Casmir noted that because there are far too many cultures for anyone to understand com-
pletely, and individuals interpret their own cultures differently, intercultural communication 
should be based on sensitivity and pursuit of common goals. He found the ideal condition is an 
ad hoc “third culture” where a group can form when they seek to incorporate aspects of each 
member’s cultural communication preferences. The norms this subculture establishes through 
appreciating individual differences create a common ground for effective communication. In-
tercultural groups that communicate effectively can be highly productive and innovative.
When communicating with people from a different culture, what can you do to re-
duce misinterpretations? Casmir and other experts offer the following suggestions:
1.	 Know yourself. Recognizing your own cultural identity and biases is critical to 
understanding the unique viewpoints of other people.
2.	 Foster a climate of mutual respect, fairness, and democracy. Clearly establish an 
environment of equality and mutual concern. This will be your “third culture” con-
text for effective intercultural communication that transcends each person’s cultural 
norms.
3.	 State facts, not your interpretation. Interpreting or evaluating what someone has 
said or done draws more on your own culture and background than on the observed 
situation. If you state only facts, you will have the opportunity to benefit from the 
other person’s interpretation. Delay judgment until you’ve had sufficient time to 
observe and interpret the situation from the differing perspectives of all concerned.
4.	 Consider the other person’s viewpoint. Before sending a message, put yourself in the 
recipient’s shoes. What are his or her values, experiences, and frames of reference? 
What do you know about his or her education, upbringing, and background that can 
give you added insight? Try to see the people in the group as they really are first, and 
take a collaborative problem-solving approach whenever potential conflicts arise.
5.	 Proactively maintain the identity of the group. Like any culture, the establishment 
of a common-ground “third culture” for effective intercultural communication takes 
time and nurturing. Remind members of the group of your common goals, mutual 
respect, and need to adapt to individual communication preferences.44
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Communication (TWZ Role Play).
SUMMARY
You’ve probably discovered the link between communication and employee satisfaction 
in this chapter: the less uncertainty, the greater the satisfaction. Distortions, ambiguities, 
and incongruities between verbal and nonverbal messages all increase uncertainty and 

	
Chapter 9  •  Communication	 181
reduce satisfaction. Careful attention to the methods and modes for each communication 
better ensures that the message is properly interpreted by the receiver.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Remember that your communication mode will partly determine your communica-
tion effectiveness.
•	 Obtain feedback to make certain your messages—however, they are communi-
cated—are understood.
•	 Remember that written communication creates more misunderstandings than oral 
communication does; communicate with employees through in-person meetings 
when possible.
•	 Make sure you use communication strategies appropriate to your audience and the 
type of message you’re sending.
•	 Keep in mind communication barriers such as gender and culture.
  TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Communication.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Communication Styles
What is your preferred communication style? Take this PIA to learn more about various 
communication styles.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	 9-1.	 What is your favorite method of communication, and how might you incorporate your 
preference into your business communications now that you’ve read the chapter?
	 9-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

182
Basics of Group 
Behavior
10
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Distinguish between the different types of groups.
	 2.	 Describe the punctuated-equilibrium model of group development.
	 3.	 Show how role requirements change in different situations.
	 4.	 Demonstrate how norms exert influence on an individual’s behavior.
	 5.	 Show how status and size differences affect group performance.
	 6.	 Describe how issues of cohesiveness and diversity can be integrated for group 
effectiveness.
	 7.	 Contrast the strengths and weaknesses of group decision making.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 183
GROUPS AND GROUP IDENTITY
Groups have their strengths—and their pitfalls. How do we get the best out of group situa-
tions? Let’s dissect the anatomy of group life, starting with the basics. In organizational be-
havior (OB), a group consists of two or more individuals, interacting and interdependent, 
who have come together to achieve particular objectives. Groups can be either formal or 
informal. A formal group is defined by the organization’s structure, with designated work 
assignments and established tasks. In formal groups, the behaviors team members should 
engage in are stipulated by and directed toward organizational goals. The six members of 
an airline flight crew are a formal group, for example. In contrast, an informal group is 
neither formally structured nor organizationally determined. Informal groups in the work 
environment meet the need for social contact. Three employees from different departments 
who regularly have lunch or coffee together are an informal group. These types of interac-
tions among individuals, though informal, deeply affect their behavior and performance.
Social Identity
Have you noticed that people often feel strongly about their groups? This is partly be-
cause shared experiences amplify our perception of events.1 As you would expect, positive 
shared experiences enhance our bond with our groups. According to research in Australia, 
sharing painful experiences also increases our felt bond and trust with others.2 Consider 
the aftermath of a sports national championship game. Fan groups of the winning team 
are elated, and sales of team-related shirts, jackets, and hats skyrocket. Conversely, fans 
of the losing team feel dejected, even embarrassed. Why? Even though fans have little to 
do with the actual performance of the sports team, their self-image can be wrapped up in 
their identification with the group. Our tendency to personally invest in the accomplish-
ments of a group is the territory of social identity theory.
People develop many group identities throughout the course of their lives. You might 
define yourself in terms of the organization you work for, the city you live in, your profes-
sion, your religious background, your ethnicity, and/or your gender. Over time, some groups 
you belong to may become more significant to you than others. A U.S. expatriate working 
in Rome might be very aware of being from the United States, for instance, but doesn’t give 
national identity a second thought when transferring from Tulsa to Tucson.3 We may thus 
pick and choose which of our social identities are salient to the situation, or we may find 
that our social identities are in conflict, such as the identities of business leader and parent.4 
In the workplace, our identification with our workgroups is often stronger than with our 
organizations, but both are important to positive outcomes in attitudes and behaviors. If we 
have low identification with our organizations, we may experience decreased satisfaction 
and engage in fewer organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs; see Chapter 1).5
Ingroups and Outgroups
Ingroup favoritism occurs when we see members of our group as better than other people and 
people not in our group as all the same. Recent research suggests that people with low open-
ness and/or low agreeableness (see Chapter 4) are more susceptible to ingroup favoritism.6
Whenever there is an ingroup, there is by necessity an outgroup, which is some-
times everyone else, but it is usually an identified group known by the ingroup’s mem-
bers. For example, if my ingroup is the Republican party in U.S. politics, my outgroup 
Group
Two or more 
individuals, interacting 
and interdependent, 
who have come 
together to achieve 
particular objectives.
Formal group
A designated work 
group defined by an 
organization’s structure.
Informal group 
A group that is neither 
formally structured 
nor organizationally 
determined; such 
a group appears in 
response to the need 
for social contact.
Social identity theory 
A perspective that 
considers when and 
why individuals 
consider themselves 
members of groups.
Ingroup favoritism 
Perspective in which 
we see members of 
our ingroup as better 
than other people, and 
people not in our group 
as all the same.
Outgroup 
The inverse of an 
ingroup; an outgoup 
can mean anyone 
outside the group, but 
more usually it is an 
identified other group.

184	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
might be anyone in the world who is not a Republican, but it’s more likely to be the other 
U.S. political parties, or perhaps just Democrats.
When there are ingroups and outgroups, there is often animosity between them. 
One of the most powerful sources of ingroup–outgroup feelings regards the practice of 
religion, even in the workplace. One global study, for instance, found that when groups 
became heavily steeped in religious rituals and discussions, they became especially 
discriminatory toward outgroups and aggressive if the outgroups had more resources.7 
Consider an example from another study of a U.K. Muslim organization that supported 
Al-Qaeda and identified moderate U.K. Muslims as its outgroup. The Al-Qaeda ingroup 
was not neutral toward the moderate outgroup; instead, the ingroup denounced the mod-
erates, denigrating them as deviant and threatening outward aggression.8
STAGES OF GROUP DEVELOPMENT
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Witness.org: Managing Groups & Teams.
Temporary groups with finite deadlines pass through a unique sequencing of actions (or 
inaction):
1.	 The first meeting sets the group’s direction.
2.	 The first phase of group activity is one of inertia and thus makes slower progress.
3.	 A transition takes place exactly when the group has used up half its allotted time.
4.	 This transition initiates major changes.
5.	 A second phase of inertia follows the transition.
6.	 The group’s last meeting is characterized by markedly accelerated activity.9
This pattern, called the punctuated-equilibrium model, is illustrated by Exhibit 10-1.
Let’s discuss each stage of the model. At the first meeting, the group’s general pur-
pose and direction is established, and then a framework emerges of behavioral patterns 
and assumptions through which the group will approach its project, sometimes in the first 
few seconds of the group’s existence. Once set, the group’s direction is solidified and is 
unlikely to be reexamined throughout the first half of its life. This is a period of inertia—
the group tends to stand still or become locked into a fixed course of action even if it gains 
new insights that challenge initial patterns and assumptions.
One of the most interesting discoveries in studies was that groups experienced a tran-
sition precisely halfway between the first meeting and the official deadline—whether mem-
bers spent an hour on their project or six months. The midpoint appears to work like an alarm 
clock, heightening members’ awareness that their time is limited and they need to get mov-
ing. This transition ends Phase 1 and is characterized by a concentrated burst of changes, 
dropping of old patterns, and adoption of new perspectives. The transition sets a revised 
direction for Phase 2, a new equilibrium or period of inertia in which the group executes 
plans created during the transition period. Lastly, the group’s last meeting is characterized 
by a final burst of activity to finish its work. In summary, the punctuated-equilibrium model 
characterizes groups as exhibiting long periods of inertia interspersed with brief revolution-
ary changes triggered primarily by members’ awareness of time and deadlines.
Punctuated-
equilibrium model 
A set of phases that 
temporary groups go 
through that involves 
transitions between 
inertia and activity.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 185
There are many models of group stages, but this one is a dominant theory with 
strong support. Keep in mind, however, that this model doesn’t apply to all groups, but 
is suited to the finite quality of temporary task groups working under a time deadline.10
GROUP PROPERTY 1: ROLES
Workgroups shape members’ behavior, and they also help explain individual behavior 
as well as the performance of the group itself. Some defining group properties are roles, 
norms, status, size, cohesiveness, and diversity. We’ll discuss each in the sections that 
follow. Let’s begin with the first group property, roles.
Shakespeare said, “All the world’s a stage, and all the men and women merely 
players.”11 Using the same metaphor, all group members are actors, each playing a role, 
a set of expected behavior patterns attributed to someone occupying a given position in 
a social unit. We are required to play a number of diverse roles, both on and off our jobs. 
As we’ll see, one of the tasks in understanding behavior is grasping the role a person is 
currently playing.
Bill is a plant manager with EMM Industries, a large electrical equipment man-
ufacturer in Phoenix. He fulfills a number of roles—employee, member of middle 
management, and electrical engineer. Off the job, Bill holds more roles: husband, 
father, Catholic, tennis player, member of the Thunderbird Country Club, and presi-
dent of his homeowners’ association. Many of these roles are compatible; some create 
conflicts. How does Bill’s religious commitment influence his managerial decisions 
regarding layoffs, expense padding, and provision of accurate information to govern-
ment agencies? A recent offer of promotion requires Bill to relocate, yet his family 
wants to stay in Phoenix. Can the role demands of his job be reconciled with the 
demands of his husband and father roles?
Different groups impose different role requirements on individuals. Like Bill, we 
all play a number of roles, and our behavior varies with each. But how do we know each 
role’s requirements? We draw upon our role perceptions to frame our ideas of appropri-
ate behaviors, and learn the expectations of our groups. We also seek to understand the 
parameters of our roles to minimize role conflict. Let’s discuss each of these facets.
Role 
A set of expected 
behavior patterns 
attributed to someone 
occupying a given 
position in a social 
unit.
A
First
Meeting
Phase 1
Completion
Phase 2
Transition
(High)
(Low)
(A+B)/2
Time
Performance
B
EXHIBIT 10-1
The Punctuated-
Equilibrium 
Model

186	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Role Perception
Our view of how we’re supposed to act in a given situation is a role perception. We 
get role perceptions from stimuli all around us—for example, friends, books, films, and 
television, like when we form an impression of politicians from House of Cards. Appren-
ticeship programs allow beginners to watch an expert so they can learn to act as expected.
Role Expectations
Role expectations are the way others believe you should act in a given context. A U.S. 
federal judge is viewed as having propriety and dignity, while a football coach is seen as 
aggressive, dynamic, and inspiring to the players.
In the workplace, we look at role expectations through the perspective of the psy-
chological contract: an unwritten agreement that exists between employees and em-
ployers. This agreement sets out mutual expectations.12 Management is expected to treat 
employees justly, provide acceptable working conditions, clearly communicate what is 
a fair day’s work, and give feedback on how well an employee is doing. Employees 
are expected to demonstrate a good attitude, follow directions, and show loyalty to the 
organization.
What happens if management is derelict in its part of the bargain? We can expect 
negative effects on employee performance and satisfaction. One study among restaurant 
managers found that violations of the psychological contract were related to greater inten-
tions to quit, while another study of a variety of different industries found broken psycho-
logical contracts were associated with lower levels of productivity, higher levels of theft, 
and greater work withdrawal.13
Role Conflict
When compliance with one role requirement makes it difficult to comply with another, 
the result is role conflict.14 At the extreme, two or more role expectations may be con-
tradictory. For example, if as a manager you were to provide a performance evaluation 
of a person you mentored, your roles as evaluator and mentor may conflict. Similarly, 
we can experience interrole conflict15 when the expectations of our different, separate 
groups are in opposition. An example can be found in work-family conflict, which Bill 
experienced when expectations placed on him as a husband and father differed from those 
placed on him as an executive with EMM Industries. Bill’s wife and children want to 
remain in Phoenix, while EMM expects its employees to be responsive to the company’s 
needs and requirements. Although it might be in Bill’s financial and career interests to 
accept a relocation, the conflict centers on choosing between family and work-role ex-
pectations. Indeed, a great deal of research demonstrates that work-family conflict is one 
of the most significant sources of stress for most employees.16
GROUP PROPERTY 2: NORMS
Did you ever notice that golfers don’t speak while their partners are putting? Why not? 
The answer is norms.
All groups have established norms—acceptable standards of behavior shared by 
members that express what they ought and ought not to do under certain circumstances. 
Role perception
An individual’s view 
of how he or she is 
supposed to act in a 
given situation.
Role expectations
How others believe a 
person should act in a 
given situation.
Psychological  
contract
An unwritten 
agreement that sets 
out what management 
expects from an 
employee and vice 
versa.
Role conflict
A situation in 
which an individual 
is confronted by 
divergent role 
expectations.
Interrole conflict
A situation in which 
the expectations of an 
individual’s different, 
separate groups are in 
opposition.
Norms
Acceptable standards of 
behavior within a group 
that are shared by the 
group’s members.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 187
It’s not enough for group leaders to share their opinions—even if members adopt the 
leaders’ views, the effect may last only three days!17 When agreed to by the group, norms 
influence behavior with a minimum of external controls. Different groups, communities, 
and societies have different norms, but they all have them.18
Norms and Emotions
Have you ever noticed how the emotions of one member of your family, especially strong 
emotions, can influence the emotions of the other members? A family can be a highly 
normative group. So can a task group whose members work together on a daily basis, 
because frequent communication can increase the power of norms. A recent study found 
that, in a task group, individuals’ emotions influenced the group’s emotions and vice 
versa. This may not be surprising, but researchers also found that norms dictated the 
experience of emotions for the individuals and for the groups—in other words, people 
grew to interpret their shared emotions in the same way.19 As we discovered in Chapter 3, 
our emotions and moods can shape our perspective, so the normative effect of groups can 
powerfully influence group attitudes and outcomes.
Norms and Conformity
As a member of a group, you desire acceptance by the group. Thus, you are susceptible to con-
forming to group norms. Considerable evidence suggests that groups can place strong pressures 
on individual members to change their attitudes and behaviors to match the group’s standard.20
The impact that group pressures for conformity can have on an individual mem-
ber’s judgment was demonstrated in studies by Solomon Asch and others.21 Asch made up 
groups of seven or eight people who were asked to compare two cards. One card had one 
line, and the other had three lines of varying length, one of which was identical to the line 
on the one-line card, as Exhibit 10-2 shows. The difference in line length was obvious; in 
fact, under ordinary conditions, subjects were incorrect less than 1 percent of the time in 
announcing which of the three lines matched the single line.
The experiment began with sets of matching exercises. Everyone gave the right an-
swers. On the third set, however, the first subject, who was part of the research team, gave 
an obviously wrong answer—for example, saying “C” in Exhibit 10-2. The next subject, 
also on the research team, gave the same wrong answer, and so forth. Now the dilemma 
confronting the subject, who didn’t know any of the subjects were on the research team, 
was this: publicly state a perception that differed from the announced position of the oth-
ers, or give an incorrect answer that agreed with the others.
The results over many experiments showed 75 percent of subjects gave at least one 
answer that conformed—that they knew was wrong but was consistent with the replies of 
Conformity 
The adjustment of 
one’s behavior to align 
with the norms of the 
group.
X
A
B
C
EXHIBIT 10-2
Examples of
Cards Used in
Asch’s Study

188	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
other group members—and the average conformer gave wrong answers 37 percent of the 
time. But does that mean we are mere robots? Certainly not. Do individuals conform to 
the pressures of all groups to which they belong? Again, obviously not. People conform 
most to their reference groups, important groups in which a person is aware of other 
members, defines himself or herself as a member or would like to be a member, and feels 
group members are significant to him or her.
Norms and Behavior
Norms can cover any aspect of group behavior.22 As we’ve mentioned, norms in the work-
place significantly influence employee behavior. This may seem intuitive, but full appre-
ciation of the influence of norms on worker behavior did not occur until the Hawthorne 
Studies conducted between 1924 and 1932 with production workers at the Western Elec-
tric Company’s Hawthorne Works in Chicago.23 Subsequent studies have reinforced the 
general findings, so next we detail the Hawthorne experiments for you.
The researchers first examined the relationship between the physical environment—
specifically, the amount of light on the shop floor—and productivity. As they increased 
the light level for the experimental group of workers, output rose for that unit and the 
control group. But as they dropped the light level, productivity continued to increase. In 
fact, productivity in the experimental group decreased only when the light intensity had 
been reduced to that of moonlight, leading researchers to believe that group dynamics, 
rather than the environment, influenced behavior.
The researchers next isolated a small group of women assembling telephones so 
their behavior could be more carefully observed. Over the next several years, this small 
group’s output increased steadily, and the number of personal and sick absences was ap-
proximately one-third of that in the regular production department. It became evident this 
group’s performance was significantly influenced by its “special” status. The members 
thought they were in an elite group, and that management showed concern about their 
interests by engaging in experimentation. In essence, workers in both the illumination 
and assembly experiments were really reacting to the increased attention they received.
A wage-incentive plan was then introduced in the bank wiring observation room. 
The most important finding was that employees did not individually maximize their out-
put. Rather, their role performance became controlled by a group norm. Members were 
afraid that if they significantly increased their output, the unit incentive rate might be 
cut, the expected daily output might be increased, layoffs might occur, or slower work-
ers might be reprimanded. So the group established its idea of a fair output—neither too 
much nor too little. Members helped each other ensure their reports were nearly level, 
and the norms the group established included a number of behavioral “don’ts.” Don’t be a 
rate-buster—turning out too much work. Don’t be a chiseler—turning out too little work. 
Don’t squeal on any of your peers. The group enforced its norms with name-calling, ridi-
cule, and even punches to the upper arms of violators. The group thus operated well below 
its capability, using norms that were tightly established and strongly enforced.
Positive Norms and Group Outcomes
One goal of every organization with corporate social responsibility (CSR; see Chapter 2) ini-
tiatives is for its values to hold normative sway over employees. After all, if employees aligned 
their thinking with positive norms, these norms would become stronger and the probability of 
Reference groups 
Important groups to 
which individuals 
belong or hope to 
belong and with whose 
norms individuals are 
likely to conform.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 189
positive impact would grow exponentially. We might expect the same outcomes from political 
correctness (PC) norms. But what is the effect of strong positive norms on group outcomes? 
The popular thinking is that to increase creativity in groups, for instance, norms should be 
loosened. However, research on gender-diverse groups indicates that strong PC norms increase 
group creativity. Why? The clear expectations about male–female interactions usually present 
in high PC environments reduce uncertainty about group expectations,24 which allows the 
members to more easily express their creative ideas without combating stereotype norms.
Positive group norms may well beget positive outcomes, but only if other factors 
are present, too. For instance, in a recent study a high level of group extraversion pre-
dicted helping behaviors more strongly when there were positive cooperation norms.25 As 
powerful as norms can be, though, not everyone is equally susceptible to positive group 
norms. Individual personalities factor in, too, as well as the level of a person’s social 
identity with the group. Also, a recent study in Germany indicated that the more satisfied 
people were with their groups, the more closely they followed group norms.26
Negative Norms and Group Outcomes
LeBron is frustrated by a coworker who constantly spreads malicious and unsubstantiated ru-
mors about him. Lindsay is tired of a member of her workgroup who, when confronted with a 
problem, takes out his frustration by yelling and screaming at her and other members. And Mi-
Cha recently quit her job as a dental hygienist after being sexually harassed by her employer.
What do these illustrations have in common? They represent employees exposed to acts 
of deviant workplace behavior.27 As we discussed in Chapter 2, counterproductive work be-
havior (CWB) or deviant workplace behavior is voluntary behavior that violates significant 
organizational norms and, in so doing, threatens the well-being of the organization or its mem-
bers. Exhibit 10-3 provides a typology of deviant workplace behaviors, with examples of each.
Deviant workplace 
behavior 
Voluntary behavior 
that violates significant 
organizational 
norms and, in so 
doing, threatens the 
well-being of the 
organization or its 
members. Also called 
antisocial behavior or 
workplace incivility.
Category
Examples
Production
Leaving early
Intentionally working slowly
Wasting resources
Property
Sabotage
Lying about hours worked
Stealing from the organization
Political
Showing favoritism
Gossiping and spreading rumors
Blaming coworkers
Personal aggression
Sexual harassment
Verbal abuse
Stealing from coworkers
EXHIBIT 10-3
Typology of Deviant Workplace Behavior
Source: Based on S. L. Robinson and R. J. Bennett, “A Typology of Deviant Workplace Behaviors: A Multidimensional 
Scaling Study,” Academy of Management Journal 38, no. 2 (1995), p. 565. Copyright 1995 by Academy of Management 
(NY); S. H. Appelbaum, G. D. Iaconi, and A. Matousek, “Positive and Negative Deviant Workplace Behaviors: Causes, 
Impacts, and Solutions,” Corporate Governance 7, no. 5 (2007), 586–598; and R. W. Griffin, and A. O’Leary-Kelly, The 
Dark Side of Organizational Behavior (New York: Wiley, 2004).”

190	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Few organizations will admit to creating or condoning conditions that encourage or 
sustain deviant behaviors. Yet they exist. For one, as we discussed before, a workgroup can 
become characterized by positive or negative attributes. When those attributes are negative, 
such as when a workgroup is high in psychopathy and aggression, the characteristics of 
deceit, amorality, and intent to harm others are pronounced.28 Second, employees have been 
reporting an increase in rudeness and disregard toward others by bosses and coworkers in 
recent years. Workplace incivility, like many other deviant behaviors, has many negative 
outcomes for those on the receiving end.29 Nearly half of employees who have suffered this 
incivility say it has led them to think about changing jobs; 12 percent actually quit because 
of it.30 Also, a study of nearly 1,500 respondents found that in addition to increasing their 
intentions to leave, incivility at work increased reports of psychological stress and physical 
illness.31 Third, research suggests that a lack of sleep, which is often caused by heightened 
work demands and which hinders a person’s ability to regulate emotions and behaviors, 
can lead to deviant behavior. As organizations have tried to do more with less and pushing 
their employees to work extra hours, they may indirectly be facilitating deviant behavior.32
Norms and Culture
Do people in collectivist cultures have different norms than people in individualist cul-
tures? Of course they do. But did you know that our orientation may be changed, even after 
years of living in one society? In one recent experiment, an organizational role-playing ex-
ercise was given to a neutral group of subjects; the exercise stressed either collectivist or in-
dividualist (see Chapter 3) norms. Subjects were then given a task of their personal choice 
or were assigned one by an ingroup or outgroup person. When the individualist-primed 
subjects were allowed personal choice of the task, or the collectivist-primed subjects were 
assigned the task by an ingroup person, they became more highly motivated.33
GROUP PROPERTY 3: STATUS, AND GROUP PROPERTY 4: SIZE
We’ve discussed how the roles we play and the norms we internalize tend to dictate our 
behavior in groups. However, those are not the only two factors that influence who we are 
in a group and how the group functions. Have you ever noticed how groups tend to stratify 
into higher- and lower-status members? Sometimes the status of members reflects their 
status outside the group setting, but not always. Also, status often varies between groups 
of different sizes. Let’s examine how these factors affect a workgroup’s efficacy.
Group Property 3: Status
Status—a socially defined position or rank given to groups or group members by others—
permeates every society. Even the smallest group will show differences in member status over 
time. Status is a significant motivator and has major behavioral consequences when individuals 
perceive a disparity between what they believe their status is and what others perceive it to be.
WHAT DETERMINES STATUS?  According to status characteristics theory, status 
tends to derive from one of three sources:34
1.	 The power a person wields over others. Because they likely control the group’s 
resources, people who control group outcomes tend to be perceived as high status.
Status 
A socially defined 
position or rank given 
to groups or group 
members by others.
Status characteristics 
theory
A theory that states 
that differences in 
status characteristics 
create status hierarchies 
within groups.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 191
2.	 A person’s ability to contribute to a group’s goals. People whose contributions 
are critical to the group’s success tend to have high status.
3.	 An individual’s personal characteristics. Someone whose personal character-
istics are positively valued by the group (good looks, intelligence, money, or a 
friendly personality) typically has higher status than someone with fewer valued 
attributes.
STATUS AND NORMS  Status has some interesting effects on the power of norms and 
pressures to conform. High-status individuals may be more likely to deviate from norms 
when they have low identification (social identity) with the group.35 They also eschew 
pressure from lower-ranking members of other groups. High-status people are also better 
able to resist conformity pressures than are their lower-status peers. An individual who 
is highly valued by a group but doesn’t need or care about the group’s social rewards 
is particularly able to disregard conformity norms.36 In general, bringing high-status 
members into a group may improve performance, but only up to a point, perhaps because 
these members may introduce counterproductive norms.37
STATUS AND GROUP INTERACTION  People tend to become more assertive when 
they seek to attain higher status in a group.38 They speak out more often, criticize more, 
state more commands, and interrupt others more often. Lower-status members tend to 
participate less actively in group discussions; when they possess expertise and insights 
that could aid the group, failure to fully utilize these members reduces the group’s overall 
performance. But that doesn’t mean a group of only high-status individuals would be 
preferable. Adding some high-status individuals to a group of mid-status individuals may 
be advantageous because group performance suffers when too many high-status people 
are in the mix.39
STATUS INEQUITY  It is important for group members to believe the status hierarchy 
is equitable. Perceived inequity creates disequilibrium, which inspires various types of 
corrective behaviors. Hierarchical groups can lead to resentment among those at the lower 
end of the status continuum. Large differences in status within groups are also associated 
with poorer individual performance, lower health, and higher intentions for the lower-
status members to leave the group.40
STATUS AND STIGMATIZATION  Although it’s clear that your own status affects 
the way people perceive you, the status of people with whom you are affiliated can 
also affect others’ views of you. Studies have shown that people who are stigmatized 
can “infect” others with their stigma. This “stigma by association” effect can result 
in negative opinions and evaluations of the person affiliated with the stigmatized 
individual, even if the association is brief and purely coincidental. Of course, many of 
the foundations of cultural status differences have no merit in the first place.
GROUP STATUS  Early in life, we acquire an “us and them” mentality.41 You may have 
correctly surmised that if you are in an outgroup, your group is of lower status in the 
eyes of the associated ingroup’s members. Culturally, sometimes ingroups represent the 
dominant forces in a society and are given high status, which can create discrimination 

192	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
against their outgroups. Low-status groups, perhaps in response to this discrimination, 
are likely to leverage ingroup favoritism to compete for higher status.42 When high-status 
groups then feel the discrimination from low-status groups, they may increase their bias 
against the outgroups.43 With each cycle, the groups become more polarized.
Group Property 4: Size
Does the size of a group affect the group’s overall behavior? Yes, but the effect depends 
on what dependent variables we examine. Groups with a dozen or more members are 
good for gaining diverse input. If the goal is fact-finding or idea-generating, then larger 
groups should be more effective. Smaller groups of about seven members are better at 
doing something productive.
One of the most important findings about the size of a group concerns social loaf-
ing, the tendency for individuals to expend less effort when working collectively than 
when alone.44 Social loafing directly challenges the assumption that the productivity of 
the group as a whole should at least equal the sum of the productivity of the individuals in 
it, no matter what the group size. The implications for OB are significant. When managers 
use collective work situations, they must also be able to identify individual efforts. Fur-
thermore, greater performance diversity creates greater social loafing the longer a group 
is together, which decreases satisfaction and performance.45
Social loafing appears to have a Western bias. It’s consistent with individualistic 
cultures, such as those found in the United States and Canada, which are dominated by 
self-interest. It is not consistent with collectivistic societies, in which individuals are mo-
tivated by group goals. For example, in studies comparing U.S. employees with employ-
ees from China and Israel (both collectivistic societies), Chinese and Israelis showed no 
propensity to engage in social loafing and actually performed better in a group than alone.
Research indicates that the stronger an individual’s work ethic is, the less likely that 
person is to engage in social loafing.46 Also, the greater the level of conscientiousness and 
agreeableness (see Chapter 4) in a group, the more likely that performance will remain 
high whether there is social loafing or not.47 There are ways to prevent social loafing:
1.	 Set group goals, so the group has a common purpose to strive toward.
2.	 Increase intergroup competition, which focuses on the shared group outcome.
3.	 Engage in peer evaluations.
4.	 Select members who have high motivation and prefer to work in groups.
5.	 Base group rewards in part on each member’s unique contributions.48
Recent research indicates that social loafing can also be counteracted by publicly 
posting individual performance ratings for group members, too.49
GROUP PROPERTY 5: COHESIVENESS,  
AND GROUP PROPERTY 6: DIVERSITY
For a group to be highly functioning, it must act cohesively as a unit, but not because all 
the group members think and act alike. In some ways, the properties of cohesiveness and 
diversity need to be valued at the initial tacit establishment of roles and norms—will the 
group be inclusive of all its members, regardless of differences in backgrounds? Let’s 
discuss the importance of group cohesiveness first.
Social loafing
The tendency for 
individuals to expend 
less effort when 
working collectively 
than when working 
individually.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 193
Group Property 5: Cohesiveness
Groups differ in their cohesiveness—the degree to which members are attracted to each 
other and motivated to stay in the group. Some workgroups are cohesive because the 
members have spent a great deal of time together, the group’s small size or purpose facili-
tates high interaction, or external threats have brought members close together.
Cohesiveness affects group productivity. Studies consistently show that the rela-
tionship between cohesiveness and productivity depends on the group’s performance-
related norms.50 If norms for quality, output, and cooperation with outsiders are high, 
a cohesive group will be more productive than a less cohesive group. But if cohesive-
ness is high and performance norms are low, productivity will be low. If cohesiveness is 
low and performance norms are high, productivity increases, but less than in the high-
cohesiveness/high-norms situation. When cohesiveness and performance-related norms 
are both low, productivity tends to fall into the low-to-moderate range. These conclusions 
are summarized in Exhibit 10-4.
What can you do to encourage group cohesiveness?
1.	 Make the group smaller.
2.	 Encourage agreement with group goals.
3.	 Increase the time members spend together.
4.	 Increase the group’s status and the perceived difficulty of attaining membership.
5.	 Stimulate competition with other groups.
6.	 Give rewards to the group rather than to individual members.
7.	 Physically isolate the group.51
Group Property 6: Diversity
The final property of groups we consider is diversity in the group’s membership, or the 
degree to which members of the group are similar to, or different from, one another. Over-
all, studies identify both costs and benefits from group diversity.
Diversity appears to increase group conflict, especially in the early stages of a 
group’s tenure, which often lowers group morale and raises dropout rates. One study 
compared groups that were culturally diverse and homogeneous (composed of people 
from the same country). On a wilderness survival test, the groups performed equally well, 
but the members from the diverse groups were less satisfied with their groups, were less 
cohesive, and had more conflict.52 Groups in which members’ values or opinions differ 
Cohesiveness
The degree to which 
group members are 
attracted to each other 
and are motivated to 
stay in the group.
Diversity 
The extent to which 
members of a group 
are similar to, or 
different from, one 
another.
High
productivity
High
High
Low
Cohesiveness
Performance Norms
Low
productivity
Low
Moderate
productivity
Moderate to
low productivity
EXHIBIT 10-4
The Impact of 
Cohesiveness 
and Performance 
Norms on 
Productivity

194	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
tend to experience more conflict, but leaders who can get the group to focus on the task 
at hand and encourage group learning are able to reduce these conflicts and enhance 
discussion of group issues.53 Gender diversity can also be a challenge to a group, but if 
inclusiveness is stressed, group conflict and dissatisfaction are lowered.54
TYPES OF GROUP DIVERSITY  You may have correctly surmised that the type of group 
diversity matters. Surface-level diversity—in observable characteristics such as national 
origin, race, and gender—alerts people to possible deep-level diversity—in underlying 
attitudes, values, and opinions. Right or wrong, one researcher argues, “The mere presence 
of diversity you can see, such as a person’s race or gender, actually cues a team that 
there’s likely to be differences of opinion.”55 Surface-level diversity may subconsciously 
cue team members to be more open-minded in their views.56 For example, two studies of 
MBA student groups found surface-level diversity led to greater openness.
The effects of deep-level diversity are less understood. Research in Korea indicates 
that putting people with a high need for power (nPow; see Chapter 8) with those with a 
low need for power can reduce unproductive group competition, whereas putting indi-
viduals with a similar need for achievement may increase task performance.57
CHALLENGES OF GROUP DIVERSITY  Although differences can lead to conflict, they 
also provide an opportunity to solve problems in unique ways. One study of jury behavior 
found diverse juries were more likely to deliberate longer, share more information, and 
make fewer factual errors when discussing evidence. Altogether, the impact of diversity 
on groups is mixed. It is difficult to be in a diverse group in the short term. However, if 
members can weather their differences, over time diversity may help them to be more 
open-minded and creative and to do better. But even positive effects are unlikely to be 
especially strong. As one review stated, “The business case (in terms of demonstrable 
financial results) for diversity remains hard to support based on the extant research.”58 
Yet, other researchers argue that we shouldn’t overlook the effects of homogeneity, many 
of which can be detrimental.59
One possible negative effect of diverse teams—especially those that are diverse 
in terms of surface-level characteristics—is faultlines, or perceived divisions that split 
groups into two or more subgroups based on individual differences such as sex, race, age, 
work experience, and education.
For example, let’s say Group A is composed of three men and three women. The 
three men have approximately the same amount of work experience and backgrounds in 
marketing. The three women have about the same amount of work experience and back-
grounds in finance. Group B has three men and three women, but they all differ in terms 
of their experience and backgrounds. Two of the men are experienced, while the other 
is new. One of the women has worked at the company for several years, while the other 
two are new. In addition, two of the men and one woman in Group B have backgrounds 
in marketing, while the other man and the remaining two women have backgrounds in 
finance. It is thus likely that a faultline will result in the subgroups of males and females 
in Group A but not in Group B, based on the differentiating characteristics.
Research on faultlines has shown that splits are generally detrimental to group 
functioning and performance. Subgroups may compete with each other, which takes 
time away from core tasks and harms group performance. Groups that have subgroups 
learn more slowly, make more risky decisions, are less creative, and experience higher 
Faultlines
The perceived 
divisions that split 
groups into two or 
more subgroups 
based on individual 
differences such as 
sex, race, age, work 
experience, and 
education.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 195
levels of conflict. Subgroups may not trust each other. Finally, satisfaction with sub-
groups is generally high, but the overall group’s satisfaction is lower when faultlines are 
present.60 However, faultlines regarding skill, knowledge, and expertise may be beneficial 
in a results-driven organizational culture.61 Furthermore, problems stemming from strong 
faultlines may be overcome when the group is given a common goal to strive for. Alto-
gether, forced collaboration between members of subgroups and focus on accomplishing 
a goal may transcend the faultlines.62
GROUP DECISION MAKING
The belief—characterized by juries—that two heads are better than one has long been 
accepted as a basic component of the U.S. legal system and those of many other coun-
tries. Many decisions in organizations are made by groups, teams, or committees. We’ll 
discuss the advantages of group decision making, along with the unique challenges group 
dynamics bring to the decision-making process. Finally, we’ll offer some techniques for 
maximizing the group decision-making opportunity.
Groups versus the Individual
Decision-making groups may be widely used in organizations, but are group decisions 
preferable to those made by an individual alone? The answer depends on a number of fac-
tors. Groups are an excellent vehicle for performing many steps in the decision-making 
process and offer both breadth and depth of input for information gathering. If group 
members have diverse backgrounds, the alternatives generated should be more extensive 
and the analysis more critical. When the final solution is agreed on, there are more people 
in a group decision to support and implement it. These pluses, however, may be more than 
offset by the time consumed by group decisions, the internal conflicts they create, and the 
pressures they generate toward conformity.
We must be careful to define the types of conflicts, however. Research in Korea indi-
cates that group conflicts about tasks may increase group performance, while conflicts in rela-
tionships may decrease performance.63 In some cases, therefore, we can expect individuals to 
make better decisions than groups. Let’s look at the considerations of group decision making.
STRENGTHS OF GROUP DECISION MAKING  Groups generate more complete 
information and knowledge. By aggregating the resources of several individuals, groups 
bring more input as well as heterogeneity into the decision process. They offer increased 
diversity of views. This opens up the opportunity to consider more approaches and 
alternatives. Finally, groups lead to increased acceptance of a solution. Group members 
who participate in making a decision are more likely to enthusiastically support and 
encourage others to accept it later.
WEAKNESSES OF GROUP DECISION MAKING  Group decisions are time-consuming 
because groups typically take more time to reach a solution. There are conformity 
pressures. The desire by group members to be accepted and considered an asset to the 
group can squash any overt disagreement. Group discussion can be dominated by one 
or a few members. If they’re low- and medium-ability members, the group’s overall 
effectiveness will suffer. Finally, group decisions suffer from ambiguous responsibility. 

196	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
In an individual decision, it’s clear who is accountable for the final outcome. In a group 
decision, the responsibility of any single member is diluted.
EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY  Whether groups are more effective than individuals 
depends on how you define effectiveness. Group decisions are generally more accurate 
than the decisions of the average individual in a group, but generally less accurate than 
the judgments of the most accurate person.64 In terms of speed, individuals are superior. 
If creativity is important, groups tend to be more effective. And if effectiveness means the 
degree of acceptance of achievable solutions, the nod again goes to the group.65
We cannot consider effectiveness without also assessing efficiency. With few ex-
ceptions, group decision making consumes more work hours than does having an indi-
vidual tackle the same problem. The exceptions tend to be instances in which, to achieve 
comparable quantities of diverse input, the single decision maker must spend a great deal 
of time reviewing files and talking to other people. In deciding whether to use groups, 
then, managers must assess whether increases in effectiveness are more than enough to 
offset the reductions in efficiency.
Groupthink
Groupthink, a by-product of a decision, can affect a group’s ability to appraise alterna-
tives objectively and achieve high-quality solutions. Groupthink relates to norms and 
describes situations in which group pressures for conformity deter the group from criti-
cally appraising unusual, minority, or unpopular views.
GROUPTHINK  Groupthink appears closely aligned with the conclusions Solomon Asch 
drew in his experiments with a lone dissenter. Individuals who hold a position different 
from that of the dominant majority are under pressure to suppress, withhold, or modify 
their true feelings and beliefs. As members of a group, we find it more pleasant to be 
in agreement—to be a positive part of the group—than to be a disruptive force, even if 
disruption would improve effectiveness. Groups that are more focused on performance 
than on learning are especially likely to fall victim to groupthink and to suppress the 
opinions of those who do not agree with the majority.66 Groupthink seems to occur most 
often when there is a clear group identity, when members hold a positive image of their 
group they want to protect, and when the group perceives a collective threat to its positive 
image.67
What can managers do to minimize groupthink?68 First, they can monitor group 
size. People grow more intimidated and hesitant as group size increases, and although 
there is no magic number that will eliminate groupthink, individuals are likely to feel 
less personal responsibility when groups get larger than about 10 members. Managers 
should also encourage group leaders to play an impartial role. Leaders should actively 
seek input from all members and avoid expressing their own opinions, especially in the 
early stages of deliberation. In addition, managers should appoint one group member to 
play the role of devil’s advocate, overtly challenging the majority position and offering 
divergent perspectives. Yet another suggestion is to use exercises that stimulate active 
discussion of diverse alternatives without threatening the group or intensifying identity 
protection. Have group members delay discussion of possible gains so they can first talk 
about the dangers or risks inherent in a decision. Requiring members to initially focus on 
Groupthink
A phenomenon in 
which the norm for 
consensus overrides 
the realistic appraisal 
of alternative courses 
of action.
Samsung
In September 
2016, the South 
Korean corporation 
Samsung was forced 
to recall all of its 
Galaxy Note 7 
products. It was a 
financial and public 
relations disaster. 
With over 450,000 
employees, many 
commentators cited 
the groupthink 
“cannot fail” attitude 
within Samsung for 
allowing the faulty 
product onto the 
market. The negative 
power of groupthink 
has, in the past, 
adversely affected 
Nokia and Sony too.

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 197
the negatives of an alternative makes the group less likely to stifle dissenting views and 
more likely to gain an objective evaluation.
Groupshift or Group Polarization
Groupshift describes the way group members tend to exaggerate their initial positions 
when discussing a given set of alternatives to arrive at a solution. In some situations, 
caution dominates and there is a conservative shift, while in other situations, groups tend 
toward a risky shift. There are differences between group decisions and the individual de-
cisions of group members.69 In groups, discussion leads members toward a more extreme 
view of the position they already held. Conservatives become more cautious, and more 
aggressive types take on more risk. We can view this group polarization as a special 
case of groupthink. The group’s decision reflects the dominant decision-making norm— 
toward greater caution or more risk—that develops during discussion.
The shift toward polarization has several explanations.70 It’s been argued, for in-
stance, that discussion makes the members more comfortable with each other and thus 
more willing to express extreme versions of their original positions. Another argument is 
that the group diffuses responsibility. Group decisions free any single member from ac-
countability for the group’s final choice, so a more extreme position can be taken. It’s also 
likely that people take extreme positions because they want to demonstrate how different 
they are from the outgroup.71 People on the fringes of political or social movements may 
take on ever-more-extreme positions just to prove they are really committed to the cause, 
whereas those who are more cautious tend to take moderate positions to demonstrate how 
reasonable they are.
We now turn to the techniques by which groups make decisions. These reduce some 
of the dysfunctional aspects of group decision making.
Group Decision-Making Techniques
The most common form of group decision making takes place in interacting groups. 
Members meet face to face and rely on both verbal and nonverbal interactions to commu-
nicate. But as our discussion of groupthink demonstrated, interacting groups often censor 
themselves and pressure individual members toward conformity of opinion. Brainstorm-
ing and the nominal group technique (discussed below) can reduce problems inherent in 
the traditional interacting group.
BRAINSTORMING  Brainstorming can overcome the pressures for conformity 
that dampen creativity72 by encouraging any and all alternatives while withholding 
criticism. In a typical brainstorming session, a half-dozen to a dozen people sit around 
a table. The group leader states the problem in a clear manner so all participants 
understand. Members then freewheel as many alternatives as they can in a given length 
of time. To encourage members to “think the unusual,” no criticism is allowed, even of 
the most bizarre suggestions, and all ideas are recorded for later discussion and analysis.
Brainstorming may indeed generate ideas—but not in a very efficient manner. Re-
search consistently shows individuals working alone generate more ideas than a group in 
a brainstorming session does. One reason for this is “production blocking.” When peo-
ple are generating ideas in a group, many are talking at once, which blocks individuals’ 
thought process and eventually impedes the sharing of ideas.73
Groupshift 
A change between a 
group’s decision and 
an individual decision 
that a member within 
the group would make; 
the shift can be toward 
either conservatism 
or greater risk but it 
generally is toward a 
more extreme version 
of the group’s original 
position.
Interacting groups 
Typical groups in 
which members 
interact with each 
other face to face.
Brainstorming
An idea-generation 
process that 
specifically encourages 
any and all alternatives 
while withholding 
any criticism of those 
alternatives.

198	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
NOMINAL GROUP TECHNIQUE  The nominal group technique may be more effective. 
This technique restricts discussion and interpersonal communication during the decision-
making process. Group members are all physically present, as in a traditional meeting, 
but they operate independently. Specifically, a problem is presented and then the group 
takes the following steps:
1.	 Before any discussion takes place, each member independently writes down ideas 
about the problem.
2.	 After this silent period, each member presents one idea to the group. No discussion 
takes place until all ideas have been presented and recorded.
3.	 The group discusses the ideas for clarity and evaluates them.
4.	 Each group member silently and independently rank-orders the ideas. The idea with 
the highest aggregate ranking determines the final decision.
The chief advantage of the nominal group technique is that it permits a group to 
meet formally but does not restrict independent thinking. Research generally shows nom-
inal groups outperform brainstorming groups.74
Each of the group-decision techniques has its own set of strengths and weaknesses. 
The choice depends on the criteria you want to emphasize and the cost-benefit trade-off. 
As Exhibit 10-5 indicates, an interacting group is good for achieving commitment to a 
solution; brainstorming develops group cohesiveness; and the nominal group technique is 
an inexpensive means for generating a large number of ideas.
SUMMARY
We can draw several implications from our discussion of groups. First, norms control behav-
ior by establishing standards of right and wrong. Second, status inequities create frustration 
and can adversely influence productivity and willingness to remain with an organization. 
Third, the impact of size on a group’s performance depends on the type of task. Fourth, 
cohesiveness may influence a group’s level of productivity, depending on the group’s perfor-
mance-related norms. Fifth, diversity appears to have a mixed impact on group performance, 
with some studies suggesting that diversity can help performance and others suggesting the 
opposite. Sixth, role conflict is associated with job-induced tension and job dissatisfaction.75 
Groups can be carefully managed toward positive organizational outcomes and optimal de-
cision making. The next chapter will explore several of these conclusions in greater depth.
Nominal group 
technique 
A group decision-
making method in 
which individual 
members meet 
face to face to pool 
their judgments in 
a systematic but 
independent fashion.
Type of Group
Effectiveness Criteria
Interacting
Brainstorming
Nominal
Number and quality of ideas
Low
Moderate
High
Social pressure
High
Low
Moderate
Money costs
Low
Low
Low
Speed
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Task orientation
Low
High
High
Potential for interpersonal conﬂict
High
Low
Moderate
Commitment to solution
High
Not applicable
Moderate
Development of group cohesiveness
High
High
Moderate
EXHIBIT 10-5
Evaluating Group Effectiveness

	
Chapter 10  •  Basics of Group Behavior	 199
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Recognize that groups can dramatically affect individual behavior in organizations, 
to either a positive or negative effect. Therefore, pay special attention to roles, 
norms, and cohesion—to understand how these are operating within a group is to 
understand how the group is likely to behave.
•	 To decrease the possibility of deviant workplace activities, ensure that group norms 
do not support antisocial behavior.
•	 Pay attention to the status aspect of groups. Because lower-status people tend to 
participate less in group discussions, groups with high-status differences are likely 
to inhibit input from lower-status members and reduce their potential.
•	 Use larger groups for fact-finding activities and smaller groups for action-taking 
tasks. With larger groups, provide measures of individual performance.
•	 To increase employee satisfaction, ensure people perceive their job roles accurately.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Group Behavior.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Communicating Supportively
Are you a supportive person? Take this PIA to find out if you communicate supportively.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	10-1.	 Which of the concepts in this chapter apply to experiences you’ve had in groups?
	10-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

200
From Groups to Teams
11
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Analyze the continued popularity of teams in organizations.
	 2.	 Contrast groups and teams.
	 3.	 Contrast the five types of team arrangements.
	 4.	 Identify the characteristics of effective teams.
	 5.	 Explain how organizations can create team players.
	 6.	 Decide when to use individuals instead of teams.
WHY HAVE TEAMS BECOME SO POPULAR?
Why are teams popular? In short, because we believe they are effective. “A team of people 
happily committed to the project and to one another will outperform a brilliant individual 
every time,” writes Forbes publisher Rich Karlgaard.1 In some ways, he’s right. Teams can 
sometimes achieve feats an individual could never accomplish.2 Teams are more flexible 
and responsive to changing events than traditional departments or other forms of permanent 

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 201
groups can be. They can quickly assemble, deploy, refocus, and disband. They are an effec-
tive means to democratize organizations and increase employee involvement. And finally, 
research indicates that our involvement in teams positively shapes the way we think as indi-
viduals, introducing a collaborative mind-set about even our own personal decision making.3
The fact that organizations have embraced teamwork doesn’t necessarily mean 
teams are always effective. Team members, being human, can be swayed by fads and 
herd mentality that can lead them astray from the best decisions. What conditions affect 
their potential? How do members work together? Do we even like teams? Maybe not. To 
answer these questions, let’s first distinguish between groups and teams.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN GROUPS AND TEAMS
Groups and teams are not the same thing. In Chapter 10, we defined a group as two or 
more individuals, interacting and interdependent, who work together to achieve particular 
objectives. A work group is a group that interacts primarily to share information and 
make decisions to help each member perform within his or her area of responsibility.
Workgroups have no need or opportunity to engage in collective work with joint 
effort, so the group’s performance is merely the summation of each member’s individual 
contribution. There is no positive synergy that would create an overall level of perfor-
mance greater than the sum of the inputs. A workgroup is a collection of individuals doing 
their work, albeit with interaction and/or dependency.
A work team, on the other hand, generates positive synergy through coordination. The 
individual efforts result in a level of performance greater than the sum of the individual inputs.
In both workgroups and work teams, there are often behavioral expectations of mem-
bers, collective normalization efforts, active group dynamics, and some level of decision 
making (even if just informally about the scope of membership). Both may generate ideas, 
pool resources, or coordinate logistics such as work schedules; for the workgroup, however, 
this effort will be limited to information gathering for decision makers outside the group.
Whereas we can think of a work team as a subset of a workgroup, the team is con-
structed to be purposeful (symbiotic) in its member interaction. The distinction between 
a workgroup and a work team should be kept even when the terms are mentioned inter-
changeably in differing contexts. Exhibit 11-1 highlights the differences between them.
Workgroup 
A group that interacts 
primarily to share 
information and make 
decisions to help each 
group member perform 
within his or her area 
of responsibility.
Work team 
A group whose 
individual efforts result 
in performance that is 
greater than the sum of 
the individual inputs.
Share information
Neutral (sometimes negative)
Individual
Random and varied
Goal
Synergy
Accountability
Skills
Work Groups
Work Teams
Collective performance
Positive
Individual and mutual
Complementary
EXHIBIT 11-1
Comparing Work 
Groups and Work 
Teams

202	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
The definitions help clarify why organizations structure work processes by teams. 
Management is looking for positive synergy that will create increased performance. The 
extensive use of teams creates the potential for an organization to generate greater outputs 
with no increase in employee headcount. Notice, however, that we said potential. There 
is nothing magical that ensures the achievement of positive synergy in the creation of 
teams. Merely calling a group a team doesn’t automatically improve its performance. As 
we show later, effective teams have certain common characteristics. If management hopes 
to gain increases in organizational performance through the use of teams, the teams must 
possess these characteristics.
TYPES OF TEAMS
Teams can make products, provide services, negotiate deals, coordinate projects, of-
fer advice, and make decisions.4 In this section, we first describe four common types 
of teams in organizations: problem-solving teams, self-managed work teams, cross-
functional teams, and virtual teams (see Exhibit 11-2). Then we will discuss multiteam 
systems, which utilize a “team of teams” and are becoming increasingly widespread as 
work increases in complexity.
Problem-Solving Teams
Quality-control teams have been in use for many years. Originally seen most often in 
manufacturing plants, these were permanent teams that generally met at a regular time, 
sometimes weekly or daily, to address quality standards and any problems with the prod-
ucts made. The use of quality-control teams has since expanded into other arenas such as 
the medical field, where they are used to improve patient care services. Problem-solving 
teams like these rarely have the authority to unilaterally implement their suggestions, 
but if their recommendations are paired with implementation processes, some significant 
improvements can be realized.
Self-Managed Work Teams
As we discussed, problem-solving teams only make recommendations. Some organiza-
tions have gone further and created teams that also implement solutions and take respon-
sibility for outcomes. Self-managed work teams are groups of employees (typically 10 
to 15 in number) who perform highly related or interdependent jobs; these teams take 
on some supervisory responsibilities.5 Typically, the responsibilities include planning 
and scheduling work, assigning tasks to members, making operating decisions, taking 
Problem-solving 
teams 
Groups of 5 to 12 
employees from the 
same department who 
meet for a few hours 
each week to discuss 
ways of improving 
quality, efficiency, and 
the work environment.
Self-managed work 
teams
Groups of 10 to 15 
people who take on 
responsibilities of their 
former supervisors.
?
Problem-solving Self-managed
Cross-functional
Virtual
Technology
EXHIBIT 11-2
Four Types of 
Teams

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 203
action on problems, and working with suppliers and customers. Fully self-managed work 
teams even select their own members who evaluate each other’s performance. When 
these teams are established, former supervisory positions become less important and are 
sometimes eliminated.
Research results on the effectiveness of self-managed work teams have not been 
uniformly positive. Some research indicates that self-managed teams may be more or 
less effective based on the degree to which team-promoting behaviors are rewarded. For 
example, one study of 45 self-managing teams found that when team members perceived 
that economic rewards such as pay were dependent on input from their teammates, per-
formance improved for both individuals and the team as a whole.6
A second area of research focus has been the impact of conflict on self-managed 
team effectiveness. Some research indicated that self-managed teams are not effective 
when there is conflict. When disputes arise, members often stop cooperating and power 
struggles ensue, which lead to lower group performance.7 However, other research indi-
cates that when members feel confident they can speak up without being embarrassed, 
rejected, or punished by other team members—in other words, when they feel psycho-
logically safe, conflict can be beneficial and boost team performance.8
Thirdly, research has explored the effect of self-managed work teams on mem-
ber behavior. Here again the findings are mixed. Although individuals on teams report 
higher levels of job satisfaction than other individuals, studies indicate they some-
times also have higher absenteeism and turnover rates. Furthermore, one large-scale 
study of labor productivity in British establishments found that although using teams 
improved individual (and overall) labor productivity, no evidence supported the claim 
that self-managed teams performed better than traditional teams with less decision-
making authority.9
Cross-Functional Teams
Starbucks created a team of individuals from production, global PR, global communica-
tions, and U.S. marketing to develop the Via brand of instant coffee. The team’s sugges-
tions resulted in a product that would be cost-effective to produce and distribute, and that 
was marketed with a tightly integrated, multifaceted strategy.10 This example illustrates 
the use of cross-functional teams, teams made up of employees from about the same 
hierarchical level, but from different work areas, who come together to accomplish a task.
Cross-functional teams are an effective means of allowing people from diverse ar-
eas within or even between organizations to exchange information, develop new ideas, 
solve problems, and coordinate complex projects. However, due to the high need for 
coordination, cross-functional teams are not simple to manage. Why? First, power shifts 
occur as different expertise is needed because the members are at roughly the same level 
in the organization, which creates leadership ambiguity. A climate of trust thus needs to 
be developed before shifts can happen without undue conflict.11 Second, the early stages 
of development are often long since members need to learn to work with higher levels 
of diversity and complexity. Third, it takes time to build trust and teamwork, especially 
among people with different experiences and perspectives.
In sum, the strength of traditional cross-functional teams is the collaborative effort 
of individuals with diverse skills from a variety of disciplines. When the unique perspec-
tives of these members are considered, these teams can be very effective.
Cross-functional 
teams 
Employees from about 
the same hierarchical 
level, but from 
different work areas, 
who come together to 
accomplish a task.

204	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Virtual Teams
The teams described in the preceding section do their work face-to-face, whereas virtual 
teams use computer technology to unite physically dispersed members in an effort to 
achieve a common goal.12 Members collaborate online using communication links such 
as wide area networks, corporate social media, videoconferencing, and e-mail; whether 
members are nearby or continents apart. Nearly all teams do at least some of their work 
remotely.
Virtual teams should be managed differently than face-to-face teams in an office, 
partially because virtual team members may not interact along traditional hierarchical 
patterns. Because of the complexity of interactions, research indicated that shared leader-
ship of virtual teams may significantly enhance team performance, although the concept 
is still in development.13 For virtual teams to be effective, management should ensure 
that: (1) trust is established among members (one inflammatory remark in an e-mail can 
severely undermine team trust); (2) progress is monitored closely (so the team doesn’t 
lose sight of its goals and no team member “disappears”); and (3) the efforts and products 
of the team are publicized throughout the organization (so the team does not become 
invisible).14
Multiteam Systems
The types of teams we’ve described so far are typically smaller, stand-alone teams, though 
their activities relate to the broader objectives of the organization. As tasks become more 
complex, teams often grow in size. Increases in team size are accompanied by higher 
coordination demands, creating a tipping point at which the addition of another member 
does more harm than good. To solve this problem, organizations use multiteam systems, 
collections of two or more interdependent teams that share a superordinate goal. In other 
words, a multiteam system is a “team of teams.”1
To picture a multiteam system, imagine the coordination of response needed after 
a major car accident. There is the emergency medical services team, which responds first 
and transports the injured people to the hospital. An emergency room team then takes 
over, providing medical care, followed by a recovery team. Although the emergency ser-
vices team, emergency room team, and recovery team are technically independent, their 
activities are interdependent, and the success of one depends on the success of the others. 
Why? Because they all share the higher goal of saving lives.
Some factors that make smaller, more traditional teams effective do not necessarily 
apply to multiteam systems and can even hinder their performance. One study showed 
that multiteam systems performed better when they had “boundary spanners” whose jobs 
were to coordinate efforts with all constituents. This reduced the need for some team 
member communication, which was helpful because it reduced coordination demands.16 
Leadership of multiteam systems is also much different than for stand-alone teams. While 
leadership of all teams affects team performance, a multiteam leader must both facilitate 
coordination between teams and lead them. Research indicated teams that received more 
attention and engagement from the organization’s leaders felt more empowered, which 
made them more effective as they sought to solve their own problems.17
In general, a multiteam system is the best choice either when a team has be-
come too large to be effective, or when teams with distinct functions need to be highly 
coordinated.
Virtual teams 
Teams that use 
computer technology 
to tie together 
physically dispersed 
members in order to 
achieve a common 
goal.
Multiteam system
A collection of two or 
more interdependent 
teams that share a 
superordinate goal; a 
team of teams.

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 205
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Teams (TWZ Role Play).
Team effectiveness
Process
• Common purpose
• Specific goals
• Team efficacy
• Conflict levels
• Social loafing
Composition
• Abilities of members
• Personality
• Allocating roles
• Diversity
• Size of teams
• Member flexibility
• Member preferences
Context
• Adequate resources
• Leadership and structure
• Climate of trust
• Performance evaluation
   and reward systems
EXHIBIT 11-3
Team 
Effectiveness 
Model
CREATING EFFECTIVE TEAMS
Teams are often created deliberately but sometimes evolve organically. Take the rise of the 
team “hive” over the past five years as an example of organic evolution. The hive process 
typically begins with freelancers. Freelancing is typically the solo work of people who are 
highly specialized in their fields and can provide expertise to organizations on a short-term 
basis. The difficulty is for the freelancers to effectively market themselves to organizations, 
and for organizations to find freelancers who fit their needs. To bridge this gap, freelancers 
form teams with other freelancers from complementary specialties to present a cohesive 
working unit—a hive—to clients. This team-based approach has proven very successful.18
Many people have tried to identify factors related to team effectiveness. To help, 
some studies have organized what was once a large list of characteristics into a relatively 
focused model.19 Exhibit 11-3 summarizes what we currently know about what makes 
teams effective. As you’ll see, it builds on many of the group concepts introduced in 
Chapter 10.
We can organize the key components of effective teams into three general catego-
ries. First are the resources and other contextual influences that make teams effective. The 
second relates to the team’s composition. Finally, process variables are events within the 
team that influence effectiveness. We will explore each of these components next.

206	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Team Context: What Factors Determine  
Whether Teams Are Successful?
The four contextual factors most significantly related to team performance, discussed 
next, are adequate resources, leadership and structure, a climate of trust, and a perfor-
mance evaluation and reward system that reflects team contributions.
ADEQUATE RESOURCES  Teams are part of a larger organization system; every 
work team relies on resources outside the group to sustain it. A scarcity of resources 
directly reduces the ability of a team to perform its job effectively and achieve its goals. 
Important resources include timely information, proper equipment, adequate staffing, 
encouragement, and administrative assistance.
LEADERSHIP AND STRUCTURE  Teams can’t function if they can’t agree on who is to do 
what and ensure all members share the workload. Agreeing on the specifics of work and 
how they fit together to integrate individual skills requires leadership and structure, either 
from management or from team members themselves. In self-managed teams, members 
absorb many of the duties typically assumed by managers. A manager’s job then becomes 
managing outside (rather than inside) the team.
As mentioned before, leadership is especially important in multiteam systems. 
Here, leaders need to delegate responsibility to teams and play the role of facilitator, 
making sure the teams work together rather than against one another.20
CLIMATE OF TRUST  Trust is the foundation of leadership; it allows a team to accept 
and commit to the leader’s goals and decisions. Members of effective teams exhibit trust 
in their leaders.21 They also trust each other. Interpersonal trust among team members 
facilitates cooperation, reduces the need to monitor each other’s behavior, and bonds 
individuals through the belief that members won’t take advantage of them. Members 
are more likely to take risks and expose vulnerabilities when they can trust others on 
their team. The overall level of trust in a team is important, but the way trust is dispersed 
among team members also matters. Trust levels that are asymmetric and imbalanced 
between team members can mitigate the performance advantages of a high overall level 
of trust—in such cases, coalitions form that often undermine the team as a whole.22
Trust is a perception that can be vulnerable to shifting conditions in a team environ-
ment. For instance, research in Singapore found that, in high-trust teams, individuals are 
less likely to claim and defend personal ownership of their ideas, but individuals who do 
still claim personal ownership are rated as lower contributors by team members.23 This 
“punishment” by the team may reflect resentments that create negative relationships, 
increased conflicts, and reduced performance.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND REWARD SYSTEM  Individual performance 
evaluations and incentives may interfere with the development of high-performance teams. 
So, in addition to evaluating and rewarding employees for their individual contributions, 
management should utilize hybrid performance systems that incorporate an individual 
member component to recognize individual contributions, and a group reward to recognize 
positive team outcomes.24 Group-based appraisals, profit sharing, small-group incentives, 
and other system modifications can reinforce team effort and commitment.

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 207
Team Composition
Maria Contreras-Sweet, head of the U.S. Small Business Administration, suggests that 
when she is building a team, she looks for a variety of qualities in potential team members 
including resourcefulness, flexibility, and discreetness (which also reflects integrity).25 
These are good qualities, but not all that we should consider when staffing teams. The 
team composition category includes variables that relate to how teams should be staffed: 
the abilities and personalities of team members, allocation of roles, diversity, cultural 
differences, size of the team, and members’ preferences for teamwork.
ABILITIES OF MEMBERS  It’s true we occasionally read about an athletic team of 
mediocre players who, because of excellent coaching, determination, and precision 
teamwork, beat a far more talented group. But such cases make the news precisely 
because they are unusual. A team’s performance depends in part on the knowledge, skills, 
and abilities of individual members.26 Abilities set limits on what members can do and 
how effectively they will perform on a team.
Research revealed insights into team composition and performance. First, when 
solving a complex problem such as reengineering an assembly line, high-ability teams—
composed of mostly intelligent members—do better than lower-ability teams. High-
ability teams are also more adaptable to changing situations; they can more effectively 
apply existing knowledge to new problems.
Finally, the ability of the team’s leader matters. Smart team leaders help less intel-
ligent team members when they struggle with a task. A less intelligent leader can, con-
versely, neutralize the effect of a high-ability team.27
PERSONALITY OF MEMBERS  We demonstrated in Chapter 4 that personality significantly 
influences individual behavior. Some dimensions identified in the Big Five personality model 
are particularly relevant to team effectiveness.28 Conscientiousness is especially important 
to teams. Conscientious people are good at backing up other team members and sensing 
when their support is truly needed. Conscientious teams also have other advantages—one 
study found that behavioral tendencies such as organization, achievement orientation, and 
endurance were all related to higher levels of team performance.29
Team composition can be based on individual personalities to good effect. Suppose 
an organization needs to create 20 teams of 4 people each and has 40 highly conscientious 
people and 40 who score low on conscientiousness. Would the organization be better off: 
(1) forming 10 teams of highly conscientious people and 10 teams of members low on 
conscientiousness; or (2) “seeding” each team with two people who score high and two 
who score low on conscientiousness? Perhaps surprisingly, evidence suggests Option 1 is 
the best choice; performance across the teams will be higher if the organization forms 10 
highly conscientious teams and 10 teams low in conscientiousness. The reason is that a 
team with varying conscientiousness levels will not work to the peak performance of its 
highly conscientious members. Instead, a group normalization dynamic (or simple resent-
ment) will complicate interactions and force the highly conscientious members to lower 
their expectations, thus reducing the group’s performance.30
What about the other traits? Teams with a high level of openness to experience 
tend to perform better, and research indicates that constructive task conflict enhances the 
effect. Open team members communicate better with one another and throw out more 

208	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
ideas, which makes teams with open people more creative and innovative.31 Task conflict 
also enhances performance for teams with high levels of emotional stability.32 It’s not so 
much that the conflict itself improves performance for these teams, but that teams charac-
terized by openness and emotional stability are able to handle conflict and leverage it to 
improve performance. The minimum level of team member agreeableness matters, too: 
teams do worse when they have one or more highly disagreeable members, and a wide 
span in individual levels of agreeableness can lower productivity. Research is not clear 
on the outcomes of extraversion, but one study indicated that a high mean level of extra-
version in a team can increase the level of helping behaviors, particularly in a climate of 
cooperation.33 Thus, the personality traits of individuals are as important to teams as the 
overall personality characteristics of the team.
ALLOCATION OF ROLES  Teams have different needs, and members should be selected 
to ensure all the various roles are filled. A study of 778 major league baseball teams 
over a 21-year period highlighted the importance of assigning roles appropriately.34 As 
you might expect, teams with more experienced and skilled members performed better. 
However, the experience and skill of those in core roles—those who handled more of the 
workflow of the team and were central to all work processes (in this case, pitchers and 
catchers)—were especially vital.35 In other words, put your most able, experienced, and 
conscientious workers in the most central roles in a team.
We can identify nine potential team member roles (see Exhibit 11-4). Success-
ful work teams have selected people to play all these roles based on their skills and 
Team
Adviser
Creator
Promoter
Assessor
Organizer
Producer
Controller
Maintainer
Linker
Fights external
battles
Initiates creative
ideas
Champions ideas
after they’re initiated
Offers insightful
analysis of options
Provides
structure
Examines details
and enforces rules
Provides direction
and follow-through
Coordinates and
integrates
Encourages the search
for more information
EXHIBIT 11-4
Potential Team 
Member Roles

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 209
preferences. (On many teams, individuals will play multiple roles.) To increase the likeli-
hood team members will work well together, managers need to understand the individual 
strengths each person can bring to a team, select members with their strengths in mind, 
and allocate work assignments that fit with members’ preferred styles.
DIVERSITY OF MEMBERS  In Chapter 10, we discussed the effect of diversity on groups. 
How does team diversity affect team performance? The degree to which members of a 
work unit (group, team, or department) share a common demographic attribute, such as 
age, sex, race, educational level, or length of service in the organization, is the subject of 
organizational demography. Organizational demography suggests that attributes such 
as age or the date of joining should help predict turnover. The logic goes like this: Turnover 
will be greater among those with dissimilar experiences because communication is more 
difficult and conflict is more likely. Increased conflict makes membership less attractive, 
so employees are more likely to quit. Similarly, the losers of a conflict are more apt to 
leave voluntarily or be forced out.36 The conclusion is that diversity negatively affects 
team performance.
Many of us hold the optimistic view that diversity should be a good thing—
diverse teams should benefit from differing perspectives. Two meta-analytic reviews 
showed, however, that demographic diversity was essentially unrelated to team per-
formance, while a third review suggested that race and gender diversity were actually 
negatively related to team performance.37 Other research findings are mixed. One 
qualifier is that gender and ethnic diversity have more negative effects in occupations 
dominated by White or male employees, but in more demographically balanced occu-
pations, diversity is less of a problem. Diversity in function, education, and expertise 
are positively related to team performance, but these effects are small and depend on 
the situation.
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES  We have discussed research on team diversity regarding a 
number of differences. But what about cultural differences? Evidence indicates cultural 
diversity interferes with team processes, at least in the short term,38 but let’s dig a little 
deeper: what about differences in cultural status? Though it’s debatable, people with 
higher cultural status are usually in the majority or ruling race group of their nations. 
Researchers in the United Kingdom, for example, found that cultural status differences 
affected team performance, noting that teams with more high cultural-status members 
than low cultural-status members realized improved performance... for every member 
on the team.39 This suggests not that diverse teams should be filled with individuals who 
have high cultural status in their countries, but that we should be aware of how people 
identify with their cultural status even in diverse group settings.
In general, cultural diversity seems to be an asset for tasks that call for a variety 
of viewpoints. But culturally heterogeneous teams have more difficulty learning to work 
with each other and solving problems. The good news is that these difficulties seem to 
dissipate with time.
SIZE OF TEAMS  Most experts agree that keeping teams small is key to improving group 
effectiveness.40 Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos uses the “two-pizza” rule, saying, “If it takes 
more than two pizzas to feed the team, the team is too big.”41 Psychologist George Miller 
claimed “the magical number [is] seven, plus or minus two,” for the ideal team size.42 
Organizational 
demography 
The degree to which 
members of a work 
unit share a common 
demographic attribute; 
such as age, sex, race, 
educational level, or 
length of service in an 
organization; and the 
impact of this attribute 
on turnover.

210	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Author and Forbes publisher Rich Karlgaard writes, “Bigger teams almost never correlate 
with a greater chance of success” because the potential connections between people grow 
exponentially as team size increases, complicating communications.43
Generally speaking, the most effective teams have five to nine members. Experts 
suggest using the smallest number of people who can do the task. Unfortunately, man-
agers often err by making teams too large. It may require only four or five members to 
develop an array of views and skills, while coordination problems can increase as others 
are added. When teams have excess members, cohesiveness and mutual accountability 
decline, social loafing increases, and people communicate less. Members of large teams 
have trouble coordinating with one another, especially under time pressure. When a natu-
ral working unit is larger and you want a team effort, consider breaking the group into 
subteams.44
MEMBER PREFERENCES  Not every employee is a team player. Given the option, many 
employees will select themselves out of team participation. When people who prefer 
to work alone are required to team up, there is a direct threat to the team’s morale and 
to individual member satisfaction.45 This suggests that, when selecting team members, 
managers should consider individual preferences along with abilities, personalities, and 
skills. High-performing teams are likely to be composed of people who prefer working 
as part of a group.
Team Processes
The final category related to team effectiveness includes process variables such as mem-
ber commitment to a common plan and purpose, specific team goals, team efficacy, team 
identity, team cohesion, mental models, conflict levels, and social loafing. These will be 
especially important in larger teams and in teams that are highly interdependent.46
Why are processes important to team effectiveness? Teams should create outputs 
greater than the sum of their inputs. Exhibit 11-5 illustrates how group processes can have 
an impact on a group’s actual effectiveness.47 Teams are often used in research laborato-
ries because they can draw on the diverse skills of various individuals to produce more 
meaningful research than researchers working independently—that is, they produce posi-
tive synergy, and their process gains exceed their process losses.
COMMON PLAN AND PURPOSE  Effective teams begin by analyzing the team’s mission, 
developing goals to achieve that mission, and creating strategies for achieving the goals. 
Teams that consistently perform better have a clear sense of what needs to be done and 
how.48 This sounds obvious, but many teams ignore this fundamental process. Effective 
teams show reflexivity, meaning they reflect on and adjust their purpose when necessary. 
A team must have a good plan, but it needs to be willing and able to adapt when conditions 
call for it.49 Interestingly, some evidence suggests that teams high in reflexivity are better 
able to adapt to conflicting plans and goals among team members.50
Reflexivity
A team characteristic 
of reflecting on and 
adjusting the master 
plan when necessary.
Potential group
effectiveness
+
=
–
Process
gains
Process
losses
Actual group
effectiveness
EXHIBIT 11-5
Effects of Group 
Processes

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 211
SPECIFIC GOALS  Successful teams translate their common purpose into specific, 
measurable, and realistic performance goals. Specific goals facilitate clear 
communication. They help teams maintain their focus on getting results. Consistent 
with the research on individual goals, team goals should be challenging. Difficult but 
achievable goals raise team performance on those criteria for which they’re set. So, 
for instance, goals for quantity tend to increase quantity, goals for accuracy increase 
accuracy, and so on.51
TEAM EFFICACY  Effective teams have confidence in themselves; they believe 
they can succeed. We call this team efficacy.52 Teams that have been successful 
raise their beliefs about future success, which, in turn, motivates them to work 
harder. In addition, teams that have a shared knowledge of individual capabilities 
can strengthen the link between team members’ self-efficacy and their individual 
creativity because members can more effectively solicit informed opinions from 
their teammates.53 What can management do to increase team efficacy? Two options 
are helping the team achieve small successes that build confidence, and providing 
training to improve members’ technical and interpersonal skills. The greater the 
abilities of team members, the more likely the team will develop confidence and the 
ability to deliver on that confidence.
TEAM IDENTITY  In Chapter 10, we discussed the important role of social identity in 
people’s lives. When people connect emotionally with the groups they’re in, they are 
more likely to invest in their relationship with those groups. It’s the same with teams. 
For example, research with soldiers in the Netherlands indicated that individuals who 
felt included and respected by team members became more willing to work hard for 
their teams, even though as soldiers they were already called upon to be dedicated to 
their units. Therefore, by recognizing individuals’ specific skills and abilities, as well as 
creating a climate of respect and inclusion, leaders and members can foster positive team 
identity and realize improved team outcomes.54
Organizational identity is important, too. Rarely do teams operate in a vacuum—
more often teams interact with other teams, requiring interteam coordination. Individuals 
with a positive team identity but without a positive organizational identity can become 
fixed to their teams and unwilling to coordinate with other teams within the organization.55
TEAM COHESION  Have you ever been a member of a team that really “gelled,” one 
in which team members felt connected? The term team cohesion means members are 
emotionally attached to one another and motivated toward the team because of their 
attachment. Team cohesion is a useful tool to predict team outcomes. For example, a 
large study in China indicated that if team cohesion is high and tasks are complex, costly 
investments in promotions, rewards, training, and so forth yield greater profitable team 
creativity. Teams with low cohesion and simple tasks, on the other hand, are not likely to 
respond to incentives with greater creativity.56
Team cohesion is a strong predictor of team performance such that when cohesion 
is harmed, performance may be too. Negative relationships are one driver of reduced 
cohesion. To mitigate this effect, teams can foster high levels of interdependence and 
high-quality interpersonal interactions.
Team efficacy 
A team’s collective 
belief among team 
members that they can 
succeed at their tasks.
Team identity
A team member’s 
affinity for and sense 
of belongingness to his 
or her team.
Team cohesion 
A situation when 
team members are 
emotionally attached 
to one another and 
motivated toward the 
team because of their 
attachment.

212	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
MENTAL MODELS  Effective teams share accurate mental models—organized mental 
representations of the key elements within a team’s environment that team members share 
(If the team mission and goals pertain to what a team needs to be effective, mental models 
pertain to how a team does its work).57 If team members have the wrong mental models, 
which is particularly likely in teams under acute stress, their performance suffers.58 One 
review of 65 independent studies found that teams with shared mental models engaged 
in more frequent interactions with one another, were more motivated, had more positive 
attitudes toward their work, and had higher levels of objectively rated performance.59 If 
team members have different ideas about how to do things, however, the team will fight 
over methods rather than focus on what needs to be done.60
An anesthetic team in a hospital is one example of an action team with shared 
mental models. Research in Switzerland found that anesthetic teams communicated two 
distinct types of messages while in an operation: vocally monitoring each other’s perfor-
mance (not to criticize but to keep a vocal record of events), and “talking to the room” 
(announcements to everyone such as, “Patient’s blood pressure is dropping”). The study 
found that high- and low-performing teams communicated in these ways equally often; 
what mattered to performance was the sequencing of the communication to maintain a 
shared mental model. High-performing teams followed up monitoring dialogue with as-
sistance and instructions, and talking-to-the-room dialogue with further team dialogue.61 
The message seems simple: to maintain shared mental models and to share in conversa-
tions about what is happening while the team is in operation!
CONFLICT LEVELS  Conflict has a complex relationship with team performance, and it’s 
not necessarily bad (see Chapter 14). Relationship conflicts—those based on interpersonal 
incompatibility, tension, and animosity toward others—are almost always dysfunctional. 
However, when teams are performing nonroutine activities, disagreements about task 
content—called task conflicts—stimulate discussion, promote critical assessment of 
problems and options, and can lead to better team decisions. According to one study 
conducted in China, moderate levels of task conflict during the initial phases of team 
performance were positively related to team creativity, but both very low and very high 
levels of task conflict were negatively related to team performance.62 In other words, both 
too much and too little disagreement about how a team should initially perform a creative 
task can inhibit performance.
SOCIAL LOAFING  As we noted earlier, individuals can engage in social loafing and 
coast on the group’s effort when their particular contributions (or lack thereof) can’t be 
identified. Effective teams undermine this tendency by making members individually and 
jointly accountable for the team’s purpose, goals, and approach.63 Therefore, members 
should be clear on what they are individually and jointly responsible for on the team.
TURNING INDIVIDUALS INTO TEAM PLAYERS
We’ve made a case for the value and growing popularity of teams. But many people are not 
inherently team players, and many organizations have historically nurtured individual accom-
plishments. Teams often fit well in countries that score high on collectivism, but what if an 
organization wants to introduce teams into a work population of individuals born and raised in 
an individualistic society? Let’s consider each phase of organizational team building.
Mental models
Team members’ 
knowledge and beliefs 
about how the work 
gets done by the team.

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 213
Selecting: Hiring Team Players
Some people already possess the interpersonal skills to be effective team players. 
Therefore, managers, when hiring team members, can make certain that candidates 
can fulfill their team roles as well as technical requirements.64 Creating teams often 
means resisting the urge to hire the best talent no matter what. For example, the 
New York Knicks professional basketball team pays Carmelo Anthony well because 
he scores a lot of points for his team; but statistics show he takes more shots than 
other highly paid players in the league, which means fewer shots for his teammates.65 
Personal traits appear to make some people better candidates for working in diverse 
teams. Teams made of members who like to work through difficult mental puzzles 
also seem more effective and able to capitalize on the multiple points of view that 
arise from diversity in age and education.66
Training: Creating Team Players
Training specialists conduct exercises that allow employees to experience the satisfac-
tion teamwork can provide. Workshops help employees improve their problem-solving, 
communication, negotiation, conflict-management, and coaching skills. L’Oréal, for ex-
ample, found that successful sales teams required much more than a staff of high-ability 
salespeople. “What we didn’t account for was that many members of our top team in sales 
had been promoted because they had excellent technical and executional skills,” said 
L’Oréal’s senior VP David Waldock. As a result of introducing purposeful team training, 
Waldock said, “We are no longer a team just on paper, working independently. We have 
a real group dynamic now, and it’s a good one.”67 An effective team doesn’t develop 
overnight—it takes time.
Rewarding: Providing Incentives to Be a Good Team Player
A traditional organization’s reward system must be reworked to encourage cooperative 
efforts rather than competitive ones.68 Nu Skin helps improve lives by providing employee 
benefits like the Tuition Reimbursement program, Flexible Spending accounts, and health 
care coverage to full time employees and their dependents. Whole Foods directs most 
of its performance-based rewards toward team performance. As a result, teams select 
new members carefully so they will contribute to team effectiveness (and, thus, team 
bonuses).69 It is usually best to set a cooperative tone as soon as possible in the life of 
a team. As we already noted, teams that switch from competitive to cooperative do not 
immediately share information, and they still tend to make rushed, poor-quality deci-
sions.70 The low trust typical of the competitive group will not be readily replaced by 
high trust with a quick change in reward systems. Promotions, pay raises, and other forms 
of recognition should be given to individuals who work effectively as team members by 
training new colleagues, sharing information, helping resolve team conflicts, and mas-
tering needed new skills. This doesn’t mean individual contributions should be ignored; 
rather, they should be balanced with selfless contributions to the team.
Finally, don’t forget the intrinsic rewards, such as camaraderie, that employees can 
receive from teamwork. It’s exciting to be part of a successful team. The opportunity 
for personal development of self and teammates can be a very satisfying and rewarding 
experience.
Nu skin enterprises
Nu Skin, an 
innovative personal 
care products 
company, provides a 
Sales Compensation 
Plan, encouraging 
its distributors 
to increase the 
consumer base and 
build a healthy 
team by teaching 
others to enrol in 
the program and 
market the products. 
Distributors are 
rewarded with 
opportunities to earn 
retail profits, qualify 
as a Sales Network 
Executive—enabling 
them to participate 
in leadership 
bonus pools—and 
to qualify for Nu 
Skin’s bi-annual 
Success Trips.

214	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
BEWARE! TEAMS AREN’T ALWAYS THE ANSWER
Teamwork takes more time and often more resources than individual work. Teams have 
increased communication demands, conflicts to manage, and meetings to run. So, the 
benefits of using teams have to exceed the costs, and that’s not always possible.71 How do 
you know whether the work of your group would be better done in teams? You can apply 
three tests.72 First, can the work be done better by more than one person? Good indicators 
are the complexity of the work and the need for different perspectives. Simple tasks that 
don’t require diverse inputs are probably better left to individuals. Second, does the work 
create a common purpose or set of goals for the people in the group that is more than the 
aggregate of individual goals? Many service departments of new vehicle dealers have in-
troduced teams that link customer-service people, mechanics, parts specialists, and sales 
representatives. Such teams can better manage collective responsibility for ensuring cus-
tomer needs are properly met.
The final test is to determine whether the members of the group are interdependent. 
Using teams makes sense when there is interdependence among tasks—the success of the 
whole depends on the success of each one, and the success of each one depends on the 
success of the others. Soccer, for instance, is an obvious team sport. Success requires a 
great deal of coordination among interdependent players. Conversely, except possibly for 
relays, swim teams are not really teams. They’re groups of individuals performing indi-
vidually, whose total performance is merely the aggregate summation of their individual 
performances.
SUMMARY
Few trends have influenced jobs as much as the massive movement to teams into the work-
place. Working on teams requires employees to cooperate with others, share information, 
confront differences, and sublimate personal interests for the greater good of the team.
Understanding the distinctions between problem-solving, self-managed, cross-
functional, and virtual teams as well as multiteam systems helps determine the appropri-
ate applications for team-based work. Concepts such as reflexivity, team efficacy, team 
identity, team cohesion, and mental models bring to light important issues relating to team 
context, composition, and processes. For teams to function optimally, careful attention 
must be given to hiring, creating, and rewarding team players. Still, effective organiza-
tions recognize that teams are not always the best method for getting the work done effi-
ciently. Careful discernment and an understanding of organizational behavior are needed.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Effective teams have adequate resources, effective leadership, a climate of trust, 
and a performance evaluation and reward system that reflects team contributions. 
These teams have individuals with technical expertise, and the right traits and skills.
•	 Effective teams tend to be small. They have members who fill role demands and 
who prefer to be part of a group.
•	 Effective teams have members who believe in the team’s capabilities, are commit-
ted to a common plan and purpose, and have an accurate shared mental model of 
what it is to be accomplished.

	
Chapter 11  •  From Groups to Teams	 215
•	 Select individuals who have the interpersonal skills to be effective team players; 
provide training to develop teamwork skills; and reward individuals for cooperative 
efforts.
•	 Do not assume that teams are always needed. When tasks will not benefit from 
interdependency, individuals may be the better choice.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Teams.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Team Development Behaviors
Take this assessment to learn more about behavior in teams.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	11-1.	 From your understanding of the chapter, list the characteristics of an optimally successful 
team.
	11-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

216
Characteristics of Leaders
12
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit  mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Summarize the conclusions of trait theories of leadership.
	 2.	 Identify the central tenets and main limitations of behavioral theories.
	 3.	 Contrast contingency theories of leadership.
	 4.	 Describe the contemporary theories of leadership and their relationship to founda-
tional theories.
	 5.	 Discuss the roles of leaders in creating ethical organizations.
	 6.	 Describe how leaders can have a positive impact on their organizations through 
building trust and mentoring.
	 7.	 Identify the challenges to our understanding of leadership.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled Leadership (TWZ 
Role Play).

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 217
TRAIT THEORIES OF LEADERSHIP
We define leadership as the ability to influence a group toward the achievement of a vi-
sion or set of goals. Surely you’ve noticed, though, that not all leaders are managers, nor 
are all managers leaders. Nonsanctioned leadership—the ability to influence that arises 
outside the formal structure of the organization—is sometimes more important than for-
mal influence. What makes a person a leader? Since strong leaders have been described 
by their traits throughout history, leadership research has sought to identify the personal-
ity, social, physical, or intellectual attributes that differentiate leaders from nonleaders. 
As we will see in the chapter, there are a number of different approaches toward analyz-
ing leadership. Keep in mind that none of the concepts is mutually exclusive—in fact, 
research is not clear yet about which variables in combination yield the best leadership. 
But we’re getting there.
To begin, the trait theories of leadership focus on personal qualities, including 
personality traits like those in the Big Five (see Chapter 4), and characteristics that predict 
two distinct outcomes: leadership emergence and leadership effectiveness. Based on the 
latest research literature, we offer two conclusions about personality traits and leader-
ship: one, traits can predict leadership; and two, traits do a better job in predicting the 
emergence of leaders and the appearance of leadership than in distinguishing between 
effective and ineffective leaders.1 The fact that an individual exhibits the right traits and 
others consider that person a leader does not necessarily mean he or she will be effective, 
successful at getting the group to achieve its goals. That said, there are some strong links 
between traits and leadership we should consider.
Personality Traits and Leadership
What constitutes a great leader? In general, individuals who like being around people 
and who are able to assert themselves (extraverted), disciplined and able to keep com-
mitments they make (conscientious), and creative and flexible (open) have an apparent 
advantage when it comes to leadership. Let’s break that down a bit.
BIG FIVE TRAITS  In examining personality traits, researchers have consistently 
found extraversion to be the most predictive trait of effective leadership.2 However, 
extraversion sometimes relates more to the way leaders emerge than to their 
effectiveness. Sociable and dominant people are more likely to assert themselves in 
group situations, which can help extraverts be identified as leaders, but effective leaders 
are not domineering. One study found leaders who scored very high in assertiveness, 
a facet of extraversion, were less effective than those who were moderately high.3 So 
although extraversion can predict effective leadership, the relationship may be due to 
unique facets of the trait.
Unlike agreeableness and emotional stability, which do not seem to predict lead-
ership, conscientiousness and openness to experience may predict leadership, espe-
cially leader effectiveness. For example, one study indicated that top management 
teams that were high in conscientiousness positively influenced organizational per-
formance through their leadership.4 Conscientiousness and extraversion are positively 
related to leaders’ self-efficacy (see Chapter 7),5 and since people are more likely to 
follow someone who is confident he or she is going in the right direction, these leaders 
tend to emerge.
Leadership
The ability to influence 
a group toward the 
achievement of a 
vision or set of goals.
Trait theories of 
leadership 
Theories that consider 
personal qualities and 
characteristics that 
differentiate leaders 
from nonleaders.

218	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
DARK-SIDE TRAITS  What about the Dark-Side personality traits of machiavellianism, 
narcissism, and psychopathy (see Chapter 4)? Research indicates they’re not all bad for 
leadership. A study in Europe and the United States found that normative (mid-range) 
scores on the Dark-Side personality traits were optimal, and low (and high) scores 
were associated with ineffective leadership. Furthermore, the study suggested that high 
emotional stability may actually accentuate ineffective behaviors.6 However, higher 
scores on Dark-Side traits and emotional stability can contribute to leadership emergence. 
Thankfully, both this study and other international research indicate that building self-
awareness and self-regulation skills may be helpful for leaders to control the effects of 
their Dark-Side traits.7
Emotional Intelligence (EI) and Leadership
Another trait that may indicate effective leadership is emotional intelligence (EI). As 
discussed in Chapter 3, a core component of EI is empathy. Empathetic leaders can 
sense others’ needs, listen to what followers say (and don’t say), and read the reac-
tions of others. A leader who effectively displays and manages emotions will find 
it easier to influence the feelings of followers by expressing genuine sympathy and 
enthusiasm for good performance, and by showing irritation when employees fail to 
perform.8 The link between EI and leadership effectiveness may be worth investigat-
ing in greater detail.9 Research has also demonstrated that people high in EI are more 
likely to emerge as leaders, even after taking cognitive ability and personality into 
account.10
BEHAVIORAL THEORIES
Trait theories help us predict leadership, but they don’t fully help us explain leader-
ship. What do successful leaders do that makes them effective? Are different types 
of leader behaviors equally effective? Behavioral theories, discussed next, help us 
define the parameters of leadership. Another way to look at this is by examining the 
utility of these theories. Trait research provides a basis for selecting the right people 
for leadership. Behavioral theories of leadership, in contrast, imply we can train 
people to be leaders.
The most comprehensive behavioral theories of leadership resulted from the Ohio 
State Studies,11 which sought to identify independent dimensions of leader behavior. Be-
ginning with more than a thousand dimensions, the studies narrowed the list to two that 
substantially accounted for most of the leadership behavior described by employees: ini-
tiating structure and consideration.
Initiating Structure
Initiating structure is the extent to which a leader is likely to define and structure his 
or her role and those of employees in the search for goal attainment. It includes behavior 
that attempts to organize work, work relationships, and goals. A leader high in initiating 
structure is someone who assigns followers particular tasks, sets definite standards of per-
formance, and emphasizes deadlines. According to a review of the leadership literature, 
initiating structure is more strongly related to higher levels of group and organization 
productivity, and to more positive performance evaluations.
Behavioral theories of 
leadership 
Theories proposing 
that specific behaviors 
differentiate leaders 
from nonleaders.
Initiating structure
The extent to which 
a leader is likely to 
define and structure 
his or her role and 
those of subordinates 
in the search for goal 
attainment.

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 219
Consideration
Consideration is the extent to which a person’s job relationships are characterized by 
mutual trust, respect for employees’ ideas, and regard for their feelings. A leader high 
in consideration helps employees with personal problems, is friendly and approachable, 
treats all employees as equals, and expresses appreciation and support (people-oriented). 
Most of us want to work for considerate leaders—when asked to indicate what most mo-
tivated them at work, 66 percent of U.S. employees surveyed mentioned appreciation.12 
Indeed, one review found the followers of leaders high in consideration were more satis-
fied with their jobs, were more motivated, and had more respect for their leaders.
Cultural Differences
Mixed results from behavioral theory tests may lie partly in follower preferences, particu-
larly cultural preferences. Research from the GLOBE program—a study of 18,000 lead-
ers from 825 organizations in 62 countries, discussed in Chapter 4—suggested there are 
international differences in the preference for initiating structure and consideration.13 The 
study found that leaders high in consideration succeeded best in countries where cultural 
values did not favor unilateral decision making, such as Brazil. As one Brazilian man-
ager noted, “We do not prefer leaders who take self-governing decisions and act alone 
without engaging the group. That’s part of who we are.” A U.S. manager leading a team 
in Brazil would therefore need to be high in consideration—team-oriented, participative, 
and humane—to be effective. In contrast, the French have a more bureaucratic view of 
leaders and are less likely to expect them to be humane and considerate. A leader high 
in initiating structure (relatively task-oriented) will do best there and can make decisions 
in a relatively autocratic manner. A manager who scores high in consideration (people-
oriented) may find her style backfires in France. In other cultures, both dimensions may 
be important—for example, Chinese culture emphasizes being polite, considerate, and 
unselfish, but it has a high performance orientation. Thus, consideration and initiating 
structure may both be important for a manager to be effective in China.
CONTINGENCY THEORIES
Some tough-minded leaders seem to gain a lot of admirers when they take over struggling 
companies and lead them out of crises. However, predicting leadership success is more 
complex than finding a few hero examples. Also, the leadership style that works in very 
bad times doesn’t necessarily translate into long-term success. When researchers looked 
at situational influences, it appeared that under condition a, leadership style x would be 
appropriate, whereas style y was more suitable for condition b, and style z for condition c. 
But what were conditions a, b, and c? We next consider the Fiedler model, one approach 
to isolating situational variables.
The Fiedler Model
Fred Fiedler developed the first comprehensive contingency model for leadership.14 The 
Fiedler contingency model proposes that group performance depends on the proper 
match between the leader’s style and the degree to which the situation gives the leader 
control. With the model, the individual’s leadership style is assumed to be permanent. 
Consideration
The extent to which 
a leader is likely to 
have job relationships 
characterized by 
mutual trust, respect 
for subordinates’ ideas, 
and regard for their 
feelings.
Fiedler contingency 
model 
The theory that 
effective groups 
depend on a proper 
match between a 
leader’s style of 
interacting with 
subordinates and the 
degree to which the 
situation gives control 
and influence to the 
leader.

220	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
As a first step, the least preferred coworker (LPC) questionnaire identifies whether 
a person is task-oriented or relationship-oriented by asking respondents to think of all 
the coworkers they ever had and describe the one they least enjoyed working with. If you 
describe this person in favorable terms (a high LPC score), you are relationship-oriented. 
If you see your least-preferred coworker in unfavorable terms (a low LPC score), you are 
primarily interested in productivity and are task-oriented.
After finding a score, a fit must be found between the organizational situation and 
the leader’s style for leadership effectiveness to be predicted. We can assess the situation 
in terms of three contingency or situational dimensions:
1.	 Leader–member relations is the degree of confidence, trust, and respect members 
have in their leader.
2.	 Task structure is the degree to which the job assignments are procedurized (that 
is, structured or unstructured).
3.	 Position power is the degree of influence a leader has over power variables such as 
hiring, firing, discipline, promotions, and salary increases.
According to the model, the higher the task structure becomes, the more proce-
dures are added; and the stronger the position power, the more control the leader has. The 
favorable situations are on the left side of the model in Exhibit 12-1. A very favorable 
situation (in which the leader has a great deal of control) might include a payroll manager 
who has the respect and confidence of his or her employees (good leader–member rela-
tions); activities that are clear and specific—such as wage computation, check writing, 
Least preferred 
coworker (LPC) 
questionnaire
An instrument that 
measures whether 
a person is task- or 
relationship-oriented.
Leader–member 
relations 
The degree of 
confidence, trust, and 
respect subordinates 
have in their leader.
Task structure
The degree to which 
job assignments are 
procedurized.
Position power
Influence derived 
from one’s formal 
structural position 
in the organization; 
includes power to 
hire, fire, discipline, 
promote, and give 
salary increases.
Good
High
Strong
Good
High
Weak
Good
Low
Strong
Good
Task-oriented
Relationship-oriented 
Good
Poor
Category
Leader–member relations
Task structure
Position power
Favorable
Moderate
Unfavorable
Performance
Low
Weak
Poor
High
Strong
Poor
High
Weak
Poor
Low
Strong
Poor
Low
Weak
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
EXHIBIT 12-1
Findings From the Fiedler Model

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 221
and report filing (high task structure); and considerable freedom to reward and punish 
employees (strong position power). An unfavorable situation, to the right in the model, 
might be that of the disliked chairperson of a volunteer United Way fundraising team (low 
leader–member relations, low task structure, low position power). In this job, the leader 
has very little control. When faced with a category I, II, III, VII, or VIII situation, task-
oriented leaders perform better. Relationship-oriented leaders, however, perform better in 
moderately favorable situations—categories IV, V, and VI.
Studies testing the overall validity of the Fiedler model were initially supportive, 
but the model hasn’t been studied much in recent years. Therefore, while it provides some 
insights we should consider, its strict practical application is problematic.
Situational Leadership Theory
Situational leadership theory (SLT) focuses on the followers. It says successful leader-
ship depends on selecting the right leadership style contingent on the followers’ readi-
ness, the extent to which followers are willing and able to accomplish a specific task. A 
leader should choose one of four behaviors depending on follower readiness.
If followers are unable and unwilling to do a task, the leader needs to give clear and 
specific directions; if they are unable but willing, the leader needs to display a high task 
orientation to compensate for followers’ lack of ability, and a high relationship orienta-
tion to get them to “buy into” the leader’s desires. If followers are able but unwilling, the 
leader needs to use a supportive and participative style; if they are both able and willing, 
the leader doesn’t need to do much.
SLT has intuitive appeal. It acknowledges the importance of followers and builds 
on the logic that leaders can compensate for followers’ limited ability and motivation. Yet 
research efforts to test and support the theory have generally been disappointing.15 Why? 
Possible explanations include internal ambiguities and inconsistencies in the model itself 
as well as problems with research methodology. So, despite its intuitive appeal and wide 
popularity, any endorsement must be cautious for now.
Path–Goal Theory
Developed by Robert House, path–goal theory extracts elements from the research on 
initiating structure and consideration, and on the expectancy theory of motivation.16 Path–
goal theory suggests it’s the leader’s job to provide followers with information, support, 
or other resources necessary to achieve goals (the term path–goal implies that effective 
leaders clarify followers’ paths to their work goals and make the journey easier by reduc-
ing roadblocks). The theory predicts:
•	 Directive leadership yields greater employee satisfaction when tasks are ambiguous 
or stressful than when they are highly structured and well laid out.
•	 Supportive leadership results in high employee performance and satisfaction when 
employees are performing structured tasks.
•	 Directive leadership is likely to be perceived as redundant among employees with 
high ability or considerable experience.
Of course, this is a simplification. The match between leadership style and situa-
tion can be individualistic and mercurial. Some tasks might be both stressful and highly 
structured, and employees may have high ability or experience in some tasks and not 
Situational leadership 
theory (SLT) 
A contingency theory 
that focuses on 
followers’ readiness.
Path–goal theory
A theory that states 
that it is the leader’s 
job to assist followers 
in attaining their goals 
and to provide the 
necessary direction 
and/or support to 
ensure that their goals 
are compatible with 
the overall objectives 
of the group or 
organization.

222	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
others. Other research has found that goal-focused leadership can lead to higher levels 
of emotional exhaustion for subordinates who are low in conscientiousness and emo-
tional stability.17 This suggests that leaders who set goals enable conscientious follow-
ers to achieve higher performance but may cause stress for workers who are low in 
conscientiousness.
Like SLT, path–goal theory has intuitive appeal, especially from a goal attainment 
perspective. Also like SLT, the theory can be only cautiously adopted for application, but 
it is a useful framework in examining the important role of leadership.18
Leader-Participation Model
The final contingency theory we cover argues that the way the leader makes decisions is 
as important as what he or she decides. The leader-participation model relates leader-
ship behavior to subordinate participation in decision making.19 Like path–goal theory, it 
says leader behavior must adjust to reflect the task structure (such as routine, nonroutine, 
or in between), but it does not cover all leadership behaviors and is limited to recommend-
ing what types of decisions might be best made with subordinate participation. It lays the 
groundwork for the situations and leadership behaviors most likely to elicit acceptance 
from subordinates.
As one leadership scholar noted, “Leaders do not exist in a vacuum;” leadership is 
a symbiotic relationship between leaders and followers.20 But the theories we’ve covered 
to this point assume leaders use a fairly homogeneous style with everyone in their work 
units. Think about your experiences in groups. Did leaders often act very differently to-
ward different people? It’s common.
CONTEMPORARY THEORIES OF LEADERSHIP
Leaders are important—to organizations and to employees. The understanding of leader-
ship is a constantly evolving science. Contemporary theories have built upon the founda-
tion we’ve just established to discover the unique ways leaders emerge, influence, and 
guide their employees and organizations. Let’s explore some of the leading current con-
cepts, and look for aspects of the theories we’ve discussed already.
Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Theory
Think of a leader you know. Does this leader have favorites who make up an ingroup? If 
you answered “yes,” you’re acknowledging leader–member exchange (LMX) theory.21 
LMX argues that, because of time pressures, leaders establish a special relationship with 
a small group of their followers. These followers make up the ingroup—they are trusted, 
get a disproportionate amount of the leader’s attention, and are more likely to receive 
special privileges. Other followers fall into the outgroup.
LMX theory proposes that early in the history of the interaction between a leader 
and a given follower, the leader implicitly categorizes the follower as an “in” or an “out;” 
that relationship becomes relatively stable over time. Leaders induce LMX by rewarding 
employees with whom they want a closer linkage and punishing those with whom they do 
not.22 For the LMX relationship to remain intact, the leader and the follower must invest 
in the relationship.
Leader-participation 
model
A leadership theory 
that provides a set of 
rules to determine the 
form and amount of 
participative decision 
making in different 
situations.
Leader–member 
exchange (LMX) 
theory
A theory that 
supports leaders’ 
creation of ingroups 
and outgroups; 
subordinates with 
ingroup status will 
likely have higher 
performance ratings, 
less turnover, and 
greater job satisfaction.

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 223
Just how the leader chooses who falls into each category is unclear, but there is 
evidence ingroup members have demographic, attitude, and personality characteristics 
similar to those of their leaders or a higher level of competence than outgroup members23 
(see Exhibit 12-2). Leaders and followers of the same gender tend to have closer (higher 
LMX) relationships than those of different genders.24 Even though the leader does the 
choosing, the follower’s characteristics drive the categorizing decision.
Research to test LMX theory has been generally supportive, with substantive evi-
dence that leaders do differentiate among followers; these disparities are far from ran-
dom; and followers with ingroup status receive higher performance ratings, engage in 
more helping or citizenship behaviors at work, and report greater satisfaction with their 
superiors.25
One study conducted in Portugal and the United States found that LMX was associ-
ated strongly with followers’ commitment to the organization when leaders were seen as 
embodying the values and identity of the organization.26 Other research suggested that 
employees of leaders who provided family support (helping employees achieve work–life 
balance) in the LMX relationship were more committed and performed better.27 These 
findings shouldn’t be surprising given our knowledge of self-fulfilling prophecy (see 
Chapter 5). Leaders invest resources in those whom they expect to perform best. Believ-
ing ingroup members are the most competent, leaders treat them as such and unwittingly 
fulfill their prophecy.
For all the positive outcomes the ingroup receives, research indicates that both the 
ingroup and the outgroup realize negative effects from LMX. For example, a study in 
Turkey demonstrated that when leaders differentiated strongly among their followers in 
terms of their relationships (some followers had very positive LMX, others very poor), 
employees from both groups responded with more negative work attitudes and higher 
levels of withdrawal behavior.28 One study in China and the United States indicated that 
differential leadership treatment hurts team trust and perceptions of procedural justice, 
especially when the team members work closely together.29 Other research indicated that, 
although ingroup team members showed increased performance, the team as a whole 
became uncoordinated in the LMX environment and overall performance suffered.30 
Close-knit teams may be able to help outgroup members retain their confidence and self-
efficacy by offering a supportive environment,31 but this is often to the detriment of the 
relationship between employees and leaders.
Personal compatibility,
subordinate competence,
and/or extraverted personality
Trust
Helpfulness
High interactions
Formal
relations
Ingroup
Outgroup
Subordinate
A
Subordinate
B
Subordinate
C
Subordinate
D
Subordinate
E
Subordinate
F
Leader
EXHIBIT 12-2
Similarity with 
and Interactions 
between the 
Leader, Ingroup, 
and Outgroup

224	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Charismatic Leadership
Do you think leaders are born not made, or made not born? True, an individual may be liter-
ally born into a leadership position (think family heirs with surnames like Ford and Hilton), 
endowed with a leadership position due to past accomplishments (like CEOs who worked 
their way up the organizational ranks), or informally acknowledged as a leader (like a Twitter 
employee who knows everything because he was “there at the start”). But here we are talking 
not about the inputs into leadership role attainment; rather, we are focused on what makes 
great leaders extraordinary. Two contemporary leadership theories—charismatic leadership 
and transformational leadership—share a common theme in the great leader debate: They 
view leaders as individuals who inspire followers through words, ideas, and behaviors.
WHAT IS CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP?  Sociologist Max Weber defined charisma (from 
the Greek for “gift”) as “a certain quality of an individual personality, by virtue of which 
he or she is set apart from ordinary people and treated as endowed with supernatural, 
superhuman, or at least specifically exceptional powers or qualities. These are not 
accessible to the ordinary person and are regarded as of divine origin or as exemplary, 
and on the basis of them the individual concerned is treated as a leader.”32
The first researcher to consider charismatic leadership in terms of organizational behav-
ior (OB) was Robert House. According to his charismatic leadership theory, followers attri-
bute heroic or extraordinary leadership abilities when they observe certain behaviors, and tend 
to give these leaders power.33 A number of studies have attempted to identify the characteristics 
of charismatic leaders: they have a vision, are willing to take personal risks to achieve that vi-
sion, are sensitive to follower needs, and exhibit extraordinary behaviors34 (see Exhibit 12-3). 
Recent research in Greece suggested that charismatic leadership increases follower organi-
zational identification (commitment) by building a shared group identity among followers.35 
Other research indicates that charismatic leadership may predict follower job satisfaction.36
ARE CHARISMATIC LEADERS BORN OR MADE?  Are charismatic leaders born with 
their qualities? Or can people actually learn to be charismatic leaders? Yes, and yes.
Individuals are born with traits that make them charismatic. In fact, studies of 
identical twins found they scored similarly on charismatic leadership measures, even if 
they were raised in different households and never met. Personality is also related to 
charismatic leadership; charismatic leaders are likely to be extraverted, self-confident, 
and achievement-oriented.37 Consider the legendary qualities of U.S. presidents Barack 
Obama, Bill Clinton, and Ronald Reagan, and U.K. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, 
when they were in office: whether you liked them or not, they are often compared because 
they all exhibited the qualities of charismatic leaders.
Charismatic 
leadership theory
A leadership theory 
that states that 
followers make 
attributions of heroic 
or extraordinary 
leadership abilities 
when they observe 
certain behaviors.
1. Vision and articulation. Has a vision—expressed as an idealized goal—that proposes a
future better than the status quo; and is able to clarify the importance of the vision in
terms that are understandable to others.
2. Personal risk. Willing to take on high personal risk, incur high costs, and engage in self-
sacrifice to achieve the vision. 
3. Sensitivity to follower needs. Perceptive of others’ abilities and responsive to their needs
and feelings.
4. Unconventional behavior. Engages in behaviors that are perceived as novel and counter
to norms.
EXHIBIT 12-3
Key 
Characteristics 
of a Charismatic 
Leader
Source: Based on  
J. A. Conger and  
R. N. Kanungo, 
Charismatic Leader-
ship in Organiza-
tions (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1998), p. 94.
Richard Branson 
A charismatic 
leader, Richard 
Branson expects 
employees to follow 
his unconventional 
behaviour. He 
engages in ‘cool’ 
stunts like jet skiing 
in a tuxedo and 
driving a tank down 
New York’s 5th 
Avenue, ensuring that 
his employees have 
fun at work. Risk 
taking is encouraged 
and seen as a sign of 
thinking out of the 
box. Though paid 
lower than industry 
standards, employees 
love to be part of the 
‘cool’ Virgin family.

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 225
Research indicates that charismatic leadership is not only the province of world leaders 
—all of us can develop, within our own limitations, a more charismatic leadership style. If you 
stay active and central in your leadership roles, you will naturally communicate your vision 
for achieving goals to your followers, which increases the likelihood you will be seen as char-
ismatic.38 To further develop an aura of charisma, use your passion as a catalyst for generating 
enthusiasm. Speak in an animated voice, reinforce your message with eye contact and facial 
expressions, and gesture for emphasis. Bring out the potential in followers by tapping into their 
emotions, and create a bond that inspires them. Remember, enthusiasm is contagious!
HOW CHARISMATIC LEADERS INFLUENCE FOLLOWERS  How do charismatic leaders 
actually influence followers? By articulating an appealing vision, a long-term strategy for 
attaining a goal by linking the present with a better future for the organization. Desirable 
visions fit the times and circumstances, and reflect the uniqueness of the organization. 
Thus, followers are inspired not only by how passionately the leader communicates, but 
also to an appealing message.
A vision needs an accompanying vision statement, a formal articulation of an or-
ganization’s vision or mission. Charismatic leaders may use vision statements to imprint 
on followers an overarching goal and purpose. These leaders also set a tone of coop-
eration and mutual support. They build followers’ self-esteem and confidence with high 
performance expectations and the belief that followers can attain them. Through words 
and actions, the leader conveys a new set of values and sets an example for followers to 
imitate. Finally, the charismatic leader engages in emotion-inducing and often unconven-
tional behavior to demonstrate courage and conviction about the vision.
Research indicates that charismatic leadership works as followers “catch” the emo-
tions their leader is conveying.39 One study found employees had a stronger sense of 
personal belonging at work when they had charismatic leaders which, in turn, increased 
their willingness to engage in helping and compliance-oriented behavior.40
DOES EFFECTIVE CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP DEPEND ON THE SITUATION?  
Charismatic leadership has positive effects across many contexts. There are, however, 
characteristics of followers, and of the situation, that enhance or somewhat limit its effects.
One factor that enhances charismatic leadership is stress. People are especially re-
ceptive to charismatic leadership when they sense a crisis, when they are under stress, or 
when they fear for their lives. We may be more receptive to charismatic leadership under 
crises because we think bold leadership is needed. Some of it, however, may be more pri-
mal. When people are psychologically aroused, even in laboratory studies, they are more 
likely to respond to charismatic leaders.41
Some personalities are especially susceptible to charismatic leadership.42 For instance, 
an individual who lacks self-esteem and questions his or her self-worth is more likely to absorb 
a leader’s direction rather than establish an individual way of leading or thinking. For these 
people, the situation may matter much less than the desired charismatic qualities of the leader.
THE DARK-SIDE OF CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP  Unfortunately, charismatic leaders who  
are larger than life don’t necessarily act in the best interests of their organizations.43 Commensurate 
with this research observation, studies have indicated that individuals who are narcissistic  
are higher in some behaviors associated with charismatic leadership.44 Many charismatic—but 
corrupt—leaders have allowed their personal goals to override the goals of their organizations. 
For example, leaders at Enron, Tyco, WorldCom, and HealthSouth recklessly used organizational 
Vision
A long-term strategy 
for attaining a goal or 
goals.
Vision statement 
A formal articulation 
of an organization’s 
vision or mission.

226	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
resources for their personal benefit, violated laws and ethics to inflate stock prices, and then 
cashed in millions of dollars in personal stock options. Some charismatic leaders—Hitler, for 
example—are all too successful at convincing their followers to pursue a disastrous vision. If 
charisma is power, then that power can be used for good . . . and for ill.
It’s not that charismatic leadership isn’t effective; overall, it is. But a charismatic leader 
isn’t always the answer. Success depends, to some extent, on the situation and on the leader’s 
vision, and on the organizational checks and balances in place to monitor the outcomes.
Transactional and Transformational Leadership
Charismatic leadership theory relies on leaders’ ability to inspire followers to believe in 
them. In contrast, Fiedler’s model, situational leadership theory, and path–goal theory de-
scribe transactional leaders, leaders who guide their followers toward established goals 
by clarifying role and task requirements. A stream of research has focused on differenti-
ating transactional from transformational leaders,45 who inspire followers to transcend 
their self-interests for the good of the organization. Transformational leaders can have an 
extraordinary effect on their followers, who respond with increased levels of commitment.46 
Richard Branson of the Virgin Group is a good example of a transformational leader. He pays 
attention to the concerns and needs of individual followers, changes followers’ awareness of 
issues by helping them look at old problems in new ways, and excites and inspires followers 
to put forth extra effort to achieve group goals. Research suggests that transformational lead-
ers are most effective when their followers are able to see the positive impact of their work 
through direct interaction with customers or other beneficiaries.47 Exhibit 12-4 briefly identi-
fies and defines characteristics that differentiate transactional from transformational leaders.
Transactional leaders 
Leaders who guide 
or motivate their 
followers in the 
direction of established 
goals by clarifying role 
and task requirements.
Transformational 
leaders
Leaders who inspire 
followers to transcend 
their own self-interests 
and who are capable of 
having a profound and 
extraordinary effect on 
followers.
Transactional Leader
Contingent Reward:  Contracts exchange of rewards for effort, promises rewards for good
performance, recognizes accomplishments.
Management by Exception (active):  Watches and searches for deviations from rules and
standards, takes corrective action. 
Management by Exception (passive):  Intervenes only if standards are not met. 
Laissez-Faire:  Abdicates responsibilities, avoids making decisions. 
Transformational Leader
Idealized Inﬂuence:  Provides vision and sense of mission, instills pride, gains respect and
trust.
Inspirational Motivation:  Communicates high expectations, uses symbols to focus efforts,
expresses important purposes in simple ways.
Intellectual Stimulation:  Promotes intelligence, rationality, and careful problem solving.
Individualized Consideration:  Gives personal attention, treats each employee individually,
coaches, advises.
EXHIBIT 12-4
Characteristics of Transactional and Transformational Leaders
Source: Based on A. H. Eagly, M. C. Johannesen-Schmidt, and M. L. Van Engen, “Transformational, Transactional, 
and Laissez-faire Leadership Styles: A Meta-Analysis Comparing Women and Men,” Psychological Bulletin 129, no. 4 
(2003), 569–591; and T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Five Factor Model of Personality and Transformational Leadership,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 85, no. 5 (2000), 751–765.”

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 227
Transactional and transformational leadership complement each other; they aren’t 
opposing approaches to getting things done.48 The best leaders are transactional and 
transformational. Transformational leadership builds on transactional leadership and pro-
duces levels of follower effort and performance beyond what transactional leadership 
alone can do. But the reverse isn’t true. If you are a good transactional leader but do not 
have transformational qualities, you’ll likely only be a mediocre leader.
FULL RANGE OF LEADERSHIP MODEL  Exhibit 12-5 shows the full range of leadership 
model. Laissez-faire, which literally means “let it be” (do nothing), is the most passive 
and therefore least effective of leader behaviors.49 Management by exception, in which 
leaders primarily “put out fires” when there are crisis exceptions to normal operating 
procedures, means leaders are often too late to be effective. Contingent reward leadership, 
which gives predetermined rewards for employee efforts, can be an effective style of 
leadership but will not get employees to go above and beyond the call of duty.
Only with the four remaining styles—all aspects of transformational leadership—
are leaders able to motivate followers to perform above expectations and transcend their 
self-interest for the sake of the organization. Individualized consideration, intellectual 
stimulation, inspirational motivation, and idealized influence (known as the “four I’s”) 
all result in extra effort from workers, higher productivity, higher morale and satisfac-
tion, higher organizational effectiveness, lower turnover, lower absenteeism, and greater 
Full range of 
leadership model 
A model that depicts 
seven management 
styles on a continuum: 
laissez-faire, 
management by 
exception, contingent 
reward leadership, 
individualized 
consideration, 
intellectual stimulation, 
inspirational 
motivation, and 
idealized influence.
Idealized
Inﬂuence
Inspirational
Motivation
Intellectual
Stimulation
Individualized
Consideration
Contingent
Reward
Management
by Exception
Laissez-Faire
Passive
Active
Ineffective
Transactional
Transformational
Effective
EXHIBIT 12-5
Full Range of 
Leadership 
Model

228	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
organizational adaptability. Based on this model, leaders are most effective when they 
regularly use the four I’s.
H O W  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N A L  L E A D E R S H I P  W O R K S   Organizations with 
transformational leaders generally have greater decentralization of responsibility, 
managers with a higher propensity to take risks, and compensation plans geared 
toward long-term results—all of which facilitate corporate entrepreneurship.50 There 
are other ways transformational leadership works, as well. One study of information 
technology workers in China found empowering leadership behavior led to feelings of 
positive personal control among workers, which increased their creativity at work.51 
Other research in Germany found that transformational leadership positively influenced 
workers’ creativity, but suggested leaders need to guard against dependent leader 
relationships, which lower employee creativity.52
Companies with transformational leaders often show greater agreement among top 
managers about the organization’s goals, which yields superior organizational perfor-
mance.53 The Israeli military has seen similar results, showing that transformational lead-
ers improve performance by building consensus among group members.54
EVALUATION OF TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP  Transformational leadership 
has been supported at diverse job levels and occupations (including school principals, 
teachers, marine commanders, ministers, presidents of MBA associations, military cadets, 
union shop stewards, sales reps). In general, organizations perform better when they have 
transformational leaders. For example, one study of research and development (R&D) 
firms found teams whose project leaders scored high on transformational leadership 
produced better-quality products as judged one year later and higher profits five years 
later.55 A review of 117 studies testing transformational leadership found it was related to 
higher levels of individual follower performance, team performance, and organizational 
performance.56
The effect of transformational leadership on performance can vary by the situation. 
In general, transformational leadership has a greater impact on the bottom line in smaller, 
privately held firms than in more complex organizations.57 Transformational leader-
ship can also vary depending on whether work is evaluated at the team or the individual 
level.58 Individual-focused transformational leadership empowers individual followers 
to develop ideas, enhance their abilities, and increase their self-efficacy. Team-focused 
transformational leaders emphasize group goals, shared values and beliefs, and unified 
efforts. Transformational leadership is not foolproof, though. For example, research in 
China suggested that, in team situations, the members’ identification with the group could 
override the effects of transformational leadership.59
TRANSFORMATIONAL VERSUS TRANSACTIONAL LEADERSHIP  We have seen that 
transformational leadership yields many desirable organizational outcomes. When 
comparing transformational leadership with transactional leadership, research indicates 
transformational leadership is more strongly correlated than transactional leadership 
with lower turnover rates, higher productivity, lower employee stress and burnout, and 
higher employee satisfaction.60 However, transformational leadership theory is not 
perfect; the full range of leadership model shows a clear division between transactional 

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 229
and transformational leadership that may not fully exist in effective leadership. And 
contrary to the full range of leadership model, the four I’s of transformational leadership 
are not always superior in effectiveness to transactional leadership; contingent reward 
leadership—in which leaders dole out rewards as certain goals are reached by employees—
sometimes works as well as transformational leadership. More research is needed, but 
the general supportable conclusion is that transformational leadership is desirable and 
effective, given the right application.
TRANSFORMATIONAL 
VERSUS 
CHARISMATIC 
LEADERSHIP  In considering 
transformational and charismatic leadership, you surely noticed some commonalities. 
There are differences, too. Charismatic leadership places somewhat more emphasis 
on the way leaders communicate (are they passionate and dynamic?), while 
transformational leadership focuses more on what they are communicating (is it a 
compelling vision?). Still, the theories are more alike than different. At their heart, 
both focus on the leader’s ability to inspire followers, and sometimes they do so in 
the same way. Because of this, some researchers believe the concepts are somewhat 
interchangeable.
RESPONSIBLE LEADERSHIP
Although theories have increased our understanding of effective leadership, they do not 
explicitly deal with the roles of ethics and trust, which some argue are essential to com-
plete the picture. Here, we consider contemporary concepts that explicitly address the 
role of leaders in creating ethical organizations. These and the theories we discussed ear-
lier are not mutually exclusive ideas (a transformational leader may also be a responsible 
one), but we could argue that most leaders generally appear to be stronger in one category 
than another.
Authentic Leadership
Authentic leadership focuses on the moral aspects of being a leader. Authentic lead-
ers know who they are, know what they believe in, and act on those values and beliefs 
openly and candidly. Their followers consider them ethical people. The primary quality 
produced by authentic leadership is trust. Authentic leaders share information, encourage 
open communication, and stick to their ideals. The result: People come to have faith in 
them. Related to this behavior is the concept of humility, another characteristic of being 
authentic. Research indicates that leaders who model humility help followers to under-
stand the growth process for their own development.61
Authentic leadership, especially when shared among top management team mem-
bers, can create a positive energizing effect that heightens firm performance.62 Transfor-
mational or charismatic leaders can have a vision and communicate it persuasively, but 
sometimes the vision is wrong (as in the case of Hitler), or the leader is more concerned 
with his or her own needs or pleasures, as were Dennis Kozlowski (ex-CEO of Tyco), Jeff 
Skilling (ex-CEO of Enron), and Raj Rajaratnam (founder of the Galleon Group).63 Au-
thentic leaders do not exhibit these behaviors. They may also be more likely to promote 
corporate social responsibility (CSR; see Chapter 2).
Authentic leaders
Leaders who know 
who they are, know 
what they believe 
in and value, and 
act on those values 
and beliefs openly 
and candidly. Their 
followers consider 
them to be ethical 
people.

230	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Ethical Leadership
Leadership is not value-free. In assessing its effectiveness, we need to address the means 
a leader uses to achieve goals as well as the content of those goals. The role of the leader 
in creating the ethical expectations for all members is crucial.64 Ethical top leadership 
influences not only direct followers, but all the way down the command structure as well, 
because top leaders create an ethical culture and expect lower-level leaders to behave 
along ethical guidelines.65 Leaders rated as highly ethical tend to have followers who 
engage in more organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs; see Chapter 1) and who are 
more willing to bring problems to the leaders’ attention.66 Research also found that ethical 
leadership reduced interpersonal conflicts.67
Ethical and authentic leadership intersect at a number of junctures. Leaders who 
treat their followers ethically and authentically—with fairness, especially by providing 
honest, frequent, and accurate information—are seen as more effective.68 Transforma-
tional leadership has ethical implications since these leaders change the way followers 
think. Charisma, too, has an ethical component. Unethical leaders use their charisma 
to enhance power over followers, directed toward self-serving ends. To integrate ethical 
and charismatic leadership, scholars have advanced the idea of socialized charismatic 
leadership—conveying other-centered (not self-centered) values through leaders who 
model ethical conduct.69 These leaders are able to bring employee values in line with 
their own values through their words and actions.70
Although every member of an organization is responsible for ethical behavior, many 
initiatives aimed at increasing organizational ethical behavior are focused on the leaders. 
Because top executives set the moral tone for an organization, they need to set high ethi-
cal standards, demonstrate them through their own behavior, and encourage and reward 
integrity in others while avoiding abuses of power. One research review found that role 
modeling by top leaders positively influenced managers throughout their organizations to 
behave ethically and fostered a climate that reinforced group-level ethical conduct. The 
findings suggest that organizations should invest in ethical leadership training programs, 
especially in industries with few ethical regulations. Leadership training programs that 
incorporate cultural values should be especially mandated for leaders who take foreign 
assignments or manage multicultural work teams.71
Servant Leadership
Scholars have recently considered ethical leadership from a new angle by examining 
servant leadership.72 Servant leaders go beyond their self-interest and focus on oppor-
tunities to help followers grow and develop. Characteristic behaviors include listening, 
empathizing, persuading, accepting stewardship, and actively developing followers’ po-
tential. Because servant leadership is based on the value of serving the needs of others, 
research has focused on its outcomes for the well-being of followers. Perhaps not surpris-
ingly, a study of 126 CEOs found that servant leadership was negatively correlated with 
the trait of narcissism.73
What are the effects of servant leadership? One study of 123 supervisors found it 
resulted in higher levels of commitment to the supervisor, self-efficacy, and perceptions 
of justice, which all were related to OCB.74 This relationship between servant leadership 
and follower OCB appears to be stronger when followers are encouraged to focus on be-
ing dutiful and responsible.75 Second, servant leadership increases team potency (a belief 
Socialized 
charismatic 
leadership
A leadership concept 
that states that leaders 
convey values that are 
other-centered versus 
self-centered and who 
role-model ethical 
conduct.
Servant leadership
A leadership style 
marked by going 
beyond the leader’s 
own self-interest and 
instead focusing on 
opportunities to help 
followers grow and 
develop.

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 231
that your team has above-average skills and abilities), which in turn leads to higher levels 
of group performance.76 Third, a study with a nationally representative sample found 
higher levels of citizenship were associated with a focus on growth and advancement, 
which in turn was associated with higher levels of creative performance.77 Other research 
found that servant leadership and a resulting culture of service increased employee job 
performance and creativity while reducing turnover intentions.78
Servant leadership may be more prevalent and effective in certain cultures.79 When 
asked to draw images of leaders, for example, U.S. subjects tended to draw them in front 
of the group, giving orders to followers. Participants from Singapore tended to draw lead-
ers at the back of the group, acting more to gather a group’s opinions together and then 
unify the group from the rear. This suggests the East Asian prototype is more like a ser-
vant leader, which might mean servant leadership is more effective in these cultures.
POSITIVE LEADERSHIP
In each of the theories we’ve discussed, you can see opportunities for the practice of 
good, bad, or mediocre leadership. Now let’s think about the intentional development of 
positive leadership environments.
Trust
Trust is a psychological state that exists when you agree to make yourself vulnerable to 
another person because you have positive expectations about how things are going to turn 
out.80 Although you aren’t completely in control of the situation, you are willing to take a 
chance that the other person will come through for you. Followers who trust a leader are 
confident their rights and interests will not be abused.81 As you might expect, transforma-
tional leaders generate a higher level of trust from their followers, which in turn is related 
to higher levels of team confidence and, ultimately, higher levels of team performance.82 
Trust is a primary attribute associated with leadership; breaking it can have serious ad-
verse effects on a group’s performance.83
THE OUTCOMES OF TRUST  Trust between supervisors and employees has a number of 
specific advantages. Here are just a few from research:
•	 Trust encourages taking risks. Whenever employees decide to deviate from the 
usual way of doing things, or to take their supervisor’s word on a new direction, 
they are taking a risk. In both cases, a trusting relationship can facilitate that leap.
•	 Trust facilitates information sharing. When managers demonstrate they will give 
employees’ ideas a fair hearing and actively make changes, employees are more 
willing to speak out.84
•	 Trusting groups are more effective. When a leader sets a trusting tone in a group, 
members are more willing to help each other and exert extra effort, which increases 
trust.
•	 Trust enhances productivity. Employees who trust their supervisors tend to re-
ceive higher performance ratings, indicating higher productivity.85
TRUST DEVELOPMENT  What key characteristics lead us to believe a leader is trust- 
worthy? Evidence has identified three: integrity, benevolence, and ability (see Exhibit 12-6).86
Trust 
A positive expectation 
that another 
person will not act 
opportunistically.

232	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Integrity refers to honesty and truthfulness. When 570 white-collar employees were 
given a list of 28 attributes related to leadership, they rated honesty the most important by 
far.87 Integrity also means maintaining consistency between what you do and say.
Benevolence means the trusted person has your interests at heart, even if your in-
terests aren’t necessarily in line with theirs. Caring and supportive behavior is part of the 
emotional bond between leaders and followers.
Ability encompasses an individual’s technical and interpersonal knowledge and 
skills. You’re unlikely to depend on someone whose abilities you don’t believe in even if 
the person is highly principled and has the best intentions.
TRUST PROPENSITY  Trust propensity refers to how likely a particular employee is to 
trust a leader. Some people are simply more likely to believe others can be trusted.88 Trust 
propensity is closely linked to the personality trait of agreeableness and people with lower 
self-esteem are less likely to trust others.89
TRUST AND CULTURE  Does trust look the same in every culture? Using the basic definition 
of trust, it certainly does. However, in the work context, trust in an employment relationship 
may be built on very different perceptions from culture to culture. For example, a recent 
study in Taiwan indicated that employees responded to paternalistic leadership, when it was 
benevolent and ethical, with increased trust.90 This positive response to paternalism may be 
unique to the collectivistic context of Taiwan, where the Confucian values of hierarchy and 
relationship predominate. In individualistic societies (see Chapter 3), we might expect that 
paternalistic leadership will rankle many employees who prefer not to see themselves as 
part of a hierarchical family work group. Employees in individualistic cultures may build 
trust according to the degree of leadership support and consistency instead.
THE ROLE OF TIME  We come to trust people by observing their behavior over a period 
of time.91 To help, leaders need to demonstrate integrity, benevolence, and ability in 
situations where trust is important—say, where they could behave opportunistically or 
let employees down. Second, trust can be won in the ability domain by demonstrating 
competence. Third, research with 100 companies around the world suggested that leaders 
can build trust by shifting their communication style from top-down commands to ongoing 
organizational dialogue. Lastly, when leaders regularly create interpersonal conversations 
Trust propensity
How likely an 
employee is to  
trust a leader.
Risk Taking
Information Sharing
Group Effectiveness
Productivity
Trust
Integrity
Leader Trustworthiness
Benevolence
Ability
Propensity to Trust
EXHIBIT 12-6
Model of Trust in Organizations

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 233
with their employees that are intimate, interactive, inclusive, and that intentionally follow 
an agenda, followers demonstrate trust with high levels of engagement.92
REGAINING TRUST  Managers who break the psychological contract with workers, 
demonstrating they aren’t trustworthy leaders, will find employees are less satisfied and 
less committed, have a higher intent toward turnover, engage in less OCB, and have lower 
levels of task performance.93 Leaders who betray trust are especially likely to be evaluated 
negatively by followers if there is already a low level of LMX.94
Once it has been violated, trust can be regained, but only in certain situations 
and depending on the type of violation.95 If the cause is lack of ability, it’s usually best 
to apologize and recognize you should have done better. When lack of integrity is the 
problem, apologies don’t do much good. Regardless of the violation, saying nothing 
or refusing to confirm or deny guilt is never an effective strategy for regaining trust. 
Trust can be restored when we observe a consistent pattern of trustworthy behavior by 
the transgressor. However, if the transgressor used deception, trust never fully returns, 
not even after apologies, promises, or a consistent pattern of trustworthy actions.96
Mentoring
Leaders often take responsibility for developing future leaders. A mentor is a senior em-
ployee who sponsors and supports a less-experienced employee, a protégé. Successful 
mentors are good teachers. They present ideas clearly, listen well, and empathize with 
protégés’ problems. Mentoring relationships serve career and psychosocial functions.97
Are all employees in an organization likely to participate in a mentoring relation-
ship? Unfortunately, no. However, research continues to indicate that employers should 
establish mentoring programs because they benefit both mentors and protégés. For ex-
ample, one study in Korea found that mentors achieved higher levels of transformational 
leadership as a result of the mentoring process, while organizational commitment and 
well-being increased for both mentors and protégés.98
You might assume mentoring is valuable for objective outcomes like compensation and 
job performance, but research suggests the gains are primarily psychological. Thus, while men-
toring can have an impact on career success, it is not as much of a contributing factor as ability 
and personality. It may feel nice to have a mentor, but it doesn’t appear that having a good men-
tor, or any mentor, is critical to your career. Rather, mentorship is a boost to your confidence.
CHALLENGES TO OUR UNDERSTANDING OF LEADERSHIP
Management expert Jim Collins said, “In the 1500s, people ascribed all events they didn’t 
understand to God. Why did the crops fail? God. Why did someone die? God. Now our all-
purpose explanation is leadership.” This may be an astute observation from management con-
sulting, but of course much of an organization’s success or failure is due to factors outside the 
influence of leadership. Sometimes it’s a matter of being in the right or wrong place at a given 
time. In this section, we present challenges to the accepted beliefs about the value of leadership.
Leadership as an Attribution
As you may remember from Chapter 5, attribution theory examines how people try to make 
sense of cause-and-effect relationships. The attribution theory of leadership says leadership 
Mentor
A senior employee 
who sponsors and 
supports a less-
experienced employee, 
called a protégé.
Attribution theory of 
leadership
A leadership theory 
that says that leadership 
is merely an attribution 
that people make about 
other individuals.

234	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
is merely an attribution people make about other individuals.99 We attribute the following to 
leaders: intelligence, outgoing personality, strong verbal skills, aggressiveness, understand-
ing, and industriousness.100 At the organizational level, we tend, rightly or wrongly, to see 
leaders as responsible for both extremely negative and extremely positive performance.101
Perceptions of leaders by their followers strongly affect leaders’ ability to be effective. 
First, one study of 128 major U.S. corporations found that whereas perceptions of CEO 
charisma did not lead to objectively better company performance, company performance did 
lead to perceptions of charisma.102 Second, perceptions of leaders’ behaviors are significant 
predictors of whether employees blame their leaders for failure, regardless of how the leaders 
assess themselves.103 Third, a study of more than 3,000 employees from western Europe, the 
United States, and the Middle East found that people who tended to “romanticize” leadership 
in general were more likely to believe their own leaders were transformational.104
Attribution theory suggests what’s important is projecting the appearance of be-
ing a leader rather than focusing on actual accomplishments. Leader-wannabes who can 
shape the perception that they’re smart, personable, verbally adept, aggressive, hardwork-
ing, and consistent in their style can increase the probability their bosses, colleagues, and 
employees will view them as effective leaders.
Substitutes for and Neutralizers of Leadership
One theory of leadership suggests that in many situations, leaders’ actions are irrelevant.105 
Experience and training are among the substitutes that can replace the need for a leader’s sup-
port or ability to create structure. Organizations such as video game producer Valve Corpora-
tion, Gore-Tex maker W. L. Gore, and collaboration-software firm GitHub have experimented 
with eliminating leaders and management. Governance in the “bossless” work environment is 
achieved through accountability to coworkers, who determine team composition and some-
times even pay.106 Organizational characteristics such as explicit formalized goals, rigid rules 
and procedures, and cohesive workgroups can replace formal leadership, while indifference to 
organizational rewards can neutralize its effects. Neutralizers make it impossible for leader 
behavior to make any difference to follower outcomes (see Exhibit 12-7).
Substitutes 
Attributes, such 
as experience and 
training, that can 
replace the need for 
a leader’s support 
or ability to create 
structure.
Neutralizers
Attributes that make it 
impossible for leader 
behavior to make any 
difference to follower 
outcomes.
Relationship-
Oriented
Leadership
Task-
Oriented
Leadership
Defining Characteristics
Individual
Experience/training
Professionalism
Indifference to rewards
No effect on
Substitutes for
Neutralizes
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
Neutralizes
Job
Highly structured task
Provides its own feedback
Intrinsically satisfying
No effect on
No effect on
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
No effect on
Organization
Explicit formalized goals
Rigid rules and procedures
Cohesive work groups
No effect on
No effect on
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
Substitutes for
EXHIBIT 12-7
Substitutes for and Neutralizers of Leadership
Source: Based on S. Kerr and J. M. Jermier, “Substitutes for Leadership: Their Meaning and Measurement,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance (1978), p. 378.”

	
Chapter 12  •  Characteristics of Leaders	 235
Sometimes the difference between substitutes and neutralizers is fuzzy. If I’m 
working on a task that’s intrinsically enjoyable, theory predicts leadership will be less im-
portant because the task provides motivation. But does that mean intrinsically enjoyable 
tasks neutralize leadership effects, or substitute for them, or both? Another problem is that 
while substitutes for leadership (such as employee characteristics and the nature of the 
task) matter to performance, that doesn’t necessarily mean leadership is irrelevant.107 It’s 
simplistic to think employees are guided to goal accomplishments solely by the actions 
of their leaders. We’ve introduced a number of variables—such as attitudes, personality, 
ability, and group norms; that affect employee performance and satisfaction. Leadership 
is simply another independent variable in our overall OB model.
Online Leadership
How do you lead people who are physically separated from you when you primarily commu-
nicate electronically? This question needs attention from OB researchers.108 Today’s manag-
ers and employees are increasingly linked by networks rather than geographic proximity.
We propose that online leaders have to think carefully about what actions they want 
their digital messages to initiate. These leaders confront unique challenges, the greatest of 
which appears to be developing and maintaining trust. Identification-based trust, based 
on a mutual understanding of each other’s intentions and appreciation of the other’s wants 
and desires, is particularly difficult to achieve without face-to-face interaction.109 Online 
negotiations can also be hindered because parties tend to express lower levels of trust.110
We believe good leadership skills will soon include the ability to communicate 
support, trust, and inspiration through electronic communication and to accurately read 
emotions in others’ messages. In electronic communication, writing skills are likely to 
become an extension of interpersonal skills in ways that are not yet defined.
SUMMARY
Leadership plays a central part in understanding group behavior because it’s the leader 
who usually directs us toward our goals. Knowing what makes a good leader should thus 
be valuable toward improving group performance. The Big Five personality framework 
shows strong and consistent relationships between personality and leadership. The be-
havioral approach’s major contribution was narrowing leadership into task-oriented (ini-
tiating structure) and people-oriented (consideration) styles. By evaluating the situation 
in which a leader operates, contingency theories promised to improve on the behavioral 
approach. Contemporary theories have made major contributions to our understanding 
of leadership effectiveness, and studies of ethics and positive leadership offer exciting 
promise.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 For maximum leadership effectiveness, ensure that your preferences on the initiat-
ing structure and consideration dimensions are a match for your work dynamics 
and culture.
•	 Hire candidates who exhibit transformational leadership qualities and who have 
demonstrated success in working through others to meet a long-term vision. 
Identification-based 
trust 
Trust based on a 
mutual understanding 
of each other’s 
intentions and 
appreciation of each 
other’s wants and 
desires.

236	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Personality tests can reveal candidates higher in extraversion, conscientiousness, 
and openness, which may indicate leadership readiness.
•	 Hire candidates whom you believe are ethical and trustworthy for management 
roles and train current managers in your organization’s ethical standards in order to 
increase leadership effectiveness.
•	 Seek to develop trusting relationships with followers because, as organizations have 
become less stable and predictable, strong bonds of trust are replacing bureaucratic 
rules in defining expectations and relationships.
•	 Consider investing in leadership training such as formal courses, workshops, and 
mentoring.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Leadership.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Ethical Leadership Assessment
If you’ve ever worked for someone who was an unethical leader, you know the 
importance of ethical leadership for positive outcomes. Take this PIA to explore ethical 
leadership further.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	12-1.	 Describe the qualities of your ideal leader in terms of the concepts in this chapter.
	12-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

237
Power and Politics in Organizations
13 
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Contrast leadership and power.
	 2.	 Explain the three bases of formal power and the two bases of personal power.
	 3.	 Explain the role of dependence in power relationships.
	 4.	 Identify power or influence tactics and their contingencies.
	 5.	 Identify the causes and consequences of abuse of power.
	 6.	 Describe how politics work in organizations.
	 7.	 Identify the causes, consequences, and ethics of political behavior.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled Power and Political 
Behavior.

238	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
POWER AND LEADERSHIP
We often talk about power abstractly—with either respect, pride, or deference. In orga-
nizational behavior (OB), power simply refers to a capacity that A has to influence the 
behavior of B so B acts in accordance with A’s wishes.1 Someone can thus have power 
but not use it; it is a capacity or potential. Probably the most important aspect of power 
is that it is a function of dependence. The greater B’s dependence on A, the greater A’s 
power in the relationship. Dependence, in turn, is based on alternatives that B perceives 
and the importance B places on the alternative(s) A controls. A person can have power 
over you only if he or she controls something you desire. If you want a college degree 
and have to pass a certain course to get it, and your current instructor is the only faculty 
member in the college who teaches that course, she has power over you because your al-
ternatives are highly limited and you place a high degree of importance on the outcome. 
Similarly, if you’re attending college on funds provided by your parents, you probably 
recognize the power they hold over you. But once you’re out of school, have a job, and 
are making a good income; your parents’ power is reduced significantly.
A careful comparison of our description of power with our description of leadership 
in Chapter 12 reveals that the concepts are closely intertwined. Leaders use power as a 
means of attaining group goals. How are the two terms different? Power does not require 
goal compatibility, just dependence. Leadership, on the other hand, requires some con-
gruence between the goals of the leader and those being led. A second difference relates 
to the direction of influence. Leadership research focuses on the downward influence on 
followers. It minimizes the importance of lateral and upward influence patterns. Power 
research takes all factors into consideration. For a third difference, leadership research 
often emphasizes style. It seeks answers to questions such as: How supportive should a 
leader be? How much decision making should be shared with followers? In contrast, the 
research on power focuses on tactics for gaining compliance. Lastly, leadership concen-
trates on the individual leader’s influence, while the study of power acknowledges that 
groups as well as individuals can use power to control other individuals or groups.
You may have noted that for a power situation to exist, one person or group needs to 
have control over resources the other person or group values. This is usually the case in es-
tablished leadership situations. However, power relationships are possible in all areas of life, 
and power can be obtained in many ways. Let’s explore the various sources of power next.
BASES OF POWER
Where does power come from? What gives an individual or a group influence over oth-
ers? We answer by dividing the bases or sources of power into two general groupings, 
formal and personal, and breaking each of these down into more specific categories.2
Formal Power
Formal power is based on an individual’s position in an organization. It can come from 
the ability to coerce or reward, or from formal authority.
COERCIVE POWER  The coercive power base depends on the target’s fear of negative 
results from failing to comply. On the physical level, coercive power rests on the 
application, or the threat of application, of bodily distress through the infliction of pain, 
the restriction of movement, or the withholding of basic physiological or safety needs.
Power 
A capacity that A 
has to influence the 
behavior of B so that B 
acts in accordance with 
A’s wishes.
Dependence
B’s relationship to 
A when A possesses 
something that B 
requires.
Coercive power 
A power base that is 
dependent on fear of 
the negative results 
from failing to comply.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 239
At the organizational level, A has coercive power over B if A can dismiss, suspend, 
or demote B, assuming B values the job. If A can assign B work activities B finds unpleas-
ant, or treat B in a manner B finds embarrassing, A possesses coercive power over B. 
Coercive power comes also from withholding key information. People in an organization 
who have data or knowledge others need can make others dependent on them.
REWARD POWER  The opposite of coercive power is reward power, with which people 
comply because it produces positive benefits; someone who can distribute rewards others view 
as valuable will have power over them. These rewards can be financial—such as controlling 
pay rates, raises, and bonuses—or nonfinancial, including recognition, promotions, interesting 
work assignments, friendly colleagues, and preferred work shifts or sales territories.3
LEGITIMATE POWER  In formal groups and organizations, probably the most common 
access to one or more of the power bases is through legitimate power. It represents 
the formal authority to control and use organizational resources based on the person’s 
structural position in the organization.
Legitimate power is broader than the power to coerce and reward. Specifically, it 
includes members’ acceptance of the authority of a hierarchical position. We associate 
power so closely with the concept of hierarchy that just drawing longer lines in an orga-
nization chart leads people to infer the leaders are especially powerful.4 In general, when 
school principals, bank presidents, or army captains speak; teachers, tellers, and first 
lieutenants usually comply.
Personal Power
Many of the most competent and productive chip designers at Intel have power, but they 
aren’t managers and they have no formal power. What they have is personal power, 
which comes from an individual’s unique characteristics. There are two bases of personal 
power: expertise and the respect and admiration of others. Personal power is not mutually 
exclusive from formal power, but it can be independent.
EXPERT POWER  Expert power is influence wielded as a result of expertise, special skills, 
or knowledge. As jobs become more specialized, we become dependent on experts to achieve 
goals. It is generally acknowledged that physicians have expertise and hence expert power: 
most of us follow our doctor’s advice. Computer specialists, tax accountants, economists, 
industrial psychologists, and other specialists wield power as a result of their expertise.
REFERENT POWER  Referent power is based on identification with a person who has 
desirable resources or personal traits. If I like, respect, and admire you; you can exercise 
power over me because I want to please you.
Referent power develops out of admiration of another and a desire to be like that 
person. It helps explain, for instance, why celebrities are paid millions of dollars to en-
dorse products in commercials. Marketing research shows people such as LeBron James 
and Tom Brady have the power to influence your choice of athletic shoes and credit cards. 
With a little practice, you and I could probably deliver as smooth a sales pitch as these 
celebrities, but the buying public doesn’t identify with us. Some people who are not in 
formal leadership positions have referent power and exert influence over others because 
of their charismatic dynamism, likability, and emotional appeal.
Reward power
Compliance achieved 
based on the ability 
to distribute rewards 
that others view as 
valuable.
Legitimate power 
The power a person 
receives as a result of 
his or her position in 
the formal hierarchy of 
an organization.
Expert power 
Influence based 
on special skills or 
knowledge.
Referent power 
Influence based on 
identification with 
a person who has 
desirable resources or 
personal traits.

240	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Which Bases of Power Are Most Effective?
Of the three bases of formal power (coercive, reward, legitimate) and two bases of per-
sonal power (expert, referent), which are most important? Research suggests the personal 
sources of power are most effective. Both expert and referent power are positively related 
to employees’ satisfaction with supervision, their organizational commitment, and their 
performance, whereas reward and legitimate power seem to be unrelated to these out-
comes. One source of formal power, coercive power, can be damaging.
Referent power can be a powerful motivator. Consider Steve Stoute’s company, 
Translation, which matches pop-star spokespersons with corporations that want to pro-
mote their brands. Stoute has paired Justin Timberlake with McDonald’s, Beyoncé with 
Tommy Hilfiger, and Jay-Z with Reebok. Stoute’s business seems to be all about referent 
power. The success of these well-known companies attests to Stoute’s expectation that the 
buying public identifies with and emulates his spokespersons and therefore thinks highly 
of the brands they represent. Stoute’s business seems to be all about referent power, using 
the credibility of artists and performers to reach youth culture.5
DEPENDENCE: THE KEY TO POWER
The most important aspect of power is that it is a function of dependence. In this section, 
we show how understanding dependence helps us understand degrees of power.
The General Dependence Postulate
Let’s begin with a general postulate: The greater B’s dependence on A, the more power A 
has over B. When you possess anything others require that you alone control, you make 
them dependent on you, and therefore you gain power over them.6 As the old saying goes, 
“In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king!” But if something is plentiful, possess-
ing it will not increase your power. Therefore, the more you can expand your own options, 
the less power you place in the hands of others. This explains why most organizations 
develop multiple suppliers rather than give their business to only one. It also explains why 
so many people aspire to financial independence. Independence reduces the power others 
can wield to limit our access to opportunities and resources.
What Creates Dependence?
Dependence increases when a resource you control is important, scarce, and 
nonsubstitutable.7
IMPORTANCE  If nobody wants what you have, it’s not going to create dependence. 
However, note that there are many degrees of importance, from needing the resource for 
survival to wanting a resource that is in fashion or adds to convenience.
SCARCITY  We see the scarcity-dependence relationship in the power situation of 
employment. When the supply of labor is low relative to demand, workers can negotiate 
compensation and benefits packages that are far more attractive than those in occupations 
with an abundance of candidates. For example, college administrators have no problem 
today finding English instructors since there is a high supply and low demand. The market 

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 241
for network systems analysts, in contrast, is comparatively tight, with demand high and 
supply limited. The resulting bargaining power of computer-engineering faculty allows 
them to negotiate higher salaries, lighter teaching loads, and other benefits.
NONSUBSTITUTABILITY  The fewer viable substitutes for a resource, the more power a 
person controlling that resource has. At universities that value faculty publishing, for example, 
the more recognition the faculty member receives through publication, the more control that 
person has because other universities also want faculty who are highly published and visible.
Social Network Analysis: A Tool for Assessing Resources
One tool to assess the exchange of resources and dependencies within an organization 
is social network analysis.8 This method examines patterns of communication among 
organizational members to identify how information flows between them. Within a social 
network, or connections between people who share professional interests, each individual 
or group is called a node, and the links between nodes are called ties. When nodes com-
municate or exchange resources frequently, they are said to have very strong ties. Other 
nodes that are not engaged in direct communication with one another achieve resource 
flows through intermediary nodes. In other words, some nodes act as brokers between 
otherwise unconnected nodes. A graphical illustration of the associations among indi-
viduals in a social network is called a sociogram, which functions like an informal version 
of an organization chart. The difference is that a formal organization chart shows how 
authority is supposed to flow, whereas a sociogram shows how resources really flow in 
an organization. An example of a sociogram is shown in Exhibit 13-1.
Project Team
Suppliers
Operations
Albert
Thomas
Anne
Martha
Eric
Sales &
Marketing
Finance
Customer
Service
Customers
EXHIBIT 13-1 
Example of a 
Sociogram

242	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Networks can create substantial power dynamics. Those in the position of brokers 
tend to have more power because they can leverage the unique resources they can acquire 
from different groups. In other words, many people are dependent upon brokers, which 
gives the brokers more power. For example, organizational culture changes such as corpo-
rate social responsibility (CSR) awareness will often begin in a single connected group of 
individuals, grow in strength, and slowly move to other connected groups through brokers 
over time.9 Data from the United Kingdom’s National Health Service shows that change 
agents, people entrusted with helping an organization to make a significant change, have 
more success if they are information brokers.10 These functions are not without cost, how-
ever. One study found that people identified as central to advice networks were more likely 
to quit their jobs, possibly because they did a great deal of extra work without reward.11
There are many ways to implement a social network analysis in an organization.12 
Some organizations keep track of the flow of e-mail communications or document shar-
ing across departments. These big data tools are an easy way to gather objective informa-
tion about how individuals exchange information. Other organizations look at data from 
human resources (HR) information systems, analyzing how supervisors and subordinates 
interact with one another. These data sources can produce sociograms showing how re-
sources and power flow. Leaders can then identify powerful brokers who exert the stron-
gest influence on many groups, and address these key individuals.
POWER TACTICS
What power tactics do people use to translate power bases into specific action? What op-
tions do they have for influencing their bosses, coworkers, or employees? Research has 
identified nine distinct influence tactics:13
•	 Legitimacy. Relying on your authority position or saying a request accords with 
organizational policies or rules.
•	 Rational persuasion. Presenting logical arguments and factual evidence to demon-
strate a request is reasonable.
•	 Inspirational appeals. Developing emotional commitment by appealing to a tar-
get’s values, needs, hopes, and aspirations.
•	 Consultation. Increasing support by involving the target in deciding how to 
accomplish your plan.
•	 Exchange. Rewarding the target with benefits or favors in exchange for acceding 
to a request.
•	 Personal appeals. Asking for compliance based on friendship or loyalty.
•	 Ingratiation. Using flattery, praise, or friendly behavior prior to making a request.
•	 Pressure. Using warnings, repeated demands, and threats.
•	 Coalitions. Enlisting the aid or support of others to persuade the target to agree.
Using Power Tactics
Some tactics are more effective than others. Rational persuasion, inspirational appeals, and 
consultation tend to be the most effective, especially when the audience is highly interested 
in the outcomes of a decision process. The pressure tactic tends to backfire and is typically 
the least effective of the nine.14 You can increase your chance of success by using two or 
Power tactics
Ways in which 
individuals translate 
power bases into 
specific actions.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 243
more tactics together or sequentially, as long as your choices are compatible.15 Using ingra-
tiation and legitimacy together can lessen negative reactions, but only when the audience 
does not really care about the outcome of a decision process or the policy is routine.16
Let’s consider the most effective way of getting a raise. You can start with a rational 
approach—figure out how your pay compares to that of your organizational peers, land 
a competing job offer, gather data that testify to your performance, or use salary calcula-
tors like Salary.com to compare your pay with others in your occupation—then share 
your findings with your manager. The results can be impressive. Kitty Dunning, a vice 
president at Don Jagoda Associates, landed a 16 percent raise when she e-mailed her boss 
numbers showing she had increased sales.17
While rational persuasion may work in this situation, the effectiveness of some in-
fluence tactics depends on the direction of influence,18 and of course on the audience. As  
Exhibit 13-2 shows, rational persuasion is the only tactic effective across organizational 
levels. Inspirational appeals work best as a downward-influencing tactic with subordinates. 
When pressure works, it’s generally downward only. Personal appeals and coalitions are most 
effective as lateral influence. Other factors relating to the effectiveness of influence include 
the sequencing of tactics, a person’s skill in using the tactic, and the organizational culture.
In general, you’re more likely to be effective if you begin with “softer” tactics that rely 
on personal power, such as personal and inspirational appeals, rational persuasion, and consul-
tation. If these fail, you can move to “harder” tactics, such as exchange, coalitions, and pres-
sure, which emphasize formal power and incur greater costs and risks.19 A single soft tactic 
is more effective than a single hard tactic, and combining two soft tactics or a soft tactic and 
rational persuasion is more effective than any single tactic or combination of hard tactics.20
As we mentioned, the effectiveness of tactics depends on the audience.21 People 
especially likely to comply with soft power tactics tend to be more reflective and intrinsi-
cally motivated; they have high self-esteem and a greater desire for control. Those likely 
to comply with hard power tactics are more action-oriented and extrinsically motivated, 
and are more focused on getting along with others than on getting their own way.
Cultural Preferences for Power Tactics
Preference for power tactics varies across cultures.22 Those from individualistic countries 
tend to see power in personalized terms and as a legitimate means of advancing their per-
sonal ends, whereas those in collectivistic countries see power in social terms and as a 
legitimate means of helping others.23 Managers in the United States seem to prefer rational 
appeal, whereas Chinese managers may prefer coalition tactics.24 Reason-based tactics 
are consistent with the U.S. preference for direct confrontation, and rational persuasion 
to influence others and resolve differences, while coalition tactics align with the Chinese 
preference for meeting difficult or controversial requests with indirect approaches.
Upward Influence
Downward Influence
Lateral Influence
Rational persuasion
Rational persuasion
Inspirational appeals
Pressure
Consultation
Ingratiation
Exchange
Legitimacy
Rational persuasion
Consultation
Ingratiation
Exchange
Legitimacy
Personal appeals
Coalitions
EXHIBIT 13-2 
Preferred 
Power Tactics 
by Influence 
Direction
ZTE corporation
Building 
relationships 
with government 
organizations and 
other institutions 
is critical in 
China. Zhongxing 
Telecommunication 
Equipment Co. 
Ltd. (ZTE) is a 
global provider 
of integrated 
telecommunication 
solutions. One of 
the corporation’s 
founders and 
past Chairman, 
the legendary 
Hou Weigui, 
worked to free the 
company from 
state or collectivist 
management. His 
low-key, mild, 
and practical 
management style 
became the image 
of ZTE for most 
people.

244	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Applying Power Tactics
People differ in their political skill, or their ability to influence others to enhance their 
own objectives. The politically skilled are more effective users of all the influence tactics. 
Political skill is also more effective when the stakes are high, such as when the individual 
is accountable for important organizational outcomes. Finally, the politically skilled are 
able to exert their influence without others detecting it, a key element in effectiveness 
(it’s damaging to be labeled political).25 These individuals are able to use their political 
skills in environments with low levels of procedural and distributive justice. When an 
organization has fairly applied rules, free of favoritism or biases, political skill is actually 
negatively related to job performance ratings.26
Lastly, we know cultures within organizations differ markedly; some are warm, 
relaxed, and supportive; others are formal and conservative. Some encourage par-
ticipation and consultation, some encourage reason, and still others rely on pressure. 
People who fit the culture of the organization tend to obtain more influence.27 Spe-
cifically, extraverts tend to be more influential in team-oriented organizations, and 
highly conscientious people are more influential in organizations that value working 
alone on technical tasks. People who fit the culture are influential because they can 
perform especially well in the domains deemed most important for success. Thus, the 
organization itself will influence which subset of power tactics is viewed as accept-
able for use.
HOW POWER AFFECTS PEOPLE
To this point, we’ve discussed what power is and how it is acquired. But we’ve not yet 
answered one important question: does power corrupt?
There is certainly evidence that there are corrupting aspects of power. Power leads 
people to place their own interests ahead of others’ needs or goals. Why does this hap-
pen? Interestingly, power not only leads people to focus on their self-interests because 
they can, it also liberates them to focus inward and thus come to place greater weight on 
their own aims and interests. Power also appears to lead individuals to “objectify” others 
(to see them as tools to obtain their instrumental goals) and to see relationships as more 
peripheral.28
That’s not all. Powerful people react—especially negatively—to any threats to their 
competence. People in positions of power hold on to it when they can, and individu-
als who face threats to their power are exceptionally willing to take actions to retain it 
whether their actions harm others or not. Those given power are more likely to make 
self-interested decisions when faced with a moral hazard (such as when hedge fund man-
agers take more risks with other people’s money because they’re rewarded for gains but 
punished less often for losses). People in power are more willing to denigrate others. 
Power also leads to overconfident decision making.29
Power Variables
As we’ve discussed, power does appear to have some important disturbing effects on us. 
But that is hardly the whole story—power is more complicated than that. It doesn’t affect 
everyone in the same way, and there are even positive effects of power. Let’s consider 
each of these in turn.
Political skill
The ability to influ-
ence others in such 
a way as to enhance 
one’s objectives.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 245
First, the toxic effects of power depend on the wielder’s personality. Research sug-
gests that if you have an anxious personality, power does not corrupt you because you 
are less likely to think that using power benefits yourself.30 Second, the corrosive ef-
fect of power can be contained by organizational systems. For example, one study found 
that while power made people behave in a self-serving manner, the self-serving behavior 
stopped when accountability for the behavior was initiated. Third, we have the means to 
blunt the negative effects of power. One study showed that simply expressing gratitude 
toward powerful others makes them less likely to act aggressively against us. Finally, 
remember the saying that those with little power abuse what little they have? There seems 
to be some truth to this in that the people most likely to abuse power are those who start 
low in status and gain power. Why is this the case? It appears that having low status is 
threatening, and the fear this creates is used in negative ways if power is given later.31
As you can see, some factors can moderate the negative effects of power. But there can 
also be general positive effects. Power energizes and increases motivation to achieve goals. It 
also can enhance our motivation to help others. One study found, for example, that a desire to 
help others translated into actual work behavior when people felt a sense of power.32
This study points to an important insight about power. It is not so much that power 
corrupts as it reveals what we value. Supporting this line of reasoning, another study 
found that power led to self-interested behavior only in those with a weak moral identity 
(the degree to which morals are core to someone’s identity). In those with a strong moral 
identity, power enhanced their moral awareness and willingness to act.33
Sexual Harassment: Unequal Power in the Workplace
Sexual harassment is defined as any unwanted activity of a sexual nature that affects an 
individual’s employment or creates a hostile work environment. According to the U.S. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), sexual harassment happens when 
a person encounters “unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other 
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature” on the job that disrupts work performance 
or that creates an “intimidating, hostile, or offensive” work environment.34 Although the 
definition changes from country to country, most nations have at least some policies to 
protect workers. Whether the policies or laws are followed is another question, however. 
Equal employment opportunity legislation is established in Pakistan, Bangladesh, and 
Oman, for example, but studies suggest it might not be well implemented.35
Generally, sexual harassment is more prevalent in male-dominated societies. For 
example, a study in Pakistan found that up to 93 percent of female workers were sexually 
harassed.36 In Singapore, up to 54 percent of workers (women and men) reported they 
were sexually harassed.37 The percentages in the United States and some other countries 
are generally much lower but still troubling. Surveys indicate about one-quarter of U.S. 
women and 10 percent of men have been sexually harassed.38 Data from the EEOC sug-
gest that sexual harassment is decreasing: sexual harassment claims now make up 10 
percent of all discrimination claims, compared with 20 percent in the mid-1990s. Of 
this percentage, though, claims from men have increased from 11 percent of total claims 
in 1997 to 17.5 percent today.39 Sexual harassment is disproportionately prevalent for 
women in certain types of jobs. In the restaurant industry, for instance, 80 percent of 
female waitstaff in a study reported having been sexually harassed by coworkers or cus-
tomers, compared to 70 percent of male waitstaff.40
Sexual harassment 
Any unwanted activity 
of a sexual nature that 
affects an individual’s 
employment and 
creates a hostile work 
environment.

246	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
The bottom line is that managers have a responsibility to protect their employees 
from a hostile work environment. They may easily be unaware that one of their employ-
ees is being sexually harassed, but being unaware does not protect them or their organiza-
tion. If investigators believe a manager could have known about the harassment, both the 
manager and the company can be held liable.
POLITICS: POWER IN ACTION
Whenever people get together in groups, power will be exerted. People in organizations 
want to carve out a niche to exert influence, earn rewards, and advance their careers. If 
they convert their power into action, we describe them as being engaged in politics. Those 
with good political skills have the ability to use their bases of power effectively.41 Politics 
are not only inevitable; they might be essential, too.
Definition of Organizational Politics
There is no shortage of definitions of organizational politics. Essentially, this type of 
politics focuses on the use of power to affect decision making in an organization, some-
times for self-serving and organizationally unsanctioned behaviors.42 For our purposes, 
political behavior in organizations consists of activities that are not required as part of 
an individual’s formal role but that influence, or attempt to influence, the distribution of 
advantages and disadvantages within the organization.43
This definition encompasses what most people mean when they talk about orga-
nizational politics. Political behavior is outside specified job requirements. It requires 
some attempt to use power bases. It includes efforts to influence the goals, criteria, or 
processes used for decision making. Our definition is broad enough to include varied 
political behaviors such as withholding key information from decision makers, joining 
a coalition, whistle-blowing, spreading rumors, leaking confidential information to the 
media, exchanging favors with others for mutual benefit, and lobbying on behalf of or 
against a particular individual or decision alternative. In this way, political behavior is 
often negative, but not always.
The Reality of Politics
Interviews with experienced managers show most believe political behavior is a major 
part of organizational life.44 Many managers report some use of political behavior is ethi-
cal, as long as it doesn’t directly harm anyone else. They describe politics as necessary 
and believe someone who never uses political behavior will have a hard time getting 
things done. Most also indicate they have never been trained to use political behavior 
effectively. But why, you may wonder, must politics exist? Isn’t it possible for an orga-
nization to be politics-free? It’s possible—if all members of that organization hold the 
same goals and interests, if organizational resources are not scarce, and if performance 
outcomes are completely clear and objective. But that doesn’t describe the organizational 
world in which most of us live.
Maybe the most important factor leading to politics within organizations is the re-
alization that most of the “facts” used to allocate limited resources are open to interpreta-
tion. When allocating pay based on performance, for instance, what is good performance? 
What’s an adequate improvement? What constitutes an unsatisfactory job? The manager 
Political behavior
Activities that are not 
required as part of a 
person’s formal role 
in the organization 
but that influence, or 
attempt to influence, 
the distribution of 
advantages and 
disadvantages within 
the organization.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 247
of any major league baseball team knows a .400 hitter is a high performer and a .125 hitter 
is a poor performer. You don’t need to be a baseball genius to know you should play your 
.400 hitter and send the .125 hitter back to the minors. But what if you have to choose 
between players who hit .280 and .290? Then less objective factors come into play: field-
ing expertise, attitude, potential, ability to perform in a clutch, loyalty to the team, and so 
on. More managerial decisions resemble the choice between a .280 and a .290 hitter than 
between a .125 hitter and a .400 hitter. It is in this large and ambiguous middle ground of 
organizational life—where the facts don’t speak for themselves—that politics flourish.
Finally, because most decisions have to be made in a climate of ambiguity—where 
facts are rarely objective and thus open to interpretation—people within organizations 
will use whatever influence they can to support their goals and interests. That, of course, 
creates the activities we call politicking. One person’s “selfless effort to benefit the orga-
nization” is seen by another as a “blatant attempt to further his or her interest.”45
CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF POLITICAL BEHAVIOR
Now that we’ve discussed the constant presence of politicking in organizations, let’s dis-
cuss the causes and consequences of these behaviors.
Factors Contributing to Political Behavior
Not all groups or organizations are equally political. In some organizations, politicking 
is overt and rampant, while in others politics play a small role in influencing outcomes. 
What causes this variation? Research and observation have identified a number of factors 
that appear to encourage political behavior. Some are individual characteristics, derived 
from the qualities of the people the organization employs; others are a result of the organi-
zation’s culture or internal environment. Exhibit 13-3 illustrates how both individual and 
organizational factors can increase political behavior and provide favorable outcomes (in-
creased rewards and averted punishments) for individuals and groups in the organization.
Political behavior
Low
High
Favorable outcomes
• Rewards
• Averted punishments
Individual factors
• High self-monitors
• Internal locus of control
• High Mach personality
• Organizational investment
• Perceived job alternatives
• Expectations of success
Organizational factors
• Reallocation of resources
• Promotion opportunities
• Low trust
• Role ambiguity
• Unclear performance
   evaluation system
• Zero-sum reward practices
• Democratic decision making
• High performance pressures
• Self-serving senior managers
EXHIBIT 13-3 
Antecedents and 
Outcomes of 
Political Behavior

248	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
INDIVIDUAL FACTORS  At the individual level, researchers have identified certain 
personality traits, needs, and other factors likely to be related to political behavior. 
In terms of traits, we find that employees who are high self-monitors, possess an 
internal locus of control, and have a high need for power (nPow; see Chapter 7) are 
more likely to engage in political behavior. The high self-monitor is more sensitive to 
social cues, exhibits higher levels of social conformity, and is more likely to be skilled 
in political behavior than the low self-monitor. Because they believe they can control 
their environment, individuals with an internal locus of control are more prone to take 
a proactive stance and attempt to manipulate situations in their favor. Not surprisingly, 
the Machiavellian personality (see Chapter 4)—characterized by the will to manipulate 
and the desire for power—is consistent with using politics as a means to further personal 
interests.
An individual’s investment in the organization and perceived alternatives influ-
ence the degree to which he or she will pursue illegitimate means of political action.46 
The more a person expects increased future benefits from the organization, and the 
more that person has to lose if forced out, the less likely he or she is to use illegitimate 
means. Conversely, the more alternate job opportunities an individual has—due to a 
favorable job market, possession of scarce skills or knowledge, prominent reputa-
tion, or influential contacts outside the organization—the more likely the person is 
to employ politics.
Finally, some individuals engage in political behavior simply because they are bet-
ter at it. Such individuals read interpersonal interactions well, fit their behavior to situ-
ational needs, and excel at networking.47 These people are often indirectly rewarded for 
their political efforts. For example, a study of a construction firm in southern China found 
that politically skilled subordinates were more likely to receive recommendations for 
rewards from their supervisors, and politically oriented supervisors were especially likely 
to respond positively to politically skilled subordinates.48 Other studies from countries 
around the world have similarly shown that higher levels of political skill are associated 
with higher levels of perceived job performance.49
ORGANIZATIONAL FACTORS  Although we acknowledge the role individual differences 
can play, the evidence more strongly suggests that certain situations and cultures promote 
politics. Specifically, when an organization’s resources are declining, when the existing 
pattern of resources is changing, and when there is opportunity for promotions, politicking 
is more likely to surface.50 When resources are reduced, people may engage in political 
actions to safeguard what they have. Also, any changes, especially those implying a 
significant reallocation of resources within the organization, are likely to stimulate 
conflict and increase politicking.
Cultures characterized by low trust, role ambiguity, unclear performance evalua-
tion systems, win–lose reward allocation practices, democratic decision making, high 
pressure for performance, and self-serving senior managers will create breeding grounds 
for politicking.51 Because political activities are not required as part of the employee’s 
formal role, the greater the role ambiguity, the more employees can engage in unnoticed 
political activity. Role ambiguity means the prescribed employee behaviors are not clear. 
In this situation, there are fewer limits to the scope and functions of the employee’s politi-
cal actions.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 249
THE ZERO-SUM APPROACH  The more an organizational culture emphasizes the zero-
sum or win–lose approach to reward allocations, the more employees will be motivated 
to engage in politicking. The zero-sum approach treats the reward “pie” as fixed, so any 
gain one person or group achieves comes at the expense of another person or group. For 
example, if $15,000 is distributed among five employees for raises, any employee who 
gets more than $3,000 takes money away from one or more of the others. Such a practice 
encourages making others look bad and increasing the visibility of what you do.
INTER-ORGANIZATIONAL FACTORS  There are also political forces at work in the 
relationships between organizations, where politics work differently depending on the 
organizational cultures.52 One study showed that when two organizations with very 
political environments interacted with one another, the political interactions between 
them hurt performance in collaborative projects. On the other hand, when companies 
with less internal political behavior interacted with one another, even political disputes 
between them did not lead to lower performance in collaborative projects. This study 
shows companies should be wary of forming alliances with organizations that have high 
levels of internal political behavior.
How Do People Respond to Organizational Politics?
For most people who have modest political skills or who are unwilling to play the politics 
game, outcomes tend to be predominantly negative in terms of decreased job satisfac-
tion, increased anxiety and stress, increased turnover, and reduced performance. How-
ever, very strong evidence indicates perceptions of organizational politics are negatively 
related to job satisfaction.53 Politics may lead to self-reported declines in employee per-
formance, perhaps because employees perceive political environments to be unfair, which 
demotivates them.54 Not surprisingly, when politicking becomes too much to handle, it 
can lead employees to quit.55 The negative effects from politicking seem to be universal 
to most cultures. When employees of two agencies in a study in Nigeria viewed their 
work environments as political, for example, they reported higher levels of job distress 
and were less likely to help their coworkers. Thus, although developing countries such 
as Nigeria present perhaps more ambiguous and therefore more political environments 
in which to work, the negative consequences of politics appear to be the same as in the 
United States.56
There are some qualifiers to keep in mind when considering the effects of poli-
ticking. First, the politics–performance relationship appears to be moderated by an indi-
vidual’s understanding of the “hows” and “whys” of organizational politics. Researchers 
have noted, “An individual who has a clear understanding of who is responsible for mak-
ing decisions and why they were selected to be the decision makers would have a better 
understanding of how and why things happen the way they do than someone who does 
not understand the decision-making process in the organization.”57 When both politics 
and understanding are high, performance is likely to increase because these individuals 
see political activity as an opportunity. This is consistent with what you might expect for 
individuals with well-honed political skills. But when understanding is low, individu-
als are more likely to see politics as a threat, which can have a negative effect on job 
performance.58
Zero-sum approach
A negotiation approach 
that treats the reward 
“pie” as fixed, so 
any gain one person 
or group achieves 
comes at the expense 
of another person or 
group.

250	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Second, political behavior at work moderates the effects of ethical leadership.59 
One study found male employees were more responsive to ethical leadership and showed 
the most citizenship behavior when levels of both politics and ethical leadership were 
high. Women, on the other hand, appeared most likely to engage in citizenship behavior 
when the environment was consistently ethical and apolitical.
Third, when employees see politics as a threat, they often respond with defen-
sive behaviors—reactive and protective behaviors to avoid action, blame, or change.60 
(Exhibit 13-4 provides some examples.) In the short run, employees may find that defen-
siveness protects their self-interest, but in the long run it wears them down. People who 
consistently rely on defensiveness find that eventually it is the only way they know how 
to behave. At that point, they lose the trust and support of their peers, bosses, employees, 
and clients.
Impression Management
We know people have an ongoing interest in how others perceive and evaluate them. For 
example, North Americans spend billions of dollars on diets, health club memberships, 
cosmetics, and plastic surgery—all intended to make them more attractive to others. Be-
ing perceived positively by others has benefits in an organizational setting. It might, for 
instance, help us initially to get the jobs we want in an organization and, once hired, to get 
favorable evaluations, superior salary increases, and more rapid promotions. The process 
Defensive behaviors
Reactive and protective 
behaviors to avoid 
action, blame, or 
change.
Avoiding Action
Overconforming.  Strictly interpreting your responsibility by saying things like “The rules
clearly state ...” or “This is the way we’ve always done it.” 
Buck passing.  Transferring responsibility for the execution of a task or decision to
someone else. 
Playing dumb.  Avoiding an unwanted task by falsely pleading ignorance or inability.
Stretching.  Prolonging a task so that one person appears to be occupied—for example,
turning a two-week task into a four-month job. 
Stalling.  Appearing to be more or less supportive publicly while doing little or nothing
privately.
Avoiding Blame
Bluffing.  Rigorously documenting activity to project an image of competence and
thoroughness, known as “covering your rear.” 
Playing safe.  Evading situations that may reflect unfavorably. It includes taking on only
projects with a high probability of success, having risky decisions approved by superiors,
qualifying expressions of judgment, and taking neutral positions in conflicts.
Justifying.  Developing explanations that lessen one’s responsibility for a negative outcome
and/or apologizing to demonstrate remorse, or both.
Scapegoating.  Placing the blame for a negative outcome on external factors that are not
entirely blameworthy. 
Misrepresenting.  Manipulation of information by distortion, embellishment, deception,
selective presentation, or obfuscation. 
Avoiding Change
Prevention.  Trying to prevent a threatening change from occurring.
Self-protection.  Acting in ways to protect one’s self-interest during change by guarding
information or other resources.
EXHIBIT 13-4 
Defensive 
Behaviors

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 251
Conformity
Agreeing with someone else’s opinion to gain his or her approval is a form of
ingratiation. 
Example: A manager tells his boss, “You’re absolutely right on your reorganization plan
for the western regional office. I couldn’t agree with you more.
Favors
Doing something nice for someone to gain that person’s approval is a form of
ingratiation.
Example: A salesperson says to a prospective client, “I’ve got two tickets to the theater
tonight that I can’t use. Take them. Consider it a thank-you for taking the time to talk
with me.”
Excuses
Explaining a predicament-creating event aimed at minimizing the apparent severity
of the predicament is a defensive IM technique. 
Example: A sales manager says to her boss, “We failed to get the ad in the paper on time,
but no one responds to those ads anyway.”
Apologies
Admitting responsibility for an undesirable event and simultaneously seeking to get a
pardon for the action is a defensive IM technique.  
Example: An employee says to his boss, “I’m sorry I made a mistake on the report. Please
forgive me.”
Self-Promotion
Highlighting your best qualities, downplaying your deficits, and calling attention to
your achievements is a self-focused IM technique. 
Example: A salesperson tells his boss, “Matt worked unsuccessfully for three years to try
to get that account. I sewed it up in six weeks. I’m the best closer this company has.”
Enhancement
Claiming that something you did is more valuable than most other members of the
organizations would think is a self-focused IM technique. 
Example: A journalist tells his editor, “My work on this celebrity divorce story was really
a major boost to our sales” (even though the story only made it to page 3 in the
entertainment section).
Flattery
Complimenting others about their virtues in an effort to make yourself appear perceptive
and likeable is an assertive IM technique. 
Example: A new sales trainee says to her peer, “You handled that client’s complaint so
tactfully! I could never have handled that as well as you did.”
Exemplification
Doing more than you need to in an effort to show how dedicated and hardworking you
are is an assertive IM technique. 
Example: An employee sends e-mails from his work computer when he works late so that
his supervisor will know how long he’s been working.
EXHIBIT 13-5 
Impression 
Management 
(IM) Techniques
Source: Based on 
B. R. Schlenker, 
Impression 
Management 
(Monterey, CA: 
Brooks/Cole, 1980); 
M. C. Bolino,  
K. M. Kacmar,  
W. H. Turnley, and 
J. B. Gilstrap, “A 
Multi-Level Review 
of Impression 
Management 
Motives and 
Behaviors,” Journal 
of Management 
34, no. 6 (2008), 
1080–1109; and R. 
B. Cialdini, “Indirect 
Tactics of Image 
Management 
Beyond Basking,” 
in R. A. Giacalone 
and P. Rosenfeld 
(eds.), Impression 
Management in 
the Organization 
(Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1989), 45–71.
by which individuals attempt to control the impression others form of them is called im-
pression management (IM).61 See Exhibit 13-5 for examples.
Most of the studies to test the effectiveness of IM techniques have related IM to 
two criteria: interview success and performance evaluations. Let’s consider each of these.
Impression 
management (IM)
The process by which 
individuals attempt to 
control the impression 
others form of them.

252	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
INTERVIEWS AND IM  The evidence indicates most job applicants use IM techniques in 
interviews and that it works.62 To develop a sense of how effective different IM techniques 
are in interviews, one study grouped data from thousands of recruiting and selection 
interviews into appearance-oriented efforts (efforts toward looking professional), explicit 
tactics (such as flattering the interviewer or talking up your own accomplishments), 
and verbal cues (such as using positive terms and showing general enthusiasm).63 
Across all the dimensions, it was quite clear that IM was a powerful predictor of how 
well people did. However, there was a twist. When interviews were highly structured, 
meaning the interviewer’s questions were written out in advance and focused on applicant 
qualifications, the effects of IM were substantially weaker. Manipulative behaviors like 
IM are more likely to have an effect in ambiguous and unstructured interviews.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS AND IM  In terms of performance evaluations, the picture 
is quite different. Ingratiation is positively related to performance ratings, meaning those who 
ingratiate with their supervisors get higher performance evaluations. However, self-promotion 
appears to backfire: Those who self-promote actually may receive lower performance 
ratings.64 There is an important qualifier to these general findings. It appears that individuals 
high in political skill are able to translate IM into higher performance appraisals, whereas 
those lower in political skill are more likely to be hurt by their IM attempts.65 One study of 
760 boards of directors found that individuals who ingratiated themselves to current board 
members (expressed agreement with the director, pointed out shared attitudes and opinions, 
complimented the director) increased their chances of landing on a board.66 Another study found 
that interns who attempted to use ingratiation with their supervisors were usually disliked—
unless they had high levels of political skill. For those who had this ability, ingratiation led to 
higher levels of liking from supervisors, and higher performance ratings.67
IM BY CULTURE  Are our conclusions about responses to politics globally valid? Should 
we expect people in Israel, for instance, to respond the same way to impression management 
that people in the United States do? Almost all our conclusions on employee reactions to 
organizational politics and impression management are based on studies conducted in 
North America. The few studies that have included other countries suggest some minor 
modifications.68 One study of managers in the U.S. culture and three Chinese cultures 
(People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan) found that U.S. managers evaluated 
“gentle persuasion” tactics such as consultation and inspirational appeal as more effective 
than did their Chinese counterparts.69 This finding may have implications for the effectiveness 
of impression management techniques in individualistic and collectivistic countries. Other 
research suggests effective U.S. leaders achieve influence by focusing on the personal goals 
of group members and the tasks at hand (an analytical approach), whereas influential East 
Asian leaders focus on relationships among group members and meeting the demands of 
people around them (a holistic approach). Further research is needed in this area.70
The Ethics of Behaving Politically
Although there are no clear-cut ways to differentiate ethical from unethical politicking, 
there are some questions you should consider. For example, what is the utility of engaging 
in politicking? Sometimes we do it for little good reason. Major league baseball player 
Al Martin claimed he played football at USC when in fact he never did. As a baseball 

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 253
player, he had little to gain by pretending to have played football! Outright lies like this 
may be rather rare and extreme examples of impression management, but many of us have 
at least distorted information to make a favorable impression. One thing to keep in mind 
is whether it’s worth the risk. Another question is this: How does the utility of engaging 
in the political behavior balance out harm (or potential harm) it will do to others? Com-
plimenting a supervisor on her appearance in order to curry favor is probably much less 
harmful than grabbing credit that others deserve.
Finally, does the political activity conform to standards of equity and justice? 
Sometimes it is difficult to weigh the costs and benefits of a political action, but the 
ethicality is clear. The department head who inflates the performance evaluation of a 
favored employee and deflates the evaluation of a disfavored employee—and then uses 
the evaluations to justify giving the former a big raise and the latter nothing—has treated 
the disfavored employee unfairly.
Unfortunately, powerful people can become very good at explaining self-
serving behaviors in terms of the organization’s best interests. They can persuasively 
argue that unfair actions are really fair and just. Those who are powerful, articulate, 
and persuasive are most vulnerable to ethical lapses because they are more likely to 
get away with them. When faced with an ethical dilemma regarding organizational 
politics, try to consider whether playing politics is worth the risk and whether others 
might be harmed in the process. If you have a strong power base, recognize the abil-
ity of power to corrupt. Remember it’s a lot easier for people who are in a powerless 
position to act ethically, if for no other reason than they typically have very little 
political discretion to exploit.
Mapping Your Political Career
As we have seen, politics is not just for politicians. You can use the concepts presented in 
this chapter in some very tangible ways we have outlined in your organization. However, 
they also have another application: You.
One of the most useful ways to think about power and politics is in terms of your 
own career. What are your ambitions? Who has the power to help you achieve them? 
What is your relationship to these people? The best way to answer these questions is 
with a political map, which can help you sketch out your relationships with the people 
upon whom your career depends. Exhibit 13-6 contains such a political map.71 Let’s walk 
through it.
Assume your future promotion depends on five people, including Jamie, your im-
mediate supervisor. As you can see in the exhibit, you have a close relationship with 
Jamie (you would be in real trouble otherwise). You also have a close relationship with 
Zack in finance. However, with the others you have either a loose relationship (Lane) or 
none at all (Jia, Marty). One obvious implication of this map is the need to formulate a 
plan to gain more influence over, and a closer relationship with, these people. How might 
you do that?
One of the best ways to influence people is indirectly. What if you played in a tennis 
league with Mark, Jamie’s former coworker who you know remains friends with Jamie? 
To influence Mark, in many cases, may also be to influence Marty. Why not post an entry 
on CJ’s blog? You can complete a similar analysis for the other four decision makers and 
their networks.

254	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
All of this may seem a bit Machiavellian to you. However, remember that only one 
person gets the promotion, and your competition may have a map of his or her own. As we 
noted in the early part of the chapter, power and politics are a part of organizational life.
SUMMARY
Few employees relish being powerless in their jobs and organizations. People respond 
differently to the various power bases. Expert and referent power are derived from an 
individual’s personal qualities. In contrast, coercion, reward, and legitimate power are 
essentially organizationally granted. Competence especially appears to offer wide appeal, 
and its use as a power base results in high performance by group members.
An effective manager accepts the political nature of organizations. Some people 
are more politically astute than others, meaning they are aware of the underlying politics 
Zack
Finance
Jamie
Operations
Jamie
Operations
CJ
Jamie’s
Favorite
Blogger
Chris
Jamie’s
Spouse
Anna
Senior
VP,
Jamie’s
Boss
Dark blue is a close connection.
Light blue is a loose connection.
Medium blue is no connection at all.
Area of Detail
Marty
IT
Lane
HR
You
Jia
Sales
Tamar
Drew’s
Best
Friend
Mark
Jamie’s
Former
Coworker
EXHIBIT 13-6 
Drawing Your Political Map
Source: Based on D. Clark, “A Campaign Strategy for Your Career,” Harvard Business Review, November 2012, 131-134.

	
Chapter 13  •  Power and Politics in Organizations	 255
and can manage impressions. Those who are good at playing politics can be expected to 
get higher performance evaluations and, hence, larger salary increases and more promo-
tions than the politically naïve or inept. The politically astute are also likely to exhibit 
higher job satisfaction and be better able to neutralize job stressors. A political map can 
provide a good schematic from which to identify positive politicking opportunities. Fi-
nally, power and politics present significant ethical considerations. To accept the reality 
of these dimensions in organizations is to accept the responsibility for awareness and 
ethical behavior.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 To maximize your power, increase others’ dependence on you. For instance, in-
crease your power in relation to your boss by developing a needed knowledge or 
skill for which there is no ready substitute.
•	 You will not be alone in attempting to build your power bases. Others, particularly 
employees and peers, will be seeking to increase your dependence on them, while 
you are trying to minimize it and increase their dependence on you.
•	 Try to avoid putting others in a position where they feel they have no power.
•	 By assessing behavior in a political framework, you can better predict the actions 
of others and use that information to formulate political strategies that will gain 
advantages for you and your work unit.
•	 Consider that employees who have poor political skills or are unwilling to play 
the politics game generally relate perceived organizational politics to lower job 
satisfaction and self-reported performance, increased anxiety, and higher turnover. 
Therefore, if you are adept at organizational politics, help others understand the 
importance of becoming politically savvy.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Power & Politics.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Gaining Power and Influence
Do you like power and influence? Take this PIA to learn more about gaining both.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	13-1. 	 If a person has more power, do you think his or her need for politics becomes greater or 
less? Why?
	13-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

256
Conflict in Organizations
14 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Describe the three types of conflict and the three loci of conflict.
	 2.	 Outline the conflict process.
	 3.	 Contrast distributive and integrative bargaining.
	 4.	 Apply the five steps of the negotiation process.
	 5.	 Show how individual differences influence negotiations.
	 6.	 Describe the social factors that influence negotiations.
	 7.	 Assess the roles and functions of third-party negotiations.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback. 
A DEFINITION OF CONFLICT
There has been no shortage of definitions of conflict,1 but common to most is the idea that 
conflict is a perception of differences or opposition. If no one is aware of a conflict, then 
it is generally agreed no conflict exists. Opposition or incompatibility, as well as interac-
tion, are also needed to begin the conflict process.
We define conflict broadly as a process that begins when one party perceives another 
party has affected or is about to negatively affect something the first party cares about. 
Conflict describes the point in ongoing activity when interaction becomes disagreement. 
People experience a wide range of conflicts in organizations over an incompatibility of 
Conflict
A process that begins 
when one party 
perceives that another 
party has negatively 
affected, or is about 
to negatively affect, 
something that the first 
party cares about.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 257
goals, differences in interpretations of facts, disagreements over behavioral expectations, 
and the like. Our definition covers the full range of conflict levels, from overt and violent 
acts to subtle forms of disagreement.
Contemporary perspectives differentiate types of conflict based on their effects. 
Functional conflict supports the goals of the group and improves its performance, and 
is thus a constructive form of conflict. For example, a debate among members of a work 
team about the most efficient way to improve production can be functional if unique 
points of view are discussed and compared openly. Conflict that hinders group perfor-
mance is destructive or dysfunctional conflict. A highly personal struggle for control that 
distracts from the task at hand in a team is dysfunctional. Exhibit 14-1 provides an over-
view depicting the effect of levels of conflict. To understand different types of conflict, 
we will discuss next the types of conflict and the loci of conflict.
Functional conflict 
Conflict that supports 
the goals of the group 
and improves its 
performance.
Dysfunctional conflict
Conflict that hinders 
group performance.
A
(Low)
(High)
Level of Conﬂict
Unit Performance
(High)
B
C
Situation
A
B
C
Level of
Conﬂict
Low
or
none
Optimal
High
Type of
Conﬂict
Dysfunctional
Functional
Dysfunctional
Unit’s Internal
Characteristics
Apathetic
Stagnant
Nonresponsive
    to change
Lack of new
    ideas
Viable
Self-critical
Innovative
Disruptive
Chaotic
Uncooperative
Unit Performance
Outcome
Low
High
Low
EXHIBIT 14-1 
The Effect of 
Levels of Conflict

258	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Types of Conflict
One means of understanding conflict is to identify the type of disagreement, or what the 
conflict is about. Is it a disagreement about goals? Is it about people who just rub one 
another the wrong way? Or is it about the best way to get things done? Although each 
conflict is unique, researchers have classified conflicts into three categories: relation-
ship, task, or process. Relationship conflict focuses on interpersonal relationships. Task 
conflict relates to the content and goals of the work. Process conflict is about how the 
work gets done.
RELATIONSHIP CONFLICT  Studies demonstrate that relationship conflicts, at least in 
work settings, are almost always dysfunctional. Why? It appears that the friction and 
interpersonal hostilities inherent in relationship conflicts increase personality clashes and 
decrease mutual understanding, which hinders the completion of organizational tasks. 
Of the three types, relationship conflicts also appear to be the most psychologically 
exhausting to individuals. Because they tend to revolve around personalities, you can see 
how relationship conflicts can become destructive. After all, we can’t expect to change 
our coworkers’ personalities, and we would generally take offense at criticisms directed 
at who we are as opposed to how we behave.
TASK CONFLICT  While scholars agree that relationship conflict is dysfunctional, there is 
considerably less agreement about whether task and process conflicts are functional. Early 
research suggested that task conflict within groups correlated to higher group performance, 
but a review of 116 studies found that generalized task conflict was essentially unrelated 
to group performance. However, close examination revealed that task conflict among top 
management teams was positively associated with performance, whereas conflict lower 
in the organization was negatively associated with group performance, perhaps because 
people in top positions may not feel as threatened in their organizational roles by conflict. 
This review also found that it mattered whether other types of conflict were occurring 
at the same time. If task and relationship conflict occurred together, task conflict more 
likely was negative, whereas if task conflict occurred by itself, it more likely was positive. 
Other scholars have argued that the strength of conflict is important: if task conflict is 
very low, people aren’t really engaged or addressing the important issues; if task conflict 
is too high, infighting will quickly degenerate into relationship conflict. Moderate levels 
of task conflict may thus be optimal. Supporting this argument, one study in China found 
that moderate levels of task conflict in the early development stage increased creativity in 
groups, but high levels decreased team performance.2
Finally, the personalities of the teams appear to matter. One study demonstrated 
that teams of individuals who are, on average, high in openness and emotional stability 
are better able to turn task conflict into increased group performance. The reason may be 
that open and emotionally stable teams can put task conflict in perspective and focus on 
how the variance in ideas can help solve the problem, rather than letting it degenerate into 
relationship conflicts.
PROCESS CONFLICT  What about process conflict? Researchers found that process 
conflicts are about delegation and roles. Conflicts over delegation often revolve around the 
perception that some members as shirking, and conflicts over roles can leave some group 
Relationship conflict
Conflict based on  
interpersonal 
relationships.
Task conflict
Conflict over content 
and goals of the work.
Process conflict
Conflict over how 
work gets done.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 259
members feeling marginalized. Thus, process conflicts often become highly personalized 
and quickly devolve into relationship conflicts. It’s also true, of course, that arguing about 
how to do something takes time away from actually doing it. We’ve all been part of groups 
in which the arguments and debates about roles and responsibilities seem to go nowhere.
Loci of Conflict
Another way to understand conflict is to consider its locus, or the framework within 
which the conflict occurs. Here, too, there are three basic types. Dyadic conflict is con-
flict between two people. Intragroup conflict occurs within a group or team. Intergroup 
conflict is conflict between groups or teams.
Nearly all the literature on relationship, task, and process conflicts considers intra-
group conflict (within the group). That makes sense given that groups and teams often 
exist only to perform a particular task. However, it doesn’t necessarily tell us all we need 
to know about the context and outcomes of conflict. For example, research has found 
that for intragroup task conflict to positively influence performance within the team, it is 
important that the team has a supportive climate in which mistakes aren’t penalized and 
every team member “[has] the other’s back.”3 But is this concept applicable to the effects 
of intergroup conflict? Think about, say, NFL football. As we said, for a team to adapt and 
improve, perhaps a certain amount of intragroup conflict (but not too much) is good for 
team performance, especially when the team members support one another. But would we 
care whether members from one team supported members from another team? Probably 
not. In fact, if groups are competing with one another so that only one team can “win,” 
conflict seems almost inevitable. Still, it must be managed. Intense intergroup conflict 
can be quite stressful to group members and might well affect the way they interact. One 
study found, for example, that high levels of conflict between teams caused individuals to 
focus on complying with norms within their teams.4
It may surprise you how certain individuals become most important during inter-
group conflicts. One study that focused on intergroup conflict found an interplay between 
an individual’s position within a group and the way that individual managed conflict 
between groups. Group members who were relatively peripheral in their own group were 
better at resolving conflicts between their group and another one. But this happened only 
when those peripheral members were still accountable to their groups, and the effect can 
be confounded by dyadic conflicts.5 Thus, being at the core of your work group does not 
necessarily make you the best person to manage conflict with other groups.
Altogether, understanding functional and dysfunctional conflict requires not only 
that we identify the type of conflict; we also need to know where it occurs. It’s possible 
that while the concepts of relationship, task, and process conflicts are useful in under-
standing intragroup or even dyadic conflict, they are less useful in explaining the effects 
of intergroup conflict. But how do we make conflict as productive as possible? A better 
understanding of the conflict process, discussed next, will provide insight about potential 
controllable variables.
THE CONFLICT PROCESS
The conflict process has five stages: potential opposition or incompatibility, cognition 
and personalization, intentions, behavior, and outcomes (see Exhibit 14-2).
Dyadic conflict
Conflict that occurs 
between two people.
Intergroup conflict
Conflict between 
different groups or 
teams.
Intragroup conflict
Conflict that occurs 
within a group or team.
Conflict process 
A process that 
has five stages: 
potential opposition 
or incompatibility, 
cognition and 
personalization, 
intentions, behavior, 
and outcomes.

260	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
Stage I: Potential Opposition or Incompatibility
The first stage of conflict is the appearance of conditions—causes or sources—that create 
opportunities for it to arise. These conditions need not lead directly to conflict, but one of 
them is necessary if it is to surface. We group the conditions into three general categories: 
communication, structure, and personal variables.
COMMUNICATION  Communication can be a source of conflict.6 There are opposing 
forces that arise from semantic difficulties, misunderstandings, and “noise” in the 
communication channel (see Chapter 9). These factors, along with jargon and insufficient 
information, can be barriers to communication and potential antecedent conditions to 
conflict. The potential for conflict has also been found to increase with too little or 
too much communication. Communication is functional up to a point, after which it is 
possible to overcommunicate, increasing the potential for conflict.
STRUCTURE  The term structure in this context includes variables such as size of group, 
degree of specialization in tasks assigned to group members, jurisdictional clarity, 
member–goal compatibility, leadership styles, reward systems, and degree of dependence 
between groups. The larger the group and the more specialized its activities, the greater 
the likelihood of conflict. Tenure and conflict are inversely related, meaning that the 
longer a person stays with an organization, the less likely conflict becomes. Therefore, 
the potential for conflict is greatest when group members are newer to the organization 
and when turnover is high.
PERSONAL VARIABLES  Our last category of potential sources of conflict is personal 
variables, which include personality, emotions, and values. People high in the personality 
traits of disagreeableness, neuroticism, or self-monitoring (see Chapter 4) are prone to 
tangle with other people more often—and to react poorly when conflicts occur.7 Emotions 
can cause conflict even when they are not directed at others. For example, an employee 
who shows up to work irate from her hectic morning commute may carry that anger into 
her workday, which can result in a tension-filled meeting.8 Furthermore, differences in 
preferences and values can generate increased levels of conflict. For example, a study 
in Korea found that when group members didn’t agree about their desired achievement 
levels, there was more task conflict; when group members didn’t agree about their desired 
Increased
group
performance
Decreased
group
performance
Overt conﬂict
• Party’s
   behavior
• Other’s
   reaction
Conﬂict-handling
intentions
• Competing
• Collaborating
• Compromising
• Avoiding
• Accommodating
Antecedent conditions
• Communication
• Structure
• Personal variables
Perceived
conﬂict
Cognition and
personalization
Intentions
Behavior
Outcomes
Potential opposition
or incompatibility
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Stage V
Stage I
Felt
conﬂict
EXHIBIT 14-2 
The Conflict 
Process

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 261
interpersonal closeness levels, there was more relationship conflict; and when group 
members didn’t have similar desires for power, there was more conflict over status.9
Stage II: Cognition and Personalization
If the conditions cited in Stage I negatively affect something one party cares about, then 
the potential for opposition or incompatibility becomes actualized in the second stage.
As we noted in our definition of conflict, one or more of the parties must be aware 
that antecedent conditions exist. However, just because a disagreement is a perceived 
conflict does not mean it is personalized. It is at the felt conflict level, when individu-
als become emotionally involved, that they experience anxiety, tension, frustration, or 
hostility.
Stage II is important because it’s where conflict issues tend to be defined, where the 
parties decide what the conflict is about.10 The definition of conflict is important because 
it delineates the set of possible settlements. Most evidence suggests that people tend to 
default to cooperative strategies in interpersonal interactions unless there is a clear signal 
that they are faced with a competitive person. However, if our disagreement regarding, 
say, your salary is a zero-sum situation (the increase in pay you want means there will be 
that much less in the raise pool for me), I am going to be far less willing to compromise 
than if I can frame the conflict as a potential win–win situation (the dollars in the salary 
pool might be increased so both of us could get the added pay we want).
Second, emotions play a major role in shaping perceptions.11 Negative emotions 
allow us to oversimplify issues, lose trust, and put negative interpretations on the other 
party’s behavior.12 In contrast, positive feelings increase our tendency to see potential 
relationships among elements of a problem, take a broader view of the situation, and 
develop innovative solutions.13
Stage III: Intentions
Intentions intervene between people’s perceptions and emotions, and their overt behav-
ior. They are decisions to act in a given way.14 There is slippage between intentions and 
behavior, so behavior does not always accurately reflect a person’s intentions.
Using two dimensions—assertiveness (the degree to which one party attempts 
to satisfy his or her own concerns) and cooperativeness (the degree to which one 
party attempts to satisfy the other party’s concerns)—we can identify five conflict-
handling intentions: competing (assertive and uncooperative), collaborating (assertive 
and cooperative), avoiding (unassertive and uncooperative), accommodating (unas-
sertive and cooperative), and compromising (mid-range on both assertiveness and 
cooperativeness).15
Intentions are not always fixed. During the course of a conflict, intentions might 
change if a party is able to see the other’s point of view or to respond emotionally to 
the other’s behavior. People generally have preferences among the five conflict-handling 
intentions. We can predict a person’s intentions rather well from a combination of intel-
lectual and personality characteristics.
COMPETING  When one person seeks to satisfy his or her own interests regardless of the 
impact on the other parties in the conflict, that person is competing. We are more apt to 
compete when resources are scarce.
Perceived conflict
Awareness by one 
or more parties of 
the existence of 
conditions that create 
opportunities for 
conflict to arise.
Felt conflict
Emotional involvement 
in a conflict that 
creates anxiety, 
tenseness, frustration, 
or hostility.
Intentions
Decisions to act in a 
given way.
Competing
A desire to satisfy 
one’s interests, 
regardless of the 
impact on the other 
party to the conflict.

262	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
COLLABORATING  When parties in conflict each desire to fully satisfy the concerns 
of all parties, there is cooperation and a search for a mutually beneficial outcome. In 
collaborating, parties intend to solve a problem by clarifying differences rather than by 
accommodating various points of view. If you attempt to find a win–win solution that 
allows both parties’ goals to be completely achieved, that’s collaborating.
AVOIDING  A person may recognize a conflict exists and want to withdraw from or 
suppress it. Examples of avoiding include trying to ignore a conflict and keeping away 
from others with whom you disagree.
ACCOMMODATING  A party who seeks to appease an opponent may be willing to place 
the opponent’s interests above his or her own, sacrificing to maintain the relationship. We 
refer to this intention as accommodating. Supporting someone else’s opinion despite 
your reservations about it, for example, is accommodating.
COMPROMISING  In compromising, there is no winner or loser. Rather, there is a 
willingness to ration the object of the conflict and accept a solution with incomplete 
satisfaction of both parties’ concerns. The distinguishing characteristic of compromising, 
therefore, is that each party intends to give up something.
A review that examined the effects of the four sets of behaviors across multiple 
studies found that openness and collaborating were both associated with superior group 
performance, whereas avoiding and competing strategies were associated with signifi-
cantly worse group performance.16 These effects were nearly as large as the effects of 
relationship conflict. This further demonstrates that it is not just the existence of conflict 
or even the type of conflict that creates problems, but rather the ways people respond to 
conflict and manage the process once conflicts arise.
Stage IV: Behavior
Stage IV is a dynamic process of interaction. For example, you make a demand on me, 
I respond by arguing, you threaten me, I threaten you back, and so on. Exhibit 14-3 
provides a way of visualizing conflict behavior. Each behavioral stage in a conflict is 
built upon a foundation. At the lowest point are perceptions, misunderstandings, and dif-
ferences of opinions. These may grow to subtle, indirect, and highly controlled forms 
Collaborating
A situation in which 
the parties to a conflict 
each desire to satisfy 
fully the concerns of 
all parties.
Avoiding
The desire to withdraw 
from or suppress a 
conflict.
Accommodating
The willingness of one 
party in a conflict to 
place the opponent’s 
interests above his or 
her own.
Compromising
A situation in which 
each party to a conflict 
is willing to give up 
something.
Overt
attacks
Verbal disputes, negative
moods, protective behaviors
Differing perceptions
EXHIBIT 14-3 
Dynamic Escalation of Conflict
Sources: P. T. Coleman, R. R. Vallacher, A. Nowak, and L. Bui-Wrzosinska, “Intractable Conflict as an Attractor: A 
Dynamical Systems Approach to Conflict Escalation and Intractability,” The American Behavioral Scientist 50, no. 11 
(2007): 1545–75; K. K. Petersen, “Conflict Escalation in Dyads with a History of Territorial Disputes,” International 
Journal of Conflict Management 21, no. 4 (2010): 415–33.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 263
of tension, such as a student challenging a point the instructor has made. Conflict can 
intensify until it becomes highly destructive. Strikes, riots, and wars clearly fall in this 
upper range. Conflicts that reach the upper ranges of the continuum are almost always 
dysfunctional. Functional conflicts are typically confined to the lower levels.
In conflict, intentions are translated into certain likely behaviors. Competing brings 
out active attempts to contend with team members, and greater individual effort to achieve 
ends without working together. Collaborating efforts create an investigation of multiple so-
lutions with other members of the team and trying to find a solution that satisfies all parties 
as much as possible. Avoidance is seen in behavior like refusals to discuss issues and reduc-
tions in effort toward group goals. People who accommodate put their relationships ahead 
of the issues in the conflict, deferring to others’ opinions and sometimes acting as a sub-
group with them. Finally, when people compromise, they both expect to (and do) sacrifice 
parts of their interests, hoping that if everyone does the same, an agreement will sift out.
If a conflict is dysfunctional, what can the parties do to de-escalate it? Or, con-
versely, what options exist if conflict is too low to be functional and needs to be increased? 
This brings us to techniques of conflict management. We have already described several 
techniques in terms of conflict-handling intentions. Under ideal conditions, a person’s 
intentions should translate into comparable behaviors.
Stage V: Outcomes
The action–reaction interplay between conflicting parties creates consequences. As our 
model demonstrates (see Exhibit 14-1), these outcomes may be functional if the conflict 
improves the group’s performance, or dysfunctional if it hinders performance.
FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES  Conflict is constructive when it improves the quality of 
decisions, stimulates creativity and innovation, encourages interest and curiosity among 
group members, provides the medium for problems to be aired and tensions released, and 
fosters self-evaluation and change. Mild conflicts also may generate energizing emotions 
so members of groups become more active and engaged in their work.17
Conflict is an antidote for groupthink (see Chapter 10). Conflict doesn’t allow the 
group to passively rubber-stamp decisions that may be based on weak assumptions, in-
adequate consideration of relevant alternatives, or other debilities. Conflict challenges 
the status quo and furthers the creation of new ideas, promotes reassessment of group 
goals and activities, and increases the probability that the group will respond to change. 
An open discussion focused on higher-order goals can make functional outcomes more 
likely. Groups that are extremely polarized do not manage their underlying disagreements 
effectively and tend to accept suboptimal solutions, or they avoid making decisions alto-
gether rather than work out the conflict.18 Research studies in diverse settings confirm the 
functionality of active discussion. Team members with greater differences in work styles 
and experience tend to share more information with one another.19
DYSFUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES  The destructive consequences of conflict on the 
performance of a group or an organization are generally well known: Uncontrolled 
opposition breeds discontent, which acts to dissolve common ties and eventually leads to 
the destruction of the group. A substantial body of literature documents how dysfunctional 
conflicts can reduce group effectiveness.20 Among the undesirable consequences are poor 
communication, reductions in group cohesiveness, and subordination of group goals to 
Conflict management
The use of resolution 
and stimulation 
techniques to achieve 
the desired level of 
conflict.

264	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
the primacy of infighting among members. All forms of conflict—even the functional 
varieties—appear to reduce group member satisfaction and trust.21 When active 
discussions turn into open conflicts between members, information sharing between 
members decreases significantly.22 At the extreme, conflict can bring group functioning 
to a halt and threaten the group’s survival.
MANAGING CONFLICT  One of the keys to minimizing counterproductive conflicts 
is recognizing when there really is a disagreement. Many apparent conflicts are due 
to people using different verbiage to discuss the same general course of action. For 
example, someone in marketing might focus on “distribution problems,” while someone 
from operations talks about “supply chain management” to describe essentially the 
same issue. Successful conflict management recognizes these different approaches and 
attempts to resolve them by encouraging open, frank discussions focused on interests 
rather than issues. Another approach is to have opposing groups pick parts of the solution 
that are most important to them and then focus on how each side can get its top needs 
satisfied. Neither side may get exactly what it wants, but each side will achieve the most 
important parts of its agenda.23 Third, groups that resolve conflicts successfully discuss 
differences of opinion openly and are prepared to manage conflict when it arises.24 An 
open discussion makes it much easier to develop a shared perception of the problems 
at hand; it also allows groups to work toward a mutually acceptable solution. Fourth, 
managers need to emphasize shared interests in resolving conflicts, so groups that 
disagree with one another don’t become too entrenched in their points of view and start 
to take the conflicts personally. Groups with cooperative conflict styles and a strong 
underlying identification with the overall group goals are more effective than groups with 
a competitive style.25
CULTURAL INFLUENCES  Differences across countries in conflict resolution strategies 
may be based on collectivistic versus individualistic (see Chapter 3) tendencies and 
motives. Collectivistic cultures see people as deeply embedded in social situations, 
whereas individualistic cultures see them as autonomous. As a result, collectivists are 
more likely to seek to preserve relationships and promote the good of the group as 
a whole, and they prefer indirect methods for resolving differences of opinion. One 
study suggests that top management teams in Chinese high-technology firms prefer 
collaboration even more than compromising and avoiding. Collectivists may also be 
more interested in demonstrations of concern and working through third parties to 
resolve disputes, whereas individualists will be more likely to confront differences of 
opinion directly and openly.
Cross-cultural negotiations can create issues of trust.26 One study of Indian and 
U.S. negotiators found that respondents reported having less trust in their cross-culture 
negotiation counterparts. The lower level of trust was associated with less discovery of 
common interests between parties, which occurred because cross-culture negotiators 
were less willing to disclose and solicit information. Another study found that both U.S. 
and Chinese negotiators tended to have an ingroup bias, which led them to favor negotiat-
ing partners from their own cultures. For Chinese negotiators, this was particularly true 
when accountability requirements were high.
Having considered conflict—its nature, causes, and consequences—we now turn to 
negotiation, which often resolves conflict.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 265
Bargaining
Characteristic
Distributive
Bargaining
Integrative
Bargaining
Goal
Get as much of the pie as
possible
Expand the pie so that both
parties are satisfied
Motivation
Win–lose
Win–win
Focus
Positions (“I can’t go
beyond this point on this
issue.”)
Interests (“Can you explain why
this issue is so important to you?”)
Interests
Opposed
Congruent
Information sharing
Low (Sharing information
will only allow other party
to take advantage)
High (Sharing information will
allow each party to find ways to
satisfy interests of each party)
Duration of relationship
Short term
Long term
EXHIBIT 14-4 
Distributive 
Versus 
Integrative 
Bargaining
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled Gordon Law 
Group: Conflict and Negotiation.
NEGOTIATION
Negotiation permeates the interactions of almost everyone in groups and organizations. 
There’s the obvious: Labor bargains with management. There’s the not-so-obvious: man-
agers negotiate with employees, peers, and bosses; salespeople negotiate with customers; 
purchasing agents negotiate with suppliers. Then there’s the subtle: an employee agrees to 
cover for a colleague for a few minutes in exchange for a future favor. In today’s loosely 
structured organizations, in which members often work with colleagues over whom they 
have no direct authority and with whom they may not even share a common boss, negotia-
tion skills are critical.
We can define negotiation as a process that occurs when two or more par-
ties decide how to allocate scarce resources.27 Although we commonly think of the 
outcomes of negotiation in one-shot economic terms, like negotiating over the price 
of a car, every negotiation in organizations also affects the relationship between ne-
gotiators and the way negotiators feel about themselves.28 Depending on how much 
the parties are going to interact with one another, sometimes maintaining the social 
relationship and behaving ethically will be just as important as achieving an immedi-
ate outcome of bargaining. Note that we use the terms negotiation and bargaining 
interchangeably.
Bargaining Strategies
There are two general approaches to negotiation—distributive bargaining and integrative 
bargaining.29 As Exhibit 14-4 shows, they differ in their goals and motivation, focus, in-
terests, information sharing, and duration of relationship. Let’s define each and illustrate 
the differences.
Negotiation
A process in which 
two or more parties 
exchange goods or 
services and attempt to 
agree on the exchange 
rate for them.

266	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
DISTRIBUTIVE BARGAINING  You see a used car advertised for sale online that looks 
great. You go see the car. It’s perfect, and you want it. The owner tells you the asking 
price. You don’t want to pay that much. The two of you negotiate. The negotiating strategy 
you’re engaging in is called distributive bargaining. Its identifying feature is that it 
operates under zero-sum conditions—that is, any gain I make is at your expense, and vice 
versa (see Chapter 13). Every dollar you can get the seller to cut from the car’s price is a 
dollar you save, and every dollar the seller can get from you comes at your expense. The 
essence of distributive bargaining is negotiating over who gets what share of a fixed pie. 
By fixed pie, we mean a set amount of goods or services to be divvied up. When the pie 
is fixed, or the parties believe it is, they tend to bargain distributively.
The essence of distributive bargaining is depicted in Exhibit 14-5. Parties A and B 
represent two negotiators. Each has a target point that defines what he or she would like to 
achieve. Each also has a resistance point, which marks the lowest acceptable outcome—
the point beyond which the party would break off negotiations rather than accept a less 
favorable settlement. The area between these two points makes up each party’s aspiration 
range. As long as there is some overlap between A’s and B’s aspiration ranges, there exists 
a settlement range in which each one’s aspirations can be met.
When you are engaged in distributive bargaining, one of the best things you can do 
is make the first offer and make it an aggressive one. Making the first offer shows power; 
individuals in power are much more likely to make initial offers, speak first at meetings, 
and thereby gain the advantage. Another reason this is a good strategy is the anchoring 
bias, mentioned in Chapter 5. People tend to fixate on initial information. Once that an-
choring point has been set, they fail to adequately adjust it based on subsequent informa-
tion. A savvy negotiator sets an anchor with the initial offer, and scores of negotiation 
studies show that such anchors greatly favor the person who sets them.30
INTEGRATIVE BARGAINING  Jake was a Chicago luxury boutique owned by Jim 
Wetzel and Lance Lawson. In the early days of the business, Wetzel and Lawson 
moved millions of dollars of merchandise from many up-and-coming designers. They 
developed such a good rapport that many designers would send allotments to Jake 
without requiring advance payment. When the economy soured in 2008, Jake had 
trouble selling inventory, and designers were not being paid for what they had shipped 
to the store. Despite the fact that many designers were willing to work with the store on 
a delayed payment plan, Wetzel and Lawson stopped returning their calls. Lamented one 
designer, Doo-Ri Chung, “You kind of feel this familiarity with people who supported 
you for so long. When they have cash-flow issues, you want to make sure you are there 
for them as well.”31 Chung’s attitude shows the promise of integrative bargaining. In 
contrast to distributive bargaining, integrative bargaining assumes that one or more of 
Distributive 
bargaining
Negotiation that seeks 
to divide up a fixed 
amount of resources; a 
win–lose situation.
Fixed pie
The belief that there is 
only a set amount of 
goods or services to be 
divvied up between the 
parties.
Integrative bargaining
Negotiation that seeks 
one or more settle-
ments that can create a 
win–win solution.
Party A’s aspiration range
Party B’s aspiration range
Party B’s
target
point
Party A’s
resistance
point
Party B’s
resistance
point
Party A’s
target
point
Settlement
range
EXHIBIT 14-5 
Staking Out the 
Bargaining Zone

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 267
the possible settlements can create a win–win solution. Of course, as the Jake example 
shows, both parties must be engaged for integrative bargaining to work.
CHOOSING BARGAINING METHODS  In terms of intraorganizational behavior, 
integrative bargaining is preferable to distributive bargaining because the former builds 
long-term relationships. Integrative bargaining bonds negotiators and allows them to 
leave the bargaining table feeling they have achieved a victory. Distributive bargaining, 
however, leaves one party a loser. It tends to build animosity and deepen divisions when 
people have to work together on an ongoing basis. Research shows that over repeated 
bargaining episodes, a losing party who feels positively about the negotiation outcome is 
much more likely to bargain cooperatively in subsequent negotiations.
Why, then, don’t we see more integrative bargaining in organizations? The answer 
lies in the conditions necessary for it to succeed. These include opposing parties who are 
open with information and candid about concerns, are sensitive to the other’s needs and 
trust, and maintain flexibility. Because these conditions seldom exist in organizations, 
negotiations often take a win-at-any-cost dynamic.
Compromise and accommodation may be your worst enemy in negotiating a win–
win agreement. Both reduce  the pressure to bargain integratively. After all, if you or your 
opponent caves in easily, no one needs to be creative to reach a settlement. Consider a 
classic example in which two siblings are arguing over who gets an orange. Unknown to 
them, one sibling wants the orange to drink the juice, whereas the other wants the orange 
peel to bake a cake. If one capitulates and gives the other the orange, they will not be 
forced to explore their reasons for wanting the orange, and thus they will never find the 
win–win solution: They could each have the orange because they want different parts.
THE NEGOTIATION PROCESS
Exhibit 14-6 provides a simplified model of the negotiation process. It views negotiation 
as made up of five steps: (1) preparation and planning, (2) definition of ground rules,  
Preparation and
planning
Deﬁnition of
ground rules
Clariﬁcation and
justiﬁcation
Bargaining and
problem solving
Closure and
implementation
EXHIBIT 14-6 
The Negotiation 
Process

268	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
(3) clarification and justification, (4) bargaining and problem solving, and (5) closure and 
implementation.32
PREPARATION AND PLANNING  This may be the most important part of the 
process. Before you start negotiating, do your homework. What’s the nature of the 
conflict? What’s the history leading up to this negotiation? Who’s involved and what 
are their perceptions of the conflict? Then consider your goals, in writing, with 
a range of outcomes from “most helpful” to “minimally acceptable.” If you’re a 
supply manager at Dell Computer, for instance, and your goal is to get a significant 
cost reduction from your keyboard supplier, make sure this goal stays paramount 
in discussions and doesn’t get overshadowed by other issues. Next, assess what 
you think are the other party’s goals. What intangible or hidden interests may be 
important to them? On what might they be willing to settle? Think carefully about 
what the other side might be willing to give up. People who underestimate their 
opponent’s willingness to give on key issues before the negotiation even starts end 
up with lower outcomes.33
Once you’ve gathered your information, develop a strategy. You should determine 
your and the other side’s best alternative to a negotiated agreement, or BATNA. Your 
BATNA determines the lowest value acceptable to you for a negotiated agreement. Any 
offer you receive that is higher than your BATNA is better than an impasse. Conversely, 
you shouldn’t expect success in your negotiation effort unless you’re able to make the 
other side an offer it finds more attractive than its BATNA.
In nearly all cases, the party with superior alternatives will do better in a nego-
tiation, so experts advise negotiators to solidify their BATNA prior to any interaction.34 
Therefore, be equipped to counter arguments with facts and figures that support your po-
sition. There is an interesting exception to this general rule—negotiators with absolutely 
no alternative to a negotiated agreement sometimes “go for broke” since they don’t even 
consider what would happen if the negotiation falls through.35
DEFINITION OF GROUND RULES  Once you’ve done your planning and developed a 
strategy, you’re ready to define with the other party the ground rules and procedures of 
the negotiation itself. Who will do the negotiating? Where will it take place? What time 
constraints, if any, will apply? To what issues will negotiation be limited? Will you follow 
a specific procedure if an impasse is reached? During this phase, the parties will exchange 
their initial proposals or demands.
CLARIFICATION AND JUSTIFICATION  When you have exchanged initial positions, 
you and the other party will explain, amplify, clarify, bolster, and justify your original 
demands. This step needn’t be confrontational. Rather, it’s an opportunity for 
educating each other on the issues, why they are important, and how you arrived at 
your initial demands. Provide the other party with any documentation that supports 
your position.
BARGAINING AND PROBLEM SOLVING  The essence of the negotiation process is 
the actual give-and-take in trying to hash out an agreement. This is where both parties 
need to make concessions. Relationships change as a result of negotiation, so take 
that into consideration. If you could “win” a negotiation but push the other side into 
BATNA
The best alterna-
tive to a negotiated 
agreement; the least 
the individual should 
accept.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 269
resentment or animosity, it might be wiser to pursue a more compromising style. If 
preserving the relationship will make you seem easily exploited, you may consider a 
more aggressive style. As an example of how the tone of a relationship in negotiations 
matters, people who feel good about the process of a job offer negotiation are more 
satisfied with their jobs and less likely to turn over a year later regardless of their actual 
outcomes from these negotiations.36
CLOSURE AND IMPLEMENTATION  The final step in the negotiation process is 
formalizing your agreement and developing procedures necessary for implementing 
and monitoring it. For major negotiations—from labor–management negotiations to 
bargaining over lease terms—this requires hammering out the specifics in a formal 
contract. For other cases, closure of the negotiation process is nothing more formal than 
a handshake.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN NEGOTIATION EFFECTIVENESS
Are some people better negotiators than others? The answer is complex. Four factors 
influence how effectively individuals negotiate: personality, mood/emotions, culture, and 
gender.
PERSONALITY TRAITS IN NEGOTIATIONS  Can you predict an opponent’s negotiating 
tactics if you know something about his or her personality? Because personality and 
negotiation outcomes are related but only weakly, the answer is, at best, “sort of.”37 
Most research has focused on the Big Five traits of agreeableness, for obvious reasons—
agreeable individuals are cooperative, compliant, kind, and conflict-averse. We might 
think such characteristics make agreeable individuals easy prey in negotiations, especially 
distributive ones. The evidence suggests, however, that overall agreeableness is weakly 
related to negotiation outcomes.
Self-efficacy (see Chapter 7) is one individual-difference variable that consistently 
seems to relate to negotiation outcomes.38 This is a fairly intuitive finding—it isn’t too 
surprising to hear that those who believe they will be more successful in negotiation situ-
ations tend to perform more effectively. It may be that individuals who are more confident 
stake out stronger claims, are less likely to back down from their positions, and exhibit 
confidence that intimidates others. Although the exact mechanism is not yet clear, it does 
seem that negotiators may benefit from trying to get a boost in confidence before going 
to the bargaining table.
MOODS/EMOTIONS IN NEGOTIATIONS  Do moods and emotions influence negotiation? 
They do, but the way they work depends on the emotion as well as the context. A negotiator 
who shows anger can induce concessions, for instance, because the other negotiator 
believes no further concessions from the angry party are possible. One factor that governs 
this outcome, however, is power—you should show anger in negotiations only if you 
have at least as much power as your counterpart. If you have less, showing anger actually 
seems to provoke “hardball” reactions from the other side.39 “Faked” anger, or anger 
produced from surface acting, is not effective, but showing anger that is genuine (deep 
acting) is (see Chapter 3).40 Having a history of showing anger, rather than sowing the 
seeds of revenge, actually induces more concessions because the other party perceives the 

270	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
negotiator as “tough.”41 Anger has a cultural context. For instance, one study found that 
when East Asian participants showed anger, it induced more concessions than when the 
negotiator expressing anger was from the United States or Europe, perhaps because of the 
stereotype of East Asians as refusing to show anger.42
Another relevant emotion is disappointment. Generally, a negotiator who perceives 
disappointment from his or her counterpart concedes more. Anxiety also may impact ne-
gotiation. For example, one study found that individuals who experienced more anxiety 
about a negotiation used more deceptions in dealing with others.43 Another study found 
that anxious negotiators expect lower outcomes, respond to offers more quickly, and exit 
the bargaining process more quickly, leading them to obtain worse outcomes.44 Even 
emotional unpredictability affects outcomes; researchers have found that negotiators who 
express positive and negative emotions in an unpredictable way extract more concessions 
because this behavior makes the other party feel less in control.45 As one negotiator put 
it, “Out of the blue, you may have to react to something you have been working on in 
one way, and then something entirely new is introduced, and you have to veer off and 
refocus.”46
CULTURE IN NEGOTIATIONS  Do people from different cultures negotiate differently? 
The simple answer is the obvious one: Yes, they do. In general, people negotiate more 
effectively within cultures than between them. For example, a Colombian is apt to do 
better negotiating with a Colombian than with a Sri Lankan.
It appears that for successful cross-cultural negotiations, it is especially important 
that the negotiators be high in openness. This suggests a good strategy is to choose cross-
cultural negotiators who are high on openness, and it helps to avoid factors such as time 
pressure that tend to inhibit learning about the other party.47 Second, because emotions 
are culturally sensitive, negotiators need to be especially aware of the emotional dynam-
ics in cross-cultural negotiation. For example, individuals from East Asian cultures may 
feel that using anger to get their way in a negotiation is not a legitimate tactic, so they 
refuse to cooperate when their opponents become upset.48
GENDER IN NEGOTIATIONS  There are many areas of organizational behavior (OB) 
in which men and women are not that different. Negotiation is not one of them. It 
seems fairly clear that men and women negotiate differently, that men and women 
are treated differently by negotiation partners, and that these differences affect 
outcomes.
A popular stereotype is that women are more cooperative and pleasant in ne-
gotiations than men. Though this is controversial, there is some merit to it. Men tend 
to place a higher value on status, power, and recognition, whereas women tend to 
place a higher value on compassion and altruism. Moreover, women tend to value 
relationship outcomes more than men, and men tend to value economic outcomes 
more than women.49
These differences affect both negotiation behavior and negotiation outcomes. 
Compared to men, women tend to behave in a less assertive, less self-interested, and 
more accommodating manner. As one review concluded, women “are more reluctant to 
initiate negotiations, and when they do initiate negotiations, they ask for less, are more 
willing to accept [the] offer, and make more generous offers to their negotiation partners 

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 271
than men do.”50 A study of MBA students at Carnegie-Mellon University found that 
the male students took the step of negotiating their first offer 57 percent of the time, 
compared to 4 percent for the female students. The net result? A $4,000 difference in 
starting salaries.51
One comprehensive literature review suggested that the tendency for men to 
receive better negotiation outcomes in some situations did not cover all situations. 
Indeed, the evidence suggested women and men bargain more equally in certain situ-
ations, women sometimes outperform men, and both men and women obtain more 
nearly equal outcomes when negotiating on behalf of someone else.52 In other words, 
everyone is better at advocating for others than they are at advocating for themselves. 
Factors that increased the predictability of negotiations also tended to reduce gen-
der differences. When the range of negotiation settlements was well defined, men and 
women were more equal in outcomes. When more experienced negotiators were at the 
table, men and women were also nearly equivalent. The study authors proposed that 
when situations are more ambiguous, with less well-defined terms and less experienced 
negotiators, stereotypes may have stronger effects, leading to larger gender differences 
in outcomes.
NEGOTIATING IN A SOCIAL CONTEXT
We have mostly been discussing negotiations that occur among parties that meet only 
once, and in isolation from other individuals. However, in organizations, many negotia-
tions are open-ended and public. When you are trying to figure out who in a work group 
should do a tedious task, negotiating with your boss to get a chance to travel internation-
ally, or asking for more money for a project; there’s a social component to the negotiation. 
You are probably negotiating with someone you already know and will work with again, 
and the negotiation and its outcome are likely to be topics people will talk about. To really 
understand negotiations in practice, then, we must consider the social factors of reputa-
tion and relationships.
Reputation
Your reputation is the way other people think and talk about you. When it comes to 
negotiation, having a reputation for being trustworthy matters. In short, trust in a nego-
tiation process opens the door to many forms of integrative negotiation strategies that 
benefit both parties.53 The most effective way to build trust is to behave in an honest way 
across repeated interactions. Then, others feel more comfortable making open-ended of-
fers with many different outcomes. This helps to achieve win–win outcomes, since both 
parties can work to achieve what is most important to themselves while still benefiting 
the other party.
Sometimes we either trust or distrust people based on word-of-mouth about a per-
son’s characteristics. What characteristics help a person develop a trustworthy reputation? 
A combination of competence and integrity.54 Negotiators higher in self-confidence and 
cognitive ability are seen as more competent by negotiation partners.55 They are also 
considered better able to accurately describe a situation and their own resources, and are 
more credible when they make suggestions for creative solutions to impasses. Individuals 

272	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
who have a reputation for integrity can also be more effective in negotiations.56 They are 
seen as more likely to keep their promises and present information accurately, so others 
are more willing to accept their promises as part of a bargain. This opens many options 
for the negotiator that wouldn’t be available to someone who is not seen as trustworthy. 
Finally, individuals who have higher reputations are better liked and have more friends 
and allies—in other words, they have more social resources, which may give them more 
understood power in negotiations.
Relationships
There is more to repeated negotiations than just reputation. The social, interpersonal 
component of relationships with repeated negotiations means that individuals go 
beyond valuing what is simply good for themselves and instead start to think about 
what is best for the other party and the relationship as a whole.57 Repeated negotia-
tions built on a foundation of trust also broaden the range of options, since a favor 
or concession today can be offered in return for some repayment further down the 
road.58 Repeated negotiations also facilitate integrative problem solving. This occurs 
partly because people begin to see their negotiation partners in a more personal way 
over time and come to share emotional bonds.59 Repeated negotiations also make 
integrative approaches more workable because a sense of trust and reliability has 
been built up.60
THIRD-PARTY NEGOTIATIONS
To this point, we’ve discussed bargaining in terms of direct negotiations. Occasionally, 
however, individuals or group representatives reach a stalemate and are unable to resolve 
their differences through direct negotiations. In such cases, they may turn to a third party 
to help them find a solution. There are three basic third-party roles: mediator, arbitrator, 
and conciliator.
A mediator is a neutral third party who facilitates a negotiated solution by using 
reasoning and persuasion, suggesting alternatives, and the like. Mediators are widely 
used in labor–management negotiations and in civil court disputes. Their overall effec-
tiveness is fairly impressive. For example, the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission (EEOC) reported a settlement rate through mediation at 72.1 percent.61 But the 
situation is the key to whether mediation will succeed; the conflicting parties must be 
motivated to bargain and resolve their conflict. In addition, conflict intensity can’t be too 
high; mediation is most effective under moderate levels of conflict. Finally, perceptions 
of the mediator are important; to be effective, the mediator must be perceived as neutral 
and noncoercive.
An arbitrator is a third party with the authority to dictate an agreement. Arbitra-
tion can be voluntary (requested by the parties) or compulsory (forced on the parties by 
law or contract). The big plus of arbitration over mediation is that it always results in a 
settlement. Whether there is a downside depends on how heavy-handed the arbitrator 
appears. If one party is left feeling overwhelmingly defeated, that party is certain to be 
dissatisfied and the conflict may resurface at a later time.
mediator
A neutral third party 
who facilitates a 
negotiated solution 
by using reasoning, 
persuasion, and 
suggestions for 
alternatives.
Arbitrator
A third party to a 
negotiation who has 
the authority to dictate 
an agreement.

	
Chapter 14   •  Conflict in Organizations	 273
A conciliator is a trusted third party who provides an informal communication link 
between the negotiator and the opponent. This role was made famous by Robert Duval in 
the first Godfather film. As Don Corleone’s adopted son and a lawyer by training, Duval 
acted as an intermediary between the Corleones and the other Mafioso families. Compar-
ing conciliation to mediation in terms of effectiveness has proven difficult because the 
two overlap a great deal. In practice, conciliators typically act as more than mere commu-
nication conduits. They also engage in fact-finding, interpreting messages, and persuad-
ing disputants to develop agreements.
SUMMARY
While many people assume conflict lowers group and organizational performance, 
this assumption is frequently incorrect. Conflict can be either constructive or destruc-
tive to the functioning of a group or unit. Levels of conflict can be either too high or 
too low to be constructive. Either extreme hinders performance. An optimal level is 
one that prevents stagnation, stimulates creativity, allows tensions to be released, and 
initiates the seeds of change without being disruptive or preventing the coordination 
of activities.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Choose an authoritarian management style in emergencies, when unpopular actions 
need to be implemented (such as cost cutting, enforcement of unpopular rules, and 
discipline), and when the issue is vital to the organization’s welfare. Be certain to 
communicate your logic when possible to make certain others remain engaged and 
productive.
•	 Seek integrative solutions when your objective is to learn, when you want to merge 
insights from people with different perspectives, when you need to gain commit-
ment by incorporating concerns into a consensus, and when you need to work 
through feelings that have interfered with a relationship.
•	 You can build trust by accommodating others when you find you’re wrong, when 
you need to demonstrate reasonableness, when other positions need to be heard, 
when issues are more important to others than to yourself, when you want to satisfy 
others and maintain cooperation, when you can build social credits for later issues, 
to minimize loss when you are outmatched and losing, and when others should 
learn from their own mistakes.
•	 Consider compromising when goals are important but not worth potential disrup-
tion, when opponents with equal power are committed to mutually exclusive goals, 
and when you need temporary settlements to complex issues.
•	 Distributive bargaining can resolve disputes, but it often reduces the satisfaction of 
one or more negotiators because it is confrontational and focused on the short term. 
Integrative bargaining, in contrast, tends to provide outcomes that satisfy all parties 
and build lasting relationships.
Conciliator
A trusted third 
party who provides 
an informal 
communication link 
between the negotiator 
and the opponent.

274	 Part 3  •  Groups in Organizations
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Strategies for Handling Conflict
We all handle conflict, but few of us may have actual strategies in place. Take this PIA to 
further explore ways to handle conflict.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	14-1.	 Do you think employee conflicts are, in general, bad? Why? In what ways do you think they 
might be constructive?
	14-2.	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

275
PART 4  Organizational Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	 1.	 Identify seven elements of an organization’s structure.
	 2.	 Identify the characteristics of the functional structure, the divisional structure, and 
the matrix structure.
	 3.	 Identify the characteristics of the virtual structure, the team structure, and the cir-
cular structure.
	 4.	 Describe the effects of downsizing on organizational structures and employees.
	 5.	 Contrast the reasons for mechanistic and organic structural models.
	 6.	 Analyze the behavioral implications of different organizational designs.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
15 
Organization Structure 
and Design
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.

276	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
WHAT IS ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE?
Have you ever noticed how different work situations affect people’s behavior? We know 
that not all situations are equally conducive to effective organizational behavior (OB). 
Careful analysis reveals that the structure of an organization has a large impact on behav-
ior. An organizational structure defines how job tasks are formally divided, grouped, 
and coordinated. Managers should address seven key elements when they design their or-
ganization’s structure: work specialization, departmentalization, chain of command, span 
of control, centralization and decentralization, formalization, and boundary spanning.1 
Exhibit 15-1 presents each element as the answer to an important structural question, and 
the following sections describe them.
Work Specialization
Early in the twentieth century, Henry Ford became rich by building automobiles on an as-
sembly line. Every worker was assigned a specific, specialized task such as putting on the 
right front door. By dividing jobs into small standardized tasks that could be performed 
repeatedly and quickly, the Ford Motor Company was able to produce a car every 10 sec-
onds, using employees with relatively limited skills. Work specialization, or division of 
labor, describes the degree to which activities in any organization are divided into sepa-
rate jobs. The essence of work specialization is to divide a job into a number of steps, each 
completed by a separate individual. Individuals thus specialize in doing part of an activity 
rather than the entirety. Overall, specialization is a means of making the most efficient use 
of employee skills and even successfully improving them through repetition. Less time 
is spent changing tasks, putting away tools and equipment from a prior step, and getting 
ready for another.
By the 1960s, it increasingly seemed that the good news of specialization could be 
carried too far. Human diseconomies began to surface in the form of boredom, fatigue, 
stress, low productivity, poor quality, increased absenteeism, and high turnover, which 
Organizational 
structure
The way in which 
job tasks are formally 
divided, grouped, and 
coordinated.
Work specialization
The degree to 
which tasks in an 
organization are 
subdivided into 
separate jobs.
The Key Question 
The Answer Is Provided by
1. To what degree are activities subdivided 
into separate jobs?
Work specialization
2. On what basis will jobs be grouped 
together?
Departmentalization
3. To whom do individuals and groups 
report?
Chain of command
4. How many individuals can a manager 
efficiently and effectively direct?
Span of control
5. Where does decision-making 
authority lie?
Centralization and decentralization
6. To what degree will there be rules and 
regulations to direct employees and
managers?
Formalization
7. Do individuals from different areas need 
to regularly interact?
Boundary spanning
EXHIBIT 15-1 
Key Design 
Questions 
and Answers 
for Designing 
the Proper 
Organizational 
Structure

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 277
more than offset the economic advantages (see Exhibit 15-2). Managers could increase 
productivity now by enlarging, rather than narrowing, the scope of job activities. Giving 
employees a variety of activities to do, allowing them to do a whole and complete job, and 
putting them into teams with interchangeable skills often achieved significantly higher 
output, with increased employee satisfaction.
Most managers today recognize the economies specialization provides in certain 
jobs and the problems when it’s carried too far. Wherever job roles can be broken down 
into specific tasks or projects, specialization is possible. As you may have guessed, spe-
cialization is often used in manufacturing, but may confer new advantages outside manu-
facturing, particularly where job sharing and part-time work are prevalent.2 Amazon’s 
Mechanical Turk program, TopCoder, and others like it have facilitated a new trend in 
microspecialization in which extremely small pieces of programming, data processing, or 
evaluation tasks are delegated to a global network of individuals by a program manager 
who then assembles the results.3 Thus, whereas specialization of yesteryear focused on 
breaking manufacturing tasks into specific duties within the same plant, today’s special-
ization judiciously breaks complex tasks into specific elements by technology, expertise, 
and region. Yet the core principle is the same.
Departmentalization
Once jobs have been divided through work specialization, they must be grouped 
so common tasks can be coordinated. The basis by which jobs are grouped is called 
departmentalization.
FUNCTIONAL DEPARTMENTALIZATION  One of the most popular ways to group 
activities is by the functions performed. A manufacturing manager might organize a plant 
into engineering, accounting, manufacturing, human resources (HR), and supply chain 
departments. A hospital might have departments for research, surgery, intensive care, 
accounting, and so forth. The major advantage of this type of functional departmentalization 
is efficiencies gained from putting like specialists together.
PRODUCT OR SERVICE DEPARTMENTALIZATION  We can also departmentalize jobs 
by the type of product or service the organization produces. Procter & Gamble places 
each major product—such as Tide, Pampers, Charmin, and Pringles—under an executive 
who has complete global responsibility for it. The major advantage here is increased 
accountability for performance because all activities related to a specific product or 
service are under the direction of a single manager.
Departmentalization
The basis by which 
jobs in an organization 
are grouped together.
Im
pa
ct f
rom 
eco
no
m
ie
s 
  
   
of 
spe
cializat
io
n 
I
m
pa
ct 
fro
m 
h
u
m
a
n 
di
se
co
no
mie
s 
(Low)
(High)
Work specialization
Productivity
(High)
EXHIBIT 15-2 
Economies and 
Diseconomies 
of Work 
Specialization

278	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
GEOGRAPHICAL DEPARTMENTALIZATION  When a firm is departmentalized on the 
basis of geography (or territory); the sales function, for instance, may have western, 
southern, midwestern, and eastern regions which are each a department organized around 
geography. This form is valuable when an organization’s customers are scattered over 
a large geographic area and have similar needs within their locations. For this reason, 
Toyota changed its management structure into geographic regions “so that they may 
develop and deliver ever better products,” said CEO Akio Toyoda.4
PROCESS AND CUSTOMER DEPARTMENTALIZATION  Process departmentalization 
works for processing customers as well as products. If you’ve ever been to a state 
motor vehicle office to get a driver’s license, you probably went through several 
departments before receiving your license. In one typical state, applicants go through 
three steps, each handled by a separate department: (1) validation by the motor vehicles 
division, (2) processing by the licensing department, and (3) payment collection by 
the treasury department. A final category of departmentalization uses the particular 
type of customer the organization seeks to reach.
IMPLICATIONS FOR OB  Interestingly, organizations do not always stay with the 
basis of departmentalization they first adopt. Microsoft, for instance, used customer 
departmentalization for years, organizing around its customer bases: consumers, large 
corporations, software developers, and small businesses. However, in a June 2013 letter 
from CEO Steve Ballmer to all employees, he announced a restructuring to functional 
departmentalization, citing a need to foster continuing innovation. The new departments 
grouped jobs by traditional functions including engineering, marketing, business 
development, strategy and research, finance, HR, and legal.5
Ballmer expected the change in Microsoft’s organizational structure would “re-
shape how we interact with our customers, developers, and key innovation partners, 
delivering a more coherent message and family of product offerings.”6 As we see 
throughout this text, whenever changes are deliberately made in organizations to align 
practices with organizational goals, particularly the goals of strong leaders, a good exe-
cution of the changes creates a much higher probability for improvement. In Microsoft’s 
case, the results are not yet determined—Ballmer, who is a strong leader, announced his 
retirement two months later (he officially left Microsoft in 2014), and further changes 
ensued. Microsoft continued to struggle with the reorganization, announcing further 
changes in its leadership personnel and team structure less than a year later.7
Chain of Command
While the chain of command was once a basic cornerstone in the design of organizations, it 
has far less importance today. But managers should still consider its implications, particularly 
in industries that deal with potential life-or-death situations when people need to quickly rely 
on decision makers. The chain of command is an unbroken line of authority that extends 
from the top of the organization to the lowest echelon and clarifies who reports to whom.
AUTHORITY  We can’t discuss the chain of command without also discussing authority 
and unity of command. Authority refers to the rights inherent in a managerial position 
to give orders and expect them to be obeyed. To facilitate coordination, each managerial 
Chain of command
The unbroken line of 
authority that extends 
from the top of the 
organization to the 
lowest echelon and 
clarifies who reports to 
whom.
Authority
The rights inherent in 
a managerial position 
to give orders and to 
expect the orders to be 
obeyed.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 279
position is given a place in the chain of command, and each manager is given a degree of 
authority in order to meet his or her responsibilities.
UNITY OF COMMAND  The principle of unity of command helps preserve the concept 
of an unbroken line of authority. It says a person should have one and only one superior to 
whom he or she is directly responsible. If the unity of command is broken, an employee 
might have to cope with conflicting demands or priorities from several superiors, as is 
often the case in organization charts’ dotted-line reporting relationships depicting an 
employee’s accountability to multiple managers.
IMPLICATIONS FOR OB  Times change, and so do the basic tenets of organizational 
design. A low-level employee today can access information in seconds that was available 
only to top managers a generation ago, and many employees are empowered to make 
decisions previously reserved for management. Add the popularity of self-managed and 
cross-functional teams as well as structural designs that include multiple bosses, and you 
can see why authority and unity of command may appear to hold less relevance. Yet many 
organizations still find they can be most productive by enforcing the chain of command. 
Indeed, one survey of more than 1,000 managers found that 59 percent agreed with the 
statement, “There is an imaginary line in my company’s organizational chart. Strategy is 
created by people above this line, while strategy is executed by people below the line.”8 
However, this same survey found that lower-level employees’ buy-in (agreement and 
active support) to the organization’s overall, big picture strategy was inhibited by their 
reliance on the hierarchy for decision making.
Span of Control
How many employees can a manager efficiently and effectively direct? The span of con-
trol describes the number of levels and managers an organization has. All things being 
equal, the wider or larger the span, with fewer levels and more employees at each level, 
the more efficient the organization can be.
Assume two organizations each have about 4,100 operative-level employees. One 
has a uniform span of 4 and the other a span of 8. As Exhibit 15-3 illustrates, the wider 
Unity of command
The idea that a 
subordinate should 
have only one superior 
to whom he or she is 
directly responsible.
Span of control
The number of 
subordinates a manager 
can efficiently and 
effectively direct.
1
Assuming
span of 4
Span of 4:
Operatives
Managers (Levels 1–6)
= 4,096
= 1,365
Span of 8:
Operatives
Managers (Levels 1–4)
Organizational Level
= 4,096
= 585
Members at each level
Assuming
span of 8
1
(Highest)
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
8
64
512
4,096
4
16
64
256
1,024
4,096
EXHIBIT 15-3 
Contrasting 
Spans of Control

280	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
span of 8 will have two fewer levels and approximately 800 fewer managers. If the 
average manager makes $50,000 a year, the wider span will save $40 million a year in 
management salaries! Obviously, wider spans are more efficient in terms of cost. How-
ever, at some point when supervisors no longer have time to provide subordinates with 
the necessary leadership and support, effectiveness declines and employee performance 
suffers.
Narrow or small spans have their advocates. Narrow spans of control with, perhaps, 
five or six members are sometimes preferred to minimize ambiguity, but narrow spans 
have three major drawbacks. First, they’re expensive because they add levels of manage-
ment. Second, they make vertical communication in the organization more complex. The 
added levels of hierarchy slow down decision making and can isolate upper manage-
ment. Third, narrow spans encourage overly tight supervision and discourage employee 
autonomy.
The trend in recent years has been toward wider spans of control. They’re 
consistent with firms’ efforts to reduce costs, cut overhead, speed decision making, 
increase flexibility, get closer to customers, and empower employees. However, to 
ensure performance doesn’t suffer because of these wider spans, organizations have 
been investing heavily in employee training. Managers recognize they can handle a 
wider span best when employees know their jobs inside and out or can turn to cowork-
ers with questions.
Centralization and Decentralization
Centralization refers to the degree to which decision making is concentrated at a single 
point in the organization. In centralized organizations, top managers make all the deci-
sions, and lower-level managers merely carry out their directives. In organizations at the 
other extreme, decentralized decision making is pushed down to the managers closest to 
the action or to workgroups. The concept of centralization includes only formal author-
ity—that is, the rights inherent to a position.
IMPLICATIONS FOR OB  An organization characterized by centralization is different 
structurally from one that’s decentralized. A decentralized organization can act 
more quickly to solve problems, more people provide input into decisions, and 
employees are less likely to feel alienated from those who make decisions that affect 
their work lives. The effects of centralization and decentralization can be predicted: 
centralized organizations are better for avoiding commission errors (bad choices), 
while decentralized organizations are better for avoiding omission errors (lost 
opportunities).9
Management efforts to make organizations more flexible and responsive have pro-
duced a trend toward decentralized decision making by lower-level managers, who are 
closer to the action and typically have more detailed knowledge about problems than 
top managers. For example, Sears and JCPenney have given their store managers con-
siderably more discretion in choosing what merchandise to stock in individual stores. 
This allows the stores to compete more effectively against local merchants. Similarly, 
when Procter & Gamble empowered small groups of employees to make decisions about 
new-product development independent of the usual hierarchy, it was able to rapidly in-
crease the proportion of new products ready for market.10 Concerning creativity, research 
Centralization
The degree to which 
decision making is 
concentrated at a 
single point in an 
organization.
Decentralized 
decision making 
The degree to which 
decision making is 
pushed down to the 
managers closest 
to the action or to 
workgroups.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 281
investigating a large number of Finnish organizations demonstrated that companies with 
decentralized research and development (R&D) offices in multiple locations were better 
at producing innovation than companies that centralized all R&D in a single office.11
Decentralization is often necessary for companies with offshore sites because lo-
calized decision making is needed to respond to each region’s profit opportunities, client 
base, and specific laws, while centralized oversight is needed to hold regional managers 
accountable. Failure to successfully balance these priorities can harm not only the orga-
nization, but also its relationships with foreign governments.12
Formalization
Formalization refers to the degree to which jobs within the organization are standard-
ized. If a job is highly formalized, the employee has a minimal amount of discretion 
over what to do and when and how to do it, resulting in consistent and uniform output. 
There are explicit job descriptions, lots of organizational rules, and clearly defined 
procedures covering work processes. Formalization not only eliminates the possibility 
of employees engaging in alternative behaviors; it removes the need for them to con-
sider alternatives. Conversely, where formalization is low, job behaviors are relatively 
unprogrammed and employees have a great deal of freedom to exercise discretion in 
their work.
The degree of formalization can vary widely between and within organizations. Re-
search from 94 high-technology Chinese firms indicated that formalization is a detriment 
to team flexibility in decentralized organization structures, suggesting that formalization 
does not work as well where duties are inherently interactive, or where there is a need 
to be flexible and innovative.13 For example, publishing representatives who call on col-
lege professors to inform them of their company’s new publications have a great deal of 
freedom in their jobs. They have only a general sales pitch, which they tailor as needed, 
and rules and procedures governing their behavior may be little more than suggestions 
on what to emphasize about forthcoming titles and the requirement to submit a weekly 
sales report. At the other extreme, clerical and editorial employees in the same publishing 
houses may need to be at their desks by 8:00 a.m. and follow a set of precise procedures 
dictated by management.
Boundary Spanning
We’ve described ways that organizations create well-defined task structures and chains of 
authority. These systems facilitate control and coordination for specific tasks, but if there 
is too much division within an organization, attempts to coordinate across groups can be 
disastrous. One way to overcome compartmentalization and retain the positive elements 
of structure is to encourage or create boundary-spanning roles.
Within a single organization, boundary spanning occurs when individuals form 
relationships with people outside their formally assigned groups. An HR executive who 
frequently engages with the IT group is engaged in boundary spanning, as is a member 
of an R&D team who implements ideas from a production team. These activities help 
prevent formal structures from becoming too rigid and, not surprisingly, enhance organi-
zation and team creativity.14
Organizations can use formal mechanisms to facilitate boundary-spanning activi-
ties through their structures. One method is to assign formal liaison roles or develop 
Formalization
 The degree to 
which jobs within 
an organization are 
standardized.
Boundary spanning
When individuals form 
relationships outside 
their formally assigned 
groups.

282	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
committees of individuals from different areas of the organization. Development activities 
can also facilitate boundary spanning. Employees with experience in multiple functions, 
such as accounting and marketing, are more likely to engage in boundary spanning.15 
Many organizations try to set the stage for these sorts of positive relationships by creating 
job rotation programs so new hires get a better sense of different areas of the organization. 
A final method to encourage boundary spanning is to bring attention to overall organiza-
tional goals and shared identity concepts.
Boundary-spanning activities occur not only within but also between organiza-
tions. Gathering information from external knowledge sources is especially advantageous 
in highly innovative industries where keeping up with the competition is challenging. 
Positive results are especially strong in organizations that encourage extensive internal 
communication; in other words, external boundary spanning is most effective when it is 
followed up with internal boundary spanning.16
COMMON ORGANIZATIONAL FRAMEWORKS AND STRUCTURES
Organizational designs are known by many names and are constantly evolving in re-
sponse to changes in the way work is done. We start with three of the more com-
mon organizational frameworks: the simple structure, the bureaucracy, and the matrix 
structure.
The Simple Structure
What do a small retail store, an electronics firm run by a hard-driving entrepreneur, and 
an airline’s “war room” in the midst of a pilot’s strike have in common? They probably 
all use the simple structure.
The simple structure has a low degree of departmentalization, wide spans of con-
trol, authority centralized in a single person, and little formalization. It is a flat organiza-
tion; it usually has only two or three vertical levels, a loose body of employees, and one 
individual with decision-making authority. Most companies start as a simple structure, 
and many innovative technology-based firms with short life spans, like cell phone app 
development firms, remain compact by design.17
Consider a retail men’s store owned and managed by Jack Gold. Jack employs five 
full-time salespeople, a cashier, and extra workers for weekends and holidays, but he runs 
the show. Though this is typical for a small business, in times of crisis large companies 
often simplify their structures (though not to this degree) as a means of focusing their 
resources.
The strength of the simple structure lies in its simplicity. It’s fast, flexible, inex-
pensive to operate, and accountability is clear. One major weakness is that it becomes 
increasingly inadequate as an organization grows because its low formalization and 
high centralization tend to create information overload at the top. Decision making 
typically becomes slower as the single executive tries to continue doing it all. This 
proves the undoing of many small businesses. If the structure isn’t changed and made 
more elaborate, the firm often loses momentum and can eventually fail. The simple 
structure’s other weakness is that it’s risky—everything depends on one person. An 
illness at the top can literally halt the organization’s information and decision-making 
capabilities.
Simple structure 
An organization 
structure characterized 
by a low degree of 
departmentalization, 
wide spans of control, 
authority centralized 
in a single person, and 
little formalization.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 283
The Bureaucracy
Standardization! That’s the key concept that underlies all bureaucracies. Consider the 
bank where you keep your checking account, the store where you buy clothes, or the 
government offices that collect your taxes, enforce health regulations, or provide lo-
cal fire protection. They all rely on standardized work processes for coordination and 
control.
The bureaucracy is characterized by highly routine operating tasks achieved 
through specialization, strictly formalized rules and regulations, tasks grouped into units, 
centralized authority, narrow spans of control, and decision making that follows the chain 
of command. Bureaucracy incorporates all the strongest degrees of departmentalization 
described earlier.
Bureaucracy is a dirty word in many people’s minds. However, it does have ad-
vantages, primarily the ability to perform standardized activities in a highly efficient 
manner. Putting like specialties together in units results in economies of scale, mini-
mum duplication of people and equipment, and a common language employees all 
share. Bureaucracies can get by with less talented—and hence less costly—middle- and 
lower-level managers because rules and regulations substitute for managerial discre-
tion. There is little need for innovative and experienced decision makers below the level 
of senior executives.
Listen in on a dialogue among four executives in one company: “You know, 
nothing happens in this place until we produce something,” said the production ex-
ecutive. “Wrong,” commented the R&D manager, “Nothing happens until we design 
something!” “What are you talking about?” asked the marketing executive, “Nothing 
happens until we sell something!” The exasperated accounting manager responded, 
“It doesn’t matter what you produce, design, or sell. No one knows what happens 
until we tally up the results!” This conversation highlights that bureaucratic special-
ization can create conflicts in which the unit perspectives override the overall goals 
of the organization.
The other major weakness of a bureaucracy is something we’ve all witnessed: ob-
sessive concern with following the rules. When cases don’t precisely fit the rules, there 
is no room for modification. The bureaucracy is efficient only as long as employees con-
front familiar problems with programmed decision rules. There are two aspects of bureau-
cracies we should explore: functional and divisional structures.
THE FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE  The functional structure groups employees by 
their similar specialties, roles, or tasks.18 An organization structured into production, 
marketing, HR, and accounting departments is an example. Many large organizations 
utilize this structure, although this is evolving to allow for quick changes in response to 
business opportunities. Still, there are advantages, including that the functional structure 
allows specialists to become experts more easily than if they worked in diversified units. 
Employees can also be motivated by a clear career path to the top of the organization chart 
specific to their specialties.
The functional structure works well if the organization is focused on one product 
or service. Unfortunately, it creates rigid, formal communications because the hierarchy 
dictates the communication protocol. Coordination among many units is a problem, and 
infighting in units and between units can lead to reduced motivation.
Bureaucracy
An organization 
structure with highly 
routine operating tasks 
achieved through 
specialization, very 
formalized rules and 
regulations, tasks that 
are grouped into func-
tional departments, 
centralized author-
ity, narrow spans of 
control, and decision 
making that follows 
the chain of command.
Functional structure
An organization 
structure that groups 
employees by their 
similar specialties, 
roles, or tasks.

284	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
THE DIVISIONAL STRUCTURE  The divisional structure groups employees into units by 
product, service, customer, or geographical market area.19 It is highly departmentalized. 
Sometimes this structure is known by the type of division structure it uses: product/service 
organizational structure (like units for cat food, dog food, and bird food that report to 
an animal food producer); customer organizational structure (like units for outpatient 
care, inpatient care, and pharmacy that report to hospital administration); or geographic 
organizational structure (like units for Europe, Asia, and South America that report to 
corporate headquarters).20
The divisional structure has the opposite benefits and disadvantages of the func-
tional structure. It facilitates coordination in units to achieve on-time completion, budget 
targets, and development and introduction of new products to market, while addressing 
the specific concerns of each unit. It provides clear responsibility for all activities related 
to a product, but with duplication of functions and costs. Sometimes this is helpful, say 
when the organization has a unit in Spain and another in China, and a marketing strategy 
is needed for a new product. Marketing experts in both places can incorporate the ap-
propriate cultural perspectives into their region’s marketing campaigns. However, having 
marketing function employees in two different countries may represent an increased cost 
for the organization, in that they are doing basically the same task in two different places.
The Matrix Structure
The matrix structure combines the functional and product structures, and we find it in 
advertising agencies, aerospace firms, R&D laboratories, construction companies, hospi-
tals, government agencies, universities, management consulting firms, and entertainment 
companies.21 Companies that use matrix-like structures include ABB, Boeing, BMW, 
IBM, and P&G.
The most obvious structural characteristic of the matrix is that it breaks the 
unity-of-command concept. Employees in the matrix have two bosses: their func-
tional department managers and their product managers. Exhibit 15-4 shows the 
matrix for a college of business administration. The academic departments of ac-
counting, decision and information systems, marketing, and so forth are functional 
Divisional structure
An organization 
structure that groups 
employees into 
units by product, 
service, customer, or 
geographical market 
area.
Matrix structure 
An organization 
structure that creates 
dual lines of authority 
and combines 
functional and product 
departmentalization.
Accounting
Finance
Management
Decision and
Information
Systems
Marketing
Programs
Undergraduate Master’s
Ph.D. Research
Community Service
Executive
Development
Academic
Departments
EXHIBIT 15-4 
Matrix Structure 
for a College 
of Business 
Administration

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 285
units. Overlaid on them are specific programs (that is, products). Thus, members in 
a matrix structure have a dual chain of command: to their functional department and 
to their product groups. A professor of accounting teaching an undergraduate course 
may report to the director of undergraduate programs as well as to the chairperson 
of the accounting department.
The strength of the matrix is its ability to facilitate coordination when the organiza-
tion has a number of complex and interdependent activities. The matrix reduces “bureau-
pathologies”—its dual lines of authority limit people’s tendency to protect their territories 
at the expense of the organization’s goals.22 The major disadvantages of the matrix lie in 
the confusion it creates, its tendency to foster power struggles, and the stress it places on 
individuals.23 Without the unity-of-command concept, ambiguity about who reports to 
whom is significantly increased and often leads to conflict and power struggles between 
functional and product managers.
ALTERNATE DESIGN OPTIONS
In the ever-increasing trend toward flatter structures, many organizations have been 
developing new options with fewer layers of hierarchy and more emphasis on opening 
the boundaries of the organization.24 In this section, we describe three such designs: the 
virtual structure, the team structure, and the circular structure.
The Virtual Structure
Why own when you can rent? That question captures the essence of the virtual struc-
ture (also sometimes called the network, or modular, structure), typically a small, core 
organization that outsources its major business functions.25 The virtual structure is highly 
centralized, with little or no departmentalization.
Exhibit 15-5 shows a virtual structure in which management outsources all the pri-
mary functions of the business. The core of the organization is a small group of executives 
Virtual structure 
A small, core 
organization that 
outsources major 
business functions.
Advertising
agency
Factories
in
South Korea
Executive
group
Commissioned
sales
representatives
Independent
research and
development
consulting
ﬁrm
EXHIBIT 15-5 
A Virtual 
Organization

286	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
whose job is to oversee directly any activities done in-house and to coordinate relation-
ships with organizations that manufacture, distribute, and perform other crucial functions. 
The dotted lines represent the relationships typically maintained under contracts. In es-
sence, managers in virtual structures spend most of their time coordinating and control-
ling external relations.
The major advantage of the virtual structure is its flexibility, which allows indi-
viduals with an innovative idea and little money to successfully compete against larger, 
more established organizations. The structure also saves a great deal of money by elimi-
nating permanent offices and hierarchical roles.26 On the other hand, the drawbacks 
have become increasingly clear as popularity has grown.27 Virtual organizations are in 
a state of perpetual flux and reorganization, which means roles, goals, and responsibili-
ties are unclear, setting the stage for political behavior. Cultural alignment and shared 
goals can be lost because of the low degree of interaction among members. Team mem-
bers who are geographically dispersed and communicate infrequently find it difficult to 
share information and knowledge, which can limit innovation and slow response time. 
Ironically, some virtual organizations are less adaptable and innovative than those with 
well-established communication and collaboration networks.
The Team Structure
The team structure seeks to eliminate the chain of command and replace departments 
with empowered teams.28 This structure removes vertical and horizontal boundaries in 
addition to breaking down external barriers between the company and its customers and 
suppliers.
By removing vertical boundaries, management flattens the hierarchy and mini-
mizes status and rank. Cross-hierarchical teams (which include top executives, middle 
managers, supervisors, and operative employees), participative decision-making prac-
tices, and the use of 360-degree performance appraisals (in which peers and others evalu-
ate performance) can be used. For example, at the Danish firm Oticon A/S, the world’s 
largest hearing aid manufacturer, all traces of hierarchy have disappeared. Everyone 
works at uniform mobile workstations, and project teams, not functions or departments, 
coordinate work.
When fully operational, the team structure may break down geographic barri-
ers. Today, most large U.S. companies see themselves as team-oriented global cor-
porations; many, like Coca-Cola and McDonald’s, do as much business overseas as 
in the United States, and some struggle to incorporate geographic regions into their 
structure. In other cases, the team approach is need-based. Such is the case with 
Chinese companies that, together, made 93 acquisitions in the oil and gas industry in 
five years—incorporating each acquisition as a new team unit—to meet forecasted 
demand their resources in China could not meet.29 The team structure provides a 
solution because it considers geography as more of a tactical, logistical issue than 
a structural one. In short, the goal may be to break down cultural barriers and open 
opportunities.
Some organizations create teams incorporating their employees and their customers 
or suppliers. For example, to ensure important product parts are reliably made to exacting 
specifications by its suppliers, Honeywell International partners some of its engineers 
with managers at those suppliers.
Team structure
An organization 
structure that replaces 
departments with 
empowered teams, 
and which eliminates 
horizontal boundaries 
and external barriers 
between customers and 
suppliers.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 287
The Circular Structure
Picture the concentric rings of an archery target. In the center are the executives; radiat-
ing outward in rings grouped by function are the managers, then the specialists, then 
the workers. This is the circular structure.30 Does it seem like organizational anarchy? 
Actually, there is still a hierarchy, but top management is at the very heart of the organiza-
tion, with its vision spreading outward.
The circular structure has intuitive appeal for creative entrepreneurs, and some 
small innovative firms have claimed it. However, as in many of the current hybrid ap-
proaches, employees are apt to be unclear about whom they report to and who is running 
the show. We are still likely to see the popularity of the circular structure spread. The 
concept may have intuitive appeal for spreading a vision of corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) initiatives, for instance.
THE LEANER ORGANIZATION: DOWNSIZING
The goal of some organizational structures we’ve described is to improve agility by creat-
ing a lean, focused, and flexible organization. Downsizing is a systematic effort to make 
an organization leaner by closing locations, reducing staff, or selling off business units 
that don’t add value. Downsizing doesn’t necessarily mean physically shrinking the size 
of your office, although that’s been happening, too.
Some firms downsize to direct all their efforts toward their core competencies. 
American Express claims to have been doing this in a series of layoffs over more 
than a decade: 7,700 jobs in 2001; 6,500 jobs in 2002; 7,000 jobs (10 percent of its 
workforce) in 2008; 4,000 jobs in 2009. The 2013 cut of 5,400 jobs (8.5 percent of 
the remaining workforce) represented “its biggest retrenchment in a decade.” An ad-
ditional layoff of 4,000 jobs was slated for 2015. Each layoff was accompanied by a 
restructuring to reflect changing customer preferences, away from personal customer 
service and toward online customer service. According to CEO Ken Chennault, “Our 
business and industry continue to become transformed by technology. As a result of 
these changes, we have the need and the opportunity to evolve our organization and 
cost structure.”31
Despite the advantages of being a lean organization, the impact of downsizing on 
organizational performance is not without controversy. Reducing the size of the work-
force has an immediately positive outcome in the form of lower wage costs, and compa-
nies downsizing to improve strategic focus often see positive effects on stock prices after 
the announcement. An example is Russia’s Gorky Automobile Factory (GAZ), which 
realized a profit for the first time in many years after President Bo Andersson fired 50,000 
workers, half the workforce.32 On the other hand, among companies that only cut employ-
ees but don’t restructure, profits and stock prices usually decline. Part of the problem is 
the effect of downsizing on employee attitudes. Employees who remain often feel worried 
about future layoffs and may be less committed to the organization. Stress reactions can 
lead to increased sickness absences, lower concentration on the job, and lower creativity. 
Downsizing can also lead to more voluntary turnover, so vital human capital is lost. The 
result is a company that is more anemic than lean.
In short, companies that make themselves lean can be more agile, efficient, and 
productive—but only if they make cuts carefully and help employees through the process 
Circular structure
An organization 
structure in which 
executives are at the 
center, spreading 
their vision outward 
in rings grouped by 
function (managers, 
then specialists, then 
workers).

288	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
through investing in people, communicating more, inviting employee participation, and 
assisting dislocated employees.
WHY DO STRUCTURES DIFFER?
We’ve described many organization design options. Exhibit 15-6 recaps our dis-
cussions by presenting two extreme models of organizational design. One we call 
the mechanistic model. It’s generally synonymous with the bureaucracy in that it 
has highly standardized processes for work, high formalization, and more manage-
rial hierarchy. The other extreme is the organic model. It’s flat, has fewer formal 
procedures for making decisions, has multiple decision makers, and favors flexible 
practices.33
With these two models in mind, let’s ask a few questions: Why are some organiza-
tions structured along more mechanistic lines whereas others follow organic characteris-
tics? What forces influence the choice of design? In this section, we present major causes 
or determinants of an organization’s structure.34
Organizational Strategies
Because structure is a means to achieve objectives, and objectives derive from the 
organization’s overall strategy, it’s only logical that structure should follow strategy. 
If management significantly changes the organization’s strategy or its values, the 
structure must also change to accommodate. For example, recent research indicates 
that aspects of organizational culture may influence the success of CSR initiatives.35 
If the culture is supported by the structure, the initiatives are more likely to have clear 
Mechanistic model
A structure 
characterized 
by extensive 
departmentalization, 
high formalization, a 
limited information 
network, and 
centralization.
Organic model 
A structure that is flat, 
uses cross-hierarchical 
and cross-functional 
teams, has low formal-
ization, possesses a 
comprehensive infor-
mation network, and 
relies on participative 
decision making.
The Organic Model
The Mechanistic Model
High specialization
Rigid departmentalization
Clear chain of command
Narrow spans of control
Centralization
High formalization
Cross-functional teams
Cross-hierarchical teams
Free ﬂow of information
Wide spans of control
Decentralization
Low formalization
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
EXHIBIT 15-6 
Mechanistic vs. Organic Models

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 289
paths toward application. Most current strategy frameworks focus on three strategy 
dimensions—innovation, cost minimization, and imitation—and a structural design 
that works best with each.36
INNOVATION STRATEGY  To what degree does an organization introduce major 
new products or services? An innovation strategy strives to achieve meaningful and 
unique innovations. Obviously, not all firms pursue innovation. Apple and 3M do, but 
conservative retailer Marks & Spencer doesn’t. Innovative firms use competitive pay and 
benefits to attract top candidates and motivate employees to take risks. Some degree of 
the mechanistic structure can actually benefit innovation. Well-developed communication 
channels, policies for enhancing long-term commitment, and clear channels of authority 
all may make it easier for rapid changes to occur smoothly.
COST-MINIMIZATION STRATEGY  An organization pursuing a cost-minimization 
strategy tightly controls costs, refrains from incurring unnecessary expenses, and cuts 
prices in selling a basic product. This describes the strategy pursued by Walmart and the 
makers of generic or store-label grocery products. Cost-minimizing organizations usually 
pursue fewer policies meant to develop commitment among their workforce.
IMITATION STRATEGY  Organizations following an imitation strategy try to both 
minimize risk and maximize opportunity for profit, moving new products or entering 
new markets only after innovators have proven their viability. Mass-market fashion 
manufacturers that copy designer styles follow this strategy, as do firms such as Hewlett-
Packard and Caterpillar. They follow smaller and more innovative competitors with 
superior products, but only after competitors have demonstrated the market is there. 
Italy’s Moleskine SpA, a small maker of fashionable notebooks, is another example 
of imitation strategy but in a different way: looking to open more retail shops around 
the world, it imitates the expansion strategies of larger, successful fashion companies 
Salvatore Ferragamo SpA and Brunello Cucinelli.37
STRUCTURAL MATCHES  Exhibit 15-7 describes the structural option that best matches 
each strategy. Innovators need the flexibility of the organic structure (although, as we 
noted, they may use some elements of the mechanistic structure as well), whereas cost 
minimizers seek the efficiency and stability of the mechanistic structure. Imitators 
combine the two structures. They use a mechanistic structure to maintain tight controls 
and low costs in their current activities but create organic subunits in which to pursue new 
opportunities.
Innovation strategy
A strategy that 
emphasizes the 
introduction of major 
new products and 
services.
Cost-minimization 
strategy
A strategy that 
emphasizes tight cost 
controls, avoidance of 
unnecessary innovation 
or marketing expenses, 
and price cutting.
Imitation strategy
A strategy that seeks 
to move into new 
products or new 
markets only after their 
viability has already 
been proven.
Strategy 
Structural Option
Innovation 
 Organic: A loose structure; low specialization, low formalization,
decentralized
Cost minimization
 
 Mechanistic: Tight control; extensive work specialization, high
formalization, high centralization
Imitation 
 Mechanistic and organic: Mix of loose with tight properties; tight
controls over current activities and looser controls for new
undertakings
EXHIBIT 15-7 
The Optimal 
Structural 
Option for Each 
Organizational 
Strategy

290	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
Organization Size
An organization’s size significantly affects its structure. Organizations that employ 2,000 
or more people tend to have more specialization, more departmentalization, more verti-
cal levels, and more rules and regulations than do small organizations. However, size 
becomes less important as an organization expands. Why? At around 2,000 employees, an 
organization is already fairly mechanistic; 500 more employees won’t have much impact. 
But adding 500 employees to an organization of only 300 is likely to significantly shift it 
toward a more mechanistic structure.
Technology
Technology describes the way an organization transfers inputs into outputs. Every organi-
zation has at least one technology for converting financial, human, and physical resources 
into products or services. For example, the Chinese consumer electronics company Haier 
uses an assembly-line process for mass-produced products, which is complemented by 
more flexible and innovative structures to respond to customers and design new prod-
ucts.38 Also, colleges may use a number of instructional technologies—the ever-popular 
lecture, case analysis, experiential exercise, programmed learning, online instruction, and 
distance learning. Regardless, organizational structures adapt to their technology.
Environment
An organization’s environment includes outside institutions or forces that can affect its 
structure, such as suppliers, customers, competitors, and public pressure groups. Dynamic 
environments create significantly more uncertainty for managers than do static ones. To 
minimize uncertainty in key market arenas, managers may broaden their structure to 
sense and respond to threats. Most companies, for example Pepsi and Southwest Airlines, 
have added social networking departments to counter negative information posted on 
blogs. Or companies may form strategic alliances.
Any organization’s environment has three dimensions: capacity, volatility, and 
complexity.39 Let’s discuss each separately.
CAPACITY  Capacity refers to the degree to which the environment can support 
growth. Rich and growing environments generate excess resources, which can buffer the 
organization in times of relative scarcity.
VOLATILITY  Volatility describes the degree of instability in the environment. A dynamic 
environment with a high degree of unpredictable change makes it difficult for management 
to make accurate predictions. Because information technology changes at such a rapid 
place, more organizations’ environments are becoming volatile.
COMPLEXITY  Finally, complexity is the degree of heterogeneity and concentration 
among environmental elements. Simple environments—like the tobacco industry 
where the methods of production, competitive and regulatory pressures, and the 
like haven’t changed in quite some time—are homogeneous and concentrated. 
Environments characterized by heterogeneity and dispersion—like the broadband 
industry—are complex and diverse, with numerous competitors.
Technology 
The way in which an 
organization transfers 
its inputs into outputs.
Environment 
Forces outside an 
organization that 
potentially affect 
the organization’s 
structure.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 291
THREE-DIMENSIONAL MODEL  Exhibit 15-8 summarizes our definition of the 
environment along its three dimensions. The arrows indicate movement toward higher 
uncertainty. Thus, organizations that operate in environments characterized as scarce, 
dynamic, and complex face the greatest degree of uncertainty because they have high 
unpredictability, little room for error, and a diverse set of elements in the environment to 
monitor constantly.
Given this three-dimensional definition of environment, we can offer some gen-
eral conclusions about environmental uncertainty and structural arrangements. The more 
scarce, dynamic, and complex the environment, the more organic a structure should be. 
The more abundant, stable, and simple the environment, the more the mechanistic struc-
ture will be preferred.
Institutions
Another factor that shapes organizational structure is institutions. These are cultural fac-
tors that act as guidelines for appropriate behavior.40 Institutional theory describes some 
of the forces that lead many organizations to have similar structures and, unlike the theo-
ries we’ve described so far, focuses on pressures that aren’t necessarily adaptive. In fact, 
many institutional theorists try to highlight the ways corporate behaviors sometimes seem 
to be performance oriented but are actually guided by unquestioned social norms and 
conformity.
The most obvious institutional factors come from regulatory pressures; certain 
industries under government contracts, for instance, must have clear reporting rela-
tionships and strict information controls. Sometimes simple inertia determines an 
organizational form—companies can be structured in a particular way just because 
that’s the way things have always been done. Organizations in countries with high 
power distance might have a structural form with strict authority relationships because 
it’s seen as more legitimate in that culture. Some have attributed problems in adapt-
ability in Japanese organizations to the institutional pressure to maintain authority 
relationships.
Sometimes organizations start to have a particular structure because of fads or trends. 
Organizations can try to copy other successful companies just to look good to investors, 
and not because they need that structure to perform better. Many companies have recently 
tried to copy the organic form of a company like Google only to find that such structures 
Institutions
Cultural factors 
that lead many 
organizations to have 
similar structures, 
especially those factors 
that might not lead to 
adaptive consequences.
Abundant
Stable
Dynamic
Complex
Simple
Scarce
EXHIBIT 15-8 
The Environment 
Along Three 
Dimensions

292	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
are a very poor fit with their operating environment. Institutional pressures are often dif-
ficult to see specifically because we take them for granted, but that doesn’t mean they aren’t 
powerful.
ORGANIZATIONAL DESIGNS AND EMPLOYEE BEHAVIOR
We opened this chapter by implying an organization’s structure can have significant ef-
fects on its members. What might those effects be?
A review of the evidence leads to a pretty clear conclusion: You can’t generalize! 
Not everyone prefers the freedom and flexibility of organic structures. Different factors 
stand out in different structures as well. In highly formalized, heavily structured, mecha-
nistic organizations, the level of fairness in formal policies and procedures (organiza-
tional justice) is a very important predictor of satisfaction. In more personal, individually 
adaptive organic organizations, employees value interpersonal justice more.41 Some peo-
ple are most productive and satisfied when work tasks are standardized and ambiguity is 
minimized—that is, in mechanistic structures. So, any discussion of the effect of organi-
zational design on employee behavior has to address individual differences. To do so, let’s 
consider employee preferences for work specialization, span of control, centralization, 
and predictability versus autonomy, as well as preferences specific to certain cultures.42
Work Specialization
The evidence generally indicates that work specialization contributes to higher em-
ployee productivity—but at the price of job satisfaction. However, work specialization 
is not an unending source of higher productivity. Problems start to surface, and pro-
ductivity begins to suffer, when the human diseconomies of doing repetitive and nar-
row tasks overtake the economies of specialization. As the workforce has become more 
highly educated and desirous of jobs that are intrinsically rewarding, we seem to reach 
the point at which productivity begins to decline as a function of specialization more 
quickly than in the past. While decreased productivity often prompts companies to add 
oversight and inspection roles, the better answer may be to reorganize work functions 
and accountability.43
Span of Control
It is probably safe to say no evidence supports a relationship between span of control and 
employee satisfaction or performance. Although it is intuitively attractive that large spans 
might lead to higher employee performance because they provide more distant supervi-
sion and more opportunity for personal initiative, research fails to support this notion. 
Some people like to be left alone; others prefer the security of a boss who is quickly 
available at all times. Consistent with several of the contingency theories of leadership 
discussed in Chapter 12, we would expect factors such as employees’ experiences and 
abilities, and the degree of structure in their tasks, to explain when wide or narrow spans 
of control are likely to contribute to performance and job satisfaction. However, some 
evidence indicates that a manager’s job satisfaction increases as the number of employees 
supervised increases.

	
Chapter 15  •  Organization Structure and Design	 293
Centralization
We find fairly strong evidence linking centralization and job satisfaction. In general, less 
centralized organizations have a greater amount of autonomy, and autonomy appears 
positively related to job satisfaction. But again, while one employee may value freedom, 
another may find autonomous environments frustratingly ambiguous.
Predictability versus Autonomy
We can draw one obvious insight: people don’t select employers randomly. They are attracted 
to, are selected by, and stay with organizations that suit their personal characteristics.44 Job 
candidates who prefer predictability are likely to seek out and take employment in mechanis-
tic structures, and those who want autonomy are more likely to end up in organic structures. 
Thus, the effect of structure on employee behavior is undoubtedly reduced when the selection 
process facilitates proper matching of individual characteristics with organizational character-
istics. Furthermore, companies should strive to establish, promote, and maintain the unique 
identity of their structures since skilled employees may quit as a result of dramatic changes.45
National Culture
Research suggests national culture influences the preference for structure.46 Organiza-
tions that operate with people from high power-distance cultures, such as Greece, France, 
and most of Latin America, often find their employees are much more accepting of mech-
anistic structures than are employees from low power-distance countries. So consider 
cultural differences along with individual differences when predicting how structure will 
affect employee performance and satisfaction.
Finally, the changing landscape of organizational structure designs has implications 
for the individual progressing on a career path. Research with managers in Japan, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States indicated that employees who weathered down-
sizing and resulting hybrid organizational structures considered their future career pros-
pects diminished. While this may or may not have been correct, their thinking shows that 
organizational structure does affect the employee and thus must be carefully designed.47
  WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled ZipCar: 
Organizational Structure.
SUMMARY
The theme of this chapter is that an organization’s internal structure contributes to explaining 
and predicting behavior. That is, in addition to individual and group factors, the structural re-
lationships in which people work have a bearing on employee attitudes and behavior. What’s 
the basis for this argument? To the degree that an organization’s structure reduces ambigu-
ity for employees and clarifies concerns such as “What am I supposed to do?” “How am I 
supposed to do it?” “To whom do I report?” and “To whom do I go if I have a problem?” 
it shapes their attitudes and facilitates and motivates them to higher levels of performance.

294	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Specialization can make operations more efficient, but remember that excessive 
specialization can create dissatisfaction and reduced motivation.
•	 Avoid designing rigid hierarchies that overly limit employees’ empowerment and 
autonomy.
•	 Balance the advantages of remote work against the potential pitfalls before adding 
flexible workplace options into the organization’s structure.
•	 Downsize your organization to realize major cost savings, and focus the company 
around core competencies—but only if necessary, because downsizing can have a 
significant negative impact on employee affect.
•	 Consider the scarcity, dynamism, and complexity of the environment, and balance 
organic and mechanistic elements when designing an organizational structure.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Organizational Structure.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Organizational Structure Assessment
To learn about how organizations are structured, complete this PIA.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	15-1. 	 Which organizational designs do you think are best suited to incorporate employees who 
work from home? Why?
	15-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

295
Creating and Maintaining 
Organizational Culture 
16 
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
 WATCH IT
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete the video exercise titled Organizational Culture (TWZ Role Play).
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
	  1.  Describe the common characteristics of organizational culture.
	  2.  Compare the functional and dysfunctional effects of organizational culture on 
people and the organization.
	  3.  Identify the factors that create and sustain an organization’s culture.
	  4.  Show how culture is transmitted to employees.
	  5.  Describe the similarities and differences in creating an ethical culture, a positive 
culture, and a spiritual culture.
	  6.  Show how national culture can affect the way organizational culture is interpreted 
in another country.

296	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
WHAT IS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE?
An executive was once asked what he thought organizational culture meant. He gave 
essentially the same answer U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart gave in defining 
pornography: “I can’t define it, but I know it when I see it.” We have all felt an indescrib-
able essence about the organizations we’ve experienced. The pervasive atmosphere can 
have a strong and measurable impact on behavior. Let’s begin discussing this important 
element of organizational behavior (OB) by exploring the parameters of the phenomenon.
A Definition of Organizational Culture
Organizational culture refers to a system of shared meaning held by members that dis-
tinguishes the organization from other organizations.1 Seven primary characteristics seem 
to capture the essence of an organization’s culture:2
1.	 Innovation and risk taking. The degree to which employees are encouraged to be 
innovative and take risks.
2.	 Attention to detail. The degree to which employees are expected to exhibit preci-
sion, analysis, and attention to detail.
3.	 Outcome orientation. The degree to which management focuses on results or 
outcomes rather than on the techniques and processes used to achieve them.
4.	 People orientation. The degree to which management decisions take into consid-
eration the effect of outcomes on people within the organization.
5.	 Team orientation. The degree to which work activities are organized around teams 
rather than individuals.
6.	 Aggressiveness. The degree to which people are aggressive and competitive rather 
than easygoing.
7.	 Stability. The degree to which organizational activities emphasize maintaining the 
status quo in contrast to growth.
Each of these characteristics exists on a continuum from low to high. Appraising an 
organization on the strength of each provides a basis for the shared understanding mem-
bers have about the organization, how things are done in it, and the way they are supposed 
to behave. Organizational culture shows how employees perceive the characteristics of 
an organization, not whether they like them—that is, it’s a descriptive term. Research on 
organizational culture has sought to measure how employees see their organization: Does 
it encourage teamwork? Does it reward innovation? Does it stifle initiative? In contrast, 
job satisfaction is an evaluative term: it seeks to measure how employees feel about the 
organization’s expectations, reward practices, and the like. See Exhibit 16-1 for a contrast 
of two companies with very different organizational cultures.
Do Organizations Have Uniform Cultures?
Organizational culture represents a perception the organization’s members hold in com-
mon. Statements about organizational culture are valid only if individuals with differ-
ent backgrounds or at different levels in the organization describe the culture in similar 
terms.3
Within the organization, the dominant culture expresses the core values a major-
ity of members share and that give the organization its distinct personality.4 That’s what 
Organizational 
culture
A system of shared 
meaning held 
by members that 
distinguishes the 
organization from 
other organizations.
Dominant culture 
A culture that expresses 
the core values that are 
shared by a majority 
of the organization’s 
members.
Core values 
The primary or 
dominant values that 
are accepted throughout 
the organization.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 297
allows us to say, for example, that the Zappos culture values customer care and dedication 
over speed and efficiency, which explains the behavior of Zappos executives and employees.5
In addition to the dominant cultures of each organization, subcultures tend to de-
velop in large organizations in response to common problems or experiences a group 
of members face in the same department or location. Most large organizations have a 
dominant culture and numerous subcultures.6 For example, the purchasing department 
can have a subculture that includes the core values of the dominant culture, such as ag-
gressiveness, plus additional values unique to members of that department, such as risk-
taking. If organizations were composed only of subcultures, the dominant organizational 
culture would be significantly less powerful. It is the “shared meaning” aspect of culture 
that makes it a potent device for guiding and shaping behavior.
Strong versus Weak Cultures
It’s possible to differentiate between strong and weak cultures.7 If most employees (re-
sponding to surveys) have the same opinions about the organization’s mission and values, 
the culture is strong; if opinions vary widely, the culture is weak.
Subcultures 
Minicultures within an 
organization, typically 
defined by department 
designations and 
geographical 
separation.
Organization A
This organization is a manufacturing ﬁrm. Managers are expected to fully document all deci-
sions, and “good managers” are those who can provide detailed data to support their rec-
ommendations. Creative decisions that incur signiﬁcant change or risk are not encouraged.
Because managers of failed projects are openly criticized and penalized, managers try not to
implement ideas that deviate much from the status quo. One lower-level manager quoted an
often-used phrase in the company: “If it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it.”
There are extensive rules and regulations in this ﬁrm that employees are required to fol-
low. Managers supervise employees closely to ensure there are no deviations. Management
is concerned with high productivity, regardless of the impact on employee morale or
turnover.
Work activities are designed around individuals. There are distinct departments and lines
of authority, and employees are expected to minimize formal contact with other employees
outside their functional area or line of command. Performance evaluations and rewards
emphasize individual effort, although seniority tends to be the primary factor in the deter-
mination of pay raises and promotions.
Organization B
This organization is also a manufacturing ﬁrm. Here, however, management encourages and
rewards risk taking and change. Decisions based on intuition are valued as much as those
that are well rationalized. Management prides itself on its history of experimenting with
new technologies and its success in regularly introducing innovative products. Managers or
employees who have a good idea are encouraged to “run with it.” And failures are treated
as “learning experiences.” The company prides itself on being market driven and rapidly
responsive to the changing needs of its customers.
There are few rules and regulations for employees to follow, and supervision is loose
because management believes that its employees are hardworking and trustworthy.
Management is concerned with high productivity but believes that this comes through 
treating its people right. The company is proud of its reputation as being a good place to work.
Job activities are designed around work teams, and team members are encouraged to
interact with people across functions and authority levels. Employees talk positively about
the competition between teams. Individuals and teams have goals, and bonuses are based
on achievement of these outcomes. Employees are given considerable autonomy in choosing
the means by which the goals are attained.
EXHIBIT 16-1 
Contrasting 
Organizational 
Cultures

298	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
In a strong culture, the organization’s core values are both intensely held and 
widely shared.8 The more members who accept the core values and the greater their com-
mitment, the stronger the culture and the greater its influence on member behavior. The 
reason is that a high degree of shared values and intensity create a climate of high behav-
ioral control. Nordstrom employees know in no uncertain terms what is expected of them, 
for example, and these expectations go a long way toward shaping their behavior.
A strong culture should reduce employee turnover because it demonstrates high 
agreement about what the organization represents. Such unanimity of purpose builds 
cohesiveness, loyalty, and organizational commitment. These qualities, in turn, lessen 
employees’ propensity to leave.9
Culture versus Formalization
We’ve seen in this text that high formalization creates predictability, orderliness, and con-
sistency. A strong culture modifies behavior similarly. Therefore, we should view for-
malization and culture as two different roads to a common destination. The stronger an 
organization’s culture, the less management needs to be concerned with developing for-
mal rules and regulations to guide employee behavior. Those guides will be internalized 
in employees when they adopt the organization’s culture.
WHAT DO CULTURES DO?
Let’s discuss the functions of culture and the role culture performs in relation to organi-
zational climate, ethics, sustainability, and innovation. Then we will explore when culture 
is an asset... and when it is a distinct liability.
The Functions of Culture
Culture defines the rules of the game. First, it has a boundary-defining role: It creates 
distinctions between organizations. Second, it conveys a sense of identity for organiza-
tion members. Third, culture facilitates commitment to something larger than individual 
self-interest. Fourth, it enhances the stability of the social system. Culture is the social 
glue that helps hold the organization together by providing standards for what employees 
should say and do. Finally, it is a sense-making and control mechanism that guides and 
shapes employees’ attitudes and behavior. This last function is of particular interest to us 
in the study of OB.10
A strong culture supported by formal rules and regulations ensures employees 
will act in a relatively uniform and predictable way. Today’s trend toward decentral-
ized organizations makes culture more important than ever, but ironically, it also makes 
establishing a strong culture more difficult. When formal authority and control systems 
are reduced through decentralization, culture’s shared meaning can point everyone in the 
same direction. However, employees organized in a team may show greater allegiance 
to their team and its values than to the organization as a whole. Furthermore, in virtual 
organizations, the lack of frequent face-to-face contact makes establishing a common set 
of norms very difficult. Strong leadership that fosters a strong culture by communicat-
ing frequently about common goals and priorities is especially important for innovative 
organizations.11
Strong culture 
A culture in which 
the core values are 
intensely held and 
widely shared.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 299
Individual–organization “fit”—that is, whether the applicant’s or employee’s at-
titudes and behavior are compatible with the culture—strongly influences who gets a job 
offer, a favorable performance review, or a promotion. It’s no coincidence that Disney 
theme park employees appear almost universally attractive, clean, and wholesome with 
bright smiles. The company selects employees who will maintain that image.
Culture Creates Climate
If you’ve worked with someone whose positive attitude inspired you to do your best, or 
with a lackluster team that drained your motivation, you’ve experienced the effects of cli-
mate. Organizational climate refers to the shared perceptions organizational members 
have about their organization and work environment.12 This aspect of culture is like team 
spirit at the organizational level. When everyone has the same general feelings about what’s 
important or how well things are working, the effect of these attitudes will be more than 
the sum of the individual parts. One meta-analysis found that across dozens of different 
samples, psychological climate was strongly related to individuals’ levels of job satisfac-
tion, involvement, commitment, and motivation.13 A positive workplace climate has been 
linked to higher customer satisfaction and organizational financial performance as well.14 
Dozens of dimensions of climate have been studied, including innovation, creativ-
ity, communication, warmth and support, involvement, safety, justice, diversity, and cus-
tomer service.15 There are a number of findings managers can use to improve their plans 
for organizational design and team building. For example, someone who encounters a 
diversity climate will feel more comfortable collaborating with coworkers regardless of 
their demographic backgrounds. Climates can interact with one another to produce be-
havior. For example, a climate of worker empowerment can lead to higher levels of per-
formance in organizations that also have a climate of personal accountability.16 Climate 
also influences the habits people adopt. If there is a climate of safety, everyone wears 
safety gear and follows safety procedures even if individually they wouldn’t normally 
think very often about being safe—indeed, many studies have shown that a safety climate 
decreases the number of documented injuries on the job.17
The Ethical Dimension of Culture
Organizational cultures are not neutral in their ethical orientation, even when they are 
not openly pursuing ethical goals. Over time, an ethical work climate (EWC), which 
is the shared concept of right and wrong behavior, develops as part of the organizational 
climate. EWC reflects the true values of the organization and shapes the ethical decision 
making of its members.
Researchers have developed ethical climate theory (ECT) and the ethical climate 
index (ECI) to categorize and measure the ethical dimensions of organizational cultures.18 
Of the nine identified ECT climate categories, five are most prevalent in organizations: 
instrumental, caring, independence, law and code, and rules. Each explains the general 
mind-set, expectations, and values of managers and employees in relationship to their 
organizations. For instance, in an instrumental ethical climate, managers may frame their 
decision making around the assumption that employees (and companies) are motivated 
by self-interest (egoistic). In a caring climate, conversely, managers may operate under 
the expectation that their decisions will positively affect the greatest number of stakehold-
ers (employees, customers, suppliers) possible.
Organizational 
climate 
The shared perceptions 
organizational 
members have about 
their organization and 
work environment.
Ethical work climate 
(EWC) 
The shared concept 
of right and wrong 
behavior in the 
workplace that reflects 
the true values of 
the organization and 
shapes the ethical 
decision making of its 
members.

300	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
Ethical climates of independence rely on each individual’s personal moral 
ideas to dictate his or her workplace behavior. Law and code climates require man-
agers and employees to use an external standardized moral compass such as a pro-
fessional code of conduct for norms, while rules climates tend to operate by internal 
standardized expectations from, perhaps, an organizational policy manual. Organi-
zations often progress through different categories as they move through their busi-
ness life cycle.
An organization’s ethical climate powerfully influences the way its individual 
members feel they should behave, so much so that researchers have been able to pre-
dict organizational outcomes from the climate categories.19 For example, instrumental 
climates are negatively associated with employee job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment, even though those climates appeal to self-interest (of the employee and 
the company). They are positively associated with turnover intentions, workplace 
bullying, and deviant behavior. Caring and rules climates may bring greater job sat-
isfaction. Caring, independence, rules, and law and code climates reduce employee 
turnover intentions, workplace bullying, and dysfunctional behavior. Research in-
dicates that ethical cultures take a long-term perspective and balance the rights of 
multiple stakeholders including employees, stockholders, and the community. Man-
agers are supported for taking risks and innovating, discouraged from engaging in 
unbridled competition, and guided to heed not just what goals are achieved but how 
they are achieved.
Culture and Sustainability
As the name implies, sustainability refers to practices that can be maintained over very 
long periods of time20 because the tools or structures that support the practices are not 
damaged by the processes. One survey found that a great majority of executives saw 
sustainability as an important part of future success.21 Concepts of sustainable manage-
ment have their origins in the environmental movement, so processes that are in harmony 
with the natural environment are encouraged. Social sustainability practices address the 
ways social systems are affected by an organization’s actions over time, and in turn, how 
changing social systems may affect the organization.
For example, farmers in Australia have been working collectively to increase water 
use efficiency, minimize soil erosion, and implement tilling and harvesting methods that 
ensure long-term viability for their farm businesses.22 In a very different context, 3M has 
an innovative pollution-prevention program rooted in cultural principles of conserving 
resources, creating products that have minimal effects on the environment, and collabo-
rating with regulatory agencies to improve environmental effects.23
To create a truly sustainable business, an organization must develop a long-term 
culture and put its values into practice.24 In other words, there needs to be a sustain-
able system for creating sustainability! In one workplace study, a company seeking 
to reduce energy consumption found that soliciting group feedback reduced energy 
use significantly more than simply issuing reading materials about the importance of 
conservation.25 In other words, talking about energy conservation and building the 
value into the organizational culture resulted in positive employee behavioral changes. 
Like other cultural practices we’ve discussed, sustainability needs time and nurturing 
to grow.
Sustainability 
Organization practices 
that can be sustained 
over a long period 
of time because the 
tools or structures 
that support them are 
not damaged by the 
processes.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 301
Culture and Innovation
The most innovative companies are often characterized by their open, unconventional, 
collaborative, vision-driven, and accelerating cultures.26 Start-up firms often have innova-
tive cultures by definition because they are usually small, agile, and focused on solving 
problems in order to survive and grow. Consider digital music leader Echo Nest, recently 
bought by Spotify. As a start-up, Echo Nest was an unconventional, flexible, and open 
company; they would even host music app “hack” days for users, fostered a music culture 
within their organization.27 All these are hallmarks of Spotify’s culture, too, making the fit 
rather seamless.28 Because of the similar organizational cultures, Echo Nest and Spotify 
may be able to continue their start-up level of innovation.
At the other end of the start-up spectrum, consider 30-year-old Intuit, one of the 
World’s 100 Most Innovative Companies according to Forbes. Intuit employees attend 
workshops to teach them how to think creatively... and unconventionally. Sessions have 
led to managers talking through puppets and holding bake sales to sell prototype apps 
with their cupcakes. The culture stresses open accountability. “I saw one senior guy 
whose idea they’d been working on for nine months get disproved in a day because some-
one had a better way. He got up in front of everyone and said, ‘This is my bad. I should 
have checked my hypothesis earlier,’ ” said Eric Ries, author of The Lean Startup. As a 
consultant for entrepreneurs, Ries considers the older software company equally innova-
tive to start-ups because of its culture.29
Alexion Pharmaceuticals is also one of Forbes’ Most Innovative and, like Intuit, 
it has been in operation long past the usual innovation life-cycle stage. Unlike Intuit, 
though, this maker of life-saving medicines is not known for management shenanigans. 
The key to Alexion’s continuing innovation is a culture of caring, which drives it to de-
velop medicines that save victims of rare diseases even when the patients affected are 
few, the cost of development is prohibitively high, and the probability of success is low.30
Culture as an Asset
As we have discussed, organizational culture can provide a positive ethical environment 
and foster innovation. Culture can also significantly contribute to an organization’s bot-
tom line in many ways.
One strong example can be found in the case of ChildNet. ChildNet is a nonprofit 
child welfare agency in Florida whose organizational culture was described as “grim” from 
2000 (when one of its foster children disappeared) through 2007 (when the CEO was fired 
amid FBI allegations of fraud and forgery). “We didn’t know if we would have jobs or who 
would take over,” employee Maggie Tilelli said. However, after intense turnaround efforts 
aimed at changing the organizational culture, ChildNet became Florida’s top-ranked agency 
within four years and Workforce Management’s Optima award winner for General Excel-
lence in 2012. While ChildNet demonstrates how an organizational culture can positively 
affect outcomes, Dish Network illustrates the elusiveness of matching a particular culture to 
an industry or organization. By every measure, Dish Network is a business success story—
it is the second-largest U.S. satellite TV provider and it has made founder Charlie Ergen one 
of the richest men in the world. Yet Dish was recently ranked as the worst U.S. company 
to work for, and employees say that this is due to the micromanaging culture Ergen created 
and enforces. Employees recounted arduous mandatory overtime, fingerprint scanners to 
record work hours to the minute, public berating (most notably from Ergen), management 

302	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
condescension and distrust, quarterly “bloodbath” layoffs, and no working from home. One 
employee advised another online, “You’re part of a poisonous environment . . . go find a job 
where you can use your talents for good rather than evil.”
Culture as a Liability
Culture can enhance organizational commitment and increase the consistency of em-
ployee behavior, which clearly benefits an organization. Culture is valuable to employees 
too, because it spells out how things are done and what’s important. But we shouldn’t 
ignore the potentially dysfunctional aspects of culture, especially a strong one, on an 
organization’s effectiveness. Hewlett-Packard, once known as a premier computer manu-
facturer, rapidly lost market share and profits as dysfunction in its top management team 
trickled down, leaving employees disengaged, uncreative, unappreciated, and polarized.31 
Let’s unpack some of the major factors that signal a negative organizational culture, be-
ginning with institutionalization.
INSTITUTIONALIZATION  When an organization undergoes institutionalization—that 
is, it becomes valued for itself and not for the goods or services it produces—it takes on 
a life of its own, apart from its founders or members.32 Institutionalized organizations 
often don’t go out of business even if the original goals are no longer relevant. Acceptable 
modes of behavior become largely self-evident to members, and although this isn’t 
entirely negative, it does mean behaviors and habits go unquestioned, which can stifle 
innovation and make maintaining the organization’s culture an end in itself.
BARRIERS TO CHANGE  Culture is a liability when shared values don’t agree with those 
that further the organization’s effectiveness. This is most likely when an organization’s 
environment is undergoing rapid change, and its entrenched culture may no longer be 
appropriate.33 Consistency of employee behavior, which is an asset in a stable environment, 
may then burden the organization and make it difficult to respond to changes.
BARRIERS TO DIVERSITY  There are many barriers to diversity that are driven by 
organizational culture. Hiring new employees who differ from the majority in race, 
age, gender, disability, or other characteristics creates a paradox:34 Management wants 
to demonstrate support for the differences these employees bring to the workplace, but 
newcomers who wish to fit in must accept the organization’s core culture. The desire for 
quick assimilation creates one barrier to diversity. Second, because diverse behaviors and 
unique strengths are likely to diminish as people assimilate, strong cultures can become 
liabilities when they effectively eliminate the advantages of diversity. Third, a strong 
culture that condones prejudice, supports bias, or becomes insensitive to differences can 
undermine formal corporate diversity policies.
STRENGTHENING DYSFUNCTIONS  We’ve discussed cultures that generally cohere 
around a positive set of values and attitudes. This consensus can create a powerful forward 
momentum. However, coherence around negativity and dysfunctional management 
systems in a corporation can produce downward forces that are equally powerful. One 
study of thousands of hospitality-industry employees in hundreds of locations found that 
local organizational cultures marked by low or decreasing job satisfaction had higher 
Institutionalization
A condition that occurs 
when an organization 
takes on a life of its 
own, apart from any 
of its members, and 
acquires immortality.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 303
levels of turnover regardless of a generally positive organization-wide culture.35 As we 
know from this text, low job satisfaction and high turnover indicate dysfunction on the 
organization’s part. Negative attitudes in groups add to negative outcomes, suggesting a 
powerful influence of culture on individuals.
BARRIERS TO ACQUISITIONS AND MERGERS  Historically, when management looked 
at acquisition or merger decisions, the key decision factors were potential financial 
advantage and product synergy. In recent years, cultural compatibility has become 
the primary concern.36 All things being equal, whether the acquisition works seems to 
have much to do with how well the two organizations’ cultures match up. When they 
don’t mesh well, the organizational cultures of both become a liability to the whole 
new organization. For example, a study conducted by Bain and Company found that 
70 percent of mergers failed to increase shareholder values, and Hay Group found that 
more than 90 percent of mergers in Europe failed to reach financial goals.37 Considering 
this dismal rate of success, Lawrence Chia from Deloitte Consulting observed, “One of 
the biggest failings is people. The people at Company A have a different way of doing 
things from Company B . . . you can’t find commonality in goals.” Culture clash was also 
commonly argued to be one of the causes of AOL Time Warner’s problems. The $183 
billion merger between America Online (AOL) and Time Warner in 2001 was the largest 
in U.S. corporate history. It was a disaster. Only 2 years later, the new company saw its 
stock fall an astounding 90 percent, and it reported what was then the largest financial 
loss in U.S. history.
CREATING AND SUSTAINING CULTURE
An organization’s culture doesn’t pop out of thin air, and once established it rarely fades 
away. What influences the creation of a culture? What reinforces and sustains it once in 
place?
How a Culture Begins
An organization’s customs, traditions, and general way of doing things are largely due to 
what it has done before and how successful it was in doing it. This leads us to the ultimate 
source of an organization’s culture: the founders.38 Founders have a vision of what the 
organization should be, and a firm’s initially small size makes it easy to impose that vi-
sion on all members.
Culture creation occurs in three ways.39 First, founders hire and keep only employ-
ees who think and feel the same way they do. Second, they indoctrinate and socialize 
employees to their way of thinking and feeling. And finally, the behavior of the founder(s) 
encourages employees to identify with them and internalize their beliefs, values, and as-
sumptions. When the organization succeeds, the personality of the founder(s) becomes 
embedded in the culture. For example, the fierce, competitive style and disciplined, au-
thoritarian nature of Hyundai, the giant Korean conglomerate, exhibits the same charac-
teristics often used to describe founder Chung Ju-Yung. Other founders with sustaining 
impact on their organization’s culture include Bill Gates at Microsoft, Ingvar Kamprad at 
IKEA, Herb Kelleher at Southwest Airlines, Fred Smith at FedEx, and Richard Branson 
at the Virgin Group.

304	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
Keeping a Culture Alive
Once a culture is in place, practices within the organization maintain it by giving employees 
a set of similar experiences.40 The selection process, performance evaluation criteria, train-
ing and development activities, and promotion procedures ensure those hired fit in with the 
culture, reward those employees who support it, and penalize (or even expel) those who 
challenge it. Three forces play a particularly important part in sustaining a culture: selection 
practices, actions of top management, and socialization methods. Let’s look at each.
SELECTION  The explicit goal of the selection process is to identify and hire individuals 
with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform successfully. The final decision, because 
it is significantly influenced by the decision maker’s judgment of how well candidates will 
fit into the organization, identifies people whose values are consistent with at least a good 
portion of the organization’s.41 The selection process also provides information to applicants. 
Those who perceive a conflict between their values and those of the organization can remove 
themselves from the applicant pool. Selection thus becomes a two-way street, allowing 
employer and applicant to avoid a mismatch and sustaining an organization’s culture by 
removing those who might attack or undermine its core values, for better or worse.
TOP MANAGEMENT  The actions of top management have a major impact on the 
organization’s culture.42 Through words and behavior, senior executives establish norms 
that filter through the organization about, for instance, whether risk taking is desirable, 
how much freedom managers give employees, what is appropriate dress, and what actions 
earn pay raises, promotions, and other rewards.
SOCIALIZATION  No matter how good a job the organization does in recruiting and 
selection, new employees need help adapting to the prevailing culture. That help is 
socialization.43 Socialization can help alleviate the problem many employees report 
when their new jobs are different than they expected. For example, Clear Channel 
Communications, Facebook, Google, and other companies are adopting fresh onboarding 
(new hire assimilation) procedures, including assigning “peer coaches,” holding 
socializing events, personalizing orientation programs, and giving out immediate work 
assignments. “When we can stress the personal identity of people, and let them bring 
more of themselves at work, they are more satisfied with their job and have better results,” 
researcher Francesca Gino of Harvard said.44
We can think of socialization as a process with three stages: prearrival, encounter, 
and metamorphosis.45 This process, shown in Exhibit 16-2, has an impact on the new 
employee’s work productivity, commitment to the organization’s objectives, and decision 
to stay with the organization.
Socialization 
A process that adapts 
employees to the 
organization’s culture.
Commitment
Socialization process
Outcomes
Turnover
Productivity
Prearrival
Encounter
Metamorphosis
EXHIBIT 16-2 
A Socialization 
Model

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 305
1.	 Prearrival stage.   The prearrival stage recognizes that each individual arrives 
with a set of values, attitudes, and expectations about both the work and the organi-
zation. One major purpose of a business school, for example, is to socialize students 
to the attitudes and behaviors companies want. Newcomers to high-profile organi-
zations with strong market positions have their own assumptions about what it’s like 
to work there.46 Most new recruits will expect Nike to be dynamic and exciting and 
a stock brokerage firm to be high in pressure and rewards. How accurately people 
judge an organization’s culture before they join the organization, and how proactive 
their personalities are, become critical predictors of how well they adjust.47
2.	 Encounter stage.   The selection process can help inform prospective employees 
about the organization as a whole. Upon entry into the organization, the new mem-
ber enters the encounter stage and confronts the possibility that expectations—
about the job, coworkers, boss, and organization in general—may differ from reality. 
If expectations were fairly accurate, this stage merely cements earlier perceptions. 
However, this is not often the case. At the extreme, a new member may become 
disillusioned enough to resign. Proper recruiting and selection should significantly 
reduce this outcome, along with encouraging friendship ties in the organization—
newcomers are more committed when friendly coworkers help them “learn the 
ropes.”48
3.	 Metamorphosis stage.   Finally, to work out any problems discovered during the 
encounter stage, the new member changes or goes through the metamorphosis 
stage. The options presented in Exhibit 16-3 are alternatives designed to bring 
about metamorphosis. Most research suggests two major “bundles” of socialization 
Encounter stage
The stage in the 
socialization process in 
which a new employee 
sees what the 
organization is really 
like and confronts 
the possibility that 
expectations and 
reality may diverge.
Metamorphosis stage
The stage in the 
socialization process in 
which a new employee 
changes and adjusts to 
the job, work group, 
and organization.
Prearrival stage 
The period of learning 
in the socialization 
process that occurs 
before a new employee 
joins the organization.
Formal vs. Informal The more a new employee is segregated from the ongoing work setting
and differentiated in some way to make explicit his or her newcomer’s role, the more
socialization is formal. Speciﬁc orientation and training programs are examples. Informal
socialization puts the new employee directly into the job, with little or no special attention.
Individual vs. Collective New members can be socialized individually. This describes how it’s
done in many professional ofﬁces. They can also be grouped together and processed
through an identical set of experiences, as in military boot camp.
Fixed vs. Variable This refers to the time schedule in which newcomers make the transition
from outsider to insider. A ﬁxed schedule establishes standardized stages of transition. This
characterizes rotational training programs. It also includes probationary periods, such as the
8- to 10-year “associate” status used by accounting and law ﬁrms before deciding on
whether or not a candidate is made a partner. Variable schedules give no advance notice of
their transition timetable. Variable schedules describe the typical promotion system, in which
one is not advanced to the next stage until one is “ready.”
Serial vs. Random Serial socialization is characterized by the use of role models who train
and encourage the newcomer. Apprenticeship and mentoring programs are examples. In
random socialization, role models are deliberately withheld. New employees are left on their
own to ﬁgure things out.
Investiture vs. Divestiture Investiture socialization assumes that the newcomer’s qualities 
and qualiﬁcations are the necessary ingredients for job success, so these qualities and
qualiﬁcations are conﬁrmed and supported. Divestiture socialization tries to strip away
certain characteristics of the recruit. Fraternity and sorority “pledges” go through 
divestiture socialization to shape them into the proper role. 
EXHIBIT 16-3 
Entry 
Socialization 
Options

306	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
practices. The more management relies on formal, collective, fixed, and serial so-
cialization programs while emphasizing divestiture, the more likely newcomers’ 
differences will be stripped away and replaced by standardized predictable behav-
iors. These institutional practices are common in police departments, fire depart-
ments, and other organizations that value rule following and order. Programs that 
are informal, individual, variable, and random while emphasizing investiture are 
more likely to give newcomers an innovative sense of their roles and methods of 
working. Creative fields such as research and development, advertising, and film-
making rely on these individual practices. Most research suggests high levels of 
institutional practices encourage person–organization fit and high levels of commit-
ment, whereas individual practices produce more role innovation.49
Researchers examine how employee attitudes change during socialization by mea-
suring it at several time points over the first few months. Several studies have now docu-
mented patterns of “honeymoons” and “hangovers” for new workers, showing that the 
period of initial adjustment is often marked by decreases in job satisfaction as idealized 
hopes come into contact with the reality of organizational life.50 Newcomers may find that 
the level of social support they receive from supervisors and coworkers is gradually with-
drawn over the first few weeks on the job, as everyone returns to “business as usual.”51 
Role conflict and role overload may rise for newcomers over time, and workers with the 
largest increases in these role problems experience the largest decreases in commitment 
and satisfaction.52 It may be that the initial adjustment period for newcomers presents 
increasing demands and difficulties, at least in the short term.
Summary: How Organizational Cultures Form
Exhibit 16-4 summarizes how an organization’s culture is established and sustained. The 
original culture derives from the founders’ philosophy and strongly influences hiring cri-
teria as the firm grows. The success of socialization depends on the deliberateness of 
matching new employees’ values to those of the organization in the selection process and 
on top management’s commitment to socialization programs. Top managers’ actions set 
the general climate, including what is acceptable behavior and what is not, and employees 
sustain and perpetuate the culture.
HOW EMPLOYEES LEARN CULTURE
Culture is transmitted to employees in a number of forms, the most potent being stories, 
rituals, material symbols, and language.
Philosophy of
organization’s
founders
Selection
criteria
Organizational
culture
Socialization
Top
management
EXHIBIT 16-4 
How 
Organizational 
Cultures Form

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 307
Stories
When Henry Ford II was chairman of Ford Motor Company, you would have been hard 
pressed to find a manager who hadn’t heard how he reminded his executives when they 
got too arrogant, “It’s my name that’s on the building.” The message was clear: Henry 
Ford II ran the company.
Today, a number of senior Nike executives spend much of their time serving as 
corporate storytellers.53 When they tell how co-founder (and Oregon track coach) Bill 
Bowerman went to his workshop and poured rubber into a waffle iron to create a better 
running shoe, they’re talking about Nike’s spirit of innovation. When new hires hear tales 
of Oregon running star Steve Prefontaine’s battles to make running a professional sport 
and attain better performance equipment, they learn of Nike’s commitment to helping 
athletes.
Stories such as these circulate through many organizations, anchoring the present 
in the past and legitimizing current practices. They typically include narratives about the 
organization’s founders, rule breaking, rags-to-riches successes, workforce reductions, 
relocations of employees, reactions to past mistakes, and organizational coping.54 Em-
ployees also create their own narratives about how they came to either fit or not fit with 
the organization during the process of socialization, including first days on the job, early 
interactions with others, and first impressions of organizational life.55
Rituals
Rituals are repetitive sequences of activities that express and reinforce the key values 
of the organization—what goals are most important and/or which people are important 
versus which are expendable.56 Some companies have nontraditional rituals to help sup-
port the values of their cultures. Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants, one of Fortune’s 100 
Best Companies to Work For, maintains its customer-oriented culture with traditions like 
a Housekeeping Olympics that includes blindfolded bedmaking and vacuum races.57 At 
marketing firm United Entertainment Group, employees work unusual hours a few times 
a year, arriving in the late afternoon and working until early morning. CEO Jarrod Moses 
does this to support a culture of creativity. He says, “You mess with somebody’s internal 
clock, and some interesting ideas come out.”58
Symbols
The layout of corporate headquarters, the types of automobiles top executives are given, 
and the presence or absence of corporate aircraft are a few examples of material sym-
bols. Others include the size of offices, the elegance of furnishings, perks, and attire.59 
These convey to employees who is important, the degree of egalitarianism top manage-
ment desires, and the kinds of behavior that are appropriate, such as risk taking, conser-
vative, authoritarian, participative, individualistic, or social.
One example of the intentional use of material symbols is Texas electric company 
Dynegy. Dynegy’s headquarters doesn’t look like your typical head-office operation. 
There are few individual offices, even for senior executives. The space is essentially made 
up of cubicles, common areas, and meeting rooms. This informality conveys to employ-
ees that Dynegy values openness, equality, creativity, and flexibility. While some organi-
zations provide their top executives with chauffeur-driven limousines and a corporate jet, 
Rituals 
Repetitive sequences 
of activities that 
express and reinforce 
the key values of 
the organization, 
which goals are most 
important, which 
people are important, 
and which are 
expendable.
Material symbols 
What conveys to 
employees who is 
important, the degree 
of egalitarianism 
top management 
desires, and the kinds 
of behavior that are 
appropriate.

308	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
other CEOs drive the company car themselves and travel in the economy section. At some 
firms, like Chicago shirtmaker Threadless, an “anything goes” atmosphere helps empha-
size a creative culture. Threadless meetings are held in an Airstream camper parked inside 
the company’s converted FedEx warehouse, while employees in shorts and flip-flops 
work in bullpens featuring disco balls and garish decorations chosen by each team.60
Some cultures are known for the perks in their environments, such as Google’s 
bocce courts, FACTSET Research’s on-site pie/cheese/cupcake trucks, software designer Au-
todesk’s bring-your-dog office, SAS’s free health care clinic, Microsoft’s organic spa, and 
adventure-gear specialist REI’s free equipment rentals. Other companies communicate 
the values of their cultures through the gift of time to think creatively, either with leaders 
or off-site. For instance, Biotech leader Genentech and many other top companies provide 
paid sabbaticals. Genentech offers every employee 6 weeks’ paid leave for every 6 years 
of service to support a culture of equitability and innovative thinking.61
Language
Many organizations and subunits within them use language to help members identify with 
the culture, attest to their acceptance of it, and help preserve it. Unique terms describe 
equipment, officers, key individuals, suppliers, customers, or products that relate to the 
business. New employees may at first be overwhelmed by acronyms and jargon that, 
once assimilated, act as a common denominator to unite members of a given culture or 
subculture.
INFLUENCING AN ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
As we discussed, the culture of an organization is set by its founders and is often difficult 
to change afterward. It’s true that the ideal scenario is a strong founder (or founders) who 
carefully plans the organization’s culture beforehand. That’s seldom the case, though; 
organizational culture usually grows organically over time. When we think of the devel-
opment of culture as ongoing and conducted through each employee, we can see ways 
to increase the ethical, positive, and/or spiritual aspects of the environment, as discussed 
next.
An Ethical Culture
Despite differences across industries and cultures, ethical organizational cultures share 
some common values and processes.62 Therefore, managers can create a more ethical 
culture by adhering to the following principles:63
•	 Be a visible role model. Employees will look to the actions of top management as a 
benchmark for appropriate behavior, but everyone can be a role model to positively 
influence the ethical atmosphere. Send a positive message.
•	 Communicate ethical expectations. Whenever you serve in a leadership capacity, 
minimize ethical ambiguities by sharing a code of ethics that states the organiza-
tion’s primary values and the judgment rules employees must follow.
•	 Provide ethical training. Set up seminars, workshops, and training programs to 
reinforce the organization’s standards of conduct, clarify what practices are permis-
sible, and address potential ethical dilemmas.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 309
•	 Visibly reward ethical acts and punish unethical ones. Evaluate subordinates on 
how their decisions measure up against the organization’s code of ethics. Review 
the means as well as the ends. Visibly reward those who act ethically and conspicu-
ously punish those who don’t.
•	 Provide protective mechanisms. Seek formal mechanisms so everyone can dis-
cuss ethical dilemmas and report unethical behavior without fear of reprimand. 
These might include identifying ethical counselors, ombudspeople, or ethical of-
ficers for liaison roles.
A widespread positive ethical climate has to start at the top of the organization.64 
One study demonstrated that when top management emphasizes strong ethical values, 
supervisors are more likely to practice ethical leadership. Positive attitudes transfer down 
to line employees, who show lower levels of deviant behavior and higher levels of coop-
eration and assistance. Several other studies have come to the same general conclusion: 
The values of top management are a good predictor of ethical behavior among employ-
ees. One study involving auditors found perceived pressure from organizational leaders 
to behave unethically was associated with increased intentions to engage in unethical 
practices.65 Clearly, the wrong type of organizational culture can negatively influence 
employee ethical behavior. Finally, employees whose ethical values are similar to those 
of their department are more likely to be promoted, so we can think of ethical culture as 
flowing from the bottom up as well.66
A Positive Culture
At first blush, creating a positive culture may sound hopelessly naïve or like a Dilbert-
style conspiracy. The one thing that makes us believe this trend is here to stay, however, 
are signs that management practice and OB research are converging. A positive orga-
nizational culture emphasizes building on employee strengths, rewards more than it 
punishes, and encourages individual vitality and growth.67 Let’s consider each of these 
areas.
BUILDING ON EMPLOYEE STRENGTHS  Although a positive organizational culture does 
not ignore problems, it does emphasize showing workers how they can capitalize on their 
strengths. As management guru Peter Drucker said, “Most Americans do not know what 
their strengths are. When you ask them, they look at you with a blank stare, or they 
respond in terms of subject knowledge, which is the wrong answer.” Wouldn’t it be better 
to be in an organizational culture that helped you discover your strengths and how to 
make the most of them?
REWARDING MORE THAN PUNISHING  Although most organizations are sufficiently 
focused on extrinsic rewards such as pay and promotions, they often forget about the power 
of smaller (and cheaper) rewards such as praise. Part of creating a positive organizational 
culture is “catching employees doing something right.” Many managers withhold praise 
because they’re afraid employees will coast or because they think praise is not valued. 
Employees generally don’t ask for praise, and managers usually don’t realize the costs of 
failing to give it.
Positive 
organizational 
culture 
A culture that 
emphasizes building 
on employee strengths, 
rewards more than 
it punishes, and 
encourages individual 
vitality and growth.

310	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
ENCOURAGING VITALITY AND GROWTH  No organization will get the best from 
employees who see themselves as mere cogs in the machine. A positive culture 
recognizes the difference between a job and a career. It supports not only what the 
employee contributes to organizational effectiveness but how the organization can make 
the employee more effective—personally and professionally.
RECOGNIZING OUTSIDE CONTEXT  Is a positive culture a cure-all? Though many 
companies have embraced aspects of a positive organizational culture, it is a new enough 
idea for us to be uncertain about how and when it works best.
Not all national cultures value being positive as much as the U.S. culture does 
and, even within U.S. culture, there surely are limits to how far organizations should 
go. The limits may need to be dictated by the industry and society. For example, 
Admiral, a British insurance company, has established a Ministry of Fun in its call 
centers to organize poem writing, foosball, conkers (a British game involving chest-
nuts), and fancy-dress days, which may clash with an industry value of more serious 
cultures. When does the pursuit of a positive culture start to seem coercive? As one 
critic notes, “Promoting a social orthodoxy of positiveness focuses on a particular 
constellation of desirable states and traits but, in so doing, can stigmatize those who 
fail to fit the template.”68 There may be benefits to establishing a positive culture, 
but an organization also needs to be objective and not pursue it past the point of 
effectiveness.
A Spiritual Culture
What do Southwest Airlines, Hewlett-Packard, Ford, The Men’s Wearhouse, Tyson Foods, 
Wetherill Associates, and Tom’s of Maine have in common? They’re among a growing 
number of organizations that have embraced workplace spirituality.
WHAT IS SPIRITUALITY?  Workplace spirituality is not about organized religious 
practices. It’s not about God or theology. Workplace spirituality recognizes that 
people have an inner life that nourishes and is nourished by meaningful work in the 
context of community.69 Organizations that support a spiritual culture recognize that 
people seek to find meaning and purpose in their work and desire to connect with other 
human beings as part of a community. Many of the topics we have discussed—ranging 
from job design to corporate social responsibility (CSR)—are well matched to the 
concept of organizational spirituality. When a company emphasizes its commitment to 
paying third-world suppliers a fair (above-market) price for their products to facilitate 
community development—as did Starbucks—or encourages employees to share prayers 
or inspirational messages through e-mail—as did Interstate Batteries—it may encourage 
a more spiritual culture.70
WHY SPIRITUALITY NOW?  As noted in our discussion of emotions in Chapter 3, the 
myth of rationality assumed the well-run organization eliminated people’s feelings. 
Concern about an employee’s inner life had no role in the perfectly rational model. 
But just as we realize that the study of emotions improves our understanding of OB, an 
awareness of spirituality can help us better understand employee behavior.
Workplace spirituality
The recognition that 
people have an inner 
life that nourishes 
and is nourished by 
meaningful work that 
takes place in the 
context of community.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 311
Of course, employees have always had an inner life. So why has the search for mean-
ing and purposefulness in work surfaced now? We summarize the reasons in Exhibit 16-5.
CHARACTERISTICS OF A SPIRITUAL ORGANIZATION  The concept of workplace 
spirituality draws on our previous discussions of values, ethics, motivation, and leadership. 
Although research remains preliminary, several cultural characteristics tend to be evident 
in spiritual organizations:71
•	 Benevolence. Spiritual organizations value kindness toward others and the happi-
ness of employees and other organizational stakeholders.
•	 Strong sense of purpose. Spiritual organizations build their cultures around a 
meaningful purpose. Although profits may be important, they’re not the primary 
value.
•	 Trust and respect. Spiritual organizations are characterized by mutual trust, hon-
esty, and openness. Employees are treated with esteem and are valued, consistent 
with the dignity of each individual.
•	 Open-mindedness. Spiritual organizations value flexible thinking and creativity 
among employees.
ACHIEVING SPIRITUALITY IN THE ORGANIZATION  Many organizations have grown 
interested in spirituality but have experienced difficulty putting principles into practice. 
Several types of practices can facilitate a spiritual workplace,72 including those that 
support work–life balance. Leaders can demonstrate values, attitudes, and behaviors 
that trigger intrinsic motivation and a sense of fulfilling a calling through work. Second, 
encouraging employees to consider how their work provides a sense of purpose can 
help achieve a spiritual workplace; often this is done through group counseling and 
organizational development, a topic we take up in Chapter 17. Third, a growing number 
of companies, including Taco Bell and Sturdisteel, offer employees the counseling 
services of corporate chaplains. Many chaplains are employed by agencies, such as 
Marketplace Chaplains USA, while some corporations, such as R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 
and Tyson Foods, employ chaplains directly. The workplace presence of corporate 
chaplains, who are often ordained Christian ministers, is obviously controversial, 
although their role is not to increase spirituality but to help human resources departments 
Spirituality can counterbalance the pressures and stress of a turbulent pace of life.
Contemporary lifestyles—single-parent families, geographic mobility, the temporary
nature of jobs, new technologies that create distance between people—underscore the
lack of community many people feel and increase the need for involvement and connection.
•
•
Formalized religion hasn’t worked for many people, and they continue to look for anchors
to replace a lack of faith and to ﬁll a growing feeling of emptiness.
• Job demands have made the workplace dominant in many people’s lives, yet they continue
to question the meaning of work.
• People want to integrate personal life values with their professional lives.
• An increasing number of people are ﬁnding that the pursuit of more material acquisitions
leaves them unfulﬁlled.
EXHIBIT 16-5 
Reasons for the 
Growing Interest 
in Spirituality

312	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
serve the employees who already have Christian beliefs.73 Similar roles for leaders of 
other faiths certainly must be encouraged.
CRITICISMS OF SPIRITUALITY  Critics of the spirituality movement in organizations 
have focused on three issues. First is the question of scientific foundation. There is 
comparatively little research on workplace spirituality, and it has been defined so broadly 
in some sources that practices from job rotation to corporate retreats at meditation centers 
have been identified as spiritual. Second, an emphasis on spirituality can clearly make 
some employees uneasy. Critics have argued that secular institutions, especially business 
firms, should not impose spiritual values on employees.74 This criticism is undoubtedly 
valid when spirituality is defined as bringing religion and God into the workplace. 
However, it seems less stinging when the goal is limited to helping employees find 
meaning and purpose in their work lives. Finally, whether spirituality and profits are 
compatible objectives is a relevant concern for managers and investors in business. The 
evidence, although limited, indicates they are. In one study, organizations that provided 
their employees with opportunities for spiritual development outperformed those that 
didn’t.75 Other studies reported that spirituality in organizations was positively related 
to creativity, employee satisfaction, job involvement, and organizational commitment.76
THE GLOBAL CONTEXT
We considered global cultural values (collectivism–individualism, power distance, and so 
on) in Chapter 4. Here our focus is a bit narrower: How is organizational culture affected 
by the global context? Organizational culture is so powerful that it often transcends na-
tional boundaries. But that doesn’t mean organizations should, or could, ignore national 
and local culture.
One of the primary things U.S. managers can do is be culturally sensitive. The 
United States is a dominant force in business and in culture—and with that influence 
comes a reputation. “We are broadly seen throughout the world as arrogant people, totally 
self-absorbed and loud,” says one U.S. executive. Some ways in which U.S. managers can 
be culturally sensitive include talking in a low tone of voice, speaking slowly, listening 
more, and avoiding discussions of religion and politics.
The management of ethical behavior is one area where national culture can rub 
against corporate culture.77 U.S. managers endorse the supremacy of anonymous mar-
ket forces as a moral obligation for business organizations. This worldview sees bribery, 
nepotism, and favoring personal contacts as highly unethical. They also value profit maxi-
mization, so any action that deviates from profit maximization may suggest inappropriate 
or corrupt behavior. In contrast, managers in developing economies are more likely to see 
ethical decisions as embedded in the social environment. That means doing special favors 
for family and friends is not only appropriate but possibly even an ethical responsibil-
ity. Managers in many nations view capitalism skeptically and believe the interests of 
workers should be put on a par with the interests of shareholders, which may limit profit 
maximization. Creating a multinational organizational culture can initiate strife between 
employees of traditionally competing countries. As national organizations seek to employ 
workers in overseas operations, management must decide whether to standardize many 
facets of organizational culture.

	
Chapter 16  •  Creating and Maintaining Organizational Culture 	 313
SUMMARY
Exhibit 16-6 depicts the impact of organizational culture. Employees form an overall 
subjective perception of the organization based on factors such as the degree of risk toler-
ance, team emphasis, and support of individuals. This overall perception represents, in 
effect, the organization’s culture or personality and affects employee performance and 
satisfaction, with stronger cultures having greater impact.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Realize that an organization’s culture is relatively fixed in the short term. To affect 
change, involve top management and strategize a long-term plan.
•	 Hire individuals whose values align with those of the organization; these employees 
will tend to remain committed and satisfied. Not surprisingly, “misfits” have con-
siderably higher turnover rates.
•	 Understand that employees’ performance and socialization depend to a consider-
able degree on their knowing what to do and not do. Train your employees well and 
keep them informed of changes to their job roles.
•	 You can shape the culture of your work environment, sometimes as much as it 
shapes you. All managers can especially do their part to create an ethical culture 
and to consider spirituality and its role in creating a positive organizational culture.
•	 Be aware that your company’s organizational culture may not be “transportable” 
to other countries. Understand the cultural relevance of your organization’s norms 
before introducing new plans or initiatives overseas.
Strength
Perceived as
Objective factors
• Innovation and risk
   taking
• Attention to detail
• Outcome orientation
• People orientation
• Team orientation
• Aggressiveness
• Stability
Organizational
culture
Performance
Satisfaction
High
Low
EXHIBIT 16-6 
How 
Organizational 
Cultures Have 
an Impact on 
Employee 
Performance and 
Satisfaction
 TRY IT!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Organizational Culture.

314	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Organizational Structure Assessment
To learn about how organizations are structured, complete this PIA.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	16-1. 	 What are the ways you would like to influence an organization’s culture? How will you go 
about making a difference?
	16-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS

315
Organizational Change
17 
Pearson MyLab Management
®
 Improve Your Grade!
When you see this icon 
, visit mymanagementlab.com for activities that are 
applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback.
 Chapter Warm-up
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the chapter warm-up.
CHANGE
If we want to realize positive outcomes for organizational behavior (OB), which after all is 
the purpose of this text in its entirety, we need to address two realities of organizational life: 
change and stress. Let’s first discuss change, which often brings about increased stress. As 
we will find, change brought upon by many forces is either reactionary or planned.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
  1.  Contrast the forces for change and planned change.
  2.  Describe ways to overcome resistance to change.
  3.  Compare the four main approaches to managing organizational change.
  4.  Demonstrate three ways of creating a culture for change.
  5.  Identify the potential environmental, organizational, and personal sources of stress 
at work as well as the role of individual and cultural differences.
  6.  Identify the physiological, psychological, and behavioral symptoms of stress at 
work.
  7.  Describe individual and organizational approaches to managing stress at work.

316	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
Forces for Change
“Change or die!” is the rallying cry among today’s managers worldwide. Change often 
occurs along one (or more) of six dimensions:
1.	 The changing nature of the workforce. Almost every organization must adjust to 
a multicultural environment, demographic changes, immigration, and outsourcing.
2.	 Technology is continually changing jobs and organizations. It is not difficult 
to imagine the idea of an office becoming an antiquated concept in the near 
future.
3.	 Economic shocks also have a huge impact on organizations. During the great 
recession of 2007 to 2009, millions of jobs were lost worldwide, home values 
dropped dramatically, and many large, well-known corporations like Merrill 
Lynch, Countrywide Financial, and Ameriquest disappeared or were acquired. 
Recovery has occurred in many countries, and with it, new job prospects and 
investments. Other countries, like Greece and Spain, struggle to regain their 
economic footing, limiting the economic viability of many Greek and Spanish 
organizations.
4.	 Competition is changing. Competitors are as likely to be across the ocean as across 
town. Successful organizations are fast on their feet, capable of developing new 
products rapidly and getting them to market quickly. In other words, they are flex-
ible and require an equally flexible and responsive workforce.
5.	 Social trends don’t remain static. Consumers who were strangers now meet and 
share product information in chat rooms and blogs. Organizations must therefore 
continually adjust product and marketing strategies to be sensitive to changing so-
cial trends. Consumers, employees, and organizational leaders are increasingly sen-
sitive to environmental concerns. “Green” practices are quickly becoming expected 
rather than optional.
6.	 Not even globalization’s strongest proponents could have imagined the change in 
world politics in recent years. We’ve seen a major set of financial crises that have 
rocked global markets, a dramatic rise in the power and influence of China, and 
intense shakeups in governments across the Arab world. Throughout the industrial-
ized world, businesses—particularly in the banking and financial sectors—have 
come under new scrutiny.
Reactionary versus Planned Change
Change is simply making things different. However, only proactive situations describe 
planned change. Many changes are in direct reaction to, say, employee demands. Some 
organizations treat all change as an accidental occurrence. In this chapter, we address 
change as an intentional, goal-oriented activity.
What are the goals of planned change? First, it seeks to improve the ability of the 
organization to adapt to changes in its environment. Second, it seeks to change employee 
behavior.
Who is responsible for managing change activities in organizations? The answer is 
change agents.1 They see a future for the organization others have not identified, and they 
are able to motivate, invent, and implement this vision. Change agents can be managers 
or non-managers, current or new employees, or outside consultants.
Change 
Making things different.
Planned change 
Change activities that 
are intentional and 
goal oriented.
Change agents
People who act as 
catalysts and assume 
the responsibility for 
managing change 
activities.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 317
RESISTANCE TO CHANGE
Our egos are fragile, and we often see change as threatening. Even when employees are 
shown data that suggest they need to change, they latch onto whatever information they 
can find that suggest they are okay and don’t need to change.2 Employees who have nega-
tive feelings about a change cope by not thinking about it, increasing their use of sick 
time, or quitting. All of these reactions can sap the organization of vital energy when it is 
most needed.3 Resistance to change doesn’t just come from lower levels of the organiza-
tion. In many cases, higher-level managers will resist changes proposed by subordinates, 
especially if these leaders are focused on immediate performance.4 Conversely, when 
leaders are more focused on mastery and exploration, they are more willing to hear and 
adopt subordinates’ suggestions for change.
Resistance to change can be positive if it leads to open discussion and debate.5 
These responses are usually preferable to apathy or silence and can indicate that members 
of the organization are engaged in the process, providing change agents an opportunity to 
explain the change effort. Change agents can also monitor resistance in order to modify 
the change to fit the preferences of members of the organization.
Resistance doesn’t necessarily surface in standardized ways. It can be overt,  
implicit, immediate, or deferred. It’s easiest for management to deal with overt and im-
mediate resistance such as complaints, a work slowdown, or a strike threat. The greater 
challenge is managing resistance that is implicit or deferred because these responses—
loss of loyalty or motivation, increased errors or absenteeism—are more subtle and more 
difficult to recognize for what they are. Deferred actions also cloud the link between the 
change and the reaction to it, sometimes surfacing weeks, months, or even years later. Or 
a single change of little inherent impact may be the straw that breaks the camel’s back 
because resistance to earlier changes has been deferred and stockpiled.
Exhibit 17-1 summarizes major forces for resistance to change, categorized by their 
sources. Individual sources reside in human characteristics such as perceptions, personalities, 
and needs. Organizational sources reside in the structural makeup of organizations themselves.
Overcoming Resistance to Change
Eight tactics can help change agents deal with resistance to change.6 Let’s review them 
briefly.
COMMUNICATION  Communication is more important than ever in times of change. 
One study of German companies revealed changes are most effective when a company 
communicates a rationale that balances the interests of various stakeholders (shareholders, 
employees, community, customers) rather than those of shareholders only.7 Other 
research on a changing organization in the Philippines found that formal information 
sessions decreased employees’ anxiety about the change, and that providing high-quality 
information about the change increased their commitment to it.8
PARTICIPATION  It’s difficult to resist a change decision in which we’ve participated. 
Assuming participants have the expertise to make a meaningful contribution, their 
involvement can reduce resistance, obtain commitment, and increase the quality of the 
change decision. However, against these advantages are the negatives: the potential for a 
poor solution and a great consumption of time.

318	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
BUILDING SUPPORT AND COMMITMENT  When managers or employees have low 
emotional commitment to change, they resist it and favor the status quo.9 Employees 
are also more accepting of changes when they are committed to the organization as a 
whole.10 So, firing up employees and emphasizing their commitment to the organization 
overall can help them emotionally commit to the change rather than embrace the status 
quo. Counseling and therapy, new-skills training, or a short paid leave of absence may 
facilitate adjustment to change when employees’ fear and anxiety are high.
DEVELOPING POSITIVE RELATIONSHIPS  People are more willing to accept changes 
if they trust the managers implementing them.11 One study surveyed 235 employees 
from a large housing corporation in the Netherlands that was experiencing a merger. 
Those who had a more positive relationship with their supervisor, and who felt that 
the work environment supported development, were much more positive about the 
change process.12 Underscoring the importance of social context, other work shows that 
even individuals who are generally resistant to change will be more willing to accept 
new and different ideas when they feel supported by their coworkers and believe the 
environment is safe for taking risks.13 Another set of studies found that individuals who 
were dispositionally resistant to change felt more positive about change if they trusted 
the change agent.14
Individual Sources
Habit—To cope with life’s complexities, we rely on habits or programmed responses.
But when confronted with change, this tendency to respond in our accustomed ways
becomes a source of resistance.
Security—People with a high need for security are likely to resist change because it
threatens their feelings of safety.
Economic factors—Changes in job tasks or established work routines can arouse
economic fears if people are concerned that they won’t be able to perform the new
tasks or routines to their previous standards, especially when pay is closely tied to
productivity.
Fear of the unknown—Change substitutes ambiguity and uncertainty for the
unknown.
Selective information processing—Individuals are guilty of selectively processing
information in order to keep their perceptions intact. They hear what they want to
hear, and they ignore information that challenges the world they’ve created.
Organizational Sources
Structural inertia—Organizations have built-in mechanisms—such as their selection
processes and formalized regulations—to produce stability. When an organization is
confronted with change, this structural inertia acts as a counterbalance to sustain
stability.
Limited focus of change—Organizations consist of a number of interdependent
subsystems. One can’t be changed without affecting the others. So limited changes in
subsystems tend to be nulliﬁed by the larger system.
Group inertia—Even if individuals want to change their behavior, group norms may
act as a constraint.
Threat to expertise—Changes in organizational patterns may threaten the expertise
of specialized groups.
Threat to established power relationships—Any redistribution of decision-making
authority can threaten long-established power relationships within the organization.
EXHIBIT 17-1 
Sources of 
Resistance to 
Change

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 319
IMPLEMENTING CHANGES FAIRLY  One way organizations can minimize negative 
impact is to make sure change is implemented fairly. As we saw in Chapter 7, procedural 
fairness is especially important when employees perceive an outcome as negative, so it’s 
crucial that employees see the reason for the change and perceive its implementation as 
consistent and fair.15
MANIPULATION AND COOPTATION  Manipulation refers to covert influence attempts. 
Twisting facts to make them more attractive, withholding information, and creating false 
rumors to get employees to accept change are all examples of manipulation. Cooptation, on 
the other hand, combines manipulation and participation. It seeks to buy off the leaders of a 
resistance group by giving them a key role, seeking their advice not to find a better solution but 
to get their endorsement. Both manipulation and cooptation are relatively inexpensive ways 
to gain the support of adversaries, but they can backfire if the targets become aware they are 
being tricked or used. Once that’s discovered, the change agent’s credibility may drop to zero.
SELECTING PEOPLE WHO ACCEPT CHANGE  Research suggests the ability to easily accept 
and adapt to change is related to personality—some people simply have more positive 
attitudes toward change.16 Individuals who are open to experience, are willing to take risks, 
and are flexible in their behavior are prime candidates. This seems to be universal. One study 
of managers in the United States, Europe, and Asia found those with a positive self-concept 
and high risk tolerance coped better with organizational change. A study of 258 police 
officers found those who were higher in the need for growth/development and internal work 
motivation, and who also had an internal locus of control, held more positive attitudes about 
organizational change efforts.17 Individuals higher in general mental ability are also better 
able to learn and adapt to changes in the workplace.18 In sum, an impressive body of evidence 
shows organizations can facilitate change by selecting people predisposed to accept it.
COERCION  Last on the list of tactics is coercion, the application of direct threats or 
force on dissenters. If management is determined to close a manufacturing plant whose 
employees don’t acquiesce to a pay cut, the company is using coercion. Other examples 
of coercion include threatening employees with forced transfers, blocked promotions, 
negative performance evaluations, and poor letters of recommendation. Coercion is most 
effective when some force or pressure is enacted on at least some resisters—for instance, 
if an employee is publicly refused a transfer request, the threat of blocked promotions 
will become a real possibility in the minds of other employees. The advantages and 
drawbacks of coercion are approximately the same as for manipulation and cooptation.
The Politics of Change
No discussion of resistance would be complete without a mention of the politics of change. 
Because change invariably threatens the status quo, it inherently implies political activity.
Politics suggests the impetus for change is more likely to come from outside change 
agents, employees new to the organization (who have less invested in the status quo), or man-
agers who are slightly removed from the main power structure. Managers who have spent a 
long time with an organization and achieved a senior position in the hierarchy are often major 
impediments to change. Of course, as you might guess, these longtime power holders tend to 
implement incremental changes when they are forced to introduce change. Radical change is 
often considered too threatening. This explains why boards of directors that recognize the im-
perative for rapid and radical change frequently turn to outside candidates for new leadership.19

320	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
APPROACHES TO MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
We now turn to several approaches to managing change: Lewin’s classic three-step model of 
the change process, Kotter’s eight-step plan, action research, and organizational development.
Lewin’s Three-Step Model
Kurt Lewin argued that successful change in organizations should follow three steps: 
unfreezing the status quo, movement to a desired end state, and refreezing the new change 
to make it permanent20 (see Exhibit 17-2).
By definition, status quo is an equilibrium state. To move from equilibrium—to over-
come the pressures of both individual resistance and group conformity—unfreezing must 
happen in one of three ways (see Exhibit 17-3). For one, the driving forces, which direct 
behavior away from the status quo, can be increased. For another, the restraining forces, 
which hinder movement away from equilibrium, can be decreased. A third alternative is 
to combine the first two approaches. Companies that have been successful in the past are 
likely to encounter restraining forces because people question the need for change.21
Once the movement stage begins, it’s important to keep the momentum going. 
Organizations that build up to change do less well than those that get to and move through the 
movement stage quickly. When change has been implemented, the new situation must be re-
frozen so it can be sustained over time. Without this last step, change will likely be short-lived 
and employees will attempt to revert to the previous equilibrium state. The objective of re-
freezing, then, is to stabilize the new situation by balancing the driving and restraining forces.
Driving forces 
Forces that direct 
behavior away from 
the status quo (Lewin).
Restraining forces
Forces that hinder 
movement from the 
existing equilibrium 
(Lewin).
Unfreezing
Refreezing
Movement
EXHIBIT 17-2 
Lewin’s Three-Step 
Change Model
Restraining
forces
Desired
state
Status
quo
Time
Driving
forces
EXHIBIT 17-3 
Unfreezing the 
Status Quo
Kotter’s Eight-Step Plan
John Kotter built on Lewin’s three-step model to create a more detailed approach for 
implementing change.22 Kotter began by listing common mistakes managers make when 
trying to initiate change. They may fail to do one or more of the following: to create a 
sense of urgency about the need for change, to create a coalition for managing the change 
process, to have a vision for change and effectively communicate it, and/or to anchor the 
changes into the organization’s culture. They also may fail to remove obstacles that could 
impede the vision’s achievement and/or provide short-term and achievable goals. Finally, 
they may declare victory too soon.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 321
Kotter established eight sequential steps to overcome these problems. They’re 
listed in Exhibit 17-4. Notice how Kotter’s first four steps essentially extrapolate Lewin’s 
“unfreezing” stage. Steps 5, 6, and 7 represent “movement,” and the final step works on 
“refreezing.” So Kotter’s contribution lies in providing managers and change agents with 
a more detailed guide for successfully implementing change.
Action Research
Action research is a change process based on the systematic collection of data and se-
lection of a change action based on what the analyzed data indicate.23 Its value is in pro-
viding a scientific methodology for managing planned change. Action research consists 
of five steps (note how they closely parallel the scientific method): diagnosis, analysis, 
feedback, action, and evaluation.
Action research provides at least two specific benefits. First, it’s problem-focused. 
The change agent objectively looks for problems, and the type of problem determines the 
type of change action. A second benefit of action research is the lowering of resistance. 
Because action research engages employees so thoroughly in the process, it reduces re-
sistance to change. Once employees have actively participated in the feedback stage, the 
change process typically takes on a momentum of its own.
Organizational Development
Organizational development (OD) is a collection of change methods that try to improve 
organizational effectiveness and employee well-being.24
OD methods value human and organizational growth, collaborative and participa-
tive processes, and a spirit of inquiry.25 Contemporary OD borrows heavily from post-
modern philosophy in placing heavy emphasis on the subjective ways people see and 
make sense of their work environment. The change agent may take the lead in OD, but 
there is a strong emphasis on collaboration.
Action research
A change process 
based on the systematic  
collection of data and  
the selection of a 
change action based on 
what the analyzed data 
indicate.
1.
Establish a sense of urgency by creating a compelling reason for why change is needed.
2.
Form a coalition with enough power to lead the change.
3.
Create a new vision to direct the change and strategies for achieving the vision.
4.
Communicate the vision throughout the organization.
5.
Empower others to act on the vision by removing barriers to change and encouraging
risk taking and creative problem solving.
6.
Plan for, create, and reward short-term “wins” that move the organization toward the
new vision.
7.
Consolidate improvements, reassess changes, and make necessary adjustments in the
new programs.
8.
Reinforce the changes by demonstrating the relationship between new behaviors and
organizational success.
EXHIBIT 17-4 
Kotter’s Eight-Step Plan for Implementing Change
Source: Based on M. du Plessis, “Re-implementing an Individual Performance Management System as a Change Inter-
vention at Higher Education Institutions Overcoming Staff Resistance,” Proceedings of the 7th European Conference 
on Management Leadership and Governance, 2011, 105–15.
Organizational 
development (OD)
A collection of 
planned change 
interventions, built on 
humanistic–democratic 
values, that seeks to 
improve organizational 
effectiveness and 
employee well-being.

322	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
What are some OD techniques or interventions for bringing about change? Here 
are six.
SENSITIVITY TRAINING  A variety of names—sensitivity training, laboratory training, 
encounter groups, and T-groups (training groups)—all refer to an early method of 
changing behavior through unstructured group interaction.26 Current organizational 
interventions such as diversity training, executive coaching, and team-building exercises 
are descendants of this early OD intervention technique.
SURVEY FEEDBACK  One tool for assessing the attitudes of organizational members, 
identifying discrepancies among member perceptions, and solving differences is the 
survey feedback approach.27 Basically, data collected from strategic surveys is then used 
to spur problem identification and discussion. 
The survey feedback approach can be helpful to keep decision makers informed 
about the attitudes of employees toward the organization. However, individuals are in-
fluenced by many factors when they respond to surveys, which may make some findings 
unreliable. Second, a high number of nonresponses may indicate organizational dysfunc-
tion or decreased job satisfaction, which the absence of data will not show. Managers who 
use the survey feedback approach should therefore monitor their organization’s current 
events and employee response rates.
PROCESS CONSULTATION  Managers often sense their unit’s performance can be 
improved but are unable to identify what to improve and how. The purpose of process 
consultation (PC) is for an outside consultant to assist a client, usually a manager, “to 
perceive, understand, and act upon process events” with which the manager must deal.28 
These events might include those surrounding the workflow, informal relationships 
among unit members, and formal communication channels in the organization. 
PC is similar to sensitivity training in assuming we can improve organizational effec-
tiveness by dealing with interpersonal problems and in emphasizing involvement. But PC 
is more task-directed, and consultants do not solve the organization’s problems, but rather 
guide or coach the client to solve his or her own problems after jointly diagnosing what needs 
improvement. The client develops the skill to analyze processes within his or her unit and can 
therefore use the skill long after the consultant is gone. Because the client actively participates 
in both the diagnosis and the development of alternatives, he or she arrives at a greater under-
standing of the process and the remedy, and becomes less resistant to the action plan chosen.
TEAM BUILDING  We’ve noted throughout this text that organizations increasingly rely 
on teams to accomplish work tasks. Team building uses high-interaction group activities 
to increase trust and openness among team members, improve coordination efforts, and 
increase team performance.29 
Team building typically includes goal-setting, development of interpersonal rela-
tions among team members, role analysis to clarify each member’s role and responsibili-
ties, and team process analysis. It may emphasize or exclude certain activities, depending 
on the purpose of the development effort and the specific problems the team is confront-
ing. Basically, however, team building uses high interaction among members to increase 
trust and openness. In these times when organizations increasingly rely on teams, team 
building is an important topic.
Sensitivity training
Training groups 
that seek to change 
behavior through 
unstructured group 
interaction.
Survey feedback 
The use of 
questionnaires to 
identify discrepancies 
among member 
perceptions; discussion 
follows and remedies 
are suggested.
Process consultation 
(PC) 
A meeting in which 
a consultant assists a 
client in understanding 
process events with 
which he or she must 
deal and identifying 
processes that need 
improvement.
Team building 
High interaction 
among team members 
to increase trust and 
openness.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 323
INTERGROUP DEVELOPMENT  A major area of concern in OD is dysfunctional 
conflict among groups. Intergroup development seeks to change groups’ attitudes, 
stereotypes, and perceptions about each other. Here, training sessions closely resemble 
diversity training, except rather than focusing on demographic differences, they focus on 
differences among occupations, departments, or divisions within an organization. Among 
several approaches for improving intergroup relations, a popular one emphasizes problem 
solving.30 Each group meets independently to list its perceptions of itself and another 
group and how it believes the other group perceives it. The groups then share their lists, 
discuss similarities and differences, and look for causes of disparities.
Once they have identified the causes of discrepancies, the groups move to the inte-
gration phase—developing solutions to improve relations between them. Subgroups can 
be formed of members from each of the conflicting groups to conduct further diagnoses 
and formulate alternative solutions.
APPRECIATIVE INQUIRY  Most OD approaches are problem-centered. They identify 
a problem or set of problems, then look for a solution. Appreciative inquiry (AI) instead 
accentuates the positive.31 Rather than looking for problems to fix, it seeks to identify the unique 
qualities and special strengths of an organization, which members can build on to improve 
performance. That is, AI focuses on an organization’s successes rather than its problems.
The AI process consists of four steps—discovery, dreaming, design, and destiny—
often played out in a large-group meeting over two to three days and overseen by a trained 
change agent. Discovery sets out to identify what people think are the organization’s 
strengths. Employees recount times they felt the organization worked best or when they 
specifically felt most satisfied with their jobs. In dreaming, employees use information 
from the discovery phase to speculate on possible futures, such as what the organiza-
tion will be like in five years. In design, participants find a common vision of how the 
organization will look in the future and agree on its unique qualities. For the fourth step, 
participants seek to define the organization’s destiny or how to fulfill their dream, and 
they typically write action plans and develop implementation strategies.
CREATING A CULTURE FOR CHANGE
We’ve considered how organizations can adapt to change. But recently, some OB schol-
ars have focused on a more proactive approach—how organizations can embrace change 
by transforming their cultures. In this section, we review three approaches: managing 
paradox, stimulating an innovative culture, and creating a learning organization. We also 
address the issue of organizational change and stress.
Managing Paradox
Managers can learn a few lessons from paradox theory,32 which states the key paradox in 
management is that there is no final optimal status for an organization.33 In a paradox situa-
tion, we are required to balance tensions across various courses of action. There is a constant 
process of finding a balancing point, a dynamic equilibrium, among shifting priorities over 
time. The first lesson is that as the environment and members of the organization change, 
different elements take on more or less importance. For example, sometimes a company 
needs to acknowledge past success and learn how it worked, while at other times looking 
Intergroup 
development 
Organizational 
development (OD) 
efforts to change the 
attitudes, stereotypes, 
and perceptions that 
groups have of each 
other.
Appreciative inquiry 
(AI) 
An approach that 
seeks to identify the 
unique qualities and 
special strengths of an 
organization, which 
can then be built on to 
improve performance.
Paradox theory 
The theory that 
the key paradox in 
management is that 
there is no final 
optimal status for an 
organization.

324	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
backward will only hinder progress. There is some evidence that managers who think ho-
listically and recognize the importance of balancing paradoxical factors are more effective, 
especially in generating adaptive and creative behaviors in those they are managing.34
Stimulating a Culture of Innovation
How can an organization become more innovative? Although there is no guaranteed for-
mula, certain characteristics—in structure, culture, and human resource (HR) policies—
surface repeatedly when researchers study innovative organizations. Let’s first clarify 
what we mean by innovation.
DEFINITION OF INNOVATION  We said change refers to making things different. 
Innovation, a specialized kind of change, is applied to initiating or improving a product, 
process, or service.35 So all innovations imply change, but not all changes introduce 
new ideas or lead to significant improvements. Innovations can range from incremental 
improvements, such as tablets, to radical breakthroughs, such as Nissan’s electric LEAF car.
SOURCES OF INNOVATION  Structural variables are one potential source of innovation.36 
A comprehensive review of the structure–innovation relationship leads to the following 
conclusions:37
1.	 Organic structures. Because they’re lower in vertical differentiation, formaliza-
tion, and centralization; organic organizations facilitate the flexibility, adaptation, 
and cross-fertilization that make the adoption of innovations easier.
2.	 Long tenure in management. Managerial tenure can provide the legitimacy and 
knowledge of how to accomplish tasks and obtain desired outcomes through cre-
ative methods.
3.	 Slack resources. Having an abundance of resources allows an organization to af-
ford to purchase or develop innovations, bear the cost of instituting them, and ab-
sorb failures.
4.	 High interunit communication.38 These organizations are heavy users of com-
mittees, task forces, cross-functional teams, and other mechanisms that facilitate 
interaction across departmental lines.
CONTEXT AND INNOVATION.  Innovative organizations tend to have similar cultures. 
They encourage experimentation and reward both successes and failures. Unfortunately, 
in too many organizations, people are rewarded for the absence of failures rather than 
for the presence of successes. Such cultures extinguish risk taking and innovation. 
Innovative organizations have policies to actively promote the training and development 
of their members so they keep current, offer high job security so employees don’t fear 
getting fired for making mistakes, and encourage individuals to become champions of 
change. These practices should be mirrored for workgroups as well. One study of 1,059 
individuals on over 200 different teams in a Chinese high-tech company found that work 
systems emphasizing commitment to employees increased creativity in teams.39 These 
effects were even greater in teams where there was cohesion among coworkers.
IDEA CHAMPIONS AND INNOVATION  Once a new idea has been developed, idea 
champions actively and enthusiastically promote it, build support, overcome resistance, 
and ensure it is implemented.40 Champions often have similar personality characteristics: 
Innovation 
A new idea applied to 
initiating or improving 
a product, process, or 
service.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 325
extremely high self-confidence, persistence, energy, and a tendency to take risks. They 
usually display traits associated with transformational leadership—they inspire and 
energize others with their vision of an innovation’s potential and their strong personal 
conviction about their mission. Situations can also influence the extent to which idea 
champions are forces for change. For example, passion for change among entrepreneurs is 
greatest when work roles and the social environment encourage them to put their creative 
identities forward.41 On the flip side, work roles that push creative individuals to do routine 
management and administration tasks will diminish both the passion for and successful 
implementation of change. Idea champions are good at gaining the commitment of others, 
and their jobs should provide considerable decision-making discretion. This autonomy 
helps them introduce and implement innovations when the context is supportive.42
Do successful idea champions do things differently in varied cultures? Yes.43 Gen-
erally, people in collectivist cultures prefer appeals for cross-functional support for inno-
vation efforts; people in high power-distance cultures prefer champions to work closely 
with those in authority to approve innovative activities before work has begun; and the 
higher the uncertainty avoidance of a society, the more champions should work within the 
organization’s rules and procedures to develop the innovation.
Creating a Learning Organization
Another way an organization can proactively manage change is to make continuous 
growth part of its culture—to become a learning organization.44
WHAT’S A LEARNING ORGANIZATION?  Just as individuals learn, so do organizations. 
A learning organization has developed the continuous capacity to adapt and change. 
The Dimensions of the Learning Organization Questionnaire (DLOQ) has been adopted and 
adapted internationally to assess the degree of commitment to learning organization principles.45
Exhibit 17-5 summarizes the five basic characteristics of a learning organization—
one in which people put aside their old ways of thinking, learn to be open with each other, 
understand how their organization really works, form a plan or vision everyone can agree 
on, and work together to achieve that vision.46
Learning 
organization
An organization that 
has developed the 
continuous capacity to 
adapt and change.
Idea champions 
Individuals who 
take an innovation 
and actively and 
enthusiastically 
promote the idea, build 
support, overcome 
resistance, and 
ensure that the idea is 
implemented.
1.
There exists a shared vision that everyone agrees on.
2.
People discard their old ways of thinking and the standard routines they use for solving
problems or doing their jobs.
3.
Members think of all organizational processes, activities, functions, and interactions
with the environment as part of a system of interrelationships.
4.
People openly communicate with each other (across vertical and horizontal boundaries)
without fear of criticism or punishment.
5.
People sublimate their personal self-interest and fragmented departmental interests to
work together to achieve the organization’s shared vision.
EXHIBIT 17-5 
Characteristics of a Learning Organization
Source: Based on P. M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organiza-
tion (New York: Doubleday, 2006).

326	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
MANAGING LEARNING  What can managers do to make their firms learning 
organizations? Here are some suggestions:
•	 Establish a strategy. Management needs to make explicit its commitment to 
change, innovation, and continuous improvement.
•	 Redesign the organization’s structure. The formal structure can be a serious im-
pediment to learning. Flattening the structure, eliminating or combining depart-
ments, and increasing the use of cross-functional teams reinforces interdependence 
and reduces boundaries.
•	 Reshape the organization’s culture. To become a learning organization, man-
agers must demonstrate by their actions that taking risks and admitting failures 
are desirable. This means rewarding people who take chances and make mistakes. 
Management needs to encourage functional conflict.
Organizational Change and Stress
Think about the times you have felt stressed during your work life. Look past the every-
day stress factors that can spill over to the workplace, like a traffic jam that makes you 
late for work. What have been your more memorable and lasting stressful times at work? 
For many people, they were those caused by organizational change.
Not surprisingly, we also find the role of leadership is critical. One study indicates 
that transformational leaders can help shape employee affect so employees stay committed 
to the change and do not perceive it as stressful.47 Other research indicates that a positive 
orientation toward change before new initiatives are planned will decrease employees’ stress 
when they go through organizational changes and increase their positive attitudes. Manag-
ers can continually strive to increase employees’ self-efficacy, change-related attitudes, and 
perceived control over the situation to create this positive change orientation. For instance, 
they can use role clarification and continual rewards to increase self-efficacy, and they can 
enhance employees’ perceived control and positive attitudes toward change by including them 
throughout the planning stages to the application of new processes.48 Another study adds the 
need for increasing the amount of communication to employees during change, assessing and 
enhancing employees’ psychological resilience through offering social support, and training 
employees in emotional self-regulation techniques.49 Through these methods, managers can 
help employees keep their stress levels low and their commitment high.
  WATCH IT
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the video exercise titled East Haven Fire 
Department: Managing Stress.
STRESS AT WORK
Friends say they’re stressed from greater workloads and longer hours than ever before. 
Parents worry about the lack of job stability and reminisce about a time when a job with a 
large corporation implied lifetime security. Employees complain about the stress of trying 
to balance work and family responsibilities. Harris, Rothenberg International, a leading 
provider of employee assistance programs (EAPs), finds that employees are having mental 

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 327
breakdowns and needing professional help at higher rates than ever.50 Indeed, as Exhibit 
17-6 shows, work is a major source of stress in most people’s lives. What are the causes 
and consequences of stress, and what can individuals and organizations do to reduce it?
What Is Stress?
Stress is a dynamic condition in which an individual is confronted with an opportunity, 
demand, or resource related to what the individual desires and for which the outcome is 
perceived to be both uncertain and important.51 Although stress is typically discussed in 
a negative context, it also has a positive purpose. Many professionals see the pressures 
of heavy workloads and deadlines as positive challenges that enhance the quality of their 
work and the satisfaction they get from their job. However, when the situation is negative, 
stress is harmful and may hinder your progress by elevating your blood pressure uncom-
fortably and creating an erratic heart rhythm as you struggle to speak and think logically.52
STRESSORS  Researchers have argued that challenge stressors—or stressors associated 
with workload, pressure to complete tasks, and time urgency—operate quite differently 
from hindrance stressors—or stressors that keep you from reaching your goals (for 
example, red tape, office politics, confusion over job responsibilities). Although research 
is just starting to accumulate, early evidence suggests challenge stressors produce less 
strain than hindrance stressors.53
Researchers have sought to differentiate the effects of challenge and hindrance stress-
ors. When challenge stress increases, those with high levels of organizational support realize 
higher role-based performance, but those with low levels of organizational support do not.54 
There is also evidence that challenge stress improves job performance in a supportive work 
environment, whereas hindrance stress reduces job performance in all work environments.55
DEMANDS AND RESOURCES  Typically, stress is associated with demands and resources. 
Demands are responsibilities, pressures, obligations, and uncertainties individuals face in 
the workplace. Resources are things within an individual’s control that he or she can use to 
resolve the demands. Let’s discuss what this demands–resources model means.56
When you take a test at school or undergo your annual performance review at work, 
you feel stress because you confront opportunities and performance pressures. A good 
performance review may lead to a promotion, greater responsibilities, and a higher sal-
ary. A poor review may prevent you from getting a promotion. An extremely poor review 
might even result in your being fired. To the extent you can apply resources to the demands 
Stress
An unpleasant 
psychological process 
that occurs in response 
to environmental 
pressures.
Challenge stressors
Stressors associated 
with workload, pressure 
to complete tasks, and 
time urgency.
Hindrance stressors
Stressors that keep you 
from reaching your 
goals (for example, red 
tape, office politics, 
confusion over job 
responsibilities).
Demands
Responsibilities, 
pressures, obligations, 
and even uncertainties 
that individuals face in 
the workplace.
Resources
Things within an 
individual’s control 
that can be used to 
resolve demands.
What area of your life causes you the most stress?
Area
Causes Most Stress
Financial worries
64%
Work
60%
Family responsibilities
47%
Health concerns
46%
EXHIBIT 17-6 
Work Is a Top Source of Stress
Source: “Stress in America: Paying with Our Health,” American Psychological Association, 
February 4, 2015, http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/stress/2014/stress-report.pdf.

328	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
on you—such as preparing for the review, putting the review in perspective (it’s not the 
end of the world), or obtaining social support—you will feel less stress. In fact, this last 
resource—social support—may be more important on an ongoing basis than anything else. 
According to recent research, people with emotional support may experience lower stress 
levels, feel less depressed from stress, and be more likely to make lifestyle changes that 
may reduce stress.57 Overall, under the demands–resources perspective, having resources 
to cope with stress is just as important in offsetting stress as demands are in increasing it.58
ALLOSTASIS  So far, what was discussed may give you the impression that individuals 
are seeking a steady state in which demands perfectly match resources. While early 
research tended to emphasize such a homeostatic, or balanced equilibrium, perspective; it 
has now become clear that no single ideal state exists. Instead, it’s more accurate to talk 
about allostatic models, in which demands shift, resources shift, and systems of addressing 
imbalances shift.59 Through allostasis, we work to find stability by changing our behaviors 
and attitudes. It all depends on the allostatic load, or the cumulative effect of stressors on 
us given the resources we draw upon.60 For example, if you’re feeling especially confident 
in your abilities and have lots of support from others, you may increase your willingness to 
experience strain and be better able to mobilize coping resources. This would be a situation 
where the allostatic load was not too great; in other cases where the allostatic load is too great 
and too prolonged, we may experience psychological or physiological stress symptoms.
Potential Sources of Stress at Work
What causes stress? A meta-analysis of responses from more than 35,000 individuals 
showed role ambiguity, role conflict, role overload, job insecurity, environmental uncer-
tainty, and situational constraints were all consistently negatively related to job perfor-
mance.61 To break it down, let’s examine the model in Exhibit 17-7.
Allostasis
Working to change 
behavior and attitudes 
to find stability.
Physiological symptoms
• Immediate effects
• Illness
• Chronic health conditions
• Anxiety
• Lower emotional well-being
• Lower job satisfaction
Psychological symptoms
Behavioral symptoms
• Lower job performance
• Higher absenteeism
• Higher turnover
Potential sources
Consequences
Experienced stress
Cultural differences
• Task demands
• Role demands
• Interpersonal demands
Environmental factors
• Economic uncertainty
• Political uncertainty
• Technological change
Personal factors
• Family problems
• Economic problems
Individual differences
• Perception
• Job experience
• Social support
• Personality traits
Organizational factors
EXHIBIT 17-7 
A Model of Stress

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 329
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS  Environmental uncertainty not only influences the design 
of an organization’s structure, it also influences stress levels among employees in that 
organization. Indeed, uncertainty is the biggest reason people have trouble coping with 
organizational changes.62 There are three main types of environmental uncertainty: 
economic, political, and technological.
Changes in the business cycle create economic uncertainties. When the economy is con-
tracting, for example, people become increasingly anxious about their job security. Political 
uncertainties don’t tend to create stress among North Americans as much as they do for em-
ployees in countries such as Haiti or Venezuela. The obvious reason is that the United States 
and Canada have more stable political systems, in which change is typically implemented in 
an orderly manner. Yet political threats and changes in all countries can induce stress. Because 
innovations can make an employee’s skills and experience obsolete in a very short time, keep-
ing up with new computer programs, robotics, automation, and similar forms of technological 
change are a further challenge to many people at work that cause them stress.
ORGANIZATIONAL FACTORS  There is no shortage of factors within an organization 
that can cause stress. Pressures to avoid errors or complete tasks in a limited time, 
work overload, a demanding and insensitive boss, and unpleasant coworkers are a few 
examples. We’ve categorized these factors around task, role, and interpersonal demands.
1.	 Task demands relate to a person’s job. They include the design of the job (includ-
ing its degree of autonomy, task variety, and automation), working conditions, and 
the physical work layout. The single factor most consistently related to stress in the 
workplace is the amount of work that needs to be done, followed closely by the pres-
ence of looming deadlines.63 Working in an overcrowded room or visible location 
where noise and interruptions are constant can also increase anxiety and stress.64
2.	 Role demands relate to pressures placed on a person as a function of the particular 
role he or she plays in the organization. Role conflicts create expectations that may 
be hard to reconcile or satisfy. Role overload occurs when the employee is expected 
to take on too much. Role ambiguity means role expectations are not clearly under-
stood and the employee is not sure what to do. Unfortunately, individuals who face 
high situational constraints by their roles (such as fixed work hours or demanding 
job responsibilities) are less able to engage in proactive coping behaviors, like tak-
ing a break, which can reduce stress levels.65
3.	 Interpersonal demands are pressures created by other employees. Some pres-
sures are expected, but a rapidly growing body of research has shown that nega-
tive coworker and supervisor behaviors, including fights, bullying, incivility, racial 
harassment, and sexual harassment, are especially and strongly related to stress at 
work.66 Interpersonal mistreatment can have effects at a physiological level, with 
one study finding that unfair treatment in a controlled setting triggered the release 
of cortisol, a hormone involved in the stress-reaction process.67 Furthermore, indi-
viduals who believe they are experiencing a social climate of discrimination from 
multiple sources over time have higher levels of psychological strain, even after 
accounting for differing baseline levels of well-being.68
PERSONAL FACTORS  The typical individual may work between 40 and 50 hours a 
week. But the experiences and problems people encounter in the other 120-plus hours in 

330	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
the week can spill over to the job. The final category of sources of stress at work includes 
factors of an employee’s personal life: family issues and personal economic problems.
National surveys consistently show people hold their families dear. Family issues, 
even good ones, can cause stress that significantly impacts individuals. Family issues are 
often closely related to work–life conflict.
The personal economic problems of overextended financial resources create stress 
and siphon attention away from work. Regardless of income level, some people are poor 
money managers or have wants and needs that exceed their earning capacity. People who 
make $100,000 per year seem to have as much trouble handling their finances as those 
who earn $20,000, although recent research indicates that those who make under $50,000 
per year do experience more stress.69
STRESSORS ARE ADDITIVE  When we review stressors individually, it’s easy to overlook 
that stress is an additive phenomenon—it builds up.70 Each new and persistent stressor adds 
to an individual’s stress level. A single stressor may be relatively unimportant in and of itself, 
but if added to an already high level of stress, it can be too much. To appraise the total amount 
of stress an individual is under, we have to sum up all of the sources and severity levels of that 
person’s stress. Since this cannot be easily quantified or observed, managers should remain 
aware of the potential stress loads from organizational factors in particular. Many employees 
are willing to express their perceived stress load at work to a caring manager.
Individual Differences in Stress
Some people thrive on stressful situations, while others are overwhelmed by them. What 
differentiates people in terms of their ability to handle stress? What individual variables 
moderate the relationship between potential stressors and experienced stress? At least 
four are relevant—perception, job experience, social support, and personality traits.
PERCEPTION  In Chapter 5, we demonstrated that employees react in response to their 
perception of reality, rather than to reality itself. Perception, therefore, will moderate the 
relationship between a potential stress condition and an employee’s reaction to it. Layoffs 
may cause one person to fear losing a job, while another sees it as an opportunity to get 
a large severance allowance and start a new business. So stress potential doesn’t lie in 
objective conditions; rather, it lies in an employee’s interpretation of those conditions.
JOB EXPERIENCE  Experience on the job tends to be negatively related to work stress. 
Why? Two explanations have been offered.71 First is selective withdrawal. Voluntary 
turnover is more probable among people who experience more stress. Therefore, people 
who remain with an organization longer are those with more stress-resistant traits or those 
more resistant to the stress characteristics of the organization. Second, people eventually 
develop coping mechanisms to deal with stress. Because this takes time, senior members 
of the organization are more likely to be fully adapted and should experience less stress.
SOCIAL 
SUPPORT  Social support—collegial relationships with coworkers or 
supervisors—can buffer the impact of stress.72 This is one of the best-documented 
relationships in the stress literature. Social support acts as a palliative, mitigating the 
negative effects of even high-strain jobs.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 331
PERSONALITY TRAITS  Stress symptoms expressed on the job may originate from the 
person’s personality.73 Perhaps the most widely studied personality trait in research on 
stress is neuroticism, which we discussed in Chapter 4. As you might expect, neurotic 
individuals are more prone to experience psychological strain.74 Evidence suggests that 
neurotic individuals are more likely to find stressors in their work environments, so they 
believe their environments are more threatening. They also tend to select less adaptive 
coping mechanisms, relying on avoidance as a way of dealing with problems rather than 
attempting to resolve them.75
Cultural Differences
Research suggests that the job conditions that cause stress show some differences across 
cultures. One study revealed that whereas U.S. employees were stressed by a lack of con-
trol, Chinese employees were stressed by job evaluations and lack of training. It doesn’t 
appear that personality effects on stress are different across cultures, however. One study 
of employees in Hungary, Italy, the United Kingdom, Israel, and the United States found 
Type A personality traits (see Chapter 4) predicted stress equally well across countries.76 
A study of 5,270 managers from 20 countries found individuals from individualistic 
countries such as the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom experienced higher 
levels of stress due to work interfering with family than did individuals from collectivist 
countries in Asia and Latin America.77 The authors proposed that this may occur be-
cause, in collectivist cultures, working extra hours is seen as a sacrifice to help the family, 
whereas in individualistic cultures, work is seen as a means to personal achievement that 
takes away from the family.
Evidence suggests that stressors are associated with perceived stress and strains 
among employees in different countries. In other words, stress is equally bad for employ-
ees of all cultures.78
CONSEQUENCES OF STRESS AT WORK
Stress shows itself in a number of ways, such as high blood pressure, ulcers, irritability, 
difficulty making routine decisions, changes in appetite, accident proneness, and the like. 
Refer back to Exhibit 17-7. These symptoms can be fit under three general categories: 
physiological, psychological, and behavioral symptoms.
PHYSIOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS  Most early concerns with stress were directed at 
physiological symptoms because most researchers were specialists in the health and 
medical sciences. Their work led to the conclusion that stress could create changes in 
metabolism, increase heart and breathing rates and blood pressure, bring on headaches, 
and induce heart attacks.
Evidence now clearly suggests stress may have other harmful physiological effects. 
A long-term study conducted in the United Kingdom found that job strain was associated 
with higher levels of coronary heart disease.79 Still another study conducted with Danish 
human services workers found that higher levels of psychological burnout at the work-
unit level were related to significantly higher levels of sickness absence.80 Many other 
studies have shown similar results linking work stress to a variety of indicators of poor 
health.

332	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS  Job dissatisfaction is an obvious cause of stress. 
But stress shows itself in other psychological states—for instance, tension, anxiety, 
irritability, boredom, and procrastination. One study that tracked physiological responses 
of employees over time found that stress due to high workloads was related to lower 
emotional well-being.81
Jobs that make multiple and conflicting demands or that lack clarity about the incum-
bent’s duties, authority, and responsibilities increase both stress and dissatisfaction.82 Simi-
larly, the less control people have over the pace of their work, the greater their stress and 
dissatisfaction. Jobs that provide a low level of variety, significance, autonomy, feedback, 
and identity appear to create stress and reduce satisfaction and involvement in the job.83 Not 
everyone reacts to autonomy in the same way, however. For those with an external locus of 
control, increased job control increases the tendency to experience stress and exhaustion.84
BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS  Research on behavior and stress has been conducted 
across several countries and over time, and the relationships appear relatively consistent. 
Behavior-related stress symptoms include reductions in productivity; increases in absences 
and turnover; and personal changes in eating habits, increased smoking or consumption 
of alcohol, rapid speech, fidgeting, and sleep disorders.85
A significant amount of research has investigated the stress–performance relation-
ship. One study indicated that individuals with high emotional intelligence (EI, discussed 
in Chapter 3) may be able to mitigate the effects of job stress on performance.86 There-
fore, this model may be a good, neutral starting point from which to study differences.
MANAGING STRESS
It’s not unlikely for employees and management to have different notions of what con-
stitutes an acceptable level of stress on the job. What management may consider to be “a 
positive stimulus that keeps the adrenaline running” is very likely to be seen as “excessive 
pressure” by the employee. Keep this in mind as we discuss individual and organizational 
approaches toward managing stress.87
Individual Approaches
An employee can and should take personal responsibility for reducing stress levels. Indi-
vidual strategies that have proven effective include time-management techniques, physi-
cal exercise, relaxation techniques, and social support networks.
TIME-MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES  Many people manage their time poorly. The well-
organized employee, like the well-organized student, can often accomplish twice as 
much as the person who is poorly organized. Time-management skills can help minimize 
procrastination by focusing efforts on immediate goals and boosting motivation even in 
the face of tasks that are less enjoyable.88
PHYSICAL EXERCISE  Physicians have recommended noncompetitive physical exercise, 
such as aerobics, walking, jogging, swimming, and riding a bicycle, as a way to deal with 
excessive stress levels. These activities decrease the detrimental physiological responses 
to stress and allow us to recover from stress more quickly.89

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 333
RELAXATION TECHNIQUES  Individuals can teach themselves to reduce tension through 
relaxation techniques such as meditation, hypnosis, and deep breathing. The objective is 
to reach a state of deep physical relaxation, in which you focus all your energy on the 
release of muscle tension.90 Deep relaxation for 15 or 20 minutes a day releases strain and 
provides a pronounced sense of peacefulness, as well as significant changes in heart rate, 
blood pressure, and other physiological factors. A growing body of research shows that 
simply taking breaks from work at routine intervals can facilitate psychological recovery 
and reduce stress significantly and may improve job performance, and these effects are 
even greater if relaxation techniques are employed.91
SOCIAL SUPPORT NETWORKS  As we have noted, friends, family, or work colleagues 
can provide an outlet when stress levels become excessive. Expanding your social support 
network provides someone to hear your problems and offer a more objective perspective 
on a stressful situation than your own.
Organizational Approaches
Several organizational factors that cause stress—particularly task and role demands—are 
controlled by management and thus can be modified or changed. Strategies to consider 
include improving employee selection and job placement, goal-setting, redesign of jobs, 
increasing employee involvement, organizational communication, employee sabbaticals, 
and corporate wellness programs.
SELECTION AND PLACEMENT  Certain jobs are more stressful than others, but as we’ve 
seen, individuals differ in their response to stressful situations. We know individuals 
with little experience or an external locus of control tend to be more prone to stress. 
Obviously, management shouldn’t hire only experienced individuals with an internal 
locus, but such individuals may adapt better to high-stress jobs and perform those jobs 
more effectively. Similarly, training can increase an individual’s self-efficacy and thus 
lessen job strain.
GOAL-SETTING  As discussed in Chapter 7, individuals perform better when they 
have specific and challenging goals and receive feedback on their progress toward 
these goals. Goals can reduce stress as well as provide motivation.92 Employees who 
are highly committed to their goals and see purpose in their jobs experience less stress 
because they are more likely to perceive stressors as challenges rather than hindrances. 
Specific goals perceived as attainable clarify performance expectations. In addition, goal 
feedback reduces uncertainties about actual job performance. The result is less employee 
frustration, role ambiguity, and stress.
REDESIGNING JOBS  Redesigning jobs to give employees more responsibility, more 
meaningful work, more autonomy, and increased feedback can reduce stress because these 
factors give employees greater control over work activities and lessen dependence on 
others. But not all employees want enriched jobs. The right redesign for employees with 
a low need for growth might include less responsibility and increased specialization. If 
individuals prefer structure and routine, reducing skill variety should reduce uncertainties 
and stress levels.

334	 Part 4  •  Organizational Systems
EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENT  Role stress is detrimental to a large extent because 
employees feel uncertain about goals, expectations, how they’ll be evaluated, and the 
like. By giving these employees a voice in the decisions that directly affect their job 
performance, management can increase employee control and reduce role stress. Thus, 
managers should consider increasing employee involvement in decision making because 
evidence clearly shows that increases in employee empowerment reduce psychological 
strain.93
ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION  Increasing formal organizational communication 
with employees reduces uncertainty by lessening role ambiguity and role conflict. Given the 
importance that perceptions play in moderating the stress–response relationship, manage­
ment can also use effective communication as a means to shape employee perceptions. 
Remember that what employees categorize as demands, threats, or opportunities at work is an 
interpretation; that interpretation can be affected by the symbols and actions communicated 
by management.
EMPLOYEE SABBATICALS  Some employees need an occasional escape from the frenetic 
pace of their work. Companies including Genentech, American Express, Intel, General 
Mills, Microsoft, Morningstar, DreamWorks Animation, and Adobe Systems have begun 
to provide extended voluntary leaves.94 These sabbaticals—ranging in length from a few 
weeks to several months—can revive and rejuvenate workers who might otherwise be 
headed for burnout.
WELLNESS PROGRAMS  Our final suggestion is to create organizationally supported 
wellness programs. These typically provide workshops to help people quit smoking, 
control alcohol use, lose weight, eat better, and develop a regular exercise program; they 
focus on the employee’s total physical and mental condition.95 Some programs help 
employees improve their psychological health as well. A meta-analysis of 36 programs 
designed to reduce stress (including wellness programs) showed that interventions that 
helped employees reframe stressful situations and use active coping strategies appreciably 
reduced stress levels.96 Most wellness programs assume employees need to take personal 
responsibility for their physical and mental health and that the organization is merely a 
means to that end.
Most firms that have introduced wellness programs have observed significant ben-
efits. Johnson & Johnson reported that their wellness program has saved the organization 
$250 million in health care costs in 10 years, and research has indicated that effective 
wellness programs significantly decreased turnover rates for most organizations.97 Other 
research sponsored by the U.S. Department of Labor and Department of Health and Hu-
man Services indicates that organizational wellness programs create healthier employees 
with fewer health risk factors.98
SUMMARY
The need for change has been implied throughout this text. For instance, think about atti-
tudes, motivation, work teams, communication, leadership, organizational structures, HR 
practices, and organizational cultures. Change was an integral part in our discussion of 
Wellness programs
Organizationally 
supported programs 
that focus on the 
employee’s total 
physical and mental 
condition.

	
Chapter 17  •  Organizational Change	 335
each. If environments were perfectly static, if employees’ skills and abilities were always 
up to date and incapable of deteriorating, and if tomorrow were always exactly the same 
as today, organizational change would have little or no relevance to managers. But the 
real world is turbulent, requiring organizations and their members to undergo dynamic 
change if they are to perform at competitive levels. Coping with all of these changes can 
be a source of stress, but with effective management, challenge can enhance engagement 
and fulfillment, leading to high performance which, as you’ve discovered in this text, is 
one major goal of the study of OB.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERS
•	 Consider that, as a manager, you are a change agent in your organization. The de-
cisions you make and your role-modeling behaviors will help shape the organiza-
tion’s change culture.
•	 Your management policies and practices will determine the degree to which the 
organization learns and adapts to changing environmental factors.
•	 Some stress is good. Increasing challenges brought by autonomy and responsibility 
at work will lead to some stress but also increase feelings of accomplishment and 
fulfillment. Hindrance stressors like bureaucracy and interpersonal conflicts, on the 
other hand, are entirely negative and should be eliminated.
•	 You can help alleviate harmful workplace stress for your employees by accu-
rately matching workloads to employees, providing employees with stress-coping 
resources, and responding to their concerns.
•	 You can identify extreme stress in your employees when performance declines, 
turnover increases, health-related absenteeism increases, and engagement declines. 
However, by the time these symptoms are visible, it may be too late to be helpful, 
so stay alert for early indicators and be proactive.
 TRY IT!
If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: Change.
 PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Tolerance of Ambiguity Scale
How well can you tolerate the ambiguity that change brings? Take this PIA to learn more 
about your tolerance level for this challenge.
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
	17-1. 	 What do you think are the best ways to prepare employees for organizational change? 
Support your answers.
	17-2. 	 Pearson MyLab Management Only—comprehensive writing assignment for this 
chapter.
P
I
A
PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS
Pearson MyLab 
Management
®

EPILOGUE
The end of a book typically has the same meaning to an author that it has to the reader: it generates feelings of 
both accomplishment and relief. As both of us rejoice at having completed our tour of the essential concepts in 
organizational behavior, this is a good time to examine where we’ve been and what it all means.
The underlying theme of this book has been that the behavior of people at work is not a random phe-
nomenon. Employees are complex entities, but their attitudes and behavior can nevertheless be explained and 
predicted with a reasonable degree of accuracy. Our approach has been to look at organizational behavior at 
three levels: the individual, the group, and the organization system.
We started with the individual and reviewed the major psychological contributions to understanding 
why individuals act as they do. We found that many of the individual differences among employees can be 
systematically labeled and categorized, and therefore generalizations can be made. For example, we know that 
individuals with a conventional type of personality are better matched to certain jobs in corporate management 
than are people with investigative personalities. So placing people into jobs that are compatible with their per-
sonality types should result in higher-performing and more satisfied employees.
Next, our analysis moved to the group level. We argued that the understanding of group behavior is more 
complex than merely multiplying what we know about individuals by the number of members in the group, 
because people act differently in a group than when they are alone. We demonstrated how roles, norms, leader-
ship styles, power relationships, and other similar group factors affect the behavior of employees.
Finally, we overlaid system-wide variables on our knowledge of individual and group behavior to further 
improve our understanding of organizational behavior. Major emphasis was given to showing how an organiza-
tion’s structure, design, and culture affect both the attitudes and the behavior of employees.
It may be tempting to criticize the stress this book placed on theoretical concepts, but as noted psycholo-
gist Kurt Lewin is purported to have said, “There is nothing so practical as a good theory.” Of course, it’s also 
true that there is nothing so impractical as a good theory that leads nowhere. To avoid presenting theories that 
lead nowhere, this book included a wealth of examples and illustrations and we regularly stopped to inquire 
about the implications of theory for the practice of management. The result has been the presentation of numer-
ous concepts that, individually, offer some insights into behavior; but when taken together, provide a complex 
system to help you explain, predict, and control organizational behavior.
336

ENDNOTES
CHAPTER 1
	 1.	 “Survey: Few CFOs Plan to Invest in Interpersonal 
Skills Development for Their Teams,” Accountemps 
press release, June 19, 2013, on the Accountemps 
website,  http://accountemps.rhi.mediaroom.com/2013-
06-19-Survey-Few-CFOs-Plan-to-Invest-in-Interper-
sonal-Skills-Development-for-Their-Teams.
	 2.	 K. Dill, “The 20 Best Places to Work in 2015,” Forbes, December 
10,  2014,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/kathryndill/ 
2014/12/10/the-best-places-to-work-in-2015/.
	 3.	 I. S. Fulmer, B. Gerhart, and K. S. Scott, “Are the 100 Best 
Better? An Empirical Investigation of the Relationship be-
tween Being a ‘Great Place to Work’ and Firm Performance,” 
Personnel Psychology 56, no. 4, (2003): 965–93.
	 4.	 S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “In-
tegrating Motivational, Social, and Contextual Work Design 
Features: A Meta-Analytic Summary and Theoretical Exten-
sion of the Work Design Literature,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 92, no. 5 (2007): 1332–56.
	 5.	 E. R. Burris, “The Risks and Rewards of Speaking Up: Mana-
gerial Responses to Employee Voice,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 55, no. 4 (2012): 851–75.
	 6.	 T. L. Miller, C. L. Wesley II, and D. E. Williams, “Educating 
the Minds of Caring Hearts: Comparing the Views of Practi-
tioners and Educators on the Importance of Social Entrepre-
neurship Competencies,” Academy of Management Learning 
& Education 2, no. 3 (2012): 349–70.
	 7.	 H. Aguinis and A. Glavas, “What We Don’t Know about 
Corporate Social Responsibility: A Review and Research 
Agenda,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 932–68.
	 8.	 D. Meinert, “Background on Bosses,” HR Magazine, August 
2014, 29.
	 9.	 Ibid.
	10.	 Ibid.
	11.	 For a review of what one researcher believes should be in-
cluded in organizational behavior, based on survey data, see 
J. B. Miner, “The Rated Importance, Scientific Validity, and 
Practical Usefulness of Organizational Behavior Theories: A 
Quantitative Review,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 2, no. 3 (2003): 250–68.
	12.	 For the original study, see F. Luthans, “Successful vs. 
Effective Real Managers,” Academy of Management Executive, 
 2, no. 2 (1988): 127–32. A great deal of research has been built 
by Fred Luthans and others from this study. See, for example, 
M. M. Hopkins, D. A. O’Neil, and J. K. Stoller, “Distinguish-
ing Competencies of Effective Physician Leaders,” Journal of 
Management Development 34, no. 5 (2015): 566–84.
	13.	 P. Wu, M. Foo, and D. B. Turban, “The Role of Personality 
in Relationship Closeness, Developer Assistance, and Career 
Success,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 73, no. 3 (2008): 
440–48.
	14.	 L. Dragoni, H. Park, J. Soltis, and S. Forte-Trammell, “Show 
and Tell: How Supervisors Facilitate Leader Development 
Among Transitioning Leaders,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 99, no. 1 (2014): 66–86.
	15.	 D. M. Rousseau, The Oxford Handbook of Evidence-Based 
Management (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014).
	16.	 J. Welch and S. Welch, “When to Go with Your Gut,” LinkedIn Pulse 
(blog post), November 12, 2013, https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/20131112125301-86541065-when-to-go-with-your-gut.
	17.	 Z. Karabell, “Everyone Has a Data Point,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 19, 2014, A11.
	18.	 E. Morozov, “Every Little Byte Counts,” The New York Times 
Book Review, May 18, 2014, 23.
	19.	 M. Taves, “If I Could Have More Data...”, The Wall Street 
Journal, March 24, 2014, R5.
	20.	 “The Future of Work—A Journey to 2022,”, Pricewater-
houseCoopers LLP Report, 2014, http://www.pwc.com/gx/
en/issues/talent/future-of-work/journey-to-2022.html
	21.	 N. Bloom, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenan, “Does Management 
Really Work? How Three Essential Practices can Address 
Even the Most Complex Global Problems,” Harvard Business 
Review, November 2012, 77–82.
	22.	 C. Cole, Association for Psychological Science, “Changing 
Neurobiology with Behavior,” Observer 27, no. 6 (2014): 
29–32.
	23.	 E. Dwoskin, “Big Data Knows When You Turn off the Lights,” 
The Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2014, B1–B2.
	24.	 S. Lohr, “Unblinking Eyes Track Employees,” The New York 
Times, June 22, 2014, 1, 15.
	25.	 R. Karlgaard, “Danger Lurking: Taylor’s Ghost,” Forbes, May 
26, 2014, 34.
	26.	 C. Karmin and S. Chaturvedi, “Grosvenor House Is Seized,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2015, C8.
	27.	 V. McGrane, “The Downside of Lower Unemployment,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 3, 2014, A2.
	28.	 A. Lowrey, “Long Out of Work, and Running Out of Options,” 
The New York Times, April 4, 2014, B1, B4.
	29.	 L. Weber and R. E. Silverman, “On-Demand Workers: ‘We 
Are Not Robots,’ ” The Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2015, 
B1, B7.
	30.	 C. Porter and M. Korn, “Can This Online Course Get Me a 
Job?” The Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2014, B7.
	31.	 D. Belkin and M. Peters, “For New Grads, Path to a Career Is 
Bumpy,” The Wall Street Journal, May 24–25, 2014, A5.
	32.	 N. Kitsantonis, “A Hands-On Approach to the Greek Econ-
omy,” The New York Times, March 25, 2014, B3.
	33.	 G. Naik, “Global Life Expectancy Rises by Six Years,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 18, 2014, A10.
	34.	 J. Greenwald, “Tips for Dealing with Employees Whose So-
cial Media Posts Reflect Badly on Your Company,” Forbes, 
March 6, 2015, www.forbes.com/sites/entrepreneursorgani-
zation/2015/03/06/tips-for-dealing-with-employees-whose-
social-media-posts-reflect-badly-on-your-company/.
	35.	 E. Jaffe, Association for Psychological Science, “Using Tech-
nology to Scale the Scientific Mountain,” Observer 27, no. 6 
(2014): 17–19.
	36.	 N. Fallon, “No Face Time? No Problem: How to Keep Virtual 
Workers Engaged,” Business News Daily, October 2, 2014, 
http://www.businessnewsdaily.com/7228-engaging-remote-
employees.html.
	37.	 E. J. Hirst, “Burnout on the Rise,” Chicago Tribune, October 
19, 2012, http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2012-10-29/busi-
ness/ct-biz-1029-employee-burnout-20121029_1_employee-
burnout-herbert-freudenberger-employee-stress.
337

338	 Endnotes
	38.	 F. Luthans and C. M. Youssef, “Emerging Positive Organizational 
Behavior,” Journal of Management 33, no. 3 (2007): 321–49;  
C. M. Youssef and F. Luthans, “Positive Organizational Behavior  
in the Workplace: The Impact of Hope, Optimism, and Resil-
ience,” Journal of Management 33, no. 5 (2007): 774–800; and  
J. E. Dutton and S. Sonenshein, “Positive Organizational Schol-
arship,” in Encyclopedia of Positive Psychology, eds. C. Cooper 
and J. Barling,  (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007).
	39.	 “Five Jobs That Won’t Exist in 10 Years... And One New Title 
You’ll Start to See,” HR Magazine, February 2014, 16.
	40.	 Editorial Board, “NCAA Should Punish the University of 
North Carolina for Cheating Scandal,” Chicago Tribune, 
November 7, 2014, http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/
opinion/editorials/ct-north-carolina-sports-scandal-edit-
1108-20141107-story.html, accessed March 11, 2015.
	41.	 D. M. Mayer, M. Kuenzi, R. Greenbaum, M. Bardes, and R. 
Salvador, “How Low Does Ethical Leadership Flow? Test of a 
Trickle-Down Model,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 108, no. 1 (2009): 1–13; and A. Ardichvili, J. 
A. Mitchell, and D. Jondle, “Characteristics of Ethical Business 
Cultures,” Journal of Business Ethics 85, no. 4 (2009): 445–51.
	42.	 D. Meinert, “Managers’ Influence,” HR Magazine, April 
2014, 25.
	43.	 X. Zhao and A. S. Mattila, “Examining the Spillover Ef-
fect of Frontline Employees’ Work-Family Conflict on 
Their Affective Work Attitudes and Customer Satisfac-
tion,” International Journal of Hospitality Management 
33 (2013): 310–15.
CHAPTER 2
	 1.	 A. Barsky, S. A. Kaplan, and D. J. Beal, “Just Feelings? 
The Role of Affect in the Formation of Organizational 
Fairness Judgments,” Journal of Management 37, no. 1 
(2011): 248–79; J. A. Mikels, S. J. Maglio, A. E. Reed, 
and L. J. Kaplowitz, “Should I Go with My Gut? Inves-
tigating the Benefits of Emotion-Focused Decision Mak-
ing,” Emotion 11, no. 4 (2011): 743–53; and A. J. Rojas 
Tejada, O. M. Lozano Rojas, M. Navas Luque, and P. J. 
Pérez Moreno, “Prejudiced Attitude Measurement Using 
the Rasch Scale Model,” Psychological Reports 109, no. 2 
(2011): 553–72.
	 2.	 See L. S. Glasman and D. Albarracín, “Forming Attitudes 
That Predict Future Behavior: A Meta-Analysis of the Atti-
tude-Behavior Relation,” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 5 
(2006): 778–822.
	 3.	 Y. L. Liu and C.-J. Keng, “Cognitive Dissonance, Social Com-
parison, and Disseminating Untruthful or Negative Truthful 
EWOM Messages,” Social Behavior and Personality 24, no. 6 
(2014): 979–94.
	 4.	 See, for instance, L. R. Fabrigar, R. E. Petty, S. M. Smith, and 
S. L. Crites, “Understanding Knowledge Effects on Attitude-
Behavior Consistency: The Role of Relevance, Complexity, 
and Amount of Knowledge,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 90, no. 4 (2006): 556–77; and D. J. Schleicher, J. 
D. Watt, and G. J. Greguras, “Reexamining the Job Satisfac-
tion-Performance Relationship: The Complexity of Attitudes,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 1 (2004): 165–77.
	 5.	 A. S. McCance, C. D. Nye, L. Wang, K. S. Jones, and C. 
Chiu, “Alleviating the Burden of Emotional Labor: The Role 
of Social Sharing,” Journal of Management 39, no. 2 (2013): 
392–415.
	 6.	 L. S. Glasman and D. Albarracin, “Forming Attitudes That 
Predict Future Behavior: A Meta-Analysis of the Attitude-
Behavior Relation.” 
	 7.	 D. P. Moynihan and S. K. Pandey, “Finding Workable Levers 
over Work Motivation: Comparing Job Satisfaction, Job In-
volvement, and Organizational Commitment,” Administration 
& Society 39, no. 7 (2007): 803–32.
	 8.	 S. Zhang, “Impact of Job Involvement on Organizational Citi-
zenship Behaviors in China,” Journal of Business Ethics 120, 
no. 2 (2014): 165–74.
	 9.	 G. Chen and R. J. Klimoski, “The Impact of Expectations on 
Newcomer Performance in Teams as Mediated by Work Char-
acteristics, Social Exchanges, and Empowerment,” Academy 
of Management Journal 46, no. 5 (2003): 591–607; A. Er-
geneli, G. Saglam, and S. Metin, “Psychological Empower-
ment and Its Relationship to Trust in Immediate Managers,” 
Journal of Business Research 60, no. 1 (2007): 41–49; and 
S. E. Seibert, S. R. Silver, and W. A. Randolph, “Taking Em-
powerment to the Next Level: A Multiple-Level Model of 
Empowerment, Performance, and Satisfaction,” Academy of 
Management Journal 47, no. 3 (2004): 332–49.
	10.	 B. J. Avolio, W. Zhu, W. Koh, and P. Bhatia, “Transforma-
tional Leadership and Organizational Commitment: Mediat-
ing Role of Psychological Empowerment and Moderating 
Role of Structural Distance,” Journal of Organizational Be-
havior 25, no. 8 (2004): 951–68.
	11.	 O. N. Solinger, W. van Olffen, and R. A. Roe, “Beyond the 
Three-Component Model of Organizational Commitment,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 1 (2008): 70–83.
	12.	 J. P. Hausknecht, N. J. Hiller, and R. J. Vance, “Work-Unit 
Absenteeism: Effects of Satisfaction, Commitment, Labor 
Market Conditions, and Time,” Academy of Management 
Journal 51, no. 6 (2008): 1223–45.
	13.	 “100 Best Companies to Work For,” Fortune, February 2015, 
www.fortune.com/best-companies/2015/. 
	14.	 L. Rhoades, R. Eisenberger, and S. Armeli, “Affective Com-
mitment to the Organization: The Contribution of Perceived 
Organizational Support,” Journal of Applied Psychology 86, 
no. 5 (2001): 825–36.
	15.	 B. L. Rich, J. A. Lepine, and E. R. Crawford, “Job En-
gagement: Antecedents and Effects on Job Performance,” 
Academy of Management Journal 53, no. 3 (2010): 
617–35.
	16.	 “Employee Engagement,” Workforce Management (Feb-
ruary 2013): 19; and “The Cornerstone OnDemand 2013 
U.S. 
Employee 
Report,” 
Cornerstone 
(2013), 
www 
.cornerstoneondemand.com/resources/research/survey-2013.
	17.	 Y. Brunetto, S. T. T. Teo, K. Shacklock, and R. Farr-Wharton, 
“Emotional Intelligence, Job Satisfaction, Well-being and En-
gagement: Explaining Organisational Commitment and Turn-
over Intentions in Policing,” Human Resource Management 
Journal 22, no. 4 (2012): 428–41.
	18.	 P. Petrou, E. Demerouti, M. C. W. Peeters, W. B. Schaufeli, 
and Jørn Hetland, “Crafting a Job on a Daily Basis: Contex-
tual Correlates and the Link to Work Engagement,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 33, no. 8 (2012): 1120–41.
	19.	 C. L. Dolbier, J. A. Webster, K. T. McCalister, M. W. Mal-
lon, and M. A. Steinhardt, “Reliability and Validity of a  
Single-Item Measure of Job Satisfaction,” American Journal 
of Health Promotion 19, no. 3 (2005): 194–98.
	20.	 Employee’s Job Satisfaction Worldwide 2012, Distributed by  
New York, NY: Statista, 2012. http://www.statista.com/
statistics/224508/employee-job-satisfaction-worldwide/;  

	
Endnotes	 339
Kelly Services, Kelly Global Workforce Index, 2012, Acquisition  
and Retention in the war for  Talent.  http://www.kellyservices 
.no/NO/Om-oss/KGWI-APRIL-2012—Talent-Acquisiton-
and-Retention/”
	21.	 N. A. Bowling, M. R. Hoepf, D. M. LaHuis, and L. R. Lep-
isto, “Mean Job Satisfaction Levels over Time: Are Things 
Bad and Getting Worse?” The Industrial-Organizational Psy-
chologist 50, no. 4 (2013): 57–64.
	22.	 L. Weber, “U.S. Workers Can’t Get No (Job) Satisfaction,” 
The Wall Street Journal: At Work (blog), June 18, 2014, 12:01 
AM,   http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2014/06/18/u-s-workers-
cant-get-no-job-satisfaction/.
	23.	 B. Cheng, M. Kan, G. Levanon, and R. L. Ray. “Job Sat-
isfaction: 2014 Edition,” The Conference Board, https://
www.conference-board.org/topics/publicationdetail.
cfm?publicationid=2785.
	24.	 L. Weber, “U.S. Workers Can’t Get No (Job) Satisfaction.”
	25.	 “Doing Business in South Korea,” World Business Culture, 
accessed January 14, 2016, www.worldbusinessculture.com/
Business-in-South-Korea.html. 
	26.	 S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “In-
tegrating Motivational, Social, and Contextual Work Design 
Features: A Meta-Analytic Summary and Theoretical Ex-
tension of the Work Design Literature,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 5 (2007): 1332–56; and D. S. Chiaburu 
and D. A. Harrison, “Do Peers Make the Place? Conceptual 
Synthesis and Meta-Analysis of Coworker Effect on Percep-
tions, Attitudes, OCBs, and Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 5 (2008): 1082–103.
	27.	 K. H. Fong and E. Snape, “Empowering Leadership, Psycho-
logical Empowerment and Employee Outcomes: Testing a 
Multi-Level Mediating Model,” British Journal of Manage-
ment 26, no. 1 (2015): 126–38.
	28.	 S. Ronen and M. Mikulincer, “Predicting Employees’ Sat-
isfaction and Burnout from Managers’ Attachment and 
Caregiving Orientations,” European Journal of Work and Or-
ganizational Psychology 21, no. 6 (2012): 828–49.
	29.	 A. Calvo-Salguero, J.-M. Salinas Martinez-de-Lecea, and 
A.-M. Carrasco-Gonzalez, “Work-Family and Family-Work 
Conflict: Does Intrinsic-Extrinsic Satisfaction Mediate the 
Prediction of General Job Satisfaction?” Journal of Psychol-
ogy 145, no. 5 (2011): 435–61.
	30.	 J. Zhang, Q. Wu, D. Miao, X. Yan, and J. Peng, “The Impact 
of Core Self-Evaluations on Job Satisfaction: The Mediator 
Role of Career Commitment,” Social Indicators Research 
116, no. 3 (2014): 809–22.
	31.	 D. Thorpe, “Why CSR? The Benefits of Corporate Social 
Responsibility Will Move You to Act,” Forbes, May 18, 
2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/devinthorpe/2013/05/18/
why-csr-the-benefits-of-corporate-social-responsibility-will-
move-you-to-act/.
	32.	 N. Fallon, “What Is Corporate Responsibility?” Business 
News Daily, December 22, 2014, http://www.businessnews-
daily.com/4679-corporate-social-responsibility.html.
	33.	 R. Feintzeig, “I Don’t Have a Job. I Have a Higher Calling,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2015, B1, B4.
	34.	 See I. Filatotchev and C. Nakajima, “Corporate Governance, 
Responsible Managerial Behavior, and Corporate Social Re-
sponsibility: Organizational Efficiency versus Organizational 
Legitimacy?” Academy of Management Perspectives 28, no. 3 
(2014): 289–306.
	35.	 A. Hurst, “Being ‘Good’ Isn’t the Only Way to Go,” The New 
York Times, April 20, 2014, 4.
	36.	 M. C. Bolino, H.-H. Hsiung, J. Harvey, and J. A. LePine, 
“Well, I’m Tired of Tryin’! Organizational Citizenship Behav-
ior and Citizenship Fatigue,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
100, no. 1 (2015): 56–74.
	37.	 Ge. E. Newman and D. M. Cain, “Tainted Altruism: When Do-
ing Some Good Is Evaluated as Doing Worse Than Doing No 
Good at All,” Psychological Science 25, no. 3 (2014): 648–55.
	38.	 Ibid.
	39.	 D. J. Schleicher, T. A. Smith, W. J. Casper, J. D. Watt, 
and G. J. Greguras, “It’s All in the Attitude: The Role of 
Job Attitude Strength in Job Attitude-Outcome Relation-
ships,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 4 (2015): 
1259–74.
	40.	 N. P. Podsakoff, P. M. Podsakoff, and S. B. MacKenzie, “Con-
sequences of Unit-Level Organizational Citizenship Behav-
iors: A Review and Recommendations for Future Research,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, no. S1 (2014): 
S87–119.
	41.	 B. J. Hoffman, C. A. Blair, J. P. Meriac, and D. J. Woehr, 
“Expanding the Criterion Domain? A Quantitative Review of 
the OCB Literature,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 2 
(2007): 555–66.
	42.	 B. B. Reiche et al., “Why Do Managers Engage in Trustwor-
thy Behavior? A Multilevel Cross-Cultural Study in 18 Coun-
tries,” Personnel Psychology 67, no. 1 (2014): 61–98.
	43.	 D. S. Chiaburu and D. A. Harrison, “Do Peers Make the 
Place? Conceptual Synthesis and Meta-Analysis of Coworker 
Effect on Perceptions, Attitudes, OCBs, and Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 5 (2008): 1082–103.
	44.	 R. Ilies, I. S. Fulmer, M. Spitzmuller, and M. D. Johnson, 
“Personality and Citizenship Behavior: The Mediating Role 
of Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 4 
(2009): 945–59.
	45.	 G. L. Lemoine, C. K. Parsons, and S. Kansara, “Above and 
Beyond, Again and Again: Self-Regulation in the Aftermath 
of Organizational Citizenship Behaviors,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 40–55.
	46.	 C. Vandenberghe, K. Bentein, R. Michon, J. Chebat, M. Trem-
blay, and J. Fils, “An Examination of the Role of Perceived 
Support and Employee Commitment in Employee-Customer 
Encounters,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 4 (2007): 
1177–87; and M. Schulte, C. Ostroff, S. Shmulyian, and A. 
Kinicki, “Organizational Climate Configurations: Relation-
ships to Collective Attitudes, Customer Satisfaction, and 
Financial Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94,  
no. 3 (2009): 618–34.
	47.	 B. Taylor, “Why Amazon Is Copying Zappos and Paying Em-
ployees to Quit,” Harvard Business Review, April 14, 2014, 
https://hbr.org/2014/04/why-amazon-is-copying-zappos-and-
paying-employees-to-quit/.
	48.	 J. Barling, E. K. Kelloway, and R. D. Iverson, “High-Quality 
Work, Job Satisfaction, and Occupational Injuries,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 88, no. 2 (2003): 276–83; and F. W. Bond 
and D. Bunce, “The Role of Acceptance and Job Control in 
Mental Health, Job Satisfaction, and Work Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 1057–67.
	49.	 Y. Georgellis and T. Lange, “Traditional versus Secular Val-
ues and the Job-Life Satisfaction Relationship across Europe,” 
British Journal of Management 23, no. 4 (2012): 437–54.
	50.	 O. Stavrova, T. Schlosser, and A. Baumert, “Life Satisfaction 
and Job-Seeking Behavior of the Unemployed: The Effect of 
Individual Differences in Justice Sensitivity,” Applied Psy-
chology: An International Review 64, no. 4 (2014): 643–70.

340	 Endnotes
	51.	 R. Gibney, T. J. Zagenczyk, and M. F. Masters, “The Nega-
tive Aspects of Social Exchange: An Introduction to Perceived 
Organizational Obstruction,” Group & Organization Manage-
ment 34, no. 6 (2009): 665–97.
	52.	 C. Caldwell and M. Canuto-Carranco, “‘Organizational Ter-
rorism’ and Moral Choices—Exercising Voice When the 
Leader Is the Problem,” Journal of Business Ethics 97, no. 1 
(2010): 159–71; and A. J. Nyberg and R. E. Ployhart, “Con-
text-Emergent Turnover (CET) Theory: A Theory of Collec-
tive Turnover,” Academy of Management Review 38, no. 1 
(2013): 109–31.
	53.	 P. E. Spector, S. Fox, L. M. Penney, K. Bruursema, A. Goh, 
and S. Kessler, “The Dimensionality of Counterproductivity: 
Are All Counterproductive Behaviors Created Equal?” Jour-
nal of Vocational Behavior 68, no. 3 (2006): 446–60; and D. 
S. Chiaburu and D. A. Harrison, “Do Peers Make the Place? 
Conceptual Synthesis and Meta-Analysis of Coworker Effects 
on Perceptions, Attitudes, OCBs, and Performance,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 93, no. 5 (2008): 1082–103.
	54.	 P. A. O’Keefe, “Liking Work Really Does Matter,” The New 
York Times, September 7, 2014, 12.
	55.	 D. Iliescu, D. Ispas, C. Sulea, and A. Ilie, “Vocational Fit and 
Counterproductive Work Behaviors: A Self-Regulation Per-
spective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 
21–39.
	56.	 A. S. Gabriel, J. M. Diefendorff, M. M. Chandler, C. M. M. 
Pradco, and G. J. Greguras, “The Dynamic Relationships of 
Work Affect and Job Satisfaction with Perceptions of Fit,” 
Personnel Psychology 67, no. 2 (2014): 389–420.
	57.	 S. Diestel, J. Wegge, and K.-H. Schmidt, “The Impact of 
Social Context on the Relationship between Individual Job 
Satisfaction and Absenteeism: The Roles of Different Foci of 
Job Satisfaction and Work-Unit Absenteeism,” Academy of 
Management Journal 57, no. 2 (2014): 353–82.
	58.	 H. Lian, D. L. Ferris, R. Morrison, and D. J. Brown, “Blame 
It on the Supervisor or the Subordinate? Reciprocal Relations 
between Abusive Supervision and Organizational Deviance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 4 (2014): 651–64.
	59.	 T. A. Beauregard, “Fairness Perceptions of Work-Life Balance 
Initiatives; Effects on Counterproductive Work Behavior,” 
British Journal of Management 25, no. 4 (2014): 772–89.
	60.	 D. Iliescu, D. Ispas, C. Sulea, and A. Ilie, “Vocational Fit 
and Counterproductive Work Behaviors: A Self-Regulation 
Perspective.”
	61.	 A. S. Gabriel, J. M. Diefendorff, M. M. Chandler, C. M. M. 
Pradco, and G. J. Greguras, “The Dynamic Relationships of 
Work Affect and Job Satisfaction with Perceptions of Fit.”
	62.	 S. Diestel, J. Wegge, and K.-H. Schmidt, “The Impact of 
Social Context on the Relationship between Individual Job 
Satisfaction and Absenteeism: The Roles of Different Foci of 
Job Satisfaction and Work-Unit Absenteeism.”
	63.	 J. F. Ybema, P. G. W. Smulders, and P. M. Bongers, “Ante-
cedents and Consequences of Employee Absenteeism: A 
Longitudinal Perspective on the Role of Job Satisfaction and 
Burnout,” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy-
chology 19, no. 1 (2010): 102–24.
	64.	 J. P. Hausknecht, N. J. Hiller, and R. J. Vance, “Work-Unit 
Absenteeism: Effects of Satisfaction, Commitment, Labor 
Market Conditions, and Time,” Academy of Management 
Journal 51, no. 6 (2008): 1123–245.
	65.	 G. Chen, R. E. Ployhart, H. C. Thomas, N. Anderson, and 
P. D. Bliese, “The Power of Momentum: A New Model of 
Dynamic Relationships between Job Satisfaction Change and 
Turnover Intentions,” Academy of Management Journal 54, 
no. 1 (2011): 159–81.
	66.	 D. Liu, T. R. Mitchell, T. W. Lee, B. C. Holtom, and T. 
R. Hinkin, “When Employees Are Out of Step with Co-
workers: How Job Satisfaction Trajectory and Dispersion 
Influence Individual- and Unit-Level Voluntary Turn-
over,” Academy of Management Journal 55, no. 6 (2012): 
1360–80.
	67.	 K. Kiazad, B. C. Holtom, P. W. Hom, and A. Newman, “Job 
Embeddedness: A Multifoci Theoretical Extension,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 100, no. 3 (2015): 641–59.
	68.	 T. H. Lee, B. Gerhart, I. Weller, and C. O. Trevor, “Under-
standing Voluntary Turnover: Path-Specific Job Satisfaction 
Effects and the Importance of Unsolicited Job Offers,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 51, no. 4 (2008): 651–71.
	69.	 K. Holland, “Inside the Minds of Your Employees,” The New 
York Times, January 28, 2007, B1; M. Schoeff Jr. “Study Sees 
Link between Morale and Stock Price,” Workforce Manage-
ment 85, no. 4 February 27, 2006: 15; and P. B. Brown “The 
Workplace as Solar System,” The New York Times, October 
28, 2006, B5.
	70.	 E. White, “How Surveying Workers Can Pay Off,” The Wall 
Street Journal, June 18, 2007, B3.
CHAPTER 3
	 1.	 S. G. Barsade and D. E. Gibson, “Why Does Affect Matter in 
Organizations?” Academy of Management Perspectives, 21, 
no. 1 (2007): 36–59.
	 2.	 Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, s. v. emotion, accessed  
July 31, 2015, http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/ 
definition/american_english/emotion.
	 3.	 The American Heritage Medical Dictionary, revised edition,  
s. v. mood, accessed April 27, 2015, http://medical-dictionary 
.thefreedictionary.com/mood.
	 4.	 Farlex Partner Medical Dictionary, s. v. mood, accessed April 
27, 2015, http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/mood.
	 5.	 See, for example, J. L. Tracy and R. W. Robins, “Emerging 
Insights into the Nature and Function of Pride,” Current Di-
rections in Psychological Science 16, no. 3 (2007): 147–50.
	 6.	 G. Nikolaidis, “Indeterminancy of Definitions and Criteria in 
Mental Health: Case Study of Emotional Disorders,” Journal 
of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 19, no. 3 (2013): 531–36; 
and W. G. Parrott, “Ur-Emotions and Your Emotions: Recon-
ceptualizing Basic Emotion,” Emotion Review 2, no. 1 (2010): 
14–21.
	 7.	 P. Ekman, Emotions Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feel-
ings to Improve Communication and Emotional Life (New 
York: Times Books/Henry Holt and Co., 2003).
	 8.	 M. Gendron, D. Roberson, J. M. van der Vyver, and L. F. Bar-
rett, “Cultural Relativity of Perceiving Emotion from Vocal-
izations,” Psychological Science 25, no. 4 (2014): 911–20.
	 9.	 R. M. Msetfi, D. E. Kornbrot, H. Matute, and R. A. Murphy, 
“The Relationship between Mood State and Perceived Control 
in Contingency Learning: Effects of Individualist and Collec-
tivist Values,” Frontiers in Psychology 6, no. 1430 (2015): 
1–18; and M. Pfundmair, V. Graupmann, D. Frey, and N. 
Aydin, “The Different Behavioral Intentions of Collectivists 
and Individualists in Response to Social Exclusion,” Personal-
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin 41, no. 3 (2015): 363–78.
	10.	 P. S. Russell and R. Giner-Sorolla, “Bodily Moral Disgust: 
What It Is, How It Is Different from Anger, and Why It Is 

	
Endnotes	 341
an Unreasoned Emotion,” Psychological Bulletin 139, no. 2 
(2013): 328–51.
	11.	 J. Dvash, G. Gilam, A. Ben-Ze’ev, T. Hendler, and S. G. 
Shamay-Tsoory, “The Envious Brain: The Neural Basis of So-
cial Comparison,” Human Brain Mapping 31, no. 11 (2010): 
1741–50.
	12.	 T. A. Ito and J. T. Cacioppo, “Variations on a Human Univer-
sal: Individual Differences in Positivity Offset and Negativity 
Bias,” Cognition and Emotion 19, no. 1 (2005): 1–26.
	13.	 D. Holman, “Call Centres,” in The Essentials of the New Work 
Place: A Guide to the Human Impact of Modern Working 
Practices, eds. D. Holman, T. D. Wall, C. Clegg, P. Sparrow, 
and A. Howard (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2005), 111–32.
	14.	 S. D. Pressman, M. W. Gallagher, S. J. Lopez, and B. Campos, 
“Incorporating Culture into the Study of Affect and Health,” 
Psychological Science 25, no. 12 (2014): 2281–83.
	15.	 K. B. Curhan, T. Simms, H. R. Markus, … C. D. Ryff, “Just 
How Bad Negative Affect Is for Your Health Depends on Cul-
ture,” Psychological Science 25, no. 12 (2014): 2277–80.
	16.	 D. Xanthopoulou, A. B. Bakker, E. Demerouti, and W. B. 
Schaufeli, “A Diary Study on the Happy Worker: How Job Re-
sources Relate to Positive Emotions and Personal Resources,” 
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 
21, no. 4 (2012): 489–517.
	17.	 J. R. Spence, D. J. Brown, L. M. Keeping, and H. Lian, “Help-
ful Today, But Not Tomorrow? Feeling Grateful as a Predic-
tor of Daily Organizational Citizenship Behaviors,” Personnel 
Psychology 67, no. 3 (2014): 705–38.
	18.	 E. Bernstein, “Feeling Awesome: Studies Find an Emotion 
Has Myriad Benefits,” The Wall Street Journal, February 24, 
2015, D3.
	19.	 L. M. Poverny and S. Picascia, “There Is No Crying in Busi-
ness,” Womensmedia.com, October 20, 2009, www.wom-
ensmedia.com/new/Crying-at-Work.shtml.
	20.	 M.-A. Reinhard and N. Schwartz, “The Influence of Affective 
States on the Process of Lie Detection,” Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology 18, no. 4 (2012): 377–389.
	21.	 J. Haidt, “The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology,” Sci-
ence 316, no. 5827, May 18, 2007, 998, 1002; I. E. de 
Hooge, R. M. A. Nelissen, S. M. Breugelmans, and M. 
Zeelenberg, “What Is Moral about Guilt? Acting ‘Proso-
cially’ at the Disadvantage of Others,” Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology 100, no. 3 (2011): 462–73; and 
C. A. Hutcherson and J. J. Gross, “The Moral Emotions: A 
Social-Functionalist Account of Anger, Disgust, and Con-
tempt,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100, 
no. 4 (2011): 719–37.
	22.	 T. Jacobs, “My Morals Are Better Than Yours,” Miller-Mc-
Cune, March/April 2012, 68–69.
	23.	 A. Gopnik, “Even Children Get More Outraged at ‘Them’ and 
‘Us’,” The Wall Street Journal, August 30–31, 2014, C2.
	24.	 N. Angier, “Spite Is Good. Spite Works,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, April 1, 2014, D1, D3.
	25.	 D. C. Rubin, R. M. Hoyle, and M. R. Leary, “Differential Pre-
dictability of Four Dimensions of Affect Intensity,” Cognition 
and Emotion 26, no. 1 (2012): 25–41.
	26.	 S. A. Golder and W. M. Macy, “Diurnal and Seasonal Mood 
Vary with Work, Sleep, and Daylength across Diverse Cul-
tures,” Science 333, no. 6051, September 30, 2011, 1878–81.
	27.	 Ibid.
	28.	 J. J. A. Denissen, L. Butalid, L. Penke, and M. A. G. van 
Aken, “The Effects of Weather on Daily Mood: A Multi-
level Approach,” Emotion 8, no. 5 (2008): 662–67; and M. 
C. Keller, B. L. Fredrickson, O. Ybarra, S. Côté, K. John-
son, J. Mikels, A. Conway, and T. Wagner, “A Warm Heart 
and a Clear Head: The Contingent Effects of Weather on 
Mood and Cognition,” Psychological Science 16, no. 9 
(2005): 724–31.
	29.	 J. J. Lee, F. Gino, and B. R. Staats, “Rainmakers: Why Bad 
Weather Means Good Productivity,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 99, no. 3 (2014): 504–13.
	30.	 J. A. Fuller, J. M. Stanton, G. G. Fisher, C. Spitzmüller, S. 
S. Russell, and P. C. Smith, “A Lengthy Look at the Daily 
Grind: Time Series Analysis of Events, Mood, Stress, and Sat-
isfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 
1019–33.
	31.	 G. Schaffer, Association for Psychological Science, “What’s 
Good, When, and Why?”, The Observer 25, no. 9 (2012): 
27–29.
	32.	 Sleep in America Poll (Washington, DC: National Sleep 
Foundation, 2005), https://sleepfoundation.org/sites/default/
files/2005_summary_of_findings.pdf.
	33.	 D. Meinert, “Sleepless in Seattle … and Cincinnati and Syra-
cuse,” HR Magazine, October 2012, 55–57.
	34.	 E. Bernstein, “Changing the Clocks Wasn’t Good for Your Re-
lationships,” The Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2015, D1, D2.
	35.	 B. A. Scott and T. A. Judge, “Insomnia, Emotions, and Job 
Satisfaction: A Multilevel Study,” Journal of Management 32, 
no. 5 (2006): 622–45.
	36.	 E. Bernstein, “Changing the Clocks Wasn’t Good for Your 
Relationships.”
	37.	 P. R. Giacobbi, H. A. Hausenblas, and N. Frye, “A Naturalis-
tic Assessment of the Relationship between Personality, Daily 
Life Events, Leisure-Time Exercise, and Mood,” Psychology 
of Sport and Exercise 6, no. 1 (2005): 67–81.
	38.	 A. Tergesen, “Why Everything You Know about Aging is 
Probably Wrong,” The Wall Street Journal, December 1, 
2014, B1–B2.
	39.	 M. G. Gard and A. M. Kring, “Sex Differences in the Time 
Course of Emotion,” Emotion 7, no. 2 (2007): 429–37; and 
M. Jakupcak, K. Salters, K. L. Gratz, and L. Roemer, “Mas-
culinity and Emotionality: An Investigation of Men’s Primary 
and Secondary Emotional Responding,” Sex Roles 49, no. 3 
(2003): 111–20.
	40.	 A. H. Fischer, P. M. Rodriguez Mosquera, A. E. M. van Vi-
anen, and A. S. R. Manstead, “Gender and Culture Differ-
ences in Emotion,” Emotion 4, no. 1 (2004): 84–7.
	41.	 A. Caza, G. Zhang, L. Wang, and Y. Bai, “How Do You Really 
Feel? Effect of Leaders’ Perceived Emotional Sincerity on 
Followers’ Trust,” The Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 4 (2015): 
518–31; and A. S. Gabriel, M. A. Daniels, J. M. Diefendorff, 
and G. J. Greguras, “Emotional Labor Actors: A Latent Pro-
file Analysis of Emotional Labor Strategies,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 100, no. 3 (2015): 863–79.
	42.	 J. M. Diefendorff and G. J. Greguras, “Contextualizing Emo-
tional Display Rules: Examining the Roles of Targets and 
Discrete Emotions in Shaping Display Rule Perceptions,” 
Journal of Management 35, no. 4 (2009): 880–98.
	43.	 D. T. Wagner, C. M. Barnes, and B. A. Scott, “Driving It 
Home: How Workplace Emotional Labor Harms Employee 
Home Life,” Personnel Psychology 67, no. 2 (2014): 
487–516.
	44.	 J. P. Trougakos, D. J. Beal, B. H. Cheng, I. Hideg, and D. 
Zweig, “Too Drained to Help: A Resource Depletion Perspec-
tive on Daily Interpersonal Citizenship Behaviors,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 227–36.

342	 Endnotes
	45.	 J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller et al. “A Meta-Analytic Structural 
Model of Dispositional Affectivity and Emotional Labor,” 
Personnel Psychology 66, no. 1 (2013): 47–90.
	46.	 B. A. Scott, C. M. Barnes, and D. T. Wagner, “Chameleonic 
or Consistent? A Multilevel Investigation of Emotional Labor 
Variability and Self-Monitoring,” Academy of Management 
Journal 55, no. 4 (2012): 905–26.
	47.	 J. P. Trougakos, D. J. Beal, S. G. Green, and H. M. Weiss, 
“Making the Break Count: An Episodic Examination of Re-
covery Activities, Emotional Experiences, and Positive Af-
fective Displays,” Academy of Management Journal 51, no. 1 
(2008): 131–46.
	48.	 U. R. Hülsheger, J. W. B. Lang, A. F. Schewe, and F. R. H. 
Zijlstra, “When Regulating Emotions at Work Pays Off: A 
Diary and an Intervention Study on Emotion Regulation and 
Customer Tips in Service Jobs,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 100, no. 2 (2015): 263–77.
	49.	 J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller et al. “A Meta-Analytic Structural 
Model of Dispositionally Affectivity and Emotional Labor.”
	50.	 K. L. Wang and M. Groth, “Buffering the Negative Effects 
of Employee Surface Acting: The Moderating Role of Em-
ployee-Customer Relationship Strength and Personalized 
Services,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 2 (2014): 
341–50.
	51.	 A. A. Grandey, “When ‘The Show Must Go on’: Surface 
Acting and Deep Acting as Determinants of Emotional Ex-
haustion and Peer-Rated Service Delivery,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal 46, no. 1 (2003): 86–96.
	52.	 U. R. HÜlsheger, H. J. E. Alberts, A. Feinholdt, and J. W. B. 
Lang, “Benefits of Mindfulness at Work: The Role of Mind-
fulness in Emotion Regulation, Emotional Exhaustion, and 
Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 2 
(2013): 310–25.
	53.	 R. Teper, Z. V. Segal, and M. Inzlicht, “Inside the Mind-
ful Mind: How Mindfulness Enhances Emotion Regulation 
through Improvements in Executive Control,” Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science 22, no. 6 (2013): 449–54.
	54.	 H. Guenter, I. J. H. van Emmerik, and B. Schreurs, “The 
Negative Effects of Delays in Information Exchange: Look-
ing at Workplace Relationships from an Affective Events 
Perspective,” Human Resource Management Review 24, no. 4  
(2014): 283–98; and F. K. Matta, H. T. Erol-Korkmaz, R. 
E. Johnson, and P. Biçaksiz, “Significant Work Events and 
Counterproductive Work Behavior: The Role of Fairness, 
Emotions, and Emotion Regulation,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior 35, no. 7 (2014): 920–44.
	55.	 C. D. Fisher, A. Minbashian, N. Beckmann, and R. E. Wood, 
“Task Appraisals, Emotions, and Performance Goal Orien-
tations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 
364–73.
	56.	 K. L. Wang and M. Groth, “Buffering the Negative Effects 
of Employee Surface Acting: The Moderating Role of Em-
ployee-Customer Relationship Strength and Personalized 
Services,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 2 (2014): 
341–50.
	57.	 T. Upshur-Lupberger, “Watch Your Mood: A Leadership 
Lesson,” The Huffington Post, April 22, 2015, http://www 
.huffingtonpost.com/terrie-upshurlupberger/watch-your-
mood-a-leaders_b_7108648.html.
	58.	 Ibid.
	59.	 P. Salovey and D. Grewal, “The Science of Emotional Intelli-
gence,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 14, no. 6 
(2005): 281–85; and D. Geddes and R. R. Callister, “Crossing 
the Line(s): A Dual Threshold Model of Anger in Organiza-
tions,” Academy of Management Review 32, no. 3 (2007): 
721–46.
	60.	 R. Gilkey, R. Caceda, and C. Kilts, “When Emotional Reasoning 
Trumps IQ,” Harvard Business Review, September 2010, 27.
	61.	 M. Seo and L. F. Barrett, “Being Emotional during Decision 
Making—Good or Bad? An Empirical Investigation,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 50, no. 4 (2007): 923–40.
	62.	 S. L. Koole, “The Psychology of Emotion Regulation: 
An Integrative Review,” Cognition and Emotion 23, no. 1 
(2009): 4–41; and H. A. Wadlinger and D. M. Isaacowitz, 
“Fixing Our Focus: Training Attention to Regulate Emo-
tion,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 15, no. 1 
(2011): 75–102.
	63.	 D. H. Kluemper, T. DeGroot, and S. Choi, “Emotion Man-
agement Ability: Predicting Task Performance, Citizenship, 
and Deviance,” Journal of Management 39, no. 4 (2013): 
878–905. 
	64.	 J. V. Wood, S. A. Heimpel, L. A. Manwell, and E. J. Whit-
tington, “This Mood Is Familiar and I Don’t Deserve to 
Feel Better Anyway: Mechanisms Underlying Self-Esteem 
Differences in Motivation to Repair Sad Moods,” Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology 96, no. 2 (2009): 
363–80.
	65.	 E. Kim, D. P. Bhave, and T. M. Glomb, “Emotion Regula-
tion in Workgroups: The Roles of Demographic Diversity and 
Relational Work Context,” Personnel Psychology 66, no. 3 
(2013): 613–44.
	66.	 Ibid.
	67.	 S. L. Koole, “The Psychology of Emotion Regulation: An Inte-
grative Review,” Cognition and Emotion 23, no. 1 (2009): 4–41.
	68.	 L. K. Barber, P. G. Bagsby, and D. C. Munz, “Affect Regula-
tion Strategies for Promoting (or Preventing) Flourishing Emo-
tional Health,” Personality and Individual Differences 49, no. 6 
(2010): 663–66.
	69.	 J. J. Lee and F. Gino, “Poker-Faced Morality: Concealing Emo-
tions Leads to Utilitarian Decision Making,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Decision Processes 126 (2015): 49–64.
	70.	 Ibid.
	71.	 R. H. Humphrey, “How Do Leaders Use Emotional Labor?” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 33, no. 5 (2012): 740–44.
	72.	 A. M. Grant, “Rocking the Boat But Keeping It Steady: The 
Role of Emotion Regulation in Employee Voice,” Academy of 
Management Journal 56, no. 6 (2013): 1703–23.
	73.	 S. Reddy, “Walk This Way: Acting Happy Can Make It So,” 
The Wall Street Journal, November 18, 2014, D3.
	74.	 S. M. Carpenter, S. Peters, D. Vastfjall, and A. M. Isen, “Posi-
tive Feelings Facilitate Working Memory and Complex Deci-
sion Making among Older Adults,” Cognition and Emotion 
27, no. 1 (2013): 184–92; B. E. Hermalin and A. M. Isen, 
“A Model of Affect on Economic Decision Making,” QME-
Quantitative Marketing and Economics 6, no. 1 (2008): 17–
40; and B. Scheibehenne and B. von Helversen, “Selecting 
Decision Strategies: The Differential Role of Affect,” Cogni-
tion and Emotion 29, no. 1 (2015): 158–67.
	75.	 N. Nunez, K. Schweitzer, C. A. Chai, and B. Myers, “Nega-
tive Emotions Felt during Trial: The Effect of Fear, Anger, 
and Sadness on Juror Decision Making,” Applied Cognitive 
Psychology 29, no. 2 (2015): 200–9.
	76.	 S. N. Mohanty and D. Suar, “Decision Making under Un-
certainty and Information Processing in Positive and Nega-
tive Mood States,” Psychological Reports 115, no. 1 (2014): 
91–105.

	
Endnotes	 343
	77.	 S.-C. Chuang and H.-M. Lin, “The Effect of Induced Positive 
and Negative Emotion and Openness-to-Feeling in Student’s 
Consumer Decision Making,” Journal of Business and Psy-
chology 22, no. 1 (2007): 65–78.
	78.	 D. van Knippenberg, H. J. M. Kooij-De Bode, and W. P. van 
Ginkel, “The Interactive Effects of Mood and Trait Negative 
Affect in Group Decision Making,” Organization Science 21, 
no. 3 (2010): 731–44.
	79.	 S. Lyubomirsky, L. King, and E. Diener, “The Benefits of 
Frequent Positive Affect: Does Happiness Lead to Success?” 
Psychological Bulletin 131, no. 6 (2005): 803–55; and M. 
Baas, C. K. W. De Dreu, and B. A. Nijstad, “A Meta-Analysis 
of 25 Years of Mood-Creativity Research: Hedonic Tone, Ac-
tivation, or Regulatory Focus,” Psychological Bulletin 134, 
no. 6 (2008): 779–806.
	80.	 M. J. Grawitch, D. C. Munz, and E. K. Elliott, “Promoting 
Creativity in Temporary Problem-Solving Groups: The Ef-
fects of Positive Mood and Autonomy in Problem Definition 
on Idea-Generating Performance,” Group Dynamics 7, no. 3 
(2003): 200–13.
	81.	 S. Lyubomirsky, L. King, and E. Diener, “The Benefits of Fre-
quent Positive Affect: Does Happiness Lead to Success?” 
	82.	 C. K. W. De Dreu, M. Baas, and B. A. Nijstad, “Hedonic Tone 
and Activation Level in the Mood-Creativity Link: Toward a 
Dual Pathway to Creativity Model,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 94, no. 5 (2008): 739–56; and J. M. 
George and J. Zhou, “Dual Tuning in a Supportive Context: 
Joint Contributions of Positive Mood, Negative Mood, and 
Supervisory Behaviors to Employee Creativity,” Academy of 
Management Journal 50, no. 3 (2007): 605–22.
	83.	 M. B. Wieth and R. T. Zacks, “Time of Day Effects on Prob-
lem Solving: When the Non-Optimal Is Optimal,” Thinking & 
Reasoning 17, no. 4 (2011): 387–401.
	84.	 R. Ilies and T. A. Judge, “Goal Regulation across Time: The 
Effect of Feedback and Affect,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 90, no. 3 (May 2005): 453–67.
	85.	 W. Tsai, C.-C. Chen, and H. Liu, “Test of a Model Linking 
Employee Positive Moods and Task Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 92, no. 6 (2007): 1570–83.
	86.	 J. E. Bono, H. J. Foldes, G. Vinson, and J. P. Muros, “Work-
place Emotions: The Role of Supervision and Leadership,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 5 (2007): 1357–67.
	87.	 S. G. Liang and S.-C. S. Chi, “Transformational Leadership 
and Follower Task Performance: The Role of Susceptibility to 
Positive Emotions and Follower Positive Emotions,” Journal 
of Business and Psychology 28, no. 1 (2013): 17–29.
	88.	 V. A. Visser, D. van Knippenberg, G. Van Kleef, and B. Wisse, 
“How Leader Displays of Happiness and Sadness Influence 
Follower Performance: Emotional Contagion and Creative 
versus Analytical Performance,” Leadership Quarterly 24, 
no. 1 (2013): 172–88.
	89.	 P. S. Christoforou and B. E. Ashforth, “Revisiting the De-
bate on the Relationship Between Display Rules and Per-
formance: Considering the Explicitness of Display Rules,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 249–61; 
A. Grandey, D. Rupp, and W. N. Brice, “Emotional Labor 
Threatens Decent Work: A Proposal to Eradicate Emotional 
Display Rules,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 36, no. 
6 (2015): 770–85; and W.-M. Hur, T.-W. Moon, and Y. S. 
Jung, “Customer Response to Employee Emotional Labor: 
The Structural Relationship Between Emotional Labor, Job 
Satisfaction, and Customer Satisfaction,” Journal of Services 
Marketing 29, no. 1 (2015): 71–80.
	90.	 P. B. Barker and A. A. Grandey, “Service with a Smile and 
Encounter Satisfaction: Emotional Contagion and Appraisal 
Mechanisms,” Academy of Management Journal 49, no. 
6 (2006): 1229–38; and E. Y. J. Tee, “The Emotional Link: 
Leadership and the Role of Implicit and Explicit Emotional 
Contagion Processes across Multiple Organizational Levels,” 
Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 4 (2015): 654–70.
	91.	 D. E. Rupp and S. Spencer, “When Customers Lash Out: The 
Effects of Customer Interactional Injustice on Emotional La-
bor and the Mediating Role of Emotions,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 91, no. 4 (2006): 971–78; and W. C. Tsai and Y. 
M. Huang, “Mechanisms Linking Employee Affective Deliv-
ery and Customer Behavioral Intentions, Journal of Applied 
Psychology 87, no. 5 (2002): 1001–8.
	92.	 T. A. Judge and R. Ilies, “Affect and Job Satisfaction: A Study 
of Their Relationship at Work and at Home,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 89, no. 4 (2004): 661–73.
	93.	 Z. Song, M. Foo, and M. A. Uy, “Mood Spillover and Cross-
over among Dual-Earner Couples: A Cell Phone Event Sampling 
Study,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 2 (2008): 443–52.
	94.	 T. J. Zagenczyk, S. L. D. Restubog, C. Kiewitz, K. Kiazad, 
and R. L. Tang, “Psychological Contracts as a Mediator 
between Machiavellianism and Employee Citizenship and 
Deviant Behaviors,” Journal of Management 40, no. 4 
(2014): 1109–22.
	95.	 T. A. Judge, B. A. Scott, and R. Ilies, “Hostility, Job Attitudes, 
and Workplace Deviance: Test of a Multilevel Mode,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 126–38; and S. Ka-
plan, J. C. Bradley, J. N. Luchman, and D. Haynes, “On the 
Role of Positive and Negative Affectivity in Job Performance: 
A Meta-Analytic Investigation,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 94, no. 1 (2009): 152–76.
	96.	 S. C. Douglas, C. Kiewitz, M. Martinko, P. Harvey, Y. Kim, 
and J. U. Chun, “Cognitions, Emotions, and Evaluations: An 
Elaboration Likelihood Model for Workplace Aggression,” 
Academy of Management Review 33, no. 2 (2008): 425–51.
	97.	 A. K Khan, S. Ouratulain, and J. R. Crawshaw, “The Mediat-
ing Role of Discrete Emotions in the Relationship between 
Injustice and Counterproductive Work Behaviors: A Study 
in Pakistan,” Journal of Business and Psychology 28, no. 1 
(2013): 49–61.
	98.	 S. Kaplan, J. C. Bradley, J. N. Luchman, and D. Haynes, “On 
the Role of Positive and Negative Affectivity in Job Perfor-
mance: A Meta-Analytic Investigation;” and J. Maiti, “Design 
for Worksystem Safety Using Employees’ Perception about 
Safety,” Work—A Journal of Prevention Assessment & Reha-
bilitation 41 (2012): 3117–22.
	99.	 J. E. Bono and R. Ilies, “Charisma, Positive Emotions and 
Mood Contagion,” Leadership Quarterly 17, no. 4 (2006): 
317–34.
CHAPTER 4
	 1.	 D. Leising, J. Scharloth, O. Lohse, and D. Wood, “What 
Types of Terms Do People Use When Describing an Individ-
ual’s Personality?” Psychological Science 25, no. 9 (2014): 
1787–94.
	 2.	 B. W. Roberts and D. Mroczek, “Personality Trait Change in 
Adulthood,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 17, 
no. 1 (2008): 31–5.
	 3.	 L. Weber, “To Get a Job, New Hires Are Put to the Test,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2015, A1, A10.

344	 Endnotes
	 4.	 L. Weber and E. Dwoskin, “As Personality Tests Multiply, 
Employers Are Split,” The Wall Street Journal, September 30, 
2014, A1, A10.
	 5.	 D. Belkin, “Colleges Put the Emphasis on Personality,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 9, 2015, A3.
	 6.	 K. I. van der Zee, J. N. Zaal, and J. Piekstra, “Validation of 
the Multicultural Personality Questionnaire in the Context of 
Personnel Selection,” European Journal of Personality 17,  
no. S1 (2003): S77–S100.
	 7.	 S. A. Birkeland, T. M. Manson, J. L. Kisamore, M. T. Bran-
nick, and M. A. Smith, “A Meta-Analytic Investigation of 
Job Applicant Faking on Personality Measures,” Interna-
tional Journal of Selection and Assessment 14, no. 14 (2006): 
317–35.
	 8.	 K. L. Cullen, W. A. Gentry, and F. J. Yammamarino, “Bi-
ased Self-Perception Tendencies: Self-Enhancement/Self- 
Diminishment and Leader Derailment in Individualis-
tic and Collectivistic Cultures,” Applied Psychology: An  
International Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 161–207.
	 9.	 D. H. Kluemper, B. D. McLarty, and M. N. Bing,  
“Acquaintance Ratings of the Big Five Personal-
ity Traits: Incremental Validity beyond and Interactive  
Effects with Self-Reports in the Prediction of Work-
place Deviance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, 
no. 1 (2015): 237–48; I. Oh, G. Wang, and M. K. 
Mount, “Validity of Observer Ratings of the Five- 
Factor Model of Personality Traits: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 4 (2011): 762–73.
	10.	 S. E. Hampson and L. R. Goldberg, “A First Large Cohort 
Study of Personality Trait Stability over the 40 Years between 
Elementary School and Midlife,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 91, no. 4 (2006): 763–79.
	11.	 S. Srivastava, O. P. John, and S. D. Gosling, “Development of 
Personality in Early and Middle Adulthood: Set Like Plaster 
or Persistent Change?” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology 84, no. 5 (2003): 1041–53; and B. W. Roberts, K. E. 
Walton, and W. Viechtbauer, “Patterns of Mean-Level Change 
in Personality Traits across the Life Course: A Meta-Analysis 
of Longitudinal Studies,” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 1 
(2006): 1–25.
	12.	 R. B. Kennedy and D. A. Kennedy, “Using the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator in Career Counseling,” Journal of Employment 
Counseling 41, no. 1 (2004): 38–44.
	13.	 See, for example, I. Oh, G. Wang, and M. K. Mount, “Validity 
of Observer Ratings of the Five-Factor Model of Personal-
ity Traits: A Meta-Analysis;” and M. R. Barrick and M. K. 
Mount, “Yes, Personality Matters: Moving on to More Impor-
tant Matters,” Human Performance 18, no. 4 (2005): 359–72.
	14.	 W. Fleeson and P. Gallagher, “The Implications of Big Five 
Standing for the Distribution of Trait Manifestation in Behav-
ior: Fifteen Experience-Sampling Studies and a Meta-Analy-
sis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97, no. 6 
(2009): 1097–114.
	15.	 T. A. Judge, L. S. Simon, C. Hurst, and K. Kelley, “What I 
Experienced Yesterday Is Who I Am Today: Relationship of 
Work Motivations and Behaviors to Within-Individual Varia-
tion in the Five-Factor Model of Personality,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 99, no. 2 (2014): 199–221.
	16.	 R. D. Zimmerman, W. R. Boswell, A. J. Shipp, B. B. Dun-
ford, and J. W. Boudreau, “Explaining the Pathways between 
Approach-Avoidance Personality Traits and Employees’ Job 
Search Behavior,” Journal of Management 38, no. 5 (2012): 
1450–75.
	17.	 See, for instance, I. Oh and C. M. Berry, “The Five-Factor 
Model of Personality and Managerial Performance: Validity 
Gains through the Use of 360 Degree Performance Ratings,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 6 (2009): 1498–513; 
J. Hogan and B. Holland, “Using Theory to Evaluate Person-
ality and Job-Performance Relations: A Socioanalytic Per-
spective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 1 (2003): 
100–12; and M. R. Barrick and M. K. Mount, “Select on Con-
scientiousness and Emotional Stability,” in Handbook of Prin-
ciples of Organizational Behavior, ed. E. A. Locke (Malden, 
MA: Blackwell, 2004), 15–28.
	18.	 P. R. Sackett and P. T. Walmsley, “Which Personality Attri-
butes Are Most Important in the Workplace?” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science 9, no. 5 (2014): 538–51.
	19.	 A. E. Poropat, “A Meta-Analysis of the Five-Factor Model of 
Personality and Academic Performance,” Psychological Bul-
letin 135, no. 2 (2009): 322–38.
	20.	 A. K. Nandkeolyar, J. A. Shaffer, A. Li, S. Ekkirala, and J. 
Bagger, “Surviving an Abusive Supervisor: The Joint Roles of 
Conscientiousness and Coping Strategies,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 99, no. 1 (2014): 138–50.
	21.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and M. Feys, “Big Five Traits and In-
trinsic Success in the New Career Era: A 15-Year Longitu-
dinal Study on Employability and Work-Family Conflict,” 
Applied Psychology: An International Review 62, no. 1 
(2013): 124–56.
	22.	 M. K. Shoss, K. Callison, and L. A. Witt, “The Effects of 
Other-Oriented Perfectionism and Conscientiousness on 
Helping at Work,” Applied Psychology: An International Re-
view 64, no. 1 (2015): 233–51.
	23.	 C. Robert and Y. H. Cheung, “An Examination of the Rela-
tionship between Conscientiousness and Group Performance 
on a Creative Task,” Journal of Research in Personality 44, 
no. 2 (2010): 222–31; and M. Batey, T. Chamorro-Premuzic, 
and A. Furnham, “Individual Differences in Ideational Behav-
ior. Can the Big Five and Psychometric Intelligence Predict 
Creativity Scores?” Creativity Research Journal 22, no. 1 
(2010): 90–97.
	24.	 J. L. Huang, A. M. Ryan, K. L. Zabel, and A. Palmer, “Per-
sonality and Adaptive Performance at Work: A Meta-Analytic  
Investigation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 1 
(2014): 162–79.
	25.	 R. D. Zimmerman, W. R. Boswell, A. J. Shipp, B. B. Dun-
ford, and J. W. Boudreau, “Explaining the Pathways between 
Approach-Avoidance Personality Traits and Employees’ Job 
Search Behavior,” Journal of Management 38, no. 5 (2012): 
1450–75.
	26.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and M. Feys, “Big Five Traits and In-
trinsic Success in the New Career Era: A 15-Year Longitudi-
nal Study on Employability and Work-Family Conflict.”
	27.	 R. J. Foti and M. A. Hauenstein, “Pattern and Variable Ap-
proaches in Leadership Emergence and Effectiveness,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 2 (2007): 347–55.
	28.	 B. Weiss and R. S. Feldman, “Looking Good and Lying to Do 
It: Deception as an Impression Management Strategy in Job 
Interviews,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 36, no. 4 
(2006): 1070–86.
	29.	 A. Minbashian, J. Earl, and J. E. H. Bright, “Openness to Expe-
rience as a Predictor of Job Performance Trajectories,” Applied 
Psychology: An International Review 62, no. 1 (2013): 1–12.
	30.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and M. Feys, “Big Five Traits and In-
trinsic Success in the New Career Era: A 15-Year Longitudi-
nal Study on Employability and Work-Family Conflict.”

	
Endnotes	 345
	31.	 R. Ilies, I. S. Fulmer, M. Spitzmuller, and M. D. Johnson, 
“Personality and Citizenship Behavior: The Mediating Role 
of Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 4 
(2009): 945–59.
	32.	 D. H. Kluemper, B. D. McLarty, and M. N. Bing, “Acquain-
tance Ratings of the Big Five Personality Traits: Incremental 
Validity beyond and Interactive Effects with Self-Reports in 
the Prediction of Workplace Deviance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 237–48.
	33.	 S. Clarke and I. Robertson, “An Examination of the Role of 
Personality in Accidents Using Meta-Analysis,” Applied Psy-
chology: An International Review 57, no. 1 (2008): 94–108.
	34.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and M. Feys, “Big Five Traits and In-
trinsic Success in the New Career Era: A 15-Year Longitudi-
nal Study on Employability and Work-Family Conflict.”
	35.	 See, for instance, S. Yamagata, et al., “Is the Genetic Struc-
ture of Human Personality Universal? A Cross-Cultural Twin 
Study from North America, Europe, and Asia,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 90, no. 6 (2006): 987–98; 
and R. R. McCrae, et al., “Consensual Validation of Personal-
ity Traits across Cultures,” Journal of Research in Personality 
38, no. 2 (2004): 179–201.
	36.	 M. Gurven, C. von Ruden, M. Massenkoff, H. Kaplan, and 
M. L. Vie, “How Universal Is the Big Five? Testing the Five-
Factor Model of Personality Variation among Forager-Farmers 
in the Bolivian Amazon,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 104, no. 2 (2013): 354–70.
	37.	 J. F. Rauthmann, “The Dark Triad and Interpersonal Percep-
tion: Similarities and Differences in the Social Consequences 
of Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and Psychopathy,” So-
cial Psychological and Personality Science 3, no. 4 (2012): 
487–96.
	38.	 P. D. Harms and S. M. Spain, “Beyond the Bright Side: Dark 
Personality at Work,” Applied Psychology: An International 
Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 15–24.
	39.	 P. K. Jonason, S. Slomski, and J. Partyka, “The Dark Triad 
at Work: How Toxic Employees Get Their Way,” Personality 
and Individual Differences 52, no. 3 (2012): 449–53.
	40.	 E. H. O’Boyle, D. R. Forsyth, G. C. Banks, and M. A. Mc-
Daniel, “A Meta-Analysis of the Dark Triad and Work Be-
havior: A Social Exchange Perspective,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 97, no. 3 (2012): 557–79.
	41.	 L. Zhang and M. A. Gowan, “Corporate Social Responsibility, 
Applicants’ Individual Traits, and Organizational Attraction: 
A Person–Organization Fit Perspective,” Journal of Business 
and Psychology 27, no. 3 (2012): 345–62.
	42.	 D. N. Hartog and F. D. Belschak, “Work Engagement and Ma-
chiavellianism in the Ethical Leadership Process,” Journal of 
Business Ethics 107, no. 1 (2012): 35–47.
	43.	 E. Grijalva and P. D. Harms, “Narcissism: An Integrative Syn-
thesis and Dominance Complementarity Model,” Academy of 
Management Perspectives 28, no. 2 (2014): 108–27.
	44.	 D. C. Maynard, E. M. Brondolo, C. E. Connelly, and C. E. 
Sauer, “I’m Too Good for This Job: Narcissism’s Role in the 
Experience of Overqualification,” Applied Psychology: An In-
ternational Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 208–32.
	45.	 E. Grijalva and P. D. Harms, “Narcissism: An Integrative Syn-
thesis and Dominance Complementarity Model.”
	46.	 B. J. Brummel and K. N. Parker, “Obligation and Entitlement 
in Society and the Workplace,” Applied Psychology: An Inter-
national Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 127–60.
	47.	 E. Grijalva and D. A. Newman, “Narcissism and Coun-
terproductive Work Behavior (CWB): Meta-Analysis and 
Consideration of Collectivist Culture, Big Five Personality, 
and Narcissism’s Facet Structure,” Applied Psychology: An 
International Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 93–126.
	48.	 D. C. Maynard, E. M. Brondolo, C. E. Connelly, and C. E. 
Sauer, “I’m Too Good for This Job: Narcissism’s Role in the 
Experience of Overqualification.”
	49.	 E. Grijalva and P. D. Harms, “Narcissism: An Integrative Syn-
thesis and Dominance Complementarity Model.”
	50.	 J. J. Sosik, J. U. Chun, and W. Zhu, “Hang on to Your Ego: 
The Moderating Role of Leader Narcissism on Relationships 
between Leader Charisma and Follower Psychological Em-
powerment and Moral Identity,” Journal of Business Ethics 
120, no. 1 (12, 2013); and B. M. Galvin, D. A. Waldman, and 
P. Balthazard, “Visionary Communication Qualities as Media-
tors of the Relationship between Narcissism and Attributions 
of Leader Charisma,” Personnel Psychology 63, no. 3 (2010): 
509–37.
	51.	 D. Meinert, “Narcissistic Bosses Aren’t All Bad, Study 
Finds,” HR Magazine, March 2014, 18.
	52.	 K. A. Byrne and D. A. Worthy, “Do Narcissists Make Bet-
ter Decisions? An Investigation of Narcissism and Dynamic 
Decision-Making Performance,” Personality and Individual 
Differences 55, no. 2 (2013): 112–17.
	53.	 C. Andreassen, H. Ursin, H. Eriksen, and S. Pallesen, “The 
Relationship of Narcissism with Workaholism, Work Engage-
ment, and Professional Position,” Social Behavior and Per-
sonality 40, no. 6 (2012): 881–90.
	54.	 O’Boyle, Forsyth, Banks, and McDaniel, “A Meta-Analysis 
of the Dark Triad and Work Behavior: A Social Exchange Per-
spective,” 558.
	55.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and B. De Clercq, “Expanding and 
Reconceptualizing Aberrant Personality at Work: Validity of 
Five-Factor Model Aberrant Personality Tendencies to Predict 
Career Outcomes,” Personnel Psychology 66, no. 1 (2013): 
173–223.
	56.	 P. K. Jonason, S. Slomski, and J. Partyka, “The Dark Triad 
at Work: How Toxic Employees Get Their Way,” Personal-
ity and Individual Differences; and H. M. Baughman, S. 
Dearing, E. Giammarco, and P. A. Vernon, “Relationships 
between Bullying Behaviours and the Dark Triad: A Study 
with Adults,” Personality and Individual Differences 52, no. 5 
(2012): 571–75.
	57.	 U. Orth and R. W. Robins, “Understanding the Link between 
Low Self-Esteem and Depression,” Current Directions in Psy-
chological Science 22, no. 6 (2013): 455–60.
	58.	 B. Wille, F. De Fruyt, and B. De Clercq, “Expanding and 
Reconceptualizing Aberrant Personality at Work: Validity of 
Five-Factor Model Aberrant Personality Tendencies to Predict 
Career Outcomes.” 
	59.	 T. A. Judge, A. Erez, J. E. Bono, and C. J. Thoreson, “The 
Core Self-Evaluations Scale: Development of a Measure,” 
Personnel Psychology 56, no. 2 (2003): 303–31.
	60.	 A. N. Salvaggio, B. Schneider, L. H. Nishi, D. M. Mayer, 
A. Ramesh, and J. S. Lyon, “Manager Personality, Manager 
Service Quality Orientation, and Service Climate: Test of 
a Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 6 (2007): 
1741–50; B. A. Scott and T. A. Judge, “The Popularity Con-
test at Work: Who Wins, Why, and What Do They Receive?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 20–33; and 
T. A. Judge and C. Hurst, “How the Rich (and Happy) Get 
Richer (and Happier): Relationship of Core Self-Evaluations 
to Trajectories in Attaining Work Success,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 4 (2008): 849–63.

346	 Endnotes
	61.	 A. M. Grant and A. Wrzesniewksi, “I Won’t Let You Down . . .  
or Will I? Core Self-Evaluations, Other-Orientation, Antici-
pated Guilt and Gratitude, and Job Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 108–21.
	62.	 L. Parks-Leduc, M. W. Pattie, F. Pargas, and R. G. Eliason, 
“Self-Monitoring as an Aggregate Construct: Relationships 
with Personality and Values,” Personality and Individual Dif-
ferences 58 (2014): 3–8.
	63.	 F. J. Flynn and D. R. Ames, “What’s Good for the Goose 
May Not Be as Good for the Gander: The Benefits of Self-
Monitoring for Men and Women in Task Groups and Dyadic 
Conflicts,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006): 
272–81.
	64.	 P.-Y. Liao, “The Role of Self-Concept in the Mechanism Link-
ing Proactive Personality to Employee Work Outcomes,” Ap-
plied Psychology—An International Review 64, no. 2 (2015): 
421–43.
	65.	 K. Tornau and M. Frese, “Construct Clean-up in Proactiv-
ity Research: A Meta-Analysis on the Nomological Net of 
Work-Related Proactivity Concepts and Their Incremental 
Values,” Applied Psychology: An International Review 62, no. 
1 (2013): 44–96.
	66.	 W.-D. Li, D. Fay, M. Frese, P. D. Harms, and X. Y. Gao, 
“Reciprocal Relationship between Proactive Personality 
and Work Characteristics: A Latent Change Score Ap-
proach,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 5 (2014): 
948–65.
	67.	 P. D. Converse, P. J. Pathak, A. M. DePaul-Haddock, T. Got-
lib, and M. Merbedone, “Controlling Your Environment and 
Yourself: Implications for Career Success,” Journal of Voca-
tional Behavior 80, no. 1 (2012): 148–59.
	68.	 G. Chen, J. Farh, E. M. Campbell-Bush, Z. Wu, and X. Wu, 
“Teams as Innovative Systems: Multilevel Motivational An-
tecedents of Innovation in R&D Teams,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 6 (2013).
	69.	 Y. Gong, S.-Y. Cheung, M. Wang, and J.-C. Huang, “Unfold-
ing the Proactive Process for Creativity: Integration of the 
Employee Proactivity, Information Exchange, and Psycho-
logical Safety Perspectives,” Journal of Management 38, no. 
5 (2012): 1611–33.
	70.	 Z. Zhang, M. Wang, and S. Junqi, “Leader-Follower Con-
gruence in Proactive Personality and Work Outcomes: The 
Mediating Role of Leader-Member Exchange,” Academy of 
Management Journal 55, no. 1 (2012): 111–30.
	71.	 G. Van Hoye and H. Lootens, “Coping with Unemployment: 
Personality, Role Demands, and Time Structure,” Journal of 
Vocational Behavior 82, no. 2 (2013): 85–95.
	72.	 R. D. Meyer, R. S. Dalal, and R. Hermida, “A Review and 
Synthesis of Situational Strength in the Organizational Sci-
ences,” Journal of Management 36, no. 1 (2010): 121–40.
	73.	 R. D. Meyer et al., “Measuring Job-Related Situational 
Strength and Assessing Its Interactive Effects with Personal-
ity on Voluntary Work Behavior,” Journal of Management 40, 
no. 4 (2014): 1010–41.
	74.	 A. M. Watson et al., “When Big Brother Is Watching: Goal 
Orientation Shapes Reactions to Electronic Monitoring dur-
ing Online Training,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 4 
(2013): 642–57.
	75.	 Y. Kim, L. Van Dyne, D. Kamdar, and R. E. Johnson, “Why 
and When Do Motives Matter? An Integrative Model of Mo-
tives, Role Cognitions, and Social Support as Predictors of 
OCB,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses 121, no. 2 (2013): 231–45.
	76.	 G. R. Maio, J. M. Olson, M. M. Bernard, and M. A. Luke, 
“Ideologies, Values, Attitudes, and Behavior,” in Handbook 
of Social Psychology, ed. J. Delamater (New York: Springer, 
2003), 283–308.
	77.	 See, for instance, A. Bardi, J. A. Lee, N. Hofmann-Tow-
figh, and G. Soutar, “The Structure of Intraindividual Value 
Change,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97, 
no. 5 (2009): 913–29.
	78.	 B. C. Holtz and C. M. Harold, “Interpersonal Justice and De-
viance: The Moderating Effects of Interpersonal Justice Val-
ues and Justice Orientation,” Journal of Management 39, no. 2 
 (2013): 339–65.
	79.	 See, for example, N. R. Lockwood, F. R. Cepero, and S. Wil-
liams, The Multigenerational Workforce (Alexandria, VA: 
Society for Human Resource Management, 2009).
	80.	 E. Parry and P. Urwin, “Generational Differences in Work Val-
ues: A Review of Theory and Evidence,” International Jour-
nal of Management Reviews 13, no. 1 (2011): 79–96.
	81.	 J. M. Twenge, S. M. Campbell, B. J. Hoffman, and C. E. 
Lance, “Generational Differences in Work Values: Leisure 
and Extrinsic Values Increasing, Social and Intrinsic Val-
ues Decreasing,” Journal of Management 36, no. 5 (2010): 
1117–42.
	82.	 B. J. Dik, S. R. Strife, and J.-I. C. Hansen, “The Flip Side 
of Holland Type Congruence: Incongruence and Job Satisfac-
tion,” Career Development Quarterly 58, no. 4 (2010): 352–
58; A. Rezaei, A. Qorbanpoor, T. A. Gatab, and A. Rezaei, 
“Comparative Research for Personality Types of Guilan Uni-
versity Physical Exercise and Counseling Students Based on 
Holland Theory,” Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences 
30 (2011): 2032–36; and D. L. Ohler and E. M. Levinson, 
“Using Holland’s Theory in Employment Counseling: Focus 
on Service Occupations,” Journal of Employment Counseling 
49, no. 4 (2012): 148–59.
	83.	 Y. Lee and J. Antonakis, “When Preference Is Not Satis-
fied But the Individual Is: How Power Distance Moderates 
Person-Job Fit,” Journal of Management 40, no. 3 (2014): 
641–57.
	84.	 W. Arthur Jr., S. T. Bell, A. J. Villado, and D. Doverspike, 
“The Use of Person–Organization Fit in Employment Deci-
sion-Making: An Assessment of Its Criterion-Related Valid-
ity,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 4 (2006): 786–801; 
and J. R. Edwards, D. M. Cable, I. O. Williamson, L. S. Lam-
bert, and A. J. Shipp, “The Phenomenology of Fit: Linking 
the Person and Environment to the Subjective Experience of 
Person–Environment Fit,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, 
no. 4 (2006): 802–27.
	85.	 E. E. Kausel and J. E. Slaughter, “Narrow Personality Traits 
and Organizational Attraction: Evidence for the Complemen-
tary Hypothesis,” Organizational Behavior and Human Deci-
sion Processes 114, no. 1 (2011): 3–14; and A. Leung and S. 
Chaturvedi, “Linking the Fits, Fitting the Links: Connecting 
Different Types of PO Fit to Attitudinal Outcomes,” Journal 
of Vocational Behavior 79, no. 2 (2011): 391–402.
	86.	 M. L. Verquer, T. A. Beehr, and S. E. Wagner, “A Meta-
Analysis of Relations between Person–Organization Fit and 
Work Attitudes,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 63, no. 3 
(2003): 473–89; and J. C. Carr, A. W. Pearson, M. J. Vest, 
and S. L. Boyar, “Prior Occupational Experience, Antici-
patory Socialization, and Employee Retention”, Journal of 
Management 32, no. 3 (2006): 343–59.
	87.	 K. H. Ehrhart, D. M. Mayer, and J. C. Ziegert, “Web-
Based Recruitment in the Millennial Generation: Work-Life 

	
Endnotes	 347
Balance, Website Usability, and Organizational Attraction,” 
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 
21, no. 6 (2012): 850–74.
	88.	 I. -S. Oh et al. “Fit Happens Globally: A Meta-Analytic Com-
parison of the Relationships of Person-Environment Fit Di-
mensions with Work Attitudes and Performance across East 
Asia, Europe, and North America,” Personnel Psychology 67, 
no. 1 (2014): 99–152.
	89.	 See The Hofstede Centre, G. Hofstede. The Hofstede Centre 
(website), http://www.geert-hofstede.com.
	90.	 V. Taras, B. L. Kirkman, and P. Steel, “Examining the Im-
pact of Culture’s Consequences: A Three-Decade, Multilevel, 
Meta-Analytic Review of Hofstede’s Cultural Value Dimen-
sions,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 
405–39.
	91.	 R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, and P. W. Dorfman, 
eds., Leadership, Culture, and Organizations: The GLOBE 
Study of 62 Societies (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2004); 
and O. Schloesser et al., “Human Orientation as a New Cul-
tural Dimension of the GLOBE Project: A Validation Study 
of the GLOBE Scale and Out-Group Human Orientation in  
25 Countries,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 44, no. 
4 (2012): 535–51.
	92.	 J. P. Meyer et al., “Affective, Normative, and Continuance 
Commitment Levels across Cultures: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Vocational Behavior 80, no. 2 (2012): 225–45.
CHAPTER 5
	 1.	 E. Bernstein, “‘Honey, You Never Said…,’” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 24, 2015, D1, D4.
	 2.	 K. C. Yam, R. Fehr, and C. M. Barnes, “Morning Employees 
Are Perceived as Better Employees: Employees’ Start Times 
Influence Supervisor Performance Ratings,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 99, no. 6 (2014): 1288–99.
	 3.	 J. Dwyer, “Witness Accounts in Midtown Hammer Attack 
Show the Power of False Memory,” The New York Times,  
May 14, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/15/nyregion/ 
witness-accounts-in-midtown-hammer-attack-show-the-
power-of-false-memory.html?_r=1.
	 4.	 G. Fields and J. R. Emshwiller, “Long after Arrests, Records 
Live On,” The Wall Street Journal, December 26, 2014, A1, A10.
	 5.	 S. S. Wang, “The Science of Standing Out,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 18, 2014, D1, D4.
	 6.	 E. Zell and Z. Krizan, “Do People Have Insight into Their 
Abilities? A Metasynthesis,” Perspectives on Psychological 
Science 9, no. 2 (2014): 111–25.
	 7.	 E. Demerouti, D. Xanthopoulou, I. Tsaousis, and A. B. Bak-
ker, “Disentangling Task and Contextual Performance,” Jour-
nal of Personnel Psychology 13, no. 2 (2014): 59–69.
	 8.	 P. Harvey, K. Madison, M. Martinko, T. R. Crook, and T. 
A. Crook, “Attribution Theory in the Organizational Sci-
ences: The Road Traveled and the Path Ahead,” Academy of 
Management Perspectives 28, no. 2 (2014): 128–46; and M. 
J. Martinko, P. Harvey, and M. T. Dasborough, “Attribution 
Theory in the Organizational Sciences: A Case of Unreal-
ized Potential,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 32, no. 1 
(2011): 144–49.
	 9.	 C. M. de Melo, P. J. Carnevale, S. J. Read, and J. Gratch, 
“Reading People’s Minds from Emotion Expressions in In-
terdependent Decision Making,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 106, no. 1 (2014): 73–88.
	10.	 J. M. Moran, E. Jolly, and J. P. Mitchell, “Spontaneous Men-
talizing Predicts the Fundamental Attribution Error,” Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience 26, no. 3 (2014): 569–76; and D. 
R. Stadler, “Competing Roles for the Subfactors of Need 
for Closure in Committing the Fundamental Attribution Er-
ror,” Personality and Individual Differences 47, no. 7 (2009): 
701–5.
	11.	 See, for instance, M. Goerke, J. Moller, S. Schulz-Hardt, U. 
Napiersky, and D. Frey, “‘It’s Not My Fault—But Only I 
Can Change It’: Counterfactual and Prefactual Thoughts of 
Managers,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 2 (2004): 
279–92; and E. G. Hepper, R. H. Gramzow, and C. Sedikides, 
“Individual Differences in Self-Enhancement and Self-Protec-
tion Strategies: An Integrative Analysis,” Journal of Personal-
ity 78, no. 2 (2010): 781–814.
	12.	 J. D. Brown, “Across the (Not So) Great Divide: Cultural 
Similarities in Self-Evaluative Processes,” Social and Person-
ality Psychology Compass 4, no. 5 (2010): 318–30.
	13.	 A. Zhang, C. Reyna, Z. Qian, and G. Yu, “Interpersonal At-
tributions of Responsibility in the Chinese Workplace: A Test 
of Western Models in a Collectivistic Context,” Journal of Ap-
plied Social Psychology 38, no. 9 (2008): 2361–77; and A. 
Zhang, F. Xia, and C. Li, “The Antecedents of Help Giving 
in Chinese Culture: Attribution, Judgment of Responsibility, 
Expectation Change and the Reaction of Affect,” Social Be-
havior and Personality 35, no. 1 (2007): 135–42.
	14.	 See P. Rosenzweig, The Halo Effect (New York: The Free 
Press, 2007); I. Dennis, “Halo Effects in Grading Student 
Projects,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 4 (2007): 
1169–76; C. E. Naquin and R. O. Tynan, “The Team Halo Ef-
fect: Why Teams Are Not Blamed for Their Failures,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88, no. 2 (2003): 332–40; and T. M. 
Bechger, G. Maris, and Y. P. Hsiao, “Detecting Halo Effects 
in Performance-Based Evaluations,” Applied Psychological 
Measurement 34, no. 8 (2010): 607–19.
	15.	 J. K. Clark, K. C. Thiem, J. Barden, J. O’Rourke Stuart, and 
A. T. Evans, “Stereotype Validation: The Effects of Activating 
Negative Stereotypes after Intellectual Performance,” Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology 108, no. 4 (2015): 
531–52.
	16.	 J. L. Eberhardt, P. G. Davies, V. J. Purdic-Vaughns, and S. L. 
Johnson, “Looking Deathworthy: Perceived Stereotypicality 
of Black Defendants Predicts Capital-Sentencing Outcomes,” 
Psychological Science 17, no. 5 (2006): 383–86.
	17.	 A. S. Rosette, G. J. Leonardelli, and K. W. Phillips, “The 
White Standard: Racial Bias in Leader Categorization,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 (2008): 758–77.
	18.	 D. A. Hofmann, “Overcoming the Obstacles to Cross-Func-
tional Decision Making: Laying the Groundwork for Collab-
orative Problem Solving,” Organizational Dynamics 44, no. 1 
(2015): 17–25.
	19.	 E. Bernstein, “The Right Answer is ‘No,’” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 11, 2014, D1–D2.
	20.	 See, for example, P. L. Curseu and S. G. L. Schruijer, “De-
cision Styles and Rationality: An Analysis of the Predictive 
Validity of the General Decision-Making Style Inventory,” 
Educational and Psychological Measurement 72, no. 6 
(2012): 1053–62.
	21.	 For a review of the rational decision-making model, see M. 
Verweij, T. J. Senior, J. F. D. Dominguez, and R. Turner, 
“Emotion, Rationality, and Decision-Making: How to Link 
Affective and Social Neuroscience with Social Theory,” Fron-
tiers in Neuroscience 9, no. 332 (2015).

348	 Endnotes
	22.	 J. G. March, A Primer on Decision Making (New York: The 
Free Press, 2009); and D. Hardman and C. Harries, “How Ra-
tional Are We?” The Psychologist 15, no. 2 (2002): 76–79.
	23.	 M. H. Bazerman and D. A. Moore, Judgment in Managerial 
Decision Making (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
	24.	 J. E. Russo, K. A. Carlson, and M. G. Meloy, “Choosing an In-
ferior Alternative,” Psychological Science 17, no. 10 (2006): 
899–904.
	25.	 N. Halevy and E. Y. Chou, “How Decisions Happen: Focal 
Points and Blind Spots in Interdependent Decision Making,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 106, no. 3 
(2014): 398–417; D. Kahneman, “Maps of Bounded Ratio-
nality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics,” The American 
Economic Review 93, no. 5 (2003): 1449–75; and J. Zhang, C. 
K. Hsee, and Z. Xiao, “The Majority Rule in Individual Deci-
sion Making,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 99, no. 1 (2006): 102–11.
	26.	 G. Gigerenzer, “Why Heuristics Work,” Perspectives on Psy-
chological Science 3, no. 1 (2008): 20–29; and A. K. Shah 
and D. M. Oppenheimer, “Heuristics Made Easy: An Effort-
Reduction Framework,” Psychological Bulletin 134, no. 2 
(2008): 207–22.
	27.	 See A. W. Kruglanski and G. Gigerenzer, “Intuitive and Delib-
erate Judgments Are Based on Common Principles,” Psycho-
logical Review 118, no. 1 (2011): 97–109.
	28.	 E. Dane and M. G. Pratt, “Exploring Intuition and Its Role 
in Managerial Decision Making,” Academy of Management 
Review 32, no. 1 (2007): 33–54; and J. A. Hicks, D. C. Cicero, 
J. Trent, C. M. Burton, and L. A. King, “Positive Affect, In-
tuition, and Feelings of Meaning,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 98, no. 6 (2010): 967–79.
	29.	 C. Akinci and E. Sadler-Smith, “Intuition in Management Re-
search: A Historical Review,” International Journal of Man-
agement Reviews 14, no. 1 (2012): 104–22.
	30.	 S. P. Robbins, Decide & Conquer: Making Winning Decisions 
and Taking Control of Your Life (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Fi-
nancial Times/Prentice Hall, 2004), 13.
	31.	 S. Ludwig and J. Nafziger, “Beliefs about Overconfidence,” 
Theory and Decision 70, no. 4 (2011): 475–500.
	32.	 C. R. M. McKenzie, M. J. Liersch, and I. Yaniv, “Overconfi-
dence in Interval Estimates: What Does Expertise Buy You,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 
107, no. 2 (2008): 179–91.
	33.	 R. P. Larrick, K. A. Burson, and J. B. Soll, “Social Com-
parison and Confidence: When Thinking You’re Better Than 
Average Predicts Overconfidence (and When It Does Not),” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 
102, no. 1 (2007): 76–94.
	34.	 K. M. Hmieleski and R. A. Baron, “Entrepreneurs’ Optimism 
and New Venture Performance: A Social Cognitive Perspec-
tive,” Academy of Management Journal 52, no. 3 (2009): 
473–88.
	35.	 See, for instance, J. P. Simmons, R. A. LeBoeuf, and L. D. 
Nelson, “The Effect of Accuracy Motivation on Anchoring 
and Adjustment: Do People Adjust from Their Provided An-
chors?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99, no. 
6 (2010): 917–32.
	36.	 C. Janiszewski and D. Uy, “Precision of the Anchor Influ-
ences the Amount of Adjustment,” Psychological Science 19, 
no. 2 (2008): 121–27.
	37.	 See, for example, P. Frost, B. Casey, K. Griffin, L. Raymundo, 
C. Farrell, and R. Carrigan, “The Influence of Confirmation 
Bias on Memory and Source Monitoring,” Journal of General 
Psychology 142, no. 4 (2015): 238–52; and W. Hart, D. Albar-
racín, A. H. Eagly, I. Brechan, M. Lindberg, and L. Merrill, 
“Feeling Validated versus Being Correct: A Meta-Analysis of 
Selective Exposure to Information,” Psychological Bulletin 
135, no. 4 (2009): 555–88.
	38.	 T. Pachur, R. Hertwig, and F. Steinmann, “How Do People 
Judge Risks: Availability Heuristic, Affect Heuristic, or 
Both?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 18, no. 
3 (2012): 314–30.
	39.	 G. Morgenson, “Debt Watchdogs: Tamed or Caught Nap-
ping?” The New York Times, December 7, 2009, 1, 32.
	40.	 K. Moser, H.-G. Wolff, and A. Kraft, “The De-Escalation of 
Commitment: Predecisional Accountability and Cognitive 
Processes,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 43, no. 2 
(2013): 363–76.
	41.	 D. J. Sleesman, D. E. Conlon, G. McNamara, and J. E. Miles, 
“Cleaning Up the Big Muddy: A Meta-Analytic Review of 
the Determinants of Escalation of Commitment,” Academy of 
Management Journal 55, no. 3 (2012): 541–62.
	42.	 H. Drummond, “Escalation of Commitment: When to Stay 
the Course?” Academy of Management Perspectives 28, no. 4 
(2014): 430–46.
	43.	 See, for instance, U. Hahn and P. A. Warren, “Perceptions of 
Randomness: Why Three Heads Are Better Than One,” Psy-
chological Review 116, no. 2 (2009): 454–61.
	44.	 See, for example, D. J. Keys and B. Schwartz, “Leaky Ratio-
nality: How Research on Behavioral Decision Making Chal-
lenges Normative Standards of Rationality,” Psychological 
Science 2, no. 2 (2007): 162–80; and U. Simonsohn, “Direct 
Risk Aversion: Evidence from Risky Prospects Valued be-
low Their Worst Outcome,” Psychological Science 20, no. 6 
(2009): 686–92.
	45.	 J. K. Maner, M. T. Gailliot, D. A. Butz, and B. M. Peruche, 
“Power, Risk, and the Status Quo: Does Power Promote Risk-
ier or More Conservative Decision Making?” Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin 33, no. 4 (2007): 451–62.
	46.	 A. Chakraborty, S. Sheikh, and N. Subramanian, “Termina-
tion Risk and Managerial Risk Taking,” Journal of Corporate 
Finance 13, no. 1 (2007): 170–88.
	47.	 R. L. Guilbault, F. B. Bryant, J. H. Brockway, and E. J. 
Posavac, “A Meta-Analysis of Research on Hindsight Bias,” 
Basic and Applied Social Psychology 26, nos. 2–3 (2004): 
103–17.
	48.	 J. Bell, “The Final Cut?” Oregon Business 33, no. 5 (2010): 27.
	49.	 E. Dash and J. Creswell, “Citigroup Pays for a Rush to Risk,” 
The New York Times, November 20, 2008, 1, 28; S. Pulliam, S. 
Ng, and R. Smith, “Merrill Upped Ante as Boom in Mortgage 
Bonds Fizzled,” The Wall Street Journal, April 16, 2008, A1, 
A14.
	50.	 M. Gladwell, “Connecting the Dots,” The New Yorker, March 
10, 2003.
	51.	 H. Moon, J. R. Hollenbeck, S. E. Humphrey, and B. Maue, 
“The Tripartite Model of Neuroticism and the Suppres-
sion of Depression and Anxiety within an Escalation of 
Commitment Dilemma,” Journal of Personality 71, no. 3 
(2003): 347–68.
	52.	 J. Musch, “Personality Differences in Hindsight Bias,” Mem-
ory 11, nos. 4–5 (2003): 473–89.
	53.	 T. Huston, “Are Women Better Decision Makers?” The New 
York Times, October 19, 2014, 9.
	54.	 K. E. Stanovich and R. F. West, “On the Relative Indepen-
dence of Thinking Biases and Cognitive Ability,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 94, no. 4 (2008): 672–95.

	
Endnotes	 349
	55.	 B. Burrough, “How Big Business Can Take the High Road,” 
The New York Times, March 9, 2014, 10.
	56.	 K. V. Kortenkamp and C. F. Moore, “Ethics under Uncer-
tainty: The Morality and Appropriateness of Utilitarianism 
When Outcomes Are Uncertain,” American Journal of Psy-
chology 127, no. 3 (2014): 367–82.
	57.	 A. Lukits, “Hello and Bonjour to Moral Dilemmas,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 13, 2014, D4.
	58.	 J. Hollings, “Let the Story Go: The Role of Emotion in the 
Decision-Making Process of the Reluctant, Vulnerable Wit-
ness or Whistle-Blower,” Journal of Business Ethics 114, no. 
3 (2013): 501–12.
	59.	 D. E. Rupp, P. M. Wright, S. Aryee, and Y. Luo, “Organiza-
tional Justice, Behavioral Ethics, and Corporate Social Re-
sponsibility: Finally the Three Shall Merge,” Management 
and Organization Review 11, no. 1 (2015): 15–24.
	60.	 N. Klein and H. Zhou, “Their Pants Aren’t on Fire,” The New 
York Times, March 25, 2014, D3.
	61.	 Ibid.
	62.	 S. D. Levitt and S. J. Dubner, “Traponomics,” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 10–11, 2014, C1, C2.
	63.	 N. Anderson, K. Potocnik, and J. Zhou, “Innovation and Cre-
ativity in Organizations: A State-of-the-Science Review, Pro-
spective Commentary, and Guiding Framework,” Journal of 
Management 40, no. 5 (2014): 1297–333.
	64.	 M. M. Gielnik, A.-C. Kramer, B. Kappel, and M. Frese, “An-
tecedents of Business Opportunity Identification and Innova-
tion: Investigating the Interplay of Information Processing 
and Information Acquisition,” Applied Psychology: An Inter-
national Review 63, no. 2 (2014): 344–81.
	65.	 G. Reynolds, “Want a Good Idea? Take a Walk,” The New 
York Times, May 6, 2014, D6.
	66.	 S. Shellenbarger, “The Power of the Doodle: Improve Your 
Focus and Memory,” The Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2014, 
D1, D3.
	67.	 C. K. W. De Dreu, B. A. Nijstad, M. Baas, I. Wolsink, and M. 
Roskes, “Working Memory Benefits Creative Insight, Musi-
cal Improvisation, and Original Ideation through Maintained 
Task-Focused Attention,” Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 38, no. 5 (2012): 656–69.
	68.	 C.-H. Wu, S. K. Parker, and J. P. J. de Jong, “Need for Cog-
nition as an Antecedent of Individual Innovation Behavior,” 
Journal of Management 40, no. 6 (2014): 1511–34.
	69.	 S. M. Wechsler, C. Vendramini, and T. Oakland, “Thinking 
and Creative Styles: A Validity Study,” Creativity Research 
Journal 24, nos. 2-3 (2012): 235–42.
	70.	 Y. Gong, S. Cheung, M. Wang, and J. Huang, “Unfolding 
the Proactive Processes for Creativity: Integration of the Em-
ployee Proactivity, Information Exchange, and Psychologi-
cal Safety Perspectives,” Journal of Management 38, no. 5 
(2012): 1611–33.
	71.	 A. Rego, F. Sousa, C. Marques, and M. P. E. Cunha, “Retail 
Employees’ Self-Efficacy and Hope Predicting Their Positive 
Affect and Creativity,” European Journal of Work and Orga-
nizational Psychology 21, no. 6 (2012): 923–45.
	72.	 H. Zhang, H. K. Kwan, X. Zhang, and L.-Z. Wu, “High Core 
Self-Evaluators Maintain Creativity: A Motivational Model 
of Abusive Supervision,” Journal of Management 40, no. 4 
(2012): 1151–74.
	73.	 D. K. Simonton, “The Mad-Genius Paradox: Can Creative 
People Be More Mentally Healthy But Highly Creative Peo-
ple More Mentally Ill?” Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
ence 9, no. 5 (2014): 470–80.
	74.	 C. Wang, S. Rodan, M. Fruin, and X. Xu, “Knowledge 
Networks, Collaboration Networks, and Exploratory In-
novation,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 2 
(2014): 484–514.
	75.	 F. Gino and S. S. Wiltermuth, “Evil Genius? Dishonesty Can 
Lead to Greater Creativity,” Psychological Science 25, no. 4 
(2014): 973–81.
	76.	 S. N. de Jesus, C. L. Rus, W. Lens, and S. Imaginário, “In-
trinsic Motivation and Creativity Related to Product: A Meta-
Analysis of the Studies Published between 1990–2010,” 
Creativity Research Journal 25, no. 1 (2013): 80–84.
	77.	 A. Somech and A. Drach-Zahavy, “Translating Team Creativ-
ity to Innovation Implementation: The Role of Team Compo-
sition and Climate for Innovation,” Journal of Management 
39, no. 3 (2013): 684–708.
	78.	 L. Sun, Z. Zhang, J. Qi, and Z. X. Chen, “Empowerment and 
Creativity: A Cross-Level Investigation,” Leadership Quarterly 
23, no. 1 (2012): 55–65.
	79.	 M. Cerne, C. G. L. Nerstad, A. Dysvik, and M. Skerlavaj, 
“What Goes Around Comes Around: Knowledge Hiding, 
Perceived Motivational Climate, and Creativity,” Academy of 
Management Journal 57, no. 1 (2014): 172–92.
	80.	 I. J. Hoever, D. van Knippenberg, W. P. van Ginkel, and H. G. 
Barkema, “Fostering Team Creativity: Perspective Taking as 
Key to Unlocking Diversity’s Potential,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 97, no. 5 (2012): 982–96.
	81.	 S. J. Shin, T. Kim, J. Lee, and L. Bian, “Cognitive Team Di-
versity and Individual Team Member Creativity: A Cross-
Level Interaction,” Academy of Management Journal 55, no. 
1 (2012): 197–212.
	82.	 T. Montag, C. P. Maertz, and M. Baer, “A Critical Analysis of 
the Workplace Creativity Criterion Space,” Journal of Man-
agement 38, no. 4 (2012): 1362–86.
	83.	 M. Baer, “Putting Creativity to Work: The Implementation of 
Creative Ideas in Organizations,” Academy of Management 
Journal 55, no. 5 (2012): 1102–19.
CHAPTER 6
	 1.	 A. R. Davies and B. D. Frink, “The Origins of the Ideal 
Worker: The Separation of Work and Home in the United 
States from the Market Revolution to 1950,” Work and Oc-
cupations 41, no. 1 (2014): 18–39.
	 2.	 U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, December 
2014; S. Ricker, “The Changing Face of U.S. Jobs: Com-
position of Occupations by Gender, Race, and Age from 
2001–2014,” The Hiring Site (CareerBuilder blog) March 
26, 2015, www.thehiringsite.careerbuilder.com/2015/03/26/9- 
findings-diversity-americas-workforce.
	 3.	 L. Colley, “Not Codgers in Cardigans! Female Workforce 
Participation and Ageing Public Services,” Gender Work and 
Organization 20, no. 3 (2013): 327–48.
	 4.	 Asaf Levanon, Paula England, and Paul Allison, “Occupa-
tional Feminization and Pay: Assessing Causal Dynamics 
Using 1950-2000 U.S. Census Data,” © The University of 
North Carolina Press, Social Forces 88(2) 865–892, Decem-
ber 2009, http://statisticalhorizons.com/wp-content/uploads/ 
2012/01/88.2.levanon.pdf.
	 5.	 C. T. Kulik, “Spotlight on the Context: How a Stereotype 
Threat Framework Might Help Organizations to Attract and 
Retain Older Workers,” Industrial and Organizational Psy-
chology 7, no. 3 (2014): 456–61.

350	 Endnotes
	 6.	 A. H. Eagly and J. L. Chin, “Are Memberships in Race, Eth-
nicity, and Gender Categories Merely Surface Characteris-
tics?” American Psychologist 65, no. 9 (2010): 934–35.
	 7.	 W. J. Casper, J. H. Wayne, and J. G. Manegold, “Who Will 
We Recruit? Targeting Deep- and Surface-Level Diversity 
with Human Resource Policy Advertising,” Human Resource 
Management 52, no. 3 (2013): 311–32.
	 8.	 Hilary Silver, “The Contexts of Social Inclusion,” Depart-
ment of Economic & Social Affairs, Working Paper No. 144, 
December 2015, http://www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2015/
wp144_2015.pdf.
	 9.	 J. H. Carlson and J. D. Seacat, “Multiple Threat: Overweight/
Obese Women in the Workforce,” and B. J. Casad and S. M. 
Merritt, “The Importance of Stereotype Threat Mechanisms 
in Workplace Outcomes,” Industrial and Organizational Psy-
chology 7, no. 3 (2014): 413–18.
	10.	 G. Czukor and M. Bayazit, “Casting a Wide Net? Perfor-
mance Deficit, Priming, and Subjective Performance Evalua-
tion in Organizational Stereotype Threat Research,” Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology 7, no. 3 (2014): 409–12; K. 
S. Jones and N. C. Carpenter, “Toward a Sociocultural Psy-
chological Approach to Examining Stereotype Threat in the 
Workplace,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology 7, no. 
3 (2014): 429–32; and C. T. Kulik, “Spotlight on the Context: 
How a Stereotype Threat Framework Might Help Organiza-
tions to Attract and Retain Older Workers,” Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology 7, no. 3 (2014): 456–61.
	11.	 L. M. Cortina, “Unseen Injustice: Incivility as Modern Dis-
crimination in Organizations,” Academy of Management Re-
view 33, no. 1 (2008): 55–75; and C. M. Harold and B. C. 
Holtz, “The Effects of Passive Leadership on Workplace Inci-
vility,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 36, no. 1 (2015): 
16–38.
	12.	 J. P. Jamieson, K. Koslov, M. K. Nock, and W. B. Mendes, 
“Experiencing Discrimination Increases Risk Taking,” Psy-
chological Science 24, no. 2 (2012): 131–39.
	13.	 C. T. Kulik, S. Ryan, S. Harper, and G. George, “Aging Popu-
lations and Management,” Academy of Management Journal 
57, no. 4 (2014): 929–35.
	14.	 T. Lytle, “Benefits for Older Workers,” HR Magazine, March 
2012, 53–58.
	15.	 A. Tergesen, “Why Everything You Know about Aging Is 
Probably Wrong,” The Wall Street Journal, December 1, 
2014, B1–B2.
	16.	 L. Turner and A. Suflas, “Global Diversity—One Program 
Won’t Fit All,” HR Magazine, May 2014, 59–61.
	17.	 L. Weber, “Americans Rip Up Retirement Plans,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 31, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/ 
article/SB10001424127887323926104578276241741448064.
html.
	18.	 M. Chand and R. L. Tung, “The Aging of the World’s Popula-
tion and Its Effects on Global Business,” Academy of Manage-
ment Perspectives 28, no. 4 (2014): 409–29.
	19.	 S. Shellenbarger, “Work & Family Mailbox,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 29, 2014, D2.
	20.	 N. E. Wolfson, T. M. Cavanaugh, and K. Kraiger, “Older 
Adults and Technology-Based Instruction: Optimizing Learn-
ing Outcomes and Transfer,” Academy of Management Learn-
ing & Education 13, no. 1 (2014): 26–44.
	21.	 A. Tergesen, “Why Everything You Know about Aging Is Prob-
ably Wrong.” The Wall Street Journal (November 30, 2014).
	22.	 Ibid.
	23.	 Ibid.
	24.	 T. W. H. Ng and D. C. Feldman, “The Relationship of Age 
with Job Attitudes: A Meta-Analysis,” Personnel Psychology 
63, no. 3 (2010): 677–718.
	25.	 E. Zell, Z. Krizan, and S. R. Teeter, “Evaluating Gender Simi-
larities and Differences Using Metasynthesis,” American Psy-
chologist 70, no. 1 (2015): 10–20.
	26.	 J. B. Allendorfer et al., “Females and Males Are Highly Simi-
lar in Language Performance and Cortical Activation Patterns 
during Verb Generation,” Cortex 48, no. 9 (2012): 1218–33; 
and A. Ardilla, M. Rosselli, E. Matute, and O. Inozemtseva, 
“Gender Differences in Cognitive Development,” Develop-
mental Psychology 47, no. 4 (2011): 984–90.
	27.	 P. L. Roth, K. L. Purvis, and P. Bobko, “A Meta-Analysis of 
Gender Group Differences for Measures of Job Performance 
in Field Studies,” Journal of Management 38, no. 2 (2012): 
719–39.
	28.	 S. C. Paustian-Underdahl, L. S. Walker, and D. J. Woehr, 
“Gender and Perceptions of Leadership Effectiveness: A 
Meta-Analysis of Contextual Moderators,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 99, no. 6 (2014): 1129–45.
	29.	 R. E. Silverman, “Study Suggests Fix for Gender Bias on the 
Job,” The Wall Street Journal, January 9, 2013, D4.
	30.	 A. J. Koch, S. D. D’Mello, and P. R. Sackett, “A Meta-Analysis 
of Gender Stereotypes and Bias in Experimental Simulations of 
Employment Decision Making,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
100, no. 1 (2015): 128–61.
	31.	 E. B. King et al., “Benevolent Sexism at Work: Gender Dif-
ferences in the Distribution of Challenging Developmen-
tal Experiences,” Journal of Management 38, no. 6 (2012): 
1835–66.
	32.	 L. Gartzia, M. K. Ryan, N. Balluerka, and A. Aritzeta, “Think 
Crisis-Think Female: Further Evidence,” European Journal 
of Work and Organizational Psychology 21, no. 4 (2014): 
603–28.
	33.	 P. Wechsler, “58 Women CFOs in the Fortune 500: Is This 
Progress?” Fortune, February 24, 2015, http://fortune.
com/2015/02/24/58-women-cfos-in-the-fortune-500-is-this-
progress/.
	34.	 L. Turner and A. Suflas, “Global Diversity—One Program 
Won’t Fit All.”
	35.	 Ibid.
	36.	 H. L. Kusterer, T. Lindholm, and H. Montgomery, “Gender 
Typing in Stereotypes and Evaluations of Actual Managers,” 
Journal of Managerial Psychology 28, no. 5 (2013): 561–79; 
and W. B. Morgan, K. B. Elder, and E. B. King, “The Emer-
gence and Reduction of Bias in Letters of Recommendation,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 43, no. 11 (2013): 
2297–2306.
	37.	 T. Vega, “With Diversity Still Lacking, Industry Fo-
cuses on Retention,” The New York Times, September 4,  
2012, B3.
	38.	 D. R. Avery, P. F. McKay, and D. C. Wilson “What Are the 
Odds? How Demographic Similarity Affects the Prevalence 
of Perceived Employment Discrimination,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 93, no. 2 (2008): 235–49.
	39.	 J. M. Sacco, C. R. Scheu, A. M. Ryan, and N. Schmitt, “An In-
vestigation of Race and Sex Similarity Effects in Interviews: 
A Multilevel Approach to Relational Demography,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88, no. 5 (2003): 852–65; and P. F. 
McKay and M. A. McDaniel, “A Reexamination of Black-
White Mean Differences in Work Performance: More Data, 
More Moderators,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 3 
(2006): 538–54.

	
Endnotes	 351
	40.	 S. Mullainathan, “The Measuring Sticks of Racial Bias,” The 
New York Times, January 4, 2015, 6.
	41.	 L. Turner and A. Suflas, “Global Diversity—One Program 
Won’t Fit All.”
	42.	 Asaf Levanon, Paula England, and Paul Allison, “Disability in 
the Workplace,” ILO-UN Global Compact Webinar, June 29, 
2011, http://bit.ly/2pnFU8s.
	43.	 B. S. Bell and K. J. Klein, “Effect of Disability, Gender, and 
Job Level on Ratings of Job Applicants,” Rehabilitation Psy-
chology 46, no. 3 (2001): 229–46; and E. Louvet, “Social 
Judgment Toward Job Applicants with Disabilities: Percep-
tion of Personal Qualities and Competences,” Rehabilitation 
Psychology 52, no. 3 (2007): 297–303.
	44.	 L. R. Ren, R. L. Paetzold, and A. Colella, “A Meta-Analysis  
of Experimental Studies on the Effects of Disability on  
Human Resource Judgments,” Human Resource Management 
Review 18, no. 3 (2008): 191–203.
	45.	 S. Almond and A. Healey, “Mental Health and Absence from 
Work: New Evidence from the UK Quarterly Labour Force 
Survey,” Work, Employment, and Society 17, no. 4 (2003): 
731–42.
	46.	 P. T. J. H. Nelissen, K. Vornholt, G. M. C. Van Ruitenbeek, 
U. R. HÜlsheger, and S. Uitdewilligen, “Disclosure or 
Nondisclosure—Is This the Question?” Industrial and Orga-
nizational Psychology 7, no. 2 (2014): 231–35.
	47.	 A. M. Santuzzi, P. R. Waltz, and L. M. Finkelstein, “Invisible 
Disabilities: Unique Challenges for Employees and Organi-
zations,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology 7, no. 2 
(2014): 204–19.
	48.	 Ibid.
	49.	 R. A. Schriber, R. W. Robins, and M. Solomon, “Personality 
and Self-Insight in Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disor-
der,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 106, no. 1 
(2014): 112–30.
	50.	 C. L. Nittrouer, R. C. E. Trump, K. R. O’Brien, and M. Hebl, 
“Stand Up and Be Counted: In the Long Run, Disclosing 
Helps All,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology 7, no. 2 
(2014): 235–41.
	51.	 L. Turner and A. Suflas, “Global Diversity—One Program 
Won’t Fit All.”
	52.	 T. Audi, “A New Mosque Rises in Anchorage,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 15, 2014, A5.
	53.	 E. B. King and A. S. Ahmad, “An Experimental Field Study 
of Interpersonal Discrimination Toward Muslim Job Appli-
cants,” Personnel Psychology 63, no. 4 (2010): 881–906.
	54.	 A. Liptak, “In a Case of Religious Dress, Justices Explore the 
Obligations of Employers,” The New York Times, February 25, 
2015,  http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/26/us/in-a-case-of-
religious-dress-justices-explore-the-obligations-of-employers.
html?
	55.	 A. Tilcsik, “Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimina-
tion against Openly Gay Men in the United States,” American 
Journal of Sociology 117, no. 2 (2011): 586–626.
	56.	 J. Browne, “What One CEO Learned by Being Outed,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 7–8, 2014, C3.
	57.	 “Facts about Discrimination in Federal Government Employ-
ment Based on Marital Status, Political Affiliation, Status as a 
Parent, Sexual Orientation, or Transgender (Gender Identity) 
Status,” U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(2013), www.eeoc.gov/federal/otherprotections.cfm.
	58.	 L. Turner and A. Suflas, “Global Diversity—One Program 
Won’t Fit All.”
	59.	 V. Priola, D. Lasio, S. De Simone, and F. Serri, “The Sound of 
Silence: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Discrimi-
nation in ‘Inclusive Organizations’,” British Journal of Man-
agement 25, no. 3 (2012): 488–502.
	60.	 “Sex-Based Discrimination,” U.S. Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission (2013), www.eeoc.gov/laws/types/
sex.cfm.
	61.	 M. Keisling, “No Longer at Zero: An Update on ENDA,” The 
Huffington Post, March 13, 2013, www.huffingtonpost.com/
mara-keisling/no-longer-at-zero-an-upda_b_2861885 
.html; and J. Pike, “One-Year Anniversary of Senate 
ENDA Passage,” Human Rights Campaign (blog), No-
vember 7, 2014, http://www.hrc.org/blog/entry/one-year-
anniversary-of-senate-enda-passage), accessed March 26, 
2015.
	62.	 C. Burns, The Costly Business of Discrimination (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Center for American Progress, 2012), www.scribd.
com/doc/81214767/The-Costly-Business-of-Discrimination.
	63.	 D. Fidas and L. Cooper, HRC Corporate Equality Index (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Human Rights Campaign Foundation, 2015), 
http://hrc-assets.s3-website-us-east-1.amazonaws.com//files/
documents/CEI-2015-rev.pdf 
	64.	 V. Priola, D. Lasio, S. De Simone, and F. Serri, “The Sound of 
Silence: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Discrimi-
nation in ‘Inclusive Organizations’ ”, British Journal of Man-
agement 25, no. 3 (2014): 488–502.
	65.	 P. A. Freund and N. Kasten, “How Smart Do You Think You 
Are? A Meta-Analysis of the Validity of Self-Estimates of 
Cognitive Ability,” Psychological Bulletin 138, no. 2 (2012): 
296–321.
	66.	 R. E. Nisbett et al., “Intelligence: New Findings and Theoreti-
cal Developments,” American Psychologist 67, no. 2 (2012): 
130–59.
	67.	 L. S. Gottfredson, “The Challenge and Promise of Cognitive 
Career Assessment,” Journal of Career Assessment 11, no. 2 
(2003): 32–34.
	68.	 M. D. Dunnette and E. A. Fleishman, eds., Human Performance 
and Productivity: Human Capability Assessment (New York and 
London: Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis Group, 2014).
	69.	 J. W. B. Lang, M. Kersting, U. R. Hülscheger, and J. Lang, 
“General Mental Ability, Narrower Cognitive Abilities, and 
Job Performance: The Perspective of the Nested-Factors 
Model of Cognitive Abilities” Personnel Psychology 63, no. 3 
(2010): 595–640.
	70.	 N. Barber, “Educational and Ecological Correlates of IQ: A 
Cross-National Investigation,” Intelligence 33, no. 3 (2005): 
273–84.
	71.	 “What Companies Will Make You Take a Wonderlic Test?” 
Beat the Wonderlic (blog) December 31, 2014, http://
www.beatthewonderlic.com/blog/2014/12/31/what- 
companies-will-make-you-take-a-wonderlic-test.
	72.	 Y. Ganzach, “Intelligence, Education, and Facets of Job Satis-
faction,” Work and Occupations 30, no. 1 (2003): 97–122.
	73.	 J. J. Caughron, M. D. Mumford, and E. A. Fleishman, “The 
Fleishman Job Analysis Survey: Development, Validation, 
and Applications,” in M. A. Wilson, W. Bennett Jr., S. G. Gib-
son, and G. M. Alliger, eds., The Handbook of Work Analy-
sis: Methods, Systems, Applications and Science of Work 

352	 Endnotes
Measurement in Organizations (New York: Routledge/Taylor 
& Francis Group, 2012); and P. D. Converse, F. L. Oswald, 
M. A. Gillespie, K. A. Field, and E. B. Bizot, “Matching Indi-
viduals to Occupations Using Abilities and the O*Net: Issues 
and an Application in Career Guidance,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 57, no. 2 (2004): 451–87.
	74.	 S. S. Wang, “Companies Find Autism Can Be a Job Skill,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 28, 2014, B1–B2.
	75.	 B. R. Ragins, J. A. Gonzalez, K. Ehrhardt, and R. Singh, 
“Crossing the Threshold: The Spillover of Community Racial 
Diversity and Diversity Climate to the Workplace,” Personnel 
Psychology 65, no. 4 (2012): 755–87.
	76.	 P. F. McKay, D. R. Avery, and M. A. Morris, “Mean Racial-
Ethnic Differences in Employee Sales Performance: The 
Moderating Role of Diversity Climate,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 61, no. 2 (2008): 349–74.
	77.	 D. R. Avery, J. A. Richeson, M. R. Hebl, and N. Ambady, “It 
Does Not Have to Be Uncomfortable: The Role of Behavioral 
Scripts in Black-White Interracial Interactions,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 94, no. 6 (2009): 1382–93.
	78.	 N. Wingfield, “Microsoft Chief Backpedals on Women’s 
Pay,” The Wall Street Journal, October 10, 2014, B1, B7.
	79.	 D. R. Avery, “Reactions to Diversity in Recruitment Advertis-
ing: Are the Differences Black and White?” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 88, no. 4 (2003): 672–79; P. F. McKay and 
D. R. Avery, “What Has Race Got to Do with It? Unraveling 
the Role of Racioethnicity in Job Seekers’ Reactions to Site 
Visits,” Personnel Psychology 59, no. 2 (2006): 395–429; and 
D. R. Avery and P. F. McKay, “Target Practice: An Organi-
zational Impression Management Approach to Attracting Mi-
nority and Female Job Applicants,” Personnel Psychology 59, 
no. 1 (2006): 157–87.
	80.	 A. Overholt, “More Women Coders,” Fortune, February 25, 
2013, 14.
	81.	 L. Kwoh, “McKinsey Tries to Recruit Mothers Who Left the 
Fold,” The Wall Street Journal, February 20, 2013, B1, B7.
	82.	 M. R. Buckley, K. A. Jackson, M. C. Bolino, J. G. Veres, and 
H. S. Field, “The Influence of Relational Demography on 
Panel Interview Ratings: A Field Experiment,” Personnel Psy-
chology 60, no. 3 (2007): 627–46; J. M. Sacco, C. R. Scheu, 
A. M. Ryan, and N. Schmitt, “An Investigation of Race and 
Sex Similarity Effects in Interviews: A Multilevel Approach 
to Relational Demography,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
88, no. 5 (2003): 852–65; and J. C. Ziegert and P. J. Hanges, 
“Employment Discrimination: The Role of Implicit Attitudes, 
Motivation, and a Climate for Racial Bias,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 90, no. 3 (2005): 553–62.
	83.	 K. Bezrukova, K. A. Jehn, and C. S. Spell, “Reviewing Diver-
sity Training: Where We Have Been and Where We Should 
Go,” Academy of Management Learning & Education 11,  
no. 2 (2012): 207–27.
	84.	 S. T. Bell, “Deep-Level Composition Variables as Predictors 
of Team Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 595–615; S. K. Horwitz and I. B. 
Horwitz, “The Effects of Team Diversity on Team Outcomes: 
A Meta-Analytic Review of Team Demography,” Journal of 
Management 33, no. 6 (2007): 987–1015; G. L. Stewart, “A 
Meta-Analytic Review of Relationships between Team De-
sign Features and Team Performance,” Journal of Manage-
ment 32, no. 1 (2006): 29–54; and A. Joshi and H. Roh, “The 
Role of Context in Work Team Diversity Research: A Meta-
Analytic Review,” Academy of Management Journal 52, no. 3 
(2009): 599–627.
	85.	 G. Andrevski, O. C. Richard, J. D. Shaw, and W. J. Ferrier, 
“Racial Diversity and Firm Performance: The Mediating Role 
of Competitive Intensity,” Journal of Management 40, no. 3 
(2014): 820–44.
	86.	 A. C. Homan, J. R. Hollenbeck, S. E. Humphrey, D. van 
Knippenberg, D. R. Ilgen, and G. A. Van Kleef, “Facing Dif-
ferences with an Open Mind: Openness to Experience, Sa-
lience of Intragroup Differences, and Performance of Diverse 
Work Groups,” Academy of Management Journal 51, no. 6 
(2008): 1204–22.
	87.	 E. Kearney and D. Gebert, “Managing Diversity and En-
hancing Team Outcomes: The Promise of Transformational 
Leadership,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 
77–89.
	88.	 C. L. Holladay and M. A. Quiñones, “The Influence of Train-
ing Focus and Trainer Characteristics on Diversity Training 
Effectiveness,” Academy of Management Learning and Edu-
cation 7, no. 3 (2008): 343–54; and R. Anand and M. Winters, 
“A Retrospective View of Corporate Diversity Training from 
1964 to the Present,” Academy of Management Learning and 
Education 7, no. 3 (2008): 356–72.
	89.	 A. Sippola and A. Smale, “The Global Integration of Diver-
sity Management: A Longitudinal Case Study,” International 
Journal of Human Resource Management 18, no. 11 (2007): 
1895–1916.
CHAPTER 7
	 1.	 C. C. Pinder, Work Motivation in Organizational Behavior, 
2nd ed. (New York, NY: Psychology Press, 2008).
	 2.	 R. J. Taormina and J. H. Gao, “Maslow and the Motivation 
Hierarchy: Measuring Satisfaction of the Needs,” American 
Journal of Psychology 126, no. 2 (2013): 155–57.
	 3.	 H. S. Guest “Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs—The Sixth 
Level,” Psychologist 27, no. 12 (2014): 982–83.
	 4.	 Ibid.
	 5.	 S. H. Mousavi and H. Dargahi, “Ethnic Differences and 
Motivation Based on Maslow’s Theory on Iranian Em-
ployees,” Iranian Journal of Public Health 42, no. 5  
(2013): 516–21.
	 6.	 D. Lester, “Measuring Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs,” Psy-
chological Reports 113, no. 1 (2013): 127–29.
	 7.	 J.-G. Choi and J.-K. Lee, “Testing the Applicability of the 
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory to the Hotel In-
dustry,” DaeHan Journal of Business 25, no. 4 (2012): 
2091–111.
	 8.	 F. Herzberg, “One More time: How do you Motivate Employ-
ees?,” Harvard Business Review, January 2003, 1–12.
	 9.	 See, for instance, C.-S. Park and K.-S. Ko, “A Study on Fac-
tors of Job Satisfaction of Caregivers in Home Care Facilities 
Based on Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory,” Church 
Social Work 19, no. 8 (2012): 123–58; and “Study on the Im-
portant Factors for Non-Commissioned Officer’s Job Satisfac-
tion in R.O.K. Army Based on Herzberg’s Two Factor Theory,” 
Journal of Korean Public Police and Security Studies 9, no. 2 
(2012): 217–38.
	10.	 D. McClelland, The Achieving Society (Princeton, NJ: Van 
Nostrand, 1961).
	11.	 B. Steinmann, S. L. Doerr, O. C. Schultheiss, and G. W. Ma-
ier, “Implicit Motives and Leadership Performance Revisited: 
What Constitutes the Leadership Motive Pattern?” Motivation 
and Emotion 39, no. 2 (2015): 167–74.

	
Endnotes	 353
	12.	 H. van Emmerick, W. L. Gardner, H. Wendt, and D. Fischer, 
“Associations of Culture and Personality with McClelland’s 
Motives: A Cross-Cultural Study of Managers in 24 Coun-
tries,” Group and Organization Management 35, no. 3 (2010): 
329–67. 
	13.	 See, for instance, F. Yang, J. E. Ramsay, O. C. Schultheiss, 
and J. S. Pang, “Need for Achievement Moderates the Effect 
of Motive-Relevant Challenge on Salivary Cortisol Changes,” 
Motivation and Emotion 39, no. 3 (2015): 321–34; M. S. 
Khan, R. J. Breitnecker, and E. J. Schwarz, “Adding Fuel to 
the Fire: Need for Achievement Diversity and Relationship 
Conflict in Entrepreneurial Teams,” Management Decision 
53, no. 1 (2015): 75–79; M. G. Koellner and O. C. Schulthe-
iss, “Meta-Analytic Evidence of Low Convergence between 
Implicit and Explicit Measures of the Needs for Achievement, 
Affiliation, and Power,” Frontiers in Psychology 5, no. 826 
(2014); and T. Bipp and K. van Dam, “Extending Hierarchical 
Achievement Motivation Models: The Role of Motivational 
Needs for Achievement Goals and Academic Performance,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 64 (2014): 157–62.
	14.	 M. G. Koellner and O. C. Schultheiss, “Meta-Analytic Evi-
dence of Low Convergence between Implicit and Explicit 
Measures of the Needs for Achievement, Affiliation, and 
Power.”
	15.	 J. Hofer, H. Busch, and C. Schneider, “The Effect of Motive-
Trait Interaction on Satisfaction of the Implicit Need for Af-
filiation among German and Cameroonian Adults,” Journal of 
Personality 83, no. 2 (2015): 167–78.
	16.	 M. Gagné and E. L. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory and 
Work Motivation,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 26, 
no. 4 (2005): 331–62; and D. T. Kong and V. T. Ho, “A Self-
Determination Perspective of Strengths Use at Work: Examin-
ing Its Determinant and Performance Implications,” Journal 
of Positive Psychology 11, no. 1 (2016): 15–25.
	17.	 C. P. Cerasoli, J. M. Nicklin, and M. T. Ford, “Intrinsic Mo-
tivation and Extrinsic Incentives Jointly Predict Performance: 
A 40-Year Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 140, no. 4 
(2014): 980–1008.
	18.	 J. E. Bono and T. A. Judge, “Self-Concordance at Work: To-
ward Understanding the Motivational Effects of Transforma-
tional Leaders,” Academy of Management Journal 46, no. 5 
(2003): 554–71.
	19.	 K. M. Sheldon, A. J. Elliot, and R. M. Ryan, “Self-Concor-
dance and Subjective Well-Being in Four Cultures,” Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Psychology 35, no. 2 (2004): 209–23.
	20.	 L. M. Graves, M. N. Ruderman, P. J. Ohlott, and J. Webber, 
“Driven to Work and Enjoyment of Work: Effects on Man-
agers’ Outcomes,” Journal of Management 38, no. 5 (2012): 
1655–80.
	21.	 J. P. Meyer, T. E. Becker, and C. Vandenberghe, “Employee 
Commitment and Motivation: A Conceptual Analysis and 
Integrative Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 6 
(2004): 991–1007.
	22.	 E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “New Directions in Goal-Set-
ting Theory,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 15, 
no. 5 (2006): 265–68.
	23.	 Ibid.
	24.	 C. Gabelica, P. Van den Bossche, M. Segers, and W. Gijselaers, 
 “Feedback, a Powerful Lever in Teams: A Review,” Educa-
tional Research Review 7, no. 2 (2012): 123–44.
	25.	 J. Lee and F. Wei, “The Mediating Effect of Psychologi-
cal Empowerment on the Relationship between Participa-
tive Goal Setting and Team Outcomes—A Study in China,” 
International Journal of Human Resource Management 22, 
no. 2 (2011): 279–95.
	26.	 S. W. Anderson, H. C. Dekker, and K. L. Sedatole, “An Em-
pirical Examination of Goals and Performance-to-Goal Fol-
lowing the Introduction of an Incentive Bonus Plan with 
Participative Goal Setting,” Management Science 56, no. 1 
(2010): 90–109.
	27.	 T. S. Bateman and B. Bruce, “Masters of the Long Haul: Pur-
suing Long-Term Work Goals,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 33, no. 7 (2012): 984–1006.
	28.	 Ibid.
	29.	 J. E. Bono and A. E. Colbert, “Understanding Responses to 
Multi-Source Feedback: The Role of Core Self-Evaluations,” 
Personnel Psychology 58, no. 1 (2005): 171–203; and S. A. 
Jeffrey, A. Schulz, and A. Webb, “The Performance Effects of 
an Ability-Based Approach to Goal Assignment,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior Management 32 (2012): 221–41.
	30.	 T. Tammemagi, D. O’Hora, and K. A. Maglieri, “The Effects 
of a Goal Setting Intervention on Productivity and Persistence 
in an Analogue Work Task,” Journal of Organizational Be-
havior Management 33, no. 1 (2013): 31–54.
	31.	 D. F. Crown, “The Use of Group and Groupcentric Individual 
Goals for Culturally Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Task 
Groups: An Assessment of European Work Teams,” Small 
Group Research 38, no. 4 (2007): 489–508.
	32.	 K. Lanaj, C. D. Chang, and R. E. Johnson, “Regulatory Focus 
and Work-Related Outcomes: A Review and Meta-Analysis,” 
Psychological Bulletin 138, no. 5 (2012): 998–1034.
	33.	 D. L. Ferris, R. E. Johnson, C. C. Rosen, E. Djurdjevic, 
C.-H. Chang, and J. A. Tan, “When Is Success Not Satisfy-
ing? Integrating Regulatory Focus and Approach/Avoidance 
Motivation Theories to Explain the Relation between Core 
Self-Evaluation and Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 342–53.
	34.	 M. Roskes, A. J. Elliot, and C. K. W. De Dreu, “Why Is Avoid-
ance Motivation Problematic, and What Can Be Done about 
It?” Current Directions in Psychological Science 23, no. 2 
(2014): 133–38.
	35.	 “KEYGroup Survey Finds Nearly Half of All Employees 
Have No Set Performance Goals,” IPMA-HR Bulletin, March 
10, 2006, 1; S. Hamm, “SAP Dangles a Big, Fat Carrot,” Busi-
nessWeek, May 22, 2006, 67–68; and “A. G. Lafley (CEO of 
Proctor & Gamble), interview by E. Amendola, P&G CEO 
Wields High Expectations But No Whip,” USA Today, Febru-
ary 19, 2007, 3B.
	36.	 See, for example, E. Lindberg and T. L. Wilson, “Manage-
ment by Objectives: The Swedish Experience in Upper 
Secondary Schools,” Journal of Educational Administra-
tion 49, no. 1 (2011): 62–75; and A. C. Spaulding, L. D. 
Gamm, and J. M. Griffith, “Studer Unplugged: Identifying 
Underlying Managerial Concepts,” Hospital Topics 88, no. 1  
(2010): 1–9.
	37.	 M. B. Kristiansen, “Management by Objectives and Results 
in the Nordic Countries: Continuity and Change, Differences 
and Similarities,” Public Performance and Management Re-
view 38, no. 3 (2015): 542–69.
	38.	 See, for instance, M. Tanikawa, “Fujitsu Decides to Backtrack 
on Performance-Based Pay,” The New York Times, March 22, 
2001, W1; and W. F. Roth, “Is Management by Objectives 
Obsolete?” Global Business and Organizational Excellence 
28, no. 4 (2009): 36–43.
	39.	 F. Gino and C. Mogilner, “Time, Money, and Morality,” Psy-
chological Science 25, no. 2 (2014): 414–21.

354	 Endnotes
	40.	 V. Lopez-Kidwell, T. J. Grosser, B. R. Dineen, and S. P. 
Borgatti, “What Matters When: A Multistage Model and 
Empirical Examination of Job Search Effort,” Academy of 
Management Journal 56, no. 6 (2012): 1655–78.
	41.	 J. W. Beck and A. M. Schmidt, “State-Level Goal Orienta-
tions as Mediators of the Relationship between Time Pressure 
and Performance: A Longitudinal Study,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 354–63.
	42.	 J. R. Themanson and P. J. Rosen, “Examining the Relation-
ships between Self-Efficacy, Task-Relevant Attentional Con-
trol, and Task Performance: Evidence from Event-Related 
Brain Potentials,” British Journal of Psychology 106, no. 2 
(2015): 253–71.
	43.	 A. Bandura, “Cultivate Self-Efficacy for Personal and Orga-
nizational Effectiveness,” in Handbook of Principles of Orga-
nizational Behavior, ed. E. Locke (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
2004), 120–36; and M. Ventura, M. Salanova, and S. Llorens, 
“Professional Self-Efficacy as a Predictor of Burnout and En-
gagement: The Role of Challenge and Hindrance Demands,” 
Journal of Psychology 149, no. 3 (2015): 277–302.
	44.	 M. Salanova, S. Llorens, and W. B. Schaufeli, “Yes I Can, I 
Feel Good, and I Just Do It! On Gain Cycles and Spirals of Ef-
ficacy Beliefs, Affect, and Engagement,” Applied Psychology 
60, no. 2 (2011): 255–85.
	45.	 J. R. Themanson and P. J. Rosen, “Examining the Relation-
ships between Self-Efficacy, Task-Relevant Attentional Con-
trol, and Task Performance: Evidence from Event-Related 
Brain Potentials.”
	46.	 M. Ben-Ami, J. Hornik, D. Eden, and O. Kaplan, “Boosting 
Consumers’ Self-Efficacy by Repositioning the Self,” Euro-
pean Journal of Marketing 48, no. 11/12 (2014): 1914–38; 
L. De Grez and D. Van Lindt, “Students’ Gains in Entrepre-
neurial Self-Efficacy: A Comparison of ‘Learning-by-Doing’ 
versus Lecture-Based Courses,” Proceedings of the 8th Euro-
pean Conference on Innovation and Entrepreneurship (2013): 
198–203; and K. S. Hendricks, “Changes in Self-Efficacy 
Beliefs over Time: Contextual Influences of Gender, Rank-
Based Placement, and Social Support in a Competitive Or-
chestra Environment,” Psychology of Music 42, no. 3 (2014): 
347–65.
	47.	 T. A. Judge, C. L. Jackson, J. C. Shaw, B. Scott, and B. L. 
Rich, “Self-Efficacy and Work-Related Performance: The 
Integral Role of Individual Differences,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 1 (2007): 107–27.
	48.	 Ibid.
	49.	 A. M. Paul, “How to Use the ‘Pygmalion’ Effect,” 
Time, April 1, 2013, http://ideas.time.com/2013/04/01/
how-to-use-the-pygmalion-effect/.
	50.	 A. Friedrich, B. Flunger, B. Nagengast, K. Jonkmann, and U. 
Trautwein, “Pygmalion Effects in the Classroom: Teacher Ex-
pectancy Effects on Students’ Math Achievement,” Contem-
porary Educational Psychology 41 (2015): 1–12.
	51.	 L. Karakowsky, N. DeGama, and K. McBey, “Facilitating 
the Pygmalion Effect: The Overlooked Role of Subordinate 
Perceptions of the Leader,” Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology 85, no. 4 (2012): 579–99; and P. 
Whiteley, T. Sy, and S. K. Johnson, “Leaders’ Conceptions of 
Followers: Implications for Naturally Occurring Pygmalion 
Effects,” Leadership Quarterly 23, no. 5 (2012): 822–34.
	52.	 A. Gegenfurtner, C. Quesada-Pallares, and M. Knogler, 
“Digital Simulation-Based Training: A Meta-Analysis,” 
British Journal of Educational Technology 45, no. 6 (2014): 
1097–114.
	53.	 E. C. Dierdorff, E. A. Surface, and K. G. Brown, “Frame-of-
Reference Training Effectiveness: Effects of Goal Orienta-
tion and Self-Efficacy on Affective, Cognitive, Skill-Based, 
and Transfer Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
95, no. 6 (2010): 1181–91; and R. Grossman and E. Salas, 
“The Transfer of Training: What Really Matters,” Interna-
tional Journal of Training and Development 15, no. 2 (2011): 
103–20.
	54.	 K. M. Eddington, C. Majestic, and P. J. Silvia, “Contrasting 
Regulatory Focus and Reinforcement Sensitivity: A Daily 
Diary Study of Goal Pursuit and Emotion,” Personality and 
Individual Differences 53, no. 3 (2012): 335–40.
	55.	 B. F. Skinner, “‘Superstition’ in the Pigeon”. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology 38, no. 2 (1948).
	56.	 M. J. Goddard, “Critical Psychiatry, Critical Psychology, and 
the Behaviorism of B. F. Skinner,” Review of General Psy-
chology 18, no. 3 (2014): 208–15.
	57.	 J. R. Brauer and C. R. Tittle, “Social Learning Theory and Hu-
man Reinforcement,” Sociological Spectrum 32, no. 2 (2012): 
157–77.
	58.	 C. Buzea, “Equity Theory Constructs in a Romanian Cultural 
Context,” Human Resource Development Quarterly 25, no. 4 
(2014): 421–39; A. W. Cappelen, T. Eichele, K. Hugdahl, K. 
Specht, and B. Tungodden, “Equity Theory and Fair Inequality: 
A Neuroeconomic Study,” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences in the United States of America 111, no. 43 
(2014): 15368–72; C. Maslach and M. P. Leiter, “Early Pre-
dictors of Job Burnout and Engagement”, Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 3 (2008): 498–512; and Q. Xiaoqing, K. 
Zhang, and Y. Xu, “Applicable Scope of Equity Theory and 
Reaction on Productivity under the Influence of Traditional 
Culture,” 2014 2nd International Conference on Social Science 
and Health, Pt. 3 in Advances in Education Research 57 (2014): 
365–69.
	59.	 J. Bai, “Analysis of Equity Theory in the Modern Enterprise 
Staff Motivation,” Proceedings of the 2012 International Con-
ference on Management Innovation and Public Policy (2012): 
165–67; C. Buzea, “Equity Theory Constructs in a Romanian 
Cultural Context,” Human Resource Development Quarterly 
25, no. 4 (2014): 421–39; and L. K. Scheer, N. Kumar, and 
J.-B. E. M. Steenkamp, “Reactions to Perceived Inequity in 
U.S. and Dutch Interorganizational Relationships,” Academy 
of Management 46, no. 3 (2003): 303–16.
	60.	 See, for instance, T. Simons and Q. Roberson, “Why Man-
agers Should Care about Fairness: The Effects of Aggregate 
Justice Perceptions on Organizational Outcomes,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 88, no. 3 (2003): 432–43; and B. C. Holtz 
and C. M. Harold, “Fair Today, Fair Tomorrow? A Longitudi-
nal Investigation of Overall Justice Perceptions,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 94, no. 5 (2009): 1185–99.
	61.	 C. O. Trevor, G. Reilly, and B. Gerhart, “Reconsidering Pay 
Dispersion’s Effect on the Performance of Interdependent 
Work: Reconciling Sorting and Pay Inequality,” Academy of 
Management Journal 55, no. 3 (2012): 585–610.
	62.	 A. Caza, M. W. McCarter, and G. B. Northcraft, “Perfor-
mance Benefits of Reward Choice: A Procedural Justice Per-
spective,” Human Resource Management Journal 25, no. 2 
(2015): 184–99; R. E. Johnson, K. Lanaj, and C. M. Barnes, 
“The Good and Bad of Being Fair: Effects of Procedural and 
Interpersonal Justice Behaviors on Regulatory Resources,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 4 (2014): 635–50; and 
D. Liu, M. Hernandez, and L. Wang, “The Role of Leadership 
and Trust in Creating Structural Patterns of Team Procedural 

	
Endnotes	 355
Justice: A Social Network Investigation,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 67, no. 4 (2014): 801–45.
	63.	 H. He, W. Zhu, and X. Zheng, “Procedural Justice and Em-
ployee Engagement: Roles of Organizational Identification 
and Moral Identity Centrality,” Journal of Business Ethics 
122, no. 4 (2014): 681–95.
	64.	 J. C. Shaw, E. Wild, and J. A. Colquitt, “To Justify or Excuse? 
A Meta-Analytic Review of the Effects of Explanations,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 3 (2003): 444–58.
	65.	 R. J. Bies, “Are Procedural and Interactional Justice Concep-
tually Distinct?” in Handbook of Organizational Justice, eds. 
J. Greenberg and J. A. Colquitt (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2005), 
85–112; and B. A. Scott, J. A. Colquitt, and E. L. Paddock, 
“An Actor-Focused Model of Justice Rule Adherence and 
Violation: The Role of Managerial Motives and Discretion,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 3 (2009): 756–69.
	66.	 G. A. Van Kleef, A. C. Homan, B. Beersma, D. V. Knippen-
berg, B. V. Knippenberg, and F. Damen, “Searing Sentiment 
or Cold Calculation? The Effects of Leader Emotional Dis-
plays on Team Performance Depend on Follower Epistemic 
Motivation,” Academy of Management Journal 52, no. 3 
(2009): 562–80.
	67.	 “Rutgers Fires Mike Rice,” ESPN, April 3, 2013, 
http://espn.go.com/sportsnation/post/_/id/9129245/
rutgers-fires-mike-rice.
	68.	 J. M. Robbins, M. T. Ford, and L. E. Tetrick, “Perceived Un-
fairness and Employee Health: A Meta-Analytic Integration,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 235–72.
	69.	 K. Leung, K. Tong, and S. S. Ho, “Effects of Interactional 
Justice on Egocentric Bias in Resource Allocation Decisions,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 3 (2004): 405–15; and 
L. Francis-Gladney, N. R. Manger, and R. B. Welker, “Does 
Outcome Favorability Affect Procedural Fairness as a Result 
of Self-Serving Attributions,” Journal of Applied Social Psy-
chology 40, no. 1 (2010): 182–94.
	70.	 L. J. Barlcay and D. P. Skarlicki, “Healing the Wounds of Or-
ganizational Injustice: Examining the Benefits of Expressive 
Writing,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 2 (2009): 
511–23.
	71.	 This section is based on B. A. Scott, A. S. Garza, D. E. Con-
lon, and Y. J. Kim, “Why Do Managers Act Fairly in the First 
Place? A Daily Investigation of ‘Hot’ and ‘Cold’ Motives 
and Discretion,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 6 
(2014): 1571–91.
	72.	 F. F. T. Chiang and T. Birtch, “The Transferability of Man-
agement Practices: Examining Cross-National Differences 
in Reward Preferences,” Human Relations 60, no. 9 (2007): 
1293–330; and M. J. Gelfand, M. Erez, and Z. Aycan, “Cross-
Cultural Organizational Behavior,” Annual Review of Psy-
chology 58 (2007): 479–514.
	73.	 M. C. Bolino and W. H. Turnley, “Old Faces, New Places: 
Equity Theory in Cross-Cultural Contexts,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior 29, no. 1 (2008): 29–50.
	74.	 R. Shao, D. E. Rupp, D. P. Skarlicki, and K. S. Jones, “Em-
ployee Justice across Cultures: A Meta-Analytic Review,” 
Journal of Management 39, no. 1 (2013): 263–301.
	75.	 R. L. Purvis, T. J. Zagenczyck, and G. E. McCray, “What’s in 
It for Me? Using Expectancy Theory and Climate to Explain 
Stakeholder Participation, Its Direction and Intensity,” Inter-
national Journal of Project Management 33, no. 1 (2015): 
3–14.
	76.	 Y. Hao and G. Jianping,  “Expectancy Theory and Nascent En-
trepreneurship,” Small Business Economics 39, no. 3 (2012), 
667–84; and G. Yu and J. Guo, “Research on Employee Moti-
vation Mechanism in Modern Enterprises Based on Victor H. 
Vroom’s Expectancy Theory,” in Proceedings of the 9th Inter-
national Conference on Innovation and Management, eds. G. 
Duysters, A. DeHoyos, and K. Kaminishi (2012): 988–91.
	77.	 Vroom refers to these three variables as expectancy, instru-
mentality, and valence, respectively.
	78.	 J. Nocera, “The Anguish of Being an Analyst,” The New York 
Times, March 4, 2006, B1, B12.
	79.	 Y. Hao and G. Jianping, “Research on Employee Motivation 
Mechanism in Modern Enterprises Based on Victor H. Vroom’s 
Expectancy Theory.” (2012): 988–91.
	80.	 H.-T. Chang, H.-M. Hsu, J.-W. Liou, and C.-T. Tsai, “Psycho-
logical Contracts and Innovative Behavior: A Moderated Path 
Analysis of Work Engagement and Job Resources,” Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology 43, no. 10 (2013): 2021–135.
	81.	 See topics of employee engagement from Gallup, “Employee 
Engagement”, Gallup, accessed May 28, 2015, http://www.
gallup.com/topic/employee_engagement.aspx. 
	82.	 M. S. Christian, A. S. Garza, and J. E. Slaughter, “Work En-
gagement: A Quantitative Review and Test of Its Relations 
with Task and Contextual Performance,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 64, no. 1 (2011): 89–136.
	83.	 W. B. Schaufeli, A. B. Bakker, and W. van Rhenen, “How 
Changes in Job Demands and Resources Predict Burnout, 
Work Engagement, and Sickness Absenteeism,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 30, no. 7 (2009): 893–917; E. R. 
Crawford, J. A. LePine, and B. L. Rich, “Linking Job De-
mands and Resources to Employee Engagement and Burnout: 
A Theoretical Extension and Meta-Analytic Test,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 834–48; and D. Xan-
thopoulou, A. B. Bakker, E. Demerouti, and W. B. Schaufeli, 
“Reciprocal Relationships between Job Resources, Personal 
Resources, and Work Engagement,” Journal of Vocational Be-
havior 74, no. 3 (2009): 235–44.
	84.	 B. L. Rich, J. A. LePine, and E. R. Crawford, “Job Engage-
ment: Antecedents and Effects on Job Performance,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 53, no. 3 (2010): 617–35.
	85.	 M. Tims, A. B. Bakker, and D. Xanthopoulou, “Do Transfor-
mational Leaders Enhance Their Followers’ Daily Work En-
gagement?” Leadership Quarterly 22, no. 1 (2011): 121–31; 
and F. O. Walumbwa, P. Wang, H. Wang, J. Schaubroeck, and 
B. J. Avolio, “Psychological Processes Linking Authentic 
Leadership to Follower Behaviors,” Leadership Quarterly 21, 
no. 5 (2010): 901–14.
CHAPTER 8
	 1.	 C. B. Gibson, J. L. Gibbs, T. L. Stanko, P. Tesluk, and S. G. 
Cohen, “Including the ‘I’ in Virtuality and Modern Job De-
sign: Extending the Job Characteristics Model to Include the 
Moderating Effect of Individual Experiences of Electronic 
Dependence and Copresence,” Organization Science 22, no. 
6 (2011): 1481–99.
	 2.	 S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “In-
tegrating Motivational, Social, and Contextual Work Design 
Features: A Meta-Analytic Summary and Theoretical Exten-
sion of the Work Design Literature,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 92, no. 5 (2007): 1332–56.
	 3.	 B. M. Meglino and A. M. Korsgaard, “The Role of Other Ori-
entation in Reactions to Job Characteristics,” Journal of Man-
agement 33, no. 1 (2007): 57–83.

356	 Endnotes
	 4.	 J. L. Pierce, I. Jussila, and A. Cummings, “Psychological 
Ownership within the Job Design Context: Revision of the 
Job Characteristics Model,” Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior 30, no. 4 (2009): 477–96.
	 5.	 C. B. Gibson, J. L. Gibbs, T. L. Stanko, P. Tesluk, and S. G. 
Cohen, “Including the ‘I’ in Virtuality and Modern Job De-
sign: Extending the Job Characteristics Model to Include the 
Moderating Effect of Individual Experiences of Electronic 
Dependence and Copresence.”
	 6.	 B. M. Naba and L. Fan, “Employee Motivation and Satis-
faction in Niger: An Application of the Job Characteristics 
Model.” In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference 
on Innovation and Management, eds. A. de Hoyos, K. Ka-
minishi, and G. Duysters (2013), 523–27.
	 7.	 M. F. Peterson and S. A. Ruiz-Quintanilla, “Cultural Social-
ization as a Source of Intrinsic Work Motivation,” Group & 
Organization Management 28, no. 2 (2003): 188–216.
	 8.	 T. Silver, “Rotate Your Way to Higher Value,” Baseline, 
March/April 2010, 12; and J. J. Salopek, “Coca-Cola Division  
Refreshes Its Talent with Diversity Push on Campus,” Work-
force Management Online, March 21, 2011, http://www 
.workforce.com/2011/03/21/coca-cola-division-refreshes-its-
talent-with-diversity-push-on-campus/
	 9.	 Review of Singapore Airlines, Skytrax, accessed May 31, 
2013, www.airlinequality.com/Airlines/SQ.htm
	10.	 S.-Y. Chen, W.-C. Wu, C.-S. Chang, and C.-T. Lin, “Job Ro-
tation and Internal Marketing for Increased Job Satisfaction 
and Organisational Commitment in Hospital Nursing Staff,” 
Journal of Nursing Management 23, no. 3 (2015): 297–306.
	11.	 A. Christini and D. Pozzoli, “Workplace Practices and Firm 
Performance in Manufacturing: A Comparative Study of Italy 
and Britain,” International Journal of Manpower 31, no. 7 
(2010): 818–42; and K. Kaymaz, “The Effects of Job Rotation 
Practices on Motivation: A Research on Managers in the Au-
tomotive Organizations,” Business and Economics Research 
Journal 1, no. 3 (2010): 69–86.
	12.	 S.-H. Huang and Y.-C. Pan, “Ergonomic Job Rotation Strategy 
Based on an Automated RGB-D Anthropometric Measuring Sys-
tem,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems 33, no. 4 (2014): 699–
710; and P. C. Leider, J. S. Boschman, M. H. W. Frings-Dresen, 
and H. F. van der Molen, “Effects of Job Rotation on Musculo-
skeletal Complaints and Related Work Exposures: A Systematic 
Literature Review,” Ergonomics 58, no. 1 (2015): 18–32.
	13.	 A. M. Grant, “Leading with Meaning: Beneficiary Contact, 
Prosocial Impact, and the Performance Effects of Transfor-
mational Leadership,” Academy of Management Journal 55, 
 no. 2 (2012): 458–76; and A. M. Grant and S. K. Parker, “Re-
designing Work Design Theories: The Rise of Relational and 
Proactive Perspectives,” Annals of the Academy of Manage-
ment 3, no. 1 (2009): 317–75.
	14.	 J. Devaro, “A Theoretical Analysis of Relational Job Design 
and Compensation,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31, 
no. 2–3 (2010): 279–301.
	15.	 K. Pajo and L. Lee, “Corporate-Sponsored Volunteering: A 
Work Design Perspective,” Journal of Business Ethics 99, no. 
3 (2011): 467–82.
	16.	 K. Bal, “Does Flextime Penalize Night Owls?” Human Re-
source Executive, June 23, 2014, http://www.hreonline.com/
HRE/view/story.jhtml?id=534357257.
	17.	 T. Kato, “Work and Family Practices in Japanese Firms: Their 
Scope, Nature, and Impact on Employee Turnover,” Inter-
national Journal of Human Resource Management 20, no. 
2 (2009): 439–56; and P. Mourdoukoutas, “Why Do Women 
Fare Better in the German World of Work Than in the US?” 
Forbes, March 25, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/panosmour-
doukoutas/2013/03/25/why-do-women-fare-better-in-the-
german-world-of-work-than-in-the-us/.
	18.	 R. Waring, “Sunday Dialogue: Flexible Work Hours,” The 
New York Times, January 19, 2013, www.nytimes.com.
	19.	 B. Y. Lee and S. E. DeVoe, “Flextime and Profitability,” In-
dustrial Relations 51, no. 2 (2012): 298–316.
	20.	 See, for example, K. M. Shockley and T. D. Allen, “When 
Flexibility Helps: Another Look at the Availability of Flexible 
Work Arrangements and Work–Family Conflict,” Journal of 
Vocational Behavior 71, no. 3 (2007): 479–93; J. G. Grzy-
wacz, D. S. Carlson, and S. Shulkin, “Schedule Flexibility 
and Stress: Linking Formal Flexible Arrangements and Per-
ceived Flexibility to Employee Health,” Community, Work, 
and Family 11, no. 2 (2008): 199–214; and L. A. McNall, 
A. D. Masuda, and J. M. Nicklin “Flexible Work Arrange-
ments, Job Satisfaction, and Turnover Intentions: The Mediat-
ing Role of Work-to-Family Enrichment,” 144, no. 1 (2010): 
61–81.
	21.	 K. M. Shockley and T. D. Allen, “Investigating the Missing 
Link in Flexible Work Arrangement Utilization: An Individual 
Difference Perspective,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 76, 
no. 1 (2010): 131–42.
	22.	 D. Eldridge and T. M. Nisar, “Employee and Organizational 
Impacts of Flextime Work Arrangements,” Industrial Rela-
tions 66, no. 2 (2011): 213–34.
	23.	 J. LaReau, “Ford’s 2 Julies Share Devotion—And Job,” Auto-
motive News, October 25, 2010, 4.
	24.	 S. Adams, “Workers Have More Flextime, Less Real Flexibil-
ity, Study Shows,” Forbes, May 2, 2014, http://www.forbes.
com/sites/susanadams/2014/05/02/workers-have-more-flex-
time-less-real-flexibility-study-shows/.
	25.	 C. B. Mulligan, “What Job Sharing Brings,” Forbes, May 
8, 
2013, 
http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/08/
what-job-sharing-brings/;  and  “ObamaCare  Employer Man-
date,” ObamacareFacts.com,” http://obamacarefacts.com/
obamacare-employer-mandate/.
	26.	 L. Woellert, “U.S. Work Share Program Helps Employers 
Avoid Layoffs,” Bloomberg Businessweek, January 24, 2013, 
www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-01-24/u-dot-s-dot-
work-share-program-helps-employers-avoid-layoffs.
	27.	 P. R. Gregory, “Why Obama Cannot Match Germany’s 
Jobs Miracle,” Forbes, May 5, 2013, www.forbes 
.com/sites/paulroderickgregory/2013/05/05/why-obama 
-cannot-match-germanys-jobs-miracle/.
	28.	 See, for example, E. J. Hill, M. Ferris, and V. Martinson, 
“Does It Matter Where You Work? A Comparison of How 
Three Work Venues (Traditional Office, Virtual Office, and 
Home Office) Influence Aspects of Work and Personal/Fam-
ily Life,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 63, no. 2 (2003): 
220–41; B. Williamson, “Managing Virtual Workers,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, July 16, 2009, http://www.bloom-
berg.com/news/articles/2009-07-15/managing-virtual-
workers; and B. A. Lautsch and E. E. Kossek, “Managing a 
Blended Workforce: Telecommuters and Non-Telecommut-
ers,” Organizational Dynamics 40, no. 1 (2010): 10–17.
	29.	 S. Raghuram and D. Fang, “Telecommuting and the Role of 
Supervisory Power in China,” Asia Pacific Journal of Man-
agement 31, no. 2 (2014): 523–47.
	30.	 D. Wilkie, “Has the Telecommuting Bubble Burst?” HR Mag-
azine, June 1, 2015, https://www.shrm.org/hr-today/news/hr-
magazine/pages/june-2015.aspx.

	
Endnotes	 357
	31.	 B. W. Reynolds, “100 Top Companies with Remote Jobs in 
2015,” Flexjobs, January 20, 2015, http://www.flexjobs.com/
blog/post/100-top-companies-with-remote-jobs-in-2015.
	32.	 S. Florentine, “10 Most Telecommuting-Friendly Tech 
Companies,” CIO, January 15, 2014, http://www.cio.com/
article/2369810/telecommuting/136064-10-Most-Telecom-
muting-Friendly-Tech-Companies.html#slide11.
	33.	 See, for instance, M. Conlin, “The Easiest Commute of All,” 
BusinessWeek, December 12, 2005: 78; and E. O’Keefe, 
“Teleworking Grows But Still a Rarity,” The Washington Post, 
February 22, 2011, B3.
	34.	 See, for example, P. Brotherton, “For Teleworkers, Less 
Is Definitely More,” TD 65, March, 19, 2011: 29; and M. 
Virick, N. DaSilva, and K. Arrington, “Moderators of the 
Curvilinear Relation between Extent of Telecommuting 
and Job and Life Satisfaction: The Role of Performance 
Outcome Orientation and Worker Type,” Human Relations 
63, no. 1 (2010): 137–54.
	35.	 M. C. Noonan and J. L. Glass, “The Hard Truth about Tele-
commuting,” Monthly Labor Review 135, no. 6 (2012): 38–45.
	36.	 J. Welch and S. Welch, “The Importance of Being There,” 
BusinessWeek, April 16, 2007, 92; and Z. I. Barsness, K. A. 
Diekmann, and M. L. Seidel, “Motivation and Opportunity: 
The Role of Remote Work, Demographic Dissimilarity, and 
Social Network Centrality in Impression Management,” 
Academy of Management Journal 48, no. 3 (2005): 401–19.
	37.	 P. Zhu and S. G. Mason, “The Impact of Telecommuting on 
Personal Vehicle Usage and Environmental Sustainability,” 
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technol-
ogy 11, no. 8 (2014): 2185–200.
	38.	 M. Marchington, “Analysing the Forces Shaping Employee 
Involvement and Participation (EIP) at Organisation Level in 
Liberal Market Economies (LMEs),” Human Resource Man-
agement Journal 25, no. 1 (2015): 1–18.
	39.	 See, for example, the literature on empowerment, such as S. 
E. Seibert, S. R. Silver, and W. A. Randolph, “Taking Em-
powerment to the Next Level: A Multiple-Level Model of 
Empowerment, Performance, and Satisfaction,” Academy 
of Management Journal 47, no. 3 (2004): 332–49; M. M. 
Butts, R. J. Vandenberg, D. M. DeJoy, B. S. Schaffer, and 
M. G. Wilson, “Individual Reactions to High Involvement 
Work Processes: Investigating the Role of Empowerment 
and Perceived Organizational Support,” Journal of Occu-
pational Health Psychology 14, no. 2 (2009): 122–36; R. 
Park, E. Applebaum, and D. Kruse, “Employee Involve-
ment and Group Incentives in Manufacturing Companies: A 
Multi-Level Analysis,” Human Resource Management Jour-
nal 20, no. 3 (2010): 227–43; D. C. Jones, P. Kalmi, and A. 
Kauhanen, “How Does Employee Involvement Stack Up? 
The Effects of Human Resource Management Policies in a 
Retail Firm,” Industrial Relations 49, no. 1 (2010): 1–21; 
and M. T. Maynard, L. L. Gilson, and J. E. Mathieu, “Em-
powerment—Fad or Fab? A Multilevel Review of the Past 
Two Decades of Research,” Journal of Management 38, no. 
4 (2012): 1231–81.
	40.	 See, for instance, A. Sagie and Z. Aycan, “A Cross-Cultural 
Analysis of Participative Decision-Making in Organizations,” 
Human Relations 56, no. 4 (2003): 453–73; and J. Brockner, 
“Unpacking Country Effects: On the Need to Operationalize 
the Psychological Determinants of Cross-National Differ-
ences,” in Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. 25, eds. 
R. M. Kramer and B. M. Staw (Oxford, UK: Elsevier, 2003), 
336–40.
	41.	 Z. X. Chen and S. Aryee, “Delegation and Employee Work 
Outcomes: An Examination of the Cultural Context of Medi-
ating Processes in China,” Academy of Management Journal 
50, no. 1 (2007): 226–38.
	42.	 G. Huang, X. Niu, C. Lee, and S. J. Ashford, “Differentiating 
Cognitive and Affective Job Insecurity: Antecedents and Out-
comes,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33, no. 6 (2012): 
752–69.
	43.	 Z. Cheng, “The Effects of Employee Involvement and Par-
ticipation on Subjective Wellbeing: Evidence from Ur-
ban China,” Social Indicators Research 118, no. 2 (2014): 
457–83.
	44.	 M. Marchington, “Analysing the Forces Shaping Employee 
Involvement and Participation (EIP) at Organisation Level in 
Liberal Market Economies (LMEs).”
	45.	 J. J. Caughron and M. D. Mumford, “Embedded Leader-
ship: How Do a Leader’s Superiors Impact Middle-Man-
agement Performance?” Leadership Quarterly 23, no. 3 
June 2012: 342–53.
	46.	 See, for instance, A. Pendleton and A. Robinson, “Employee 
Stock Ownership, Involvement, and Productivity: An Inter-
action-Based Approach,” Industrial and Labor Relations Re-
view 64, no. 1 (2010): 3–29.
	47.	 D. K. Datta, J. P. Guthrie, and P. M. Wright, “Human Re-
source Management and Labor Productivity: Does Industry 
Matter?” Academy of Management Journal 48, no. 1 (2005): 
135–45; C. M. Riordan, R. J. Vandenberg, and H. A. Richard-
son, “Employee Involvement Climate and Organizational Ef-
fectiveness.” Human Resource Management 44, no. 4 (2005): 
471–88; and J. Kim, J. P. MacDuffie, and F. K. Pil, “Em-
ployee Voice and Organizational Performance: Team versus 
Representative Influence,” Human Relations 63, no. 3 (2010): 
371–94.
	48.	 M. Marchington, “Analysing the Forces Shaping Employee 
Involvement and Participation (EIP) at Organisation Level in 
Liberal Market Economies (LMEs).”
	49.	 E. White, “Opportunity Knocks, and It Pays a Lot Better,” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2006, B3.
	50.	 M. Sabramony, N. Krause, J. Norton, and G. N. Burns “The 
Relationship between Human Resource Investments and 
Organizational Performance: A Firm-Level Examination of 
Equilibrium Theory,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 
(2008): 778–88.
	51.	 C. Isidore, “Walmart Ups Pay Well above Minimum 
Wage,” CNN Money, February 19, 2015, http://money.cnn.
com/2015/02/19/news/companies/walmart-wages/.
	52.	 See, for example, M. Damiani and A. Ricci, “Managers’ Ed-
ucation and the Choice of Different Variable Pay Schemes: 
Evidence from Italian Firms,” European Management Journal 
32, no. 6 (2014): 891–902; and J. S. Heywood and U. Jirjahn, 
“Variable Pay, Industrial Relations and Foreign Ownership: 
Evidence from Germany,” British Journal of Industrial Rela-
tions 52, no. 3 (2014): 521–52.
	53.	 S. Miller, “Variable Pay Spending Spikes to Record High,” 
Society for Human Resource Management: Compensation 
Topics & Strategy, September 2, 2014, http://www.shrm.org/
hrdisciplines/compensation/articles/pages/variable-pay-high 
.aspx.
	54.	 S. Miller, “Companies Worldwide Rewarding Performance 
with Variable Pay,” Society for Human Resource Management: 
Compensation Topics & Strategy, March 1, 2010, https://
www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/compensation/
pages/variableworld.aspx.

358	 Endnotes
	55.	 S. Miller, “Asian Firms Offer More Variable Pay Than West-
ern Firms,” Society for Human Resource Management: Com-
pensation Topics & Strategy, March 28, 2012, https://www 
.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/compensation/pages/
asianvariablepay.aspx.
	56.	 H. Kim, K. L. Sutton, and Y. Gong, “Group-Based Pay-for-
Performance Plans and Firm Performance: The Moderating 
Role of Empowerment Practices,” Asia Pacific Journal of 
Management 30, no. 1 2013: 31–52.
	57.	 J. Cloutier, D. Morin, and S. Renaud, “How Does Variable 
Pay Relate to Pay Satisfaction among Canadian Work-
ers?” International Journal of Manpower 34, no. 5 (2013): 
465–85.
	58.	 E. Belogolovsky and P. A. Bamberger, “Signaling in Secret: 
Pay for Performance and the Incentive and Sorting Effects 
of Pay Secrecy,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 6 
(2014): 1706–33.
	59.	 Ibid.
	60.	 C. B. Cadsby, F. Song, and F. Tapon, “Sorting and Incentive 
Effects of Pay for Performance: An Experimental Investiga-
tion,” Academy of Management Journal 50, no. 2 (2007): 
387–405.
	61.	 J. H. Han, K. M. Barol, and S. Kim, “Tightening Up the 
Performance-Pay Linkage: Roles of Contingent Reward 
Leadership and Profit-Sharing in the Cross-Level Influence 
of Individual Pay-for-Performance,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 100, no. 2 (2015): 417–30.
	62.	 K. A. Bender, C. P. Green, and J. S. Heywood, “Piece Rates 
and Workplace Injury: Does Survey Evidence Support Adam 
Smith?” Journal of Population Economics 25, no. 2 (2012): 
569–90.
	63.	 J. S. Heywood, X. Wei, and G. Ye, “Piece Rates for Profes-
sors,” Economics Letters 113, no. 3 (2011): 285–87.
	64.	 A. Baker and V. Mertins, “Risk-Sorting and Preference for 
Team Piece Rates,” Journal of Economic Psychology 34 
(2013): 285–300.
	65.	 A. Clemens, “Pace of Work and Piece Rates,” Economics Let-
ters 115, no. 3 (2012): 477–79.
	66.	 K. A. Bender, C. P. Green, and J. S. Heywood, “Piece Rates 
and Workplace Injury: Does Survey Evidence Support Adam 
Smith?”
	67.	 S. L. Rynes, B. Gerhart, and L. Parks, “Personnel Psychology: 
Performance Evaluation and Pay for Performance,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 56, no. 1 (2005): 571–600.
	68.	 “Paying Doctors for Performance,” The New York Times, Jan-
uary 27, 2013, A16.
	69.	 S. Halzack, “Companies Look to Bonuses Instead of Salary 
Increases in an Uncertain Economy,” The Washington Post, 
November 6, 2012, https://www.washingtonpost.com/busi-
ness/economy/companies-look-to-bonuses-instead-of-salary- 
increases-in-an-uncertain-economy/2012/11/06/52a7ec12-27
51-11e2-9972-71bf64ea091c_story.html.
	70.	 E. J. Castillo, “Gender, Race, and the New (Merit-Based) 
Employment Relationship,” Industrial Relations 51, no. S1 
(2012): 528–62.
	71.	 P. Furman, “Ouch! Top Honchos on Wall Street See Big-
gest Cuts to Bonuses,” New York Daily News, Febru-
ary 18, 2013, http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/
ouch-top-honchos-wall-street-biggest-cuts-bonues-arti-
cle-1.1267228.
	72.	 N. Chun and S. Lee, “Bonus Compensation and Productiv-
ity: Evidence from Indian Manufacturing Plant-Level Data,” 
Journal of Productivity Analysis 43, no. 1 (2015): 47–58.
	73.	 E. White, “Employers Increasingly Favor Bonuses to Raises,” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 28, 2006, B3. 
	74.	 B. Goyette “Mark Zuckerberg Reaped $2.3 Billion on Face-
book Stock Options,” The Huffington Post, April 26, 2013, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/26/zuckerberg- 
stock-options_n_3166661.html?utm_hp_ref=business.
	75.	 D. D’Art and T. Turner, “Profit Sharing, Firm Performance, 
and Union Influence in Selected European Countries,” 
Personnel Review 33, no. 3 (2004): 335–50; and D. Kruse, 
R. Freeman, and J. Blasi, Shared Capitalism at Work: Em-
ployee Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-
Based Stock Options (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2010).
	76.	 A. Bayo-Moriones and M. Larraza-Kintana, “Profit-Sharing 
Plans and Affective Commitment: Does the Context Matter?” 
Human Resource Management 48, no. 2 (2009): 207–26.
	77.	 N. Chi and T. Han, “Exploring the Linkages between Formal 
Ownership and Psychological Ownership for the Organiza-
tion: The Mediating Role of Organizational Justice,” Journal 
of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 81, no. 4 
(2008): 691–711.
	78.	 J. H. Han, K. M. Barol, and S. Kim, “Tightening Up the Per-
formance-Pay Linkage: Roles of Contingent Reward Lead-
ership and Profit-Sharing in the Cross-Level Influence of 
Individual Pay-for-Performance.”
	79.	 R. P. Garrett, “Does Employee Ownership Increase Innova-
tion?” New England Journal of Entrepreneurship 13, no. 2, 
(2010): 37–46.
	80.	 D. McCarthy, E. Reeves, and T. Turner, “Can Employee 
Share-Ownership Improve Employee Attitudes and Behav-
iour?” Employee Relations 32, no. 4 (2010): 382–95.
	81.	 A. Pendleton, “Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Own-
ership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-Based Stock 
Options,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64, no. 3 
(2011): 621–22.
	82.	 A. Pendleton and A. Robinson, “Employee Stock Owner-
ship, Involvement, and Productivity: An Interaction-Based 
Approach,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64, no. 1 
(2010): 3–29.
	83.	 X. Zhang, K. M. Bartol, K. G. Smith, M. D. Pfarrer, and D. 
M. Khanin, “CEOs on the Edge: Earnings Manipulation and 
Stock-Based Incentive Misalignment,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 51, no. 2 (2008): 241–58.
	84.	 Z. Lin, J. Kelly, and L. Trenberth, “Antecedents and Con-
sequences of the Introduction of Flexible Benefit Plans in 
China,” International Journal of Human Resource Manage-
ment vol. 22, no. 5 (2011): 1128–45.
	85.	 Ibid.
	86.	 R. C. Koo, “Global Added Value of Flexible Benefits,” Ben-
efits Quarterly 27, no. 4 (2011): 17–20.
	87.	 P. Stephens, “Flex Plans Gain in Popularity,” CA Magazine, 
January/February 2010, 10.
	88.	 D. Lovewell, “Flexible Benefits: Benefits on Offer,” Em-
ployee Benefits, March 2010, S15.
	89.	 S. J. Peterson and F. Luthans, “The Impact of Financial and 
Nonfinancial Incentives on Business Unit Outcomes over 
Time,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 
156–65.
	90.	 C. Xu and C. Liang, “The Mechanisms Underlying an 
Employee Recognition Program,” in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Public Human Resource Man-
agement and Innovation, eds. L. Hale and J. Zhang (2013), 
28–35.

	
Endnotes	 359
	91.	 See F. Luthans and A. D. Stajkovic, “Provide Recognition 
for Performance Improvement,” in Handbook of Principles 
of Organizational Behavior, ed. E. A. Locke (Malden, MA: 
Blackwell, 2004): 166–80.
CHAPTER 9
	 1.	 R. Wijn and K. Van den Bos, “On the Social-Communicative 
Function of Justice: The Influence of Communication Goals 
and Personal Involvement on the Use of Justice Assertions,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36, no. 2 (2010): 
161–72.
	 2.	 J. Michael Cole, “IKEA Unveils LGBT-Friendly ‘All Homes 
Are Created Equal’ Ad Campaign,” The NewsLens, October 
6, 2016, https://international.thenewslens.com/article/50834; 
“The IKEA Group Approach To Sustainability,” IKEA, ac-
cessed on May 2017, http://www.ikea.com/ms/en_KW/pdf/
sustainability_report/group_approach_sustainability_fy11.
pdf; Michele Bianchi and Lindsay Hedenskog, “What Home Is 
For A Refugee Without One,” IKEA Highlights, 2016, https://
highlights.ikea.com/2016/home-for-a-refugee; IKEA Group, 
Yearly Summary, 2015, http://www.ikea.com/ms//en_JP/pdf/
yearly_summary/IKEA_Group_Yearly_Summary_2015.pdf; 
and Emma Graham-Harrison, “Banned And Barred, Israel’s 
Women Stand Up To Religious Hardliners,” The Guardian, 
March 19, 2017, https://www.theguardian.com. 
	 3.	 D. C. Barnlund, “A Transactional Model of Communica-
tion,” in Communication Theory, ed. C. D. Mortenson (New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2008), 47–57; and see K. Byron, 
“Carrying Too Heavy a Load? The Communication and Mis-
communication of Emotion by E-mail,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review 33, no. 2 (2008): 309–27.
	 4.	 A. Tenhiaelae and F. Salvador, “Looking inside Glitch Miti-
gation Capability: The Effect of Intraorganizational Com-
munication Channels,” Decision Sciences 45, no. 3 (2014): 
437–66.
	 5.	 S. Jhun, Z.-T. Bae, and S.-Y. Rhee, “Performance Change of 
Managers in Two Different Uses of Upward Feedback: A Lon-
gitudinal Study in Korea,” International Journal of Human 
Resource Management 23, no. 20 (2012): 4246–64; B. Oc, M. 
R. Bashshur, and C. Moore, “Speaking Truth to Power: The 
Effect of Candid Feedback on How Individuals with Power 
Allocate Resources,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, 
no. 2 (2015): 450–63; and J. W. Smither and A. G. Walker, 
“Are the Characteristics of Narrative Comments Related to 
Improvement in Multirater Feedback Ratings over Time?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 3 (2004): 575–81.
	 6.	 J. S. Lublin, “Managers Need to Make Time for Face Time,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 18, 2015, B6.
	 7.	 E. Nichols, “Hyper-Speed Managers,” HR Magazine, April 
2007, 107–10.
	 8.	 R. Walker, “Declining an Assignment, with Finesse,” The New 
York Times, August 24, 2014, 8.
	 9.	 See, for example, G. Michelson, A. van Iterson, and K. Wad-
dington, “Gossip in Organizations: Contexts, Consequences, 
and Controversies,” Group & Organization Management 35, 
no. 4 (2010): 371–90.
	10.	 G. Van Hoye and F. Lievens, “Tapping the Grapevine: A 
Closer Look at Word-of-Mouth as a Recruitment Source,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 2 (2009): 341–52.
	11.	 J. K. Bosson, A. B. Johnson, K. Niederhoffer, and W. B. 
Swann Jr., “Interpersonal Chemistry through Negativity: 
Bonding by Sharing Negative Attitudes about Others,” Per-
sonal Relationships 13, no. 2 (2006): 135–50.
	12.	 T. J. Grosser, V. Lopez-Kidwell, and G. Labianca, “A Social 
Network Analysis of Positive and Negative Gossip in Organi-
zational Life,” Group & Organization Management 35, no. 2 
(2010): 177–212.
	13.	 R. Feintzeig, “The Boss’s Next Demand: Make Lots of 
Friends,” The Wall Street Journal, February 12, 2014, B1, B6.
	14.	 R. E. Silverman, “A Victory for Small Office Talkers,” The 
Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2014, D2.
	15.	 L. Dulye, “Get Out of Your Office,” HR Magazine, July 2006, 
99–101.
	16.	 E. Bernstein, “How Well Are You Listening?” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 13, 2015, D1.
	17.	 E. Bernstein, “How ‘Active Listening’ Makes Both Par-
ticipants in a Conversation Feel Better,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 12, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/how-
active-listening-makes-both-sides-of-a-conversation-feel-bet-
ter-1421082684.
	18.	 S. Shellenbarger, “Work & Family Mailbox,” The Wall Street 
Journal, July 30, 2014, D2.
	19.	 E. C. Ravlin, A.-K. Ward, and D. C. Thomas, “Exchanging 
Social Information across Cultural Boundaries,” Journal of 
Management 40, no. 5 (2014): 1437–65.
	20.	 V. N. Giri, “Nonverbal Communication Theories,” in Encyclo-
pedia of Communication Theory, eds. S. W. Littlejohn and K. 
A. Foss (Washington, DC: Sage, 2009).
	21.	 C. K. Goman, “5 Body Language Tips to Increase Your Curb 
Appeal,” Forbes, March 4, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/
carolkinseygoman/2013/03/14/5-body-language-tips-to-in-
crease-your-curb-appeal/.
	22.	 See N. Kock, “The Psychobiological Model: Towards a 
New Theory of Computer-Mediated Communication Based 
on Darwinian Evolution,” Organization Science 15, no. 3 
(2004): 327–48; and C. E. Timmerman and S. N. Mad-
havapeddi, “Perceptions of Organizational Media Richness: 
Channel Expansion Effects for Electronic and Traditional 
Media across Richness Dimensions,” IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication 51, no. 1 (2008): 18–32.
	23.	 R. L. Daft and R. A. Noe, Organizational Behavior (Fort 
Worth, TX: Harcourt, 2001), 311.
	24.	 S. Shellenbarger, “Is This How You Really Talk?” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 24, 2013, D1, D3.
	25.	 B. Giamanco and K. Gregoire, “Tweet Me, Friend Me, Make 
Me Buy,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 2012, 88–93.
	26.	 “At Many Companies, Hunt for Leakers Expands Arsenal of 
Monitoring Tactics,” The Wall Street Journal, September 11, 
2006, B1, B3; and B. J. Alge, G. A. Ballinger, S. Tangirala, 
and J. L. Oakley, “Information Privacy in Organizations: Em-
powering Creative and Extrarole Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 221–32.
	27.	 R. E. Petty and P. Briñol, “Persuasion: From Single to Mul-
tiple to Metacognitive Processes,” Perspectives on Psycho-
logical Science 3, no. 2 (2008): 137–47; F. A. White, M. A. 
Charles, and J. K. Nelson, “The Role of Persuasive Arguments 
in Changing Affirmative Action Attitudes and Expressed Be-
havior in Higher Education,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
93, no. 6 (2008): 1271–86.
	28.	 K. L. Blankenship and D. T. Wegener, “Opening the Mind to 
Close It: Considering a Message in Light of Important Val-
ues Increases Message Processing and Later Resistance to 
Change,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94, 
no. 2 (2008): 196–213.

360	 Endnotes
	29.	 See, for example, Y. H. M. See, R. E. Petty, and L. R. Fabrigar, 
“Affective and Cognitive Meta-Bases of Attitudes: Unique 
Effects of Information Interest and Persuasion,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 94, no. 6 (2008): 938–55; 
M. S. Key, J. E. Edlund, B. J. Sagarin, and G. Y. Bizer, “Indi-
vidual Differences in Susceptibility to Mindlessness,” Person-
ality and Individual Differences 46, no. 3 (2009): 261–64; and 
M. Reinhard and M. Messner, “The Effects of Source Like-
ability and Need for Cognition on Advertising Effectiveness 
under Explicit Persuasion,” Journal of Consumer Behavior 8, 
no. 4 (2009): 179–91.
	30.	 M. Richtel, “Lost in E-Mail, Tech Firms Face Self-Made 
Beast,” The New York Times, June 14, 2008,  http://www 
.nytimes.com/2008/06/14/technology/14email.html.
	31.	 S. Norton, “A Post-PC CEO: No Desk, No Desktop,” The Wall 
Street Journal, November 20, 2014, B5.
	32.	 P. Briñol, R. E. Petty, and J. Barden, “Happiness versus Sad-
ness as a Determinant of Thought Confidence in Persuasion: 
A Self-Validation Analysis,” Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 93, no. 5 (2007): 711–27.
	33.	 R. C. Sinclair, S. E. Moore, M. M. Mark, A. S. Soldat, and 
C. A. Lavis, “Incidental Moods, Source Likeability, and Per-
suasion: Liking Motivates Message Elaboration in Happy 
People,” Cognition and Emotion 24, no. 6 (2010): 940–61; 
and V. Griskevicius, M. N. Shiota, and S. L. Neufeld, “Influ-
ence of Different Positive Emotions on Persuasion Process-
ing: A Functional Evolutionary Approach,” Emotion 10, no. 2 
(2010): 190–206.
	34.	 J. Sandberg, “The Jargon Jumble: Kids Have ‘Skeds,’ Col-
leagues, ‘Needs,’” The Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2006, 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB116165746415401680.html.
	35.	 Ibid.
	36.	 B. E. Ashforth and V. Anand, “The Normalization of Corrup-
tion in Organizations,” Research in Organizational Behavior 
25 (2003): 1–52; and E. Liu and M. E. Roloff, “Exhausting 
Silence: Emotional Costs of Withholding Complaints,” Nego-
tiation and Conflict Management Research 8, no. 1 (2015): 
25–40.
	37.	 F. J. Milliken, E. W. Morrison, and P. F. Hewlin, “An Explor-
atory Study of Employee Silence: Issues That Employees 
Don’t Communicate Upward and Why,” Journal of Manage-
ment Studies 40, no. 6 (2003): 1453–76.
	38.	 L. A. Withers and L. L. Vernon, “To Err Is Human: Embar-
rassment, Attachment, and Communication Apprehension,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 40, no. 1 (2006): 
99–110.
	39.	 See, for instance, B. D. Blume, T. T. Baldwin, and K. C. Ryan, 
“Communication Apprehension: A Barrier to Students’ Lead-
ership, Adaptability, and Multicultural Appreciation,” Acad-
emy of Management Learning & Education 12, no. 2 (2013): 
158–72; B. D. Blume, G. F. Dreher, and T. T. Baldwin, “Ex-
amining the Effects of Communication Apprehension within 
Assessment Centres,” Journal of Occupational and Organi-
zational Psychology 83, no. 3 (2010): 663–71; and X. Shi, T. 
M. Brinthaupt, and M. McCree, “The Relationship of Self-
Talk Frequency to Communication Apprehension and Public 
Speaking Anxiety,” Personality and Individual Differences 75 
(2015): 125–9.
	40.	 See, for example, T. L. Rodebaugh, “I Might Look OK, But 
I’m Still Doubtful, Anxious, and Avoidant: The Mixed Ef-
fects of Enhanced Video Feedback on Social Anxiety Symp-
toms,” Behaviour Research and Therapy 42, no. 12 (2004): 
1435–51.
	41.	 K. B. Serota, T. R. Levine, and F. J. Boster, “The Prevalence 
of Lying in America: Three Studies of Self-Reported Lies,” 
Human Communication Research 36, no. 1 (2010): 2–25.
	42.	 C. E. Naguin, T. R. Kurtzberg, and L. Y. Belkin, “The Finer 
Points of Lying Online: E-Mail versus Pen and Paper,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 2 (2010): 387–94.
	43.	 See W. L. Adair, “Integrative Sequences and Negotiation 
Outcome in Same- and Mixed-Culture Negotiations,” In-
ternational Journal of Conflict Management 14, nos. 3–4 
(2003): 1359–92; W. L. Adair and J. M. Brett, “The Nego-
tiation Dance: Time, Culture, and Behavioral Sequences in 
Negotiation,” Organization Science 16, no. 1 (2005): 33–51; 
E. Giebels and P. J. Taylor, “Interaction Patterns in Crisis Ne-
gotiations: Persuasive Arguments and Cultural Differences,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 5–19; and 
M. G. Kittler, D. Rygl, and A. Mackinnon, “Beyond Culture 
or Beyond Control? Reviewing the Use of Hall’s High-/Low-
Context Concept,” International Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Management 11, no. 1 (2011): 63–82.
	44.	 M. C. Hopson, T. Hart, and G. C. Bell, “Meeting in the Mid-
dle: Fred L. Casmir’s Contributions to the Field of Intercul-
tural Communication,” International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations 36, no. 6 (2012): 789–97.
CHAPTER 10
	 1.	 E. J. Boothby, M. S. Clark, and J. A. Bargh, “Shared Expe-
riences Are Amplified,” Psychological Science 25, no. 12 
(2014): 2209–16.
	 2.	 B. Bastien, J. Jetten, and L. J. Ferris, “Pain as Social Glue: 
Shared Pain Increases Cooperation,” Psychological Science 
25, no. 11 (2014): 2079–85.
	 3.	 O. Yakushko, M. M. Davidson, and E. N. Williams, “Iden-
tity Salience Model: A Paradigm for Integrating Multiple 
Identities in Clinical Practice,” Psychotherapy 46, no. 2 
(2009): 180–92; and S. M. Toh and A. S. Denisi, “Host 
Country Nationals as Socializing Agents: A Social Identity 
Approach,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 28, no. 3 
(2007): 281–301.
	 4.	 N. Karelaia and L. Guillén, “Me, a Woman and a Leader: Pos-
itive Social Identity and Identity Conflict,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 125, no. 2 (2014): 
204–19.
	 5.	 S. Zhang, G. Chen, X.-P. Chen, D. Liu, and M. D. Johnson, 
“Relational versus Collective Identification within Work-
groups: Conceptualization, Measurement Development, and 
Nomological Network Building,” Journal of Management 40, 
no. 6 (2014): 1700–31.
	 6.	 G. J. Lewis and T. C. Bates, “Common Heritable Effects 
Underpin Concerns over Norm Maintenance and In-Group 
Favoritism: Evidence from Genetic Analyses of Right-Wing 
Authoritarianism and Traditionalism,” Journal of Personality 
82, no. 4 (2014): 297–309.
	 7.	 S. L. Neuberg et al., “Religion and Intergroup Conflict: Find-
ings from the Global Group Relations Project,” Psychological 
Science 25, no. 1 (2014): 198–206.
	 8.	 W. M. L. Finlay, “Denunciation and the construction of 
Norms in Group Conflict: Examples from an Al-Qaeda-Sup-
porting Group,” British Journal of Social Psychology 53, no. 
4 (2014): 691–710.
	 9.	 M. J. Garfield and A. R. Denis, “Toward an Integrated 
Model of Group Development: Disruption of Routines by 

	
Endnotes	 361
Technology-Induced Change,” Journal of Management In-
formation Systems 29, no. 3 (2012): 43–86; and A. Chang, 
P. Bordia, and J. Duck, “Punctuated Equilibrium and Lin-
ear Progression: Toward a New Understanding of Group 
Development,” Academy of Management Journal 46, no. 1 
(2003): 106–17.
	10.	 M. M. Kazmer, “Disengaging from a Distributed Research 
Project: Refining a Model of Group Departures,” Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology 
61, no. 4 (2010): 758–71.
	11.	 William Shakespeare.  As You Like It. First Folio 1623 
	12.	 K. Giese and A. Theil, “The Psychological Contract in Chi-
nese–African Informal Labor Relations,” International Jour-
nal of Human Resource Management 26, no. 14 (2015): 
1807–26; L. Sels, M. Janssens, and I. Van den Brande, “Assess-
ing the Nature of Psychological Contracts: A Validation of Six 
Dimensions,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 25, no. 4 
(2004): 461–88; and C. Gui, C. Lee, and D. M. Rousseau, 
“Psychological Contract and Organizational Generalizability 
and Instrumentality,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 2 
(2004): 311–21.
	13.	 M. D. Collins, “The Effect of Psychological Contract Ful-
fillment on Manager Turnover Intentions and Its Role as a 
Mediator in a Casual, Limited-Service Restaurant Environ-
ment,” International Journal of Hospitality Management 29, 
no. 4 (2010): 736–42; J. M. Jensen, R. A. Opland, and A. M. 
Ryan, “Psychological Contracts and Counterproductive Work 
Behaviors: Employee Responses to Transactional and Rela-
tional Breach,” Journal of Business and Psychology 25, no. 4 
(2010): 555–68.
	14.	 K. S. Wilson and H. M. Baumann, “Capturing a More 
Complete View of Employees’ Lives outside of Work: The 
Introduction and Development of New Interrole Conflict 
Constructs,” Personnel Psychology 68, no. 2 (2015): 235–82.
	15.	 Ibid
	16.	 See, for example, F. T. Amstad, L. L. Meier, U. Fasel, A. Elf-
ering, and N. K. Semmer, “A Meta-Analysis of Work-Family 
Conflict and Various Outcomes with a Special Emphasis on 
Cross-Domain versus Matching-Domain Relations,” Jour-
nal of Occupational Health Psychology 16, no. 2 (2011): 
151–69.
	17.	 Y. Huang, K. M. Kendrick, and R. Yu, “Conformity to the 
Opinions of Other People Lasts for No More Than 3 Days,” 
Psychological Science 25, no. 7 (2014): 1388–93.
	18.	 M. S. Hagger, P. Rentzelas, and N. K. D. Chatzisrantis, “Ef-
fects of Individualist and Collectivist Group Norms and 
Choice on Intrinsic Motivation,” Motivation and Emotion 38, 
no. 2 (2014): 215–23; and M. G. Ehrhart and S. E. Naumann, 
“Organizational Citizenship Behavior in Work Groups: A 
Group Norms Approach,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, 
no. 6 (2004): 960–74.
	19.	 E. Delvaux, N. Vanbeselaere, and B. Mesquita, “Dynamic 
Interplay between Norms and Experiences of Anger and 
Gratitude in Groups,” Small Group Research 46, no. 3 (2015): 
300–23.
	20.	 R. B. Cialdini and N. J. Goldstein, “Social Influence: Com-
pliance and Conformity,” Annual Review of Psychology 55 
(2004): 591–621.
	21.	 P. Kundu and D. D. Cummins, “Morality and Conformity: 
The Asch Paradigm Applied to Moral Decisions,” Social In-
fluence 8, no. 4 (2013): 268–79.
	22.	 S. Sansfacon and C. E. Amiot, “The Impact of Group Norms 
and Behavioral Congruence on the Internalization of an 
Illegal Downloading Behavior,” Group Dynamics: Theory 
Research and Practice 18, no. 2 (2014): 174–88; and L. 
Rosh, L. R. Offermann, and R. Van Diest, “Too Close for 
Comfort? Distinguishing between Team Intimacy and Team 
Cohesion,” Human Resource Management Review 22, no. 2 
(2012): 116–27.
	23.	 J. S. Hassard, “Rethinking the Hawthorne Studies: The West-
ern Electric Research in Its Social, Political, and Historical 
Context,” Human Relations 65, no. 11 (2012): 1431–61.
	24.	 J. A. Goncalo, J. A. Chatman, M. M. Duguid, and J. A. Ken-
nedy, “Creativity from Constraint? How the Political Correct-
ness Norm Influences Creativity in Mixed-Sex Work Groups,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 60, no. 1 (2015): 1–30.
	25.	 E. Gonzalez-Mule, D. S. DeGeest, B. W. McCormick, J. Y. 
Seong, and K. G. Brown, “Can We Get Some Cooperation 
around Here? The Mediating Role of Group Norms on the Re-
lationship between Team Personality and Individual Helping 
Behaviors,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 5 (2014): 
988–99.
	26.	 T. Masson and I. Fritsche, “Adherence to Climate Change-
Related Ingroup Norms: Do Dimensions of Group Identifica-
tion Matter?” European Journal of Social Psychology 44, no. 
5 (2014): 455–65.
	27.	 See R. J. Bennett and S. L. Robinson, “The Past, Present, and 
Future of Workplace Deviance,” in Organizational Behavior: 
The State of the Science, 2nd ed., ed. J. Greenberg (Mahwah, NJ:  
Erlbaum, 2003), 237–71; and C. M. Berry, D. S. Ones, and 
P. R. Sackett, “Interpersonal Deviance, Organizational Devi-
ance, and Their Common Correlates: A Review and Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 2 (2007): 
410–24.
	28.	 M. A. Baysinger, K. T. Scherer, and J. M. LeBreton, “Explor-
ing the Disruptive Effects of Psychopathy and Aggression on 
Group Processes and Group Effectiveness,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 99, no. 1 (2014): 48–65.
	29.	 T. C. Reich and M. S. Hershcovis, “Observing Workplace 
Incivility,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 1 (2015): 
203–15; and Z. E. Zhou, Y. Yan, X. X. Che, and L. L. Meier, 
“Effect of Workplace Incivility on End-of-Work Negative Af-
fect: Examining Individual and Organizational Moderators in 
a Daily Diary Study,” Journal of Occupational Health Psy-
chology 20, no. 1 (2015): 117–30.
	30.	 See C. Pearson, L. M. Andersson, and C. L. Porath, “Work-
place Incivility,” in Counterproductive Work Behavior: Inves-
tigations of Actors and Targets, eds. S. Fox and P. E. Spector 
(Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
2005), 177–200.
	31.	 S. Lim, L. M. Cortina, and V. J. Magley, “Personal and Work-
group Incivility: Impact on Work and Health Outcomes,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 1 (2008): 95–107.
	32.	 M. S. Christian and A. P. J. Ellis, “Examining the Effects of 
Sleep Deprivation on Workplace Deviance: A Self-Regulatory 
Perspective,” Academy of Management Journal 54, no. 5 
(2011): 913–34.
	33.	 M. S. Hagger, P. Rentzelas, and N. K. D. Chatzisrantis, “Ef-
fects of Individualist and Collectivist Group Norms and 
Choice on Intrinsic Motivation.”
	34.	 J. Dippong and W. Kalkhoff, “Predicting Performance Expec-
tations from Affective Impressions: Linking Affect Control 
Theory and Status Characteristics Theory,” Social Science Re-
search 50 (2015): 1–14; and A. E. Randel, L. Chay-Hoon, and 
P. C. Earley, “It’s Not Just about Differences: An Integration 
of Role Identity Theory and Status Characteristics Theory,” in 

362	 Endnotes
Research on Managing Groups and Teams, ed. M. C. T. Hunt 
(2005), 23–42.
	35.	 A. E. Randel, L. Chay-Hoon, and P. C. Earley, “It’s Not Just 
about Differences: An Integration of Role Identity Theory and 
Status Characteristics Theory.”
	36.	 P. F. Hewlin, “Wearing the Cloak: Antecedents and Conse-
quences of Creating Facades of Conformity,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 94, no. 3 (2009): 727–41.
	37.	 B. Groysberg, J. T. Polzer, and H. A. Elfenbein, “Too 
Many Cooks Spoil the Broth: How High-Status Individuals  
Decrease Group Effectiveness.” 
	38.	 C. Bendersky and N. P. Shah, “The Cost of Status Enhancement: 
Performance Effects of Individuals’ Status Mobility in Task 
Groups,” Organization Science 23, no. 2 (2012): 308–22.
	39.	 B. Groysberg, J. T. Polzer, and H. A. Elfenbein, “Too Many 
Cooks Spoil the Broth: How High-Status Individuals De-
crease Group Effectiveness.
	40.	 A. M. Christie and J. Barling, “Beyond Status: Relating Sta-
tus Inequality to Performance and Health in Teams,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 920–34; and L. H. 
Nishii and D. M. Mayer, “Do Inclusive Leaders Help to Re-
duce Turnover in Diverse Groups? The Moderating Role of 
Leader–Member Exchange in the Diversity to Turnover Re-
lationship,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 6 (2009): 
1412–26.
	41.	 M. Cikara and J. J. Van Bavel, “The Neuroscience of Inter-
group Relations: An Integrative Review,” Perspectives on Psy-
chological Science 9, no. 3 (2014): 245–74.
	42.	 M. Rubin, C. Badea, and J. Jetten, “Low Status Groups Show 
In-Group Favoritism to Compensate for Their Low Status and 
Compete for Higher Status,” Group Processes & Intergroup 
Relations 17, no. 5 (2014): 563–76.
	43.	 C. L. Wilkins, J. D. Wellman, L. G. Babbitt, N. R. Toosi, and 
K. D. Schad, “You Can Win But I Can’t Lose: Bias against 
High-Status Groups Increases Their Zero-Sum Beliefs about 
Discrimination,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 
57 (2014): 1–14.
	44.	 R. B. Lount Jr. and S. L. Wilk, “Working Harder or Hardly 
Working? Posting Performance Eliminates Social Loafing and 
Promotes Social Laboring in Workgroups,” Management Sci-
ence 60, no. 5 (2014): 1098–106; S. M. Murphy, S. J. Wayne, 
R. C. Liden, and B. Erdogan, “Understanding Social Loafing: 
The Role of Justice Perceptions and Exchange Relationships,” 
Human Relations 56, no. 1 (2003): 61–84; and R. C. Liden, S. 
J. Wayne, R. A. Jaworski, and N. Bennett, “Social Loafing: A 
Field Investigation,” Journal of Management 30, no. 2 (2004): 
285–304.
	45.	 C. Rubino, D. R. Avery, S. D. Volpone, and L. Ford, “Does 
Teaming Obscure Low Performance? Exploring the Temporal 
Effects of Team Performance Diversity,” Human Performance 
27, no. 5 (2014): 416–34.
	46.	 D. L. Smrt and S. J. Karau, “Protestant Work Ethic Moder-
ates Social Loafing,” Group Dynamics: Theory Research and 
Practice 15, no. 3 (2011): 267–74.
	47.	 M. C. Schippers, “Social Loafing Tendencies and Team Per-
formance: The Compensating Effect of Agreeableness and 
Conscientiousness,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 13, no. 1 (2014): 62–81.
	48.	 A. Gunnthorsdottir and A. Rapoport, “Embedding Social Di-
lemmas in Intergroup Competition Reduces Free-Riding,” Or-
ganizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 101, 
 no. 2 (2006): 184–99; and E. M. Stark, J. D. Shaw, and M. K. 
Duffy, “Preference for Group Work, Winning Orientation, and 
Social Loafing Behavior in Groups,” Group & Organization 
Management 32, no. 6 (2007): 699–723.
	49.	 R. B. Lount Jr. and S. L. Wilk, “Working Harder or Hardly 
Working? Posting Performance Eliminates Social Loafing 
and Promotes Social Laboring in Workgroups.”
	50.	 A. Gunnthorsdottir and A. Rapoport, “Embedding Social Di-
lemmas in Intergroup Competition Reduces Free-Riding;” 
and E. M. Stark, J. D. Shaw, and M. K. Duffy, “Preference 
for Group Work, Winning Orientation, and Social Loafing Be-
havior in Groups.”
	51.	 L. L. Greer, “Group Cohesion: Then and Now,” Small Group 
Research 43, no. 6 (2012): 655–61.
	52.	 D. S. Staples and L. Zhao, “The Effects of Cultural Diversity 
in Virtual Teams Versus Face-to-Face Teams,” Group Deci-
sion and Negotiation 15, no. 4 (2006): 389–406.
	53.	 K. J. Klein, A. P. Knight, J. C. Ziegert, B. C. Lim, and J. L. 
Saltz, “When Team Members’ Values Differ: The Moder-
ating Role of Team Leadership,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 114, no. 1 (2011): 25–36; 
and G. Park and R. P. DeShon, “A Multilevel Model of 
Minority Opinion Expression and Team Decision-Making 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 
(2010): 824–33.
	54.	 J. S. Chun and J. N. Choi, “Members’ Needs, Intragroup Con-
flict, and Group Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 99, no. 3 (2014): 437–50.
	55.	 M. Rigoglioso, “Diverse Backgrounds and Personali-
ties Can Strengthen Groups,” Stanford Knowledgebase, 
August 15, 2006, https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/
diverse-backgrounds-personalities-can-strengthen-groups.
	56.	 K. W. Phillips and D. L. Loyd, “When Surface and Deep-
Level Diversity Collide: The Effects on Dissenting Group 
Members,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 99, no. 2 (2006): 143–60; and S. R. Sommers, “On 
Racial Diversity and Group Decision Making: Identifying 
Multiple Effects of Racial Composition on Jury Delibera-
tions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99, no. 4 
(April 2006): 597–612.
	57.	 J. S. Chun and J. N. Choi, “Members’ Needs, Intragroup Con-
flict, and Group Performance.”
	58.	 E. Mannix and M. A. Neale, “What Differences Make a Dif-
ference? The Promise and Reality of Diverse Teams in Organi-
zations,” Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 6, no. 2 
(2005): 31–55.
	59.	 E. P. Apfelbaum, K. W. Phillips, and J. A. Richeson, “Re-
thinking the Baseline in Diversity Research: Should We Be 
Explaining the Effects of Homogeneity?” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science 9, no. 3 (2014): 235–44.
	60.	 See M. B. Thatcher and P. C. Patel, “Group Faultlines: A Re-
view, Integration, and Guide to Future Research,” Journal of 
Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 969–1009.
	61.	 K. Bezrukova, S. M. B. Thatcher, K. A. Jehn, and C. S. Spell, 
“The Effects of Alignments: Examining Group Faultlines, Or-
ganizational Cultures, and Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 97, no. 1 (2012): 77–92.
	62.	 R. Rico, M. Sanchez-Manzanares, M. Antino, and D. Lau, 
“Bridging Team Faultlines by Combining Task Role Assign-
ment and Goal Structure Strategies,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 97, no. 2 (2012): 407–20.
	63.	 J. S. Chun and J. N. Choi, “Members’ Needs, Intragroup Con-
flict, and Group Performance.”
	64.	 B. L. Bonner, S. D. Sillito, and M. R. Baumann, “Collective 
Estimation: Accuracy, Expertise, and Extroversion as Sources 

	
Endnotes	 363
of Intra-Group Influence,” Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes 103, no. 1 (2007): 121–33.
	65.	 J. E. Kammer, W. Gaissmaier, T. Reimer, and C. C. Scher-
muly, “The Adaptive Use of Recognition in Group Decision 
Making,” Cognitive Science 38, no. 5 (2014): 911–42.
	66.	 G. Park and R. P. DeShon, “A Multilevel Model of Minor-
ity Opinion Expression and Team Decision-Making Effec-
tiveness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 
824–33.
	67.	 R. Benabou, “Groupthink: Collective Delusions in Organiza-
tions and Markets,” Review of Economic Studies 80 (2013): 
429–62.
	68.	 See S. Schultz-Hardt, F. C. Brodbeck, A. Mojzisch, R. Ker-
schreiter, and D. Frey, “Group Decision Making in Hidden 
Profile Situations: Dissent as a Facilitator for Decision Qual-
ity,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 91, no. 6 
(2006): 1080–93.
	69.	 See I. Yaniv, “Group Diversity and Decision Quality: Ampli-
fication and Attenuation of the Framing Effect,” International 
Journal of Forecasting 27, no. 1 (2011): 41–49.
	70.	 M. P. Brady and S. Y. Wu, “The Aggregation of Preferences in 
Groups: Identity, Responsibility, and Polarization,” Journal of 
Economic Psychology 31, no. 6 (2010): 950–63.
	71.	 Z. Krizan and R. S. Baron, “Group Polarization and Choice-
Dilemmas: How Important Is Self-Categorization?” European 
Journal of Social Psychology 37, no. 1 (2007): 191–201.
	72.	 See R. P. McGlynn, D. McGurk, V. S. Effland, N. L. Johll, 
and D. J. Harding, “Brainstorming and Task Performance in 
Groups Constrained by Evidence,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 93, no. 1 (2004): 75–87; and 
R. C. Litchfield, “Brainstorming Reconsidered: A Goal-Based 
View,” Academy of Management Review 33, no. 3 (2008): 
649–68.
	73.	 N. L. Kerr and R. S. Tindale, “Group Performance and De-
cision-Making,” Annual Review of Psychology 55 (2004): 
623–55.
	74.	 C. Faure, “Beyond Brainstorming: Effects of Different Group 
Procedures on Selection of Ideas and Satisfaction with the Pro-
cess,” Journal of Creative Behavior 38, no. 1 (2004): 13–34.
	75.	 P. L. Perrewé, K. L. Zellars, G. R. Ferris, A. M. Rossi, C. J. 
Kacmar, and D. A. Ralston, “Neutralizing Job Stressors: Po-
litical Skill as an Antidote to the Dysfunctional Consequences 
of Role Conflict,” Academy of Management Journal 47, no. 1 
(2004): 141–52.
CHAPTER 11
	 1.	 R. Karlgaard, “Think (Really!) Small,” Forbes, April 13, 
2015, 32.
	 2.	 J. C. Gorman, “Team Coordination and Dynamics: Two Cen-
tral Issues,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 23, 
no. 5 (2014): 355–60.
	 3.	 Ibid.
	 4.	 J. Mathieu, M. T. Maynard, T. Rapp, and L. Gilson, “Team 
Effectiveness 1997–2007: A Review of Recent Advancements 
and a Glimpse into the Future,” Journal of Management 34, 
no. 3 (2008): 410–76.
	 5.	 See, for example, S.-B. Yang and M. E. Guy, “The Effective-
ness of Self-Managed Work Teams in Government Organiza-
tions,” Journal of Business and Psychology 26, no. 4 (2011): 
531–41; and G. S. Van der Vegt, S. Bunderson, and B. Kui-
pers, “Why Turnover Matters in Self-Managing Work Teams: 
Learning, Social Integration, and Task Flexibility,” Journal of 
Management 36, no. 5 (2010): 1168–91.
	 6.	 G. L. Stewart, S. H. Courtright, and M. R. Barrick, “Peer-
Based Control in Self-Managing Teams: Linking Rational 
and Normative Influence with Individual and Group Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 
435–47.
	 7.	 C. W. Langfred, “The Downside of Self-Management: A Lon-
gitudinal Study of the Effects of Conflict on Trust, Autonomy, 
and Task Interdependence in Self-Managing Teams,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 50, no. 4 (2007): 885–900.
	 8.	 B. H. Bradley, B. E. Postlethwaite, A. C. Klotz, M. R. Ham-
dani, and K. G. Brown, “Reaping the Benefits of Task Con-
flict in Teams: The Critical Role of Team Psychological 
Safety Climate,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, no. 1 
(2012): 151–58.
	 9.	 J. Devaro, “The Effects of Self-Managed and Closely Man-
aged Teams on Labor Productivity and Product Quality: An 
Empirical Analysis of a Cross-Section of Establishments,” 
Industrial Relations 47, no. 4 (2008): 659–98.
	10.	 A. Shah, “Starbucks Strives for Instant Gratification with Via 
Launch,” PRWeek, December 1, 2009, 15.
	11.	 F. Aime, S. Humphrey, D. S. DeRue, and J. B. Paul, “The 
Riddle of Heterarchy: Power Transitions in Cross-Functional 
Teams,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 2 (2014): 
327–52.
	12.	 See, for example, L. L. Martins, L. L. Gilson, and M. T. May-
nard, “Virtual Teams: What Do We Know and Where Do We 
Go from Here?” Journal of Management 30, no. 6 (2004): 
805–35; and B. Leonard, “Managing Virtual Teams,” HR 
Magazine, June 2011, 39–42.
	13.	 J. E. Hoch and S. W. J. Kozlowski, “Leading Virtual Teams: 
Hierarchical Leadership, Structural Supports, and Shared 
Team Leadership,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 3 
(2014): 390–403.
	14.	 A. Malhotra, A. Majchrzak, and B. Rosen, “Leading Virtual 
Teams,” Academy of Management Perspectives 21, no. 1 
(2007): 60–70; and J. M. Wilson, S. S. Straus, and B. McEv-
ily, “All in Due Time: The Development of Trust in Computer-
Mediated and Face-to-Face Teams,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 19, no. 1 (2006): 16–33.
	15.	 P. Balkundi and D. A. Harrison, “Ties, Leaders, and Time in 
Teams: Strong Inference about Network Structure’s Effects on 
Team Viability and Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal 49, no. 1 (2006): 49–68; G. Chen, B. L. Kirkman, R. 
Kanfer, D. Allen, and B. Rosen, “A Multilevel Study of Lead-
ership, Empowerment, and Performance in Teams,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 92, no. 2 (2007): 331–46; L. A. DeChurch 
and M. A. Marks, “Leadership in Multiteam Systems,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006): 311–29; A. Srivas-
tava, K. M. Bartol, and E. A. Locke, “Empowering Leadership 
in Management Teams: Effects on Knowledge Sharing, Ef-
ficacy, and Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 
49, no. 6 (2006): 1239–51; and J. E. Mathieu, K. K. Gilson, 
and T. M. Ruddy, “Empowerment and Team Effectiveness: An 
Empirical Test of an Integrated Model,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 97–108.
	16.	 R. B. Davison, J. R. Hollenbeck, C. M. Barnes, D. J. 
Sleesman, and D. R. Ilgen, “Coordinated Action in Mult-
iteam Systems,” Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 4 
(2012): 808–24.
	17.	 M. M. Luciano, J. E. Mathieu, and T. M. Ruddy, “Leading 
Multiple Teams: Average and Relative External Leadership 

364	 Endnotes
Influences on Team Empowerment and Effectiveness,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 2 (2014): 322–31.
	18.	 R. Greenwald, “Freelancing Alone—But Together,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 3, 2014, R5.
	19.	 V. Gonzalez-Roma and A. Hernandez, “Climate Uniformity: 
Its Influence on Team Communication Quality, Task Conflict, 
and Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, 
no. 6 (2014): 1042–58; and C. F. Peralta, P. N. Lopes, L. L. 
Gilson, P. R. Lourenco, and L. Pais, “Innovation Processes 
and Team Effectiveness: The Role of Goal Clarity and Com-
mitment, and Team Affective Tone,” Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology 88, no. 1 (2015): 80–107.
	20.	 P. Balkundi and D. A. Harrison, “Ties, Leaders, and Time in 
Teams: Strong Inference about Network Structure’s Effects 
on Team Viability and Performance,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 49, no. 1 (2006): 49–68; G. Chen, B. L. Kirk-
man, R. Kanfer, D. Allen, and B. Rosen, “A Multilevel Study 
of Leadership, Empowerment, and Performance in Teams,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 2 (2007): 331–46; L. A.  
DeChurch and M. A. Marks, “Leadership in Multiteam 
Systems,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006): 
311–29; A. Srivastava, K. M. Bartol, and E. A. Locke, “Em-
powering Leadership in Management Teams: Effects on 
Knowledge Sharing, Efficacy, and Performance,” Academy 
of Management Journal 49, no. 6 (2006): 1239–51; and J. 
E. Mathieu, K. K. Gilson, and T. M. Ruddy, “Empowerment 
and Team Effectiveness: An Empirical Test of an Integrated 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 
97–108.
	21.	 J. Schaubroeck, S. S. K. Lam, and A. C. Peng, “Cognition-
Based and Affect-Based Trust as Mediators of Leader Be-
havior Influences on Team Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 96, no. 4, (2011). 
	22.	 B. A. De Jong and K. T. Dirks, “Beyond Shared Perceptions 
of Trust and Monitoring in Teams: Implications of Asymme-
try and Dissensus,” Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 
(2012): 391–406.
	23.	 G. Brown, C. Crossley, and S. L. Robinson, “Psychological 
Ownership, Territorial Behavior, and Being Perceived as a 
Team Contributor: The Critical Role of Trust in the Work En-
vironment,” Personnel Psychology 67, no. 2 (2014): 463–85.
	24.	 See F. Aime, C. J. Meyer, and S. E. Humphrey, “Legitimacy of 
Team Rewards: Analyzing Legitimacy as a Condition for the 
Effectiveness of Team Incentive Designs,” Journal of Busi-
ness Research 63, no. 1 (2010): 60–66; P. A. Bamberger and 
R. Levi, “Team-Based Reward Allocation Structures and the 
Helping Behaviors of Outcome-Interdependent Team Mem-
bers,” Journal of Managerial Psychology 24, no. 4 (2009): 
300–27; and M. J. Pearsall, M. S. Christian, and A. P. J. El-
lis, “Motivating Interdependent Teams: Individual Rewards, 
Shared Rewards, or Something in Between?” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 183–91.
	25.	 A. Bryant, “Taking Your Skills with You,” The New York 
Times, May 31, 2015.
	26.	 R. R. Hirschfeld, M. H. Jordan, H. S. Feild, W. F. Giles, and 
A. A. Armenakis, “Becoming Team Players: Team Members’ 
Mastery of Teamwork Knowledge as a Predictor of Team Task 
Proficiency and Observed Teamwork Effectiveness,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006): 467–74; and K. R. 
Randall, C. J. Resick, and L. A. DeChurch, “Building Team 
Adaptive Capacity: The Roles of Sensegiving and Team Com-
position,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 3 (2011): 
525–40.
	27.	 H. Moon, J. R. Hollenbeck, and S. E. Humphrey, “Asym-
metric Adaptability: Dynamic Team Structures as One-Way 
Streets,” Academy of Management Journal 47, no. 5 (2004): 
681–95; A. P. J. Ellis, J. R. Hollenbeck, and D. R. Ilgen, 
“Team Learning: Collectively Connecting the Dots,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88, no. 5 (2003): 821–35; C. L. Jack-
son and J. A. LePine, “Peer Responses to a Team’s Weak-
est Link: A Test and Extension of LePine and Van Dyne’s 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 3 (2003): 
459–75; and J. A. LePine, “Team Adaptation and Postchange 
Performance: Effects of Team Composition in Terms of 
Members’ Cognitive Ability and Personality,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 88, no. 1 (2003): 27–39.
	28.	 C. C. Cogliser, W. L. Gardner, M. B. Gavin, and J. C. Broberg, 
“Big Five Personality Factors and Leader Emergence in Vir-
tual Teams: Relationships with Team Trustworthiness, Mem-
ber Performance Contributions, and Team Performance,” 
Group & Organization Management 37, no. 6 (2012): 752–
84; and “Deep-Level Composition Variables as Predictors of 
Team Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 595–615.
	29.	 T. A. O’Neill and N. J. Allen, “Personality and the Prediction 
of Team Performance,” European Journal of Personality 25, 
no. 1 (2011): 31–42.
	30.	 S. E. Humphrey, J. R. Hollenbeck, C. J. Meyer, and D. R. 
Ilgen, “Personality Configurations in Self-Managed Teams: A 
Natural Experiment on the Effects of Maximizing and Mini-
mizing Variance in Traits,” Journal of Applied Psychology 41, 
no. 7 (2011): 1701–32.
	31.	 A. P. J. Ellis, J. R. Hollenbeck, and D. R. Ilgen, “Team Learn-
ing: Collectively Connecting the Dots.” C. O. L. H. Porter, J. 
R. Hollenbeck, and D. R. Ilgen, “Backing up Behaviors in 
Teams: The Role of Personality and Legitimacy of Need,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 3 (2003): 391–403; 
and M. C. Schilpzand, D. M. Herold, and C. E. Shalley, 
“Members’ Openness to Experience and Teams’ Creative 
Performance,” Small Group Research 42, no. 1 (2011): 
55–76.
	32.	 B. H. Bradley, B. E. Postlewaite, and K. G. Brown, “Ready to 
Rumble: How Team Personality Composition and Task Con-
flict Interact to Improve Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 385–92.
	33.	 E. Gonzalez-Mule, D. S. DeGeest, B. W. McCormick, J. Y. 
Seong, and K. G. Brown, “Can We Get Some Cooperation 
around Here? The Mediating Role of Group Norms on the Re-
lationship between Team Personality and Individual Helping 
Behaviors,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 5 (2014): 
988–99.
	34.	 S. E. Humphrey, F. P. Morgeson, and M. J. Mannor, “Devel-
oping a Theory of the Strategic Core of Teams: A Role Com-
position Model of Team Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 48–61.
	35.	 Ibid.
	36.	 A. Joshi, “The Influence of Organizational Demography on 
the External Networking Behavior of Teams,” Academy of 
Management Review 31, no. 3 (2006): 583–95.
	37.	 A. Joshi and H. Roh, “The Role of Context in Work Team 
Diversity Research: A Meta-Analytic Review,” Academy of 
Management Journal 52, no. 3 (2009): 599–627; S. K. Hor-
witz and I. B. Horwitz, “The Effects of Team Diversity on 
Team Outcomes: A Meta-Analytic Review of Team Demog-
raphy,” Journal of Management 33, no. 6 (2007): 987–1015; 
and S. T. Bell, A. J. Villado, M. A. Lukasik, L. Belau, and 

	
Endnotes	 365
A. L. Briggs, “Getting Specific about Demographic Di-
versity Variable and Team Performance Relationships: A 
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Management 37, no. 3 (2011): 
709–43.
	38.	 S. Mohammed and L. C. Angell, “Surface- and Deep-Level 
Diversity in Workgroups: Examining the Moderating Effects 
of Team Orientation and Team Process on Relationship Con-
flict,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 25, no. 8 (2004): 
1015–39.
	39.	 Y. F. Guillaume, D. van Knippenberg, and F. C. Brodebeck, 
“Nothing Succeeds Like Moderation: A Social Self-Reg-
ulation Perspective on Cultural Dissimilarity and Perfor-
mance,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 5 (2014): 
1284–308.
	40.	 D. Coutu, “Why Teams Don’t Work,” Harvard Business Re-
view, May 2009, 99–105. The evidence in this section is de-
scribed in L. L. Thompson, Making the Team, 5th ed. (New 
York, NY: Pearson, 2013), 65–67. See also R. C. Liden, S. J. 
Wayne, and R. A. Jaworski, “Social Loafing: A Field Investi-
gation,” Journal of Management 30, no. 2 (2004): 285–304.
	41.	 R. Karlgaard, “Think (Really!) Small,” Forbes, April 13, 2015, 32.
	42.	 Ibid.
	43.	 Ibid.
	44.	 “Is Your Team Too Big? Too Small? What’s the Right Num-
ber? Knowledge@Wharton, June 14, 2006, http://knowledge 
.wharton.upenn.edu/article/is-your-team-too-big-too-small-
whats-the-right-number-2/; see also A. M. Carton and J. N. 
Cummings, “A Theory of Subgroups in Work Teams,” Acad-
emy of Management Review 37, no. 3 (2012): 441–70.
	45.	 S. A. Kiffin-Peterson and J. L. Cordery, “Trust, Individualism, 
and Job Characteristics of Employee Preference for Team-
work,” International Journal of Human Resource Manage-
ment 14, no. 1 (2003): 93–116.
	46.	 J. A. LePine, R. F. Piccolo, C. L. Jackson, J. E. Mathieu, and 
J. R. Saul, “A Meta-Analysis of Teamwork Processes: Tests of 
a Multidimensional Model and Relationships with Team Ef-
fectiveness Criteria,” Personnel Psychology 61, no. 2 (2008): 
273–307.
	47.	 J. F. Dovidio, “Bridging Intragroup Processes and Intergroup 
Relations: Needing the Twain to Meet,” British Journal of 
Social Psychology 52, no. 1 (2013): 1–24; and J. Zhou, J. 
Dovidio, and E. Wang, “How Affectively-Based and Cog-
nitively-Based Attitudes Drive Intergroup Behaviours: The 
Moderating Role of Affective-Cognitive Consistency,” Plos 
One 8, no. 11 (2013): article e82150.
	48.	 J. A. LePine, R. F. Piccolo, C. L. Jackson, J. E. Mathieu, and 
J. R. Saul, “A Meta-Analysis of Teamwork Processes: Tests 
of a Multidimensional Model and Relationships with Team 
Effectiveness Criteria;” and J. E. Mathieu and T. L. Rapp, 
“Laying the Foundation for Successful Team Performance 
Trajectories: The Roles of Team Charters and Performance 
Strategies,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 
90–103.
	49.	 A. Gurtner, F. Tschan, N. K. Semmer, and C. Nagele, “Get-
ting Groups to Develop Good Strategies: Effects of Reflexiv-
ity Interventions on Team Process, Team Performance, and 
Shared Mental Models,” Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes 102, no. 2 (2007): 127–42; M. C. 
Schippers, D. N. Den Hartog, and P. L. Koopman, “Reflexiv-
ity in Teams: A Measure and Correlates,” Applied Psychol-
ogy: An International Review 56, no. 2 (2007): 189–211; and 
C. S. Burke, K. C. Stagl, E. Salas, L. Pierce, and D. Kendall, 
“Understanding Team Adaptation: A Conceptual Analysis 
and Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 6 (2006): 
1189–207.
	50.	 A. N. Pieterse, D. van Knippenberg, and W. P. van Ginkel, 
“Diversity in Goal Orientation, Team Reflexivity, and Team 
Performance,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 114, no. 2 (2011): 153–64.
	51.	 See R. P. DeShon, S. W. J. Kozlowski, A. M. Schmidt, K. 
R. Milner, and D. Wiechmann, “A Multiple-Goal, Multilevel 
Model of Feedback Effects on the Regulation of Individual 
and Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, 
no. 6 (2004): 1035–56.
	52.	 K. Tasa, S. Taggar, and G. H. Seijts, “The Development of 
Collective Efficacy in Teams: A Multilevel and Longitudi-
nal Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 1 
(2007): 17–27; D. I. Jung and J. J. Sosik, “Group Potency 
and Collective Efficacy: Examining Their Predictive Validity, 
Level of Analysis, and Effects of Performance Feedback on 
Future Group Performance,” Group & Organization Manage-
ment 28, no. 3 (2003): 366–91; and R. R. Hirschfeld and J. 
B. Bernerth, “Mental Efficacy and Physical Efficacy at the 
Team Level: Inputs and Outcomes among Newly Formed Ac-
tion Teams,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 6 (2008): 
1429–37.
	53.	 A. W. Richter, G. Hirst, D. van Knippenberg, and M. Baer, 
“Creative Self-Efficacy and Individual Creativity in Team 
Contexts: Cross-Level Interactions with Team Informational 
Resources,” Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 6 (2012): 
1282–90.
	54.	 N. Ellemers, E. Sleebos, D. Stam, and D. de Gilder, “Feeling 
Included and Valued: How Perceived Respect Affects Positive 
Team Identity and Willingness to Invest in the Team,” British 
Journal of Management 24, no. 1 (2013): 21–37.
	55.	 T. A. De Vries, F. Walter, G. S. Van derr Vegt, and P. J. M. 
D. Essens, “Antecedents of Individuals’ Interteam Coordi-
nation: Broad Functional Experiences as a Mixed Bless-
ing,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 5 (2014): 
1334–59.
	56.	 S. Chang, L. Jia, R. Takeuchi, and Y. Cai, “Do High-Com-
mitment Work Systems Affect Creativity? A Multilevel Com-
binational Approach to Employee Creativity,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 99, no. 4 (2014): 665–80.
	57.	 S. Mohammed, L. Ferzandi, and K. Hamilton, “Metaphor No 
More: A 15-Year Review of the Team Mental Model Con-
struct,” Journal of Management 36, no. 4 (2010): 876–910.
	58.	 A. P. J. Ellis, “System Breakdown: The Role of Mental Mod-
els and Transactive Memory on the Relationships between 
Acute Stress and Team Performance,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 49, no. 3 (2006): 576–89.
	59.	 L. A. DeChurch and J. R. Mesmer-Magnus, “The Cognitive 
Underpinnings of Effective Teamwork: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 32–53.
	60.	 S. W. J. Kozlowski and D. R. Ilgen, “Enhancing the Effective-
ness of Work Groups and Teams,” Psychological Science in 
the Public Interest 7, no. 3 (2006): 77–124; and B. D. Ed-
wards, E. A. Day, W. Arthur Jr., and S. T. Bell, “Relationships 
among Team Ability Composition, Team Mental Models, and 
Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 3 
(2006): 727–36.
	61.	 M. Kolbe, G. Grote, M. J. Waller, J. Wacker, B. Grande, and 
D. R. Spahn, “Monitoring and Talking to the Room: Autoch-
thonous Coordination Patterns in Team Interaction and Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 6 (2014): 
1254–67.

366	 Endnotes
	62.	 J. Farh, C. Lee, and C. I. C. Farh, “Task Conflict and Team 
Creativity: A Question of How Much and When,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1173–80.
	63.	 K. H. Price, D. A. Harrison, and J. H. Gavin, “Withholding 
Inputs in Team Contexts: Member Composition, Interaction 
Processes, Evaluation Structure, and Social Loafing,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 91, no. 6 (2006): 1375–84.
	64.	 G. Hertel, U. Konradt, and K. Voss, “Competencies for Vir-
tual Teamwork: Development and Validation of a Web-Based 
Selection Tool for Members of Distributed Teams,” European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 15, no. 4 
(2006): 477–504.
	65.	 T. V. Riper, “The NBA’s Most Overpaid Players,” Forbes, April 
5, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/tomvanriper/2013/04/05/
the-nbas-most-overpaid-players/.
	66.	 E. Kearney, D. Gebert, and S. C. Voelpel, “When and How 
Diversity Benefits Teams: The Importance of Team Members’ 
Need for Cognition,” Academy of Management Journal 52, 
no. 3 (2009): 581–98.
	67.	 H. M. Guttman, “The New High-Performance Player,” The 
Hollywood Reporter, October 27, 2008, www.hollywoodre-
porter.com.
	68.	 C.-H. Chuang, S. Chen, and C.-W. Chuang, “Human Re-
source Management Practices and Organizational Social 
Capital: The Role of Industrial Characteristics,” Journal of 
Business Research 66, no. 5 (2013): 678–87.
	69.	 T. Erickson and L. Gratton, “What It Means to Work Here,” 
BusinessWeek, January 10, 2008, www.businessweek.com.
	70.	 M. D. Johnson, J. R. Hollenbeck, S. E. Humphrey, D. R. Ilgen, 
D. Jundt, and C. J. Meyer, “Cutthroat Cooperation: Asym-
metrical Adaptation to Changes in Team Reward Structures,” 
Academy of Management Journal 49, no. 1 (2006): 103–19.
	71.	 C. E. Naquin and R. O. Tynan, “The Team Halo Effect: Why 
Teams Are Not Blamed for Their Failures,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 88, no. 2 (2003): 332–40.
	72.	 E. R. Crawford and J. A. Lepine, “A Configural Theory of 
Team Processes: Accounting for the Structure of Taskwork 
and Teamwork,” Academy of Management Review 38, no. 1 
(2013): 32–48.
CHAPTER 12
	 1.	 N. Ensari, R. E. Riggio, J. Christian, and G. Carslaw, “Who 
Emerges as a Leader? Meta-Analyses of Individual Differ-
ences as Predictors of Leadership Emergence,” Personality 
and Individual Differences 51, no. 4 (2011): 532–36.
	 2.	 See M. H. Do and A. Minbashian, “A Meta-Analytic Exami-
nation of the Agentic and Affiliative Aspects of Extraversion 
on Leadership Outcomes,” Leadership Quarterly 25, no. 5 
(2014): 1040–53.
	 3.	 D. R. Ames and F. J. Flynn, “What Breaks a Leader: The 
Curvilinear Relation between Assertiveness and Leader-
ship,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92, no. 2 
(2007): 307–24.
	 4.	 A. E. Colbert, M. R. Barrick, and B. H. Bradley, “Personality 
and Leadership Composition in Top Management Teams: Im-
plications for Organizational Effectiveness,” Personnel Psy-
chology 67, no. 2 (2014): 351–87.
	 5.	 K.-Y. Ng, S. Ang, and K. Chan, “Personality and Leader Ef-
fectiveness: A Moderated Mediation Model of Leadership 
Self-Efficacy, Job Demands, and Job Autonomy,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 (2008): 733–43.
	 6.	 R. B. Kaiser, J. M. LeBreton, and J. Hogan, “The Dark Side of 
Personality and Extreme Leader Behavior,” Applied Psychol-
ogy: An International Review 64, no. 1 (2015): 55–92.
	 7.	 B. H. Gaddis and J. L. Foster, “Meta-Analysis of Dark Side 
Personality Characteristics and Critical Work Behaviors 
among Leaders across the Globe: Findings and Implica-
tions for Leadership Development and Executive Coach-
ing,” Applied Psychology: An International Review 64, no. 
1 (2015): 25–54.
	 8.	 R. H. Humphrey, J. M. Pollack, and T. H. Hawver, “Leading 
with Emotional Labor,” Journal of Managerial Psychology 23, 
 no. 2 (2008): 151–68.
	 9.	 F. Walter, M. S. Cole, and R. H. Humphrey, “Emotional Intel-
ligence: Sine Qua Non of Leadership or Folderol?” Academy 
of Management Perspectives 25, no. 1 (2011): 45–59.
	10.	 S. Côté, P. N. Lopes, P. Salovey, and C. T. H. Miners, “Emo-
tional Intelligence and Leadership Emergence in Small 
Groups,” Leadership Quarterly 21, no. 3 (2010): 496–508.
	11.	 This research is updated in T. A. Judge, R. F. Piccolo, and R. 
Ilies, “The Forgotten Ones? The Validity of Consideration and 
Initiating Structure in Leadership Research,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 89 no. 1 (2004): 36–51.
	12.	 D. Akst, “The Rewards of Recognizing a Job Well Done,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2007, D9.
	13.	 M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, M. S. de Luque, and R. J. House, 
“In the Eye of the Beholder: Cross Cultural Lessons in Lead-
ership from Project GLOBE,” Academy of Management Per-
spectives 20, no. 1 (2006): 67–90.
	14.	 For a more current discussion on the model, see S. Altmaee, 
K. Tuerk, and O.-S. Toomet, “Thomas-Kilmann’s Conflict 
Management Modes and Their Relationship to Fiedler’s 
Leadership Styles (Basing on Estonian Organizations),” Bal-
tic Journal of Management 8, no. 1 (2013): 45–65.
	15.	 See, for instance, G. Thompson and R. P. Vecchio, “Situa-
tional Leadership Theory: A Test of Three Versions,” Leader-
ship Quarterly 20, no. 5 (2009): 837–48; and R. P. Vecchio, C. 
R. Bullis, and D. M. Brazil, “The Utility of Situational Lead-
ership Theory—A Replication in a Military Setting,” Small 
Group Research 37, no. 5 (2006): 407–24.
	16.	 R. Fehr, K. C. Yam, and C. Dang, “Moralized Leadership: 
The Construction and Consequences of Ethical Leader Per-
ceptions,” Academy of Management Review 40, no. 2 (2015): 
182–209; and M. Hernandez, C. P. Long, and S. B. Sitkin, 
“Cultivating Follower Trust: Are All Leader Behaviors 
Equally Influential?” Organization Studies 35, no. 12 (2014): 
1867–92.
	17.	 S. J. Perry, L. A. Witt, L. M. Penney, and L. Atwater, “The 
Downside of Goal-Focused Leadership: The Role of Person-
ality in Subordinate Exhaustion,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 95, no. 6 (2010): 1145–53.
	18.	 R. R. Vecchio, J. E. Justin, and C. L. Pearce, “The Utility of 
Transactional and Transformational Leadership for Predict-
ing Performance and Satisfaction within a Path-Goal Theory 
Framework,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology 81 (2008): 71–82.
	19.	 V. H. Vroom and A. G. Jago, “The Role of the Situation in 
Leadership,” American Psychologist  62, no. 1 (2007): 17–24.
	20.	 W. Bennis, “The Challenges of Leadership in the Modern 
World,” American Psychologist  62, no. 1 (2007): 2–5.
	21.	 X. Zhou and C. A. Schriesheim, “Supervisor–Subordinate 
Convergence in Descriptions of Leader–Member Exchange 
(LMX) Quality: Review and Testable Propositions,” Leader-
ship Quarterly 20, no. 6 (2009): 920–32.

	
Endnotes	 367
	22.	 B. Erdogan and T. N. Bauer, “Differentiated Leader–Member 
Exchanges: The Buffering Role of Justice Climate,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1104–20; and X. 
Zhou and C. A. Schrisheim, “Quantitative and Qualitative 
Examination of Propositions Concerning Supervisor–Sub-
ordinate Convergence in Descriptions of Leader–Member 
Exchange (LMX) Quality,” Leadership Quarterly 21, no. 5 
(2010): 826–43.
	23.	 M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship Development as a Key Ingredient 
for Leadership Development,” in Future of Leadership Devel-
opment, eds. S. E. Murphy and R. E. Riggio (Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum, 2003), 129–47.
	24.	 R. Vecchio and D. M. Brazil, “Leadership and Sex-Similarity: 
A Comparison in a Military Setting,” Personnel Psychology 
60, no. 2 (2007): 303–35.
	25.	 See, for instance, R. Ilies, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morge-
son, “Leader–Member Exchange and Citizenship Behaviors: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 
1 (2007): 269–77; and Z. Chen, W. Lam, and J. A. Zhong, 
“Leader–Member Exchange and Member Performance: A 
New Look at Individual-Level Negative Feedback-Seeking 
Behavior and Team-Level Empowerment Culture,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 92, no. 1 (2007): 202–12.
	26.	 R. Eisenberger et al. “Leader-Member Exchange and Affec-
tive Organizational Commitment: The Contribution of Su-
pervisor’s Organizational Embodiment,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1085–103.
	27.	 J. Bagger and A. Li, “How Does Supervisory Family Sup-
port Influence Employees’ Attitudes and Behaviors? A Social 
Exchange Perspective,” Journal of Management 40, no. 4 
(2014): 1123–50.
	28.	 B. Erdogan and T. N. Bauer, “Differentiated Leader–Member 
Exchanges: The Buffering Role of Justice Climate,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1104–20.
	29.	 D. Liu, M. Hernandez, and L. Wang, “The Role of Leadership 
and Trust in Creating Structural Patterns of Team Procedural 
Justice: A Social Network Investigation,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 67, no. 4 (2014): 801–45.
	30.	 A. N. Li and H. Liao, “How Do Leader–Member Exchange 
Quality and Differentiation Affect Performance in Teams? An 
Integrated Multilevel Dual Process Model,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 99, no. 5 (2014): 847–66.
	31.	 J. Hu and R. C. Liden, “Relative Leader-Member Exchange 
within Team Contexts: How and When Social Comparison 
Impacts Individual Effectiveness,” Personnel Psychology 66, 
 no. 1 (2013): 127–72.
	32.	 M. Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, 
trans A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons (Eastford, CT: Martino 
Fine Books, 2012).
	33.	 V. Seyranian and M. C. Bligh, “Presidential Charismatic 
Leadership: Exploring the Rhetoric of Social Change,” Lead-
ership Quarterly 19, no. 1 (2008): 54–76.
	34.	 Ibid.
	35.	 A. Xenikou, “The Cognitive and Affective Components of 
Organisational Identification: The Role of Perceived Support 
Values and Charismatic Leadership,” Applied Psychology: An 
International Review 63, no. 4 (2014): 567–88.
	36.	 P. A. Vlachos, N. G. Panagopoulos, and A. A. Rapp, “Feeling 
Good by Doing Good: Employee CSR-Induced Attributions, 
Job Satisfaction, and the Role of Charismatic Leadership,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 118, no. 3 (2013): 577–88.
	37.	 A. Deinert, A. C. Homan, D. Boer, S. C. Voelpel, and D. 
Gutermann, “Transformational Leadership Sub-Dimensions 
and Their Link to Leaders’ Personality and Performance,” 
Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 6 (2015): 1095–1120; and R. E. 
de Vries, “Personality Predictors of Leadership Styles and the 
Self-Other Agreement Problem,” Leadership Quarterly 23, 
no. 5 (2012): 809–21.
	38.	 P. Balkundi, M. Kilduff, and D. A. Harrison, “Centrality and 
Charisma: Comparing How Leader Networks and Attribu-
tions Affect Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 96, no. 6 (2012): 1209–22.
	39.	 A. Erez, V. F. Misangyi, D. E. Johnson, M. A. LePine, and K. 
C. Halverson, “Stirring the Hearts of Followers: Charismatic 
Leadership as the Transferal of Affect,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 3 (2008): 602–15. On the role of vision 
in leadership, see M. Hauser and R. J. House, “Lead through 
Vision and Values,” in Handbook of Principles of Organiza-
tional Behavior, ed. E. A. Locke (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
2004), 257–73.
	40.	 D. N. Den Hartog, A. H. B. De Hoogh, and A. E. Keegan, 
“The Interactive Effects of Belongingness and Charisma on 
Helping and Compliance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, 
no. 4 (2007): 1131–39.
	41.	 J. C. Pastor, M. Mayo, and B. Shamir, “Adding Fuel to Fire: 
The Impact of Followers’ Arousal on Ratings of Charisma,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 6 (2007): 1584–96.
	42.	 F. Cohen, S. Solomon, M. Maxfield, T. Pyszczynski, and J. 
Greenberg, “Fatal Attraction: The Effects of Mortality Sa-
lience on Evaluations of Charismatic, Task-Oriented, and 
Relationship-Oriented Leaders,” Psychological Science 15, 
no. 12 (2004), 846–51; and J. Griffith, S. Connelly, C. Thiel, 
and G. Johnson, “How Outstanding Leaders Lead with Af-
fect: An Examination of Charismatic, Ideological, and Prag-
matic Leaders,” Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 4 (2015): 
502–17.
	43.	 See, for instance, J. A. Raelin, “The Myth of Charismatic 
Leaders,” Training and Development Journal, March 2003, 
47–54; and P. A. Vlachos, N. G. Panagopoulos, and A. A. 
Rapp, “Feeling Good by Doing Good: Employee CSR-In-
duced Attributions, Job Satisfaction, and the Role of Char-
ismatic Leadership,” Journal of Business Ethics 118, no. 3 
(2013): 577–88.
	44.	 B. M. Galvin, D. A. Waldman, and P. Balthazard, “Visionary 
Communication Qualities as Mediators of the Relationship 
between Narcissism and Attributions of Leader Charisma,” 
Personnel Psychology 63, no. 3 (2010): 509–37.
	45.	 See, for instance, D. Deichmann and D. Stam, “Leveraging 
Transformational and Transactional Leadership to Cultivate 
the Generation of Organization-Focused Ideas,” Leadership 
Quarterly 26, no. 2 (2015): 204–19; H.-J. Wolfram and L. 
Gratton, “Gender Role Self-Concept, Categorical Gender, and 
Transactional-Transformational Leadership: Implications for 
Perceived Workgroup Performance,” Journal of Leadership & 
Organizational Studies 21, no. 4 (2014): 338–53; and T. A. 
Judge and R. F. Piccolo, “Transformational and Transactional 
Leadership: A Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 5 (2004): 755–68.
	46.	 A. E. Colbert, M. R. Barrick, and B. H. Bradley, “Personality 
and Leadership Composition in Top Management Teams: Im-
plications for Organizational Effectiveness,” Personnel Psy-
chology 67, no. 2 (2014): 351–87.
	47.	 A. M. Grant, “Leading with Meaning: Beneficiary Contact, 
Prosocial Impact, and the Performance Effects of Transfor-
mational Leadership,” Academy of Management Journal 55,  
no. 2 (2012): 458–76.

368	 Endnotes
	48.	 D. Deichmann and D. Stam, “Leveraging Transformational 
and Transactional Leadership to Cultivate the Generation of 
Organization-Focused Ideas;” and H.-J. Wolfram and L. Grat-
ton, “Gender Role Self-Concept, Categorical Gender, and 
Transactional-Transformational Leadership: Implications for 
Perceived Workgroup Performance.”
	49.	 T. R. Hinkin and C. A. Schriescheim, “An Examination of 
‘Nonleadership’: From Laissez-Faire Leadership to Leader 
Reward Omission and Punishment Omission,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 93, no. 6 (2008): 1234–48.
	50.	 Y. Ling, Z. Simsek, M. H. Lubatkin, and J. F. Veiga, “Trans-
formational Leadership’s Role in Promoting Corporate Entre-
preneurship: Examining the CEO-TMT Interface,” Academy 
of Management Journal 51, no. 3 (2008): 557–76.
	51.	 X. Zhang and K. M. Bartol, “Linking Empowering Leader-
ship and Employee Creativity: The Influence of Psychologi-
cal Empowerment, Intrinsic Motivation, and Creative Process 
Engagement,” Academy of Management Journal 53, no. 1 
(2010): 107–28.
	52.	 S. A. Eisenbeib and S. Boerner, “A Double-Edged Sword: 
Transformational Leadership and Individual Creativity,” Brit-
ish Journal of Management 24, no. 1 (2013): 54–68.
	53.	 A. E. Colbert, A. E. Kristof-Brown, B. H. Bradley, and M. 
R. Barrick, “CEO Transformational Leadership: The Role of 
Goal Importance Congruence in Top Management Teams,” 
Academy of Management Journal 51, no. 1 (2008): 81–96.
	54.	 D. Zohar and O. Tenne-Gazit, “Transformational Leader-
ship and Group Interaction as Climate Antecedents: A Social 
Network Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 
(2008): 744–57.
	55.	 R. T. Keller, “Transformational Leadership, Initiating Struc-
ture, and Substitutes for Leadership: A Longitudinal Study of 
Research and Development Project Team Performance,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 202–10.
	56.	 G. Wang, I. Oh, S. H. Courtright, and A. E. Colbert, “Trans-
formational Leadership and Performance across Criteria and 
Levels: A Meta-Analytic Review of 25 Years of Research,” 
Group & Organization Management 36, no. 2 (2011): 
223–70.
	57.	 Y. Ling, Z. Simsek, M. H. Lubatkin, and J. F. Veiga, “The 
Impact of Transformational CEOs on the Performance of 
Small- to Medium-Sized Firms: Does Organizational Context 
Matter?” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 (2008): 
923–34.
	58.	 X. Wang and J. M. Howell, “Exploring the Dual-Level Effects 
of Transformational Leadership on Followers,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1134–44.
	59.	 N. Li, D. S. Chiaburu, B. L. Kirkman, and Z. Xie, “Spotlight 
on the Followers: An Examination of Moderators of Relation-
ships between Transformational Leadership and Subordi-
nates’ Citizenship and Taking Charge,” Personnel Psychology 
66, no. 1 (2013): 225–60.
	60.	 M. Birasnav, “Knowledge Management and Organizational 
Performance in the Service Industry: The Role of Transfor-
mational Leadership beyond the Effects of Transactional 
Leadership,” Journal of Business Research 67, no. 8 (2014): 
1622–29; H. Hetland, G. M. Sandal, and T. B. Johnsen, “Burn-
out in the Information Technology Sector: Does Leadership 
Matter?” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy-
chology 16, no. 1 (2007): 58–75; and A. K. Tyssen, A. Wald, 
and S. Heidenreich, “Leadership in the Context of Temporary 
Organizations: A Study on the Effects of Transactional and 
Transformational Leadership on Followers’ Commitment in 
Projects,” Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 
21, no. 4 (2014): 376–93.
	61.	 B. P. Owens and D. R. Hekman, “Modeling How to Grow: An 
Inductive Examination of Humble Leader Behaviors, Contin-
gencies, and Outcomes,” Academy of Management Journal 
55, no. 4 (2012): 787–818.
	62.	 K. M. Hmieleski, M. S. Cole, and R. A. Baron, “Shared Au-
thentic Leadership and New Venture Performance,” Journal of 
Management 38, no. 5 (2012), 1476–99.
	63.	 R. Ilies, F. P. Morgeson, and J. D. Nahrgang, “Authentic Lead-
ership and Eudaemonic Well-Being: Understanding Leader-
Follower Outcomes,” Leadership Quarterly 16, no. 3 (2005): 
373–94; B. Levin, “Raj Rajaratnam Did Not Appreciate Rajat 
Gupta’s Attempt to Leave the Goldman Board, Join ‘The Bil-
lionaire Circle,’” NetNet with John Carney, March 14, 2011, 
accessed July 26, 2011, from www.cnbc.com/.
	64.	 J. Stouten, M. van Dijke, and D. De Cremer, “Ethical Leader-
ship: An Overview and Future Perspectives,” Journal of Per-
sonnel Psychology 11, no. 1 (2012): 1–6.
	65.	 J. M. Schaubroeck et al. “Embedding Ethical Leadership 
within and across Organization Levels,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 55, no. 5 (2012): 1053–78.
	66.	 K. M. Kacmar, D. G. Bachrach, K. J. Harris, and S. Zivnuska, 
“Fostering Good Citizenship through Ethical Leadership: Ex-
ploring the Moderating Role of Gender and Organizational 
Politics,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, no. 3 (2011): 
633–42; and F. O. Walumbwa and J. Schaubroeck, “Leader 
Personality Traits and Employee Voice Behavior: Mediating 
Roles of Ethical Leadership and Work Group Psychologi-
cal Safety,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 5 (2009): 
1275–86.
	67.	 D. M. Mayer, K. Aquino, R. L. Greenbaum, and M. Kuenzi, 
“Who Displays Ethical Leadership, and Why Does It Matter? 
An Examination of Antecedents and Consequences of Ethi-
cal Leadership,” Academy of Management Journal 55, no. 1 
(2012): 151–71.
	68.	 D. van Knippenberg, D. De Cremer, and B. van Knippenberg, 
“Leadership and Fairness: The State of the Art,” European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 16, no. 2 
(2007): 113–40.
	69.	 M. E. Brown and L. K. Treviño, “Socialized Charismatic 
Leadership, Values Congruence, and Deviance in Work 
Groups,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 4 (2006): 
954–62.
	70.	 M. E. Brown and L. K. Treviño, “Leader-Follower Values 
Congruence: Are Socialized Charismatic Leaders Better 
Able to Achieve It?” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 2 
(2009): 478–90.
	71.	 S. A. Eisenbeiaß and S. R. Giessner, “The Emergence and 
Maintenance of Ethical Leadership in Organizations,” Journal 
of Personnel Psychology 11, no. 1 (2012): 7–19.
	72.	 D. van Dierendonck, “Servant Leadership: A Review and Syn-
thesis,” Journal of Management 37, no. 4 (2011): 1228–61.
	73.	 S. J. Peterson, F. M. Galvin, and D. Lange, “CEO Servant 
Leadership: Exploring Executive Characteristics and Firm Per-
formance,” Personnel Psychology 65, no. 3 (2012): 565–96.
	74.	 F. Walumbwa, C. A. Hartnell, and A. Oke, “Servant Leader-
ship, Procedural Justice Climate, Service Climate, Employee 
Attitudes, and Organizational Citizenship Behavior: A Cross-
Level Investigation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 3 
(2010): 517–29.
	75.	 D. De Cremer, D. M. Mayer, M. van Dijke, B. C. Schouten, and 
M. Bardes, “When Does Self-Sacrificial Leadership Motivate 

	
Endnotes	 369
Prosocial Behavior? It Depends on Followers’ Prevention Fo-
cus,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 4 (2009): 887–99.
	76.	 J. Hu and R. C. Liden, “Antecedents of Team Potency and 
Team Effectiveness: An Examination of Goal and Process 
Clarity and Servant Leadership,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 96, no. 4 (2011): 851–62.
	77.	 M. J. Neubert, K. M. Kacmar, D. S. Carlson, L. B. Chonko, 
and J. A. Roberts, “Regulatory Focus as a Mediator of the 
Influence of Initiating Structure and Servant Leadership on 
Employee Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 6 
(2008): 1220–33.
	78.	 R. C. Liden, S. J. Wayne, C. Liao, and J. D. Meuser, “Servant 
Leadership and Serving Culture: Influence on Individual and 
Unit Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 5 
(2014): 1434–52.
	79.	 T. Menon, J. Sim, J. Ho-Ying Fu, C. Chiu, and Y. Hong, 
“Blazing the Trail versus Trailing the Group: Culture and Per-
ceptions of the Leader’s Position,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 113, no. 1 (2010): 51–61.
	80.	 J. A. Simpson, “Psychological Foundations of Trust,” Current 
Directions in Psychological Science 16, no. 5 (2007): 264–68.
	81.	 F. D. Schoorman, R. C. Mayer, and J. H. Davis, “An Integra-
tive Model of Organizational Trust: Past, Present, and Future,” 
Academy of Management Review 32, no. 2 (2007): 344–54.
	82.	 J. Schaubroeck, S. S. K. Lam, and A. C. Peng, “Cognition-
Based and Affect-Based Trust as Mediators of Leader Be-
havior Influences on Team Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 96, no. 4 (July 2011): 863–71.
	83.	 See, for instance, K. Boies, J. Fiset, and H. Gill, “Com-
munication and Trust Are Key: Unlocking the Relationship 
Between Leadership and Team Performance and Creativ-
ity,” Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 6 (2015): 1080–94; D. I. 
Jung and B. J. Avolio, “Opening the Black Box: An Experi-
mental Investigation of the Mediating Effects of Trust and 
Value Congruence on Transformational and Transactional 
Leadership,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 21, no. 8 
(2000), 949–64; and A. Zacharatos, J. Barling, and R. D. 
Iverson, “High-Performance Work Systems and Occupa-
tional Safety,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90, no. 1 
(2005), 77–93.
	84.	 J. R. Detert and E. R. Burris, “Leadership Behavior and Em-
ployee Voice: Is the Door Really Open?” Academy of Man-
agement Journal 50, no. 4 (2007): 869–84.
	85.	 J. A. Colquitt, B. A. Scott, and J. A. LePine, “Trust, Trustworthi-
ness, and Trust Propensity: A Meta-Analytic Test of Their Unique 
Relationships with Risk Taking and Job Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 92, no. 4 (2007): 909–27.
	86.	 J. A. Colquitt, B. A. Scott, and J. A. LePine, “Trust, Trust-
worthiness, and Trust Propensity: A Meta-Analytic Test of 
Their Unique Relationships with Risk Taking and Job Perfor-
mance;” and F. D. Schoorman, R. C. Mayer, and J. H. Davis, 
“An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust: Past, Present, 
and Future.”
	87.	 Cited in D. Jones, “Do You Trust Your CEO?” USA Today, 
February 12, 2003, 7B.
	88.	 M. J. Ashleigh, M. Higgs, and V. Dulewicz, “A New Pro-
pensity to Trust Scale and Its Relationship with Individual 
Well-Being: Implications for HRM Policies and Practices,” 
Human Resource Management Journal 22, no. 4 2012, 360–
76; R. C. Mayer and M. B. Gavin, “Trust in Management 
and Performance: Who Minds the Shop While the Employ-
ees Watch the Boss?” Academy of Management Journal 48, 
no. 5 (2005): 874–88; and C. F. Peralta and M. F. Saldanha, 
“Knowledge-Centered Culture and Knowledge Sharing: The 
Moderator Role of Trust Propensity,” Journal of Knowledge 
Management 18, no. 3 (2014): 538–50.
	89.	 J. A. Simpson, “Foundations of Interpersonal Trust,” in Social 
Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, 2nd ed., eds. A. 
W. Kruglanski and E. T. Higgins (New York: Guilford, 2007), 
587–607.
	90.	 X.-P. Chen, M. B. Eberly, T.-J. Chiang, J.-L. Farh, and B.-
Shiuan Cheng, “Affective Trust in Chinese Leaders: Linking 
Paternalistic Leadership to Employee Performance,” Journal 
of Management 40, no. 3 (2014): 796–819.
	91.	 J. A. Simpson, “Foundations of Interpersonal Trust.”
	92.	 B. Groysberg and M. Slind, “Leadership Is a Conversation,” 
Harvard Business Review, June 2012, 76–84.
	93.	 H. Zhao, S. J. Wayne, B. C. Glibkowski, and J. Bravo, “The 
Impact of Psychological Contract Breach on Work-Related 
Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Personnel Psychology 60, no. 3 
(2007): 647–80.
	94.	 D. L. Shapiro, A. D. Boss, S. Salas, S. Tangirala, and M. A. 
Von Glinow, “When Are Transgressing Leaders Punitively 
Judged? An Empirical Test,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
96, no. 2 (2011): 412–22.
	95.	 D. L. Ferrin, P. H. Kim, C. D. Cooper, and K. T. Dirks, “Si-
lence Speaks Volumes: The Effectiveness of Reticence in 
Comparison to Apology and Denial for Responding to Integ-
rity- and Competence-Based Trust Violations,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 92, no. 4 (2007): 893–908.
	96.	   M. E. Schweitzer, J. C. Hershey, and E. T. Bradlow, 
“Promises and Lies: Restoring Violated Trust,” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 101, 
no. 1 (2006): 1–19.
	97.	   See, for example, L. Eby, M. Buits, and A. Lockwood, “Pro-
tégés’ Negative Mentoring Experiences: Construct Develop-
ment and Nomological Validation,” Personnel Psychology 
57, no. 2 (2004): 411–47.
	98.	   J. U. Chun, J. J. Sosik, and N. Y. Yun, “A Longitudinal Study 
of Mentor and Protégé Outcomes in Formal Mentoring Re-
lationships,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33, no. 8 
(2012): 35–49.
	99.	   See, for instance, B. Schyns, J. Felfe, and H. Blank, “Is Cha-
risma Hyper-Romanticism? Empirical Evidence from New 
Data and a Meta-Analysis,” Applied Psychology: An Inter-
national Review 56, no. 4 (2007): 505–27.
	100.	  M. J. Martinko, P. Harvey, D. Sikora, and S. C. Douglas, 
“Perceptions of Abusive Supervision: The Role of Subor-
dinates’ Attribution Styles,” Leadership Quarterly 22, no. 4 
(2011): 751–64.
	101.	  M. C. Bligh, J. C. Kohles, C. L. Pearce, J. E. Justin, and J. F. 
Stovall, “When the Romance Is Over: Follower Perspectives 
of Aversive Leadership,” Applied Psychology: An Interna-
tional Review 56, no. 4 (2007): 528–57.
	102.	  B. R. Agle, N. J. Nagarajan, J. A. Sonnenfeld, and D. Sriniva-
san, “Does CEO Charisma Matter?” Academy of Management 
Journal 49, no. 1 (2006): 161–74.
	103.	  M. C. Bligh, J. C. Kohles, C. L. Pearce, J. E. Justin, and J. F. 
Stovall, “When the Romance Is Over.”
	104.	  B. Schyns, J. Felfe, and H. Blank, “Is Charisma Hyper- 
Romanticism?”
	105.	  M. Van Vugt and B. R. Spisak, “Sex Differences in the Emer-
gence of Leadership during Competitions within and between 
Groups,” Psychological Science 19, no. 9 (2008): 854–8.
	106.	  R. E. Silverman, “Who’s the Boss? There Isn’t One,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2012, B1, B8.

370	 Endnotes
	107.	  See, for instance, L. Pedraja-Rejas, “The Importance of 
Leadership in the Knowledge Economy,” Interciencia 40, 
no. 10 (2015): 654.
	108.	  L. A. Hambley, T. A. O’Neill, and T. J. B. Kline, “Virtual 
Team Leadership: The Effects of Leadership Style and 
Communication Medium on Team Interaction Styles and 
Outcomes,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 103, no. 1 (2007): 1–20; and B. J. Avolio and S. 
S. Kahai, “Adding the ‘E’ to E-Leadership: How It May Im-
pact Your Leadership,” Organizational Dynamics 31, no. 4 
(2003): 325–38.
	109.	  S. J. Zaccaro and P. Bader, “E-Leadership and the Challenges 
of Leading E-Teams: Minimizing the Bad and Maximiz-
ing the Good,” Organizational Dynamics 31, no. 4 (2003): 
381–85.
	110.	  C. E. Naquin and G. D. Paulson, “Online Bargaining and In-
terpersonal Trust,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 1 
(2003), 113–20.
CHAPTER 13
	 1.	 B. Oc, M. R. Bashshur, and C. Moore, “Speaking Truth to 
Power: The Effect of Candid Feedback on How Individuals 
with Power Allocate Resources,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 100, no. 2 (2015): 450–63.
	 2.	 E. Landells and S. L. Albrecht, “Organizational Political 
Climate: Shared Perceptions about the Building and Use of 
Power Bases,” Human Resource Management Review 23, no. 
4 (2013): 357–65; P. Rylander, “Coaches’ Bases of Power: 
Developing Some Initial Knowledge of Athletes’ Compliance 
with Coaches in Team Sports,” Journal of Applied Sport Psy-
chology 27, no. 1 (2015): 110–21; and G. Yukl, “Use Power 
Effectively,” in Handbook of Principles of Organizational 
Behavior, ed. E. A. Locke (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), 
242–47.
	 3.	 See, for example, O. Baumann and N. Stieglitz, “Rewarding 
Value-Creating Ideas in Organizations: The Power of Low-
Powered Incentives,” Strategic Management Journal 35, no. 3 
(2014): 358–75.
	 4.	 S. R. Giessner and T. W. Schubert, “High in the Hierarchy: 
How Vertical Location and Judgments of Leaders’ Power Are 
Interrelated,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 104, no. 1 (2007): 30–44.
	 5.	 S. Perman, “Translation Advertising: Where Shop Meets Hip 
Hop,” Time, August 30, 2010, http://content.time.com/time/
magazine/article/0,9171,2011574,00.html.
	 6.	 R. E. Sturm and J. Antonakis, “Interpersonal Power: A Re-
view, Critique, and Research Agenda,” Journal of Manage-
ment 41, no. 1 (2015): 136–63.
	 7.	 M. C. J. Caniels and A. Roeleveld, “Power and Dependence 
Perspectives on Outsourcing Decisions,” European Manage-
ment Journal 27, no. 6 (2009): 402–17; and R.-J. B. Jean, 
D. Kim, and R. S. Sinkovics, “Drivers and Performance 
Outcomes of Supplier Innovation Generation in Customer-
Supplier Relationships: The Role of Power-Dependence,” 
Decision Sciences 43, no. 6 (2012): 1003–38.
	 8.	 R.S. Burt, M. Kilduff, and S. Tasselli, “Social Network Analy-
sis: Foundations and Frontiers on Advantage,” Annual Review 
of Psychology 64 (2013): 527–47; M. A. Carpenter, M. Li, 
and H. Jiang, “Social Network Research in Organizational 
Contexts: A Systematic Review of Methodological Issues and 
Choices,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 1328–61; 
and M. Kilduff and D. J. Brass, “Organizational Social Net-
work Research: Core Ideas and Key Debates,” Academy of 
Management Annals 4 (2010): 317–57.
	 9.	 J. Gehman, L. K. Treviño, and R. Garud, “Values Work: A 
Process Study of the Emergence and Performance of Organi-
zational Values Practices,” Academy of Management Journal 
56, no. 1 (2013): 84–112.
	10.	 J. Battilana and T. Casciaro, “Change Agents, Networks, 
and Institutions: A Contingency Theory of Organizational 
Change,” Academy of Management Journal 55, no. 2 (2012): 
381–98.
	11.	 S. M. Soltis, F. Agneessens, Z. Sasovova, and G. Labianca, “A 
Social Network Perspective on Turnover Intentions: The Role 
of Distributive Justice and Social Support,” Human Resource 
Management 52, no. 4 (2013): 561–84.
	12.	 R. Kaše, Z. King, and D. Minbaeva, “Using Social Net-
work Research in HRM: Scratching the Surface of a Fun-
damental Basis of HRM,” Human Resource Management 
52, no. 4 (2013): 473–83; R. Cross and L. Prusak, “The 
People Who Make Organizations Go—Or Stop,” Har-
vard Business Review, June 2002, https://hbr.org/2002/06/
the-people-who-make-organizations-go-or-stop.
	13.	 See, for example, D. M. Cable and T. A. Judge, “Managers’ 
Upward Influence Tactic Strategies: The Roll of Manager 
Personality and Supervisor Leadership Style,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior 24, no. 2 (2003): 197–214; M. P. M. 
Chong, “Influence Behaviors and Organizational Commit-
ment: A Comparative Study,” Leadership and Organization 
Development Journal 35, no. 1 (2014): 54–78; and M. Lewis-
Duarte and M. C. Bligh, “Agents of ‘Influence’: Exploring 
the Usage, Timing, and Outcomes of Executive Coaching 
Tactics,” Leadership & Organization Development Journal 
33, nos. 3–4 (2012): 255–81.
	14.	 G. R. Ferris, W. A. Hochwarter, C. Douglas, F. R. Blass, R. W. 
Kolodinksy, and D. C. Treadway, “Social Influence Processes 
in Organizations and Human Resource Systems,” in Research 
in Personnel and Human Resources Management, vol. 21, 
eds. G. R. Ferris and J. J. Martocchio (Oxford, UK: JAI Press/
Elsevier, 2003), 65–127; C. A. Higgins, T. A. Judge, and G. R. 
Ferris, “Influence Tactics and Work Outcomes: A Meta-Anal-
ysis,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 24, no. 1 (2003): 
89–106; and M. Uhl-Bien, R. E. Riggio, K. B. Lowe, and M. 
K. Carsten, “Followership Theory: A Review and Research 
Agenda,” Leadership Quarterly 25, no. 1 (2004): 83–104.
	15.	 M. P. M. Chong, “Influence Behaviors and Organizational 
Commitment: A Comparative Study.”
	16.	 R. E. Petty and P. Briñol, “Persuasion: From Single to Multi-
ple to Metacognitive Processes,” Perspectives on Psychologi-
cal Science 3, no. 2 (2008): 137–47.
	17.	 J. Badal, “Getting a Raise from the Boss,” The Wall Street 
Journal, July 8, 2006, B1, B5.
	18.	 M. P. M. Chong, “Influence Behaviors and Organizational 
Commitment: A Comparative Study.”
	19.	 Ibid.
	20.	 O. Epitropaki and R. Martin, “Transformational-Transac-
tional Leadership and Upward Influence: The Role of Rela-
tive Leader–Member Exchanges (RLMX) and Perceived 
Organizational Support (POS), Leadership Quarterly 24, no. 
2 (2013): 299–315.
	21.	 A. W. Kruglanski, A. Pierro, and E. T. Higgins, “Regulatory 
Mode and Preferred Leadership Styles: How Fit Increases Job 
Satisfaction,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology 29, no. 2 
(2007): 137–49; and A. Pierro, L. Cicero, and B. H. Raven, 

	
Endnotes	 371
“Motivated Compliance with Bases of Social Power,” Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology 38, no. 7 (2008): 1921–44.
	22.	 G. Yukl, P. P. Fu, and R. McDonald, “Cross-Cultural Dif-
ferences in Perceived Effectiveness of Influence Tactics 
for Initiating or Resisting Change,” Applied Psychology: 
An International Review 52, no. 1 (2003): 66–82; and P. P. 
Fu, T. K. Peng, J. C. Kennedy, and G. Yukl, “Examining the 
Preferences of Influence Tactics in Chinese Societies: A 
Comparison of Chinese Managers in Hong Kong, Taiwan, 
and Mainland China,” Organizational Dynamics 33, no. 1 
(2004): 32–46.
	23.	 C. J. Torelli and S. Shavitt, “Culture and Concepts of Power,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99, no. 4 
(2010): 703–23.
	24.	 P. P. Fu, T. K. Peng, J. C. Kennedy, and G. Yukl, “Examining 
the Preferences of Influence Tactics in Chinese Societies: A 
Comparison of Chinese Managers in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and 
Mainland China.”
	25.	 G. R. Ferris, D. C. Treadway, P. L. Perrewé, R. L. Brouer, 
C. Douglas, and S. Lux, “Political Skill in Organizations,” 
Journal of Management 33, no. 3 (2007): 290–320; K. 
J. Harris, K. M. Kacmar, S. Zivnuska, and J. D. Shaw, 
“The Impact of Political Skill on Impression Manage-
ment Effectiveness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, 
no. 1 (2007): 278–85; W. A. Hochwarter, G. R. Ferris, 
M. B. Gavin, P. L. Perrewé, A. T. Hall, and D. D. Frink, 
“Political Skill as Neutralizer of Felt Accountability–Job 
Tension Effects on Job Performance Ratings: A Longi-
tudinal Investigation,” Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes 102, no. 2 (2007): 226–39; and  
D. C. Treadway, G. R. Ferris, A. B. Duke, G. L. Adams, 
and J. B. Tatcher, “The Moderating Role of Subordinate 
Political Skill on Supervisors’ Impressions of Subordinate 
Ingratiation and Ratings of Subordinate Interpersonal Fa-
cilitation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 
848–55.
	26.	 M. C. Andrews, K. M. Kacmar, and K. J. Harris, “Got Politi-
cal Skill? The Impact of Justice on the Importance of Political 
Skills for Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
94, no. 6 (2009): 1427–37.
	27.	 C. Anderson, S. E. Spataro, and F. J. Flynn, “Personality and 
Organizational Culture as Determinants of Influence,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 3 (2008): 702–10.
	28.	 Y. Cho and N. J. Fast, “Power, Defensive Denigration, and 
the Assuaging Effect of Gratitude Expression,” Journal of Ex-
perimental Social Psychology 48, no. 3 (2012): 778–82.
	29.	 M. Pitesa and S. Thau, “Masters of the Universe: How Power 
and Accountability Influence Self-Serving Decisions un-
der Moral Hazard,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 
3 (2013): 550–58; N. J. Fast, N. Sivanathan, D. D. Mayer, 
and A. D. Galinsky, “Power and Overconfident Decision-
Making,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 117, no. 2 (2012): 249–60; and M. J. Williams, 
“Serving the Self from the Seat of Power: Goals and Threats 
Predict Leaders’ Self-Interested Behavior,” Journal of Man-
agement 40, no. 5 (2014): 1365–95.
	30.	 J. K. Maner, M. T. Gaillot, A. J. Menzel, and J. W. Kunstman, 
“Dispositional Anxiety Blocks the Psychological Effects of 
Power,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38, no. 11 
(2012): 1383–95.
	31.	 N. J. Fast, N. Halevy, and A. D. Galinsky, “The Destructive 
Nature of Power without Status,” Journal of Experimental So-
cial Psychology 48, no. 1 (2012): 391–94.
	32.	 T. Seppälä, J. Lipponen, A. Bardi, and A. Pirttilä-Backman, 
“Change-Oriented Organizational Citizenship Behaviour: 
An Interactive Product of Openness to Change Values, Work 
Unit Identification, and Sense of Power,” Journal of Occu-
pational and Organizational Psychology 85, no. 1 (2012): 
136–55.
	33.	 K. A. DeCelles, D. S. DeRue, J. D. Margolis, and T. L. 
Ceranic, “Does Power Corrupt or Enable? When and Why 
Power Facilitates Self-Interested Behavior,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 97, no. 3 (2012): 681–89.
	34.	 “Facts about Sexual Harassment,” The U.S. Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission, accessed June 19, 2015 www 
.eeoc.gov/facts/fs-sex.html.
	35.	 F. Ali and R. Kramar, “An Exploratory Study of Sexual Ha-
rassment in Pakistani Organizations,” Asia Pacific Journal of 
Management 32, no. 1 (2014): 229–49.
	36.	 Ibid.
	37.	 “Workplace Sexual Harassment Statistics”, Association of 
Women for Action and Research, 2015, http://www.aware 
.org.sg/ati/wsh-site/14.
	38.	 R. Ilies, N. Hauserman, S. Schwochau, and J. Stibal, “Re-
ported Incidence Rates of Work-Related Sexual Harassment 
in the United States: Using Meta-Analysis to Explain Re-
ported Rate Disparities,” Personnel Psychology 56, no. 3 
(2003): 607–31; and G. Langer, “One in Four U.S. Women 
Reports Workplace Harassment,” ABC News, November 
16, 
2011, 
http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2011/11/
one-in-four-u-s-women-reports-workplace-harassment/.
	39.	 “Sexual Harassment Charges,” Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission, accessed August 20, 2015, www.eeoc 
.gov/eeoc/statistics/.
	40.	 B. Popken, “Report: 80% of Waitresses Report Being Sexu-
ally Harassed,” USA Today, October 7, 2014, http://www 
.today.com/money/report-80-waitresses-report-being-sexu-
ally-harassed-2D80199724.
	41.	 G. R. Ferris, D. C. Treadway, R. W. Kolokinsky, W. A. Hoch- 
warter, C. J. Kacmar, and D. D. Frink, “Development and 
Validation of the Political Skill Inventory,” Journal of Man-
agement 31, no. 1 (2005): 126–52.
	42.	 A. Pullen and C. Rhodes, “Corporeal Ethics and the Politics of 
Resistance in Organizations,” Organization 21, no. 6 (2014): 
782–96.
	43.	 G. R. Ferris and W. A. Hochwarter, “Organizational Politics,” 
in APA Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychol-
ogy, vol. 3, ed. S. Zedeck (Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association, 2011), 435–59.
	44.	 D. A. Buchanan, “You Stab My Back, I’ll Stab Yours: Man-
agement Experience and Perceptions of Organization Political 
Behavior,” British Journal of Management 19, no. 1 (2008): 
49–64.
	45.	 M. A. Finkelstein and L. A. Penner, “Predicting Organiza-
tional Citizenship Behavior: Integrating the Functional and 
Role Identity Approaches,” Social Behavior and Personality 
32, no. 4 (2004): 383–98; and J. Schwarzwald, M. Koslowsky, 
and M. Allouf, “Group Membership, Status, and Social Power 
Preference,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 35, no. 3 
(2005): 644–65.
	46.	 See, for example, J. Walter, F. W. Kellermans, and C. Lechner, 
“Decision Making within and between Organizations: Ratio-
nality, Politics, and Alliance Performance,” Journal of Man-
agement 38, no. 5 (2012): 1582–610.
	47.	 G. R. Ferris, D. C. Treadway, P. L. Perrewé, R. L. Grouer, C. 
Douglas, and S. Lux, “Political Skill in Organizations.”

372	 Endnotes
	48.	 J. Shi, R. E. Johnson, Y. Liu, and M. Wang, “Linking Subor-
dinate Political Skill to Supervisor Dependence and Reward 
Recommendations: A Moderated Mediation Model,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 374–84.
	49.	 W. A. Gentry, D. C. Gimore, M. L. Shuffler, and J. B. Leslie, 
“Political Skill as an Indicator of Promotability among Mul-
tiple Rater Sources,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33, 
no. 1 (2012): 89–104; and I. Kapoutsis, A. Paplexandris, A. 
Nikolopoulous, W. A. Hochwarter, and G. R. Ferris, “Politics 
Perceptions as a Moderator of the Political Skill-Job Perfor-
mance Relationship: A Two-Study, Cross-National, Construc-
tive Replication,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 78, no. 1 
(2011): 123–35.
	50.	 M. Abbas, U. Raja, W. Darr, and D. Bouckenooghe, “Com-
bined Effects of Perceived Politics and Psychological Capital 
on Job Satisfaction, Turnover Intentions, and Performance,” 
Journal of Management 40, no. 7 (2014): 1813–30; and C. C. 
Rosen, D. L. Ferris, D. J. Brown, and W.-W. Yen, “Relation-
ships among Perceptions of Organizational Politics (POPs), 
Work Motivation, and Salesperson Performance,” Journal of 
Management and Organization 21, no. 2 (2015): 203–16.
	51.	 See, for example, M. D. Laird, P. Harvey, and J. Lancaster, 
“Accountability, Entitlement, Tenure, and Satisfaction in 
Generation Y,” Journal of Managerial Psychology 30, no. 1 
(2015): 87–100; J. M. L. Poon, “Situational Antecedents and 
Outcomes of Organizational Politics Perceptions,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 18, no. 2 (2003): 138–55; and K. L. 
Zellars, W. A. Hochwarter, S. E. Lanivich, P. L. Perrewe, and 
G. R. Ferris, “Accountability for Others, Perceived Resources, 
and Well Being: Convergent Restricted Non-Linear Results in 
Two Samples,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology 84, no. 1 (2011): 95–115.
	52.	 J. Walter, F. W. Kellermanns, and C. Lechner, “Decision Mak-
ing within and between Organizations: Rationality, Politics, 
and Alliance Performance,” Journal of Management 38, no. 5 
(2012): 1582–610.
	53.	 W. A. Hochwarter, C. Kiewitz, S. L. Castro, P. L. Perrewé, 
and G. R. Ferris, “Positive Affectivity and Collective Efficacy 
as Moderators of the Relationship between Perceived Politics 
and Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 
33, no. 5 (2003): 1009–35; and C. C. Rosen, P. E. Levy, and 
R. J. Hall, “Placing Perceptions of Politics in the Context of 
Feedback Environment, Employee Attitudes, and Job Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 1 (2006): 
211–30.
	54.	 S. Aryee, Z. Chen, and P. S. Budhwar, “Exchange Fairness 
and Employee Performance: An Examination of the Relation-
ship between Organizational Politics and Procedural Justice,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 94, 
no. 1 (2004): 1–14.
	55.	 M. C. Andrews, L. A. Witt, and K. M. Kacmar, “The Interac-
tive Effects of Organizational Politics and Exchange Ideology 
on Manager Ratings of Retention,” Journal of Vocational Be-
havior 62, no. 2 (2003): 357–69.
	56.	 O. J. Labedo, “Perceptions of Organisational Politics: Ex-
amination of the Situational Antecedent and Consequences 
among Nigeria’s Extension Personnel,” Applied Psychology: 
An International Review 55, no. 2 (2006): 255–81.
	57.	 K. M. Kacmar, M. C. Andrews, K. J. Harris, and B. Tepper, 
“Ethical Leadership and Subordinate Outcomes: The Me-
diating Role of Organizational Politics and the Moderating 
Role of Political Skill,” Journal of Business Ethics 115, no. 1 
(2013): 33–44.
	58.	 Ibid.
	59.	 K. M. Kacmar, D. G. Bachrach, K. J. Harris, and S. Zivnuska, 
“Fostering Good Citizenship through Ethical Leadership: Ex-
ploring the Moderating Role of Gender and Organizational 
Politics,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 3 (2011): 
633–42.
	60.	 C. Homburg and A. Fuerst, “See No Evil, Hear No Evil, 
Speak No Evil: A Study of Defensive Organizational Behav-
ior towards Customer Complaints,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science 35, no. 4 (2007): 523–36.
	61.	 See, for instance, M. C. Bolino and W. H. Turnley, “More 
Than One Way to Make an Impression: Exploring Profiles of 
Impression Management,” Journal of Management 29, no. 2 
(2003): 141–60; S. Zivnuska, K. M. Kacmar, L. A. Witt, D. 
S. Carlson, and V. K. Bratton, “Interactive Effects of Impres-
sion Management and Organizational Politics on Job Perfor-
mance,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 25, no. 5 (2004): 
627–40; and M. C. Bolino, K. M. Kacmar, W. H. Turnley, and 
J. B. Gilstrap, “A Multi-Level Review of Impression Manage-
ment Motives and Behaviors,” Journal of Management 34, no. 
6 (2008): 1080–109.
	62.	 L. A. McFarland, A. M. Ryan, and S. D. Kriska, “Impres-
sion Management Use and Effectiveness across Assess-
ment Methods,” Journal of Management 29, no. 5 (2003): 
641–61; C. A. Higgins and T. A. Judge, “The Effect of 
Applicant Influence Tactics on Recruiter Perceptions of 
Fit and Hiring Recommendations: A Field Study,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 89, no. 4 (2004): 622–32; and W. C. 
Tsai, C.-C. Chen, and S. F. Chiu, “Exploring Boundaries 
of the Effects of Applicant Impression Management Tac-
tics in Job Interviews,” Journal of Management 31, no. 1 
(2005): 108–25.
	63.	 M. R. Barrick, J. A. Shaffer, and S. W. DeGrassi. “What You 
See May Not Be What You Get: Relationships among Self-
Presentation Tactics and Ratings of Interview and Job Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, no. 6 (2009): 
1394–411.
	64.	 E. Molleman, B. Emans, and N. Turusbekova, “How to 
Control Self-Promotion among Performance-Oriented Em-
ployees: The Roles of Task Clarity and Personalized Respon-
sibility,” Personnel Review 41, no. 1 (2012): 88–105.
	65.	 K. J. Harris, K. M. Kacmar, S. Zivnuska, and J. D. Shaw, “The 
Impact of Political Skill on Impression Management Effective-
ness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 1 (2007): 278–85; 
and D. C. Treadway, G. R. Ferris, A. B. Duke, G. L. Adams, 
and J. B. Thatcher, “The Moderating Role of Subordinate Po-
litical Skill on Supervisors’ Impressions of Subordinate Ingra-
tiation and Ratings of Subordinate Interpersonal Facilitation,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 848–55.
	66.	 J. D. Westphal and I. Stern, “Flattery Will Get You Every-
where (Especially If You Are a Male Caucasian): How In-
gratiation, Boardroom Behavior, and Demographic Minority 
Status Affect Additional Board Appointments of U.S. Com-
panies,” Academy of Management Journal 50, no. 2 (2007): 
267–88.
	67.	 Y. Liu, G. R. Ferris, J. Xu, B. A. Weitz, and P. L. Perrewé, 
“When Ingratiation Backfires: The Role of Political Skill in 
the Ingratiation-Internship Performance Relationship,” Acad-
emy of Management Learning & Education 13, no. 4 (2014): 
569–86.
	68.	 E. Vigoda, “Reactions to Organizational Politics: A Cross-
Cultural Examination in Israel and Britain,” Human Rela-
tions 54, no. 11 (2001), 1483–1518; and Y. Zhu and D. Li, 

	
Endnotes	 373
“Negative Spillover Impact of Perceptions of Organizational 
Politics on Work-Family Conflict in China,” Social Behavior 
and Personality 43, no. 5 (2015): 705–14.
	69.	 J. L. T. Leong, M. H. Bond, and P. P. Fu, “Perceived Effective-
ness of Influence Strategies in the United States and Three 
Chinese Societies,” International Journal of Cross Cultural 
Management 6, no. 1 (2006): 101–20.
	70.	 Y. Miyamoto and B. Wilken, “Culturally Contingent Situated 
Cognition: Influencing Other People Fosters Analytic Percep-
tion in the United States But Not in Japan,” Psychological Sci-
ence 21, no. 11 (2010): 1616–22.
	71.	 D. Clark, “A Campaign Strategy for Your Career,” Harvard 
Business Review, November 2012, 131–34.
CHAPTER 14
	 1.	 See, for instance, D. Tjosvold, A. S. H. Wong, and N. Y. F. 
Chen, “Constructively Managing Conflicts in Organizations,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organi-
zational Behavior 1 (2014): 545–68; and M. A. Korsgaard, 
S. S. Jeong, D. M. Mahony, and A. H. Pitariu, “A Multilevel 
View of Intragroup Conflict,” Journal of Management 34, no. 
6 (2008): 1222–52.
	 2.	 J. Farh, C. Lee, and C. I. C. Farh, “Task Conflict and Team 
Creativity: A Question of How Much and When,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1173–80.
	 3.	 B. H. Bradley, B. F. Postlethwaite, A. C. Klotz, M. R. Hamdani, 
and K. G. Brown, “Reaping the Benefits of Task Conflict in 
Teams: The Critical Role of Team Psychological Safety Climate,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 1 (2012), 151–58.
	 4.	 S. Benard, “Cohesion from Conflict: Does Intergroup Con-
flict Motivate Intragroup Norm Enforcement and Support for 
Centralized Leadership?” Social Psychology Quarterly 75, 
no. 2 (2012): 107–30.
	 5.	 G. A. Van Kleef, W. Steinel, and A. C. Homan, “On Being 
Peripheral and Paying Attention: Prototypicality and Informa-
tion Processing in Intergroup Conflict,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 1 (2013): 63–79.
	 6.	 R. S. Peterson and K. J. Behfar, “The Dynamic Relation-
ship between Performance Feedback, Trust, and Conflict in 
Groups: A Longitudinal Study,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 92, nos. 1–2 (2003): 102–12.
	 7.	 T. M. Glomb and H. Liao, “Interpersonal Aggression in Work 
Groups: Social Influence, Reciprocal, and Individual Effects,” 
Academy of Management Journal 46, no. 4 (2003): 486–96; 
and V. Venkataramani and R. S. Dalal, “Who Helps and 
Harms Whom? Relational Aspects of Interpersonal Helping 
and Harming in Organizations,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 92, no. 4 (2007): 952–66.
	 8.	 R. Friedman, C. Anderson, J. Brett, M. Olekalns, N. Goates, 
and C. C. Lisco, “The Positive and Negative Effects of An-
ger on Dispute Resolution: Evidence from Electronically 
Mediated Disputes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 2 
(2004): 369–76.
	 9.	 J. S. Chun and J. N. Choi, “Members’ Needs, Intragroup Con-
flict, and Group Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 99, no. 3 (2014): 437–50.
	10.	 See, for instance, J. R. Curhan, “What Do People Value When 
They Negotiate? Mapping the Domain of Subjective Value in 
Negotiation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 91, 
no. 3 (2006): 117–26; and N. Halevy, E. Chou, and J. K. Mur-
nighan, “Mind Games: The Mental Representation of Conflict,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 102, no. 1 
(2012): 132–48.
	11.	 A. M. Isen, A. A. Labroo, and P. Durlach, “An Influence of Prod-
uct and Brand Name on Positive Affect: Implicit and Explicit 
Measures,” Motivation and Emotion 28, no. 1 (2004): 43–63.
	12.	 Ibid.
	13.	 C. Montes, D. Rodriguez, and G. Serrano, “Affective Choice 
of Conflict Management Styles,” International Journal of 
Conflict Management 23, no. 1 (2012): 6–18.
	14.	 See, for example, R. Troetschel and P. M. Gollwitzer, “Im-
plementation Intentions and the Willful Pursuit of Prosocial 
Goals in Negotiations,” Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
chology 43, no. 4 (2007): 579–98.
	15.	 See P. Badke-Schaub, G. Goldschmidt, and M. Meijer, “How 
Does Cognitive Conflict in Design Teams Support the Devel-
opment of Creative Ideas?” Creativity and Innovation Man-
agement 19, no. 2 (2010): 119–33; and Z. Ma, A. Erkus, and 
A. Tabak, “Explore the Impact of Collectivism on Conflict 
Management Styles: A Turkish Study,” International Journal 
of Conflict Management 21, no. 2 (2010): 169–85.
	16.	 L. A. DeChurch, J. R. Mesmer-Magnus, and D. Doty, “Mov-
ing beyond Relationship and Task Conflict: Toward a Pro-
cess-State Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, 
no. 4 (2013): 559–78.
	17.	 G. Todorova, J. B. Bear, and L. R. Weingart, “Can Conflict 
Be Energizing? A Study of Task Conflict, Positive Emotions, 
and Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 3 
(2014): 451–67.
	18.	 B. A. Nijstad and S. C. Kaps, “Taking the Easy Way Out: Pref-
erence Diversity, Decision Strategies, and Decision Refusal 
in Groups,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94, 
no. 5 (2008), pp. 860–870.
	19.	 M. E. Zellmer-Bruhn, M. M. Maloney, A. D. Bhappu, and R. 
Salvador, “When and How Do Differences Matter? An Ex-
ploration of Perceived Similarity in Teams,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 107, no. 1 (2008): 
41–59.
	20.	 P. J. Hinds and D. E. Bailey, “Out of Sight, Out of Sync: Un-
derstanding Conflict in Distributed Teams,” Organization Sci-
ence 14, no. 6 (2003): 615–32.
	21.	 K. A. Jehn, L. Greer, S. Levine, and G. Szulanski, “The Ef-
fects of Conflict Types, Dimensions, and Emergent States on 
Group Outcomes,” Group Decision and Negotiation 17, no. 6 
(2005): 777–96.
	22.	 M. E. Zellmer-Bruhn, M. M. Maloney, A. D. Bhappu, and R. 
Salvador, “When and How Do Differences Matter?”
	23.	 J. Fried, “I Know You Are, But What Am I?” Inc., July/August 
2010, 39–40.
	24.	 K. J. Behfar, R. S. Peterson, E. A. Mannix, and W. M. K. Tro-
chim, “The Critical Role of Conflict Resolution in Teams: 
A Close Look at the Links between Conflict Type, Conflict 
Management Strategies, and Team Outcomes,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 93, no. 1 (2008): 170–88; and A. G. Tekleab, 
N. R. Quigley, and P. E. Tesluk, “A Longitudinal Study of 
Team Conflict, Conflict Management, Cohesion, and Team 
Effectiveness,” Group & Organization Management 34, no. 2 
(2009): 170–205.
	25.	 A. Somech, H. S. Desivilya, and H. Lidogoster, “Team Con-
flict Management and Team Effectiveness: The Effects of 
Task Interdependence and Team Identification,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 30, no. 3 (2009): 359–78.
	26.	 W. Liu, R. Friedman, and Y. Hong, “Culture and Accountabil-
ity in Negotiation: Recognizing the Importance of In-Group 

374	 Endnotes
Relations,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 117, no. 1 (2012): 221–34; and B. C. Gunia, J. M. 
Brett, A. K. Nandkeolyar, and D. Kamdar, “Paying a Price: 
Culture, Trust, and Negotiation Consequences,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 96, no. 4 (2010): 774–89.
	27.	 See, for instance, D. Druckman and L. M. Wagner, “Justice 
and Negotiation,” Annual Review of Psychology, 67 (2016): 
387–413.
	28.	 See, for example, D. R. Ames, “Assertiveness Expectancies: 
How Hard People Push Depends on the Consequences They 
Predict,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 95, no. 
6 (2008): 1541–57; and J. R. Curhan, H. A. Elfenbein, and H. 
Xu, “What Do People Value When They Negotiate? Mapping 
the Domain of Subjective Value in Negotiation,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 91, no. 3 (2006): 493–512.
	29.	 R. Lewicki, D. Saunders, and B. Barry, Negotiation, 6th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2009).
	30.	 J. C. Magee, A. D. Galinsky, and D. H. Gruenfeld, “Power, 
Propensity to Negotiate, and Moving First in Competitive 
Interactions,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 33, 
no. 2 (2007): 200–12.
	31.	 E. Wilson, “The Trouble with Jake,” The New York Times, July 
15, 2009, www.nytimes.com.
	32.	 This model is based on R. J. Lewicki, D. Saunders, and B. 
Barry, Negotiation, 7th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2014).
	33.	 R. P. Larrick and G. Wu, “Claiming a Large Slice of a Small 
Pie: Asymmetric Disconfirmation in Negotiation,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 93, no. 2 (2007): 212–33.
	34.	 L. L. Thompson, J. Wang, and B. C. Gunia, “Negotiation,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 61, (2010): 491–515.
	35.	 M. Schaerer, R. I. Swaab, and A. D. Galinsky “Anchors Weigh 
More Than Power: Why Absolute Powerlessness Liberates 
Negotiators to Achieve Better Outcomes,” Psychological Sci-
ence 26, no. 2 (2014): 170–81:10.1177/0956797614558718.
	36.	 J. R. Curhan, H. A. Elfenbein, and G. J. Kilduff, “Getting off 
on the Right Foot: Subjective Value versus Economic Value 
in Predicting Longitudinal Job Outcomes from Job Offer Ne-
gotiations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 2 (2009): 
524–34.
	37.	 H. A. Elfenbein, “Individual Difference in Negotiation: A 
Nearly Abandoned Pursuit Revived,” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 24, no. 2 (2015): 131–36.
	38.	 S. Sharma, W. Bottom, and H. A. Elfenbein, “On the Role of 
Personality, Cognitive Ability, and Emotional Intelligence in 
Predicting Negotiation Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Organi-
zational Psychology Review 3, no. 4 (2013): 293–336.
	39.	 G. Lelieveld, E. Van Dijk, I. Van Beest, and G. A. Van Kleef, 
“Why Anger and Disappointment Affect Other’s Bargaining 
Behavior Differently: The Moderating Role of Power and the 
Mediating Role of Reciprocal Complementary Emotions,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38, no. 9 (2012): 
1209–21.
	40.	 S. Côté, I. Hideg, and G. A. Van Kleef, “The Consequences 
of Faking Anger in Negotiations,” Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 49, no. 3 (2013): 453–63.
	41.	 G. A. Van Kleef and C. K. W. De Dreu, “Longer-Term Con-
sequences of Anger Expression in Negotiation: Retaliation or 
Spillover?” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46, 
no. 5 (2010): 753–60.
	42.	 H. Adam and A. Shirako, “Not All Anger Is Created Equal: 
The Impact of the Expresser’s Culture on the Social Effects 
of Anger in Negotiations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, 
no. 5 (2013): 785–98.
	43.	 M. Olekalns and P. L Smith, “Mutually Dependent: Power, 
Trust, Affect, and the Use of Deception in Negotiation,” Jour-
nal of Business Ethics 85, no. 3 (2009): 347–65.
	44.	 A. W. Brooks and M. E. Schweitzer, “Can Nervous Nellie 
Negotiate? How Anxiety Causes Negotiators to Make Low 
First Offers, Exit Early, and Earn Less Profit,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115, no. 1 (2011): 
43–54.
	45.	 M. Sinaceur, H. Adam, G. A. Van Kleef, and A. D. Galinsky, 
“The Advantages of Being Unpredictable: How Emotional In-
consistency Extracts Concessions in Negotiation,” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 49, no. 3 (2013): 498–508.
	46.	 K. Leary, J. Pillemer, and M. Wheeler, “Negotiating with Emo-
tion,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 2013, 96–103.
	47.	 L. A. Liu, R. Friedman, B. Barry, M. J. Gelfand, and Z. Zhang, 
“The Dynamics of Consensus Building in Intracultural and 
Intercultural Negotiations,” Administrative Science Quarterly 
57, no. 2 (2012): 269–304.
	48.	 M. Liu, “The Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Effects of Anger 
on Negotiation Strategies: A Cross-Cultural Investigation,” 
Human Communication Research 35, no. 1 (2009): 148–69; 
and H. Adam, A. Shirako, and W. W. Maddux, “Cultural Vari-
ance in the Interpersonal Effects of Anger in Negotiations,” 
Psychological Science 21, no. 6 (2010): 882–89.
	49.	 P. D. Trapnell and D. L. Paulhus, “Agentic and Communal 
Values: Their Scope and Measurement,” Journal of Personal-
ity Assessment 94, no. 1 (2012): 39–52.
	50.	 C. T. Kulik and M. Olekalns, “Negotiating the Gender Di-
vide: Lessons from the Negotiation and Organizational Be-
havior Literatures,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 
1387–415.
	51.	 C. Suddath, “The Art of Haggling,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
November 26, 2012, 98.
	52.	 J. Mazei, J. Hüffmeier, P. A. Freund, A. F. Stuhlmacher, L. 
Bilke, and G. Hertel, “A Meta-Analysis on Gender Differ-
ences in Negotiation Outcomes and Their Moderators,” Psy-
chological Bulletin 141, no. 1 (2015): 85–104.
	53.	 D. T. Kong, K. T. Dirks, and D. L. Ferrin, “Interpersonal Trust 
within Negotiations: Meta-Analytic Evidence, Critical Con-
tingencies, and Directions for Future Research,” Academy of 
Management Journal 57, no. 5 (2014): 1235–55.
	54.	 G. R. Ferris, J. N. Harris, Z. A. Russell, B. P. Ellen, A. 
D. Martinez, and F. R. Blass, “The Role of Reputation in 
the Organizational Sciences: A Multilevel Review, Con-
struct Assessment, and Research Directions,” Research in 
Personnel and Human Resources Management 32 (2014): 
241–303.
	55.	 R. Zinko, G. R. Ferris, S. E. Humphrey, C. J. Meyer, and F. 
Aime, “Personal Reputation in Organizations: Two-Study 
Constructive Replication and Extension of Antecedents and 
Consequences,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology 85, no. 1 (2012): 156–80.
	56.	 A. Hinshaw, P. Reilly, and A. Kupfer Schneider, “Attor-
neys and Negotiation Ethics: A Material Misunderstand-
ing?” Negotiation Journal 29, no. 3 (2013): 265–87; and 
N. A. Welsh, “The Reputational Advantages of Demon-
strating Trustworthiness: Using the Reputation Index with 
Law Students,” Negotiation Journal 28, no. 1 (2012): 
117–45.
	57.	 J. R. Curhan, H. A. Elfenbein, and X. Heng, “What Do People 
Value When They Negotiate? Mapping the Domain of Subjec-
tive Value in Negotiation,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 91, no. 3 (2006): 493–512.

	
Endnotes	 375
	58.	 W. E. Baker and N. Bulkley, “Paying It Forward vs. Reward-
ing Reputation: Mechanisms of Generalized Reciprocity,” Or-
ganization Science 25, no. 5 (2014): 1493–510.
	59.	 G. A. Van Kleef, C. K. W. De Dreu, and A. S. R. Manstead, 
“An Interpersonal Approach to Emotion in Social Decision 
Making: The Emotions as Social Information Model” in Ad-
vances in Experimental Social Psychology vol. 42, ed. M. P. 
Zanna, (2010), 45–96.
	60.	 F. Lumineau and J. E. Henderson, “The Influence of Rela-
tional Experience and Contractual Governance on the Ne-
gotiation Strategy in Buyer–Supplier Disputes,” Journal of 
Operations Management 30, no. 5 (2012): 382–95.
	61.	 U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Questions 
and Answers About Mediation, accessed June 9, 2015, http://
www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/mediation/qanda.cfm.
CHAPTER 15
	 1.	 See, for instance, R. L. Daft, Organization Theory and  
Design, 10th ed. (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing, 
2010).
	 2.	 J. G. Miller, “The Real Women’s Issue: Time,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 9–10, 2013, C3.
	 3.	 T. W. Malone, R. J. Laubacher, and T. Johns, “The Age of 
Hyperspecialization,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 
2011, 56–65.
	 4.	 C. Woodyard, “Toyota Brass Shakeup Aims to Give Regions 
More Control,” USA Today, March 6, 2013, www.usatoday.
com/story/money/cars/2013/03/06/toyota-shakeup/1966489/.
	 5.	 S. Ballmer, “One Microsoft: Company Realigns to Enable 
Innovation at Greater Speed, Efficiency,” Microsoft, July 11, 
2013,  http://blogs.microsoft.com/firehose/2013/07/11/one-
microsoft-company-realigns-to-enable-innovation-at-greater-
speed-efficiency/.
	 6.	 Ibid.
	 7.	 A. Wilhelm, “Microsoft Shakes Up Its Leadership and In-
ternal Structure as its Fiscal Year Comes to a Close,” Tech-
Crunch, June 17, 2015, http://techcrunch.com/2015/06/17/
microsoft-shakes-up-its-leadership-and-internal-structure-as-
its-fiscal-year-comes-to-a-close/#.mcn-4eo:OnA3.
	 8.	 See, for instance, “How Hierarchy Can Hurt Strategy Execu-
tion,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 2010, 74–75.
	 9.	 F. A. Csascar, “Organizational Structure as a Determinant of 
Performance: Evidence from Mutual Funds,” Strategic Man-
agement Journal 33, no. 6 (2013): 611–32.
	10.	 B. Brown and S. D. Anthony, “How P&G Tripled Its Inno-
vation Success Rate,” Harvard Business Review, June 2011, 
64–72.
	11.	 A. Leiponen and C. E. Helfat, “Location, Decentralization, 
and Knowledge Sources for Innovation,” Organization Sci-
ence 22, no. 3 (2011): 641–58.
	12.	 K. Parks, “HSBC Unit Charged in Argentine Tax Case,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 19, 2013, C2.
	13.	 P. Hempel, Z.-X. Zhang, and Y. Han, “Team Empowerment 
and the Organizational Context: Decentralization and the 
Contrasting Effects of Formalization,” Journal of Manage-
ment 38, no. 2 (2012): 475–501.
	14.	 J. E. Perry-Smith and C. E. Shalley, “A Social Composition 
View of Team Creativity: The Role of Member Nationality-
Heterogeneous Ties Outside of the Team,” Organization 
Science 25, no. 5 (2014): 1434–52; J. Han, J. Han, and D. J. 
Brass, “Human Capital Diversity in the Creation of Social 
Capital for Team Creativity,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 35, no. 1 (2014): 54–71; N. Sivasubramaniam, S. 
J. Liebowitz, and C. L. Lackman, “Determinants of New 
Product Development Team Performance: A Meta Analytic 
Review,” Journal of Product Innovation Management 29, 
no. 5 (2012): 803–20.
	15.	 T. A de Vries, F. Walter, G. S. Van der Vegt, and P. J. M. D. 
Essens, “Antecedents of Individuals’ Interteam Coordination: 
Broad Functional Experiences as a Mixed Blessing,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 57, no. 5 (2014): 1334–59.
	16.	 N. J. Foss, K. Laursen, and T. Pedersen, “Linking Customer 
Interaction and Innovation: The Mediating Role of New 
Organizational Practices,” Organization Science 22, no. 4 
(2011): 980–99; N. J. Foss, J. Lyngsie, and S. A. Zahra, 
“The Role of External Knowledge Sources and Organiza-
tional Design in the Process of Opportunity Exploitation,” 
Strategic Management Journal 34, no. 12 (2013): 1453–71; 
and A. Salter, P. Crisuolo, and A. L. J. Ter Wal, “Coping 
with Open Innovation: Responding to the Challenges of 
External Engagement in R&D,” California Management 
Review 56, no. 2 (2014): 77–94.
	17.	 A. Murray, “Built Not to Last,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 18, 2013, A11.
	18.	 For a quick overview, see J. Davoren, “Functional Structure 
Organization Strength and Weakness,” Small Business Chron-
icle, accessed June 25, 2015, http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ 
functional-structure-organization-strength-weakness-60111.html.
	19.	 See, for instance, A. Writing, “Different Types of Organiza-
tional Structure,” Small Business Chronicle, accessed June 
25, 
2015, 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/different-types-
organizational-structure-723.html.
	20.	 For a quick overview, see “Types of Business Organizational  
Structures,” Pingboard, July 24, 2013, accessed June 25, 
2015 https://pingboard.com/blog/types-business-organiz- 
ational-structures/.
	21.	 J. R. Galbraith, Designing Matrix Organizations That Actu-
ally Work: How IBM, Procter & Gamble, and Others De-
sign for Success (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009); and E. 
Krell, “Managing the Matrix,” HR Magazine, April 2011, 
69–71.
	22.	 See, for instance, M. Bidwell, “Politics and Firm Boundar-
ies: How Organizational Structure, Group Interests, and Re-
sources Affect Outsourcing,” Organization Science 23, no. 6 
(2012): 1622–42.
	23.	 See, for instance, T. Sy and L. S. D’Annunzio, “Challenges and 
Strategies of Matrix Organizations: Top-Level and Mid-Level 
Managers’ Perspectives,” Human Resource Planning 28, no. 1 
(2005): 39–48; and T. Sy and S. Cotê, “Emotional Intelligence: 
A Key Ability to Succeed in the Matrix Organization,” Journal 
of Management Development 23, no. 5 (2004): 437–55.
	24.	 N. Anand and R. L. Daft, “What Is the Right Organization 
Design?” Organizational Dynamics 36, no. 4 (2007): 329–44.
	25.	 See, for instance, N. S. Contractor, S. Wasserman, and K. 
Faust, “Testing Multitheoretical, Multilevel Hypotheses about 
Organizational Networks: An Analytic Framework and Em-
pirical Example,” Academy of Management Review 31, no. 
3 (2006): 681–703; and Y. Shin, “A Person-Environment Fit 
Model for Virtual Organizations,” Journal of Management 30, 
no. 5 (2004): 725–43.
	26.	 J. Schramm, “At Work in a Virtual World,” HR Magazine, 
June 2010, 152.
	27.	 C. B. Gibson and J. L. Gibbs, “Unpacking the Concept of 
Virtuality: The Effects of Geographic Dispersion, Electronic 

376	 Endnotes
Dependence, Dynamic Structure, and National Diversity on 
Team Innovation,” Administrative Science Quarterly 51, no. 
3 (2006): 451–95; H. M. Latapie and V. N. Tran, “Subculture 
Formation, Evolution, and Conflict between Regional Teams 
in Virtual Organizations,” The Business Review, Summer 
2007, 189–93; and S. Davenport and U. Daellenbach, “‘Be-
longing’ to a Virtual Research Center: Exploring the Influence 
of Social Capital Formation Processes on Member Identifica-
tion in a Virtual Organization,” British Journal of Manage-
ment 22, no. 1 (2011): 54–76.
	28.	 See, for instance, E. Devaney, “The Pros & Cons of 7 Popular Or-
ganizational Structures,” Hubspot, December 23, 2014, 6:00AM, 
accessed June 25, 2015, http://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/
team-structure-diagrams.
	29.	 J. Scheck, L. Moloney, and A. Flynn, “Eni, CNPC Link 
Up in Mozambique,” The Wall Street Journal, March 15,  
2013, B3.
	30.	 E. Devaney, “The Pros & Cons of 7 Popular Organizational 
Structures.”
	31.	 L. Gensler, “American Express to Slash 4,000 Jobs on Heels 
of Strong Quarter,” Forbes, January 21, 2015, http://www 
.forbes.com/sites/laurengensler/2015/01/21/american-ex-
press-earnings-rise-11-on-increased-cardholder-spending/.
	32.	 L. I  Alpert, “Can Imported CEO Fix Russian Cars?” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 20, 2013, http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887323639604578370121394214736.
	33.	 K. Walker, N. Ni, and B. Dyck, “Recipes for Successful 
Sustainability: Empirical Organizational Configurations for 
Strong Corporate Environmental Performance,” Business 
Strategy and the Environment 24, no. 1 (2015): 40–57.
	34.	 See, for instance, J. R. Hollenbeck et al., “Structural Con-
tingency Theory and Individual Differences: Examination of 
External and Internal Person-Team Fit,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 87, no. 3 (2002): 599–606; and A. Drach-Zahavy 
and A. Freund, “Team Effectiveness under Stress: A Struc-
tural Contingency Approach,” Journal of Organizational Be-
havior 28, no. 4 (2007): 423–50.
	35.	 K. Walker, N. Ni, and B. Dyck, “Recipes for Successful 
Sustainability: Empirical Organizational Configurations for 
Strong Corporate Environmental Performance.”
	36.	 See, for instance, S. M. Toh, F. P. Morgeson, and M. A. Cam-
pion, “Human Resource Configurations: Investigating Fit 
with the Organizational Context,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 93, no. 4 (2008): 864–82.
	37.	 M. Mesco, “Moleskine Tests Appetite for IPOs,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 19, 2013, B8.
	38.	 J. Backaler, “Haier: A Chinese Company That Innovates,” Forbes, 
June 17, 2010, http://www.forbes.com/sites/china/2010/06/17/
haier-a-chinese-company-that-innovates/.
	39.	 See, for instance, J. A. Cogin and I. O. Williamson, “Standard-
ize or Customize: The Interactive Effects of HRM and Environ-
ment Uncertainty on MNC Subsidiary Performance,” Human 
Resource Management 53, no. 5 (2014): 701–21; G. Kim and 
M.-G. Huh, “Exploration and Organizational Longevity: The 
Moderating Role of Strategy and Environment,” Asia Pacific 
Journal of Management 32, no. 2 (2015): 389–414.
	40.	 R. Greenwood, C. R. Hinings, and D. Whetten, “Rethink-
ing Institutions and Organizations,” Journal of Management 
Studies, 51, no. 7 (2014): 1206–20; and D. Chandler and 
H. Hwang, “Learning from Learning Theory: A Model of 
Organizational Adoption Strategies at the Microfoundations 
of Institutional Theory,” Journal of Management 41, no. 5 
(2015): 1446–76.
	41.	 C. S. Spell and T. J. Arnold, “A Multi-Level Analysis of Orga-
nizational Justice and Climate, Structure, and Employee Men-
tal Health,” Journal of Management 33, no. 5 (2007): 724–51; 
and M. L. Ambrose and M. Schminke, “Organization Struc-
ture as a Moderator of the Relationship between Procedural 
Justice, Interactional Justice, Perceived Organizational Sup-
port, and Supervisory Trust,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
88, no. 2 (2003): 295–305.
	42.	 See, for instance, C. S. Spell and T. J. Arnold, “A Multi-Level 
Analysis of Organizational Justice and Climate, Structure, 
and Employee Mental Health;” J. D. Shaw and N. Gupta, 
“Job Complexity, Performance, and Well-Being: When Does 
Supplies-Value Fit Matter?” Personnel Psychology 57, no. 4 
(2004); and C. Anderson and C. E. Brown, “The Functions 
and Dysfunctions of Hierarchy,” Research in Organizational 
Behavior 30 (2010): 55–89.
	43.	 T. Martin, “Pharmacies Feel More Heat,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 16–17, 2013, A3.
	44.	 See, for instance, R. E. Ployhart, J. A. Weekley, and K. 
Baughman, “The Structure and Function of Human Capital 
Emergence: A Multilevel Examination of the Attraction-Se-
lection-Attrition Model,” Academy of Management Journal 
49, no. 4 (2006): 661–77.
	45.	 J. B. Stewart, “A Place to Play for Google Staff,” The New 
York Times, March 16, 2013, B1.
	46.	 See, for instance, B. K. Park, J. A. Choi, M. Koo, S. Sul, and 
I. Choi, “Culture, Self, and Preference Structure: Transitivity 
and Context Independence Are Violated More by Interdepen-
dent People,” Social Cognition 31, no. 1 (2013): 106–18.
	47.	 J. Hassard, J. Morris, and L. McCann, “‘My Brilliant Career?’ 
New Organizational Forms and Changing Managerial Careers 
in Japan, the UK, and USA,” Journal of Management Studies 
49, no. 3 (2012): 571–99.
CHAPTER 16
	 1.	 See, for example, B. Schneider, M. G. Ehrhart, and W. H. 
Macey, “Organizational Climate and Culture,” Annual Review 
of Psychology 64 (2013): 361–88.
	 2.	 I. Borg, J. F. Groenen, K. A. Jehn, W. Bilsky, and S. H. 
Schwartz, “Embedding the Organizational Culture Profile 
into Schwartz’s Theory of Universals in Values,” Journal of 
Personnel Psychology 10, no. 1 (2011): 1–12.
	 3.	 See, for example, C. Ostroff, A. J. Kinicki, and M. M. Tam-
kins, “Organizational Culture and Climate,” in Handbook of 
Psychology: Industrial and Organizational Psychology, eds. 
W. C. Borman, D. R. Ilgen, and R. J. Klimoski (Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley, 2003), 565–93.
	 4.	 D. A. Hoffman and L. M. Jones, “Leadership, Collective Per-
sonality, and Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
90, no. 3 (2005), 509–22.
	 5.	 T. Hsieh, “How I did it: Zappos’s CEO on Going to Extremes 
for Customers” Harvard Business Review, July–August 2010, 
41–45.
	 6.	 P. Lok, R. Westwood, and J. Crawford, “Perceptions of Or-
ganisational Subculture and Their Significance for Organisa-
tional Commitment,” Applied Psychology: An International 
Review 54, no. 4 (2005): 490–514; and B. E. Ashforth, K. M. 
Rogers, and K. G. Corley, “Identity in Organizations: Explor-
ing Cross-Level Dynamics,” Organization Science 22, no. 5 
(2011): 1144–56.

	
Endnotes	 377
	 7.	 For discussion of how culture can be evaluated as a shared 
perception, see D. Chan, “Multilevel and Aggregation Issues 
in Climate and Culture Research,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
Organizational Climate and Culture, eds. B. Schneider and K. 
M. Barbera (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2014), 
484–495.
	 8.	 L. M. Kotrba, M. A. Gillespie, A. M. Schmidt, R. E. Smerek, 
S. A. Ritchie, and D. R. Denison, “Do Consistent Corpo-
rate Cultures Have Better Business Performance: Exploring 
the Interaction Effects,” Human Relations 65, no. 2 (2012): 
241–262; and M. W. Dickson, C. J. Resick, and P. J. Hanges, 
“When Organizational Climate Is Unambiguous, It Is Also 
Strong,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006): 
351–364.
	 9.	 M. Schulte, C. Ostroff, S. Shmulyian, and A. Kinicki, “Orga-
nizational Climate Configurations: Relationships to Collective 
Attitudes, Customer Satisfaction, and Financial Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 3 (2009): 618–634.
	10.	 S. Maitlis and M. Christianson, “Sensemaking in Organiza-
tions: Taking Stock and Moving Forward,” The Academy of 
Management Annals 8, (2014): 57–125; and K. Weber and M. 
T. Dacin, “The Cultural Construction of Organizational Life,” 
Organization Science 22, no. 2 (2011): 287–298.
	11.	 Y. Ling, Z. Simsek, M. H. Lubatkin, and J. F. Veiga, “Trans-
formational Leadership’s Role in Promoting Corporate Entre-
preneurship: Examining the CEO-TMT Interface,” Academy 
of Management Journal 51, no. 3 (2008): 557–76; and A. 
Malhotra, A. Majchrzak, and B. Rosen, “Leading Virtual 
Teams,” Academy of Management Perspectives 21, no. 1 
(2007): 60–70.
	12.	 L. R. James et al., “Organizational and Psychological Cli-
mate: A Review of Theory and Research,” European Journal 
of Work and Organizational Psychology 17, no. 1 (2008): 
5–32; and B. Schneider and K. M. Barbera, “Introduction and 
Overview,” in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Cli-
mate and Culture, eds. B. Schneider and K. M. Barbera (New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2014), 3–22.
	13.	 J. Z. Carr, A. M. Schmidt, J. K. Ford, and R. P. DeShon, 
“Climate Perceptions Matter: A Meta-Analytic Path Analysis 
Relating Molar Climate, Cognitive and Affective States, and 
Individual Level Work Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 88, no. 4 (2003): 605–619.
	14.	 M. Schulte, C. Ostroff, S. Shmulyian, and A. Kinicki, “Or-
ganizational Climate Configurations: Relationships to Col-
lective Attitudes, Customer Satisfaction, and Financial 
Performance.” 
	15.	 S. D. Pugh, J. Dietz, A. P. Brief, and J. W. Wiley, “Looking 
Inside and Out: The Impact of Employee and Community 
Demographic Composition on Organizational Diversity Cli-
mate,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 6 (2008): 1422–
1428; K. H. Ehrhart, L. A. Witt, B. Schneider, and S. J. Perry, 
“Service Employees Give as They Get: Internal Service as a 
Moderator of the Service Climate-Service Outcomes Link,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 2 (2011): 423–31; and 
A. Simha and J. B. Cullen, “Ethical Climates and Their Ef-
fects on Organizational Outcomes: Implications from the Past 
and Prophecies for the Future,” Academy of Management Per-
spectives 26, no. 4 (2011): 20–34.
	16.	 J. C. Wallace, D. Johnson, K. Mathe, and J. Paul, “Structural 
and Psychological Empowerment Climates, Performance, and 
the Moderating Role of Shared Felt Accountability: A Mana-
gerial Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 3 
(2011): 840–850.
	17.	 J. M. Beus, S. C. Payne, M. E. Bergman, and W. Arthur, 
“Safety Climate and Injuries: An Examination of Theoretical 
and Empirical Relationships,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
95, no. 4 (2010): 713–727.
	18.	 A. Simha and J. B. Cullen, “Ethical Climates and Their Ef-
fects on Organizational Outcomes: Implications from the Past 
and Prophecies for the Future,” Academy of Management Per-
spectives 26, no. 4 (2011): 20–34.
	19.	 Ibid.
	20.	 J. Howard-Greenville, S. Bertels, and B. Lahneman, “Sustain-
ability: How It Shapes Organizational Culture and Climate,” 
in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Climate and Cul-
ture, eds. B. Schneider and K. M. Barbera (New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press, 2014), 257–275.
	21.	 P. Lacy, T. Cooper, R. Hayward, and L. Neuberger, “A New 
Era of Sustainability: UN Global Compact-Accenture CEO 
Study 2010,” Joint Report from Accenture and the United 
Nations: The Global Compact, June 2010, https://www 
.unglobalcompact.org/docs/news_events/8.1/UNGC_Accen-
ture_CEO_Study_2010.pdf.
	22.	 B. Fitzgerald, “Sustainable Farming Will Be Next, ‘Revolution in 
Agriculture,’” Australian Broadcasting Company: Rural, May 
28, 2015, 10:12PM, http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-29/
state-of-tomorrow-sustainable-farming/6504842.
	23.	 A. A. Marcus and A. R. Fremeth, “Green Management Mat-
ters Regardless,” Academy of Management Perspectives 23, 
no. 3 (2009): 17–26.
	24.	 P. Bansal, “From Issues to Actions: The Importance of Indi-
vidual Concerns and Organizational Values in Responding to 
Natural Environmental Issues,” Organization Science 14, no. 
5 (2003): 510–527; P. Bansal, “Evolving Sustainably: A Lon-
gitudinal Study of Corporate Sustainable Development,” Stra-
tegic Management Journal 26, no. 3 (2005): 197–218; and J. 
Howard-Grenville and A. J. Hoffman, “The Importance of Cul-
tural Framing to the Success of Social Initiatives in Business,” 
Academy of Management Executive 17, no. 2 (2003):70–84.
	25.	 A. R. Carrico and M. Riemer, “Motivating Energy Con-
servation in the Workplace: An Evaluation of the Use of 
Group-Level Feedback and Peer Education,” Journal of En-
vironmental Psychology 31, no. 1 (2011): 1–13.
	26.	 J. P. Kotter, “Change Management: Accelerate!” Harvard 
Business Review, November 2012: 44–58.
	27.	 R. Walker, “Behind the Music,” Fortune, October 29, 2012, 
57–58.
	28.	 J. P. Titlow, “How Spotify’s Music-Obsessed Culture Keeps 
Employees Hooked,” Fast Company, August 20, 2014, http://
www.fastcompany.com/3034617/how-spotifys-music-ob-
sessed-culture-makes-the-company-rock.
	29.	 E. Ries, The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Publishing, 
2011).
	30.	 M. Herper, “Niche Pharma,” Forbes, September 24, 2012, 
80–89.
	31.	 J. Bandler and D. Burke, “How HP Lost Its Way,” Fortune, 
May 21, 2012, 147–164.
	32.	 G. F. Lanzara and G. Patriotta, “The Institutionalization of 
Knowledge in an Automotive Factory: Templates, Inscrip-
tions, and the Problems of Durability,” Organization Studies 
28, no. 5 (2007): 635–660; and T. B. Lawrence, M. K. Mauws, 
B. Dyck, and R. F. Kleysen, “The Politics of Organizational 
Learning: Integrating Power into the 4I Framework,” Acad-
emy of Management Review 30, no. 1 (2005): 180–191.
	33.	 L. G. Flores, W. Zheng, D. Rau, and C. H. Thomas, “Orga-
nizational Learning: Subprocess Identification, Construct 

378	 Endnotes
Validation, and an Empirical Test of Cultural Antecedents,” 
Journal of Management 38, no. 2 (2012): 640–667; and W. S. 
Shim and R. M. Steers, “Symmetric and Asymmetric Leader-
ship Cultures: A Comparative Study of Leadership and Orga-
nizational Culture at Hyundai and Toyota,” Journal of World 
Business 47, no. 4 (2012): 581–591.
	34.	 See D. L. Stone, E. F. Stone-Romero, and K. M. Lukasze-
wski, “The Impact of Cultural Values on the Acceptance 
and Effectiveness of Human Resource Management Policies 
and Practices,” Human Resource Management Review 17, 
no. 2 (2007): 152–165; D. R. Avery, “Support for Diversity 
in Organizations: A Theoretical Exploration of Its Origins 
and Offshoots,” Organizational Psychology Review 1, no. 3 
(2011): 239–256; and A. Groggins and A. M. Ryan, “Embrac-
ing Uniqueness: The Underpinnings of a Positive Climate for 
Diversity,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psy-
chology 86, no. 2 (2013): 264–282.
	35.	 D. Liu, T. R. Mitchell, T. W. Lee, B. C. Holtom, and T. R. 
Hinkin, “When Employees Are out of Step with Coworkers: 
How Job Satisfaction Trajectory and Dispersion Influence 
Individual and Unit-Level Voluntary Turnover,” Academy of 
Management Journal 55, no. 6 (2012): 360–1380.
	36.	 R. A. Weber and C. F. Camerer, “Cultural Conflict and Merger 
Failure: An Experimental Approach,” Management Science 
49, no. 4 (2003): 400–412; I. H. Gleibs, A. Mummendey, and 
P. Noack, “Predictors of Change in Postmerger Identification 
during a Merger Process: A Longitudinal Study,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 95, no. 5 (2008): 1095–
1112; and F. Bauer and K. Matzler, “Antecedents of M&A 
Success: The Role of Strategic Complementarity, Cultural Fit, 
and Degree and Speed of Integration,” Strategic Management 
Journal 35, no. 2 (2014): 269–291.
	37.	 K. Voigt, “Mergers Fail More Often Than Marriages,” 
CNN, May 22, 2009, http://edition.cnn.com/2009/BUSI-
NESS/05/21/merger.marriage/.
	38.	 Y. L. Zhao, O. H. Erekson, T. Wang, and M. Song, “Pio-
neering Advantages and Entrepreneurs’ First-Mover Deci-
sions: An Empirical Investigation for the United States and 
China,” Journal of Product Innovation Management 29, no. 
S1 (2012): 190–210.
	39.	 E. H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, Vol. 2. 
(New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2010).
	40.	 See, for example, D. E. Bowen and C. Ostroff, “The ‘Strength’ 
of the HRM System, Organizational Climate Formation, and 
Firm Performance,” Academy of Management Review 29, no. 
2 (2004): 203–221.
	41.	 W. Li, Y. Wang, P. Taylor, K. Shi, and D. He, “The In-
fluence of Organizational Culture on Work-Related Per-
sonality Requirement Ratings: A Multilevel Analysis,” 
International Journal of Selection and Assessment 16, no. 
4 (2008): 366–384; I. Oh, K. S. Kim, and C. H. Van Id-
dekinge, “Taking It to another Level: Do Personality-Based 
Human Capital Resources Matter to Firm Performance?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 3 (2015): 935–947; 
and A. Bardi, K. E. Buchanan, R. Goodwin, L. Slabu, and 
M. Robinson, “Value Stability and Change during Self-
Chosen Life Transitions: Self-Selection versus Socializa-
tion Effects,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
106, no. 1 (2014): 131–147.
	42.	 D. C. Hambrick, “Upper Echelons Theory: An Update,” 
Academy of Management Review 32, no. 2 (2007): 334–343; 
M. A. Carpenter, M. A. Geletkanycz, and W. G. Sanders, “Up-
per Echelons Research Revisited: Antecedents, Elements, 
and Consequences of Top Management Team Composition,” 
Journal of Management 30, no. 6 (2004): 749–778; and H. 
Wang, A. S. Tsui, and K. R. Xin, “CEO Leadership Behav-
iors, Organizational Performance, and Employees’ Attitudes,” 
Leadership Quarterly 22, no. 1 (2011): 92–105.
	43.	 V. Tabvuma, Y. Georgellis, and T. Lange, “Orientation Train-
ing and Job Satisfaction: A Sector and Gender Analysis,” Hu-
man Resource Management 54, no. 2 (2015): 303–321; and 
T. N. Bauer, T. Bodner, B. Erdogan, D. M. Truxillo, and J. 
S. Tucker, “Newcomer Adjustment during Organizational 
Socialization: A Meta-Analytic Review of Antecedents, Out-
comes, and Methods,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 
3 (2007): 707–721.
	44.	 R. E. Silverman, “Companies Try to Make the First Day for 
New Hires More Fun,” The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 
2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014241278873233
36104578501631475934850.html.
	45.	 D. M. Cable, F. Gino, and B. R. Staats, “Breaking Them in 
or Eliciting Their Best? Reframing Socialization around New-
comers’ Authentic Self-Expression,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 58, no. 1 (2013): 1–36; and M. Wang, J. Kammeyer-
Mueller, and Y. Liu, “Context, Socialization, and Newcomer 
Learning,” Organizational Psychology Review 5, no. 1 (2015): 
3–25.
	46.	 C. J. Collins, “The Interactive Effects of Recruitment Prac-
tices and Product Awareness on Job Seekers’ Employer 
Knowledge and Application Behaviors,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 1 (2007): 180–190.
	47.	 J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller and C. R. Wanberg, “Unwrapping 
the Organizational Entry Process: Disentangling Multiple An-
tecedents and Their Pathways to Adjustment,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 88, no. 5 (2003): 779–794; E. W. Morrison, 
“Longitudinal Study of the Effects of Information Seeking on 
Newcomer Socialization,” Journal of Applied Psychology 78, 
no. 2 (2003): 173–183; and M. Wang, Y. Zhan, E. McCune, 
and D. Truxillo, “Understanding Newcomers’ Adaptability 
and Work-Related Outcomes: Testing the Mediating Roles of 
Perceived P-E Fit Variables,” Personnel Psychology 64, no. 1 
(2011): 163–189.
	48.	 A. M. Ellis, T. N. Bauer, L. R. Mansfield, B. Erdogan, D. M. 
Truxillo, and L. S. Simon, “Navigating Uncharted Waters: 
Newcomer Socialization through the Lens of Stress Theory,” 
Journal of Management 41, no. 1 (2015): 203–235; and E. 
Lapointe, C. Vandenberghe, and J.-S. Boudrias, “Organiza-
tional Socialization Tactics and Newcomer Adjustment: The 
Mediating Role of Role Clarity and Affect-Based Trust Rela-
tionships,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psy-
chology 87, no. 3 (2014): 599–624.
	49.	 T. N. Bauer, T. Bodner, B. Erdogan, D. M. Truxillo, and J. 
S. Tucker, “Newcomer Adjustment during Organizational 
Socialization: A Meta-Analytic Review of Antecedents, Out-
comes, and Methods,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 
3 (2007): 707–721.
	50.	 W. R. Boswell, A. J. Shipp, S. C. Payne, and S. S. Culbertson, 
“Changes in Newcomer Job Satisfaction over Time: Examin-
ing the Pattern of Honeymoons and Hangovers,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 94, no. 4 (2009): 844–858; and W. R. 
Boswell, J. W. Boudreau, and J. Tichy, “The Relationship be-
tween Employee Job Change and Job Satisfaction: The Hon-
eymoon-Hangover Effect,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90, 
no. 5 (2005): 882–892.
	51.	 J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller, C. R. Wanberg, A. L. Ruben-
stein, and Z. Song, “Support, Undermining, and Newcomer 

	
Endnotes	 379
Socialization: Fitting in during the First 90 Days,” Academy 
of Management Journal 56, no. 4 (2013): 1104–1124; and 
M. Jokisaari and J. Nurmi, “Change in Newcomers’ Supervi-
sor Support and Socialization Outcomes after Organizational 
Entry,” Academy of Management Journal 52, no. 3 (2009): 
527–544.
	52.	 C. Vandenberghe, A. Panaccio, K. Bentein, K. Mignonac, and 
P. Roussel, “Assessing Longitudinal Change of and Dynamic 
Relationships among Role Stressors, Job Attitudes, Turnover 
Intention, and Well-Being in Neophyte Newcomers,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 32, no. 4 (2011): 652–671.
	53.	 E. Ransdell, “The Nike Story? Just Tell It!” Fast Company, 
January–February 2000, 44–46; and A. Muccino, “Exclusive 
Interview with Chuck Eichten,” Liquid Brand Summit (blog), 
February 4, 2011, http://blog.liquidbrandsummit.com/once-
there-was-a-brand-qa-with-nike-design-director-chuck-
eichten/.
	54.	 S. L. Dailey and L. Browning, “Retelling Stories in Orga-
nizations: Understanding the Functions of Narrative Rep-
etition,” Academy of Management Review 39, no. 1 (2014): 
22–43.
	55.	 A. J. Shipp and K. J. Jansen, “Reinterpreting Time in Fit The-
ory: Crafting and Recrafting Narratives of Fit in Medias Res,” 
Academy of Management Review 36, no. 1 (2011): 76–101.
	56.	 See G. Islam and M. J. Zyphur, “Rituals in Organizations: A 
Review and Expansion of Current Theory,” Group & Organi-
zation Management 34, no. 1 (2009): 114–39.
	57.	 M. Moskowitz and F. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to 
Work For,” Fortune, February 6, 2012, 120.
	58.	 A. Bryant, “Take the Bus, and Watch the Ideas Flow,” The 
New York Times, September 16, 2012, 2.
	59.	 M. G. Pratt and A. Rafaeli “Artifacts and Organizations: Un-
derstanding Our Objective Reality,” in Artifacts and Organi-
zations: Beyond Mere Symbolism, eds. A. Rafaeli and M. G. 
Pratt (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2006), 279–288.
	60.	 B. Gruley, “Relaxed Fit,” Bloomberg Businessweek, Septem-
ber 17–23, 2012, 98–99.
	61.	 M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to 
Work For,” Fortune, February 6, 2012, 117–124.
	62.	 A. Ardichvilli, J. A. Mitchell, and D. Jondle, “Characteris-
tics of Ethical Business Cultures,” Journal of Business Eth-
ics 85, no. 4 (2009): 445–451; D. M. Mayer, “A Review of 
the Literature on Ethical Climate and Culture,” in The Oxford 
Handbook of Organizational Climate and Culture, eds. B. 
Schneider and K. M. Barbera (New York, NY: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2014), 415–440.
	63.	 J. P. Mulki, J. F. Jaramillo, and W. B. Locander, “Critical Role 
of Leadership on Ethical Climate and Salesperson Behaviors,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 86, no. 2 (2009): 125–141; M. 
Schminke, M. L. Ambrose, and D. O. Neubaum, “The Effect 
of Leader Moral Development on Ethical Climate and Em-
ployee Attitudes,” Organizational Behavior and Human Deci-
sion Processes 97, no. 2 (2005): 135–151; and M. E. Brown, 
L. K. Treviño, and D. A. Harrison, “Ethical Leadership: A 
Social Learning Perspective for Construct Development and 
Testing,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses 97, no. 2 (2005): 117–134.
	64.	 D. M. Mayer, M. Kuenzi, R. Greenbaum, M. Bardes, and S. 
Salvador, “How Low Does Ethical Leadership Flow? Test of a 
Trickle-Down Model,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 108, no. 1 (2009): 1–13; and L. J. Chris-
tensen, A. Mackey, and D. Whetten, “Taking Responsibility 
for Corporate Social Responsibility: The Role of Leaders in 
Creating, Implementing, Sustaining, or Avoiding Socially 
Responsible Firm Behaviors,” Academy of Management Per-
spectives 28, no. 2 (2014): 164–178.
	65.	 B. Sweeney, D. Arnold, and B. Pierce, “The Impact of Per-
ceived Ethical Culture of the Firm and Demographic Vari-
ables on Auditors’ Ethical Evaluation and Intention to Act 
Decisions,” Journal of Business Ethics 93, no. 4 (2010): 
531–551.
	66.	 M. L. Gruys, S. M. Stewart, J. Goodstein, M. N. Bing, and A. 
C. Wicks, “Values Enactment in Organizations: A Multi-Level 
Examination,” Journal of Management 34, no. 4 (2008): 
806–843.
	67.	 D. L. Nelson and C. L. Cooper eds., Positive Organizational 
Behavior (London, UK: Sage, 2007); K. S. Cameron, J. E. 
Dutton, and R. E. Quinn, eds., Positive Organizational Schol-
arship: Foundations of a New Discipline (San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler, 2003); and F. Luthans and C. M. Youssef, 
“Emerging Positive Organizational Behavior,” Journal of 
Management 33, no. 3 (2007): 321–349.
	68.	 S. Fineman, “On Being Positive: Concerns and Counter-
points,” Academy of Management Review 31, no. 2 (2006): 
270–291.
	69.	 E. Poole, “Organisational Spirituality: A Literature Review,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 84, no. 4 (2009): 577–588.
	70.	 L. W. Fry and J. W. Slocum, “Managing the Triple Bottom 
Line through Spiritual Leadership,” Organizational Dynamics 
37, no. 1 (2008): 86–96.
	71.	 See, for example, C. L. Jurkiewicz and R. A. Giacalone, “A 
Values Framework for Measuring the Impact of Workplace 
Spirituality on Organizational Performance,” Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics 49, no. 2 (2004): 129–142.
	72.	 See, for example, B. S. Pawar, “Workplace Spirituality Facili-
tation: A Comprehensive Model,” Journal of Business Ethics 
90, no. 3 (2009): 375–386; and L. Lambert, Spirituality Inc.: 
Religion in the American Workplace (New York: University 
Press, 2009).
	73.	 M. Oppenheimer, “The Rise of the Corporate Chaplain,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, August 23, 2012, 58–61.
	74.	 M. Lips-Miersma, K. L. Dean, and C. J. Fornaciari, “Theoriz-
ing the Dark Side of the Workplace Spirituality Movement,” 
Journal of Management Inquiry 18, no. 4 (2009): 288–300.
	75.	 J.-C. Garcia-Zamor, “Workplace Spirituality and Organiza-
tional Performance,” Public Administration Review 63, no. 
3 (2003): 355–363; and L. W. Fry, S. T. Hannah, M. Noel, 
and F. O. Walumbwa, “Impact of Spiritual Leadership on 
Unit Performance,” Leadership Quarterly 22, no. 2 (2011): 
259–270.
	76.	 A. Rego and M. Pina e Cunha, “Workplace Spirituality and 
Organizational Commitment: An Empirical Study,” Journal 
of Organizational Change Management 21, no. 1 (2008): 53–
75; R. W. Kolodinsky, R. A. Giacalone, and C. L. Jurkiewicz, 
“Workplace Values and Outcomes: Exploring Personal, Orga-
nizational, and Interactive Workplace Spirituality,” Journal of 
Business Ethics 81, no. 2 (2008): 465–480; and M. Gupta, V. 
Kumar, and M. Singh, “Creating Satisfied Employees through 
Workplace Spirituality: A Study of the Private Insurance Sec-
tor in Punjab, India,” Journal of Business Ethics 122, no. 1 
(2014): 79–88.
	77.	 D. J. McCarthy and S. M. Puffer, “Interpreting the Ethicality 
of Corporate Governance Decision in Russia: Utilizing Inte-
grative Social Contracts Theory to Evaluate the Relevance of 
Agency Theory Norms,” Academy of Management Review 33, 
no. 1 (2008): 11–31.

380	 Endnotes
CHAPTER 17
	 1.	 See, for instance, J. Birkinshaw, G. Hamel, and M. J. Mol, 
“Management Innovation,” Academy of Management Review 
33, no. 4 (2008): 825–845; and J. Welch and S. Welch, “What 
Change Agents Are Made Of,” BusinessWeek, October 20, 
2008, 96.
	 2.	 P. G. Audia and S. Brion, “Reluctant to Change: Self-Enhanc-
ing Responses to Diverging Performance Measures,” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 102, no. 2 
(2007): 255–269.
	 3.	 M. Fugate, A. J. Kinicki, and G. E. Prussia, “Employee Cop-
ing with Organizational Change: An Examination of Al-
ternative Theoretical Perspectives and Models,” Personnel 
Psychology 61, no. 1 (2008): 1–36.
	 4.	 R. B. L. Sijbom, O. Janssen, and N. W. Van Yperen, “How 
to Get Radical Creative Ideas into a Leader’s Mind? Lead-
er’s Achievement Goals and Subordinates’ Voice of Creative 
Ideas,” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy-
chology 24, no. 2 (2015): 279–296.
	 5.	 J. D. Ford, L. W. Ford, and A. D’Amelio, “Resistance to 
Change: The Rest of the Story,” Academy of Management Re-
view 33, no. 2 (2008): 362–377.
	 6.	 R. K. Smollan, “The Multi-Dimensional Nature of Resistance 
to Change,” Journal of Management & Organization 17, no. 6 
(2011): 828–849.
	 7.	 P. C. Fiss and E. J. Zajac, “The Symbolic Management of 
Strategic Change: Sensegiving via Framing and Decou-
pling,” Academy of Management Journal 49, no. 6 (2006): 
1173–1193.
	 8.	 A. E. Rafferty and S. L. D. Restubog, “The Impact of Change 
Process and Context on Change Reactions and Turnover 
during a Merger,” Journal of Management 36, no. 5 (2010): 
1309–1338.
	 9.	 D. M. Herold, D. B. Fedor, and S. D. Caldwell, “Beyond 
Change Management: A Multilevel Investigation of Contex-
tual and Personal Influences on Employees’ Commitment to 
Change,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 4 (2007): 
942–951; and G. B. Cunningham, “The Relationships among 
Commitment to Change, Coping with Change, and Turnover 
Intentions,” European Journal of Work and Organizational 
Psychology 15, no. 1 (2006): 29–45.
	10.	 R. Peccei, A. Giangreco, and A. Sebastiano, “The Role of 
Organizational Commitment in the Analysis of Resistance to 
Change: Co-predictor and Moderator Effects,” Personnel Re-
view 40, no. 2 (2011): 185–204.
	11.	 J. P. Kotter, “Leading Change: Why Transformational Efforts 
Fail,” Harvard Business Review, January 2007, 96–103.
	12.	 K. van Dam, S. Oreg, and B. Schyns, “Daily Work Con-
texts and Resistance to Organisational Change: The Role 
of Leader–Member Exchange, Development Climate, and 
Change Process Characteristics,” Applied Psychology: An In-
ternational Review 57, no. 2 (2008): 313–334.
	13.	 A. H. Y. Hon, M. Bloom, and J. M. Crant, “Overcoming Re-
sistance to Change and Enhancing Creative Performance,” 
Journal of Management 40, no. 3 (2014): 919–941.
	14.	 S. Oreg and N. Sverdlik, “Ambivalence toward Imposed 
Change: The Conflict between Dispositional Resis-
tance to Change and the Orientation toward the Change 
Agent,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 2 (2011): 
337–349.
	15.	 D. B. Fedor, S. Caldwell, and D. M. Herold, “The Effects 
of Organizational Changes on Employee Commitment: A 
Multilevel Investigation,” Personnel Psychology 59, no. 
1 (2006): 1–29; and R. D. Foster, “Resistance, Justice, and 
Commitment to Change,” Human Resource Development 
Quarterly 21, no. 1 (2010): 3–39.
	16.	 S. Oreg, “Personality, Context, and Resistance to Organiza-
tional Change,” European Journal of Work and Organiza-
tional Psychology 15, no. 1 (2006): 73–101.
	17.	 S. M. Elias, “Employee Commitment in Times of Change: 
Assessing the Importance of Attitudes toward Organizational 
Change,” Journal of Management 35, no. 1 (2009): 37–55.
	18.	 J. W. B. Lang and P. D. Bliese, “General Mental Ability 
and Two Types of Adaptation to Unforeseen Change: Ap-
plying Discontinuous Growth Models to the Task-Change 
Paradigm,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 2 (2009): 
411–428.
	19.	 See, for instance, A. Karaevli, “Performance Consequences 
for New CEO ‘Outsiderness’: Moderating Effects of Pre- and 
Post-Succession Contexts,” Strategic Management Journal 
28, no. 7 (2007): 681–706.
	20.	 See, for instance, J. Manchester et al., “Facilitating Lewin’s 
Change Model with Collaborative Evaluation in Promoting 
Evidence Based Practices of Health Professionals,” Evalua-
tion and Program Planning 47 (2014): 82–90.
	21.	 P. G. Audia, E. A. Locke, and K. G. Smith, “The Paradox of 
Success: An Archival and a Laboratory Study of Strategic Per-
sistence Following Radical Environmental Change,” Academy 
of Management Journal 43, no. 5 (2000): 837–853; and P. G. 
Audia and S. Brion, “Reluctant to Change: Self-Enhancing 
Responses to Diverging Performance Measures,” Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 102, no. 2 
(2007): 255–269.
	22.	 See, for instance, J. Kim, “Use of Kotter’s Leading Change 
Model to Develop and Implement a Heart Failure Education 
Program for Certified Nursing Assistants in a Long-Term 
Care Facility,” Nursing Research 64, no. 2 (2015): E35; and J. 
Pollack and R. Pollack, “Using Kotter’s Eight Stage Process 
to Manage an Organisational Change Program: Presentation 
and Practice,” Systemic Practice and Action Research 28, no. 
1 (2015): 41–66.
	23.	 See, for example, L. S. Lüscher and M. W. Lewis, “Orga-
nizational Change and Managerial Sensemaking: Working 
through Paradox,” Academy of Management Journal 51, no. 
2 (2008): 221–240.
	24.	 For example, see R. J. Marshak and D. Grant, “Organizational 
Discourse and New Organization Development Practices,” 
British Journal of Management 19, no. 1 (2008): S7–S19.
	25.	 See, for instance, R. Lines, “Influence of Participation in Stra-
tegic Change: Resistance, Organizational Commitment and 
Change Goal Achievement,” Journal of Change Management 
4, no. 3 (2004): 193–215.
	26.	 M. J. Mol and J. Birkinshaw, “The Role of External Involve-
ment in the Creation of Management Innovations,” Organiza-
tion Studies 35, no. 9 (2014): 1287–1312; and R. Slater and A. 
Coyle, “The Governing of the Self/the Self-Governing Self: 
Multi-Rater Feedback and Practices 1940–2011,” Theory & 
Psychology 24, no. 2 (2014): 233–255.
	27.	 T. Fauth, K. Hattrub, K. Mueller, and B. Roberts, “Nonre-
sponse in Employee Attitude Surveys: A Group-Level Analy-
sis,” Journal of Business and Psychology 28, no. 1 (2013): 
1–16.
	28.	 F. J. Lambrechts, R. Bouwen, S. Grieten, J. P. Huybrechts, 
and E. H. Schein, “Learning to Help through Humble In-
quiry and Implications for Management Research, Practice, 

	
Endnotes	 381
and Education: An Interview with Edgar H. Schein,” Acad-
emy of Management Learning & Education 10, no. 1 (2011): 
131–148.
	29.	 W. W. G. Dyer, W. G. Dyer, and J. H. Dyer, Team Building: 
Proven Strategies for Improving Team Performance (Hobo-
ken, NJ: Jossey-Bass, 2007).
	30.	 U. Wagner, L. Tropp, G. Finchilescu, and C. Tredoux, eds., 
Improving Intergroup Relations (New York, NY: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2008).
	31.	 See, for example, B. Verleysen, F. Lambrechts, and F. Van 
Acker, “Building Psychological Capital with Appreciative In-
quiry: Investigating the Mediating Role of Basic Psychologi-
cal Need Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 
51, no. 1 (2015): 10–35.
	32.	 P. Jarzabkowski, J. Lê, and A. Van de Ven, “Responding to 
Competing Strategic Demands: How Organizing, Belonging, 
and Performing Paradoxes Coevolve,” Strategic Organization 
11, no. 3 (2013): 245–280; and W. K. Smith, “Dynamic Deci-
sion Making: A Model of Senior Leaders Managing Strate-
gic Paradoxes,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 6 
(2014): 1592–1623.
	33.	 J. Jay, “Navigating Paradox as a Mechanism of Change and 
Innovation in Hybrid Organizations,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 56, no. 1 (2013): 137–159.
	34.	 Y. Zhang, D. A. Waldman, Y. Han, and X. Li, “Paradoxical 
Leader Behaviors in People Management: Antecedents and 
Consequences,” Academy of Management Journal 58, no. 2 
(2015): 538–566.
	35.	 See, for instance, G. P. Pisano, “You Need an Innovation 
Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, June 2015, 44–54.
	36.	 H. W. Volberda, F. A. J. Van den Bosch, and C. V. Heij, “Man-
agement Innovation: Management as Fertile Ground for In-
novation,” European Management Review 10, no. 1 (2013): 
1–15.
	37.	 F. Damanpour, “Organizational Innovation: A Meta-Analysis 
of Effects of Determinants and Moderators,” Academy of 
Management Journal 34, no. 3 (1991): 555–590; and G. Wes-
terman, F. W. McFarlan, and M. Iansiti, “Organization Design 
and Effectiveness over the Innovation Life Cycle,” Organiza-
tion Science 17, no. 2 (2006): 230–238.
	38.	 See P. Schepers and P. T. Van den Berg, “Social Factors of 
Work-Environment Creativity,” Journal of Business and Psy-
chology 21, no. 3 (2007): 407–428.
	39.	 S. Chang, L. Jia, R. Takeuchi, and Y. Cai, “Do High-Com-
mitment Work Systems Affect Creativity? A Multilevel Com-
binational Approach to Employee Creativity,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 99, no. 4 (2014): 665–680.
	40.	 M. E. Mullins, S. W. J. Kozlowski, N. Schmitt, and A. W. 
Howell, “The Role of the Idea Champion in Innovation: The 
Case of the Internet in the Mid-1990s,” Computers in Human 
Behavior 24, no. 2 (2008): 451–467.
	41.	 C. Y. Murnieks, E. Mosakowski, and M. S. Cardon, “Path-
ways of Passion: Identity Centrality, Passion, and Behavior 
among Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Management 40, no. 6 
(2014): 1583–1606.
	42.	 S. C. Parker, “Intrapreneurship or Entrepreneurship?” Journal 
of Business Venturing 26, no. 1 (2011): 19–34.
	43.	 M. Č, M. Jaklič, and M. Škerlavaj, “Decoupling Management 
and Technological Innovations: Resolving the Individualism-
Collectivism Controversy,” Journal of International Manage-
ment 19, no. 2 (2013): 103–117.
	44.	 See, for example, T. B. Lawrence, M. K. Mauws, B. Dyck, 
and R. F. Kleysen, “The Politics of Organizational Learning: 
Integrating Power into the 4I Framework,” Academy of Man-
agement Review 30, no. 1 (2005): 180–191.
	45.	 J. Kim, T. Egan, and H. Tolson, “Examining the Dimensions 
of the Learning Organization Questionnaire: A Review and 
Critique of Research Utilizing the DLOQ,” Human Resource 
Development Review 14, no. 1 (2015): 91–112.
	46.	 L. Berghman, P. Matthyssens, S. Streukens, and K. Vanden-
bempt, “Deliberate Learning Mechanisms for Stimulating 
Strategic Innovation Capacity,” Long Range Planning 46, nos. 
1–2 (2013): 39–71.
	47.	 M.-G. Seo, M. S. Taylor, N. S. Hill, X. Zhang, P. E. Tesluk, 
and N. M. Lorinkova, “The Role of Affect and Leadership 
during Organizational Change,” Personnel Psychology 65, no. 
1 (2012): 121–165.
	48.	 M. Fugate, G. E. Prussia, and A. J. Kinicki, “Managing 
Employee Withdrawal during Organizational Change: The 
Role of Threat Appraisal,” Journal of Management 38, no. 3 
(2012): 890–914.
	49.	 J. Shin, M. S. Taylor, and M.-G. Seo, “Resources for Change: 
The Relationships of Organizational Inducements and Psy-
chological Resilience to Employees’ Attitudes and Behaviors 
toward Organizational Change,” Academy of Management 
Journal 55, no. 3 (2012): 727–748.
	50.	 B. Mirza, “Workplace Stress Hits Three-Year High,” HR Mag-
azine, April 2012, 15.
	51.	 “What Is Stress?” from The American Institute of Stress 
website, accessed February 24, 2016, http://www.stress.org/
what-is-stress.
	52.	 Ibid.
	53.	 N. P. Podsakoff, J. A. LePine, and M. A. LePine, “Differential 
Challenge-Hindrance Stressor Relationships with Job Atti-
tudes, Turnover Intentions, Turnover, and Withdrawal Behav-
ior: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 
2 (2007): 438–54; and J. A. LePine, M. A. LePine, and C. L. 
Jackson, “Challenge and Hindrance Stress: Relationships with 
Exhaustion, Motivation to Learn, and Learning Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 5 (2004): 883–891.
	54.	 J. C. Wallace, B. D. Edwards, T. Arnold, M. L. Frazier, and D. 
M. Finch, “Work Stressors, Role-Based Performance, and the 
Moderating Influence of Organizational Support,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 254–262.
	55.	 IBID
	56.	 A. B. Bakker, E. Demerouti, and A. I. Sanz-Vergel, “Burnout 
and Work Engagement: The JD–R Approach,” Annual Review 
of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 1 
(2014): 389–411.
	57.	 “Stress in America: Paying with Our Health,” American Psy-
chological Association press release, February 4, 2015, from 
the APA website, https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/
stress/2014/stress-report.pdf.
	58.	 J. de Jonge and C. Dormann, “Stressors, Resources, and 
Strain at Work: A Longitudinal Test of the Triple-Match 
Principle,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 5 (2006): 
1359–1374.
	59.	 D. C. Ganster and C. C. Rosen, “Work Stress and Employee 
Health: A Multidisciplinary Review,” Journal of Management 
39, no. 5 (2013): 1085–1122.
	60.	 P. Sterling, “Allostasis: A Model of Predictive Regulation,” 
Physiology & Behavior 106, no. 1 (2012): 5–15.
	61.	 S. Gilboa, A. Shirom, Y. Fried, and C. L. Cooper, “A Meta-
Analysis of Work Demand Stressors and Job Performance: 
Examining Main and Moderating Effects,” Personnel Psy-
chology 61, no. 2 (2008): 227–271.

382	 Endnotes
	62.	 A. E. Rafferty and M. A. Griffin, “Perceptions of Organiza-
tional Change: A Stress and Coping Perspective,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 71, no. 5 (2007): 1154–1162.
	63.	 R. Ilies, N. Dimotakis, and I. E. De Pater, “Psychological and 
Physiological Reactions to High Workloads: Implications for 
Well-Being,” Personnel Psychology 63, no. 2 (2010): 407–
436; and A. B. Bakker, E. Demerouti, and A. I. Sanz-Vergel, 
“Burnout and Work Engagement: The JD–R Approach,” An-
nual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza-
tional Behavior 1 (2014): 389–411.
	64.	 T. L. Smith-Jackson and K. W. Klein, “Open-Plan Offices: 
Task Performance and Mental Workload,” Journal of Environ-
mental Psychology 29, no. 2 (2009): 279–289.
	65.	 C. Fritz and S. Sonnentag, “Antecedents of Day-Level Pro-
active Behavior: A Look at Job Stressors and Positive Af-
fect during the Workday,” Journal of Management 35, no. 1 
(2009): 94–111.
	66.	 S. Lim, L. M. Cortina, and V. J. Magley, “Personal and Work-
group Incivility: Impact on Work and Health Outcomes,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 1 (2008): 95–107; N. T. 
Buchanan and L. F. Fitzgerald, “Effects of Racial and Sexual 
Harassment on Work and the Psychological Well-Being of 
African American Women,” Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology 13, no. 2 (2008): 137–151; C. R. Willness, P. 
Steel, and K. Lee, “A Meta-Analysis of the Antecedents and 
Consequences of Workplace Sexual Harassment,” Person-
nel Psychology 60, no. 1 (2007): 127–162; and B. Moreno-
Jiménez, A. Rodríguez-Muñoz, J. C. Pastor, A. I. Sanz-Vergel, 
and E. Garrosa, “The Moderating Effects of Psychological 
Detachment and Thoughts of Revenge in Workplace Bully-
ing,” Personality and Individual Differences 46, no. 3 (2009): 
359–364.
	67.	 L. Yang, J. Bauer, R. E. Johnson, M. W. Groer, and K. Salo-
mon, “Physiological Mechanisms That Underlie the Effects 
of Interactional Unfairness on Deviant Behavior: The Role of 
Cortisol Activity,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 2 
(2014): 310–321.
	68.	 M. T. Schmitt, N. R. Branscombe, T. Postmes, and A. Garcia, 
“The Consequences of Perceived Discrimination for Psycho-
logical Well-Being: A Meta-Analytic Review,” Psychological 
Bulletin 140, no. 4 (2014): 921–948.
	69.	 “Stress in America: Paying with Our Health,” American Psy-
chological Association, February 4, 2015, http://www.apa 
.org/news/press/releases/stress/2014/stress-report.pdf.
	70.	 Q. Hu, W. B. Schaufeli, and T. W. Taris, “The Job Demands–
Resources Model: An Analysis of Additive and Joint Effects 
of Demands and Resources,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 
79, no. 1 (2011): 181–190.
	71.	 E. R. Crawford, J. A. LePine, and B. L. Rich, “Linking Job 
Demands and Resources to Employee Engagement and Burn-
out: A Theoretical Extension and Meta-Analytic Test,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 834–848.
	72.	 See J. B. Halbesleben, “Sources of Social Support and Burn-
out: A Meta-Analytic Test of the Conservation of Resources 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, no. 5 (2006): 
1134–1145; N. Bolger and D. Amarel, “Effects of Social 
Support Visibility on Adjustment to Stress: Experimental 
Evidence,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 
458–475; and C. Fernet, M. Gagné, and S. Austin, “When 
Does Quality of Relationships with Coworkers Predict 
Burnout over Time? The Moderating Role of Work Motiva-
tion,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31, no. 8 (2010): 
1163–1180.
	73.	 J. B. Avey, F. Luthans, and S. M. Jensen, “Psychological Capi-
tal: A Positive Resource for Combating Employee Stress and 
Turnover,” Human Resource Management 48, no. 5 (2009): 
677–693.
	74.	 See, for example, C. M. Middeldorp, D. C. Cath, A. L. Beem, 
G. Willemsen, and D. I. Boomsma, “Life Events, Anxious De-
pression, and Personality: A Prospective and Genetic Study,” 
Psychological Medicine 38, no. 11 (2008): 1557–1565; A. A. 
Uliaszek et al. “The Role of Neuroticism and Extraversion 
in the Stress-Anxiety and Stress-Depression Relationships,” 
Anxiety, Stress, and Coping 23, no. 4 (2010): 363–381.
	75.	 J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller, T. A. Judge, and B. A. Scott, “The 
Role of Core Self-Evaluations in the Coping Process,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 177–195.
	76.	 J. Chen, C. Silverthorne, and J. Hung, “Organization Com-
munication, Job Stress, Organizational Commitment, and 
Job Performance of Accounting Professionals in Taiwan and 
America,” Leadership & Organization Development Journal 
27, no. 4 (2006): 242–249; and C. Liu, P. E. Spector, and L. 
Shi, “Cross-National Job Stress: A Quantitative and Quali-
tative Study,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 28, no. 2 
(2007): 209–239.
	77.	 P. E. Spector et al., “Cross National Differences in Relation-
ships of Work Demands, Job Satisfaction, and Turnover Inten-
tion with Work-Family Conflict,” Personnel Psychology 60, 
no. 4 (2007): 805–835.
	78.	 H. M. Addae and X. Wang, “Stress at Work: Linear and Cur-
vilinear Effects of Psychological-, Job-, and Organization-Re-
lated Factors: An Exploratory Study of Trinidad and Tobago,” 
International Journal of Stress Management 13, no. 4 (2006): 
476–493.
	79.	 M. Kivimäki, J. Head, J. E. Ferrie, E. Brunner, M. G. Mar-
mot, J. Vahtera, and M. J. Shipley, “Why Is Evidence on Job 
Strain and Coronary Heart Disease Mixed? An Illustration of 
Measurement Challenges in the Whitehall II Study,” Psycho-
somatic Medicine 68, no. 3 (2006): 398–401.
	80.	 M. Borritz et al., “Impact on Burnout and Psychosocial Work 
Characteristics on Future Long-Term Sickness Absence, Pro-
spective Results of the Danish PUMA Study among Human 
Service Workers,” Journal of Occupational and Environmen-
tal Medicine 52, no. 10 (2010): 964–970.
	81.	 R. Ilies, N. Dimotakis, and I. E. DePater, “Psychological and 
Physiological Reactions to High Workloads: Implications for 
Well-Being,” Personnel Psychology 63, no. 2 (2010): 407–463.
	82.	 D. Örtqvist and J. Wincent, “Prominent Consequences of Role 
Stress: A Meta-Analytic Review,” International Journal of 
Stress Management 13, no. 4 (2006): 399–422.
	83.	 J. J. Hakanen, A. B. Bakker, and M. Jokisaari, “A 35-Year 
Follow-Up Study on Burnout among Finnish Employees,” 
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 16 no. 3 (2011): 
345–360; E. R. Crawford, J. A. LePine, and B. L. Rich, “Link-
ing Job Demands and Resources to Employee Engagement 
and Burnout: A Theoretical Extension and Meta-Analytic 
Test,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010): 834–
848; and G. A. Chung-Yan, “The Nonlinear Effects of Job 
Complexity and Autonomy on Job Satisfaction, Turnover, and 
Psychological Well-Being,” Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology 15, no. 3 (2010): 237–251.
	84.	 L. L. Meier, N. K. Semmer, A. Elfering, and N. Jacobshagen, 
“The Double Meaning of Control: Three-Way Interactions 
between Internal Resources, Job Control, and Stressors at 
Work,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 13, no. 3 
(2008): 244–258.

	
Endnotes	 383
	85.	 E. M. de Croon, J. K. Sluiter, R. W. B. Blonk, J. P. J. Broersen, 
and M. H. W. Frings-Dresen, “Stressful Work, Psychological 
Job Strain, and Turnover: A 2-Year Prospective Cohort Study 
of Truck Drivers,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 
3 (2004): 442–454; R. Cropanzano, D. E. Rupp, and Z. S. 
Byrne, “The Relationship of Emotional Exhaustion to Work 
Attitudes, Job Performance, and Organizational Citizenship 
Behaviors,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 1 (2003): 
160–169; and S. Diestel and K. Schmidt, “Costs of Simultane-
ous Coping with Emotional Dissonance and Self-Control De-
mands at Work: Results from Two German Samples,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 96, no. 3 (2011): 643–653.
	86.	 Y.-C. Wu, “Job Stress and Job Performance among Employees 
on the Taiwanese Finance Sector: The Role of Emotional Intelli-
gence,” Social Behavior and Personality 39, no. 1 (2011): 21–31. 
This study was replicated with similar results in U. Yozgat, S. 
Yurtkoru, and E. Bilginoglu, “Job Stress and Job Performance 
among Employees in Public Sector in Istanbul: Examining the 
Moderating Role of Emotional Intelligence,” in Procedia—Social 
and Behavioral Sciences vol. 75, ed. E. Eren (2013), 518–524.
	87.	 K. M. Richardson and H. R. Rothstein, “Effects of Occupa-
tional Stress Management Intervention Programs: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 13, 
no. 1 (2008): 69–93.
	88.	 R. W. Renn, D. G. Allen, and T. M. Huning, “Empirical Ex-
amination of Individual-Level Personality-Based Theory of 
Self-Management Failure,” Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior 32, no. 1 (2011): 25–43; and P. Gröpel and P. Steel, “A 
Mega-Trial Investigation of Goal Setting, Interest Enhance-
ment, and Energy on Procrastination,” Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences 45, no. 5 (2008): 406–411.
	89.	 S. Klaperski, B. von Dawans, M. Heinrichs, and R. Fuchs, 
“Does the Level of Physical Exercise Affect Physiological and 
Psychological Responses to Psychosocial Stress in Women?” 
Psychology of Sport and Exercise 14, no. 2 (2013): 266–274.
	90.	 K. M. Richardson and H. R. Rothstein, “Effects of Occupa-
tional Stress Management Intervention Programs: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 13, 
no. 1 (2008): 69–93.
	91.	 V. C. Hahn, C. Binnewies, S. Sonnentag, and E. J. Mojza, 
“Learning How to Recover from Job Stress: Effects of a Re-
covery Training Program on Recovery, Recovery-Related 
Self-Efficacy, and Well-Being,” Journal of Occupational 
Health Psychology 16, no. 2 (2011): 202–216; and C. Bin-
newies, S. Sonnentag, and E. J. Mojza, “Recovery during 
the Weekend and Fluctuations in Weekly Job Performance: 
A Week-Level Study Examining Intra-Individual Relation-
ships,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychol-
ogy 83, no. 2 (2010): 419–41.
	92.	 E. R. Greenglass and L. Fiksenbaum, “Proactive Coping, 
Positive Affect, and Well-Being: Testing for Mediation 
Using Path Analysis,” European Psychologist 14, no. 1 
(2009): 29–39; and P. Miquelon and R. J. Vallerand, “Goal 
Motives, Well-Being, and Physical Health: Happiness 
and Self-Realization as Psychological Resources under 
Challenge,” Motivation and Emotion 30, no. 4 (2006): 
259–272.
	93.	 M. M. Butts, R. J. Vandenberg, D. M. DeJoy, B. S. Schaffer, 
and M. G. Wilson, “Individual Reactions to High Involvement 
Work Processes: Investigating the Role of Empowerment and 
Perceived Organizational Support,” Journal of Occupational 
Health Psychology 14, no. 2 (2009): 122–136.
	94.	 “100 Best Companies to Work For,” Fortune, August 17, 
2011, http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune.
	95.	 L. Blue, “Making Good Health Easy,” Time, February 12, 
2009,  http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/ 
0,9171,1879199,00.html; and M. Andrews, “America’s Best 
Health Plans,” US News and World Report, November 5, 2007, 
54–60.
	96.	 K. M. Richardson and H. R. Rothstein, “Effects of Oc-
cupational Stress Management Intervention Programs: A 
Meta-Analysis.” 
	97.	 L. L. Berry, A. M. Mirabito, and W. B. Baun, “What’s the 
Hard Return on Employee Wellness Programs?” Harvard 
Business Review, December 2010, https://hbr.org/2010/12/
whats-the-hard-return-on-employee-wellness-programs.
	98.	 S. Mattke, et al. Workplace Wellness Programs Study (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND, 2013).

GLOSSARY
ability  An individual’s capacity to perform the various tasks in 
a job.
accommodating  The willingness of one party in a conflict to 
place the opponent’s interests above his or her own.
action research  A change process based on the systematic col-
lection of data and the selection of a change action based on what 
the analyzed data indicate.
affect  A broad range of feelings that people experience.
affect intensity  Individual differences in the strength with 
which individuals experience their emotions.
affective component  The emotional or feeling segment of an 
attitude.
affective events theory (AET)  A model that suggests that 
workplace events cause emotional reactions on the part of employ-
ees, which then influence workplace attitudes and behaviors.
agreeableness  A personality dimension that describes someone 
who is good natured, cooperative, and trusting.
allostasis  Working to change behavior and attitudes to find 
stability.
anchoring bias  A tendency to fixate on initial information, 
from which one then fails to adequately adjust for subsequent 
information.
anthropology  The study of societies to learn about human be-
ings and their activities.
appreciative inquiry (AI)  An approach that seeks to identify the 
unique qualities and special strengths of an organization, which 
can then be built on to improve performance.
arbitrator  A third party to a negotiation who has the authority to 
dictate an agreement.
attitudes  Evaluative statements or judgments concerning ob-
jects, people, or events.
attribution theory  An attempt to determine whether an indi-
vidual’s behavior is internally or externally caused.
attribution theory of leadership  A leadership theory that says 
that leadership is merely an attribution that people make about 
other individuals.
authority  The rights inherent in a managerial position to give 
orders and to expect the orders to be obeyed.
automatic processing  A relatively superficial consideration of 
evidence and information making use of heuristics.
autonomy  The degree to which a job provides substantial free-
dom and discretion to the individual in scheduling the work and in 
determining the procedures to be used in carrying it out.
availability bias  The tendency for people to base their judg-
ments on information that is readily available to them.
avoiding  The desire to withdraw from or suppress a conflict.
BATNA  The best alternative to a negotiated agreement; the least 
the individual should accept.
behavioral component  An intention to behave in a certain way 
toward someone or something.
behavioral ethics  Analyzing how people actually behave when 
confronted with ethical dilemmas.
384
behavioral theories of leadership  Theories proposing that 
specific behaviors differentiate leaders from nonleaders.
behaviorism  A theory that behavior follows stimuli in a rela-
tively unthinking manner.
big five model  A personality assessment model that taps five 
basic dimensions.
biographical characteristics  Personal characteristics—such 
as age, gender, race, and length of tenure—that are objective and 
easily obtained from personnel records. These characteristics are 
representative of surface-level diversity.
bonus  A pay plan that rewards employees for recent perfor-
mance rather than historical performance.
boundary spanning  When individuals form relationships out-
side their formally assigned groups.
bounded rationality  A process of making decisions by con-
structing simplified models that extract the essential features from 
problems without capturing all their complexity.
brainstorming  An idea-generation process that specifically en-
courages any and all alternatives while withholding any criticism 
of those alternatives.
bureaucracy  An organization structure with highly routine 
operating tasks achieved through specialization, very formalized 
rules and regulations, tasks that are grouped into functional depart-
ments, centralized authority, narrow spans of control, and decision 
making that follows the chain of command.
centralization  The degree to which decision making is concen-
trated at a single point in an organization.
chain of command  The unbroken line of authority that extends 
from the top of the organization to the lowest echelon and clarifies 
who reports to whom.
challenge stressors  Stressors associated with workload, pres-
sure to complete tasks, and time urgency.
change  Making things different.
change agents  People who act as catalysts and assume the re-
sponsibility for managing change activities.
channel richness  The amount of information that can be trans-
mitted during a communication episode.
charismatic leadership theory  A leadership theory that states 
that followers make attributions of heroic or extraordinary leader-
ship abilities when they observe certain behaviors.
circular structure  An organization structure in which executives 
are at the center, spreading their vision outward in rings grouped 
by function (managers, then specialists, then workers).
coercive power  A power base that is dependent on fear of the 
negative results from failing to comply.
cognitive  component  The opinion or belief segment of an 
attitude.
cognitive  dissonance  Any incompatibility between two or 
more attitudes or between behavior and attitudes.
cognitive evaluation theory  A version of self-determination 
theory in which allocating extrinsic rewards for behavior that had 
been previously intrinsically rewarding tends to decrease the over-
all level of motivation if the rewards are seen as controlling.

	
Glossary	 385
cohesiveness  The degree to which group members are attracted 
to each other and are motivated to stay in the group.
collaborating  A situation in which the parties to a conflict each 
desire to satisfy fully the concerns of all parties.
collectivism  A national culture attribute that describes a tight so-
cial framework in which people expect others in groups of which 
they are a part to look after them and protect them. Collectivistic 
countries/cultures in which people see themselves as interdepen-
dent and seek community and group goals. Collectivistic values 
are found in Asia, Africa, and South America, for example.
communication  The transfer and the understanding of meaning.
communication  apprehension  Undue tension and anxiety 
about oral communication, written communication, or both.
communication process  The steps between a source and a re-
ceiver that result in the transfer and understanding of meaning.
competing  A desire to satisfy one’s interests, regardless of the 
impact on the other party to the conflict.
compromising  A situation in which each party to a conflict is 
willing to give up something.
conciliator  A trusted third party who provides an informal com-
munication link between the negotiator and the opponent.
confirmation bias  The tendency to seek out information that 
reaffirms past choices and to discount information that contradicts 
past judgments.
conflict  A process that begins when one party perceives that an-
other party has negatively affected, or is about to negatively affect, 
something that the first party cares about.
conflict management  The use of resolution and stimulation 
techniques to achieve the desired level of conflict.
conflict process  A process that has five stages: potential opposi-
tion or incompatibility, cognition and personalization, intentions, 
behavior, and outcomes.
conformity  The adjustment of one’s behavior to align with the 
norms of the group.
conscientiousness  A personality dimension that describes 
someone who is responsible, dependable, persistent, and organized.
consideration  The extent to which a leader is likely to have job 
relationships characterized by mutual trust, respect for subordi-
nates’ ideas, and regard for their feelings.
contingency  variables  Situational factors or variables that 
moderate the relationship between two or more variables.
contrast effect  Evaluation of a person’s characteristics that is 
affected by comparisons with other people recently encountered 
who rank higher or lower on the same characteristics.
controlled processing  A detailed consideration of evidence and 
information relying on facts, figures, and logic.
core self-evaluation (CSE)  Believing in one’s inner worth and 
basic competence.
core values  The primary or dominant values that are accepted 
throughout the organization.
corporate social responsibility (CSR)  An organization’s self-
regulated actions to benefit society or the environment beyond 
what is required by law.
cost-minimization strategy  A strategy that emphasizes tight 
cost controls, avoidance of unnecessary innovation or marketing 
expenses, and price cutting.
counterproductive 
work 
behavior 
(CWB)  Intentional 
employee behavior that is contrary to the interests of the 
organization.
creativity  The ability to produce novel and useful ideas.
cross-functional teams  Employees from about the same hierar-
chical level, but from different work areas, who come together to 
accomplish a task.
dark triad  A constellation of negative personality traits consist-
ing of Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy.
decentralized decision making  The degree to which decision 
making is pushed down to the managers closest to the action or to 
workgroups.
decisions  Choices made from among two or more alternatives.
deep acting  Trying to modify one’s true inner feelings based 
on display rules.
deep-level diversity  Differences in values, personality, and 
work preferences that become progressively more important for 
determining similarity as people get to know one another better.
defensive behaviors  Reactive and protective behaviors to avoid 
action, blame, or change.
demands  Responsibilities, pressures, obligations, and even un-
certainties that individuals face in the workplace.
departmentalization  The basis by which jobs in an organiza-
tion are grouped together.
dependence  B’s relationship to A when A possesses something 
that B requires.
deviant workplace behavior  Voluntary behavior that violates 
significant organizational norms and, in so doing, threatens the 
well-being of the organization or its members. Also called antiso-
cial behavior or workplace incivility.
discrimination  Noting of a difference between things; often we 
refer to unfair discrimination, which means making judgments 
about individuals based on stereotypes regarding their demo-
graphic group.
displayed emotions  Emotions that are organizationally re-
quired and considered appropriate in a given job.
distributive bargaining  Negotiation that seeks to divide up a 
fixed amount of resources; a win–lose situation.
distributive justice  Perceived fairness of the amount and alloca-
tion of rewards among individuals.
diversity  The extent to which members of a group are similar to, 
or different from, one another.
diversity management  The process and programs by which 
managers make everyone more aware of and sensitive to the needs 
and differences of others.
divisional structure  An organization structure that groups em-
ployees into units by product, service, customer, or geographical 
market area.
dominant culture  A culture that expresses the core values that 
are shared by a majority of the organization’s members.
driving forces  Forces that direct behavior away from the status 
quo (Lewin).
dyadic conflict  Conflict that occurs between two people.
dysfunctional conflict  Conflict that hinders group performance.
effectiveness  The degree to which an organization meets the 
needs of its clientele or customers.

386	 Glossary
efficiency  The degree to which an organization can achieve its 
ends at a low cost.
emotion regulation  The process of identifying and modifying 
felt emotions.
emotional contagion  The process by which people’s emotions 
are caused by the emotions of others.
emotional dissonance  Inconsistencies between the emotions 
people feel and the emotions they project.
emotional intelligence (EI)  The ability to detect and to manage 
emotional cues and information.
emotional labor  A situation in which an employee expresses 
organizationally desired emotions during interpersonal transac-
tions at work.
emotional stability  A personality dimension that characterizes 
someone as calm, self-confident, and secure (positive) versus ner-
vous, depressed, and insecure (negative).
emotions  Intense feelings that are directed at someone or 
something.
employee engagement  An individual’s involvement with, sat-
isfaction with, and enthusiasm for the work he or she does.
employee involvement and participation (EIP)  A participa-
tive process that uses the input of employees to increase employee 
commitment to organizational success.
employee recognition program  A plan to encourage specific 
employee behaviors by formally appreciating specific employee 
contributions.
employee stock ownership plan (ESOP)  A company-estab-
lished benefits plan in which employees acquire stock, often at 
below-market prices, as part of their benefits.
encounter stage  The stage in the socialization process in 
which a new employee sees what the organization is really like 
and confronts the possibility that expectations and reality may 
diverge.
environment  Forces outside an organization that potentially af-
fect the organization’s structure.
equity theory  A theory that individuals compare their job in-
puts and outcomes with those of others and then respond to elimi-
nate any inequities.
escalation of commitment  An increased commitment to a pre-
vious decision in spite of negative information.
ethical dilemmas and ethical choices  Situations in which indi-
viduals are required to define right and wrong conduct.
ethical work climate (EWC)  The shared concept of right and 
wrong behavior in the workplace that reflects the true values of 
the organization and shapes the ethical decision making of its 
members.
evidence-based management (EBM)  The basing of manage-
rial decisions on the best available scientific evidence.
exit  Dissatisfaction expressed through behavior directed toward 
leaving the organization.
expectancy theory  A theory that the strength of a tendency to 
act in a certain way depends on the strength of an expectation that 
the act will be followed by a given outcome and on the attractive-
ness of that outcome to the individual.
expert power  Influence based on special skills or knowledge.
extraversion  A personality dimension describing someone who 
is sociable, gregarious, and assertive.
faultlines  The perceived divisions that split groups into two or 
more subgroups based on individual differences such as sex, race, 
age, work experience, and education.
feedback  The degree to which carrying out the work activities 
required by a job results in the individual obtaining direct and clear 
information about the effectiveness of his or her performance.
felt conflict  Emotional involvement in a conflict that creates 
anxiety, tenseness, frustration, or hostility.
felt emotions  An individual’s actual emotions.
femininity  A national culture attribute that indicates little dif-
ferentiation between male and female roles; a high rating indicates 
that women are treated as the equals of men in all aspects of the 
society.
Fiedler contingency model  The theory that effective groups 
depend on a proper match between a leader’s style of interacting 
with subordinates and the degree to which the situation gives con-
trol and influence to the leader.
filtering  A sender’s manipulation of information so that it will 
be seen more favorably by the receiver.
fixed pie  The belief that there is only a set amount of goods or 
services to be divvied up between the parties.
flexible benefits  A benefits plan that allows each employee to 
put together a benefits package individually tailored to his or her 
own needs and situation.
flextime  Flexible work hours.
formal channels  Communication channels established by an 
organization to transmit messages related to the professional ac-
tivities of members.
formal group  A designated workgroup defined by an organiza-
tion’s structure.
formalization  The degree to which jobs within an organization 
are standardized.
full range of leadership model  A model that depicts seven 
management styles on a continuum: laissez-faire, management by 
exception, contingent reward leadership, individualized consider-
ation, intellectual stimulation, inspirational motivation, and ideal-
ized influence.
functional conflict  Conflict that supports the goals of the group 
and improves its performance.
functional structure  An organization structure that groups em-
ployees by their similar specialties, roles, or tasks.
fundamental attribution error  The tendency to underestimate 
the influence of external factors and overestimate the influence 
of internal factors when making judgments about the behavior of 
others.
general mental ability (GMA)  An overall factor of intelligence, 
as suggested by the positive correlations among specific intellec-
tual ability dimensions.
goal-setting theory  A theory that specific and difficult goals, 
with feedback, lead to higher performance.
grapevine  An organization’s informal communication network.
group  Two or more individuals, interacting and interdependent, 
who have come together to achieve particular objectives.
group cohesion  The extent to which members of a group sup-
port and validate one another while at work.
group functioning  The quantity and quality of a group’s work 
output.

	
Glossary	 387
groupshift  A change between a group’s decision and an individ-
ual decision that a member within the group would make; the shift 
can be toward either conservatism or greater risk but it generally 
is toward a more extreme version of the group’s original position.
groupthink  A phenomenon in which the norm for consensus 
overrides the realistic appraisal of alternative courses of action.
halo effect  The tendency to draw a general impression about an 
individual on the basis of a single characteristic.
heredity  Factors determined at conception; one’s biological, 
physiological, and inherent psychological makeup.
hierarchy   of  needs  Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of five needs—
physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization—in 
which, as each need is substantially satisfied, the next need becomes 
dominant.
high-context cultures  Cultures that rely heavily on nonverbal 
and subtle situational cues in communication.
hindrance stressors  Stressors that keep you from reaching your 
goals (for example, red tape, office politics, confusion over job 
responsibilities).
hindsight bias  The tendency to believe falsely, after an outcome 
of an event is actually known, that one would have accurately pre-
dicted that outcome.
idea champions  Individuals who take an innovation and ac-
tively and enthusiastically promote the idea, build support, over-
come resistance, and ensure that the idea is implemented.
idea evaluation  The process of creative behavior involving the 
evaluation of potential solutions to problems to identify the best one.
idea generation  The process of creative behavior that involves 
developing possible solutions to a problem from relevant informa-
tion and knowledge.
identification-based trust  Trust based on a mutual understand-
ing of each other’s intentions and appreciation of each other’s 
wants and desires.
illusory correlation  The tendency of people to associate two 
events when in reality there is no connection.
imitation strategy  A strategy that seeks to move into new 
products or new markets only after their viability has already been 
proven.
impression management (IM)  The process by which individu-
als attempt to control the impression others form of them.
individualism  A national culture attribute that describes the de-
gree to which people prefer to act as individuals rather than as 
members of groups. In individualistic countries/cultures, people 
see themselves as independent and desire personal goals and per-
sonal control. Individualistic values are present in North America 
and Western Europe, for example.
informal channels  Communication channels that are created 
spontaneously and that emerge as responses to individual choices.
informal group  A group that is neither formally structured nor 
organizationally determined; such a group appears in response to 
the need for social contact.
information gathering  The stage of creative behavior when 
possible solutions to a problem incubate in an individual’s 
mind.
information overload  A condition in which information inflow 
exceeds an individual’s processing capacity.
informational justice  The degree to which employees are pro-
vided truthful explanations for decisions.
ingroup favoritism  Perspective in which we see members of 
our ingroup as better than other people, and people not in our 
group as all the same.
initiating structure  The extent to which a leader is likely to de-
fine and structure his or her role and those of subordinates in the 
search for goal attainment.
innovation  A new idea applied to initiating or improving a 
product, process, or service.
innovation strategy  A strategy that emphasizes the introduc-
tion of major new products and services.
inputs  Variables like personality, group structure, and organiza-
tional culture that lead to processes.
institutionalization  A condition that occurs when an organiza-
tion takes on a life of its own, apart from any of its members, and 
acquires immortality.
institutions  Cultural factors that lead many organizations to 
have similar structures, especially those factors that might not lead 
to adaptive consequences.
instrumental values  Preferable modes of behavior or means of 
achieving one’s terminal values.
integrative bargaining  Negotiation that seeks one or more 
settlements that can create a win–win solution.
intellectual abilities  The capacity to do mental activities—
thinking, reasoning, and problem solving.
intentions  Decisions to act in a given way.
interacting groups  Typical groups in which members interact 
with each other face to face.
intergroup  conflict  Conflict between different groups or  
teams.
intergroup  development  Organizational development (OD) 
efforts to change the attitudes, stereotypes, and perceptions that 
groups have of each other.
interpersonal justice  The degree to which employees are 
treated with dignity and respect.
interrole conflict  A situation in which the expectations of an 
individual’s different, separate groups are in opposition.
intragroup conflict  Conflict that occurs within a group or team.
intuition  An instinctive feeling not necessarily supported by 
research.
intuitive decision making  An unconscious process created out 
of distilled experience.
job characteristics model (JCM)  A model that proposes any job 
can be described in terms of five core job dimensions: skill variety, 
task identity, task significance, autonomy, and feedback.
job design  The way the elements in a job are organized.
job embeddedness  The extent to which an employee’s connec-
tions to the job and community result in an increased commitment 
to the organization.
job engagement  The investment of an employee’s physical, 
cognitive, and emotional energies into job performance.
job involvement  The degree to which a person identifies with 
a job, actively participates in it, and considers performance impor-
tant to their self-worth.
job rotation  The periodic shifting of an employee from one task 
to another.
job  satisfaction  A positive feeling about one’s job resulting 
from an evaluation of its characteristics.

388	 Glossary
job sharing  An arrangement that allows two or more individuals 
to split a traditional full-time job.
leader–member exchange (LMX) theory  A theory that sup-
ports leaders’ creation of ingroups and outgroups; subordinates 
with ingroup status will likely have higher performance ratings, 
less turnover, and greater job satisfaction.
leader–member relations  The degree of confidence, trust, and 
respect subordinates have in their leader.
leader-participation model  A leadership theory that provides 
a set of rules to determine the form and amount of participative 
decision making in different situations.
leadership  The ability to influence a group toward the achieve-
ment of a vision or set of goals.
learning organization  An organization that has developed the 
continuous capacity to adapt and change.
least 
preferred 
coworker 
(LPC) 
questionnaire  An 
instrument that measures whether a person is task- or 
relationship-oriented.
legitimate power  The power a person receives as a result of his 
or her position in the formal hierarchy of an organization.
long-term orientation  A national culture attribute that empha-
sizes the future, thrift, and persistence.
low-context cultures  Cultures that rely heavily on words to 
convey meaning in communication.
loyalty  Dissatisfaction expressed by passively waiting for condi-
tions to improve.
Machiavellianism  The degree to which an individual is prag-
matic, maintains emotional distance, and believes that ends can 
justify means.
management by objectives (MBO)  A program that encom-
passes specific goals, participatively set, for an explicit time period 
and including feedback on goal progress.
masculinity  A national culture attribute that describes the ex-
tent to which the culture favors traditional masculine work roles of 
achievement, power, and control. Societal values are characterized 
by assertiveness and materialism.
material symbols  What conveys to employees who is impor-
tant, the degree of egalitarianism top management desires, and the 
kinds of behavior that are appropriate.
matrix  structure  An 
organization 
structure 
that 
creates 
dual lines of authority and combines functional and product 
departmentalization.
McClelland’s theory of needs  A theory that achievement, 
power, and affiliation are three important needs that help explain 
motivation.
mechanistic model  A structure characterized by extensive de-
partmentalization, high formalization, a limited information net-
work, and centralization.
mediator  A neutral third party who facilitates a negotiated solu-
tion by using reasoning, persuasion, and suggestions for alternatives.
mental models  Team members’ knowledge and beliefs about 
how the work gets done by the team.
mentor  A senior employee who sponsors and supports a less-
experienced employee, called a protégé.
merit-based pay plan  A pay plan based on performance ap-
praisal ratings.
metamorphosis stage  The stage in the socialization process in 
which a new employee changes and adjusts to the job, workgroup, 
and organization.
mindfulness  Objectively and deliberately evaluating the emo-
tional situation in the moment.
model  An abstraction of reality, a simplified representation of 
some real-world phenomenon.
moods  Feelings that tend to be less intense than emotions and 
that lack a contextual stimulus.
moral emotions  Emotions that have moral implications because 
of our instant judgment of the situation that evokes them.
motivating potential score (MPS)  A predictive index that sug-
gests the motivating potential in a job.
motivation  The processes that account for an individual’s in-
tensity, direction, and persistence of effort toward attaining a goal.
multiteam system  A collection of two or more interdependent 
teams that share a superordinate goal; a team of teams.
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)  A personality test that 
taps four characteristics and classifies people into 1 of 16 personal-
ity types.
narcissism  The tendency to be arrogant, have a grandiose sense 
of self-importance, require excessive admiration, and have a sense 
of entitlement.
need for achievement (nAch)  The drive to excel, to achieve in 
relationship to a set of standards, and to strive to succeed.
need for affiliation (nAff)  The desire for friendly and close in-
terpersonal relationships.
need for cognition  A personality trait of individuals depicting 
the ongoing desire to think and learn.
need for power (nPow)  The need to make others behave in a 
way in which they would not have behaved otherwise.
negative affect  A mood dimension that consists of emotions 
such as nervousness, stress, and anxiety at the high end and relax-
ation, tranquility, and poise at the low end.
neglect  Dissatisfaction expressed through allowing conditions 
to worsen.
negotiation  A process in which two or more parties exchange 
goods or services and attempt to agree on the exchange rate for 
them.
neutralizers  Attributes that make it impossible for leader behav-
ior to make any difference to follower outcomes.
nominal group technique  A group decision-making method in 
which individual members meet face to face to pool their judg-
ments in a systematic but independent fashion.
norms  Acceptable standards of behavior within a group that are 
shared by the group’s members.
openness to experience  A personality dimension that char-
acterizes someone in terms of imagination, sensitivity, and 
curiosity.
organic model  A structure that is flat, uses cross-hierarchical 
and cross-functional teams, has low formalization, possesses a 
comprehensive information network, and relies on participative 
decision making.
organizational behavior  A field of study that investigates the 
impact individuals, groups, and structure have on behavior within 
organizations, for the purpose of applying such knowledge toward 
improving an organization’s effectiveness.
organizational citizenship behavior (OCB)  Discretionary be-
havior that contributes to the psychological and social environment 
of the workplace.
organizational climate  The shared perceptions organizational 
members have about their organization and work environment.

	
Glossary	 389
organizational commitment  The degree to which an employee 
identifies with a particular organization and its goals and wishes to 
maintain membership in the organization.
organizational  culture  A system of shared meaning held 
by members that distinguishes the organization from other 
organizations.
organizational demography  The degree to which members of 
a work unit share a common demographic attribute, such as age, 
sex, race, educational level, or length of service in an organization, 
and the impact of this attribute on turnover.
organizational development (OD)  A collection of planned change 
interventions, built on humanistic–democratic values, that seeks to im-
prove organizational effectiveness and employee well-being.
organizational justice  An overall perception of what is fair 
in the workplace, composed of distributive, procedural, informa-
tional, and interpersonal justice.
organizational structure  The way in which job tasks are for-
mally divided, grouped, and coordinated.
organizational survival  The degree to which an organization is 
able to exist and grow over the long term.
outcomes  Key factors that are affected by some other variables.
outgroup  The inverse of an ingroup; an outgoup can mean any-
one outside the group, but more usually an identified other group.
paradox theory  The theory that the key paradox in manage-
ment is that there is no final optimal status for an organization.
participative management  A process in which subordinates 
share a significant degree of decision-making power with their im-
mediate superiors.
path–goal theory  A theory that states that it is the leader’s job 
to assist followers in attaining their goals and to provide the neces-
sary direction and/or support to ensure that their goals are compat-
ible with the overall objectives of the group or organization.
perceived conflict  Awareness by one or more parties of the ex-
istence of conditions that create opportunities for conflict to arise.
perceived organizational support (POS)  The degree to which 
employees believe an organization values their contribution and 
cares about their well-being.
perception  A process by which individuals organize and inter-
pret their sensory impressions in order to give meaning to their 
environment.
personality  The sum total of ways in which an individual reacts 
to and interacts with others.
personality traits  Enduring characteristics that describe an in-
dividual’s behavior.
personality–job fit theory  A theory that identifies six person-
ality types and proposes that the fit between personality type and 
occupational environment determines satisfaction and turnover.
person–organization fit  A theory that people are attracted to 
and selected by organizations that match their values, and leave 
when there is not compatibility.
physical abilities  The capacity to do tasks that demand stamina, 
dexterity, strength, and similar characteristics.
piece-rate pay plan  A pay plan in which workers are paid a 
fixed sum for each unit of production completed.
planned change  Change activities that are intentional and goal 
oriented.
political behavior  Activities that are not required as part of a 
person’s formal role in the organization but that influence, or at-
tempt to influence, the distribution of advantages and disadvan-
tages within the organization.
political skill  The ability to influence others in such a way as to 
enhance one’s objectives.
position power  Influence derived from one’s formal structural 
position in the organization; includes power to hire, fire, discipline, 
promote, and give salary increases.
positive affect  A mood dimension that consists of specific posi-
tive emotions such as excitement, self-assurance, and cheerfulness at 
the high end and boredom, sluggishness, and tiredness at the low end.
positive diversity climate  In an organization, an environment of 
inclusiveness and an acceptance of diversity.
positive organizational culture  A culture that emphasizes 
building on employee strengths, rewards more than it punishes, 
and encourages and growth.
positive organizational scholarship  An area of OB research 
that concerns how organizations develop human strengths, foster 
vitality and resilience, and unlock potential.
positivity offset  The tendency of most individuals to experi-
ence a mildly positive mood at zero input (when nothing in par-
ticular is going on).
power  A capacity that A has to influence the behavior of B so 
that B acts in accordance with A’s wishes.
power distance  A national culture attribute that describes the 
extent to which a society accepts that power in institutions and 
organizations is distributed unequally.
power tactics  Ways in which individuals translate power bases 
into specific actions.
prearrival stage  The period of learning in the socialization pro-
cess that occurs before a new employee joins the organization.
prevention focus  A self-regulation strategy that involves striv-
ing for goals by fulfilling duties and obligations.
proactive personality  People who identify opportunities, show 
initiative, take action, and persevere until meaningful change 
occurs.
problem  A discrepancy between the current state of affairs and 
some desired state.
problem formulation  The stage of creative behavior that in-
volves identifying a problem or opportunity requiring a solution 
that is as yet unknown.
problem-solving teams  Groups of 5 to 12 employees from 
the same department who meet for a few hours each week to 
discuss ways of improving quality, efficiency, and the work 
environment.
procedural justice  The perceived fairness of the process used to 
determine the distribution of rewards.
process conflict  Conflict over how work gets done.
process consultation (PC)  A meeting in which a consultant as-
sists a client in understanding process events with which he or she 
must deal and identifying processes that need improvement.
processes  Actions that individuals, groups, and organizations 
engage in as a result of inputs and that lead to certain outcomes.
productivity  The combination of the effectiveness and effi-
ciency of an organization.
profit-sharing plan  An organization-wide program that distrib-
utes compensation based on some established formula designed 
around a company’s profitability.
promotion focus  A self-regulation strategy that involves striv-
ing for goals through advancement and accomplishment.
psychological contract  An unwritten agreement that sets out 
what management expects from an employee and vice versa.

390	 Glossary
psychological empowerment  Employees’ belief in the degree to 
which they affect their work environment, their competence, the mean-
ingfulness of their job, and their perceived autonomy in their work.
psychology  The science that seeks to measure, explain, and 
sometimes change the behavior of humans and other animals.
psychopathy  The tendency for a lack of concern for others and 
a lack of guilt or remorse when actions cause harm.
punctuated-equilibrium model  A set of phases that temporary 
groups go through that involves transitions between inertia and 
activity.
randomness error  The tendency of individuals to believe that 
they can predict the outcome of random events.
rational  Characterized by making consistent, value-maximizing 
choices within specified constraints.
rational decision-making model  A decision-making model 
that describes how individuals should behave in order to maximize 
some outcome.
reference groups  Important groups to which individuals belong 
or hope to belong and with whose norms individuals are likely to 
conform.
referent power  Influence based on identification with a person 
who has desirable resources or personal traits.
reflexivity  A team characteristic of reflecting on and adjusting 
the master plan when necessary.
reinforcement theory  A theory that behavior is a function of 
its consequences.
relational job design  Constructing jobs so employees see the 
positive difference they can make in the lives of others directly 
through their work.
relationship   conflict  Conflict 
based 
on 
interpersonal 
relationships.
representative participation  A system in which workers par-
ticipate in organizational decision making through a small group 
of representative employees.
resources  Things within an individual’s control that can be used 
to resolve demands.
restraining forces  Forces that hinder movement from the exist-
ing equilibrium (Lewin).
reward power  Compliance achieved based on the ability to dis-
tribute rewards that others view as valuable.
risk aversion  The tendency to prefer a sure gain of a moderate 
amount over a riskier outcome, even if the riskier outcome might 
have a higher expected payoff.
rituals  Repetitive sequences of activities that express and re-
inforce the key values of the organization, which goals are most 
important, which people are important, and which are expendable.
role  A set of expected behavior patterns attributed to someone 
occupying a given position in a social unit.
role conflict  A situation in which an individual is confronted by 
divergent role expectations.
role expectations  How others believe a person should act in a 
given situation.
role perception  An individual’s view of how he or she is sup-
posed to act in a given situation.
selective perception  The tendency to selectively interpret what 
one sees on the basis of one’s interests, background, experience, 
and attitudes.
self-concordance  The degree to which people’s reasons for pur-
suing goals are consistent with their interests and core values.
self-determination theory  A theory of motivation that is con-
cerned with the beneficial effects of intrinsic motivation and the 
harmful effects of extrinsic motivation.
self-efficacy theory  An individual’s belief that he or she is ca-
pable of performing a task.
self-managed work teams  Groups of 10 to 15 people who take 
on responsibilities of their former supervisors.
self-monitoring  A personality trait that measures an individ-
ual’s ability to adjust his or her behavior to external, situational 
factors.
self-serving bias  The tendency for individuals to attribute their 
own successes to internal factors and put the blame for failures on 
external factors.
sensitivity training  Training groups that seek to change behav-
ior through unstructured group interaction.
servant leadership  A leadership style marked by going beyond 
the leader’s own self-interest and instead focusing on opportunities 
to help followers grow and develop.
sexual harassment  Any unwanted activity of a sexual nature 
that affects an individual’s employment and creates a hostile work 
environment.
short-term orientation  A national culture attribute that empha-
sizes the present and accepts change.
simple structure  An organization structure characterized by a 
low degree of departmentalization, wide spans of control, authority 
centralized in a single person, and little formalization.
situation strength theory  A theory indicating that the way person-
ality translates into behavior depends on the strength of the situation.
situational leadership theory (SLT)  A contingency theory that 
focuses on followers’ readiness.
skill variety  The degree to which a job requires a variety of dif-
ferent activities.
social identity theory  A perspective that considers when and 
why individuals consider themselves members of groups.
social loafing  The tendency for individuals to expend less effort 
when working collectively than when working individually.
social psychology  An area of psychology that blends concepts 
from psychology and sociology to focus on the influence of people 
on one another.
socialization  A process that adapts employees to the organiza-
tion’s culture.
socialized charismatic leadership  A leadership concept that 
states that leaders convey values that are other-centered versus 
self-centered and who role-model ethical conduct.
social-learning theory  The view that we can learn through both 
observation and direct experience.
sociology  The study of people in relation to their social environ-
ment or culture.
span of control  The number of subordinates a manager can ef-
ficiently and effectively direct.
status  A socially defined position or rank given to groups or 
group members by others.
status characteristics theory  A theory that states that dif-
ferences in status characteristics create status hierarchies within 
groups.

	
Glossary	 391
stereotype threat  The degree to which we internally agree with 
the generally negative stereotyped perceptions of our groups.
stereotyping  Judging someone on the basis of one’s perception 
of the group to which that person belongs.
stress  An unpleasant psychological condition that occurs in re-
sponse to environmental pressures.
strong culture  A culture in which the core values are intensely 
held and widely shared.
subcultures  Minicultures within an organization, typically de-
fined by department designations and geographical separation.
substitutes  Attributes, such as experience and training, that can 
replace the need for a leader’s support or ability to create structure.
surface acting  Hiding one’s inner feelings and forgoing emo-
tional expressions in response to display rules.
surface-level diversity  Differences in easily perceived charac-
teristics such as gender, race, ethnicity, age, or disability, that do 
not necessarily reflect the ways people think or feel but that may 
activate certain stereotypes.
survey feedback  The use of questionnaires to identify discrep-
ancies among member perceptions; discussion follows and rem-
edies are suggested.
sustainability  Organization practices that can be sustained over 
a long period of time because the tools or structures that support 
them are not damaged by the processes.
systematic study  Looking at relationships, attempting to attri-
bute causes and effects, and drawing conclusions based on scien-
tific evidence.
task conflict  Conflict over content and goals of the work.
task identity  The degree to which a job requires completion of 
a whole and identifiable piece of work.
task performance  The combination of effectiveness and effi-
ciency at doing core job tasks.
task significance  The degree to which a job has a substantial 
impact on the lives or work of other people.
task  structure  The degree to which job assignments are 
procedurized.
team building  High interaction among team members to in-
crease trust and openness.
team cohesion  A situation when team members are emotionally 
attached to one another and motivated toward the team because of 
their attachment.
team efficacy  A team’s collective belief among team members 
that they can succeed at their tasks.
team identity  A team member’s affinity for and sense of be-
longingness to his or her team.
team structure  An organization structure that replaces depart-
ments with empowered teams, and which eliminates horizontal 
boundaries and external barriers between customers and suppliers.
technology  The way in which an organization transfers its in-
puts into outputs.
telecommuting  Working from home at least two days a week 
on a computer that is linked to the employer’s office.
terminal values  Desirable end-states of existence; the goals a 
person would like to achieve during his or her lifetime.
three-stage model of creativity  The proposition that cre-
ativity involves three stages: causes (creative potential and 
creative environment), creative behavior, and creative outcomes 
(innovation).
trait activation theory (TAT)  A theory that predicts that some 
situations, events, or interventions “activate” a trait more than 
others.
trait  theories  of  leadership  Theories 
that 
consider 
per-
sonal qualities and characteristics that differentiate leaders from 
nonleaders.
transactional leaders  Leaders who guide or motivate their fol-
lowers in the direction of established goals by clarifying role and 
task requirements.
transformational leaders  Leaders who inspire followers to 
transcend their own self-interests and who are capable of having a 
profound and extraordinary effect on followers.
trust  A positive expectation that another person will not act 
opportunistically.
trust propensity  How likely an employee is to trust a leader.
two-factor theory  A theory that relates intrinsic factors to job 
satisfaction and associates extrinsic factors with dissatisfaction. 
Also called motivation-hygiene theory.
uncertainty avoidance  A national culture attribute that de-
scribes the extent to which a society feels threatened by uncertain 
and ambiguous situations and tries to avoid them.
unity of command  The idea that a subordinate should have only 
one superior to whom he or she is directly responsible.
utilitarianism  A system in which decisions are made to provide 
the greatest good for the greatest number.
value system  A hierarchy based on a ranking of an individual’s 
values in terms of their intensity.
values  Basic convictions that a specific mode of conduct or end-
state of existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite 
or converse mode of conduct or end-state of existence.
variable-pay program  A pay plan that bases a portion of an 
employee’s pay on some individual and/or organizational measure 
of performance.
virtual structure  A small, core organization that outsources ma-
jor business functions.
virtual teams  Teams that use computer technology to tie to-
gether physically dispersed members in order to achieve a com-
mon goal.
vision  A long-term strategy for attaining a goal or goals.
vision statement  A formal articulation of an organization’s 
vision or mission.
voice  Dissatisfaction expressed through active and constructive 
attempts to improve conditions.
wellness 
programs  Organizationally 
supported 
pro-
grams that focus on the employee’s total physical and mental 
condition.
whistle-blowers  Individuals who report unethical practices by 
their employer to outsiders.
withdrawal behavior  The set of actions employees take to 
separate themselves from the organization.
work specialization  The degree to which tasks in an organiza-
tion are subdivided into separate jobs.
work team  A group whose individual efforts result in perfor-
mance that is greater than the sum of the individual inputs.

392	 Glossary
workforce diversity  The concept that organizations are becom-
ing more heterogeneous in terms of gender, age, race, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation, and other characteristics.
workgroup  A group that interacts primarily to share informa-
tion and make decisions to help each group member perform 
within his or her area of responsibility.
workplace spirituality  The recognition that people have an in-
ner life that nourishes and is nourished by meaningful work that 
takes place in the context of community.
zero-sum approach  A negotiation approach that treats the 
reward “pie” as fixed, so any gain one person or group achieves 
comes at the expense of another person or group.

393
Page references with “e” indicate exhibits.
A
Ability
intellectual, 123 –125, 24e
physical, 125, 126e
of team members, 207
Absenteeism, 57
Accommodation, 262
Acquisitions, mergers, 303
Acting, 68
Action research, 321
Affect, 60–62, 61e
intensity, 65
Affective circumplex, 63e
Affective component of attitudes, 48
Affective events theory (AET), 69
Affirmative action programs (AAP), 128
Age, 117–118, 67
Agreeableness, 80, 81e, 82
Allostasis, 328
Anchoring bias, 102–103
Anthropology, 37
Appeals, 242
Appreciative inquiry (AI), 323
Arbitrator, 272
Arousal, 138
Attitudes, 44
behavior and, 49
components of, 48, 48e
definition of, 47
development and perception of, 33
toward job, 50–51, 74
summary of, 59
Attribution theory, 98, 98e
of leadership, 233–234
Authentic leadership, 229
Automatic processing, 174–175
Autonomy, 151
predictability vs., 293
Availability bias, 103
Avoidance, 84, 262
B
Bargaining
distributive, 266, 266e
integrative, 266–267
method selection, 267
negotiation and, 265–267, 265e, 266e
problem solving and, 268–269
strategies of, 265–267, 265e, 266e
Behavior, 192–195
See also Group, behavior; 
Organizational behavior (OB); 
Political behavior
attitudes and, 49
defense, 250
deviant, 74–75
ethical, 42, 108
managing, 167
norms and, 188
stress and, 332
withdrawal, 44
Behavioral component of attitudes, 48
Behavioral ethics, 42, 108
Behavioral theories of leadership, 
218–219
Behaviorism, 140
Benevolence, 311
Big data
current usage of, 35
limitations of, 35–36
new trends in, 35
Big Five Model, 80–82, 81e, 217–218
Biographical characteristics
age, 117–118
cultural identity, 123
disabilities, 123–125
race and ethnicity, 123
religion, 125
sex, 122–123
sexual orientation and gender identity, 
125–126
Bonuses, 161–162
Borderline personality, 84
Boundary spanning, 281–282
Bounded rationality, 101
Brainstorming, 197
Bureaucracy, 282–283
C
Capacity, of organization’s environment, 
290
Casmir, Fred, 179
Causation, internal and external, 97
Centralization, 280–281, 293
Chain of command, 278–279
Challenge stressors, 327
Change
See also Organizational change
agents of, 316
barriers to, 302
planned, 316
processes, 33
Channel richness, 173–174
Charismatic leadership theory
born vs. learned qualities, 224–225
dark side of, 225–226
influencing followers, 225
situational contingencies, 225
transformational leadership vs., 229
Circular structure, 287
Clarity, Element of Situational Strength, 86
Coalitions, 242
Coercion, 319
Coercive power, 238–239
Cognition, need for, 175
Cognitive component of attitudes, 48
Cognitive dissonance, 49
Cognitive evaluation theory, 134–135
Cohesiveness, 192–193
Collaboration, 261
Collectivism, 62, 91
Communication, 260
apprehension, 178–179
barriers to, 176–178
channels for, 168
choosing, 172–174
cultural barriers and, 178–179
cultural context and, 179, 179e
cultural factors and, 178–180, 179e
cultural guide for, 179–180
direction of, 168–171, 170e
downward, 169
emotions and, 177
functions of, 167–168
information security and, 174
interpersonal, 33
interunit, 324
language and, 177
lateral, 169
lying and, 178
modes of, 171–172
nonverbal, 172
oral, 171–172
organizational, 334
persuasive, 174–176
process of, 168, 168e
silence and, 177
summary of, 180–181
tailoring messages, 175–176
393
INDEX

394	 Index
Communication (continued)
upward, 169
written, 172
Competition, 261, 316
Complexity, of organization’s 
environment, 290
Compromise, 262
Conciliator, 273
Confirmation bias, 103
Conflict
cultural barriers caused by, 179–180
definition of, 256–257, 257e
dyadic, 259
dysfunctional, 257, 257e
felt, 261
functional, 257, 257e
intergroup, 259
interrole, 186
intragroup, 259
levels of, 212
loci of, 259
management, 263, 264
negotiation and, 33
perceived, 261
process of, 259–264, 260e, 262e
relationship, 212, 258
role, 186
structure and, 260
summary of, 273
task, 212, 258
team and, 212
types of, 258–259
Conflict process, 259, 260e
behavior, 262–263, 262e
cognition and personalization, 261
intentions
accommodating, 262
avoiding, 262
collaborating, 262
competing, 261
compromising, 262
outcomes
cultural influences, 264
dysfunctional, 263–264
functional, 263
management, 264
potential opposition or incompatibility
communication, 260
personal variables, 260–261
structure, 260
Conscientiousness, 80, 81, 81e
Consensus of behavior, 97–98
Consequences, Element of Situational 
Strength, 86
Consistency of behavior, 86, 97–98
Constraints, Element of Situational 
Strength, 86
Consultation, 242
Context, 96–97
Contingency theories, 219–222, 220e
Contingency variables, 38
Contrast effects, 99
Controlled processing, 175
Cooptation, 319
Core self-evaluations (CSEs), 54, 59, 84–85
Core values, 296
Corporate social responsibility (CSR), 32, 
54–55, 168, 242, 310
Cost-minimization strategy, 289
Counterproductive work behavior (CWB), 
56–58
Creative outcomes, 111
Creative potential, 109
Creativity, 73, 108–109, 109e
environment and, 110–111
ethics and, 110
expertise and, 110
intelligence and, 110
personality and, 110
Cross-functional teams, 203
Cultural context, 179, 179e
Cultural differences, 105, 209
leadership and, 219
Cultural identity, 123
Culture(s), 179, 179e, 301
See also Organizational culture
adapting to differing norms, 39–40
barriers, 178–179
dominant, 296
IM and, 252
influences in conflict, 264
justice and, 144
negotiation in, 270
norms and, 190
trust and, 232
values, 91–94, 93e
working with people from different, 39
Customer satisfaction, 55–56
Customer service,74
D
Dark side traits, 218
Dark Triad, 82–84
Day of the week, as source of emotions 
and moods, 64, 65e
Decentralization, 280–281
Decision making, 73
common biases in, 102–103, 102e
errors in, 102e, 104
ethics in, 104–108
group, 195–199, 198e
individual differences in, 104–106
intuitive, 101–102
organizational constraints of, 106
in organizations, 100–104
perception and, 100
Deep acting, 68
Deep-level diversity, 114
Defensive behaviors, 250
Demands, 327
Departmentalization
functional, 277
geographical, 278
implications for OB, 278
process and customer, 278
product or service, 277
Dependence, 238
creating, 240–241
power and, 240–242, 241e
Details, attention to, 296
Deviant workplace behaviors, 74–75
Dimensions of the Learning Organization 
Questionnaire (DLOQ), 325
Disabilities, at work, 119–121
Discrimination
stereotype threat, 115
in the workplace, 116–117, 116e
Displayed emotions, 68
Distinctiveness of behavior, 97
Distributive bargaining, 256, 256e
Distributive justice, 142
Diversity, 113
barriers to, 302
biographical characteristics of,  
117–119
deep-level, 114
demographic characteristics of, 114
diverse, 126–127
group behavior and, 192–195
in groups, 127–128
implementing management strategies for, 
125–128
levels of, 114
positive diversity climate, 126
programs, 128
surface-level, 114
of team members, 209
workforce and, 40
Divisional structure, 284
Dominant culture, 296
Downsizing, 287–288
Downward communication, 169
Driving forces, 320
Dyadic conflict, 259
Dysfunctional conflict, 257, 257e
Dysfunctions, strengthening, 302–303
E
Economic shocks, 316
Effectiveness, 45

	
Index	 395
Efficiency, 45
Emotional contagion, 74
Emotion(s), 65–67
about, 60–62, 61e
basic, 61–62
communication and, 211
displayed, 68
displays, controlling, 68
and ethics, 64
experiencing, 63
felt, 68
function of, 63–64
moral, 62
in negotiation, 269–270
and norms, 187
OB applications of, 72–76
regulation
about, 71
ethics of, 72
influences and outcomes of, 71
techniques of, 71–72
sharing, 167
sources of, 65–68, 66e
stability, 80, 81e, 82
summary of, 75
suppression, 71
Emotional dissonance, 69
Emotional intelligence (EI), 69–70, 70e
leadership and, 218
Emotional labor, 68–69
Employee assistance programs (EAPs), 
326–327
Employee engagement, 51
Employee involvement and participation 
(EIP), 157–159, 334
Employee recognition program, 164
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP), 
162–163
Employee well-being, 41
Employment non-discrimination act 
(ENDA), 122
Enactive mastery, 138
Environment
capacity, 290
complexity, 290
organizational structure and,  
290–291
three-dimensional model, 291, 291e
volatility, 290
Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), 122
Equity theory, 141–142, 141e
Escalation of commitment, 103–104
Ethical climate index (ECI), 299–300
Ethical climate theory (ECT), 299–300
Ethical work climate (EWC), 299–300
Ethic(s)
behavioral, 42, 108
choices, 42
creativity and, 110
decision making, 108–110
dilemmas, 42
emotion and, 64, 72
expectations of, 308
leadership, 230
organizational culture and, 299–300, 
308–309
of political behavior, 252–253
rewards for, 309
three ethical decision criteria, 107
training for, 308
Evidence-based management (EBM), 34–36
Exchange, 242
Exclusion, 116e
Exercise
as source of emotions and moods, 67
as stress management, 332
Exit response, 56
Expectancy theory, 145–146, 145e
Expertise, creativity and, 110
Expert power, 239
External equity, 159
Extraversion, 80, 81e, 82
F
FACTSET Research, 308
Faultlines, 194
Feedback, 135, 151, 167
Felt conflict, 261
Felt emotions, 68
Femininity, masculinity vs., 91
Fiedler contingency model, 219–221, 220e
Filtering of communication, 176
Fixed pie, beliefs in negotiation, 266
Flexible benefits, 163
Flextime, 155–156, 155e
Formal channels, 168
Formal groups, 183
Formalization, 281
Formal power, 238–239
Formal regulations, 106
Formal small-group networks, 170, 170e
Full range of leadership model, 227–228, 
227e
Functional conflict, 257, 257e
Functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), 70
Functional structure, 283
Fundamental attribution error, 98
G
General dependence postulate, 240
General mental ability (GMA), 124, 105
Generational values, 89
Global Leadership and Organizational 
Behavior Effectiveness (GLOBE) 
research program, 92
Goal(s), 211
commitment, 136
difficulty and feedback dimensions, 135
national characteristics, impact on goal-
performance relationship, 137
task(s) characteristics, impact on goal-
performance relationship, 136
setting implementation, 137, 137e, 333
setting theory, 135–138, 137e
Grapevine, 170–171
Group(s), behavior
about, 183
cohesiveness, 45, 192–193, 193e
decision making, 195–199, 198e
diversity and, 192–195
functioning, 45
interaction and status, 191
outcomes
negative norms and, 189–190, 190e
positive norms and, 188–189
outgroup, 184–185
polarization, 197
size and, 192
social identity and, 183
stages of development, 184–195, 185e, 
187e, 189e, 193e
status, 190–192
structure and processes, 33
summary of, 198–199
Groupshift, 197
Groupthink, 196–197
H
Halo effect, 99
Heredity, 79
Herzberg, Frederick, 132
Heuristics, 99
Hierarchy of needs theory, 131, 132e
High-context cultures, 179, 179e
Hindrance stressors, 327
Hindsight bias, 104
Historical precedents, as an organizational 
constraint of decision making, 106
Hofstede’s framework, 91, 93e
GLOBE framework and, 82
House, Robert, 224
Human resources (HR) management, 33
I
Idea evaluation, 109
Idea generation, 109
Identification-based trust, 235

396	 Index
Illusory correlation, 65
Imitation strategy, 289
Importance, 240
Impression management (IM), 250–252, 
250e, 251e
Incivility, 116e
Individualism, 62
collectivism vs., 91
Informal channels, 168
Informal group, 183
Information
exchange, 168
gathering, 109
overload, 176
security, 174
Informational justice, 143
Ingratiation, 242
Initiating 218
Innovation, 111, 296
context and, 324
culture and, 301
definition of, 324
idea champions and, 324–325
sources of, 324
strategy, 289
Institutionalization, 302
Institutions, organizational structure and, 
291–292
Instrumental values, 88
Integrative bargaining, 296–297
Intellectual ability, 123–125, 124e
Intelligence, 69–70, 70e
abilities, 123–125, 124e
creativity and, 110
Intelligence quotient (IQ), 124
Intentions, 261–262
Interacting groups, 197
Intergroup conflict, 259
Intergroup development, 323
Internal equity, 159
Interpersonal communication, 33
Interpersonal justice, 143
Interpersonal skills, development of, 32
Interrole conflict, 170
Interviews, 252
Intimidation, 116e
Intragroup conflict, 259
Intuition, 34–35, 101–102
Intuitive decision making, 101–102
J
Job characteristics model (JCM), 151–153, 
152e
Job(s), 89, 90e, 330
attitudes of, 50–51, 74
design, 151–153, 152e
relational, 154
dissatisfaction, impact of, 56–59
embeddedness, 58
engagement, 146
experience, 330
involvement, job satisfaction and, 50
performance, 55
person-job fit theory, 89, 90e
redesign, 153–154, 333
rotation, 153–154
sharing, 156–157
Job satisfaction, 32
causes of, 52–55, 53e
impact of, 58
job involvement and, 50
measuring, 51–52
outcomes of, 55–56
K
Kotter’s eight-step plan, 320, 321e
L
Language, 308
communication and, 177
Lateral communication, 169
Leader behavior and power, 33
Leader-member exchange (LMX) theory, 
222–223, 223e
Leader-member relations, 220
Leadership, 73–74
See also Transformational leadership
as an attribution, 233–234
authentic, 229
behavioral theories of, 218–219
charismatic, 224–226, 229
contemporary theories of, 222–229, 
223e, 226e, 227e
contingency theories of, 219–222, 220e
cultural differences and, 219
dark side traits and, 218
emotional intelligence and, 218
ethical, 230
Fiedler contingency model, 219–221, 220e
mentoring in, 233
model, 227–228, 227e
neutralizers of, 234–235, 234e
online, 235
path-goal theory, 221–222
personality traits and, 217–218
positive, 231–233, 232e
power and, 238
responsible, 229–231
servant, 230–231
situational leadership theory, 221
socialized charismatic, 230
structure and, 206
substitutes for, 234–235, 234e
summary of, 235–236
trait theories of, 217
transactional and transformational, 
226–229, 226e, 227e
understanding challenges, 233–235, 234e
Leadership-participation model, 222
Learning organization, 325–326, 325e
Least preferred coworker (LPC) 
questionnaire, 220
Legitimacy, 242
Legitimate power, 239
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
(LGBT), 121–122
Lewin’s three-step model, 320, 320e
Life satisfaction, 56
Long-term orientation, 92–93
Low-context cultures, 179, 179e
Loyalty response, 56
Lying, 108, 178
M
Machiavellianism, 83
Management, 34–36
activities, effective vs. successful, 33–34
conflict, 263, 264
diversity and, 125–128
long tenure in, 324
OB and, 32
participative, 158
top, 304
Management by objectives (MBO), 137
Manipulation, 319
Masculinity, femininity vs., 91
Maslow, Abraham, 131, 132e
Material symbols, 307
Matrix structure, 284–285, 284e
McClelland’s theory of needs, 132–134
Mechanisms, protective, 309
Mechanistic model, 288
Mediator, 272
Mental models, 212
Mentoring, 233
Merit-based pay, 161
Mindfulness, 69
Minztberg’s managerial roles, 7e
Mockery, and insults, 66e
Moods
See also Emotion(s)
about, 60–62, 61e
experiencing, 63
OB applications of, 72–75
positive and negative affect, 62–63
sources of, 63e, 64–68
summary of, 75
Moral emotions, 62

	
Index	 397
Motivating potential score (MPS), 152
Motivation
direction, of effort, 131
intensity of efforts, 131
persistence of effort, 131
about, 131–132
behaviorism, 140
cognitive evaluation theory, 134–135
contemporary theories of, 134–146, 
137e, 139e, 142e, 145e
early theories of, 131–134, 132e, 133e
expectancy theory, 145–146, 145e
goal-setting theory, 135–138, 137e
hierarchy of needs theory, 131, 132e
integrating theories of, 146–148, 147e
by job design, 151–153, 152e
job engagement and, 146
McClelland’s theory of needs, 132–134
in OB, 33, 73
operant conditioning theory, 140
reinforcement theory, 140
self-concordance, 135
self-determination theory, 134–135
self-efficacy theory, 138–140, 139e
social-learning theory, 140
summary of, 148, 164–165
two-factor theory, 132, 133e
using alternative work arrangements, 
154–157, 155e
using benefits, 163
using EIP, 157–159
using extrinsic rewards, 159–163
using intrinsic rewards, 163–164
using job redesign, 153–154
Multiteam systems, 204
Myers-Briggs type indicator (MBTI), 
79–80
N
Narcissism, 83
Need for achievement (nAch), 133
Need for affiliation (nAff), 133
Need for power (nPow), 133
Negative affect, 62–63, 63e
Neglect response, 56
Negotiation, 33
bargaining strategies in, 265–267, 265e, 
266e
culture in, 270
differences in effectiveness, 269–271
gender in, 270–271
moods/emotions in, 269–270
personality traits in, 269
process of, 267–269, 267e
reputation and, 271–272
in a social context, 271–272
third-party, 272–273
Networking, 33
Nonsubstitutability, 241
Nonverbal communication, 172
Normal group technique, 198, 198e
Norms
behavior and, 188
conformity and, 187–188, 188e
culture and, 39–40, 190
emotions and, 187
group outcomes and negative, 189–190, 
189e
group outcomes and positive, 188–189
and status, 191
Nudging, 93
O
Obsessive-compulsive personality, 84
Open-mindedness, 311
Openness, 80, 81e, 82
Operant conditioning theory, 140
Oral communication, 171–172
Organic model, 288
Organic structures, 324
Organizational behavior (OB)
absolutes in, 37–38
challenges and opportunities for, 38, 39e
continuing globalization of, 38–40
core topics of, 33
definition of, 33
disciplines that contribute to, 36–37, 37e
emotions in, 72–76
history of, 31–32
implications for managers, 45–46
management and, 32
moods in, 72–76
Organizational behavior (OB) model, 43e
development of, 42–43
inputs, 43
outcomes, 44–45
processes, 43
Organizational change
about, 315
action research in, 321
appreciative inquiry in, 323
approaches to managing, 320–323, 320e, 
321e
building support and commitment for, 
318
coercion in, 319
communication in, 317
creating a culture for, 323–326, 325e
creating a learning organization, 
325–326, 325e
developing positive relationships for, 318
DLOQ in, 325
forces for, 316
implementing changes fairly in, 319
intergroup development in, 323
Kotter’s eight-step plan, 320, 321e
Lewin’s three-step model, 320, 320e
managing paradox in, 323–324
manipulation, cooptation in, 319
organizational development in, 321–323
overcoming resistance to, 317–319
participation in, 317
process consultation in, 322
politics of, 320
reactionary vs. planned, 316
resistance to, 317–319, 318e
selecting people to accept, 319
sensitivity training in, 322
stimulating a culture of innovation for, 
324–325
stress and, 326
summary of, 334–335
survey feedback for, 322
team building in, 322
Organizational citizenship behavior 
(OCB), 44, 55
Organizational climate, 299
Organizational commitment, 50
Organizational communication, 334
Organizational culture
about, 296
as an asset, 301–302
beginning, 303
creating, sustaining, 303–306, 304e, 
305e, 306e
creating climate, 299
employee learning, 307–308
ethical, 299–300, 308–309
formalization vs., 298
formation of, 306
functions of, 298–299
global context in, 312
influencing, 308–312, 311e
innovation and, 300
keeping alive, 304–306, 304e, 305e, 
306e
as liability, 302–303
positive, 309–310
spiritual, 310–312, 311e
strong vs. weak, 297–298
summary of, 313, 313e
sustainability and, 300
uniformity in, 296–297, 297e
Organizational demography, 209
Organizational development (OD), 
321–323
Organizational justice, 141–142, 142e
distributive justice, 142
ensuring justice, 144

398	 Index
Organizational justice (continued)
culture and, 144
equity theory, 141–142, 141e
informational justice, 143
interpersonal justice, 143
organizational justice, 141–142, 142e
outcomes, 143–144
procedural justice, 142–143
Organizational situations, 86–87
Organizational strategies, 288, 288e
cost-minimization, 289
imitation, 289
innovation, 289
structural, 289, 289e
Organizational structure
about, 276, 276e
boundary spanning in, 281–282
bureaucracy in, 283–284
centralization, decentralization in, 
280–281, 293
chain of command in, 278–279
circular, 287
common frameworks, 282–285, 284e
departmentalization in, 277–278
designing, 285–287, 285e, 292–293
differences in, 288–292, 288e, 291e
divisional, 284
downsizing in, 287–288
employee behavior and, 292–293
environment and, 290–291
formalization in, 281
functional, 283
institutions and, 291–292
matrix, 284–285, 284e
national culture in, 293
predictability vs. autonomy, 293
simple, 282
size and, 290
span of control in, 279–280, 279e, 292
strategies for, 288–289, 288e, 289e
summary of, 293–294
team, 286
technology in, 290
virtual design, 285–286, 285e
work specialization in, 276–277, 277e, 
292
Organizational survival, 45
Orientation, 296
Outcome orientation, 296
Outcomes, in OB model, 44–45
Outgroup, 184–185
Overconfidence bias, 102
P
Paradox theory, 323–324
Participative management, 158
Path-goal theory, 221–222
Pay, 54, 159
People orientation, 296
Perceived conflict, 261
Perceived organizational support (POS), 
50
Perceiver, 96
Perception, 320
about, 95–96
individual decision making and, 100
influencing factors,96–97
judging others, 97–99, 98e
shortcuts in, 99
Performance evaluation systems, 106
impression management and, 252
reward system and, 206
Personality, 54, 65, 105, 175
about, 77–79
assessing, 78
Big Five Model, 80
creativity and, 110
determinants, 79
frameworks of, 79–84
linked to value, 89–91, 90e
MBTI and, 79–80
self-reports and observer-ratings, 78–79
situations and, 85–87
summary of, 94
of team members, 207–208
Personality traits, 78, 331
leadership and, 217–218
Personal power, 239
Person-job fit theory, 89, 90e
Person-organization fit theory, 90
Persuasion, 167
rational, 242
Physical ability, 125, 126e
Piece-rate pay plan, 160–161
Planned change, 316
Political behavior, 246
causes and consequences of, 247–254, 
247e, 250e, 251e, 254e
contributing factors to, 247–249, 247e
ethics of, 252–253
individual factors, 248
inter-organizational factors, 249
organizational factors, 248
zero-sum approach, 249
Political skill, 244
Politics
career mapping, 253–254, 254e
impression management and, 250–251, 
250e, 251e
organizational, 246
power and, 246–247
reality of, 246–247
response to, 249–250
summary of, 254–255
Position power, 220
Positive affect, 62–63, 63e
Positive diversity climate, 126
Positive leadership, 231–233, 232e
Positive organizational culture,  
309–310
Positive organizational scholarship (POS), 
41–42
Positivity offset, 63
Power
affecting people, 244–246
bases of, 238–240
coercive, 238–239
dependence and, 240–242, 241e
distance, 50, 91
expert, 239
formal, 238–239
leadership and, 33, 238
legitimate, 239
most effective, 240
need for power, 133
personal, 239
politics in, 246–247
position, 220
referent, 239
reward, 239
sexual harassment and, 245–246
social network analysis and, 241–242, 
241e
summary of, 254–255
tactics
applying, 244
cultural preferences for, 243, 243e
using, 242–243
variables, 244–245
Predictability, autonomy vs., 293
Pressure, 242
Prevention focus, 136
Proactive personality, 85
Problem, 100
Problem formulation, 109
Problem-solving teams, 202
Procedural justice, 142–143
Process consultation (PC), 322
Productivity, 45
Profit-sharing plan, 162
Promotion focus, 136
Psychological contract, 186
Psychological empowerment, 50
Psychology, 36
Psychopathy, 84
Punctuated-equilibrium model, 184,  
185e
Pygmalion effect, 139

	
Index	 399
Q
Queer/questioning, undecided, intersex, 
lesbian, transgender, bisexual, asexual, 
or gay (QUILTBAG), 122
R
Randomness error, 104
Rational decision making model, 101, 101e
Reference groups, 188
Referent power, 239
Reflexivity, 210
Reinforcement theory, 140
Relationships
conflicts in, 212, 258
negotiations in, 272
Relaxation techniques, 333
Religion, at work, 121
Representative participation, 158–159
Reputation, in negotiation, 271–272
Resistance point, 266
Resources, 324, 327
Respect, 311
Responsible leadership, 229–231
Restraining forces, 320
Reward power, 239
Reward systems, 106, 309
Risk aversion, 104
Risk taking, 296
Rituals, 307
Role(s), 185–186
allocation of, 208–209, 208e
conflict, 186
expectations, 186
model, 308
perception, 186
S
Sabbaticals, employee, 334
Safety, injury at work, 75
Scarcity, 240–241
Schizotypal personality, 84
Selection, 72, 304
Selective perception, 99, 176
Self-concordance, 135
Self-determination theory, 134–135
Self-efficacy
increasing in yourself, 138–139
influencing in others, 139–140
Self-efficacy theory, 138–140, 139e
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 139
Self-managed work teams, 202–203
Self-monitoring, 85
Self-serving bias, 98–99
Semantics, cultural barriers caused by, 178
Sensitivity training, 322
Servant leadership, 230–231
Sex (gender), 105, 118–119
in negotiation, 270–271
as source of emotions and moods, 67
Sexual harassment, 116e, 245–246
Sexual orientation, gender identity, 121–122
Short-term orientation, 92–93
Silence, communication and, 177
Simple structure, 282
Situational leadership theory (SLT), 221
Situation strength theory, 86–87
Skill variety, 151
Skinner, B.F., 140
Sleep, as source of emotions and moods, 67
Social entrepreneurship education, 32
Social identity theory, 183
Socialization, 304–306, 304e, 305e
Socialized charismatic leadership, 230
Social-learning theory, 140
Social loafing, 192, 212
Social media, 40–41
Social network analysis, 241–242, 241e
Social psychology, 36
Social support, 330, 333
Social trends, 316
Sociology, 37
Span of control, 279–280, 279e, 292
Spiritual organization
achieving, 312–313
characteristics of, 311
criticisms of, 312
Stability, 80, 81e, 82, 296
Status
group interaction and, 191
inequity, 191
norms and, 191
stigmatization and, 191
Status characteristics theory, 190–191
Stereotyping, 115, 99
Stigmatization, status and, 191
Strengths, employee, 309
Stress, 44
about, 326–328, 327e
additive stressors in, 330
allostasis in, 328
behavioral symptoms of, 332
causes of, 327
consequences of, 331–332
demands and resources, 327–328
environmental factors of, 329
individual differences in, 330–331
job experience and, 330
management of, 332–334
individual approaches to, 332–333
organizational approaches to, 333–334
organizational factors of, 329
perception in, 330
personal factors of, 329–330
personality traits and, 331
physiological symptoms of, 331
potential sources of, 328–330, 328e
psychological symptoms of, 332
social support and, 330
as source of emotions and moods, 67
summary of, 334–335
Strong culture, 298
Structural matches, 289, 289e
Structure(s)
See also Organizational structure
circular, 287
conflict and, 260
divisional, 284
functional, 283
group behavior and, 33
leadership and, 206
matrix, 284–285, 284e
organic, 324
simple, 282
task and, 220
team and, 286
virtual, 285–286, 285e
Subcultures, 297
Surface acting, 68
Surface-level diversity, 114
Survey feedback, 322
Sustainability, 300
Symbols, 307–308
Systematic study, complementing intuition 
with, 34–35
System-imposed time constraints, 106
T
Target point, 266 
Task(s)  
conflicts, 212, 258
identity, 151
performance, 44
significance, 151
structure, 220
Team(s)
ability of, 207
building, 322
cohesion of, 212
composition of, 207–210, 206e
conflict levels and, 212
creating effective, 205–212, 205e, 208e, 
210e, 213
cross-functional, 203
diversity of, 209
efficacy of, 211
groups vs., 201–202, 201e
identity of, 211
mental models and, 212

400	 Index
Team(s) (continued)
multiteam systems, 204
orientation, 296
personality of, 207–208
popularity of, 200–201
problem-solving, 202
processes of, 210–212, 210e
rewarding, 213
selecting, 213
self-managed, 202–203
size of, 209–210
social loafing and, 212
structure, 286
summary of, 214–215
turning individuals into, 213
types of, 202e
virtual, 204
work, 201
Technology, 290, 316
Telecommuting, 157
Terminal values, 88
Third-party negotiations, 272–273
Three-dimensional model, 291, 291e
Three ethical decision criteria, 107
Three-stage model of creativity, 108, 109e
Time-management techniques, 332
Time of day, as source of emotions and 
moods, 65, 66e
Tone differences, cultural barriers caused 
by, 178
Traditional management, 33
Training, ethical, 308
Trait Activation Theory (TAT), 87, 87e
Trait theories of leadership, 217
Transactional leadership, 226–229, 226e, 227
Transformational leadership, 226–227, 
226e, 227e
charismatic vs., 229
evaluation of, 228
process of, 228
Translation, 240
Trust, 311
culture and, 232
development of, 231
identification-based, 235
leadership and, 206, 231–233, 232e
outcomes of, 231
propensity, 232
regaining, 233
in the role of time, 232–233
Turnover, 58
Two-factor theory, 132, 133e
U
Uncertainty avoidance, 91
Unity of command, 279
Upward communication, 169
Utilitarianism, 107
V
Values
core, 296
cultural, 91–94, 93e
generational, 89
instrumental, 88
personality and, 89–91, 90e
terminal vs. instrumental, 88
Value system, 88
Variable-pay program, 159–160
Verbal persuasion, 138
Vicarious modeling, 138
Virtual structure, 285–286, 285e
Virtual teams, 204
Vision, 225
Vitality, 310
Voice response, 56
Volatility, of organization’s environment, 
290
W
Weather, as source of emotions and 
moods, 65
Weber, Max, 224
Wellness programs, 334
Whistle-blowers, 107
Withdrawal behavior, 44
Wonderlic intellectual ability test, 125–125
Word connotations, cultural barriers 
caused by, 178
Work
design, 33
environment, 41–42
group, 201
specialization, 276–277, 277e, 292
team, 201
Workforce
changing nature of, 316
demographics of, 40
diversity of, 40
Workplace
deviant behavior in, 74–75
disabilities in, 119–121
discrimination in, 116–117, 116e
religion in, 121
safety, injury at, 75
spirituality in, 310
Written communication, 172
Z
Zero-sum approach, 249

This is a special edition of an established 
title widely used by colleges and universities 
throughout the world. Pearson published this 
exclusive edition for the benefit of students 
outside the United States and Canada. If you 
purchased this book within the United States 
or Canada, you should be aware that it has 
been imported without the approval of the 
Publisher or Author.
Pearson Global Edition
GLOBAL 
EDITION
For these Global Editions, the editorial team at Pearson has 
collaborated with educators across the world to address a 
wide range of subjects and requirements, equipping students 
with the best possible learning tools. This Global Edition 
preserves the cutting-edge approach and pedagogy of the 
original, but also features alterations, customization, and 
adaptation from the North American version.

